Advertisement.
THis Book at its first Publishing, which was shortly after the Death of King
Charles the First, had the ill fortune to be coldly received in the world, by
reason of the Circumstances of those times; but after K. Charles the Second was
possessed of the Crown, and endeavored to advance the Prerogative beyond its
just bounds, the Book began to be much enquired after, and looked into by many
Learned Men who were not willing to part easily with their Birthrights, so
that in a short time it became very scarce, and was sold at a great rate; this
occasioned the private Reprinting of it in the year 1672, which as soon as the
Government perceived, they Prosecuted both the Publisher and the Book so
violently, that many hundreds of the Books were seized and burnt; that, and the
great want of the Book since occasioned the Reprinting of it (without any
Alterations or Omissions) in the year 1682, when the Press was at liberty by
reason of the ceasing of the Act for Printing, but Prerogative then getting
above the Law, it met with a new Persecution, and the Publisher was Indicted
for the Reprinting of it; the passages in it upon which the Indictment was
found, were these, Part II. Page 76. beginning Line the 24th, thus, I do easily
grant that Kings have many occasions and opportunities to beguile their people;
yet can they do nothing as Kings, but what of Right they ought to do. They may
call Parliaments, but neither as often or seldom as they please, if the Statute
Laws of this Realm might take place. And, Part II. Page 148. Line 32. And
though Kings may be Chief Commanders, yet they are not the Chief Rulers. The
Prosecution went on so rigorously, that the Publisher, though beyond the Seas,
yet willing to try the Cause, appeared according to the constant practice of
the Court of King's Bench, by his Attorney, but for not being personally
present in the Court, (which was then impossible) he was by the Arbitrary Power
of the then Lord Chief Justice Jefferys Out-lawed for a Misdemeanour, and so
remained till this wonderful Revolution, by the wise Conduct of his Highness
the Prince of Orange.

The Books have been ever since with care and charge preserved, for the benefit
of all that are willing to know and maintain their Ancient Laws and
Birthrights.

It was well known to, and owned by, the late Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, who
was one of the Executors of the Great and Learned Mr. Seldom, that the
Groundwork was his, upon which Mr. Bacon raised this Superstructure, which
has been and is so well esteemed, that it is now again made public, by

January the 10th. 1688-9. John Starkey.

AN Historical and Political DISCOURSE OF THE Laws and Government OF ENGLAND,
FROM The FIRST TIMES to the End of the Reign of QUEEN ELIZABETH.

WITH A VINDICATION of the ANCIENT WAY of Parliaments in England,

Collected from some Manuscript Notes of John Seldom, Esquire by Nathaniel Bacon of
Grays Inn, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, And are to be Sold by J. Robinson at the
Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, R. Bentley in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane, T. Goodwin at
the Maiden Head in Fleetstreet, and T. Fox at the Angel in Westminster Hall,
1689.

AN HISTORICAL and POLITICAL DISCOURSE OF THE Laws and Government OF ENGLAND.

The FIRST PART.

From the FIRST TIMES till the REIGN OF EDWARD III.

LONDON: Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleet Street near
Temple Bar. M.DC.LXXXII.

Advertisement.
A Private Debate concerning the right of an English King to Arbitrary rule
over English Subjects, as Successor to the Norman Conqueror, (so called) first
occasioned this Discourse. Herein I have necessarily fallen upon the Antiquity
and Uniformity of the Government of this Nation: It, being cleared, may also
serve as an Idea for them to consider, who do mind the restitution of this
shattered Frame of Policy. for as in all other Cures, so in that of a
distempered Government, the Original Constitution of the Body is not lightly to
be regarded; and the contemplation of the Proportions and manners of the Nation
in a small Model, brings no less furtherance to the right apprehension of the
true nature thereof (besides the delight) than the perusing of a Map does to
the Traveller, after a long and tedious travel.

I propound not this Discourse as a Pattern drawn up to the life of the thing,
nor the thing it self as a Masterpiece for future Ages: for well I know, that
Commonwealths in their minority want not only perfection of Strength and
Beauty, but also of Parts and Proportion; especially seeing that their full age
attaineth no further growth, than to a mixture of diverse Forms in one. Ambition
has done much by Discourse and Action to bring forth Absolute Monarchy out of
the Womb of Notion; but yet, like that of the Philosopher's Stone, the issue is
but wind, and the end misery to the undertakers: And therefore more than
probable it is, that the utmost perfection of this Nether-worlds best
Government, consists in the upholding of a due proportion of several Interests,
compounded into one temperature.

He that knows the secrets of all Men's Hearts, does know that my aim in this
Discourse is neither at Scepter or Crosier, nor after Popular Dotage, but that
Justice and Truth may moderate in all. This is a Vessel, I confess, ill and
weakly built, yet does it adventure into the vast Ocean of your Censures,
Gentlemen, who are Antiquaries, Lawyers, and Historians; any one of whom might
have steered in this course much better than my self. Had my own credit been
the freight, I must have expected nothing less than wrack and loss of all; but
the main design of this Voyage being for discovery of the true nature of this
Government to common view, I shall ever account your just Censures and
Contradictions (especially published with their grounds) to be my most happy
return, and as a Crown to this Work: And that my labor has its full reward,
if others, taking advantage by my imperfections, shall beautify England with a
more perfect and lively Character.

THE CONTENTS Of the FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. Of the Britons and their Government. page 1 II. Concerning the
Conversion of the Britons into the Faith. 2 III. Of the entry of the Romans
into Britain, and the State thereof during their continuance. 3 IV. Of the
entry of the Saxons, and their manner of Government. 8 V. Of Austin's coming to
the Saxons in England, his Entertainment and Work. 11 VI. Of the imbodying of
Prelacy into the Government of this Kingdom. 13 VII. Of Metropolitans in the
Saxons time. 15 VIII. Of the Saxon Bishops. 16 IX. Of the Saxon Presbyters. 17
X. Of inferior Church Officers amongst the Saxons. 18 XI. Of Church-mens
maintenance amongst the Saxons. ibid. XII. Of the several Precincts or
Jurisdictions of Church Governors amongst the Saxons. 22 XIII. Of the manner
of the Prelates Government of the Saxon Church. 23 XIV. Of Causes
Ecclesiastical. 24 XV. A brief censure of the Saxon Prelatical
Church Government. 27 XVI. Of the Saxons Commonwealth and the Government
thereof, and first of the King. 29 XVII. Of the Saxon Nobility 33 XVIII. Of the
Freemen amongst the Saxons. 34 XIX. Of the Villains amongst the Saxons. 35 XX.
Of the grand Council amongst the Saxons called the Micklemote. 36 XXI. Of the
Council of Lords. 38 XXII. Of the manner of the Saxon Government in the time of
War. 39 XXIII. Of the Government of the Saxon Kingdom in the times of peace,
and first of the division of the Kingdom into Shires, and their Officers. 40
XXIV. Of the County Court, and Sheriffs Torn. 41 XXV. Of the division of the
County into Hundreds, and the Officers and Court thereunto belonging. 42 XXVI.
Of the division of the Hundreds into Decennaries. 43 XXVII. Of Franchises, and
first of the Church-franchise. 44 XXVIII. Of the second Franchise, called the
Marches. 45 XXIX. Of County Palatines. ibid. XXX. Of Franchises of the person.
46 XXXI. Of Manors. ibid. XXXII. Of Courts incident and united unto Manors.
48 XXXIII. Of Townships and their Markets. 49 XXXIV. Of the Forests. 51 XXXV.
Concerning Judges in Courts of Justice. 52 XXXVI. Of the proceedings in
Judicature by Indictment, Appeal, Presentment, and Action. 53 XXXVII. Of the
several manners of extraordinary trial by Torture, Ordeal, Compurgators, and
Battle. 55 XXXVIII. Of the ordinary manner of Trial amongst the Saxons by
Inquest. 56 XXXIX. Of passing Judgment and Execution. 59 XL. Of the penal Laws
amongst the Saxons. 60 XLI. Of the Laws of property of Lands and Goods, and the
manner of their Conveyance. 64 XLII. Of the times of Law and vacancy. 68 XLIII.
An Epilogue to the Saxons Government. 69 XLIV. OF the Norman entrance. 70 XLV.
Of the Title of the Norman Kings to the English Crown; that it was by Election.
72 XLVI. That the Government of the Normans proceeded upon the Saxon
principles, and first of Parliaments. 75 XLVII. Of the Franchise of the Church
in the Norman times. 77 XLVIII. Of the several subservient Jurisdictions, by
Marches, Counties, Hundreds, Buroughs, Lordships, and Decennaries. 82 XLIX. Of
the Immunities of the Saxon Freemen under the Norman Government. 84 L.
Recollection of certain Norman Laws concerning the Crown, in relation to those
of the Saxons formerly mentioned. 86 LI. Of the like Laws that concern common
Interest of Goods. 89 LII. Of Laws that concern common Interest of Lands. 90
LIII. Of diverse Laws made concerning the execution of Justice. 94 LIVE. Of the
Militia during the Normans time. 65 LV. That the entry of the Normans into this
Government could not be by Conquest. 97 LVI. A brief Survey of the sense of
Writers concerning the point of Conquest. 99 LVII. OF the Government during the
Reigns of Stephen, Henry the Second, Richard the First, and John; and first of
their Titles to the Crown, and disposition in Government. 103 LVIII. Of the
state of the Nobility of England from the Conquest, and during the Reign of
these several Kings. 107 LIX. Of the state of the Clergy, and their power in
this Kingdom from the Norman time. 109 LX. Of the English Commonalty since the
Norman time. 117 LXI. Of Judicature, the Courts, and their Judges. 118 LXII. Of
the certain Laws of Judicature in the time of Henry the 2. 120 LXIII. Of the
Militia of this Kingdom during the Reign of these Kings. 125 LXIV. OF the
Government of Henry the Third, Edward the First, and Edward the Second, Kings
of England: And first, a general view of the disposition of their Government.
129 LXV. Of the condition of the Nobility of England, till the time of Edward
the Third. 137 LXVI. Of the state of the English Clergy until the time of
Edward the Third: and herein concerning the Statutes of Circumspecte agatis,
Articuli Cleri, and of General Councils, and National Synods. 140 LXVII. Of the
condition of the Freemen of England, and the Grand Charter, and several
Statutes concerning the same, during the Reign of these Kings. 158 LXVIII. Of
Courts and their Proceedings. 177 LXIX. Of Coroners, Sheriffs, and Crown-Pleas.
179 LXX. Of the Militia during these Kings Reigns. 184 LXXI. Of the Peace. 188.
THE PREFACE.
THe policy of the English Government, so far as is praiseworthy, is (all one
with Divine Providence) wrapped up in a Vail of Kings, and Wise men; and thus
implicitly has been delivered to the World by Historians, who for the most
part read Men, and wear their Pens in decyphering their Persons and Conditions:
Some of whom, having met with ingenious Writers, survive themselves, possibly
more famous after death than before: Others, after a miserable life wasted, are
yet more miserable in being little better than Tables to set forth the Painters
Workmanship, and to let the World know, that their Historians are more witty
than they, of whom they wrote, were either wise or good. And thus History, that
should be a witness of Truth and Time, becomes little better than a Parable, or
rather, than a Nonsense in a fair Character, whose best commendation is, that
it is well written.

Doubtless, Histories of Persons, or Lives of Men, have their excellency in
Fruit, for imitation and continuance of Fame, as a reward of Virtue: yet will
not the coacervation of these together declare the nature of a Commonwealth
better than the beauty of a Body dismembered is revived by thrusting together
the Members, which cannot be without deformity. Nor will it be denied, but many
wise and good Kings and Queens of this Realm, may justly challenge the honor
of passing many excellent Laws, albeit it is the proper work of the
Representative Body to form them; yet to no one, nor all of them, can we
attribute the honor of that Wisdom and Goodness that constituted this blessed
Frame of Government. For seldom is it seen that one Prince builds upon the
foundation of his Predecessor, or pursues his ends or aims; because as several
men they have several Judgments and Desires, and are subject to a Royal kind
of self-love, that inciteth them either to exceed former Precedents, or at
least to differ from them, that they may not seem to rule by Copy, as
insufficient of themselves, which is a kind of disparagement to such as are
above. Add hereunto, that it is not to be conceited that the wisest of our
Ancestors saw the Idea of this Government; nor was it any where in precedent
but in him that determined the same from Eternity: For as no Nation can show
more variety and inconstancy in the Government of Princes than this, especially
for three hundred years next ensuing the Normans: So reason cannot move
imagination that these Wheels, by diverse, if not contrary motions, could ever
conspire into this temperature of policy, were there not some primum mobile
that has ever kept one constant motion in all.

My aim therefore shall be to lay aside the consideration of Man as much as may
be, and to extract a summary view of the cardinal passes of the Government of
this Kingdom, and to glance at the various Aspects of the ancient upon the
modern, that so these diverse Princes, and wise Councils in their different
course, may appear to be no other than the instruments of him that is but one,
and of one mind, whose goings forth have been in a continual course of Wisdom
and Goodness for our selves in these latter days. And herein I am encouraged,
because I am not in danger of temptation to Flattery or Spleen, nor pinched
with Penury of grounds of observation; having to do with a Nation, than which a
clearer mirour of Gods gracious Government is not to be found amongst all the
Nations and People under Heaven.

A TABLE Of the PRINCIPAL MATTERS contained IN THE FIRST PART of this BOOK.
ABbots page 142 Abbey quarter 151. not taxed or visited from foreign parts 152
Vacancies ibid. Purveyance ibid. Abere murder amongst the Saxons 62 Accolites
amongst the Saxons 18 Accusation, witnesses amongst the Saxons 94 Action
amongst the Saxons 53 Acquittal, vide Knight Service. Administration, vide
Intestate. Adultery amongst the Saxons 26 Amongst the Normans 88 After 145
Advowsons cognizance 111 Aedeling 33 Age, vide Infancy. Aids after the Norman
times 125, 173, 178 Alderman 33 Alienations license 114, 171 Allegiance
according to the Saxons 53 The Normans 94 Amercements 163 Apostasy punished by
the Saxons 25 After 121 Appeals amongst the Saxons 53 The Normans 94 After 171
Appeals to Rome 110 Settled 111 To Ecclesiastical Courts ibid. Archbishops, vide
Metropolitans. Arrays 191, etc. Arms assessment 128 Vide Arrays. Austin the
Monk, his coming and his Actions 11, etc.
B.
BAil 122, 21, 158, etc. 182 Barks, vide Bridges. Baron, vide Court. Bargain
and sale of Goods amongst the Saxons 67 The Normans 82 Barons Wars 221, etc.
Bastardy amongst the Saxons 26 Battle trial amongst the Saxons 56 Batteries
punished by the Saxons 62, 120 Bigamists 91 Bishops amongst the Saxons 16 Vide
Prelacy: amongst the Normans; their power increased 77, etc. Vide Elections:
their Oath to the Pope 115 Blasphemy punished by the Saxons 25, 61 Amongst the
Normans 86 Bloodshed, vide Manslaughter. Bridges 164 Britons, their Religion
and Government 1, etc. Conversion 2 Instructed in Learning 4 A Province ibid.
The last that submitted to the Papalty, and the first that shook it off 13
Burgage amongst the Saxons 51 Burghbote ibid. Burglary punished by the Saxons
63 Burning of Woods punished by the Saxons ibid. Vide 121 Buroughs Mag. Chart.
Buroughs English 66
C.
Canon Law 75 Vide Prelacy. Carriages 165, 166 Castles, their use 73, 165, etc.
Abuse 104 Occasion of the first Civil Wars 130 Castles-guard, vide Mag. Chart.
166 De Cautione admittenda 113 Chancery 178 Chancemedley 179 Church,
maintenance by the Saxons 18, etc. Franchise 44 Alienation 115 Reparation 146
Churchmen, Action 183, 184 Discharged from Torns 183 Purveyance 17, 143 Their
complaints 141, 147 Privileged from distress 150 Cricksceat amongst the Saxons
19 Normans 86 Vide First Fruits. Circuits 120 Citation 113, 151, 242 Clerks
trial 116, 143, 151 Killers of Clerks 116 Comites ex plebe 35 Common Pleas
settled 162 Commutation, vide Articuli Cleri. Compurgators amongst the Saxons 56
Confession sacred 150 Constitutions at Clarindon 111 De Consimili casu 178
Conveyance, vide Deeds. Copyhold, vide Manor. Coroners amongst the Saxons 41,
179 Corporations 48, etc. 78 Coverfew 102 Councils general, vide Synods.
Council of Lords amongst the Saxons 33 Vide Lords. Counties, Courts amongst the
Saxons 41 Normans 82, 131 After 172, 179, 285 Court Baron amongst the Saxons 48
Crown-pleas Mag. Chart. 164 Courtesy of England in the Saxons time 65 Custodes
pagani amongst the Saxons 35
D.
DAne-guelt 102 Released 118 Darreign presentment Mag. Chart. 163 Deacons 18
Deaneries amongst the Saxons 23 Debt to the King, satisfaction 160 Debt to the
King, Mag. Chart. Decen^^ amongst the Saxons 43 Normans 83 Deeds among the
Saxons 67 Defamation 146, 149 Departure beyond Sea without license 112
Diocesses amongst the Saxons 23 Distress in the Normans time 89 Mag. Charta
161, etc. Vide County Court. Disseisin, vide Redisseisin and Novel-disseisin.
Dower in the Saxon time 64 Norman times 91, 160.
E.
ECclesiastical cognizance and power 109, etc. 80, 127 Vide Stat Circumspecte
agatis and Articuli Cleri. Ederbrece amongst the Saxons 63 Edward the first 133
Edward the Second 35 Elections 75, 112, 144, 151 Elegit amongst the Saxons 59
Englishire, a Saxon Law 62 Error, vide Appeals. Escheats 167 Vide Forfeiture,
Felony. Escuage, Mag. Charta 173, etc. Excommunication in the Saxons time 59
Normans 80 After the Normans time 113 Excommunicato deliberando 150
Excommunicato capiendo 151 182 Execution in the Saxon time 59 Executors, Mag.
Charta. Exorcists 18
F.
FAirs in the Norman time 89 Fauxonry 120, 122 Feast-days, Norman Law 87
Felonies and Felons punishment and forfeiture 94, 121, 167 Concealment 181
Defamed ibid. Feorme or Farm amongst the Saxons 47 Fightwit amongst the Saxons
62 Fine, by the Normans 94, 175, etc. Folkmote, vide County Court. Fools and
Idiots amongst the Normans 93 After 175 Foreign Councils 130, 132, 137
Fornication, vide Adultery. Forests amonst the Saxons 51 Franchises 42
Frankpledge amongst the Saxons 78 Vide View. Freemen of the Saxons 34 Normans
84 After 117, 169 Frithbrech amongst the Saxons 62 Fugam fecit 53 Fugitives 167
G.
GAvel-kind amongst the Saxons 66 Normans 100 Glebe amongst the Saxons 20 Goods
found, Saxon Law 68 Norman 89 Sale ibid. Grithbrech, vide Frithbrech.
H.
HAbendum, Saxon 67 Hamsockne, Saxon 63 Heresy punished by the Saxons 24
Normans 86 After 121 Haubergettum, Haubertum, Halbargellum, what it is 194
Heretock, Saxon 33 Henry the First 74 Henry the Second 104 Henry the Third 129,
etc. Shifts for Money 130 Foreign Councils 132 Yields up his interest in the
Militia to the Lords ibid. etc. Heordpeny, vide Peter Pence. Highways
privilege 190 Hundred, and the Court Saxon 42 Norman 83 Hundred Setena Saxon
43
I.
IDolatry punished by the Saxons 60 Normans 86 Vide Blasphemy. Imprisonment
Saxons 62 Norman 94 Incest punished by the Saxons 62 Indictment Saxon Law 53
Infancy amongst the Saxons 55 After 123 Infangtheoff, Saxon 46 Inheritance
Saxons 62 Normans 100 After 122, etc. Inquest Saxon 56 Interdict in the Saxon
time 24 After 113 Intent punished by the Normans 94 Intestate Saxon Law 68
Norman 89 Afterward 144, etc. 165, etc. John 106 Judgment, vide Execution.
Judges, vide Justice. Judicatory 118, etc. Jury grand and petit amongst the
Saxons 56 Justice and their Courts amongst the Saxons 52 Chief Justice 119
Judges or Justices itinerant after the Normans 120, 124, 177
K.
KIngs amongst the Saxons; election, continuance, covenant, maintenance, power
in Church matters 22, etc. 35 Amongst the Normans: election 70, etc. Covenant
72, etc. Power in Church Matters 77, etc. In the times of Stephen, Henry the
Second, Richard the First, and John: Election 103 Power in Church Matters 109,
etc. In the time of Henry the Third, Edward the First, and Edward the Second.
Succession 129, etc. Power in Ecclesiastical matters 140, etc. 145 In Civil
affairs 173, etc. 199, etc. Knight Service amongst the Saxons 47 Marriage 91,
126, 159 Acquittal 93 Widows 160.
L.
LAnguage endeavored to be changed by the Normans 101 Lashlight amongst the
Saxons 62 Lecturers amongst the Saxons 18 Leet amongst the Saxons 48 Legierwit
amongst the Saxons 62 Livery and seisin amongst the Saxons 67 London 161 Lords
day maintained by the Saxons 61 By the Normans as plea of the Crown 86 Lords,
their Councils amongst the Saxons 38, 52 From the Conquerour's till Henry the
Third 107 Lorica, what it is 193 Lucius 5, etc. Luminaries amongst the Saxons
20 Lunacy, vide Fools.
M.
MAgna Charta 107 Renewed with the Curse 130 Stat. etc. 158 Cap. 35. 152 Cap.
37. ibid. Mainpernours by the Saxons 53, 54 By the Normans. 94 Maims punished
by the Saxons 62 Mambota amongst the Saxons 61 Manors amongst the Saxons 46
Normans 83 Manslaughter punished by the Saxons 61 Normans 87 After 121
Manumisson 85 Marriage-portion, vide Dower. Marriage, vide Knights-service.
Merchants, Mag. Charta 170 Marches amongst the Saxons 45 Normans 82 Markets
amongst the Saxons 49 Normans 89 Vide Townships. Marshals Courts 178
Matrimonial causes amongst the Saxons 26 Medietas linguae amongst the Saxons 57
Metropolitan amongst the Saxons 15 Micklemote amongst the Saxons 36 The Primacy
of Canterbury settled there 22 Mills tythed 149 Militia amongst the Saxons 39
The Normans 95 During the Kings next ensuing 127 During Henry 3. Edward 1.
Edward 2. 184 Mint amongst the Saxons. Normans 85 Monastery admission 114
Mortdancester 123, 163 Mortmain 152 Mortuary amongst the Saxons 20
N.
NEws scandalous 182 Night-watches by the Normans 88 After 190 Nobility amongst
the Saxons 33 From the Normans times 107 From King John's time 137 Normans,
their Title, 70, etc. Not Conquest 97 Novel disseisin 124, 163.
O.
OBlations cognizance 146 Odio and Atia 168, etc. Officers power greater than
Kings 108 Ordeal amongst the Saxons 55 Ordinaries intestate 144 Outfangtheoff
amongst the Saxons 46 Ostiares amongst the Saxons 18 Oaths 153, 169
P.
PAlatine county amongst the Saxons 45 Parishes amongst the Saxons 22
Parliaments 75, 173 Parks trespasses 183 Passage 170 Peace amongst the Saxons
62 The Normans 87 After 188 Penal Laws, Saxons 60 Normans 86 After in the time
of Henry 2. 120 After 179 Perjury punished by the Saxons 25, 63 Peers amongst
the Saxons 58 Peter Pence amongst the Saxons 20 The Normans 86 Pledges 94
Plough-Alms, Saxons 20 Pope's power 12, 110, 114 Oppressions of the Clergy 140
Prelacy in England not till Constantine's 7. came from Rome by Austin 13, etc.
Suddenly grown 27 Pr^cipe Mag. Charta 167 Priors, vide Abbots. Presbyters
amongst the Saxons 17 Presentment amongst the Saxons 54 Priority, vide Tenure.
Prohibitions 142, 145 Protector 130 Provinces amongst the Saxons 22 Purveyance
152, 165, etc.
Q.
QUare Clausum fregit, Saxon 63 Quare excommunicavit 141 Quare non admisit
ibid. Quarentine 160, 176 Quo warranto 152
R.
RAnsom 59, 162 Rape, Norman 88 After 121, etc. 180 Reasonable part 160, 165
Vide Dower. Redemption, vide Ransom. Redisseisn 183 Relief, Norman 90 After 125
Religious houses, vide Abbeys. Replevy, Norman 89 After 161 Richard the First
105 Romans entry 3 The Papalty, with seven degrees of their Church Officers 18
Seven sorts of Church-maintenance 22 Romescot, Romesfeogh, vide Heordpenny.
Robbery punished by the Saxons 63 By Normans 88 After 121, 122, 180, 190
S.
Sabbath Day, Saxon-Law 61 Sacrilege, Saxon-Law 25 Sanctuary 87, 114, 150
Saxons in England mingled 56 Seal, vide Deeds 67 Sheriffs, Saxon 40 Extortion
172, 179 Simony punished by the Saxons 26 Sorcery, vide Witchery. Soul-shot
Saxon 20 Socage Saxon 48 Steven his government 103 Stat. Magna Charta, vide
Magna Charta. Merton, cap. 1, 2, 6, 7. 160 Cap. 1. 176 Cap. 3. 183 Cap. 9, 157
Cap. 10. 172 Cap. 11. 183 Marlbridge, cap. 1, 2, 3. 161 Cap. 4. ibid Cap. 5.
175 Cap. 8. 183 Cap. 9. 162 Cap. 10. 142, 172 Cap. 15. 162 Cap. 16. 163 Cap.
17. 176 Cap. 19. 164 Cap. 20. 163 Cap. 21. 162 Cap. 22. 162 Cap. 25. 179, 188
Cap. 29. 142 West. cap. 1, 2, 5. 143, etc. Cap. 3. 181, 189 Cap. 4. 176 Cap. 6.
164 Cap. 9. 181 Cap. 10. 179 Cap. 11. 168 Cap. 12. 181 Cap. 13. 180 Cap. 14.
172 Cap. 15. 182 Cap. 16. 162 Cap. 20. 183 Cap. 22. 160 Cap. 23. 179 Cap. 32.
166 Cap. 33. 172 Cap. 34. 182 Cap. 36. 178 Cap. 51. 163 Bigamy 154, etc.
Gloucest. cap. 1. 164 Cap. 5. 160 Cap. 6. 163 Cap. 8. 179, 189 Cap. 9. 168 De
Religiosis 153 Westminster. 2. cap. 13. 172 Cap. 16. 160 Cap. 19. 144 Cap. 24. 178
Cap. 26. 183 Cap. 29. 168, 178 Cap. 30. 164 Cap. 33. 153 Cap. 44. 180 Winton
189, etc. Circumspecte agatis 145, etc. Quia emptores 172 De Judaismo 171 Quo
Warranto 152 De vasto 160 De consultatione habenda 148 De Wardis 160 Artic.
super Cart. cap. 2. 166 Cap. 3. 178 Cap. 9. 179 Cap. 12. 163 Cap. 13, 14. 173
Cap. 15. 178 Cap. 18. 160 Conjunct. feoffat. 164 Amortizand. terris 153
Asportat. bonis Relig. 152 De militibus 184 Artic. Cleri. 137, 148 Vicecomit.
137, 172, 179 De prisis bonis Cleri 137, 152 Prerog. Reg. 137 Cap. 3, 13. 160
Cap. 7. 172 Cap. 9. 175 Cap. 11. 176 Cap. 14, 16. 167 Subdeacons 18 Suit of
Court 125 Vide Manor. Synods, Briton 7 Saxon 23 Disadvantages to Prelacy 27
Norman 77 Without the Laity 117 Power 154, etc.
T.
TAil, Saxon Law 66 Taxes 173 Vide Freemen. Tenures, vide Manor. Normans
changed them not 100 Tenures by several Lords priority 124 By Escheats 171 Term
Saxon 68 Testament, Saxon ibid. After 126, etc. Thefts cognizance 121, 222
Tithes, original 19 Cognizance 27 Normans 86, 111, 148, 149 Torn, Saxon 41, 173
Torture amongst the Saxons 55 Townships and their Courts, Saxon 49 Normans 83
Treason punished by Saxons 61 After 121 Trover of Goods 89 Troth-plight 111
V.
VAcancies of Churches 111, etc. 115 Vacation, vide Term. View of Pledges,
Saxon 48 Norman 83 After 164, 173 Villains, Saxon 34 Normans 85 Violence done
to Clerks 146 Use in deeds of Conveyance, Saxon 67 Usury 171
W.
WArdship 92, 126, 160, 169 Warranty, Saxon 67 Wears 167 Wera wergilda, Saxon
62 Weights and Measures, Saxons 28 Normans 88, 168 Widows, vide Socage and
Knight Service. William the First 70, etc. William Rufus 73 Wife, Saxon 62
Will, vide Testament. Witnesses, deeds Saxon 67 Witchery 25 Punished by Saxons
60 Wita, Saxon 62 Worship, Saxon, cognizance 24 Wrecks 176.
AN Historical and Political Discourse OF THE Laws and Government OF ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. Of the BRITONS, and their Government.
THIS is Britain, or rather that part thereof, in after-ages called Saxony and
England, from the peoples Names transplanted thither. The Britons (to lay aside
all conceits of Fame) I take to be an issue of the Neighboring Nations, from
the German and Belgic shores; induced hereto, partly by the vicinity of the
Names of he People, Caes. com. lib. 5.
Cities, or Towns and Places, but more of their Manners and Customs, both in
Religion and Civil Government. Tacit. Anal. 14.
Barbarians they were, Amian. lib. 15.
and so esteemed by the Romans, that were but refined Barbarians themselves,
Caes. com. lib. 6. Tacit.
and yet they worshipped an Invisible, Infinite, Omnipotent God by Sacrifices:
but the greatest part of their reverence fell short, and rested upon their
Priests, whom they accounted the only Secretaries that God had on earth, feared
their interdict worse than death itself, and (in these times of uttermost
darkness) held them forth to neighboring Nations, to instruct them into an
higher excellency than that of brutish men.

In their civil Government they allowed preeminence of their Magistrates rather
than Supremacy, and had many chiefs in a little room; the Romans called them
little Kings, for the greater renown of their Empire. But others of more
sobriety account them no better than Lords: Caes. com. lib. 5.
Of liberties, not much exceeding those of a City; and these (though in time of
peace independent upon each other, yea perpetual Enemies, yet) in time of
Foreign War, joined together to choose one Head to command them all, according
to the custom of the Germans, Lib. 6.
as Caesar notes. But that which yet clears the matter, is the testimony of
Dion in the Life of Severus the Emperor, who expressly says, That in Britain
the People held the Helm of Government in their own power. So as these were not
Kings, nor their Government Monarchical, and yet might be regular enough,
considering the rudeness that in those days overspread the world. True it is,
that by a holy man this Nation was in latter times of Barbarism, Hieron.
called Tyrannorum gens, the word being taken mitiori sensu, or from a common
repute of excessive cruelty, or oppression by Superiors. As touching their
Cruelty, I find no footsteps in story: Somewhat reflecteth upon their
Sacrifices, as if they offered Man's flesh; Caes. com. 6.
but that was common to the Gauls, who borrowed their Religion from Britain;
and it might be founded rather upon an error in judgment, than savageness of
nature. Much less cause does appear of any cry of oppression upon inferiors,
but rather against that; as the multitude of Kings or Lords do manifestly
witness, who being observed in the time of Julius Caesar, continued in Tiberius
his time and afterward, until in the Reign of Claudius it is said, that
Caractacus ruled over many Nations. For it is a certain Maxim, that though
great Nations may be upholden by power, small Territories must be maintained by
justice; without which, the door will be soon set open to the next passenger
that comes; especially where the people are bent to war, as these were, and
therein had attained such exquisite perfection of skill in Chariot-service, as
must needs convince us of their much experience against themselves, in regard
that to other people it was scarce known; no, nor yet to Caesar himself, that
had been practiced in the Wars of all Nations. And this is all that I can
produce out of story, touching the Government of Britain, before the entry of
that light that lightneth every one that comes into the world.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Conversion of the BRITONS unto the Faith.
IT was long before the Son of God was inwombed, and whiles as yet Providence
seemed to close only with the Jewish Nation, and to hover over it, as a choice
picked place from all the earth, that with a gracious eye surveying the
forsaken condition of other Nations, it glanced upon this Island; both thoughts
and words reflected on Isles, Isles of the Gentiles, Isles afar off, Isa. 42.
4. 51. 5. 60. 9. 66. 19.
as if amongst them the Lord of all the earth had found out one place that
should be to him as the Gemme of the ring of this Terrestrial Globe: and if the
ways of future providence may be looked upon as a gloss of those Prophecies, we
must confess that this Island was conceived in the womb thereof, long before it
was manifested to the world.

To recover the forgotten ways of past providence, is no less difficult, than
to search out the hidden bowels of future promises; and therefore I shall not
busy my self to find out the particular instruments that brought Gods presence
into this dark corner, but only glance at the time and manner, that it may
appear we were not forgotten, nor yet lost, or least in mind, at that time of
the dispensation of this grace unto all men. I dare not instance as Gildas, the
certain time of six years; yet I may say, that no sooner was the Scepter
departed from Judah, but with a swift pace, both it and the Lawgiver came
hither like an Arrow flying through other Countries, but sticking with a ne
plus ultra in this Island, (then a People rather than a Commonwealth) as if we
were the only White that then was in God's aim. It Is probable in the highest
degree that the work was done within the first Century, and very nigh about the
Apostolic times; for that in the second Century Britain was a Church of Fame,
and known to the Fathers that dwelt afar off, even to Tertullian and Origin,
and in short time had outreached the Roman confines in that Island, Tertul.
adv. Judaeos.
(which had cost them above two Hundred years Travel) and was grown to the
state of the first Christian Kingdom that ever was. Unto which, if we shall
allow time for the gathering and growth thereof unto this Royal pitch,
proportionable to the half of that which afterward was spent in the like work,
upon the Saxon and Danish Kings, we must in reason conclude that the work was
first ordered by Apostolical direction, or some of their Emissaries. Customs
also do not obscurely declare Ages. For before that Pius Bishop of Rome began
to speak in the big Language of Decrees, it was indifferent to keep Easter
either upon the day observed by the Roman Church, or on the day according to
the Jews custom: Platina de vit. Eleuthe.
and although the Roman Church began within fifty years after the death of John
the Evangelist, to stickle to impose their custom upon other Churches; yet the
Church of Britain conformed not to that course by the space of five Hundred
years after that time; Bed^ l. 5. c. 25.
which reflecteth probability, that the Church was there settled in times of
indifferency, not by Roman Order, but by some other purposed Messenger.

The manner yet is more remarkable; for that not only Principalities and
Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses in high places, (which are but
Stumbling Blocks) but also natural wisdom of the Druides (who were Masters of
the Consciences of the Britons, and their high conceit of their excellency
above the ordinary strain of men, and unto which the Cross of Christ is mere
foolishness; and above all, the deep obligement of the People unto these their
Rabbis, in a Devotion beyond the reach of other Nations: All these, I say)
stood in the way, and rendered the people more incapable of any new Light. But
when the time fore-set is fully come, all Mountains are laid low, and
double-folded Doors fly open; and this Conqueror of all Nations attempts
Britain, not in the Rear, nor by undermining, but assails them in their full
strength, presents in a clear Sunshine that one true Sacrifice of God-man; at
the appearing whereof, their shadows of many Sacrifices of man's flesh fly away.
And thus those Druides that formerly had dominion of the Britons Faith, become
now to be helpers of their joy, Origin. hom. 4. Ezekiel.
and are become the leaders of the blind people in a better way, and unto a
better hope; and held forth that Light which through Gods mercy has continued
in this Island ever since, through many Storms and dark Mists of time, until
the present Noonday.

CHAP. III. Of the entry of the Romans into Britain, and the state thereof
during their continuance.
THis conversion of the Druides was but the first step to that which followed,
Psalm. 2. 3.
for the Decree was more full of grace, than to make this Isle to be only as an
Inn for him to whom it was formerly given for a possession. The Romans are
called into the work, under whose Iron yoke, God had subdued all Nations,
thereby more speedily to bring to pass his own conquest, both of that one Head,
and all its Members. The first Caesar had entered Britain before the
Incarnation, and having seen and saluted it, and played his prize, returned
with the same only of Conquest of some few Lordships neighboring to the
Belgic shore; Tacit.
and so it continued correspondent to the Romans, or rather forgotten of them,
till the time of Claudius the Emperor; who being at leisure to bethink him of
the Britons Tribute, Vit. Agric.
or rather aspiring to honor by a way formerly untroden by his Ancestors,
first settled Colonies in Britain, and brought it into the form of a Province,
and engaged his Successors in a continual War to perfect that work, which
outwearied their strength at last, and made them forego the prey, as too heavy
for the Eagle to truss and carry away.

It often befalls, that things of deformed shape are nevertheless of excellent
spirit, and serve the turn best of all: and it is no less remarkable, that this
tide of Roman invasion, however it represented to the world little other than a
tumor of vainglory in the Romans, that must needs be fatal to the Britons
liberty and welfare: yet by overruling providence it conduced so much to the
Britons future glory, as it must be acknowledged one of the chief masterpieces
of supernatural moderatorship that ever this poor Island met with. First, he
taught them to bear the yoke, to stoop, and become tractable; for stubborn
spirits must first stoop under power, before they will stoop to instruction.
But this only in the way, for tractableness, if good ensue not, is of it self
but a disposition for evil. Secondly, it brought into Britain the knowledge of
Arts and Civility; and questionless it was a wise policy of Agricola, Tacit.
vit. Agric.
to go that way to work; for it is an easy and Royal work to govern wise men,
but to govern fools or madmen, is a continual slavery; and thus Religion
already settled in Britain, became honored with a train of Attendants and
Handmaids. Thirdly, they reduced the number of little Lordships nigher to the
more honorable estate of Monarchy: for the Romans, by dear experience, finding
no stability or assurance in what they had gotten, so long as so many petty
Kings had the rule; they wisely brought the whole into one Province (because it
is much easier to govern many subordinate each to other, than coordinate one
with another) over which they allowed one chief, to rule the people according
to their own Laws, saving their service to the Romans and their Lieutenants,
until they were necessitated to yield up all to the next occupant. This served
the British Church with a double interest. The first, Religion spreads sooner
under one uniform Government, than under variety; and under Monarchy rightly
ordered, rather than any other Government whatsoever; albeit that other
Governments may afford it faster footing when it is entered. Secondly, Rome was
a renowned Church throughout the world for gifts and graces; and it is obvious
to conceive, that it was specially purposed by Divine Providence to make that
place a Fountain, that from thence the knowledge of Christ might convey it self
joyfully with the influence of Imperial power, as the spirits with the Blood,
into all Nations of that vast body.

Above one hundred years were spent in this Provincial way of Government of
Britain, under the Roman Lieutenants; during all which time, Religion spread
under ground, whiles the Roman power in a continual war sprang upward. Nor is
it strange that Religion should thrive in War: the French Wars in Edward the
Thirds time, brought much of this happiness to England from the Waldenses; and
Germany had no less benefit by the wars of Charles the Fifth with the Italians,
French and Turks: and thus the Romans levened with the Gospel, by exchanging
men with Britain, and other mutual correspondencies, insinuated that leven by
degrees, which in the conclusion prevailed over all.

For the Roman Lieutenants having gotten sure footing in Britain, steered their
course with a different hand; generally they were of the Roman stamp, seeking
to kill Christ in the Cradle; and by that means Religion met with many storms
of bitter persecution, and so was compelled to bear a low sail: but some being
more debonaire, and of wiser observation, soon found, that the way of justice
and gentleness had more Force in Britain than Arms, and so endeavored to
maintain that by moderation, which they had gotten by labor and blood; as it
is ever seen that where conquest is in the van, gentleness follows in the rear,
because no Bow can stand long bent, but at length must give in and grow weak.
And thus by connivance, the Britons got a little more scope, and Religion more
encouragement, till it became acquainted with the Roman Deputies, began to
treat with the Emperors themselves, and under the wise government of Aurelius
the Emperor mounting into the British Throne, Crowned Lucius first of all
Kings with the Royal Title of a Christian.

He now not so much a Vassal as a Friend and Ally to the Romans, and perceiving
the Empire to be past noon, and their Lieutenants to comply with the
Christians, began to provide for future Generations, and according to the two
grand defects of Religion and Justice, applied himself for the establishment of
both.

Religion in Britain has hitherto been for the most part maintained by
immediate influence from Heaven. No Schools, no Learning, either maintained or
desired; the want whereof, together with the persecutions stirred up by the
Emperors, especially Domitian, brought the Church to so low an ebb, that the
Sacraments ceased: for Histories tell us that Lucius sent to Rome for relief,
and that the Bishop of that place (whether Evaristus or Eleutherius) sent over
Learned men to Preach and Baptize both King and People; M. Westminster. an. 181.
and this, Rome might probably gain some Honor, although possibly the King
intended it not, or much less to acknowledge any Authority or Power in that
Church, over that of Britain. This act of Lucius so advanced him in the opinion
of Writers, that they know not when they have said enough. Some will have him
to be the instrument of the first entry of Religion into this Isle; others,
that he settled a form of Church Government under the three Archbishops of
London, York, and Caerlion upon Vske, and 28 Bishoprics: the first of which is
cried down by many demonstrative instances; nor can it consist with the second,
nor that with it, or with the truth of other stories. For it neither can be
made out that Lucius had that large circuit within his Dominion, nor that the
title of Archbishop was in his days known; and it is very improbable that the
British Church was so numerous, or that Religion in his time was overspread the
whole Island: nor is there any mention in any Author of any Monuments of these
Archbishops, or Bishops of Britain, for the space of 200. years after this
King's reign, and yet no continual raging persecution (that we read of) that
should enforce them to obscure their profession, or hide their heads; or if
such times had been, it would have been expected that Bishops in those days
should be in Britain, (as well as in other places) most famous for gifts and
graces, and pass in the forefront of persecution. But we find no such thing; no
not in the rages of Dioclesian, which made the British Church famous for
Martyrs: Writers speak of Alban, Amphibalus, Aron, Julius and a multitude of
Lay People, but do not mention one Bishop, nor Presbyter, M. Westminster. an. 303.
nor other Clergyman, but quendam Clericum, a man it seems of no note, and of
unknown name. In Charity therefore the English Church in those days must be of
mean repute for outward pomp; and to liftedup to that height of Archbishops,
when as Rome it self was content with a Bishop.

Somewhat more probable it is, that is noted by Writers concerning Lucius his
endeavor to settle the Commonwealth and good Laws for Government, and to that
end did write a Letter to Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome, for a Model of the Roman
Laws; probably being induced thereunto by the splendour of the state of the
Roman-Church and Commonwealth, the only Favorite of fame in those times
through the Northern parts of the World. Things afar off, I confess, are dim,
and it is meet that Antiquaries should have the honor due to great
after-sight: And therefore I might think (as some of them have done) that the
Epistle of Eleutherius to King Lucius is spurious, if I could imagine to what
end any man should hazard his wits upon such a Fiction, or if the incongruities
charged against it were incurable; but being allowed to be first written in
Latin, and then translated into British for the peoples satisfaction, and in
that Language (the Original being lost) traduced to posterity; and then by some
Latin Writer in after-ages returned into Latin, and so derived to these times
(all which very probably has been;) such occasions of exceptions well arise by
mistake of Translators and Transcribers in ignorant times, and the substance
nevertheless remain entire and true. Considering therefore that the matter of
that Epistle savoureth of the purer times of the Church, Cic Attic. 2.
and so contrary to the dregs of Romulus, I mean, the policy, practice, and
language of the Roman Clergy in these latter ages, wherein this forgery (if so
it be) was made; I must allow it to pass for current for the substance, not
justifying the syllabical writing thereof.

To others it seems needless and vain, that Lucius should send for a model to
Eleutherius, when as the Roman Deputies and Legions at home might have
satisfied the Kings desire in that particular, or their own experience might
have taught them grounds sufficient, after two hundred years converse with the
Romans, that they should have little needed a model for that which they saw
continually before their view, or might have understood by inquiry of their own
acquaintance. But what could be expected of rough Soldiers, concerning form of
government of a Commonwealth? or if some exceeded the ordinary strain in
policy, yet they were too wise to communicate such Pearls to conquered Nations,
that ought to look no higher than the will of the Conqueror, and subsist in no
better condition than may be controlled by the Supreme Imperial Law of the Lord
Paramount; or if in this they had corresponded to the desires of the Britains,
yet being for the most part ignorant of the main, they could never have
satisfied the expectations of a Christian King, who desires such a Law as may
befriend Religion, and wherein no man was more like to give direction than
Eleutherius, who seeing a kind of enmity between the Roman-Laws, and Christ's
Kingdom, sends to the King a fair refusal of his request, upon this ground,
that Leges Romanas and Caesaris semper reprobare possumus. He saw that they
were not well grounded, he therefore refers the King to the sacred Scripture,
that is truth itself. Laws that come nighest to it are most constant, and make
the Government more easy for the Magistrate, quiet for the People, and
delightful to all; because men's minds are settled in expectation of future
events in Government, according to the present rule; and changes in course of
Government, are looked at as uncoth motions of the Celestial Bodies, portending
Judgments or Dissolution. This was the way of humane wisdom; but God has an
eye on all this beyond all reach of pre-conceit of man, which was to make
England happy in the enjoying of a better Law and Government than Rome, how
glorious soever then it was; and to deliver that Island from the common danger
of the World; for had we once come under the Law of the first Beast, as we were
under his Power, we had been in danger of being born Slaves under the Law of
the second Beast, as other Nations were, who cannot shake it off to this day.

But Lucius lived not to effect this work; it was much delayed by the evil of
the times, nothing was more changeable. Then the Emperors grew many of them so
vicious, as they were a burden to Mankind; nor could they endure any Deputy or
Lieutenant that were of better fame than themselves had. Some of them minded
the affairs of the East, others of the North, none of them were ad omnia. And
the Lieutenants in Britain, either too good for their Emperor, and so were
soon removed; or too bad for the people of the Land, and never suffered to rest
free from Tumults and Insurrections: So that neither Lucius could prevail, nor
any of his Successors; but passing through continual cross floods of
Persecutions under Maximinus, Dioclesian, and Maximinianus, and many Civil
Broiles, till the times of Constantine, at length the Haven was attained.

For Constantine having overcome Maxentius, and gotten thereby into the highest
Orb of Government in the Empire; reflected such an amiable aspect upon the
Churches, especially in Britain, as if he had intended to pay to them all that
God had lent him. A wise Prince he was questionless; yet toward the Church
showed more affection; endeavoring to reduce the Government in every place
unto the Roman Prototype, and therein added much honor to that See, especially
to Pope Sylvester, whose Scholar he had been. This may seem a sufficient
inducement to persuade, that he was the first Patron of English Prelacy, seeing
we find it in no approved testimony before that time, nor was it long after,
when as the presence of the British Bishops are found at the Synod by him
called at Arles, Council. Brit. 42.
viz. the Bishops (not Archbishops) of London and York, and the Bishop of
Maldune, and those in no great pomp, if the relation be true, that by reason of
their poverty they were not able to undergo the charge of their Journey and
Attendance; so as it seems they had but new set up, and had not yet found out
the right way of trade that the Bishops had attained. And thus God ordered
first the settling of a Government of the Church in Britain, and its Liberties,
before the Secular part enjoyed any; therein working with this Nation, as with
a man, making him to be bonus homo before he can be bonus civis.

The Church of Britain thus set together, is wound up for motion; they soon
learned the use of Synods from that Synod at Arles, if they had it not before:
and took as much power to themselves in their Synods as in other Countries were
used, and somewhat more to boot. For they had the hap to continue in Britain in
free course, a full century of years, before the Civil Magistrate had any other
power, but what was wrapped up under the allowance of their Romon Masters; who
like, Gallio, looked upon the Church Affairs as out of their Sphere, and
therefore cared for none of those things; or if the zeal of any See far
prevailed, it was much in favor of the Bishops, upon whom the Emperors began
to dote as Oracles; and this raised the price of the Clergy, and taught them
the way to fish for themselves. No wonder it is therefore if Synods in Britain,
or rather the Clergy in the Synods, (which probably were then the
representative Body of the Nation) swayed all that was free from the
Roman-Magistracy, and in some things out-reached their Limits, especially
during the interim wherein the Romans held the Arms of civil Magistracy bound,
and let the Clergy have their scope, that soon began to be ambient, and conceit
a new Idaea of deportment, like that of the second Beast in its Infancy. Nor
did the Britons espy their danger herein, for they had been used to idolize
their Druides, and it was no more but facing about to do as much for their
Bishops.

Of this power of Synods I shall propound but three Presidents, and so draw to
a Conclusion of what I think meet to note concerning the British affairs. I
supose it will not be doubted but that public Consultations concerning the
public Government of any Place or Nation, ought not to be called but by the
Supreme Power; and that such Consultations are to be directed by that Supreme
Power. The Britons had a King, and yet without his consent they call a Synod
against the Pelagian Heresy, M. Westminster. An. 446. Beda. Lib. 1. cap. 17.
and choose a Moderator from beyond the Sea, and by that Synod not only
overwhelmed the Heresy, but excommunicated their King. This was a National
Synod, and might well stand with the rule of State, which then had seated the
Supreme Power in the People, as I formerly noted out of Dion. But it could be
no warrant for that which followed, viz. that a Country Synod should
excommunicate a King, as it befell in the the cases of Moris and Morcant: or
that such a Synod should intermeddle in matters of Meum and tuum, Council. Brit.
p. 49, 62, 382. Council. Brit. 385
as in the case of Loumack, who having invaded the patrimony of the Church, the
Bishop of Landaff, in a Synod of his Clergy, enjoined him Penance. And the like
befell unto Brockvaile, who was compelled by the Synod to make amends to
Civiliack Bishop of Landaff, for injury to him done: Which I note not by way of
imputation; for this exorbitancy (if so it were) might correspond with these
Times, wherein very probable it is, that Justice could not be had elsewhere.
And had the Clergy been as careful of Holiness, as in the former cases they
seem jealous for Justice, Britain must have had the repute of a Nation of
Priests and Holy men, rather than of Tyrants: whereas it was become a glut of
wickedness, and a burden that God would endure no longer: Gildas.
Which rendereth their Synod liable to Exception, as being such as were either
lifted up, or drawn aside; and as the List to the Cloth, shows that the
Nation stood in need of that instruction, which with a strong hand God wrought
into them by the sad Calamity which ensues.

CHAP IV. Of the entry of the Saxons, and their manner of Government.
WAsted with time, and wounded by eternal doom, the glory of the Western Empire
going down apace, now draws nigh unto its everlasting night; and that vast
body (not able longer to subsist, but dying by degrees) abandons this Isle of
Britain its utmost limit, and last inlivened, to subsist alone miserably, or
else to die. The choice was more difficult by how much the more England was
much wasted in the Roman Wars, the flower of their strength spent in Foreign
service, the remainder but few, and these exceeding vicious; and which was
worst of all, engaged by the Romans in a War with the Picts, against whom the
Romans themselves found it too burdensome for some of them to hold out, without
the help of a Wall: and albeit that the very name of an old Servant of four
hundred years continuance, might have moved a Roman heart to commiserate, yet
their spirits fail, and forsaken England must now go into the wilderness, and
naked as they are, endure the brunt of the cold storms of the Northern Picts,
without any shelter but the hidden will of God then frowning upon them. In this
condition, they half desperate, seek for a cure in reason worse than the
disease. For it had been better for them to have stooped to hard conditions
with the Picts, considering they were all but one people, and differing only by
the breadth of a wall, than to call in a new people whose qualities they were
ignorant of; and at the best to make them their companions, who might prove (as
they afterward did) both Lords and Masters over them. But there is no reason
against God's will. The Britons needed present help, Amian. l. 16.
they overlaid by invasions from the Picts (who soon espied the Romans gone,
and their own advantage) sent for aid where they were most like to speed for
the present, and left the future to look to it self. Ireland was nigh, but we
find nothing concerning their interest in shipping; the French Coasts were not
their own men, being yet within the Roman Line: and none were at liberty, but
such as were never subdued by the Romans; Zossimus hist* lib. 3.
only the Saxons are in the thoughts of the Britons, a mighty people not far
off, able to mate the Romans in their chiefest pride; and though in a manner
Borderers upon the Roman world, yet unsubdued by them, used to the Wars, mighty
at Sea, and now given over by the Romans in a plain field, were at leisure, and
so well knew the way to Britain, that the Romans entitled the Coasts of
Norfolk and Suffolk the Saxons Coasts, from the many visits that the Saxons had
already made into those parts, Amian. lib. 28. 30.
full sore against the Romans wills.

I hold it both needless and fruitless to enter into the Lists, concerning the
original of the Saxons; whether they were Natives from the Northern parts of
Germany, or the Relics of the Macedonian Army under Alexander. But it seems
their Government about the time of Tiberius was in the general so suitable to
the Grecians, Suffrid. Petrus Fris. antiquit. lib. 3. cap. 1.
as if not by the Relics of Alexanders Army (which is generally agreed,
emptied it self into the North) yet by the Neighborhood of Greece unto these
Nations, it cannot be imagined, but much of the Grecian wisdom was derived into
those parts, long before the Romans glory was mounted up to the full pitch; and
because this wisdom could never be thus imported, but in vessels of man's flesh,
rigged according to the Grecian guize, it may be well supposed, that there is
some consanguinity between the Saxons and the Grecians, although the degrees be
not known. The people were a free people, governed by Laws, and those made not
after the manner of the Gauls (as Caesar notes) by the great men, Caes. Com.
but by the people; and therefore called a free-people, because they are a Law
to themselves, and this was a privilege belonging to all the Germans, as
Tacitus observes, in cases of most public consequence, de majoribus omnes;
Histor. Germ. Plutarch. vit. Solon. and Lycurg.
like unto the manner both of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians in their Concio.
For which cause also I take the Gauls to be strangers in Blood unto the
Britons, however nigh they were in habitation. That some matters of action
(especially concerning the public safety) were by that general vote concluded
and ordered, seems probably by their manner of meeting with their weapons. But
such matters as were of less concernment, Albinus Sax. 72.
the Council of Lords determined de minoribus Principes, says the same Author.
Their Country they divided into Counties or Circuits all under the government
of twelve Lords, like the Athenian territory under the Archontes. Xenophon.
These (with the other Princes) had the judicial power of distributive justice
committed to them, together with one hundred of the Commons out of each
division. Tacit.
The Election of these Princes with their Commission, was concluded inter
majora by the general Assembly, and they executed their Commission in Circuits,
Emius.
like unto the Athenian Heliastick or Subdial Court, which was rural, and for
the most part kept in the open air. In brief, their judicial proceedings were
very suitable to the Athenian, but their military more like the Lacedomonian,
whom above all others in their manners they most resembled. In their Religion
they were very devout, saving that they much rested in the reverence they bare
to their Priests, whom they made the moderator of their general Assembly, their
Judge, Advocate, and Executioner in Martial Law; therein submitting to them as
unto Gods instrument. They worship an invisible and an infinite Diety; man's
flesh is their Sacrifice of highest account: and as often as they make inquiry
by lots, they do it with that solemn reverence as may put all the Christian
world to the blush, precatus Deos, caelumque suspiciens; and this done by the
Priest of the Town, if it be in public causes, or otherwise if private, then
by the master of the Family; so as they had Family Worship as well as public.
These things I note, that it may appear how nigh these invited guests resemble
the old Religion of the Britons, and how probable it is, that this Island has
from time to time been no other than as a Sewer to empty the superfluity of the
German Nations; Avent. Anal. Bowr. 1. 10. Beuter. in Tac. 125
and how the influence of these old principles does work in the fundamental
government of this Kingdom, to this present day. These are the instruments
chosen by God, and called by the Britons to be their deliverers from their
Enemies, which they did indeed; yet not swayed thereto by love of Justice or
compassion (for if writers say true, Amian.
they were no better than high-way-men both by Sea and Land) but by their love
of spoil and prey, and by the displeasure of God against a dissolute people.
They profess friendship nevertheless in their first entrance; but espying the
weakness of the Britons, and feeling the strength of the Picts, and finding the
Land large and good, they soon picked quarrels with their Host, made peace with
the Picts, and of fained Friends, becoming unfeigned Foes to the Britons,
scattered a poor remnant of Christians, some to the furthest corners of the
Kingdom, others into foreign Nations, like so many Seeds men, to sow the
precious Seed of Life in a savage soil. And those few that remained behind,
profiting under much misery, by their doctrine and good example yielded better
blessings unto their new-come guests than they either expected or desired. And
thus the miseries of poor Britain became riches of mercy to the North and
Eastern people; and the ruins here, the foundations of many famous Churches
elsewhere. Nor yet was mercy from the Britons utterly taken away, nor their
blood drawn out to the last drop, or their name quite blotted out of the book
of fame: for whereas two things make men miserable, viz. the heaviness of the
burden without, and the failing of the heart within, and Gods ordinary way of
redress of the former begins in taking away the latter; thus dealt he with
the Britons. For in danger, as want of strength breeds fear, and that (by
extremity) despair, so despair oftentimes revives into a kind of rage that puts
strength forth beyond reason; I say beyond reason, for cause cannot not be
given thereof, other than Gods extraordinary dispensation in a judiciary way,
when he sees the stronger to wax insolent over the weaker. Thus the Britons
fled from the Picts so long as they had any hope of relief from the Saxons; but
being become their Enemies, and pursuing them to the low water mark, that in
all reason they must either drink or bleed their last; then their courage
revived, and by diverse Victories, by the space of 200 years, God stopped the
hasty Conquest of the Saxons. The result whereof, by truces, leagues, commerce*
conversation, and marriages between these two Nations, declared plainly that it
was too late for the Saxons to get all; their bounds being predetermined by
God, and thus declared to the world. In all which, God (taming the Britons
pride by the Saxons power, and discovering the Saxons darkness by the Britons
light) made himself Lord over both people in the conclusion.

CHAP. V. Of Austin's coming to the Saxons in England. His Entertainment, and
Work.
DUring these troublesome times, came a third party that wrought more trouble
to this Isle than either Pict or Saxon, for it troubled all. This was the
Canonical power of the Roman Bishop, now called the Universal Bishop. For the
Roman Emperor having removed the Imperial residence to Constantinople, weakened
the Western part of the Empire; and exposed it not only to the foreign
invasions of the Goths, Vandals, Herules, Lombards, and other flotes of people,
that about these times, by secret instinct were weary of their own dwellings;
but also to the rising power of the Bishop of Rome, Naucler. 505.
and purposely for his advancement. Who by patience out-rode the storms of
foreign force, and took advantage of those public calamitous times to
insinuate deeper into the Consciences of distressed people, that knew no other
consolation in a plundered estate, but from God and the Bishop, who was the
chief in account amongst them. The power of the Bishop of Rome thus growing in
the West, made him to out-reach not only his own Diocese and Province, but to
mind a kind of Ecclesiastical Empire, and a title according thereunto; which at
length he attained from an Emperor fitted for his turn; and that was enough to
make him pass for current in the Empire. But Britain was forsaken by the Roman
Empire above 153 years before: So as, though the Emperor could prefer his
Chaplains Power or Honor as far as his own, which was to the French shore; yet
Britain was in another world under the Saxons power and not worth looking after
till the plundering was over, and the Saxon affairs settled; so as some fat may
be had. Then an instrument is sought after for the work, and none is found so
far fit to wind the Saxon up to the Roman bent as a Monk, that was a holy
humble man in the opinion of all, but of those that were so in the truth, and
knew him. This is Austin, sent by Pope Gregory to do a work that would not be
publicly owned. It was pretended to bring Religion to the Saxons in England;
therefore they give him the title of the Saxon Apostle; but to be plain, it was
to bring in a Church-policy, with a kind of worship that rendered the Latria to
God, and the Dulia to Rome. The Saxons were not wholly distitute of Religion,
and that, Greg. Epist. lib. 5. Epist. 59.
Gregory himself in his Letter to Brunchilda, the French Queen, confesses,
Indicamus, says he, ad nos pervenisse Ecclesiam Anglicanam velle fieri
Christianam; so as there was a good disposition to Religion before ever Austin
came, and such an one as rang loud to Rome. But far more evident is it from the
Saxons keeping of Easter more Asiatico, which custom also continued after
Austins coming fifty years, Bed. hist. lib. 3. cap. 25.
sore against Austins will. The dispute between Coleman and Wilfride bears
witness to that; and it had been a miraculous ignorance or hardness, had the
Saxons, a people ordained for mercy (as the sequel showed) conversed with the
Christian Britons and Picts above 150 years, Bed. hist. lib. 1. cap. 23.
without any touch of their Religion. If we then take Austin in his best
color, Lib. 3. cap. 4.
he might be said to bring Religion to the South Saxons, after the Roman garb;
Bed. hist. lib. 1. cap. 27.
and his hottest disputes about Easter, Tonsure, the Roman supremacy; Lib. 2.
cap. 2.
and his own Legatine power, and his worthy Queries to the Pope, show he
regarded more the fashion than the thing; and the fashion of his person, more
than the work he pretended; for he loved state, and to be somewhat like to the
Legate of an Universal Bishop; Greg. Epist. l. 7. Epist. 13. 7.
and therefore of a Monk he suddenly becomes a Bishop in Germany, before ever
he had a Diocese, Council. Brit. 92.
or saw England; and after he perceived that his work was like to thrive, he
returned, and was made Archbishop of the Saxons, before any other Bishops were
amongst them; Bed. hist. lib. 1. cap. 29.
and after three years had the Pall, with title of Supremacy over the British
Bishops that never submitted to him.

His advantages were, first his entrance upon Kent, the furthest corner of all
the Island from the Britains and Picts, and so less prejudiced by their
Church-policy; and at that very time interessed in the Roman air above all the
other Saxons: for their King had Married a Daughter of France, one that was a
pupil to Rome, Bed. hist. lib. 1. cap. 25.
and a devout woman; she first brought Austin into acceptance with the King,
who also at that present held the chief power of all the Saxon Kings in this
Isle, Greg. Epist. lib. Epist. 59.
which was now of great efficacy in this work; for where Religion and power
flow from one spring to one stream, it is hard to choose the one, and refuse the
other. And thus Rome may thank France for the first earnest they had of all the
riches of England, and we for the first entrance of all our ensuing bondage and
misery. Austin had also a gift or trick of working miracles, 2 These. 2.
whether more suitable to the working of Satan, or of God, I cannot define. It
seems they walked only in the dark; for either the Britons saw through them,
or saw them not; nor could Austin with his miracles or finess settle one
footstep of his Church-poliy amongst them; happily they remembering the Roman
Dagon, liked the worse of the Roman woman; and the rather because the Carriage
of their Messenger was as full of the Archbishop, as it was empty of the
Christian. I would not touch upon particular passages of action, but that it is
so remarkable, that Austin himself, but a Novice in comparison of the British
Bishops (the clearest lights that the Northern parts of the world then had, and
unto whom the right hand of fellowship was due by the Roman Canon) should
nevertheless show no more respect to them at their first solemn entrance into
his presence than to Vassals. I would not but note the same as a strong
argument that this whole work ab initio, was but a vapor of Prelacy. This the
British Bishops soon espied, and shaped him an answer suitable to his message,
the substance whereof was afterward sent him in writing by the Abbot of Bangor,
and of late published by Sir Henry Spelman, as follows:

BE it known (and without doubt) unto you, that we all, and every one of us,
are obedient and subject to the Church of God, and to the Pope of Rome, and to
every godly Christian, to love every one in his degree, in perfect Charity, and
to help every one of them, by word and deed to be Children of God: And other
obedience than this I do not know to be due to him whom you name to be Pope;
nor by the Father of Fathers to be claimed or demanded. And this obedience we
are ready to give and pay to him, and to every Christian continually. Besides,
we are under the government of the Bishop of Caerleon upon Uske, who is to
oversee under God over us, and cause us to keep the way spiritual.

This was the Britons resolution, and they were as good as their word; for they
maintained the liberty of their Church five hundred years after this time; and
were the last of all the Churches of Europe that gave their power to the Roman
beast; and Henry the Eighth, that came of that blood by Teuther, the first that
took away that power again. Austin having met with this affront, and perceiving
that the Britons were stronger in their Faith than he by his Miracles, cast
about to try the Saxons courtesy; that what the Ephod could not, the Sword
wrapped up therein should. I say not that he procured, but he threatened or
prophesied the destruction of the Monks of Bangor; Bed. hist. lib. 2. cap. 2.
and it came to pass, and the accasion by writers loudly suspected.
Nevertheless the Saxons were not so zealous of their new Religion, as to make a
new National quarrel between the Britons and themselves, but left the game to
be played out by Austin; Council Brit. fol. 111.
who finding by experience that it would not prove the work of one man, left it
to successors to work out by degrees in efflux of time. And thus Austin,
neither good Servant to the Servant of Servants, nor good Monk, retires to
settle his Saxon province, and to present, or rather to prostitute it to the
lusts of that red Whore; which was the general piety of those ignorant times.

CHAP. VI. Of the Imbodying of Prelacy into the Government of this Kingdom.
I Cannot think that the platform of the mystery of iniquity (when boiled to
the height) was ever foreseen, or in the aim of the wicked spirits on Earth,
or those in Hell. Yet were they all instruments of this monstrous birth, filled
with subtilty and mischief, guided principally by occasion, and overruled by
the Justice and Wisdom of God, to make a yoke for Monarchs, and a scourge to
the world for their refusal of the government of Christ, until this Monster
came to perfection; and wherein themselves were feloes de se, and wrought their
own mischief. For Austin coming in as a third Proprietor with King and People,
and having gathered the materials of a Church, reason told them that a form of
government must be settled in that Church. The Saxons had no principles of their
own (for they had no learning) and to go to the Britons for a pattern might be
ignoble; and where the choice is small, Tacit. mor. Sermon.
it is soon made. Rome held now the most part of the Churches of Europe at
School; the Saxons soon resolve, Rome that had been their Mother, shall be also
their Father: And thus at one draught they drank up a Potion of the whole
Hierarchy of Rome from, the Pope to the Apparator, with a quicquid imponitur
and imponetur, which was of such lasting efficacy, that it cease not to work
even to this day, although it was slow in the first operation. For the Saxons
had a Commonwealth founded in the liberty of the people; and it was a
masterpiece for Austin and the Clergy, so to work, as to remain members of this
Commonwealth, and yet retain their hearts for Rome, which was now grown almost
to the pitch of that Antichrist. For reason must needs tell them, that the
Saxon principles would not suffer them to be ad omnia for Rome, nor the Roman
Canon allow them to be wholly Saxon; and they faw plainly that the times were
too tender to endure them to be declarative on either part; and therefore they
chose a third way, which was to preserve the municipal Laws in moderation
toward the Canon, and to that end to endeavor such a temper upon the State as
must admit them to be in repute, such as without whom the Commonwealth could
not well subsist, no more than a body without a soul; and that few occasions
should befall, but (at least in ordine remoto) must reflect upon both, and then
all reason will bespeak them to join in the legislative power and government of
this Kingdom; but especially as Bishops, who are now Magnae spes altera Romae,
and the very top-flowers of wisdom and learning. And unto this temper the
Saxons were sufficiently prepared and inclinable; for it was no new thing for
them to admit their Heathenish Priests into their general meetings, and allow
them much power therein; and then it is but the person changed, and they must
do as much for their Bishops, now they are become Christian; especially
themselves being all for the field, and overgrown with a general ignorance, the
common disease of those times. Kings were in no better condition: it was hard
for them to be Baptized, and not to be Baptized into Rome, and commonly under
such a Covenant as though many might repent of, yet none durst amend: For
whenas the Pope is Lord of the Consciences of the people, the Kings power may
sometimes outface, but can never govern: the Saxon Kings were therefore fain
to make a virtue of necessity, and advance Bishops to be common favorites both
of Rome and themselves, to maintain good correspondency between both Swords;
and to countenance the power of the temporal Magistrate in cases of dispute,
else he oftentimes might command, and yet go without. Thus entered the Prelates
upon affairs of Kings and Kingdoms, and became lovers of Lordships, and
troublers of States; and if in any thing they served their Country, they served
Rome much more; their merchandise was made of the policies and Counsels of all
Kingdoms and States, and such returns proceeded as were still subservient to
the Roman interest; and they intoxicated the domestic counsels in such manner,
as they generally staggered, and many times came short of home. Nevertheless,
at the first this was but rare, clancular, and covered with much modesty; for
(excepting such choice spirits as Austin had) Roman Prelacy in these younger
times was but Velvet-headed, and endured not much greatness or big titles, but
spoke like a Lamb; Ego non verbis quaero prosperari, sed moribus, said this
Gregory to the Alexandrian Bishop, who had put upon him the title of Universal
Bishop or Pope: and whereas he had in a way of Courtship called Gregory's
Counsels commands, Greg. Epist. ad Eulog.
he startles, at it; quod verbum jussionis, says he, peto a meo auditu
removeri, quia scio quis sum and qui estis. Thus Prelacy first conveyed it self
into opinion, afterward into conscience; and ambition coming in the rear, made
it become both Bishop and Lord.

CHAP. VII. Of Metropolitans in the Saxons time.
BEing in pursuit of the Government of this Kingdom in elder times, and therein
first of the persons with their relation, then of their work, and lastly of
their Courts and Laws, and now in hand with the Ecclesiastical persons, I shall
descend to their particular ranks or degrees, and shall show what they were in
their original, and what overplus they had by Laws. And first concerning the
Metropolitan. In his original, his Office was to visit the Bishops, admonish
and exhort them* and in full Synod to correct such disorders as the Bishop
could not reform, and in all things to proceed according to the prescript Canon.

Thus witnesses Boniface, Council. Brit. p. 258.
an Archbishop to an Archbishop of an Archbishop; not according to the practice
of the times wherein it was written, but according to the ancient rule. An. 745.
For long before Boniface his time Archbishops were swollen beyond the girt of
the Canon; and before that England wa^ honored with that rank of men,
Metropolitans were become Metrono^^ians, and above all rule, but that of their
own will, and through common custom had no regard to any other; so as if
England will have them, it must be content to have them with their faults. But
the truth is, the dignity, or title (which you will) was a plant of that
virulent nature that would scarce keep underground in the time of the hottest
persecution: For Steven, Mag. cent. 3 cap. 7.
Bishop of Rome, liked the title of Universal Bishop. And after a little peace,
it is a wonder how it grew to that height that it had; and no less wonderful
that the Saxons gave entertainment to such Potentates. Much of whose spirits
they might have observed in the entrance of their first Archbishop Austin, if
God had not given them over to thraldom under the mystery of iniquity (of
sinful man aspiring into the place of God, taught by that Courtly messenger of
Rome) because they would not stoop to that mystery of godliness, God manifested
in the flesh, as it was taught in simplicity by the rural Picts and Britons.
But this was not all, for because Archbishops were gotten above Canon, which
was thought scandalous; therefore they gave as large a power by Canon as the
former usurpation amounted unto, and so stretched the Canon to the mind of the
man, whenas they should have rather reduced the man to the Canon. The words of
the Canon in our English tongue, run thus: It belongs to the Metropolian Bishop
to rule Gods Churches; to govern, choose, appoint, confirm, and remove Abbots,
Abbotesses, Presbyters, and Deacons; and herewith the King has nothing to do.
And thus, though the apparent power of Archbishops was great and unlimited,
Council. Brit. p. 190.
yet what more was wrapped up in that word Churches, only time must declare;
for it is very likely that in those days it was not understood: yet the
practice does not obscurely declare the matter, for before this Law was
established by Withered in a Council (wherein Bertnaldus Archbishop of
Canterbury was president, An. 694. Ant. Brit. p. 55.
and who was first Primate of England) Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury used
such power over other Bishops in ordaining or removing them, as a Writer says,
that his rule was no other than perturbatio and impetus animi. But the
Metropolitan in England as the times then were, Malmsb. lib. 1. cap. 2.
had yet a further advantage, even over Kings themselves; Ant. Brit. p. 54.
for there were diverse Kingdoms in this Island, and Kings had no further power
than their limits afforded them: But there was but one Metropolitan for a long
time in all the Saxon Territories, so as his power was in spirituals over many
Kingdoms, and so he became indeed Alterius orbis Papa. And it was a remarkable
testimony of Gods special providence, that the spirits of these petty Popes
should be so bound up under the notion of the infallibility of the Roman Chair,
that they had not torn the European Church into as many Popedoms as Provinces.
But no doubt God ordered it for a Scourge to the World, that Antichrist should
be but one, that he might be the more absolute Tyrant; and that Kings should
bow down their necks under the double or rather multiple yoke of Pope and
Archbishops, for their Rebellion against the King of Kings.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Saxon Bishops.
HAd not Bishops been somewhat suitable, the Roman Clergy had not been like it
self; and it had been contrary to Austin's principles to have advanced to
Bishoprics men better qualified than himself. They first ruled the Saxon
Church jointly in the nature of a Presbytery, till about Sixty years after
Austin's time, their pride would not endure together any longer, and it may be
grew somewhat untractable under the Metropolitan, that resolved to be prouder
than all; and thereupon Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury first divided his
Province into Five Diocesses, and by appointment of the Kings and People placed
Bishops over each, Ant. Brit. Council. Brit 133.
every one of them being of the right Roman stamp, Ant. Brit. 45. Ibid. 53.
as himself was of the right Roman shaving. And it had been a wonder if
Episcopacy (now for the space of Three hundred years degenerated, and that into
such a monstrous shape as a Pope) should by transplanting become regenerate
into their original condition of meekness and humility. But it is a much
greater wonder that they should become so purely ambitious as not to endure a
thought of the ways of sobriety, but would be proud by Law; to let all the
world know that they held it no infirmity, but an honor. For albeit that in
the first time the Bishops work was to instruct and teach, to see the service
of God to be diligently and purely administered in public Congregations,
Council. Brit. 238, 246, 261.
to Exhort, Reprove, and by teaching to amend such matters as he should find in
life and Doctrine contrary to Religion; and accordingly they carried themselves
meekly and humbly, Mag. Cent. 7. cap. 7.
studying peace and truth, and meddled not with Secular Affairs: they are now
grown up into State, Bed. hist. lib. 4. cap. 3.
and must now ride on horseback, that were wont to go on foot Preaching the
Word; and must be respected above the rank of ordinary Presbytery; none must
doubt of their truth, nor question their words, but they must be holden Sacred,
as the word of a King, sine juramento sit irrefragabile. Council Brit. 196.
Their presence must be a Sanctuary against all violence; An. 697.
all Clerks and Religious houses must stoop under their power; their sentence
must be definitive: Ibid. 329. An. 816.
and thus advanced, they must keep state, viz. not go too far to meet Princes
in their approach toward them, nor to light off their Horses backs to do
Princes Reverence at their meeting; because they are equal to Princes and
Emperors: and if any Bishop shall behave himself otherwise, Conc. 8. genesis
Constant. can. 14.
and after the old rustical fashion (for such are the words of the Canon) for
disgrace done to their Dignity they must be suspended: So as by their own
confession, Bishops henceforth are Bishops of a new fashion, that must incur a
note of infamy for showing any gesture of humility to Princes; which if any man
will see more fully, let him peruse the Canon if he please. But this is not
sublime enough; they must be not only equal, but in many respects superior to
Princes: for in matters that concern God, Omnibus dignitatibus praesunt; and
more plainly, Princes must obey them Ex cord cum magna humilitate; Mag. cent.
8. cap 9.
and this was allowed of by Offa the great in a legatine Synod. And thus highly
advanced, Bishops are now consecrated to any work, and make every thing Sacred.
Oaths taken before them are of highest moment; Council. Brit. 128.
and therefore the trial of Crimes before them, and the acknowledgment of Deeds
of conveyance in their presence, are without control. An. 693.
Their custody is a sufficient Seal to all weights and measures, Ll. Sax. cap.
37.
which they committed to some Clerk whom they trusted: An. Aetheist. cap. 11.
and at this day (though a Lay-person) bears title of Clerk Council. Brit*
Council. Brit. p. 197.
of the Market. And although anciently they might not interesse secularibus;
yet afterward it became a part of their Office to assist Judges in secular
causes, An. 697.
to see that justice be not wronged; and they had the sole cognizance of all
causes criminal belonging to the Clergy, their Tenants or Servants; and in
their Synods their power reached to such Crimes of Laymen as came within the
savor of the Canon, though it were but in the cold scent, as the Laws of
Athelstane and other his successors sufficiently set forth. And thus dressed
up, let them stand aside, that room may be made for their Train.

CHAP IX. Of the Saxon Presbyters.
THese follow their Lords the Bishops as fast as they can hunt; for being of
the same Order (as the less proud times acknowledged) they would not be under
foot, Council. Brit. p. 576.
and the others above the top. True it is, that the Bishops loaded them with
Canons, and kept them under by hard work, under the trick of Canonical
obedience; yet it was no part of their meaning to suffer them to become vile in
the eyes of the Laity, Council. Brit. p. 448.
for they knew well enough that the Presbyters must be their bridles to lead
and curb the people, Ll. Aethe^st. 13. Ibid. 406.
and their eyes to see whether the winds from below blew fair or foul for them;
whose consciences already told them that they merited not much favor from the
people. Council. Brit. p. 273.
They see it therefore necessary to inhaunce the price of a Presbyter somewhat
within the alloye of a Bishop, Ll. Aethel. c. 2. Ll. Canut. c. 12.
to the end that the Presbytery may not be too like the Babylonian Image, Mag.
cent. 8* cap. 9.
whose head was Gold, and feet of Iron and Clay. A Presbyter therefore they
will have to be of equal Repute with a Baron; and his person shall be in Repute
so Sacred, as that all wrong done thereunto must be doubly punished, with
satisfaction to the party, and to the Church. His Credit or Fame must not be
touched by Lay-testimony: Nor is he to be judged by any Secular power; but to
be honored as an Angel. Such are these instruments of the Bishops Government;
and these are put as a glass between the Bishops and people, and could
represent the people to the Bishop black or white, and the Bishop to them in
like manner, as they pleased; and so under fear of the Bishops curse, kept the
people in awe to themselves and it.

CHAP. X. Of other inferior Church Officers amongst the Saxons.
THey had other inferior degrees of the Clergy, which because they are merely
subservient, and not considerable in Church Government, I shall only touch upon
them. Deacons.
The first are called Deacons, which were attending upon the Presbyters to
bring the offerings to the Altar, to read the Gospel, to Baptize, and
Administer the Lords Supper. Then follow the Subdeacons, who used to attend
the Deacons with consecrated Vessels, Subdeacons.
and other necessaries for the Administering of the Sacrements. Next these
Acolites, which waited with the Trapers ready lighted while the Gospel was
read, Acolites.
and the Sacrament consecrated. Exorcists.
Then Exorcists, that served to disposses such as are possessed by the Devil;
and office (as it may seem) of little use, Council. Brit. p. 54.
yet very ancient; for they are found at the Synod at Arles, which was within
Three Hundred years after Christ's death. Lecturers came next, Lecturers.
who served to read and expound; and these were of use when Churches began to
multiply, and Presbyters grew idle. Lastly, Ostiaries; which used to ring the
bells, Ostiaries.
and open and shut the Church-doors.

These are the several ranks of Church Officers, being Seven in number, (for
Bishops and Presbyters make but one) and might be (as thus ordered) the Seven
heads of the Beast whereon the woman sits; Council. Brit. 261.
and with much ado make up a kind of Church Service, somewhat like a great Hoe
in a ship-yard at the stirring of a little log, An. 750.
and are nevertheless well paid for their labor.

CHAP. XI. Of Church-mens maintenance amongst the Saxons.
I Take no notice in this account of the Abbots and Priors, and other such
Religious men, as they were then called; nor can I pass them amongst the number
of Church Governors or Officers, being no other than as a sixth finger, or an
excrescence that the body might well spare, and yet they sucked up much of the
blood and spirits thereof. But as touching the maintenance of those formerly
mentioned, who had a constant influence in the Government of the affairs of the
public worship of God, and regard of salvation of the Souls of the people; I
say their maintenance was diversely raised, and as diversely employed. First,
through the bounty of Kings and great men, Lands and Manors were bestowed upon
the Metropolitan and Bishops, in free Alms; and from these arose the
maintenance that ascended up in abundance to the higher Region of the Clergy,
but came again in thin dews scarce enough to keep the Husbandmans hope from
despair; otherwise had not the Prelates so soon mounted up into the chair of
Pomp and State, as they did. I say, these are given in free Alms, or more
plainly, as Alms free from all service; and this was doubtless soon thought
upon, for it was formerly in president with their Heathenish-Priests and
Druids, as Caesar notes, that they had omnium rerum immunitatem: yet with the
exception of works of public charity and safety, such as are maintaining of
Highways, repairing of Bridges, and fortifying of Castles, etc. and hereof the
presidents are numerous. The work whereto this wages was appointed, was the
worship of God, and increase of Religion; and thus not only many of the Kings
Subjects were exempted from public service, but much of the Revenue of the
Kingdom formerly employed for the public safety, became acquitted from the
service of the Field, to the service of the Bead; the strength of the Kingdom
much impaired, and the Subjects much grieved; who in those early times saw the
inconveniences, and complained thereof to their Kings, but could not prevail.
This was the vintage of Kings and great men, M. Paris in vit. Eadrick. Abb.
but the gleanings of the people were much more plentiful; for besides the
Courts (which swelled as the irregularities of those times increased, and
thereby enriched the Cofers of that covetous Generation, the greatest part
whereof ought by the Canon to go to the public) the best part of the settled
maintenance, An. 1009.
especially of the inferior degrees, Council. Brit. 513.
arose from the good affections of the people, Ll. Aetheld. 31.
who were either forward to offer, or easily persuaded to forgo constant supply
for the Churchmen out of their Estates, as well real as personal, especially
in the particulars ensuing. The most ancient of all the rest was the
first fruits, which was by way of eminency called Cyrick-sceate, or in more
plain English, First Fruits
Church free; which was always payable upon St. Martins day unto the Bishop out
of that house where the party did inhabit upon the day or Feast of the
Nativity. Council. Brit. p. 185.
It was first granted by Parliament in the time of King Ina; and in case of
neglect of payment, An. 693.
or denial, it was penal eleven-fold to the Bishop, Council. Brit. p. 545.
besides a fine to the King, as was afterward ordered by Canutus.

After the first fruits comes to consideration the Revenue of Tithes, the
which I find no public Act of State to warrant, Tithes.
till the Legatine Council under Offa: Although the Canon was more ancient.
Council. Brit. p. 298.
The Bishop at the first was the general Receiver as well of these as of the
former, An. 787.
and by him they were divided into Three parts, Council. Brit. 259.
and employed one to the poor; another for the maintenance of the Church; and a
Third part for the maintenance of the Presbyter. But in future times many Acts
of State succeeded concerning this, amongst which that grant of Athelwolfe must
be a little paused upon. Ingulfus. Gest. pontif. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
Some Writers say that he gave the tenth Mansion, and the tenth of all his
goods: but Malmsbury says, the tenth of the hides of Land; but in the Donation
it self, as it is by him recited, it is the Tenth Mansion. But Matthew. Westminster.
understands that he gave the Tenth part of his Kingdom, An. 854.
but in the Donation by him published it is decimam partem terrae meae. In my
opinion, all this being by Tradition, little can be grounded thereupon. The
form of the Donation it self is uncertain and various, the inference or
relation more uncertain and unadvised; for if the King had granted that which
was not his own, it could neither be accounted pious or rational. Nor do we
find in the Donation that the King in precise words gave the Land, or the Tenth
part of the Land of his Kingdom, but the Tenth of his Land in the Kingdom: And
the exemplification published by Matthew. Westminster. countenanceth the same, albeit
the Historian observed it not. But suppose that the Kingdom joined with the
King in the concession, and that it was the course to pass it only in the
Kings name, yet could not the Tenth Hide, Tenth Mansion, or Tenth part of the
Kingdom be granted, without confusion in the possessions of the people. For
either some particular persons must part with all their possessions, or else
out of every man's possession must have issued a proportionable supply; or
lastly a Tenth part of every man's possession, or House and Land, must be set
forth from the rest; or some must lose all and become beggars, to save others:
all which are to me equally improbable. Nevertheless I do not take the thing to
be wholly fabulous, but may rather suppose that either a Tenth was given out of
the Kings own Demesnes, which is most probable; or else the Tenth of the
profits of the Lands throughout the Kingdom; and that it was by public Act of
State, and that clause forgotten by Historians. And thus might a good president
be led to Alfred, Athelstan, Council. Brit. p. 392.
and other Kings, An. 905. Ibid. 527.
who settled Tithes under payment of penalties, and appointed the times of
payment, viz. An. 1009. Luminaries.
The small Ttihes at Whitsontide, and the great Tithes at Alhollantide.

Another Tribute was that of Luminaries, which by Alfred and Gunthrum was first
settled by Law, Council. Brit. p. 377.
although it had been before claimed by Canon. It was payable thrice a year,
viz. Hollantide, Candlemas, and Easter, Ibid. 545. An. 1032.
at each time half a penny upon every Hide of Land; and this was under a
penalty also.

Another Income arose from the Plough, and under the name of Plough-Alms: At
the first it was granted by Edward the Elder generally, Plough-alms. An. 905.
and the value was a penny upon every plough; and in aftertimes it was
ordained to be paid Fifteen days after Easter. An. 1009.


Next comes a Fee at the death of the party, which was commonly called Soul
shot, Soul-shot.
and paid (before the dead body was buried) unto that Church where the dead
parties dwelling was. Council. Brit. p. 571. An. 1009.
So as they never left paying and asking so long as the body was above ground;
and this it is probable turned into that fee which was afterward called a
Mortuary.

The incumbent also of every Church had Glebe laid to the Church; besides
oblations, and other casual profits, Glebe.
as well arising from houses bordering upon the Church, Council. Brit. 260. An.
750.
as otherwise. All these four last were payable to the Priest of that
particular Congregation, and had not their beginning till Parishes came to be
settled.

Lastly, the zeal of the charity of England was not so cold as to contain it
self within it is own bounds: Peter Pence.
They were a dependent Church upon Rome, and their old Mother must not be
forgotten. An alms is granted; for under that lowly title it passed first, but
afterward called Romscot or Romesfeogh, or Heord-penny; for it was a penny
upon every hearth or chimney, payable at the Feast of St. Peter ad vincula; and
therefore also called Peter Pence: it was for the Popes use; and was settled
under great penalties upon the defaulters. It arose by degrees and parcels: For
first Ina the Saxon King granted a penny out of every house in his Kingdom:
Council. Brit. p. 230. An. 725.
After him Offa granted it out of every dwelling house that had ground thereto
occupied to the yearly value of Thirty pence, Council. Brit. p. 311. An. 791.
excepting the Lands which he had purposed for the Monastery at St. Albans.
Ibid. 313. An. 847
This Offa had a much larger Dominion than Ina, and was King over Three and
twenty Shires. After whom Aethelwolf passed a new grant thereof out of his
whole Kingdom, which was well-nigh all that part which was called Saxony, with
this proviso nevertheless, that where a man had diverse dwelling houses, he was
to pay only for that house wherein he dwelt at the time of payment. Afterward
Edward the Confessor Ibid. 6. 1.
confirmed that Donation out of such Tenements as had Thirty pence vivae
pecuniae. If then it be granted, that the Saxon Subjects had any property in
their Lands or Tenements, as no man ever questioned, then could not this charge
be imposed without the public consent of the people* and then the assertions
of Polydore and the Monks, who tell us that Ina and Offa had made the whole
Kingdom tributary to Rome, must needs be a mistake, both in the person, and the
nature of the gift, seeing there is a much more difference between an Alms and
a Tribute, than between the King and the People. Now that it was an Alms, and
not a Tribute, may apear, for that the original was a sudden pang of Zeal,
conceived and born in one breath, Vit. Offae. 19.
while the King was at Rome; and therefore not imposed as a Tribute. Secondly,
it was ex regali munificentia, and therefore free. Thirdly, it was expressly the
gift of the King; for the Law of St. Edward, which provideth for the recovery
of the Arrears of this Money, Council. Brit. p. 445. 545.
and enjoyneth that they must be paid to the King, and not to Rome, Council.
Brit. p. 621.
as it was in the days of Canutus and Edgar, rendereth the reason thereof to
be, because it was the Kings Alms.

Secondly, that it was an Alms only from the King, and out of his own
Demesnes, may seem not improbable, because it was ex regali munificentia, which
could never be affirmed if the gift had been out of the Estates of others.
Secondly, it was granted only out of such houses as yielded Thirty pence Rent,
called vivae pecuniae, because in those times Rent was paid in Victual; so as
it may seem that only Farms were charged herewith: and not all men's Farms
neither; for the general income will never answer that proportion. The
particular hereof I shall in brief set forth. It appears in the former
Quotation, that Offa charged this Leavy upon the Inhabitants dwelling in Nine
several Diocesses, viz. Hereford, which contained the City and County adjacent.
2. Worcester, containing the Cities and Shires of it and Gloucester. 3.
Litchfield, containing Warwickshire, Cheshire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and
Derbyshire. 4. Leicester, with the County adjacent. 5. Lincoln, with the County
adjacent. 6. Dorchester, whereto belonged Northamptonshire, Buckinghamshire,
Bedfordshire, Huntingtonshire, Cambridgeshire, and half Hertfordshire. 7.
London, with Essex, Middlesex, and the other half of Hertfordshire. 8. Helmham,
with Norfolk. 9. Domuck or Dunwich, with Suffolk. In which nine Diocesses were
two and Twenty Shires. And he further granted it out of Spatinghenshire, (now
Nottingham) whose Church belonged to York. But in Ethelwolfs time the Grant was
enlarged, and extended into Fifteen Diocesses; which, together with their
several charge out of the English Martyrology, I shall particularize, Fox
Mary^. p. 340.
as follows: l. s. d. Cantuar. Dioces. 07 18 0 London 16 10 0 Roffen 05 12 0
Norwic 21 10 0 Elienum 05 00 0 Lincoln 42 00 0 Cistrens 08 00 0 Winton 17 06 8
Exon 09 05 0 Wigorn 10 05 0 Hereford 06 00 0 Bathon 12 05 0 Latisburgh 17 00 0
Coventry 10 05 0 Ebor 11 10 0 200 06 8

The whole Sum whereof not exceeding Two hundred pounds Six shillings and Eight
pence, will not amount to Seven hundred pounds of now-currant Money, if the
weight of a Penny was not less in those times than in the Reign of Edward the
First, when it was the Twentieth part of an Ounce, and that the Twelfth part of
a Pound, as by the Statute thereof made may appear. Nor can the difference be
much (if any) in regard of the vicinity of the time of this extract to that of
the Statute: for though no particular date thereof appear, yet it seems to be
done after the Translation of the Sea from Thetford to Norwich, which was done
in William Rufus his time; and after the erecting of the Bishopric of Ely,
Brit. Ant. p. 18.
which was in the time of Henry the First. Now albeit this charge was in future
times diversely ordered and changed; yet upon this account it will appear, that
not above Eight and forty thousand and Eighty Houses were charged in this time
of Edward the Second with this Assessment; which is a very small proportion to
the number of Houses of Husbandry in these days, and much more inferior to the
proportion of Houses in those times, if Polydores observation be true, that in
the Conquerour's time there were Sixty thousand Knights Fees; and as others,
Fifty thousand Parishes. It may therefore be rather thought that none but the
Kings Farmers were charged herewith, notwithstanding the positive Relations of
Writers, who in this case, as in most others, wherein the credit of Rome is
engaged, spare not to believe lightly, and to write largely. And thus for their
Sevenfold Church Officers, we have also as many kinds of constant maintenance.
One in Lands and Tenements, and Six several kinds out of the Profits and the
personal Estate, besides the emergent benefits of Oblations and others formerly
mentioned.

CHAP. XII. Of the several Precincts of Jurisdictions of Church Governors
amongst the Saxons.
THe Church Officers thus called to the Drum and paid, are sent to their
several charges over Provinces, Diocesses, Deaneries, and Parishes, as they
could be settled by time and occasion. Before the Saxons arrival, Malms. gest.
Reg. lib. 1. c. 4.
London had the Metropolitan Sea, or was the chiefest in precedence; for
Archbishops the Britons had none. Afterward, by advice of the Wisemen,
Canterbury obtained the precedence, for the honor of Austin, who was there
buried. The number of Provinces, and their several Metropolitan Sees, Bed.
hist. lib. 1. cap. 29.
was first ordered by advice of Pope Gregory, who appointed two Archbishops in
Saxony; the one to reside at Canterbury, the other at York; and that each of
them should have Twelve Bishops under them. But this could never be completed
till Austin was dead; as by the Epistle of Kenulphus to Pope Leo appears. Nor
then had the Pope the whole power herein intailed to his Tripple Crown; Malmsb.
loco citat. Vit. Offae.
for the same Epistle witnesses, that the Council of the wisemen of the
Kingdom, ruled the case of the Primacy of Canterbury. Malmsb. Council. Brit. 133.
And Offa the King afterward divided the Province of Canterbury into two
Provinces, which formerly was but one. Antiq. Brit.
The Precincts of Diocesses have been altered ordinarily by Kings, Antiq. Brit.
p. 54.
or the Archbishops and their Synods, as the lives of those first Archbishops
set forth. M. Westminster. An. 775.
Theodore had divided his Province into Five Diocesses, and within a hundred
years after Offa we find it increased into eleven Diocesses.

Diocesses have also been subdivided into inferior Precincts, called Deanaries
or Decanaries, the chief of which was wont to be a Presbyter of the highest
note, called Decanus, or Arch-Presbyter. The name was taken from that Precinct
of the Lay-power, called Decennaries, having Ten Presbyters under his visit,
even as the Decenners under their chief. Ll. Edw. conf. cap. 31.
The smallest Precinct was that of the Parish, Lindwood. l. 1. de constit. c. 1.
the oversight whereof was the Presbyters work. They had Abbeys and other
religious Houses; but these were however Regular among themselves, yet
Irregular in regard of Church Government, whereof I treat.

CHAP. XIII. Of the manner of the Prelates Government of the Saxon-Church.
HAving discoursed of the Persons and Precincts, it now befalls to touch upon
the manner of the Government of the Church by the Saxon-Prelates; which was not
wrapped up in the narrow closet of private opinion, but stated and regulated by
public Council, as well in the making as executing of Laws already made.
Malmesh. gest. pontif. lib. 3. fo. 263.
This course was learned from antiquity, and enforced upon them by a
Roman-constitution, in the case that concerned Archbishop Theodore and
Wilfrid, upon this ground, Quod enim multorum concilio geritur nulli
consentientium ingerat scandalum. These are most ordinarily called Synods,
although at the pleasure of the Relator called also Councils, and are either
Diocesan, or Provincial, Baronius An. 930.
or National, and these either particular or general. The general consisted of
all the Bishops and Clergy; and such was the Synod under Archbishop Dunstan
called. The National Synods were diversely called; sometimes by the Pope,
sometimes by the King, as the first moving occasion concerned either of them.
For Pope Agatho in a Synod at Rome, Malmesb. gest. pontif. lib. 3. p. 263.
ordered that a Synod should be called in Saxony (viz. England) Sacrosancta
authoritate and nostra Synodali unitate; An. 680.
and many Legatine Synods in succeeding times demonstrate the same. That the
Saxon Kings also called them upon occasion, is obvious through all the
Councils, and needless to instance amongst, so many particulars. Council. Brit.
p. 191. 310. and 318.
The Provincial Synods were sometimes convocated by the King, and sometimes by
the Archbishop, and sometimes jointly. The Diocesan were called by the Bishop.
In the National and Provincial, sometimes Kings moderated alone, sometimes the
Archbishop alone, and sometimes they joined together. The Assistants were
others, Ibid. 316. 318, 387.
both of the Clergy and Laity, of several Ranks or Degrees; and it seems that
Women were not wholly excluded; for in a Synod under Withered King of Kent,
Abbatisses were present and attested the acts of that Synod, together with
others of the Clergy of greater degree. The matters in action were either the
making or executing of Laws for Government; and (because few Laws passed that
did not some way reflect upon the King and people, as well as the Clergy) the
King was for the most part present, and always the Lords, and others: Yet if
the matters concerned the Church in the first act, the King though present,
Council. Brit. 245. 317, 387.
the Archbishop was nevertheless President; as it besel at a Synod at
Clevershoe, An. 747. and another at Celchith, An. 816. And in the Reign of
Edward the Elder, though the Synod was called by the King, yet the Archbishop
was President. Concerning all which it may be in the sum well conceived, that
in the penning of the Councils aforesaid, either the Clergy (being Penmen)
were partial or negligent in the setting down of the right form; and that the
Kings called these Assemblies by instance of the Archbishop, and sometime
presided in his own person, and sometimes deputed the Archbishop thereunto.

The executing of Laws was for the most part left to the Diocesan Synods; yet
when the cases concerned great men, the more general Councils had the
cognizance, and therein proceeded strictly, sparing no persons of what degree
soever. M. Westminster. An. 955. 958.
Examples we find hereof, amongst others, of one incestuous Lord, and two
delinquent Kings, Edwy and Edgar. Nay they spared not the whole Kingdom;
Council. Brit. 479.
for in the quarrel between Cenulphus the King, and Archbishop Wilfrid, the
whole Kingdom was under interdict for six years space; and no Baptism
administered all that time. Ibid. 337.
Nor were they very nice in meddling with matters beyond their sphere, even with
matters of Property; for at a Provincial Council (for so it is called) they
bore all down before them, even the King himself, as in the case between
Cenulphus the King, Ibid. 319. 332.
and the Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning the Monastery of Cotham. Council.
Brit. p. 334.
The like also of another Synod concerning the Monastery of Westburgh: It Is
true, the Lords were present; and it may be said, that what was done, was done
in their right; yet the Clergy had the rule, and begat the Child; and the
Lay-Lords only might challenge right to the name. This concurrence of the
Laity with the Clergy contracted much business, and by that means a customary
power, which once rooted, the Clergy after they saw their time (though not
without difficulty) turned both King and Lords out, and shut the doors after
them, and so possessed themselves of the whole by Survivorship. But of this
hereafter.

The particular Diocesan Synods were, as I said, called by the Bishops within
their several Diocesses. The work therein was to preach the Word as a
preparative; Mag. cent. 8. cap. 9.
then to visit and enquire of the manners of the Clergy in the worship of God,
and of all matters of scandal, and them to correct. These Synods were to be
holden twice every year, at certain times; and if they met with any matter too
hard for them to reform, they referred it to the Provincial or National Synod.

CHAP. XIV. Of Causes Ecclesiastical.
AS the power of Synods grew by degrees, so did also their work; both which did
mutually breed and feed each other. Heresy. An. 446.
Their work consisted in the reforming and settling matters of Doctrine and
Practice. The first was the most ancient, and which first occasioned the use of
Synods. In this Island the Pelagian Heresy brought in the first precedent of
Synods that we have extant; and herein it will admit of no denial, but in the
infancy of the Church the Teachers are the principal Judges of the nature of
Error and Heresy, as also of the truth; as the Church is the best guide to
every Christian in his first instruction in the principles; but after some
growth there is that in every Church and Christian that makes itself party in
judging of truth and error jointly with the first Teachers. And therefore it is
not without reason, that in that first Synod, although Germanus was called
Judex, Beda. hist. l. 1.
yet the people has the name of Arbiter, and it is said that they did
contestare judicium.

Blasphemy was questionless under Church-censure, Blasphemy.
but I find no footsteps of any particular Law against it; Council. Brit. p.
341. An. 840.
yet in Scotland a Law was made to punish it with cutting out the Tongue of the
Delinquent: But it may be feared that neither the Saxons nor their Roman
Teachers, were so zealous for the honor of Gods Name, as to regard that odious
sin; unless we should account them so holy as that they were not tainted
therewith, and so needed no Law.

But Apostasy was an early sin, and soon provided against; Apostasy.
the Church-censure was allowed of in Britain before the Saxons Church had any
breath: Afterward it was punished by Fine and Imprisonment, An. 314. Council.
Brit. 41.
by a Law made by Alfred, Ibid. 367.
as he provided in like manner for other Church Laws.

The times anciently were not so zealous for due observance of Divine Worship,
False Worship.
unless by the Churchmen who were the Leaders therein; a foreign Canon was
made to enforce that Duty long before, Canon. Apost. cap. 10.
but it would not down with the rude Saxons: they, or the greater sort of them,
were content to come to Church only to pray and hear the Word, and so went
away. This is noted by that ancient Writer in nature of an imputation, as if
somewhat else was to be done, Bed. hist. lib. 3. cap. 26.
which they neglected; this somewhat was the Mass, which in those days was wont
to be acted after the Sermon ended. Mag. Cent. 7. cap. 6.
And it is probable that if the Nobles were so ill trained up, the inferior
sort was worse; and yet find we no Law to constrain their diligence: or to
speak more plainly, it is very likely the Saxons were so resolute in their
Worship, Council. Brit. p. 306.
as there was either little need of Law to retain them, or little use of Law to
reclaim them. For it is observed in their late Psalter, that the Roman Clergy
was not more forward to Image or Saint-worship, than the people were backward
thereto; and therein showed themselves the true Seed of their Ancestors in
Germany, Tacit. Mor. Germ.
of whom it is observed that they endured not Images, but worshipped a Deity
which they saw sola reverentia.

Sorcery and Witchcraft they had in abomination: yet it was a sin always in a
mist, and hard to be discerned but by the quick-sighted Clergy; and therefore
it was left to their censure, as a sin against the Worship of God. Council.
Brit. 246. An. 745.
This Ethebald the Mercian King first endowed them with; and they alone
exercised the Cognizance thereof till Alfred's time, Ibid. 377.
who inflicted thereupon the penalty of Banishment: Ibid. 405. An. 928.
but if any were killed by enchantment, the delinquent suffered death by a Law
made by Aethelstan. And thus by degrees became one and the same Crime
punishable in several Jurisdictions, in several respects.

Concerning Perjury, Perjury.
the Prelates had much to do therewith in future times; and they had the first
hint from Ina the Saxon King's Grant to them of power to take Testimonies upon
Oath, Ll. Sax. fol. 4.
as supposing that the Reverence that men might bear to their Persons and
Functions, would the rather overawe their Tongues in witnessing; that they
would not dare to falsify, lest these knowing men should espy it, and
forthwith give them their doom. An. 9, 28.
But no positive Law allowed them that power of sentence, till Aethelstan's Law
gave it; and upon conviction by the same Law, distested the delinquents Oath
for ever.

Sacrilege comes in the next place, Sacrilege.
being a particular Crime merely of the Clergy-mens invention and naming; for
before they baptized it, you might have well enough called it Theft,
Oppression, or Extortion. This Crime the Prelates held under their Cognizance
by virtue of that general Maxim, Council. Brit. p. 127.
That all wrong done to the Church, must be judged by the Church. The first
time that I can observe they challenged this power, An. 610. Ibid. 265.
was by Egbert Archbishop of York in the Seventh Century.

But nothing was more their own than Simony; Simony.
and that may be the reason why we find so little thereof either for the
discovery or correcting of it. Council. Brit. 163.
All former Crimes were in their first act destructive to the Church, but this
advantageous; and therefore though the Canons roar loud, yet the execution is
not mortal, because it is bent against the dignity, and not the gain. And
although the Canon would not that any Presbyter should be made, but presented
therewith to some place to exercise his Function in, yet it serves not for
those times when men were sent forth rather to make Flocks than to feed Flocks.

And yet the Theme of Marriage was the best Dish in all their Entertainment:
They had the whole common place thereof, Matrimonial Causes.
with the Appurtenances, within the compass of their Text, before ever it
attained the honor of a Sacrament. It was a branch of Moses Law, whereof they
were the sole Expositors, and so seems to be cast upon them by a kind of
necessity, as an Orphan that had no owner. Nevertheless a passage in Eusebius
seems to report this Trust in the Civil Magistrate: for he relates out of
Justin Martyr, concerning a Divorce sued out by a godly Matron long before the
Prelacie got into the Saddle, or the Clergy had the power of Judicature. And
whereas Lucius taxed Vrbicius the Magistrate for punishing Ptolomy who was
guilty of no Crime worthy of his cognizance in that kind, amongst other Crimes
(enumerated by him, whereof Ptolomy was not guilty) he names the Crimes
against the Seventh Commandment; intimating thereby a power in the Judge to
have cognizance of those Crimes as well as others. But the Prelacie beginning
to mount, nibled at it in the second Centurie, but more clearly in the fourth,
when the persecutions were allayed, and men of Learning began to feel their
Honor; and never left pursuit till they had swallowed the Bait, and exercised
not only a Judiciary power in determining all Doubts and Controversies
concerning the same, but challenged an Efficienciary power in the
Marriage-making. This Garland Austin brought over with him, and crowned the
Saxon Clergy therewith, as may appear by his Queries to Pope Gregory: Beda
hist. l. 1. cap. 27.
And thus the Saxons that formerly wedded themselves, became hereafter wedded
by the Clergy. Yet the Civil Magistrate retained a supreme Legislative power
concerning it, as the joint Marriages between the Saxons, Britons, and Picts,
do manifest: For it is said of that Work, that it was effected per commune
concilium and assensum omnium Episcoporum, procerum, comitum, and omnium
sapientum, seniorum, and populorum totius regni, and per praeceptum Regis Inae;
Council. Brit. 219.
and in the time of Edward their King, Council. Brit. p. 427. An. 944.
were enacted Laws or Rules concerning Marriage; and so unto the Lay-power was
the Ecclesiastical adjoined in this Work.

The Clergy having gained the Principal, with more ease obtained the
Appurthenances; Bastardy.
such as Bastardy, Adultery, Fornication, and Incest There was some doubt
concerning Bastardy, because it trenched far into the Title of Inheritance; and
so they attained that sub modo, as afterward will appear. The Laws of Alfred
and Edward the elder, allowed them the cognizance of Incest; Incest.
although nevertheless the Civil Magistrate retained also the cognizance
thereof, Council. Brit. p. 392. An. 905.
so far as concerned the penalty of the Temporal Law. Adultery and Fornication,
they held without control; Adultery. Fornication.
yet in the same manner as the former: for the Civil Magistrate had cognizance
thereof, so far as touched the Temporal penalty. And to give them as much as
can be allowed, Council. Brit. p. 558.
it is probable that in all or most of the Cases foregoing, they had the honor
to advise in determining of the Crime, and declaring the Law, or defining the
matter; for in those ignorant times it could not be expected from any other.

But how the cognizance of Tithes crept under their wing, Tithes.
might be much more wondered at, for that it was originally from the Grant of
the People: nor can a better ground be found by me than this, that it was a
matter of late original: For till the Seventh Century the times were
troublesome; and no settled maintenance could be expected for the Ministry,
where men were not in some certainty of their daily Bread. And as it will
hardly be demonstrated that this Title was ever in any positive National Law
before the time of Charlemain, in whose time, by a Synod of Clergy and Laity,
it was decreed that Tithes should be gathered by selected persons, to pay the
Bishops and Presbyters: Synod Durien. cap. 7. An. 785.
So neither can I find any Saxon National Constitution to settle this duty,
till Alfred's time, although the Churchmen had them as a voluntary Gift (so
far as touched the quota pars) Rabban. Epist. ad Hadubrand
for the space of well-nigh a hundred years before. But Alfred made a National
Law, under a penalty, to enforce this Duty; which the Canon could not wring
from the Saxons, Council. Brit. p. 277.
how dreadful soever the Censure proved. And by this means the Church had their
remedy by Ecclesiastical censure for the matter in fact, and also the Civil
Magistrate the cognizance in point of Right, albeit future times introduced a
change herein.

CHAP. XV. A brief Censure of the Saxon Prelatical Church Government.
THis that I have said, might at the first view seem to represent a curious
Structure of Church-policie, which might have put a period to time it self; but
(to speak sine ira and studio) the height was too great, considering the
foundation, and therefore ever weak, and in need of props. The foundation was
neither on the Rock, nor on good ground, but by a Ginn screwed to the Roman
Consistory, or like a Castle in the Air, hanging upon a pin of Favor of Kings
and great men. At the first they thought best to temporize, and to hold both
these their strings to their Bow; but feeling themselves somewhat under-propped
by the Consciences of the ignorant people, they soon grew wondrous brave, even
to the jealousy of Princes; which also was known so notoriously, that the
public Synods rang, That the Prelates loved not Princes, but emulated them,
and envied their greatness, and pursued them with detraction. Council. Brit. p.
254. An. 747.
And if the Cloth may be judged by the List, that one example of Wilfrid
Archbishop of York will speak much. He was once so humble minded, Malmesb.
gest. pontif. lib. 3. An. 680.
as he would always go on foot to preach the Word; but by that time he was warm
in his Archbishops Robes, he was served in Vessels of Gold and Silver, and with
Troops of Followers, in such Gallantry, as his Pomp was envied of the Queen. A
strange growth of Prelacy in so small a space as Eighty years, and in the midst
of stormy times, such as then afflicted this poor Country! But this is not all;
for never does Pride lead the way, but some other base Vice follows. I will not
mention the lives of the Monks, Nuns, and other Clerks; Bonis. epist. ad
Cutbertum. An. 745.
Malmsbury speaks sufficiently of their Luxury, Drunkenness, Quarrelling, and
Fighting. Others witness thereto, and tell us that the Clergy seldom read the
Scripture, and did never preach, and were so grossly ignorant, that Alfred the
King being a diligent Translator of Latin Writers into the Saxon Tongue,
renders this reason, Because they would be very useful to some of his Bishops
that understood not the Latin Tongue. Council. Brit. p 379.
Nor were the Presbyters of another dye; for that King bewailing their
ignorance, in his Letter to Wolfegus, says, That those which were de gradu
spirituali, were come to that condition, that few of them on this side Humber
could understand their Common prayers, or translate them into Saxon; and so
few, as I do not (says he) remember one on this side the Thames when I began
to reign. And the Synod that should have salved all, covers the Sore with this
Canonical Plaster, that those of the Clergy that could not say Domine
miserere in Latin, Council. Brit. p. 248, and 253. An. 747.
should instead thereof say, Lord have mercy upon us in English. It was
therefore a vain thing for the Clergy to rest upon their Works, or Title of
Divine Right; their great Pomp, sacred Places, and savor of Kings, commended
them to the Administration, or rather Adoration of ignorant people; and the
favor of the Roman Chair, unto the regard of Kings: who maintained their
interest with the Conclave on the one side, and with the People on the other
side, by their means; and so they mutually served one another. It cannot be
denied but the Pope and Kings were good Cards in those days; yet had the
Prelacie maturely considered the nature of the Saxon Government, so much
depending upon the people, they might have laid a more sure foundation, and
attained their ends with much more ease and honor. I commend not the base way
of Popularity by principles of Flattery, but that honorable service of Truth
and Virtue which sets up a Throne in the minds of the Vulgar, few of whom but
have some sparks of Nature left unquenched: for though Respect may chance to
meet with Greatness, yet Reverence is the proper Debt to Goodness; without
which we look at great men as Comets, whose influence works mischief, and whose
light serves rather to be gazed upon, than for direction.

The foundation thus happily laid, the progress of the building was no less
irregular in regard of their ends that they aimed at: For first, they admitted
the Laity into their Synods; who were not so dull but could epsy their
ambition, nor so base spirited as to live in slavery after conviction. This
Error was espied I confess, but it was too late; and though they reformed it,
yet it was after Four hundred years labor. And in the mean time, by the
contentions of the Clergy amongst themselves, Kings had first learned so much
of their Supremacy, and the Laity so much of their Liberty, as they began to
plead with the Clergy, and had brought the matter to issue, before the Synod
could rid themselves of these Lay-Spectators, or rather Overseers of their ways
and actions. A second Error was the yoking of the Bishops power under that of
the Synods: for they had little or no power by the Canon that was not under
their control, Cantab. 10. 200, 263.
neither in admission or deprivation of Presbyters or others, determining of
any Cause, nor passing sentence of Excommunication: And this could not but much
hinder the hasty growth of Antichrist's power in this Kingdom. Nor could it
ever be completed so long as the Synods had the chief power. Nevertheless the
inthralled spirits of the Clergy, and terror of the Papal thunderbolt, in
continuance of time surmounted this difficulty, and Synods became so tame and
easily led, as if there had been but one Devil to rule amongst them all. For if
any quick eye or active spirit did but begin to peep or stir, the Legate e
latere soon reduced him into rank, and kept all in awe with a Sub poena, of
unknown danger. A third error, was the allowing of peculiars and exemptions of
Religious Houses from ordinary jurisdiction; and this was an error in the first
concoction, a block in the way of Prelacy, and a clog to keep it down. This
error was soon felt, and was occasion of much mutiny in the body
Ecclesiastical; but exceeding profitable for Rome, not only in point of Revenue
by the multitude of Appeals, but especially in maintaining a party for the
Roman See, in case the Prelacy of England should stumble at the Supremacy of
Rome. Otherwise it seemed like a Wen upon the body, rather than any Homogene
Member; and without which certainly the English Prelacy had thriven much
better, and the Roman Chair much worse. In all which regards, I must conclude,
that the Prelatical Government in England was as yet like a young Bear not
fully licked, but left to be made complete by time and observation.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Saxons Commonwealth, and the Government thereof; and first
of the King.
HAving already treated of the Saxon Church, in order I am now come to the
Republic, which in all probability will be expected to be suitable to their
original in Germany; whereunto having relation, I shall first fall upon the
persons and degrees abstractively, then in their Assemblies, and lastly of
their Laws and customs. The Saxons in their first state in Germany were
distributed into four Classes, viz. the Nobles, the Freemen, the Manumitted
persons, and the Bondmen. Under the Nobility, and from them, arose one that
was called a King, of whom I shall speak apart: the two last differed only in
the bare liberty of their persons, and therefore may be comprehended under one
head, as they were in their original.

A King amongst the Saxons in probability was anciently a Commander in the
field, an Officer pro tempore, and no necessary Member in the constitution of
their State: for in time of peace, when the Commonwealth was it self, the
executive power of the Law rested much in the Nobility; but in times of War,
and in public distractions, they chose a General, and all swear Obedience unto
him during the War; it being finished, the General laid down his Command, Witik
in gest. Saxon. lib. 1.
and every one lived aequo jure propria contentus potestate. But in their
transmigration into Britain, the continuance of the War causing the continual
use of the General, made that Place or Office to settle and swell into the
condition of a King; and so he that was formerly Dux became Rex; there being no
more difference in the nature of their places, than in the sense of the words;
the one signifying to Lead, the other to Govern; so as he that formerly was a
servant for the occasion, afterward became a servant for life; yet clothed
with Majestly, like some bitter Pill covered with Gold, to make the service
better tasted. Nor was the place more desirable, if duly considered. For first,
his Title rested upon the good opinion of the Freemen; and it seems to be
one of the best Gems of the Crown, for that he was thereby declared to be most
worthy of the love and service of the people. Yet was the ground of their
Election so uncertain, as a man might imagine that sometimes there appeared
more of the will than of the judgment in it; that it might be said to be the
more free, for they neither excluded women nor children further than present
occasions led them. The West Saxons deposed Seburg their Queen, because they
would not fight under a woman; but the Mercians obeyed Elfled their Queen, M.
Westminster. An. 672.
and under her fought valiantly with good success against the Danes; M. Westminster.
An. 912, 919.
imitating the custom of the Sitones or Norwegians in Germany; Tacit. Cragius.
or they might borrow it from the Lacedaemonians. A Custom it was so much the
more honorable, by how much it demonstrateth freedom, and that the worth of
the people rested not so much in the head, as it is diffused through the whole
body. And it seems to run in the Blood of an Englishman, even to this day,
to be as brave under a single Queen, as under the most valiant King, if not
much more; and still to strive to be as famous for the defense of Majesty
wherever they set it, as the Britons were of old. Nor were they different in
their respect of age, from that of the Sex; for though after the death of
Edmond, Edwin or Edgar were to have succeeded in the Crown by the right of
descent, yet the States would not admit them, because they were Minors; but the
Mercians admitted Kenelme a child of Seven years old to be their King. They
likewise excluded not Bastards till the Clergy interposed; for they having
wound themselves into the Councils of the Kingdom, procured a Constitution to
back them in the Election of Kings Legitimate, etc. Let the Kings be legally
chosen by Priests and Elders, and not such as are begotten by Adultery or
Incest: which Constitution was made in a Legatine Council, and confirmed by
great Offa. Mag. cent. 8. cap. 2.
The rule of their Election was the same with that in Germany, viz. An. 747.
Tacitus.
to elect the chiefest out of the chiefest Family, that is, the chiefest for
worth, not by descent; yet the honor they bare to their brave Kings who had
deserved well, made some to honor their posterity, and to choose their eldest
after their decease; and so in time Crowns were taken up by custom, and
Election oftentimes subsequent was accounted but a ceremony, unless the people
will dispute the point.

Secondly, this Election was qualified under a stipulation or covenant, wherein
both Prince and people were mutually bound each to other; the people to defend
their King, Tacitus
which the Historian says was praecipuum Sacramentum; and the Prince to the
people to be no other than the influence of the Law, Council. Brit. p. 397.
suitable to that saying of Aethelstan the Saxon King, Seeing I according to
your Law allow you what is yours, do you so with me; as if the Law were the
sole umpire between King and people, and unto which not only the people, but
also the King must submit. The like whereunto, Ina the great Saxon King also,
Ll. Inae. Lamb.
No great man, says he, nor any other in the whole Kingdom may abolish the
written Laws. Kings furthermore bound themselves (at their entrance into the
Throne) hereunto by an Oath; as it is noted of Canutus, unto whom, after Miror
cap. 1. Sect. 1.
Aetheldred was dead, the Bishops, Abbots, Dukes, and other Nobles, came and
Elected him to be their King, and swear Fealty unto him; and he again swear to
them, that Secundum Deum, Wigorn. An. 1016.
and secundum seculum, etc. viz. according to the Laws of God, and of the
Nation, he would be a faithful Lord to them. It Is probable, I grant, that the
praecipuum Sacramentum formerly mentioned, was in the first nature more
personal for the defense of the person of their Leader, whilst he was their
Captain: because it much concerned the good of the Army, and without whom all
must scatter, and be brought to ruin; and this the words of the Historian do
evidence. But the safety of the whole people depended not on him after the War
was done, and therefore the Oath tied them not any further: nor did the safety
of the people afterward, when as the Saxons entered this Land, so absolutely
rest upon the person of the King, especially if he proved unfit to manage the
work: and therefore the fealty that the people swear to their King, was not so
absolutely determined upon their persons, otherwise than in order to the
public weal, as may appear from the Laws of the Confessor, who was within
Thirty years after the Reign of Aethelstan formerly mentioned. The words in
English run thus: All the people in their Folkmote shall confederate themselves
as sworn Brethren, to defend the Kingdom against strangers and enemies,
together with their Lord the King, and to preserve his Lands and Honors
together with him with all faithfulness, and that within and without the
Kingdom of Britain they will be faithful to him as to their Lord and King. So
as it is evident, the Saxons fealty to their King, was subservient to the
public safety; and the public safety is necessarily dependant upon the
liberty of the Laws. Nor was it to be expected that the Saxons would endure a
King above this pitch. For those parts of Germany (whence they came) that had
the Regiment of Kings (which these had not) yet used they their Kings in no
other manner than as Servants of State, Tacitus.
in sending them as Ambassadors and Captains, as if they claimed more interest
in him than he in them: And the Historian says expressly, that amongst those
people in Germany that had Kings, their Kings had a defined power, and were not
supra libertatem. And this Maxim of State became afterward privileged by
Sanctuary: for by the growth of Antichrist, not only the Clergy, but even their
Tenants and Retainers were exempt from the reach of Kings; and even by their
own concession allowed of a Law that cut the throat of their indefined
prerogative, viz. That if the King defend not his people, and especially
Churchmen from injury, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit, verum nomen Regis
perdit. Ll. Sax. Ed. cap. 17.
Which Law however it might pass for current Divinity in those days, yet it is
strange it should get into a public Act of State. M. Westminster. An. 756. 758.
Nor was this a dead word; for the people had formerly a trick of deposing
their Kings (when they saw him peep above the ordinary reach) and this was an
easy work for them to do, Wigorn. An. 755.
where ever Neighboring Princes of their own Nation watched for the windfals
of Crowns. This made the Monarchical Crown in this Land, to walk circuit into
all parts of the Country to find heads fit to wear it, until the Norman times.

Thirdly, the Saxons had so hampered their Kings in their Elections, and made
them so properly their own, as they claimed an interest not only in the person
of their Kings, but also in their Estates, so as in some respects they were
scarcely sui juris. For King Baldred had given the Manor of Malings in Sussex
to Christ-church in Canterbury; and because the Lords consented not thereto, it
was revoked, Council. Brit. 340.
and King Egbert afterward made a new grant by advice of the Lords; which
shows that the Demesnes of the Crown were holden sacred, and not to be disposed
of to any other use, though pious, without the consent of the Lords: and
herewith concur all the Saxon infeodations, attested and confirmed by Bishops,
Abbots, Dukes, and others of the Nobility, under their several hands.

Nevertheless, Kings were not then like unto plumed Eagles, exposed to the
charity of the Fowls for food, but had a Royal maintenance suitable to their
Majesty. Their power was double, one as a Captain, another as a King; the first
was first, and made way for the second. As Captain, their power was to lead the
Army, punish according to Demerits, and according to Laws, and reward according
to Discretion. As Captain, they had by ancient custom the spoil left to their
ordering by permission of the Army, Exigunt Principis liberalitate illum
Bellatorem equum, illam cruentam and victricem frameam; Tacitus.
and they were not wont in such cases to be close handed ( per bella raptus
munificentiae materia) the spoils in these wasted parts of Germany bring little
other than Horses and Arms. But after they came into Britain, the change of
Soil made them more fat; Horses and Arms were turned into Towns, Houses, Lands,
and Cattle; and these were distributed as spoils amongst the Saxon Soldiers by
their Generals; and this redounded to the maintenance of the State and port of
the great men, who were wont to be honored non stipendiis sed muneribus; and
the people used ultro and viritim confer principibus, vel armentorum vel
frugum aliquid. Tacitus.
But now upon the distribution of conquered Towns, Houses, Lands, and Cattle in
Britain, a yearly product of Victuals or other service was reserved and allowed
to the Saxon Kings by the people; as the people allowed to Joshua his Land,
Jos. 19. 46. So as they needed no longer the former course of Offerings, but
had enough to maintain their Royal port, and great superfluity of Demesnes
besides; as their charity to the Churchmen does sufficiently evidence. And by
this means all the Lands in England became mediately or immediately holden of
the Crown, and a settled maintenance annexed to the same; besides the casual
profits upon emergencies, or perquisites of Felons or Fugitives goods, mines of
Gold and Silver, Treasure trove, Mulcts for offenses, and other privileges,
which being originally in the Kings, Mir. 101. 298.
were by them granted, and made Royalties in the hands of Subjects, Ll. Edw. c.
4.
as at this day.

To the increase of his Majesty and maintenance, there was an access of power,
not to make, dispense with, or alter Laws, but to execute and act the Laws
established: and against this power there was no rising up, so long as it, like
an unfeathered Arrow, gadded not at random. It Is true, the Churchmen or
Prelates checked them often, but could never give them the mate. For peace
sake, Kings many times yielded much; yet would no King of Saxon principles
allow of any Canon that extolled the Clergy's Authority above that of Kings.
And though the placing and displacing of Bishops seemed to be all
Ecclesiastical work, yet would not the Kings altogether connive (as the
examples of Ina in placing a Bishop in Wells; Offa, in making two Provinces of
one; Cenulphus, Malmesb. gest. pontif. lib. 3. gest. Reg. lib. 1 cap. 4.
in restoring Polydorus; Edfrid, in deposing Wilfrid; and Edward the Confessor,
in making Robert Norman Archbishop of Canterbury) may induce into opinion: and
for their own safety sake, M. Paris An. 1095.
the Prelates thought it wisdom for them sometimes to stoop to that power that
at other times they must be beholding to. And therefore though in Synodical
disputes they would hold with the Canon, yet in matters of Action would suit
with the occasion, and thereby taught Princes to account of Canons but as
Notions; and politickly to put the honor of Commissioners upon these men. Thus
the current of both powers passing in one channel, made the people drink double
Beer at once: the turns both of Pope and King were competently served, and
these men had the honor of the two-handed Sword; and all seemed composed into
a fair compromise. But the Popedom finding its Authority becalmed, endured this
but as a burden, till Pope Nicholas the second's time, who by the like trick
commended all to the Crown, as from the Papal Benediction. For Edward the
Confessor, upon his foundation of the Abbey of Westminster, sent to the Pope
for his allowance and confirmation of what he had done, or was to do; and to
make way for the more favor, sent presents, and a confirmation of Romescot.
The Pope was so inflamed with such an abundant measure of blessing, as he not
only granted the Kings desire, but also discharged that Abbey from ordinary
jurisdiction, made it a peculiar subject only to the Kings visitation, Council.
Brit. p. 614.
and concluded his Bull with this Horn, An. 1066.
Vobis vero and posteris vestris regibus committimus advocationem and tuitionem
ejusdem loci, and omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum; and vice nostra, cum
concilio Episcoporum and Abbatum, constituatis ubique quae justa sunt. How the
King took the conclusion, I find not, but he could never make better use than
by way of estoppel, unless he meaned to sacrifice his own right as a
thank-offering to a shadow, which I find not that he or his next Successors
ever did. But as touching the Laity, Histories do not touch upon any conceit of
withdrawing Monarchical power. It Is true, Kings had their excesses, yet all was
amended either by the body of the people, when they pleased to examine the
matter, or by the Princes fair compliance when complaint was made, and so the
Law was saved. Can^^. cap. 67.
And thus upon all the premises I shall conclude, a Saxon King was no other
than a primum mobile set in a regular motion, by Laws established by the whole
body of the Kingdom.

CHAP XVII. Of the Saxon Nobility.
THe ancient Saxon Nobility in Germany were the chiefest in action both in War
and in Peace. That rank of men was continued by three means, viz. by Birth or
Blood, by Valor, and by Wisdom. The first was rather at the first a stem
arising out of the first two, than a different degree or kind: for Noble blood
was at the first enobled by brave actions, afterward continued in their honor
to their Posterity, till by as base courses it was lost, as it was gained by
worthy Achievements: these were called Adelingi. The Nobility of Action
consisted either in matters of War or of Peace. Those of Peace arose
principally from Wisdom, which being gained for the most part by much
experience, were therefore called Aldermanni, or elder men. The Nobility of War
arose somewhat from valor or courage with wisdom, but more from good success:
for many brave and fortunate Commanders have not been very daring; and the
bravest spirits, though wise, Ll. Edw. cap. 35.
have not been ever honored with good success: these were called Heretochii.
Nitard. lib. 4.
Nevertheless all these names or titles were used promiscuously in following
times, and all called Nobiles: But both that, and Duces, Satrape, and Comites,
were all of the Roman Dialect, as the former were of the Saxon. Time also
brought others into this honorable Band, viz. The great Officers of the Kings
Household, and their attests are found amongst the Kings Charters, amongst the
Nobles; and that much advanced the price of Kings; for he that is worthy to be
not only Lord above Nobles, but Master of some, may by a little courtesy
prevail over all. This starry Heaven had several Orbs; some so high, as in
common esteem they were next the Imperial Heaven, having a tincture of Royal
Blood, and at the next door to the Throne: Tacitus.
Others, though not of so clear light, had nevertheless no less powerful
influence upon the people, but rather more, by how much more nigher to them.
Their power in matters of Peace or Government of the Commonwealth, was
exercised either collectively, or apart and severally. In their meetings they
ordered the smaller emergencies of the public in convocating and directing the
people. De minoribus rebus consultant principes. Tacitus.
These minora are such as are subservient to the majora, and pro hic and nunc
require sudden order touching any particular part or member of the
Commonwealth. At other times they visited their several Territories or
Circuits, hearing and determining matters of Controversy, and executing
Judgment according to the known Laws, Principes jura per pagos vicosque
reddunt; Yet they had Comites of the Country joined with them, whereof
afterward. This was their course in German Saxony; Tacitus.
but in England the new stem of Kingly power, arising higher than all the rest,
sucked much from them, and kept them under: for the judiciary power was in time
drawn up into the Regal order, and the Lords executed the same as Deputies from
and under him, designed thereto by Writs and Commissions, as it is more
particularly noted of King Alfred. Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 1.
The Lords thus lessened in their judiciary power, carried the less authority
in their Votes and Consultations. The King was a perpetual Moderator in that
work, and it was no small advantage he had thereby to sway the Votes. Men that
are advanced, if they have any excellency, soon gain admiration; and it is a
hard thing for one that has yielded his heart to admiration, to keep it from
adoration. This has mounted up Kings to the top more than their own ambition,
and made them undertake what they ought not, because we esteem more highly of
them than we ought. I speak not against due, but undue Obedience; for had the
Saxon Lords remembered themselves, and the true nature of the authority of their
King, they needed not to be amazed at their check, Council. Brit. p. 333.
nor to give way to their passion, as they did many times, and advised others
to do the like. Nor had Kings by degrees become beyond control, and incapable
to be advised. This error the Lords espied too late, and sometimes would
remember their ancient right and power, and did take boldness to set a Law upon
the exorbitancy of their King, as in that case of Aethelwolf and his Queen
amongst others may appear: but that was like some enterprises, M. Westminster. An.
854.
that owe more to extremity of occasion, than to the courage of the undertaker.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Freemen amongst the Saxons.
THe next and most considerable degree of all the people, is that of the
Freemen, called anciently Frilingi, or Freeborn, or such as are born free from
all yoke of Arbitrary power, and from all Law of compulsion, other than what is
made by his voluntary consent; for all Freemen have votes in the making and
executing of the general Laws of the Kingdom. In the first they differed from
the Gauls, of whom it is noted, Caes. Com. lib. 6.
that the Commons are never called to Council, nor are much better than
servants. In the second they differ from many free people, and are a degree
more excellent, being adjoined to the Lords in judicature, both by advice and
power, Tacitus.
consilium and authoritas adsunt: And therefore those that were elected to that
work were called Comites ex plebe, and made one rank of Freemen for wisdom
superior to the rest. Another degree of these were beholding to their Riches,
and were called Custodes Pagani, an honorable title belonging to Military
service; Lamb. in 4. fol. 72.
and these were such as had obtained an estate of such value, as that their
ordinary Arms were a Helmet, a Coat of Mail, and a gilt Sword. The rest of the
Freemen were contented with the name of Ceorles or Pagani, viz. Rural Clowns,
who nevertheless were the most considerable party both in War and Peace; and
had as sure a title to their own liberties, as the Custodes pagani or the
Country Gentleman had.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Villains amongst the Saxons.
THe most inferior rank amongst the Saxons were those that of latter times
were called Villains; but those also anciently divided into two degrees, the
chiefer of which were called Free lazzi. These were such as had been Slaves,
but had purchased their freedom by desert; and though they had escaped the
depth of bondage, yet attained they not to the full pitch of freemen; for the
Lord might acquit his own title of bondage, Tacitus.
but no man could be made free without the act of the whole body. And therefore
the Historian says, that they are not multum supra servos, or scarce not
servants. They are seldom of account in any Family, never in any City: but in
Kingdoms sometimes advanced above the Freemen, yea, above Nobles. Those are now
adays amongst the number and rank of such as are called Copyholders, who have
the privilege of Protection from the Laws, but no privilege of Vote in the
making of Laws.

The most inferior of all, were those which were anciently called Lazzi or
Slaves; those were the dregs of the people, and wholly at the will of their
Lord, to do any service, or undergo any punishment. Tacitus.
And yet the magnanimity of the Saxons was such, as they abhorred Tyranny: and
it was rarely used amongst them, by beating, torture, imprisonment, or other
hard usage, to compel them to serve; they would rather kill them as Enemies.
And this wrought Reverence in these men toward their Lords, and maintained a
kind of generosity in their minds, that they did many brave exploits; and many
times not only purchased their own freedom, but also brought strength and
honor to the Kingdom. And though the insolency of the Danes much quelled this
Saxon Nobleness, yet was it revived again by the Confessors Laws, which
ordained, That the Lords should so demean themselves toward their men, that
they neither incur guilt against God, nor offense against the King; or, which
is all one, to respect them as Gods people, and the Kings Subjects. And thus
much of the several degrees of men amongst the Saxons, being the materials of
their Commonwealth; a model whereof in the making and executing of the Laws,
and manner thereof, now next ensues.

CHAP. XX. Of the grand Council of the Saxons called the Micklemote.
IT was originally a Council of the Lords and Freemen; afterward, Tacitus.
when they assumed the title of a Kingdom, the King was a Member thereof, and
generally President therein; but always intended to be present, though actually
and in his own person by emergent occasions he may be absent, and sometimes by
disability of his person he be unmeet to vote or be President in such an
Assembly. As it was in the Council at Clano or Cleve in Wiltshire, Malmesb.
gest. Reg. lib. 2. cap. 9.
when the great case between the Monks and married Priests was concluded; the
King was absent, as the story says, because of his minority; and yet if
Writers say true, Lib. 5. An. 978.
he was then in the Sixteenth year of his age. The Lords were also nevertheless
in the same condition of privilege as formerly; and though it appears that
the Kings had gotten the privilege of summoning the grand meeting in his own
name, yet it was by advice of the great men; and being met, their Votes were no
other in value than as formerly: for all their Laws were ex consilio sapientum,
and (for ought can appear out of antiquity) the vote of the meanest continued
as good as of the greatest, arbitrium est penes plebem. Tacitus.
And thus the Micklemote or Wittagenmote of the Saxons in England, continued in
the King, Lords, and Freemen, by the space of One hundred and fifty years, and
in some parts of England nigh Two hundred years before ever the Roman Bishops
foot entered, or the Roman-Clergy crept into the Councils of State. Afterward
the Prelates were admitted de been esse, for advice, as sapientes, and
continued by allowance; how canonically, ipsi viderint, for I understand it not
(especially as the Scripture was then expounded) Nemo militans Deo implicet
negotiis saecularibus: yet if they be allowed (what in those days they
ordinarily took up) a degree of policy above devotion, that knot is also soon
untied. I say, they entered as Sapientes, not as Prelati, or Church Governors;
for then they had holden the same power in Church Matters agitated in the
Wittagenmote, that they had usurped in their Synods which they held only for
Church-visitation; which they could never have, because the Sapientes Regni had
their votes therein as freely as they. Nor could the Prelates by any Law
entitle themselves to such power or privilege, so contrary to the privilege
of the Wittagenmote. For though it be true, that the German Priests had a
liberty to be present in these grand Assemblies, and to have some presidency
therein, as to command silence, etc. yet it is not title to these, Tacitus.
unless they will interest themselves as their Successors, to possess by a jus
Divinum that jus Diabolicum (which those Priests formerly had) in a way of
immediate providence; somewhat like the possession of the Mantle of Eliah found
by Elishah. They might, I grant, plead the title from Kings; but, it must be
granted also, that Kings as yet had no more power over the Church than in the
Commonwealth. Nor could they have that from the Lords, which the Lords never
had, but was ever accounted amongst the majora, and of which the Wittagenmote
had the only cognizance, as it will appear in some particulars ensuing.

Unto the King, Lords, and Clergy, must be added, as I said, the Freemen, to
make up the Micklemote complete; and though it be true that no monument of
story speaks of this grand meeting from their being in Germany, until after the
coming of Austin; yet whenas the Saxon Histories then find them in the same
condition that the German story leaves them, it is very probable that in the
interval they continued their wonted custom, although they had no Learning to
leave monuments thereof unto the world, And hereof the examples are not rare,
in those remembrances that those ancient times have left us. For within six
years after Austins arrival, Council. Brit. 126.
Aethelbert calls a Common Council tam cleri quam populi. Ina after him made
Laws suasu and instituto Episcoporum, omnium senatorum, and natu majorum
sapientum populi; in magna servorum Dei frequentia. Ll. Sax. Lamb. Cantab. fol.
2.
Alfred after him reformed the former Laws consulto sapientum. Ibid. fol. 22.
After him Aethelstan called a Council, Ibid. fol. 53.
in which was the Archbishop, and with him the Optimates and sapientes
frequentissimi, besides others, whereof I shall treat now that I come to the
matters handled in this Court.

The matters in agitation in the Wittagenmote generally, were all both of
public and private concernment. That which concerned the public, were such as
regarded removal of inconveniences, such as are Laws for Leagues and Affinity
with other Nations for preventing of War. And thus became the Saxons and
Britons united, and the mortal feud between those two Nations laid aside,
Council. Brit. p. 219.
and they made one: And the Saxons and Danes reconciled, Ll. Lamb. Cantab. fol.
36.
by a Covenant agreed unto, and sworn between both Nations. The like also may
be said of their making of War of defense against Foreign Invasion. Matters of
public and general charge also were debated and concluded in that Assembly,
Ll. Edw. Lamb. Cant. fol. 139.
as the payment of Tithes, it is said they were granted Rege, Baronibus, and
Populo. Such also as concerned the Church; for so Edwin the King of
Northumberland, upon his marriage with a Christian Lady, being importuned to
renounce his Paganism, answered, he would so do, Antiq. Brit. p. 51.
if that his Queens Religion should be accounted more holy and honorable to
God by the wise men, and Princes of his Kingdom. And all the Church-Laws in the
Saxons time were made in the Micklemote. Council. Brit. 127.
Monasteries were by their general consent dedicated, Ibid. 321.
and their Possessions confirmed. The City of Canterbury made the Metropolitan.
Matters also of private regard were there proceeded upon, as not only general
grievances, but perverting of Justice in case of private persons: as in that
Council called Synodale concilium under Beornulfus the Mercian King, Ibid. 332.
quaesitum est quomodo quis cum justitia sit tractat^^, seu quis injuste sit
spoliatus. The name of which Council called Synodal, minds me to intimate
that which I have often endeavored to find out, but yet cannot, viz. that
there was any difference between the general Synods and the Wittagenmote,
unless merely in the first occasion of the summons. And if there be any credit
to be allowed to that book called, The Mirror of Justices, Cap. 1. Sec. 3.
it tells us, that this Grand Assembly is to confer of the Government of Gods
people, how they may be kept from sin, live in quiet, and have right done them,
according to the Customs and Laws; and more especially of wrong done by the
King, Queen, or their Children; Sec. 2.
for that the King may not by himself or Justices determine Causes wherein
himself is actor. And to sum up all, Cap. 4. Sec. 11.
it seems a Court made to rise and stoop according to occasion.

The manner of debate was concluded by Vote, and the sum taken in the gross by
noise; like to the Lacedaemonians, Tacitus.
who determined what was propounded clamore non calculis; yet when the noise
was doubtful, Plut. Lycurg. Thucyd. lib. 1. de Lacedem.
they took the votes severally. The meeting of the Saxons at this Assembly in
the first times was certain, viz. at the new and full Moon. Tacitus.
But Religion changing, other things changed these times to the Feasts of
Easter, Pentecost, and the Nativity; at which times they used to present
themselves before the King at his Court, for the honor of his person, and to
consult and provide for the affairs of his Kingdom; and at such times Kings
used to make show of themselves in their greatest pomp, crowned with their
Royal Crown. An. 1158.
This custom continued till the times of Henry the second, who at Worcester
upon the day of the Nativity offered his Crown upon the Altar, and so the
Ceremony ceased.

This grand Assembly thus constituted was, holden sacred; and all the Members,
or that had occasion therein, were under the Public faith both in going and
coming, unless the party were fur probatus. If a Member were wronged, the
Delinquent paid double damages, and fine to the King, Council. Brit. p. 127.
by a Law made by Ethelbert above a Thousand years ago. This privilege of Safe
pass being thus ancient and fundamental, and not by any Law taken away, Ll
Canut. p. 2. cap. 79.
rests still in force. But how far it belongs to such as are no Members,
Ll. Ed. cap. 35.
and have affairs nevertheless depending on that Court, I am not able to
determine; yet it seems that Privilege outreacheth Members: unless we should
conceit so wide, that the State did suppose that a Member might be a notorious
and known Thief.

Lastly, this Assembly, though it were called the Wittagenmote, or the meeting
of wise men, yet all that would come might be present, and interpose their
liking or disliking of the Proposition, si displicuit sententia fremitu
aspernatur, si placuit frameas concutiunt. And some hints I meet with, that
this course continued here in England: for some Presidents run, in magna
servorum Dei frequentia; Ll. Sax. Lamb. p. 1.
and that of Ina, commune concilium seniorum, and populorum totius Regni,
Council. Brit. 219.
in another Council by him holden. The Council of Winton, Ingulfus.
An 855. is said to be in the presence of the great men, aliorumque fidelium
infinita multitudine: and it will appear that it continued thus after the
Norman times. What power the vulgar had to control the Vote of the wise men, I
find not; fremitu aspernabantur, it is said, and probably it was a touch of the
rudeness of those times; for it was not from any positive Law of the Nation,
but a fundamental Law in Nature, that wise men should make Laws; and that the
supreme Judicature should rest in the Wittagenmote, was never an honor
bestowed upon it by the Saxons, but an endowment from the light of Reason;
which can never be taken away from them by that headless conceit provoco ad
populum, but that Body must be as monstrous as the Anthropophagi, whose heads
are too nigh their belly to be wise.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Council of Lords.
THis in the first condition was a meeting only of the Lords, for direction in
emergent cases, concerning the government and good of the Commonwealth, and for
the promoting of administration of Justice; these the Historian calls Minora,
because they were to serve only the present passions of State. Afterward,
when they had gotten a King into their number, they had so much the more work
as might concern due correspondency between him and the people, and of
themselves toward both. This work was not small, especially in those times of
the growth of Kings, but much greater by the access of Prelates into their
number; with whom came also a glut of Church Affairs, that continually
increased according as the Prelates ambition swelled; so as this Council might
seem to rule the Church alone in those days, whenas few motions that any way
concerned Churchmen, but were resolved into the Prelatical cognizance, as the
minora Ecclesiae. And thus under the color of the minora Ecclesiae, and the
minora Reipublicae, Mag. cent. 8. cap. 9.
this mixed Council of Lords came by degrees to intermeddle too far in the
magnalia Regni. An. 712.
For by this means the worshipping of Images and the Mass was obtruded upon the
Saxons by the Roman Bishop and his Legate, Council. Brit. p. 189.
and the Archbishop of Canterbury; An. 694.
and decreed, That no Temporal or Lay-person shall possess any Ecclesiastical
possessions. That elections of Ecclesiastical persons and Officers shall be by
Bishops. That the possessions of Church men shall be free from all Lay-service
and Taxes. And in one sum, they did any thing that bound not the whole body of
the Freemen. In which had these Lords reflected more upon the office, and less
upon the person, and not at all upon their private interest, they doubtless had
been a blessing to their Generations, and a Golden Scepter in the hand of a
righteous King: But contrarily missing their way, they became a Sword in the
Kings hand against the Subjects, a snare to the Kingdom; and, had not the
Wittagenmote in their meeting allayed those distempers, the Saxon-government
had been little other than a Commonwealth reversed.

CHAP. XXII. Of the manner of the Saxons Government in time of War.
AS the condition of States or Kingdoms are diversely considered in War and
Peace, so also must their Government be: For however War in it self be but a
feverish Distemper in a Commonwealth, yet in some cases it is as necessary, as
a kindly Ague in due season is for the preservation of the Body; which many
times takes distemper rather from the excellency of its constitution, than from
the abundance of humors. Nor did the temper of the Saxon Commonwealth ever
shine more than in War, while it set a Law upon that which ordinarily is master
of all mis-rule and confusion, and so fought by rule rather than by passion.
Tacitus.
Their Chief in the first times was chosen by the Freemen in the Field, Ll. Ed.
cap. 35.
either at the Wittagenmote or the Folkmote, according to the extent of his
command; being carried upon a Shield born upon their shoulders, like as now
Knights of the Shire are. This Emblem they entertained him with, to declare
their trust in him, and the work that was expected from him. His first title
was Heretock, afterward he was called Duke or Dux; the latter whereof turned
to a bare Title in the conclusion, but the former maintained its own honor so
long as the name lasted. Tacitus.
After his election, all swear to be at his order, and not to forsake him. This
was a trick of imbased times: for though the Lacedemonian Law was positive,
that none should fly or break his Rank, but get the Victory or die; yet were
they neither bound by Oath or Penalty, shame in those times being accounted
worse than death by those brave minds. But times growing more old, grew also
more base-spirited, and men could not be (drawn into the field) holden in Rank
by Oaths or Honor; and this occasioned that Law of Ina the Saxon King, Ll.
Sax. Lamb. Cantab. 10.
that in such case a Country-Gentleman should be fined One hundred and twenty
shillings if he were landed; but if otherwise, Council. Brit. p. 528.
Sixty shillings, and the Yeoman Thirty shillings; and afterward the penalty
was increased to the forfeiture of all the estate of the Delinquent. An. 1009.
In their Wars they went forth by bodies collectively, as they were united by
the law of pledges; this made them stick close together for the honor of their
Families and Friends, and rendered their encounters mortal, Tacitus.
and to the worsted party commonly fatal: for once beaten in the field, they
could hardly recover either by rallying or gathering a new Army. Probable it is
that the Lords might have their Villains to follow them in the Battle, but the
strength consisted of the Freemen; and though many were bound by tenure to
follow their Lords to the Wars, and many were Volunteers, yet it seems all were
bound upon call under peril of Fine, Ll. Ed. cap. 35.
and were bound to keep Arms for the preservation of the Kingdom, their Lords,
and their own persons; and these they might neither pawn nor sell, but leave
them to descend to their Heirs, and in default of them, to their Lord, and in
default of him, to their chief pledge, and for want of such to the King. They
mustered their Arms once every year both in Towns and Hundreds, viz. the morrow
after Candlemas; and such whose bodies were unfit for service, were to find
sufficient men for service in their stead. Ll. Canut. c. 58.
They were strict in their Discipline, if they followed their rule, which was
made not by the arbitry of the General, but by Parliament. These, amongst other
scattered principles concerning Sea-affairs, may serve to let us know that the
Law-martial, and that of the Sea, were branches of the positive Laws of the
Kingdom, settled by the general Vote in the Wittagenmote, and not left to the
will of a lawless General or Commander; so tender and uniform were those times
both in their Laws and Liberties.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Government of the Saxon Kingdom in times of peace; and
first of the division of the Kingdom into Shires, and their Officers.
IF the Saxon Government was regular in time of War, how much rather in time of
peace! All great works are done by parcels and degrees; and it was the Saxons
ancient way in Germany, to divide their Territory into several Circuits or
Circles, and to assign to each their several Magistrates, all of them ruled by
one Law; like one soul working in several Members to one common good. Thus they
did here in England, having found the Land already divided into several parts
called Comitatus, or Counties, from the word Comes, that signifies a Companion;
and the Counties thence called, are nothing but Societies or Associations in
public charge and service. But the Saxon word is Shire or Share, that is, a
portion or precinct of ground belonging to this or that person, or great Town,
and bearing the name of that person or Town; and sometimes of the situation of
the people, as North or South folk, East or South Sex or Saxons. Seld. Tit. Hon.
This division by the names seems to be of Saxon original; and though by the
testimony of Ingulfus and other Writers, it might seem to be done by Alfred;
yet it will appear to be more ancient, if the Reader mind the grant of
Peter Pence made by King Offa, wherein is recorded the several Diocesses and
Shires out of which that grant was made, under the very same names that they
own at this day; M. Westminster. An. 794.
and that was more ancient than Alfreds time by the space of eighty years.

Each of these Shires or Counties had their two chief Governors for
distributive justice; of these the Sheriff was more ancient and worthy Officer,
being the Lieutenant, Sheriffs.
and aided by the power of the County in certain cases; for his Commission
extended not to leavy War, but to maintain Justice in that County, and within
the same; and in this work, he was partly ministerial, and partly judicial: in
the one he was the Kings Servant to execute his Writs; in the other he
regulated the Courts of Justice under his Survey. Ll. Edw. c. 35.
He was chosen in the County Court called the Folkmote, by the Votes of the
Freeholders; and as the King himself, and the Heretock, were entitled to their
honor by the peoples favor.

The Coroner, though in original later, Coroners.
was nevertheless very ancient: he was the more Servant or Officer to the King,
of the two. His work was to enquire upon view of Manslaughter, and by
Indictment of all Felonies as done contra Coronam, Miror. cap. 1. Sect. 13.
which formerly were only contra Pacem, and triable only by appeal. And also he
was to enquire of all Escheats and Forfeitures, and them to seize. He was also
to receive appeals of Felonies, and to keep the rolls of the Crown-pleas within
the County. It Is evident he was an Officer in Alfreds time; Miror. p. 300.
for that King put a Judge to death, for sentencing one to suffer death upon
the Coroners record, without allowing the Delinquent liberty of Traverse. This
Officer also was made by election of the Freeholders in their County Court,
Fitz N. Br. 163, 164.
as the Sheriff was, and from amongst the men of chiefest rank in the County,
and sworn in their presence; but the Kings Writ led the work.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the County Court, and the Sheriffs Torn.
THE Government of the County in times of peace, consisted much in the
administration of Justice, which was done in the public meetings of the
Freeholders; and their meetings were either in one place, or in several parts
of the County: in each of which the Sheriff had the managing of the acts done
there. Folkmote, or County Court.
The meeting of the Freemen in one place was called the Folkmote by the Saxons
(saving the judgment of the honorable Reporter, Coke Instit. 2. p. 69.) and of
latter times the County Court: the work wherein, was partly for consultation
and direction concerning the ordering of the County, for the safety and peace
thereof; such as were redress of Grievances, election of Officers, prevention
of dangers, etc. and partly it was judicial, Miror. p. 147.
in hearing and determining the common Pleas of the County, the Church Affairs,
and some trespasses done therein; but not matters criminal, for the Bishop was
Judge therein, together with the Sheriff; and by the Canon he was not to
intermeddle in matters of Blood: yet neither was the Bishops nor Sheriffs work
in that Court, other than directory or declaratory; for the Freemen were
Judges of the act, and the other did but edocere jura populo; Ll. Canut. Miror.
cap. 1. Sec. 15.
yet in special cases upon petition, a Commission issued forth from the King to
certain Judges of Oier, Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 1.
to join with the others in the hearing and determining of such particular
cases. But in case of injustice or error, the party grieved had liberty of
appeal to the Kings Justice. Ll. Canut. Ll. Edgar.
Nor did the Common Pleas originally commence in the County Court, unless the
parties dwelt in several Liberties or Hundreds in the same County; and in case
any mistake were in the commencing of Suits in that Court, which ought not to
be, upon complaint, the Kings Writ reduced it to its proper place; and in this
also the Kings own Court had no pre-eminence. In those ancient times this
County Court was to be holden but twice a year, Council. Brit. p. 197. tit. 22.
Ll. Edw. cap. 35.
by the constitution of King Edgar, but upon urgent emergencies oftener; and
that either by the Kings special Writ, or if the emergent occasions were sudden
and important, by extraordinary summons of ringing the Mootbels. Unto this
Court all the Freemen of the County assembled to learn the Law, to administer
Justice, Ll. Edw. cap. 35.
to provide remedy for public inconvenience, and to do their fealty to the
King before the Bishop and Sheriff upon Oath; and in the work of administering
Justice, causes concerning the Church must have the precedence; Ll. Edw. cap. 4.
so as yet the Canon Law had not gotten footing in England.

The other Court wherein the Sheriff had the direction, Sheriffs Torn.
was in the meeting of the Freemen in several parts of the County; and this
was anciently, Miror. cap. 1. Sec. 16.
and now is called the Sheriffs Torn; which simply considered, is but a
Hundred-Court, Ll. Edgar. cap. 5.
or the Sheriffs Torn to keep the Hundred-Court. It was ordered to be kept
twice every year, viz. at the Lady Day and Michaelmas, or soon after. Ll. Edw.
cap. 35.
Unto this Court all the Freeholders of the Hundred repaired, Ll. Canut. p. 2.
cap. 17.
and there they, the Bishop and Sheriff, executed the same power and work for
kind, that they did in the County Court. In this Court all the Suits in the
Hundred-Court depending, had their determination, and others had their
commencement and proceedings, as well the Pleas of the Crown as others. Some
have conceived it to be a County Court, or superior thereto; but there being
no ground thereof, I conceive it to be no other than a Visitation of the County
by parcels or in circuit.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Division of the County into Hundreds, and the Officers and
Court thereto belonging.
COunties were too great to meet upon every occasion; and every occasion too
mean to put the whole County to that charge and trouble: and this induced
sub-divisions; the first whereof is that of the Hundred, now, and also
anciently so called; but as ancient (if not more) is the name Pagus; for the
Historian tells us, that the Germans, in the executing of their Laws, a hundred
of the Freemen joined with the chief Lord per pagos vicosque, Tacitus.
which first were called Centenarii, or Hundreders, from their number; but used
for a title of Honor, like the Triarii. And as a second hereunto, I shall add
that testimony of the Council at Berkhamsted, which speaking the reduction of
Suits from the Kings Court ad pagi vel loci praepositum; in other places it is
rendered, to the Governors of the Hundred or Borough. And at this day in
Germany, their Country is divided into Circuits, called Centen or Canton, and
Centengriecht; and the Hundreders they call Centgraven, or Hundred-chiefes,
whether for Government in time of peace, Cluer. lib. 1. cap. 19.
or for command in time of War; the latter whereof, the word Wapentake does not
a little favor. Amongst these, one was ( per eminentiam) called the Centgrave
or Lord of the Hundred, and thereunto elected by the Free men of that Hundred,
and unto whom they granted a stipend in the nature of a Rent, Malmesb. Reg.
gest. p. 54.
called Hundredsettena, together with the government of the same. The division
of the County in this manner, was done by the Freemen of the County, who are
the sole Judges thereof, if Polydores testimony may be admitted; and it may
seem most likely that they ruled their division at the first, according to the
multitude of the Inhabitants; which did occasion the great inequality of the
Hundreds at this day. The Government of the Hundred rested at the first upon
the Lord and the Hundredars; Ll. Alured. cap. 4.
but afterward by Alfred they were found inconvenient, because of the
multitude, and reduced to the Lord or his Bailiff, and twelve of the Hundred;
and these twelve were to be sworn, neither to condemn the Innocent, nor acquit
the Nocent. This was the Hundred Court, which by the Law was to be holden once
every Month; and it was a mixed Court of Common Pleas and Crown-pleas: for the
Saxon Laws order, Ll. Edw. 35.
that in it there should be done justice to Thieves; Ll. Aetheldr. 1.
and the trial in diverse cases in that Court is by Ordeale. Their Common Pleas
were cases of a middle nature, Ll. Aethelst. 20
as well concerning Ecclesiastical persons and things, as secular; Ll. Edw.
cap. 32.
for the greater matters were by Commission, or the Kings Writ removed, Ll.
Aetheldr. cap. 1.
as I formerly observed; all Freeholders were bound to present themselves
hereat. Lindenbrog. Ll. Allem. and Saxon.
And no sooner did the Defendant appear, but he answered the matter charged
against him, and judgment passed before the Court adjourned; Council. Brit. p.
273.
except in cases where immediate proof was not to be had, Tacitus.
albeit it was holden unreasonable in those days to hold so hasty process:
Glossar. 155.
and therefore the Archbishop of York prefers the Ecclesiastical or Canonical
way before this. Lastly, in their meeting, as well at the Hundred as
County Court, they retained their ancient way of coming Armed.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Division of the Hundreds into Decennaries.
THis was the last subdivision of the County, and that rested upon the persons;
and it was either not at all, or not so observable, as to be worthy of the
Roman story, and therefore may rather be thought an extract from Moses Law,
introduced by Alfred or his direction. I say, this rested on the persons, and
not upon the place; for though the Centeners were comprehended within certain
bounds, yet the Decenners were not limited but only within the limits of the
Hundred. And of these also, it appears to me there were diverse sorts; for
such matters of controversy that did arise amongst the Decenners, if of
greater moment, were referred to the chiefer Justices, which were appointed
super december decanes, which I conceive were ten chief pledges; and these might
bear the names of the Centeners, although they be not the Centgraven: and the
rather I incline thereto, because in all probability there must needs be above
one hundred Freeholders in Hundredo; and all Freemen were Decenners, that is,
ranked into several tens; Ll. Canut. c. 19.
each one being pledge for others good abearing, and in case of default, to
answer it before the Judge, and in case of default of appearance, his nine
pledges should have one and thirty days to bring the Delinquent forth to
justice. If this failed, then the chief of those Decenners by the votes of that
and the Neighbor Decenners, was to purge himself and his fellow-pledges, both
of the guilt of the fact, and of being parties to the flight of the Delinquent.
And if they could not this do, then were they by their own Oaths to acquit
themselves, and to bind themselves to bring the Delinquent to justice as soon
as they could; and in the mean time, to pay the damage out of the Estate of the
Delinquent; and if that were not sufficient, then out of their own Estate; Ll.
Edw. cap. 15.
but if the Delinquents Estate was sufficient, the surplussage thereof remained
with the pledges. And lastly, the Master of the Family was a pledge for his
whole Family. Ll. Canut. c. 28.
This was the Law of Decenners, and may seem to be somewhat a rigorous Law, not
only in case of Delinquency, but also for their abode; Ll. Alured. cap. 33.
for none of them might depart from their dwelling without consent of his
fellow-pledges, Ll. Canut. p. 2. cap. 15.
nor out of the County without allowance of the Sheriff, or other Governor of
the same. Ll. Edw. c. 20.
And if any controversy arose between the pledges, the chief pledge by them
chosen, called also the Dean or Headburrough, may determine the same; but this
held only in matters of lighter consequence.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Francheses: and first of the Church-Francheses.
WE have hitherto trod in the road-way of the Government of the Commonwealth;
but private regards have made bypath, which we must trace, or else the
footsteps in many particulars will remain unknown. These are called Exemptions,
but more ordinarily Francheses, from which scarce any part of the Kingdom
remained free; and are to be considered, either in regard of the place or
person. In the latter I intend that of the Churchmen, whose Persons and
Estates, in many particulars, were exempted from the civil power of this
Kingdom. Their persons devoted to a peculiar work, they would have to be under
a peculiar Law, called the Canon Law, which at the first extended only to their
own persons, and that only pro reformatione morum: for so an Archbishop tells
us, Council. Brit. p. 258.
that it did teach quomodo Canonici, id est, regulares Clerici vivere debent;
Ll. Edw. Conf.
but when it grew to its full charge, it gave a louder report, Quicunque
aliquid tenuerit, vel in fundo Ecclesiae mansionem habuerit, extra curiam
Ecclesiasticam non placitabit quamvis foris fecerit. And thus as Church-ground
increased by the blind charity of those times, so long Churchmen multiplied,
and the Canon enlarged from the persons of regulars to all Clergymen, and from
them to their Tenants and Neighbors; from thence to certain Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical crimes or scandals, wherever they were found; and wherever it
touched, it took and bound by Excommunication, Ll. Edw. cap. 7.
and upon significavit, being first delivered to Satan, they delivered him over
to the Sentence of the Law, to be imprisoned. If the offender be out of reach
by the space of thirty and one days, he is Outlawed; so as there is no way left
to escape the Church-fury.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the second Franchises, called the Marches.
FRanchises of the place, were such as were limited within precincts of place,
and annexed thereto; and of this sort first were those of the borders, of which
those are the most ancient that bordered the Britons, now called the Marches of
Wales, in which was a peculiar Government, so far as concerned administration
of justice; for otherwise the subjects each of them submitted themselves to the
service of their own Prince. This was therefore a third, different, and mixed
Government, agreed upon jointly between the Britons and Saxons, who after a
long and burdensome War, (wherein both peoples were well wearied) by degrees
became Friends, entered Traffic, and into the strictest Societies by Marriage.
Thus finding the sweetness of peace, they provide against future occasions of
strife that might arise in commerce by the justling of two Laws together; and
agree in one Law, and upon a certain number of Judges elected by common
consent, who were to see to the execution of these Laws as joint Assessors.
From these, as I conceive, arose those which are now called the Lords Marchers,
and were at the first twelve in number, viz. six Saxons, and six Britons. It
seems this form of Government was first instituted by Aetheldred, Ll.
Aetheld. cap. 3.
and by way of prescription or custom, continues till this day: and as it was
the birth of truce, so for the future became both Mother and Nurse of peace
between those two peoples, like the twilight between the day and night, until
both were brought under one head, and by divine providence settled in a lasting
day.

CHAP. XXIX. Of County-Palatines.
OF the same sort of Franchises were these which are called County-Palatines,
which were certain parcels of the Kingdom assigned to some particular person,
and their Successors, with Royal power therein to execute all Laws established,
in nature of Province holden of the Imperial Crown: and therefore the Kings
Writ passed not within the precinct, no more than in the Marches. These were
occasioned from the courage of the Inhabitants that stoutly defended their
Liberties against the usurping power of those greater Kings that endeavored to
have the Dominion over the whole Heptarchy, and not being easily overcome, were
admitted into composition of Tributaries; and therefore are found very ancient:
for Alfred put one of his Judges to death for passing Sentence upon a
Malefactor, for an offense done in a place where the Kings Writ passed not;
Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 1.
and the same Author reciting another example of his justice against another of
his Justices, for putting one to death without president, renders the Kings
reason, for that the King and his Commissioners ought to determine such cases,
excepting those Lords in whose precinct the Kings Writ passes not.

CHAP. XXX. Of Francheses of the Person.
FRancheses of the Person are such Liberties annexed unto the Person, as are
not absolute Lordships, but only tending thereto, and limited within a
Precinct, but not annexed thereto: and these are matters of profit rather than
power; as those of Bury St. Edmonds, Doncaster, Dorchester, Circester; all
which were in the Saxon times: Miror. cap. 5.
and these or some of them had juridical power in cases of Felonies and
Robberies arising within that Precinct, Infangtheoff.
so as the Delinquent was both Inhabitant and taken within the same; this was
called Infangtheoff: and if upon fresh pursuit made by the right owner or
possessor, the Delinquent was taken with the prey in his possession, or as the
old Dialect is, Handhaben Backhearend; Ll. Edw. cap. 26.
Then was he carried immediately before the Coroner of that Liberty, and the
Sakeber, or party wronged, made his proof by Witnesses; and thereupon judgment
forthwith passed without answer, and execution immediately ensued. Some
Liberties had Outfangtheoff, that is, the trial and forfeiture of such
Delinquents, Outfangtheoff.
being no Inhabitants, and yet taken within the Liberty; or Inhabitants, and
not taken within the Liberties: Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 35.
but this Trial was always by Jury. The Antiquity of these Liberties are not
obscurely manifested in their names, Briton. cap. 15.
and more clearly by the Saxon Laws and Acts; for it is observed of Alfred, Ll.
Edw. cap. 21.
that he seized a Franches of Infangtheoff, because the Lord of that Franches
would not send a Felon (taken within his Liberty for a Felony committed without
the same) to the Goal of the County, as he ought to have done. Miror. cap. 5.
Sec. 1.
Other Liberties there were granted also by Charter; a taste whereof may be seen
in one Grant made by King Edgar, to the Monastery of Glastenbury, wherein was
granted Sack, Hamsockne, Friderbrece, Forstel, Teme, Flemone, Ferdre, Hundred
Setene, Sock, Tholl, Adae, Horda, Bufan Orderan, Been Orderan; the particular
natures of each may be observed in the Glossaries; all of them being allowed to
the Crown by the Law, and by the advice of the Council of Lords granted over to
these Grantees in nature of Deputies to the King, to possess both the power and
profit thereto belonging.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Manors.
NEvertheless, most of these Liberties, if not all of them, were many times
granted by Kings as appendant to Manors; which were Francheses of smaller
circuit, being at the first portions of ground granted to some particular
persons, and by them subdivided and granted over to particular persons to hold
of the Grantors by Rents, Services, and suit to one Court; all being no other
than the spoils of War, and rewards of valor, or other service. These in their
collective nature are called a Manor, and by continuance of time become a kind
of body politic. In Antiquity it is called Mansum, from the Mansion House,
although it is not of the Essence of a Manor, nor ought the words of Bracton to
be construed according to the literal sense; Bracton. fol. 212.
for the house may be destroyed, and yet the Manor continue; and the ground was
granted in tenure before any house built thereupon. The quantity of the ground
thus given to hold by Service, was according to the pleasure of the Lord more
or less, and therefore might extend into diverse Parishes; as on the other part,
one Town might comprehend diverse Manors. The Estate that was granted, depended
partly on the condition of the Grantee: Fleta. lib. 4. cap. 15.
for some were servi or Bondmen, and their Estate was altogether at the will
of the Lord, as was also the benefit; but the servants merit, and the Lords
benignity concurring with some Conscience of Religion, as the light grew more
clear, abated the rigor of the tenure into that which we now call Copyhold.
Other Estates were made to the Free men, which in the first times were only for
years; albeit therein they were not niggardly, for they sticked not at Leases
for a hundred years, Ingulfus Croyl.
yet with a render of Rent, which in those days was of Corn or other Victual;
and thence the Leases so made were called Feormes or Farms, which word
signifies Victuals. But times ensuing, turned the Victual into Money, and
terms of years to terms of lite and inheritance, retaining the Rents, and those
called Quit-rents, or the Rents of those persons that are acquitted or free.
Gloss. 1. 58. Ll. Saxon. 16, 17. Lamb.
But in case of estates of inheritance for the most part after the death of the
Tenants were reserved Heriots or a relief: which were not left to the will of
the Lord, but was put in certainty, in the very letter of the Law: Gloss. 348.
Ll. Canut. p. 1. cap. 69.
for according to each man's degree, such was his Relief or Heriot.

But over and above all, they reserved special service to be done by the person
of the Tenant, or some other by his procurement, of which those that were their
servi or villains were at the will of the Lord: others had their particular
service set down in their grants. These concerned either War or Peace; the
former was afterward called the service of the Knight or Soldier; the latter
the service of the Husbandman or Plough. That of the Soldier was the more
honorable, Knight Service.
and suitable to the old German trade; Pigrum and iners videtur sudore
acquirere quod possis sanguine parare: and the work was to defend the Kingdom,
the Lords person and Honor; and to this end he was ever to have his weapons in
readiness, which gave name to the service, and altered as times and customs
changed. This service by custom, from a work degenerated into the bare Title,
and became a dignity: and the men named, or rather entitled Milites; and many
of the Saxon Charters were attested by men bearing that Title; yet the service
itself was far more ancient, and called servicium loricae; of which sort also
were the Custodes pagani that wore a Helmet, a coat of Mail, and a guilt Sword:
not unlike the old German way of calling forth of their Tirones to the war.
Tacitus.
Of this rank some were more eminent than others; for some bare the single
title of Knight, and, it seemed, served on foot: others served on horseback,
and were called Rad knights, or Knights-riders, as Bracton notes; Seldom.
Spicil.
and these I take to be the Vavasours, noted in the Conquerours Laws: for that
their relief is a Helmet, a Coat of Mail, a Shield, a Sphere, and a horse. Now
for the maintaining of this service, they had Lands and Tenements called
Knights-Fees, which bound the owner to that service, into whose hands soever
they came, to be done either by the person of the owner, or other fit person by
him procured, and therefore were discharged from the payment of all Taxes and
Tollage, which was the Law of the Goths of old, and remains in Sweden at this
day. Co. Litlet. 75. Bureus.
The number of these Fees much increased, so as in the Conquerours time they
were above sixty thousand, which was a mighty body for a small Island, and
brought much honor to the Nation.

But the profit arose from beneath, I mean from the soccage tenure or service
of the Plough, Soccage tenure.
which in the first times was performed by those that were unfit for the
service of the Wars, either being green and young, or decrepit and aged; and
sometimes by the Women. But after that the Saxon Conquest was at a stop,
Tacitus.
and that no more was to be gotten by Blood, men endeavored to satisfy their
desires by sweat, and turned their Swords into Plough-shares; and thus the
Husbandry increased exceedingly, and has proved the best Pillar of the
Commonweal; the nature of this tenure is fully set out by the Reporter; nor
can I add thereto more than the Law of the Confessor concerning these men, viz.
That no man might trouble them, Co. Litlet. fol. 86.
but for their Rent, nor any Lord thrust them out of their Farm, so long as
they do their service. Ll. Edw. c. 33. Spiceleg.
And thus it appears, that the service became in nature of a condition
subsequent, begetting an increaser of the Estate, Ll. Edw. c. 33.
which by continuance wrought an inheritance, and so the Title of Entry was
turned wholly into distresses for service not performed; yet the Lord was no
looser thereby, so long as Heriots, Rents, and Services accrewed unto him.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Courts incident and united unto Manors.
BY Grants made by Lords unto Tenants already noted, the Lords had power by
common right to call their Tenants before them, and enquire concerning their
payment of Rents, and performance of service, which became Courts of constant
appointment: of which sort there-were two, one for the Freemen, the other for
the Bondmen; and this brought forth another service, which we call suit of
Court. Court Leet.
The Court of Freemen was holden from three weeks to three weeks, wherein the
Freemen, as in the Hundred and County were Judges of the fact, Miror. p. 17.
and from them named, as at this day, Court Leet, Lind. gloss. Albin. Hist.
Saxon. p. 72.
or the Court of the Liti, of such as are manumitted or Freemen. In this Court
all Actions or Suits between the Freemen of the same Manor, and within the
same arising, were determined; nor could any Court (no not the Kings)
intermeddle with such Suits before Trial had; but by the Lords allowance. And
upon this privilege, the Writ of right Patent was grounded. But the full
nature of this Court is not within my intention, but I must refer the Reader to
the Law Books. F. N. Br. 2.
For it was the least part of the work and power which this Court obtained by
continuance of time; in regard that Manors exceedingly multiplied, so as no
part of the Land was left free; and many one of them extended into diverse
Decennaries, the Lords obtained great power over them, and had of Kings, grants
of view of Frank-pledge within their several Lordships; View of Frank-pledge.
and further power of inquiry, and punishing of matters of public nuisance, and
such as were contra Pacem and Coronam; which by custom became annexed unto the
Court Leet. The nusances of Copy-holds being done to disherison of the Lord,
and not proper for the Court of public inquiry. The Judge of this Court Leet
was the Lord, or his Steward, for the directory part; and the Steward was
properly Coroner within the Manor to take Presentiments, and certify them to
the Coroner of the County. And thus this Court swallowed up much of the power
of the Decenners Court in the very infancy, so as we find no footsteps of any
Writ of Right to the Decenners, or Chief-pledges; but contrariwise many views
of Frank-pledge granted to particular persons in the time of Alfred: Miror.
cap. ^. Sec. 1.
and many things done by the Chief pledges in the Courts of these Manors, as
is to be yet seen in many ancient Court-Rolls.

The other Court, which by common Right belonged to the Lords of Manors, was
that of the Copyholders, called or rather included under the name of the
Court Baron; Court Baron.
which albeit it is called in the ordinary style Curia Baronum, yet not so
properly, as I conceive; and it may be by way of mistake for Baronis: Co.
Instit. cap. 57.
for if it were so properly united formerly to the Court of Freemen, as ( ab
excellentiori) it always passed under that name, yet when that Court is
omitted, and slipped out of the way, the Court of Copy holders that remains,
improperly retains the name of that which is gone. This Court at the first
was intended only for the Lords benefit, and for the Tenants right, as
subservient thereunto. I say, the Tenants right, not against their Lord; for
they had no right against him: but against any other they had protection of
Law, both for themselves and their Estates. And, as I said before, by custom,
or rather light of Religion, their persons and Estates were considerable, even
by the Lords themselves. Ll. Edw.
Which also caused a Law to be made, ut sic de suis hominibus agant, quatenus
erga Deum reatum non incurrant, and Regem non offendant. Which Law could never
be intended of the Freeholders; for it had been a vain redundancy to have made
an especial Law for that, which was provided for by the known fundamental Law
of the Kingdom, against which a speedy remedy lay by the Kings Writ. And these
men, how mean soever, had even in those days a kind of Property both in Lands
and Goods: for the Laws, though by their antic Language darkened, yet plainly
speak de terra sua and Catallis ejus. Seldom. Spicil. 184. cap. 33.
And if the ancient Germans were so generous to their Bondmen, surely much
rather, after their coming into this Island; inasmuch as their service was more
and more necessary in Agriculture, which could never be performed by the
Natives, who were not in their own persons conquered, although their Land was.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Townships and their Markets.
THE next Franchese is that of Towns: This was taken up as a Birth of War and
Nurse of Peace; for their Ancestors liked not to dwell in crowds, ne pati
quidem inter se junctas seeds: Tacitus.
it being their trade or pastime to war upon Beasts, when they found no Enemies
amongst them. This solitudinary custom could not be soon shaken off, and might
well occasion multitudes of Towns in those times (though small ones doubtless)
that Writers speak of; if true it be, that after the wasting times of the Danes
and Normans, in the Conquerours time, were found in England, Forty five
thousand Parishes, and Sixty two thousand Villages. Nor was Peace less
beneficial to them, than they careful of it; for by continuance of Peace,
Husbandry, Manifactures, and Commerce, occasioned people to gather to places
commodious for Habitation, in good Soil, nigh Navigable Rivers or Havens; and
according to their situation and trade, so they swelled in multitude or
decayed. Some of whom growing more eminent than others, more care was had of
their government and safety; for the latter by building of Walls and Castles,
and for the former by settling a Magistracy peculiar to that place or Township;
not as so many Decenners, but as one body consisting of many members. And thus
by custom they grew to be Fraternities, or Corporations under one Magistrate or
Head, whom they called Alderman; and held a Court of Justice (at the first
holden twice a year) which was in nature of a Leet with a view of Frank-pledge,
Ll. Canut. c. 44. Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 1.
as may appear in the cases of Dorchester, Circester, and Doncaster, in
Alfred's time: and herewith they had public Markets, which served them for
their better conveniences.

This privilege of Market was a liberty of public sale and trade in
Commodities that principally concern the Belly; Markets.
but by common course became a pass for Commodities of every kind almost.
Concerning this liberty, I shall desire leave to interpose this Parenthesis
ensuing, before I proceed in the intended discourse.

In the first times, as every man by common right had property in his own
Goods, so by the same right he had power to alien to any person, at any time,
in any place, by gift, sale, exchange, or other ways; and that by such
Alienation, but especially by sale, a Right was vested in the Buyer against all
men, saving the Eigne-right, which was recompensed upon warranty, and recovery
in value. And in those days common sense taught men to buy or sell, of or to
the next Neighbor that would bargain with them: and for want of such occasion,
to repair to the next Assembly, Meeting, or Concourse of people, for the sale
of such Commodities as their Neighborhood would not take off their hands. And
thus the greater Towns that had Walls or Castles, became the greatest Markets,
and others less; and this made the Neighborhood of those Towns to repair
thither to buy, as others to sell. But time discovering a double inconveniency
herein, viz. that by these less public sales in smaller Villages, where little
or no care of Right or Justice was had (and by which means the word Pagan
became a word of reproach) many men's Goods by clandestine Contracts were lost,
and no care had of their recovery; and (which was yet more prejudicial to the
Public) that the greater Towns appointed for the strength and defense of the
Kingdom, became ill provided with supply of Victuals, either for the present or
future; and what was had, for the most part was gotten at the second hand, and
higher rate than the Country-Villages had. The wise men, by public Edict, laid
a restraint of Markets in smaller Villages, and more private places; and thus
the greater Towns having Markets formerly, became more public Markets, not by
any new Right or Privilege from the Crown; for it neither had such power nor
could have (but upon usurpation) against the common Right of such Towns and
places of public defense. This Restraint, upon the reasons aforesaid, was made
first in the Saxon-times, as may appear by their Laws, but more clearly
declared and confirmed afterward by the Laws of the Normans, which never gave
any new Right of Market-overt unto those places of public defense, but only
did inhibit the same in the smaller Villages and private places. In which
respect, although the Kings of this Nation in future times took leave to
abolish that Restraint which did lie upon some of those more private places,
for certain reasons of State; and so these places became Markets-overt, which
formerly were none: yet could they never take away that privilege which Nature
it self cast upon those greater Towns (being the very Limbs of the Kingdom)
without wrong done to the common Right, and the public Good; nor abridge them
of that power, but that they might still use their liberty at times and places
within their Precinct, as might best conduce with the benefit of the
Inhabitants of those places, even as any particular Free man may govern his own
Estate as him likes best. And thus upon the whole matter it is to be
concluded, that the ancient Buroughs of this Kingdom properly do not hold
their liberty of Market-overt by Prescription or Charter, but by common Right;
and not as a Corporation made by Charter, but as they are a multitude of people
anciently gathered together and united, upon whom the strength and wealth of
the Kingdom does or did formerly much more depend, than on any of the smaller
Villages and open Towns; even as every Free man possesses and uses his proper
Inheritance and Estate without particular privilege derived from the Crown:
Nor can the King take away the liberty of Market-overt from such places, more
than he can take away the liberty of buying and selling from any Free man, to
whom the Law allows a liberty of ownership. This I submit to the censure of
the learned in the Laws, in regard of the different opinions concerning the
same.

This liberty of Township thus made, and the Place and People Inhabitants
thereof being of such consequence in the public administration, had for their
better support and safety liberty of Fortification, Ll. Edw. cap. 1.
and power to charge one another with the maintenance of the Fortifications by
an imposition called Burghbote; Ll. Aethelst. cap. 12.
and held their Tenements under a Rent to their Lord or King called Burgage,
Ll. Aethelst. cap. 13. Gloss.
as they were a body aggregate.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Forests.
BEsides other Prerogatives of the Saxon Kings, they had also a Franchise for
wild Beasts for the Chase, which we commonly call Forest, being a precinct of
ground neither parcel of the County, nor the Diocese, nor of the Kingdom, but
rather appendant thereunto. This savoured of the old German sport, but by
custom turned from sport to earnest: For although in the first times the Saxons
were so few, and the Country so spacious, that they might allow the Beasts
their Farm as well as themselves their own; People nevertheless so multiplied,
as of necessity they must intercommon either with Beasts or Fishes: the former
whereof, however more cleanly, yet the latter had the surest footing, and was
chosen as the least of two evils, rather than for any likelihood of good
Neighborhood. For as Nature taught Beasts to prey for themselves, so men to
defend their own; and this bred such a fewd between Beasts and men, as that
Kings doubting to lose their Game, took in with the weaker, that the world
might see the happiness of England, where Beasts enjoy their liberty as well as
men. But this was, as it were, by compromise; for it had been very hard to have
pleased the Free men, who had liberty of Game within their own ground by common
Right, Ll. Canut. c. 77.
and to preserve the Kings liberty of Forest co-incident therewith, had not the
King employed on the one side the power of a Dane that looked somewhat like a
Conqueror; and on the other side, that which looked as like to the bounty of a
King, in allowing liberty of ownership to men inhabiting within the bounds of
the Forest, which at the first was set apart only for the Kings pleasure: and
all his wits to make a Law somewhat short of a full freedom, and yet
outreaching that of Bondage, which we since have commended to posterity under
the Forest-Charter. And yet for all that, it proved a hard matter for Kings to
hunt by Law; and the Law it self is a Yoke somewhat too heavy for a
Commonwealth to bear in old age, if self-denying Majesty shall please to take
it away.

CHAP. XXXV. Concerning Judges in Courts of Justice.
THus far of the several Tribes and numbers of this Commonwealth, which like so
many Conduit-heads, derived the influence of Government through the whole body
of this Island; and in every of which, Judiciary power acted it self in all
Causes arising within the verge of that Precinct; some of which had more
extraordinary trial before the King and his Council of Lords, according as the
parties concerned were of greater degree, or the Cause of more public
concernment. Examples hereof are the Cases between the Bishop of Winchester and
Leoftin in Aetheldred's time, and between the two Bishops of Winchester and
Durham in Edward's time: But custom made this Court stoop to smaller game in
latter times, and to reach at the practice of the County Court, by sending the
Kings Writs to remove certain Causes from the cognizance of those rural
Judicatories to their sublime determination. Glanvil. lib. 6. cap. 6, 7, 8.
And thus became the Council of Lords as an Oracle to the whole Nation; and the
King amongst the rest, as the Priest that many times rendered the Answer or
Sentence of that Oracle in his own sense, and had it confirmed to him by an
Oath se judicium rectum in Regno facturum, Ll. Edw. c. 16.
and justitiam per concilium procerum regni sui tenturum; so as, though he was
the first in view, yet the Council of Lords was the first in nature, and the
Cynosure to direct his tongue and actions.

From this Fountain issued also streams of Judicature into all parts by Judges
itinerant under the Kings Commission, Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 2. and cap. 1. Sec. 3.
to reform errors, punish defaults in the ordinary rural Judicatories, and to
dissolve hard and knotty Cases; and these were occasioned at the instance of
the party: and Alfred (whose birth this was) sent them forth in way of
Association with the Sheriff, Lord of the Fee, or other ordinary Magistrate.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Proceedings in Judicature by Indictment, Appeal,
Presentment, and Action.
FOr the proceedings in course, the Saxons were wont to begin with matters
belonging to the Church, and afterward to Secular causes; in which if the
matters were criminal, the most ancient way of proceeding was by Appeal of the
party complaining. But afterward in cases that concerned Damage, Injury, or
Violence done to the Body of a man or his Estate, the King was found to be
therein prejudiced, besides the prejudice immediately done to the Subject: for
a man disabled in Body or Estate, is disabled to serve the King and the
Public; and upon this ground a way was found out to punish the offender by
Indictment, Indictment.
besides the satisfaction done to the party wronged. Lambert. Ll. Inae. 15.
The proceedings against such Delinquents were by attachment of the party, who
thereupon, gave Pledges for his appearance. If the party could not be found, a
fugam fecit was returned, and that was a conviction in Law; and pursuit was
made after the party by Huy and Cry. If he was thereby taken, the ancient way
was that of Hallifax-Law; but in latter times he was imprisoned, Ll. Inae. Lam.
fol. 7.
or admitted to Bail if the offenses were bailable: and if the party bailed
made default, Ll. Alured. c. 6.
or did not abide the Trial, his Bail suffered as Principal. Miror. c. 2. Sec.
24.
If no Bail could be procured, the Delinquent was imprisoned till he was
legally acquitted; Ll Edw. cap. 4.
but this imprisonment was only in nature of restraint. Miror. p. 255. Gloss.
335.
If the Delinquent was found upon the Huy and Cry, and would not yield himself,
Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 9. and 10.
he was in repute a common Enemy, Ll. Edw. cap. 7.
and (as a Wolf) any man might kill him; Ll. Canut. c. 45.
as the Law was also the same in case of Vtlary. Miror. cap. 2. Sec. 22.
At the time of trial (if at the Kings suit) the Delinquent was indicted in
this manner by any party present. I D. C. do say for the King, that I. S. is
defamed by good men; that he upon -- day of -- etc. into the House and Goods of
-- did cast fire, and the same did burn: or, (if it were for Bloodshed) with a
Sword did strike and wound him in the left arm, and that this was done
Feloniously, or, (if the case required) Traitorously: and if I. S. deny the
same, I will for the King prove the matter against him, as the King ought to
do, that is to say, by Witnesses, and Twelve men. But if the complaint was at
the suit of the party, Appeal. Miror. cap. 2. Sec. 15.
then the Prosecutor sued him upon Appeal, in manner following: I. C. appealeth
D. H. here present, for that E. Father, Brother, Son, or Uncle (according as
the case was) to I. C. being in the peace of God, and of our Sovereign Lord the
King, at the dwelling house of E. at -- etc. the said D. H. upon the -- day of
-- in the -- year of -- with a Sword made a Wound of two inches long, and six
inches deep, in the left pap of the body of the said E. whereof he died; and
this was done Feloniously, and of Malice forethought. And if the said D. H.
shall deny the same, the said I. C. is ready to prove the same against him in
his body, or as a Monk, Woman, or Clerk, behooves to prove the same; that is,
by Champion; for neither Monk, Woman, nor Clerk was by Law to justify by
Battle in their own person. The several causes of Appeal and Indictment may be
found in the Law Books, to whom I refer the Reader, it not being within the
compass of this Discourse to fall upon the particulars. I shall only observe
the difference between Indictments former and latter, and between them and
Appeals, viz. that Appeals are positive Accusations in the name of the
Prosecutor of the fact done by the party appealed; whereas Indictments were
only a publication or affirmation of the same of a fact done by the party
indicted, and wherein Not guilty pleaded, served only as in nature of a Quere,
to usher in the votes of the Freemen concerning the fact.

Secondly, the difference between former Indictments from these in these days,
consists in this, that the ancient Indictments were in the name of one man;
those of the later sort are in the name of the Jury; and the former were only
of a same, the later, of the fact.

A third way of bringing Controversies unto judgment, Miror. cap. 2. Sec. 23.
concerned only such matters as were of less consequence; and these were
introduced by way of Presentment, Presentment.
in the name or behalf of the King, in nature of a positive Accusation of one
for a Crime, first laid down generally, and then asserted by a particular fact,
in this manner: I say, for our Sovereign Lord the King, That H. here is
perjured, and has broken says against the King; because, whereas H. is or was
Chancellor of the King, and was sworn that he would not sell Right, or any
remedial Writ to any one: yet upon the -- day of -- etc. he sold to B. a Writ
of Attaint, and would not grant the same under half a Mark. So as the
difference between an Indictment and Presentment in those days was only in the
degree of the Crime for which the party Delinquent was accused, and in the
manner of conclusion of the Presentment, which was without Averment.

The last way of Trials concerns such offenses that exceed not the nature of
Trespass done to a man's Person or his Goods; Miror. cap. 2. Sec. 24.
and this was by way of Action, Action.
and it was to obtain recompense for Damage sustained. Now because the former
were called Personal Trespasses, the Process was by attachment of the Person;
who thereupon put in Bail, or else his Person was secured by imprisonment till
Trial, and satisfaction made. But in the later that concerned the reality, Ll.
Etheldr. cap. 20.
Three Summons went forth in the Hundred-Court; Ll. Canu^. c. 10 Lindenbr. tit.
36.
and if default were made, complaint thereof ensued in the County Court, and
thence issued forth a Distringas; and if the Defendant still persisted in
declining his appearance, the Distress was forfeited, and a Summons issued upon
the Land. If then the Defendant would not appear, or upon appearance would not
give Pledges to abide Judgment, his whole Land was seized for the benefit of
the King, of the Lord of the Hundred, and of the Complainant, because he had
offended against all three. But if the party appeared in former times, he
answered forthwith, and Judgment passed without delay, as has been said;
unless in urgent cases, where the matter was raw; and then it was adjourned,
and Pledges given by the Defendant to the full value, Ll. Edgar. c. 7.
after the custom of the Athenians; and if the Defendant made Default at the
day, his Pledges were forfeited. But in aftertimes, for better and more
advised proceeding, the Defendant was admitted to his Essoines; yet with a
Proviso, that no Essoine should be allowed for above Fifteen days; Miror. cap.
5. Sec. 1.
and this was the direction of King Alfred.

In the answer of the Defendant, he either traversed the matter in fact, or
confessed and justified, Miror cap. 3. Sect. 16.
or confessed and submitted. The first put the matter to the judgment of the
Freemen; the second to the judgment of the Judge; the third to the discretion
of the Complainant, whereby the Defendant generally found mercy, and in case of
Trespass, rendered less damage. I find no footsteps in those times of
Dilatorypleas, or Demurrer, or other delays, unless in case of infancy; for the
Saxons knew no other age of ability to do or suffer, but the age above One and
twenty years: and in Alfred's time a Judge suffered death for passing Sentence
of death upon one under that age. Albeit the Canonists had in those days
brought into custom other ages of ability in matters concerning Marriage;
Lindenb. gloss. Miror. cap. 5. Sect. 1.
although it may well be thought that it requires no less maturity to manage
the affairs of a married life, than to discern the nature and difference of
manners, especially in case of crimes, which are contrary to the very light of
nature.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the several manners of extraordinary trial by Torture,
Ordeale, Compurgators, and Battle.
EVidence of the matter in fact, upon trial of Causes in the Saxon Judicatory,
sometimes consisted in the pregnant testimony of the Fact it self, Torture.
and sometimes in the testimony of some Circumstances. The first was an
unquestionable ground of conviction; the second was too weak to command the
Verdict, although sometimes it persuaded it; and therefore those
incompassionate times found out a trick of extorted confession, by torture of
the party, following the principles of passion therein, rather than sober
judgment; for circumstances are sufficient to irritate the hearts of those
that are passionate; and where Jealousy is once entered, there is no place for
sparing, be the matter never so untrue. Yet I do not find any Law amongst the
Saxons to patronize this fashion of conviction; albeit it seems it was
practiced, for Alfred the King punished one of his Judges with death for
passing Sentence upon an extorted confession by Torture before the Corner.
Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 1. Cragius.
And possibly it might be gained from the Lacedaemonians, although little to the
praise of their Greekish wisdom in that particular: Seeing that in all reason
it must be supposed, that Fear and Grief will enforce Flattery upon the
Tormentor, as well as Self-love draw forth Flattery to the Benefactor.

A second sort of Evidence was that of Ordeale, Ordeale.
being also grounded upon a pre-conceit or suspicion: the manner hereof was
diverse. The thing seems to be the birth of the Brain of some Churchman, who
had read of the cursed Water. The first mention that I find thereof was at the
Council of Mentz, An. 813. An. 895. Ll. Aethelst. Can. 23. An. 928.
and afterward in the Council of Triers; but not a footstep thereof in this
Kingdom till by Aethelstan it was advanced into the degree of a Law; after
which time it continued in use well nigh Three hundred years. A strange
monument of God's idulgency to an ignorant Age thus turning extraordinary to
ordinary, for the clearing of innocence; and (which is no less wonderful)
allowing in those times unto men under nature such a power over themselves, as
to adventure against nature. Doubtless that man or woman was of a daring spirit
that first tried the trick, if he had not a miraculous faith in that promise,
Cum ambulaveris per ignem, etc. and it showed metal in them that followed the
example. But the next age grew dull, Isa. 43. 2.
and men being weary of such bane-touches, the Clergy that cried it up, their
successors cried it down, and so devoured their own birth without any
difficulty, other than a bare injunction of a King, Spicil. Seldom.
that had power to command only such as would obey.

But where fame was yet more slight, Compurgators.
and springing rather from want of charity and misapprehension, than promising
circumstances, men were wont to be contented with a voier Dire, or the Oath of
the party suspected, and the concurrent testimony of other men: The first
attesting his own innocence, the other contesting their Consciences of the
truth of the former testimony; and therefore were, and still are called
Compurgators. Their number was more or less, and of greater or less value,
according as the offense or the party suspected was of greater or less
concernment. This manner of trial was of ancient use, Ll. Edm. c. 16.
and both it and that Ordeale under the directory of the Clergy; yet this was
the ancienter by Three hundred years, An. 647.
and first brought into this Nation by the Council at Berghamsted under
Bertwald Archibishop of Canterbury. Ll Canut. cap. 5.
And it was performed sometimes more solemnly by solemn receiving of the
Eucharist, especially if the person suspected was of the sacred Function.

One manner of trial yet remains, Battle.
which was used both in trial of matters of Crime and Title; and it is the
trial by Battle, which was in criminal matters with sharp Weapons; but in
titulary matters with blunt Weapons. No Defendant could refuse Battle offered,
but such as were too excellent, as the King; or too sacred, as the Clergy; or
too weak, as Women, Maimed persons, and Children; or too inscient, as Idiots
and Lunaticks; or too mean, as Villains. And as these were not necessitated to
answer in Battle, so was no Freeman compelled to answer them by Battle. Miror.
cap. 2. Sect. 13.
This way was an old way, as may appear by the conclusion of Appeals, and
seems more satisfactory than that of Ordeale; because this rested upon the
Consciences both of Appellant and Defendant; whereas Ordeale rested only upon
the single Conscience of the Defendant, which oftentimes was rather hardy than
innocent. And the continuance of this trial in title, even at this day, shows
that men can away with this, and that there is not evil sufficient in it to
eradicate this weed, although it be kept under ground; and experience shows,
that Right and Victory always do not concur.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the ordinary manner of Trial amongst the Saxons by Inquest.
THe last and most ordinary way of trial was by Witnesses (upon traverse of the
matter in Fact) before the Jurors, Inquest.
and their votes thereupon: this made the Verdict, and it determined the matter
in fact. In former time questionless it was a confused manner of trial, by
Votes of the whole multitude; which made the Verdict hard to be discerned: But
time taught them better advice, to bring the Voters to a certain number,
according to the Grecian way, who determined controversies by the suffrages of
Four and thirty, Emmius.
or the Major part of them. But how the number came to be reduced to Twelve, I
cannot conjecture, unless in imitation of that rule of Compurgators, that
ordinarily exceeded not that number. The first Law that defined this number,
was that of Aetheldred, about three hundred years before the Conquest. In
singulis Centuriis, An. 675. Ll. Sax. Lamb.
etc. In English thus: In every Century or Hundred let there be a Court; and
let Twelve ancient Freemen, together with the Lord of the Hundred, be sworn
that they will not condemn the Innocent, nor acquit the Guilty. And this was so
strictly eyed, Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 1.
that Alfred put one of his Judges to death for passing Sentence upon a Verdict
corruptly obtained, upon the votes of the Jurors, whereof Three of the Twelve
were in the Negative. And the same King put another of his Judges to death, for
passing sentence of death upon an Ignoramus returned by the Jury. And a third,
for condemning a man upon an Inquest taken ex officio, whenas the Delinquent
had not put himself upon their trial.

But the Saxons were more careful of the credit and life of man, Two Juries.
for no man's life or credit rested altogether upon the cast of Twelve opinions:
but first Twelve men enquired of the fame and ground thereof; which if liked,
rendered the party under the spot of delinquency, and meet to be looked upon as
under the suspicion of the Law, who formerly was but under the suspicion of
some particular man. And then was a second enquiry of the fact, if the party
traversed the vote of Fame. In both which trials the Verdict grounded it self
upon those allegata and probata which were before them. The first of these
enquiries was before the Coroner, who, even in these old days, had the view of
Bloodshed. The second was had before the Judge of life and death: neither of
which could legally indamage the party without the other, unless the Judge
meaned to answer it with the peril of his own person and Estate; as it befell in
Alfred's time, when a Judge suffered death for passing Sentence upon the
Coroners only Record; unto which a Replication is allowed, Miror. cap. 5. Sec.
1.
as the Book says. And another Judge had the same measure for condemning one
without Appeal or Indictment foregoing. Where, by the way, I might note another
difference between Appeals and Indictments in this; Miror. cap. 2. Sec. 11.
that Appeals were and are the more speedy Trials than Indictments, inasmuch as
the former were but one act, the latter two.

And yet time and experience refined this way of trial into a more excellent
condition: Medietas Linguae.
For the bloody times of the Saxons first age passing over, and peace arising
by degrees, they, together with the Britons, began to intercommon, and about
the Marches became a mixed people under a mixture of Government and Laws, as
has been already noted. Amongst which one concerned their way of trial of
matters in fact by a Jury mixed both of Britons and Saxons, which was settled by
a Law made by Aetheldred. Viri sint, etc. In English thus: Let there be Twelve
men of understanding in the Law, six of them English, and six Welsh, Ll.
Aetheldred cap. 3. Lamb.
and let them deal Justice both to English and Welsh. The equity of this Law in
future ages spread it self into all Trials of Foreigners in every place
throughout this Island. Unto such as stumble at this conceit, because they are
said to be aetate superiores, and jure consulti, I shall only note thus much;
That it is not to be doubted, but the work of Jurors required chief men both
for experience and knowledge in the customs of those times, to enable them to
judge of the matter in fact; and upon whose judgment the Life and Death of the
party rested principally: And as probable it is, that those Jurors, as they
were then chief men, so they sat in the most eminent place of the Assembly or
Court, and were co assessors with the Bishop and Sheriff, who did serve but
only to advise the rest; and they, or one of them to publish the Sentence
which the Law predetermined. And this chief place the Jurors might have
possessed at this day, as they do in Sweden, had the chief men holden the
service still worthy of their attendance.

But great men grew too great in their own esteem for the service of their
Country, Peers.
betaking themselves to serve themselves; and matters of highest employment
were left to those of the meaner condition; who being in their own persons of
less admiration, were thought unmeet to sit in such eminent places, and so from
the Bench descended to the Floor, as at this day. This disidiousness of the
greater sort made one step further to the full perfection of that manner of
Trial both of the Persons and Estates of the English, which has been the envy
of other Nations, and is called the trial per Pares, or by Peers. For the pride
of the Danes (now growing into one people with the Saxons) not enduring such
fellowship with the mean Saxon-freemen in this public service; and the wise
Saxon King espying the danger in betrusting the Lives and Estates of the
poorest sort unto the dictate of these superbient humors; and on the contrary
in prostituting the Nobler blood upon the vote of the inferior rank of men,
provided a third way, and by agreement between him and Gunthurne the Dane,
settled the Law of Peers. Si minister regius, Ll. Alured. Council. Brit. fol. 492.
etc. If a Lord or a Baron be accused of Homicide, he shall be acquitted by
Twelve Lords: but if of inferior rank, he shall be acquitted by Eleven of his
Equals and one Lord. Thus Gods providence disposed of the pride of men, to be
an instrument of its own restraint: For the great men, ere they were aware,
hereby lost one of the fairest Flowers of their Garland, viz. the Judicature,
or rather the mastership of the Life or Death of the meaner sort; and thereby a
fair opportunity of containing them for ever under their awe. And no less
remarkable was the benefit that redounded to this Nation hereby; for had the
great men holden this power, as once they had it, it might soon have endangered
the liberty of the Freemen, and thereby been destructive to the Fundamental
Constitution of the Government of this Realm, which consists in the just and
equal participation of these Privileges, wherein all are equally concerned.
This was the trial wherein the people of this Nation were made happy above all
other people, and whereby the Freemen, as they had the Legislative power, so
likewise had the Juridical; and thereby, next under God, an absolute dominion
over themselves and their Estates. For though this course of trial was first
applied to matters of Crime, yet it soon also seized upon the Commonpleas,
which for the most part was the work of main import in the Hundred Court; and
suitable hereunto are the prescriptions which are extant in the Law Books of
Cognizance of Pleas, and Writs of Assize, etc. from the times of the Saxons,
26. ass. pl. 24.
as in that case of the Abbot of Bury amongst others does appear.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of passing of Judgment and Execution.
AFter Verdict, Judgment passed according to the letter of the Law, or known
Custom; in criminal matters, according to the greatness of the offense, either
for death or loss of Member. But if the circumstances favored the Delinquent,
he was admitted to redemption of Life or Member, by Fine also settled by letter
of the Law, and not left to the Judges discretion. If the Crime reached only
to shameful penance, Ll. Inae.
such as Pillory or Whipping, Ll. Canut.
(the last whereof was inflicted only upon Bondmen) then might that Penance be
reduced to a Ransom (according to the grain of the offense) assessed in the
presence of the Judge by the Freemen, and entered upon the Roll, and the Estreat
of each Ransom severally and apart sent to the Sheriff. This Ransom was paid
usually unto the King and Lord, and the party indamaged, or his friends, if the
case so required; according to the old German rule, Ll. Inae. cap. 22.
Pars mulctae Regi vel civitati, pars ipsi qui vindicatur, vel propinquis ejus.
Tacitus.
This course opened indeed a way for Mercy; but, through corruption, a
Floud-gate to Wickedness in the conclusion. Of Imprisonment there was little
use in the eldest times; afterward it was more used, not only to secure the
person to come to trial of Law for miscarriages past, but sometimes to secure
men against committing of future mischief, especially if it more concerned the
public. I find but little or no use thereof barely as a punishment, nor would
their Ancestors so punish their Bondmen: Vinculis coercere rarum est. In case
of Debt or Damage, the recovery thereof was in nature of elegit; for the party
wronged either had the offenders goods to him delivered, or the value in money
upon sale of the goods made by the Sheriff; and if that satisfied not, Ll. Edw.
then the moity of the Lands was extended, and so by moities so far as was
possible, salvo contenemento; and when all was gone, the Defendants Arms (which
were accounted as the Nether-milstone, or stock of maintenance) were last of
all seized; Ll. Alured. c. 1.
and then the party was accounted undone, and cast upon the charity of his
friends for his sustenance: but the person of the man was never imprisoned as a
pledge for the debt, no not in the Kings case. Alfred imprisoned one of his
Judges for imprisoning a man in that case. One punishment of death they had in
cases of crime, Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 1.
and that was by hanging or strangling; and where the crime was not so great,
sometimes ensued loss of member or mutilation, and in many such cases
Excommunication, pronounced indeed by the Clergy, but determined by the Law;
which in the first conception was framed in the womb of the Legislative power
in Parliament, Council. Brit. 105, 251, 365, 420.
as may appear in many Laws there made; nor was there in those times any
question made of the cognizance thereof, so long as the Clergy and Laity had
charity enough to join in all public Councils.

CHAP. XL. Of the Penal Laws amongst the Saxons.
PAssing the Courts and manner of proceedings till Sentence, we are now come to
the particular Laws that directed the Sentence; and first of those that
concerned criminal offenses. During the Saxons time the Commonwealth was in its
minority, the Government tender, the Laws green, and subject to bend according
to the blast of time and occasion, and according to the different dispositions
of Governors, Ages, and People. For though the Saxons were in name our first
matter; yet not they only, but they having once made the breach open, and
entered this Island, it became a common receptacle of those Eastern people, the
Angles, Danes, Almains, and Goths, as their several Laws left with us in power
do not obscurely inform us; and amongst all the rest, the Goths were not the
least concerned herein; for the Saxon King determining what people shall be
holden Denizons in this Kingdom, says, That the Goths ought to be received and
protected in this Kingdom, as sworn Brethren, Kinsmen, and proper Citizens of
this Commonwealth. Nor can any Nation upon earth show so much of the ancient
Gothique Law as this Island has. Nevertheless in this mixture of people of
several Nations, there being a suitable mixture of Laws; as the power of any
one of these peoples changed, so likewise did their Laws change in power; and
long it was ere a right temper of one uniform Law could be settled: yet in the
interim, these short remembrances left unconsumed by time I have subjoyned,
that it may appear their motions were excellent, though somewhat inconstant in
their practice.

Those times were dark, and yet so far as any light appeared, the people were
to be honored for their resolution in the defense thereof. For there was few
of the Commandments of the two Tables which they did not assert by Laws by them
made, the third and tenth excepted; which latter commands the inward man only,
and whereof God has the sole cognizance.

True it is that the first Commandment contains much of the same nature; The
first Commandment. Witchery.
yet somewhat is visible, and that they bound: For whereas in those times the
Devil had such power, as he did prevail with some (and those it may be not a
few) to renounce God, and deliver themselves wholly to his own will; they
punished this crime with banishment, as judging him unworthy their society that
would communicate with Devils. Yet if the Delinquent had done any mischief
whereby death ensued, Ll. Sax. cap. 6.
the parties punishment was death; yet might all be discharged by Ransom, and
good security for good behavior for time to come.

For their worship of God, The second Commandment.
they were no less zealous in maintenance of the manner; as their Forefathers
liked not the use of Images or Pictures for adoration, neither did they: and
though the Clergy in other matters led them much, yet in this they were alone
for a long time: for though the Roman Church had the use of Images above Three
hundred years before Austin's coming, yet could not that custom fasten upon the
Saxons for the space of above One hundred years after Austin's coming;
notwithstanding the endeavors of Charlemain, and Pope Constantine (by his
bastard-decree begotten upon the dream of the Bishop of Worcester) that saw the
Virgin Mary's picture brought him in his sleep by her self, and with a command
from her, That it should be set up in the Church and worshipped: I say, Council.
Brit. 218.
it could not fasten any constant practice of Idol-worship, nor ever wrest a
Law from the Wittagenmote to countenance the same; but rather on the contrary,
they still preserved the memorial of the second Commandment in the Decalogue,
even then when as the Romanists had expunged the same out of the number:
Council. Brit. 364.
and they enforced the same by a Law of their own making, so far as their
Clergy, Ll. Canut. c. 5.
or Reverence they bear to Rome, would allow.

It has been formerly observed, that the Saxons took no note of the vice of
profane swearing and cursing; which crime (if it were in use, as it cannot be
otherwise conceited but it was) as the times then were, The third Commandment.
must lie upon the Clergie-mens account for their neglect of teaching the
point; or upon the general ignorance of those times, which understood not the
Commandment nor the Scripture: For we find no Canon against it, nor scarce any
Doctrine concerning it, but only in case of false swearing, till Anselm's
time. True it is, that Chrysostom seems zealous against all swearing; but
that was his personal goodness, which for ought appears died with him. And
Anselm contending against swearing by the Creatures, and idle swearing, renders
his grounds in such manner, Cent. 1. cap. 4. de leg.
as it may be well conceived that he understood not the main.

I am the rather induced to conceive charitably of those times, The fourth
Commandment.
in regard of their exceeding zeal for the honor of the Lords day; which
shows, that so far as their knowledge would maintain them, they had zeal to
make it into action. They began this day doubtless as other days, according to
the custom of their Forefathers in Germany, Tacitus.
Nox ducere diem videtur. And because they would not allow their secular
affairs to trench too nigh that days devotion, they made the Lords day to begin
on Saturday at three of the clock in the afternoon, and to continue till
Munday-morning. No pastime, no not their beloved sport of Hunting, Council.
Brit. 445, 446.
was allowed during all that while; nor no works were to be done, but such as
concerned the Worship of God: and those Laws they bound with penalty of Fine,
if the Delinquent were a Freeman; if he were a bond-servant, he was to be
whipped. Nor were these the Laws of one King or Age only, Ibid. 268, 377, 404,
518, 546.
but of the whole current of the Saxon Government; and may (although dark times
they were) yet put us in these days of light to the blush, to enter into
comparison with them for their Devotion.

In their Conversation with men, The fifth Commandment.
the Saxons seemed yet more strict: and being a people of a public spirit,
they preferred the good of their Country above all; accounting Treachery
against it, or neglect thereof in time of danger, to be a Crime of the greatest
concernment, and to be punished in the highest degree, Proditores, and
transfugas arboribus suspendunt. Tacitus. Treason.
Other Treason than this, no not against Kings, did they then acknowledge any;
and therefore the form of the Indictment for contriving the death of their
King, Miror cap. 2. Sec. 11.
concluded only Felonice, as may appear in that form of an Indictment for an
offense of that nature intended and plotted against Edmond the Saxon King:
Whenas for the plotting against Alliance, though of common and inferior
nature, the Indictment concluded Felonice and Proditorie. And wereas the
penalty, Miror cap. 2. Sec. 13.
in case of Treachery against the Country, was death, and forfeiture of the
whole Estate, both real and personal: In Treachery against the King, Ll. Edw.
c. 38. Council. Aenham. 26.
it was only loss of life, and of the personal Estate. And therefore it may
seem that Majesty had not yet arrived at its full growth; or else that the
greatest measure thereof rested in the body still.

If in any thing the Saxons were indulgent, The Sixth Commandment.
it was in matters of Blood; for they were a warlike people, and looked upon it
as under the regiment of valor; and therefore it was punished only with fine,
according to the old rule, Manslaughter.
Luitur homicidium certo armentorum and pecorum numero. So as even in Germany
they had learned the trick to set a price upon that crime; and this they
afterward called Manbotta wera wirgida wita, and lashlight: and, which was
worse, they countenanced that which in after-ages was called deadly feud; and
so under color of punishing Murder with revenge, Sax. Lamb. sol. 17, 18.
they added blood to blood. But as times grew more tame, and inclining to
civility or Religion, the cry of Blood was more hideous; and this urged on the
Law of Appeals, Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 1.
and so private revenge became under the power of the Law, Li. Alured. Sax.
praesace Lamb.
which punished death with death, savouring of such a King as Alfred was, who
first taught the Scriptures to speak in the dialect of our own Laws; like the
Rubric amongst the Canons, bringing therewith both strength and beauty: yet
they had degrees of bloodshed, and made a difference in the punishment; for
some sprung from sudden passion, but other was forethought and purposed; which
last they called Abere Murder, Glossar. p. 4.
or Murder by foreplot or treachery; and this was made nullo pretio
emendabile; Ll. Canut. cap. 93.
and yet toward the times of the Danes, devotion grew of so high a dye, that a
Sanctuary could represent any bloodshed more allowable, if not acceptable,
under the golden color of recompense made to the King, the Lord of the party
slain, and the parties friends, for the loss of a Subject, a Tenant, and a
Friend according to that of their forefathers, recepitque satisfactionem
universa domus. Tacitus.
It would be too tedious to recite all the particular Laws, with their changes,
and therefore they shall be lest to the view in the several Laws of Alfred,
Edmond, Canutus, and Edward, the Saxon Kings. Yet one custom first begun by the
Danes, Englishire.
I cannot omit: That if a man were found slain, whose parents or friends were
unknown, Stams. lib. 1. cap. 10.
by common intendment he was presumed to be a Dane; Miror. cap. 1. Sec. 13.
and then if the delinquent were not taken, nor fled to Sactuary, nor known
where he is, the whole Hundred was amerced for the escape; Bracton lib. 3.
tract. 1. ca. 15.
but if the party slain were known to be of English Parents, it was otherwise.
Breach of peace. Batteries. Maimes. Imprisonments.
This custom lasted long after the Normans time, the Dane being only changed
into the Norman, and was called Englishire. Batteries, Maimes, Imprisonments,
and other breaches of peace, were punished by Fine, which they called
Fightwitt, Grithbrece, or Frithbreck; and the Delinquent ordinarily put in
sureties for the peace for future time. The fine was increased by the number of
Delinquents joining in the fact: for if seven joined, Alured. praef. Lam. 17.
it was a Riot, and the fine was then called Flothbote. If the number were five
times so many, viz. thirty and five, then it was a Rebellion or War. Secondly,
the fine was increased by the time or season of the fact, as in Lent, or while
the Army was in the field; because, in the first case, the holy time was
profaned; in the second, the Country was more endangered, when the strength
was abroad, and the Army might be discouraged at the news of the disturbance at
home. Ll. Edw. c. 31.
And therefore the Saxons punished this with death, Ll. Sax. ca. 36.
or fine suitable. Thirdly, the fine was the greater in case of the excellency
of the place, Ll. Inae. cap. 6.
where it was holy ground, The Seventh Commandment.
or in the presence of great persons, such as the King or Bishop.

Adultery among the old Germans was holden a crime of a high nature; Baron.
Annal. 745. number. 5.
the penalty of the woman that committed that crime was death: Council. Brit.
558.
I find not what became of the man. In latter times of the Saxons it grew less
penal, and more common. Ll. Canut. 50. reg. 22.
By Alfreds Law it was finable, and the fine called Legierwit. By Canutus the
man was fined or banished, Incest.
the woman to lose her nose, ears, and her portion. Ll. Sax. 48. reg. 19.
Incest was more penal to the man than Adultery, and yet it touched not his
life. The eighth Commandment.


Robbery amongst the Lacedaemonians was accounted but a trick of youth, the
Athenians thoughts were more severe. The Germans likewise differed in their
censures concerning it; the Saxons punished it with death, Lind. Ll. Aug. and
Sax.
but the Angles with fine only; yet Ina the King made it mortal, and Canutus
followed him therein; Ll. Sax. 4. reg. 3. Miror. 26.
and Edward the Confessor limited that punishment to thefts of twelve pence in
value, or above. Burning of Woods.
Burning of woods was finable by Ina's Law; but Burglary was Felony. Burglary.
In King Edmunds time only the Danes made it finable; Ll. Ed. cap. 6.
possibly being guilty in their own Consciences of their own propensity to
rapine and plunderings. Ll. Canut. p. 59.
This privilege of the dwelling house was anciently called Hamsoca, or
Hamsoken, or Hamsokne. Trespasses.
Trespasses committed upon ground were all comprehended under the general name
of Ederbrece, or hedge-breaking; and the penalty was not only the damage to the
party, but also fine to the King upon Action, which in these days passes under
the name of Quare clausum fregit, according to the words of the Writ. Ll. Sax.
ca. 36.
The damages were more or less, according to the time or season when it was
done: for it when the Army was abroad, the damages were doubled; and in like
manner, if done in Lent time. If the trespass was done by a Beast, Ll. Inae. 5.
6.
the owner must pay the damages; Ibid. c. 40.
but if it were occasioned through the complainants default (as through his
gap) no damages were paid. The constant fine to the King in all such
trespasses, Ll. Sax. c. 36.
was by Alfreds Law set at five shillings. Other Actions also were then used,
as touching damage done to Goods, and Actions upon the case: for in Alfreds
time the Plaintiff recovered not only damages for trespasses done to
Possessions and Goods, but also costs for injuries in point of scandal and
defamation, Miror. p. 301.
in case the complainant specially declares that he is thereby disabled, or
indamaged in his preferment, and makes proof of the same; suitable unto the
forms of our pleadings at this day, which conclude with per quod, etc. or and
deterioratus est, etc.

The Saxons were utter enemies to Perjury; The Ninth Commandment.
they punished it with eternal discredit of testimony; and sometimes with
banishment, or with grievous fines to the King, and mulcts to the Judge. For
that difference I find observed in those days between fines and mulcts, Ll.
Aethelst. c. 12.
albeit the more ancient times used them for one and the same; Ll. Canut. c. 5.
Spec. Sax. l. 3. art. 53.
for so the Historian pars mulctae Regi. In all these matters where any
interest was vested in the Crown, Ll. Edw. c. 18.
the King had the prerogative of pardon; yet always the recompense to the party
was saved; besides the security of the good behavior for time to come, as the
case required.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Laws of Property, of Lands and Goods, and their manner of
Conveyance.
THus passing over some tops of Saxon penal-Laws, Miror. cap. 5. Sec. 1.
besides the general rule or Law of eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. it now
remains as lightly to glance at a few generals concerning the settling and
property of possessions in point of Title; concerning which, although it be
true that the Conquerors of this part of the Isle were a body aggregate of many
Nations or peoples, and so diverse customs must necessarily settle by common
intendment in several places, according as they chose their habitation: yet the
general custom of the Germans, as touching descent of inheritance, was to the
eldest Son. Inheritance.
For Tacitus speaking of the German Cavalry, says, That the Horse of the party
dead went not to the eldest Son, ut caetera, but to the most valiant man
amongst them of that Lineage; which words ut caetera do plainly intimate, that
other matters of profit passed to the eldest Son in point of descent. Nor can I
conceive how men should be induced to conceit, that the custom of Gavelkind was
the ancient general custom of the Germans. It is true, the words of the same
Historian have misled some; the words are, Haeredes tamen and successores
cuique liberi; these taken collectively, I grant may import somewhat tending
that way; but they may as properly be taken disjunctively, that the Children
inherit by course; and if none such were, then the Brothers; if they failed,
then uncles. And it is not only evident, that in the public Succession to the
Crown they had an eye this way, but in the descent of private and particular
estates, as by many instances out of those old Histories may appear; and had
any other custom been general, Alfreds rule by Moses Law had never succeeded;
nor could that other custom hold out against the constant desire of the Saxons
to perpetuate their Families in greatness and honor: all which, besides the
express Laws set forth in the Codes, are in my conceit sufficient to induce an
Historical Faith, That the general course of descent was to the eldest Sons,
and not to all jointly. Nevertheless out of this Estate of Inheritance, diverse
particular estates were created, as well by common custom, as by the especial
act of the owner of such an estate. Such of them as were wrought by custom, was
occasioned from Marriage, whereby if the man was settled of such estate as
formerly has been recited, and died, his Wife surviving, by ancient custom she
had her Dower, Dower.
or third part of such estate of inheritance. This custom, though ancient, yet
was not originally from the Germans, but from the Latins, who used to give
Dower with the man, and receive Portion with the woman. Plut. vit. Solon.
Apotheg. Lacon.
But the Germans learned from the Greeks otherwise; for the Laws both of Solon
and Lycurgus forbad the latter, lest Marriages should be made for reward, and
not grounded upon affection; which, as they conceived, would be a means to
maintain the strength of mankind in generation. And therefore Tacitus notes
this by way of Antithesis, Dotem non uxor marito, sed uxori maritus offert. The
Dower that was given in the first times was Goods; and these were utensils for
War. And the Wife many times returned to the man tokens of her love, in the
same kind, and not as gages of future maintenance, unless we shall account War
their proper calling from whence their livelihood issued. Succeeding times
growing more calm, changed the custom of fighting into trading, and taught them
to prefer the stock gotten by commerce, before that of War; and so the Dower
was changed. This course continued all the Saxons time, for ought I can find;
for not much above threescore years before the Conquest, Ll Sax. Lamb. Edm.
fol. 76.
it was by a public Law confirmed, that the Bridegroom before Marriage should
set forth that portion of Goods that should be his Wives; Ll. Sax. 50. Reg. 22.
and these were ever afterward holden her own proper Goods. But if no such
provision was made before Marriage, then the Law or Custom gave the Wife half
her Husbands Goods, if she outlived him; and if there were Children, then the
whole estate in Goods, to provide for herself and them, until she took a second
Husband: but if the Husband suffered death as a Malefactor, the Wife was to
have but one third part. Ll. Sax. Lamb. fol. 14.
I find no footsteps of Dower in Lands until the Normans time; Ll. Inae. ca. 51.
who were also as well owners of the Wives personal estate, as of their
persons, and before which time the Saxon Wives in diverse regards were more
absolute and independent; I say not more happy, because they were never one
with their Husbands; nor were they ever under the Law of free-pledge, as Wives;
nor was the Husband his Wives pledge as he was her Husband, although as a
Master he was free pledge for his servants: Ll. Ed. Lamb. cap. 7.
for the Law was, that in case the Husband carried his Wife away into another
Lordship, as he must give pledges that his Wife shall have no wrong, so she
must give pledge by her friends that she shall do no wrong; and she passed
therefore as an appurtenant to her Husband, rather than one in unity with him;
and her estate or portion was rather appurtenant to her than him: for if she
failed in her good carriage to her Husband, she was to make amends out of her
own Estate to her Husband; and if her estate sufficed not, then her pledges
were to satisfy her Husband. Ll. Sax. 50. Reg. 22.
Nevertheless what failed in the relation of the Woman to the Man, was supplied
in the relation of the Man to the Woman; for, besides the respect the Men bare
to the Women, as their Wives, they honored them as German Women, that admired
valor in all, Idolized it in their Husbands, and shared in it themselves; and
upon occasion merited thereby not only to be companions in honor, but
triumphers above Men, yea their Commanders and Governors. Nor was this the
original trick of the rude and uncompt Germans, or barbarous Britans, but of
the wise Greeks, and received (as may be supposed) from the Lacedaemonians, upon
as good ground as the Wife of Leonidas the Lacedemonian King rendered; who being
asked why the Lacedemonian women ruled their Husbands: It is true, said she,
for we only know how to obey our Husbands. A second particular estate, which
the Law derived out of the inheritance, was advancement to the Husband; for the
Saxons were not so stupid as to refuse favor proffered: and therefore they
made a Law of Counter-tenure to that of Dower, which we commonly call tenure by
the courtesy of England; Courtesy of England.
which was but a perquisite of the Wives estate given to the Husband, in case
he over-lived his Wife, and had issue by her born alive. The name was probably
given by the Normans, who as it seems had no such custom; and therefore they
gave it the name from the English (albeit since that time Scotland has also
allowed it amongst them) Ll. Alm. tit. 92. Lindenbr. cod.
who might probably bring it into this Kingdom or Country amongst the mingled
people: for this Custom or Law is found amongst the ancient Almain Laws;
differing only from the Law this day in the evidence of the title, which now
arises upon the birth of the Child heard to cry; whenas in those days the
title vested not unless the Child opened his eyes, ut possit videre culmen
domus, and quatuor parietes, which touches not only the opening of the eye,
but also the rolling of it about.

Estates that were derived out of the Estate of an Inheritance by the act of
the party, either were such as concerned the whole Inheritance, or part
thereof. That which concerned the whole Inheritance, was nothing but a
parcelling of it out according to the will of the giver; and this was
afterward called Estate Tail; Estate tail.
which passed also amongst some places by way of custom, Ll. Ang. tit. 6.
Lindenbr.
as amongst the Angles it was a Law that the Inheritance should pass unto the
Issue-males on the Fathers side until the fifth generation, before any title
could accrue to the Issue female; and then according to their Proverb, it went
from the Lance to the Spindle. But the Danes possibly might prevent this in the
continuance thereof; for they brought along with them that which was formerly
the Saxon custom, Ll. Sax. tit. 7. ibid.
which carried the Inheritance unto the Daughters, Council. Brit. 333.
upon the failing of the Issue Male, as in the example of Cenedritha Daughter
to Cenulphus, amongst multitudes of others may appear. But where Lands were
conveyed by writing or act of the party, it was a Maxim, That the Will of the
Conveyor should be strictly observed: Ll. Alured. Sax. c. 7.
nor could any one that came in by virtue of such Writing ever alien the Land
to cross the current of the original Conveyance. The entailing of Estates
therefore was very ancient, Plo. com. 251.
although by corrupt custom it was deluded, as the Lord Dier in his argument of
the L. Berklies Case observes.

Another custom of Inheritance was caught I know not how, it is called Borough
English, Borough-English.
and by the name may seem to be brought in by some Cynical odd Angle that meant
to cross the World, and yet in a way not contrary to all reason: for where
nature affords least help, the wisdom of men has used to be most careful of
supply; and thus the youngest became preferred before the elder in the course
of descent of Inheritance, according to this custom. There is no further
monument of the antiquity hereof that I have met with, than the name it self,
which imports that it sprang up whiles as yet the names of Angles and Saxons
held in common cognizance; and might arise first from the grant of the Lords to
their Tenants, and so by continuance become usual. And by this means also might
arise the custom of Copy-holds of this nature so frequent, especially in those
Eastern parts of this Island where the Angles settled, and from whom that part
had the name of the East- Angles.

Another custom of descent remains, and that is to the Children
indifferently, Gavel-kind.
and it is called Gavel-kind, or Gave-all kind: and by the very name seems at
the first to arise rather from the donation of the Parent or other Ancestor,
contrary to common custom, than by common Law; otherwise no need had been of an
especial name. In the Original it seems it equally concerned all, both Sons and
Daughters, as partners; and for want of such, the Brothers and Sisters. It
seems to be first the Law of the Goths or Jutes; Stephan. Dan. Bureus. Suel.
for it remains in use in these parts of the Eastern Countries. But in latter
times this estate was also tailed, or cut out sometimes to the Sons and
Daughters severally; that is, the Sons or Brothers to have two parts, and the
Daughters or Sisters one part: othertimes to all the Sons, and for want of
such, to all the Daughters. And thus these courses of estates passed over Seas
to the Southern part of this Island, where that people most settled, in a double
stream; the first from the Athenians, that loved the stateliness of their
Families; Emmius Grec.
the other from the Lacedaemonians, who desired rather the continuance of their
Families than their greatness.

The manner of conveying of Estates between party and party, Conveyances in
writing.
was either by act of the party executed in his lifetime, or after his death.
Such as were executed in the lifetime of the owner, and were such as for the
most part were in matters of great moment, were Estates passing by deed of
Conveyance in writing: And for this way the Saxons were beholding to the
Latins, who taught them that course, both for form and language. Ll. Sax. cap.
31.
And Alfred enforced by a particular Law, viz. That all such as hold Lands by
Deed in Writing should hold them according to the intent thereof, and not alien
the same contrary thereunto, the intent thereof being proved by the Witnesses.
The nature of the Conveyances in these ancient times may appear by a Deed of
one of the Kings of this Island about 400 years before the Conquest, whereby he
granted Four Plough-lands in the Isle of Thanet, unto an Abbess; wherein,
instead of that which we now call the habendum, Habendum. Use. Warranty.
the words are contulimus possidendum, etc. and after that follows the uses
of the Deed, tuo usui, etc. and then concludes with a Warranty, in these words,
tu vero successoresque tui defendant in perpetuum, nunquam me haeredesque meos
contra hanc chartulam aliquando esse venturos: the effect of which last clause
may appear by the Law of the sale of Goods, which in those times was, that if
the sale of Goods warranted did not hold, Ll. Inae. c. 74.
the loss should light upon the sellers. Ll. Sax. c. 24.
The Deeds were usually subscribed with the name of him that made the
Conveyance, Ll Edw. c. 24. Signed.
or passed the Estate; and if he could not write his name (as it befell often)
then the Deed was under-signed with his mark: For Withered King of Kent used
the sign of the Cross in subscribing his Grants, pro ignorantia literarum. They
used also in those days to seal their Deeds; Sealed. Council. Brit. p. 198.
for so much the conclusion of King Ina's Charter to the Abbey of Glastenbury
imports, in words to this effect in English; I Ina the King, do confirm this
Grant and Liberty, by subscription of my own hand, and under the seal of the
holy Cross. True it is, Ingulphus tells us that Seals to Deeds were of Norman
original; I believe his intent is concerning Seals of Wax annexed or affixed
unto Deeds. Lastly, in those days also they used to attest their Deeds,
Witnesses.
by subscribing the names of such as were present; who being of greater or
meaner rank, rendered the credit of the Deed accordingly more or less valuable:
and upon this ground did the acknowledging or proving of Deeds before the King,
Acknowledgment.
Bishop, County, or Hundred, first arise.

That was the Roman fashion; but the more ancient German way of Conveyance was
by Livery and Seisin, Livery and Seisin. Cragius.
as most suitable to their ignorance, who had Learning in as slight account as
the Lacedaemonians had, and cared for no more than would serve the turn of
natural necessity. A property they had both in Lands and Goods; and where that
rests, no man can deny them the natural way of giving and receiving by
delivery. And therefore though matters of ordinary use seldom come into the
observation of story, and this petty ceremony might very well pass sub
silentio; yet we are not altogether left destitute of the footsteeps thereof in
antiquity. Council. Brit. 319.
For Aethbald the Mercian King, above Eight hundred years ago, gave the
Monastery of Cutham, with all the Lands thereunto appertaining, to
Christ-Church in Canterbury; and for the confirmation thereof, commanded a clod
of earth with all the Writings to be laid upon the Altar. Council Brit. 192.
Another monument hereof more ancient by the space of above an hundred years we
find in that Grant of Withered King of Kent, of four Plough-lands in the Isle
of Thanet, the latter part whereof this Clause concludes thus: Ad cujus cumulum
affirmationis, cespitem hujus supradictae terrae super sanctum altar posui.

Every man had liberty to execute the Law of his Inheritance in his lifetime;
but some were surprised with sudden occasions, and unexpected issues and ends;
and in such cases they did what they could to declare their intents by last
Will; Last Will.
which by common intendment being in writing, has occasioned some to think
that the Saxons in their original had no use thereof, being, as they conceived,
so illiterate as not to have the use of writing. But the Character remaining to
this day evinceth the contrary; nor can those words of Tacitus, Et nullum est
testamentum, in any rational way be expounded in this sense, if we consider the
Context, which runs thus: Haeredes and successores cuique liberi, and nullum
est testamentum. Which in my opinion founds in this sense: The Heirs and
Successors to every one are his Children, and there is no testamentary power
to disherit or alter the course of Descent, which by Custom or Law is settled.
Otherwise to deny them the use of all testamentary power, was a matter quite
abhorring the custom of all the Grecians, from whom they learned all that they
had. M. Westminster. An. 817.
Nevertheless the Saxons had not been long acquainted with the Romanists,
Malmsb. gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 2.
but they had gotten that trick of theirs also of disheriting by last Will, as
by the testament of Aethelwolf, and others of the like nature, in Histories may
appear.

The Conveyances formerly mentioned concerned Lands and Goods; Goods.
but if no such disposal of Goods were, the ancient German custom carried them
after the death of the ancestor promiscuously, or rather in common to all the
Children; but in succeeding times, the one half by the Law of Edmond passed to
the relict of the party deceased, by force of contract rather than course of
descent. After him Edward the Confessor, recollecting the Laws, declared that
in case any one died intestate, the Children should equally divide the Goods;
which I take to be understood with a salvo of the Wifes Dower or Portion. As
yet therefore the Ordinaries have nothing to do with the Administration, for
Goods passed by descent as well as Lands; and upon this custom the Writ de
rationabili part bonorum was grounded at the Common Law, as well for the
Children as the Wifes part, F. N. Br. 122.
according as by the body of the Writ may appear.

CHAP. XLII. Of times of Law, and Vacancy.
SUch like, as has been showed, was the course of Government in those darker
times; nor did the fundamentals alter either by the diversity and mixture of
people of several Nations in the first entrance, nor from the Danes or Normans
in their survenue: not only because in their original they all breathed one
air of the Laws and Government of Greece, but also they were no other than
common dictates of nature refined by wise men, which challenge a kind of awe
in the sense of the most barbarous. I had almost forgot one circumstance, which
tended much to the honor of all the rest, that is, their speedy execution of
Justice; for they admitted no delays, till upon experience they found that by
staying a little longer they had done the sooner: and this brought forth
particular times of exemption, Miror. cap. 4. Sec. 16.
as that of Infancy and Childbearing, in case of answering to criminal
Accusations. Ll. Sax. cap. 10. Council. Brit. 518.
But more especially in case of regard of holiness of the time: as that of the
Lords day, Saints days, Fasts, Ember days; for even those days were had in much
honor. Nor only days, but seasons; as from Advent to the Octaves of Epiphany;
from Septuagesima till Fifteen days after Easter, or (as by the Laws of the
Confessor) till Eight days after Easter; and from Ascension to the Eighth day
after Pentecost. And though as Kings and times did change, so these seasons
might be diversely cut out, as the Laws of Alfred, Aethelstan, Aetheldred,
Edgar, Canutus, and Edward, do manifest; yet all agreed in the season of the
year, and that some were more fit for holy observation than others. And thus by
the devotion of Princes, and power of the Clergy, the four Terms of the year
were cut out for course of Law in the Kings Court, the rest of the year being
left vacant for the exercise and maintenance of Husbandry, and particular
callings and employments; saving that even in those times the Courts of the
County and Hundred held their ancient and constant course. Miror cap. 4. Sect.
Last of all, and as a binding Law unto all, it was provided that false Judges
should give satisfaction to the party wronged by them, and (as the case
required) to forfeit the residue to the King; to be disabled for ever for place
of judicature, and their lives left to the Kings mercy.

CHAP. XLIII. The end of the Saxon Government.
ANd this far of the joints of the Saxon Government in their Persons,
Precincts, Courts, Causes, and Laws; wherein as the distance will permit, and
according to my capacity, I have endeavored to refresh the Image of the Saxon
Commonwealth, the more curious lineaments being now disfigured by time. Afar
off it seems a Monarchy, but in approach discovers more of a Democracy; and if
the temper of a body may appear by the prevailing humor toward age, that
Government did still appear more prevalent in all assaults both of time and
change. The first great change it felt was from the Danes that stormed them,
and showed therein much of the wrath both of God and man. And yet they trenched
not upon the fundamental Laws of the peoples Liberty. The worst effect was upon
the Church, in the decay of the power of Religion and the Worship of God. For
after much toil and loss both of sweat and blood, the Danes (finding that
little was to be gotten by blows but blows, and that the Clergy at the least
was the side-wind in the course of all affairs) laid aside their Paganism, and
joined with the Clergy: and as their Converts and Pupils, gained not only
their quiet residence, but by the favor of the Clergy to make trial of the
Throne; and therein served the Clergy so well, as they brought the people to a
perfect Idolatry, with times, places, and persons, and subjection of their
Estates to Church-Tributes. And as at Tennis, the Dane and Bishop served each
other with the fond Countryman, that whether Lord Dane or Lord-Bishop was the
greater burden, is hard to be determined. Thus became ambitious Prelacy in its
full glory, and the poor Church of Christ clouded in darkness, and little hold
left for recovery, but only by the liberty of the Saxon Freemen, which the
Danes could never conquer; not for want of will or power, but of time and
occasion: For the Crown returned to the Saxon-line again after the half age of
one man, although it was worn by three; so God would have it: nor did any
monument of the Danish Government remain, saving a few customs in some places,
which show rather that the Danes were here, than that they ruled here.

To sum up all; The Saxon Commonwealth was a building of greatest strength
downward even to the foundation, arched together both for Peace and War. That
by the Law of Decenners, wherein Justice was the bond, their Armies were
gathered, not by promiscuous flocking of people, but by orderly concurrence of
Families, Kindreds, and Decenners, Tacitus.
all choosing their own Leaders. And so Honor, Love, and Trust conspired
together to leave no man's life in danger, nor death unrevenged.

It was a beautiful composure, mutually dependant in every part from the Crown
to the Clown; the Magistrates being all choice men, and the King the choicest
of the chosen: election being the birth of esteem, and that of merit; this bred
love and mutual trust, which made them as corner-stones, pointed forward to
break the wave of danger. Nor was other reward expected by the great men, but
honor and admiration, which commonly brought a return of acts of renown.

Lastly, it was a regular frame in every part, squared and made even by Laws,
which in the people ruled as Lex loquens, and in the Magistrate as Lex
intelligens; all of them being grounded on the wisdom of the Greeks, and
Judicials of Moses. Thus the Saxons became somewhat like the Jews, distinct
from all other people; their Laws honorable for the King, easy for the
Subject; and their Government, above all other, likest unto that of Christ's
Kingdom, whose Yoke is easy, and Burden light. But their motion proved so
irregular, as God was pleased to reduce them by another way.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Norman entrance.
THus was England become a goodly Farm: The Britons were the Owners, the Saxons
the Occupants, having no better title than a possession upon a forcible entry,
with a continuando for the space of Four hundred years: seldom quiet, either
from the claim and disturbances of the restless Britons, or invading Danes; who
not only got footing in the Country, but settled in the Throne; and after gave
over the same to the use (as it proved) of another people sprung from the wild
stock of Norway, and thence transplanted into a milder Climate, yet scarcely
civilized. That in one Isle the glory of God's bounty might shine forth to all
the barbarism of Europe, in making a beautiful Church out of the refuse of
Nations. These were the Normans out of the continent of France, that in their
first view appeared like the Pillar of the Cloud, with terror of Revenge upon
the Danish pride, the Saxon cruelty, and Idolatry of both people. But after
some distance showed like the Pillar of fire, clearing God's providence for the
good of this Island, to be enjoyed by the succeeding generations. Nor was this
done by Revelation or Vision, but by overruling the aspiring mind of Duke
William of Normandy to be a scourge unto Harold for his usurpation, and unto
the people for their causless deserting the Royal Stem. Yet because the
haughtiest spirit is still under fame and opinion, and cannot rest without
pretense or color of Right and Justice, the Duke first armed himself with
Titles, which were too many to make one good claim; and served rather to busy
men's minds with musing, whilst he catches the prey, than settle their
judgments in approving of his way. First, he was Cousin-german to the
Confessor, and he childless; and thus the Duke was nigh, though there were
nigher than he: but the worst point in the case was, that the Duke was a
Bastard, and so by the Saxon Law without the line; nor was there other salve
thereto but the Norman custom, that made no difference; so as the Duke had a
color to frame a Title, though England had no Law to allow it. And this was
the best flower of his Garland, when he meant to solace himself with the
English, as may appear by what his Son Henry the first sets forth to the World
in his Charter whereby he advanced the Abbey of Ely into the degree of a
Bishopric; and wherein, amongst his other titles, Spicileg.
he calls himself Son of William the great, Qui Edwardo Regi successit in
regnum jure haereditario.

But if that came short, he had the bequest of the Confessor, who had designed
the Duke to be his Successor: and this was confirmed by the consent of the
Nobility, M. Paris. 1. Ant. Brit. Eccles. 96.
and principally of Harold himself, who in assurance thereof promised his
Sister to the Duke in marriage. This countenanced a double Title, one by
Legacy, the other by Election; and might be sufficient, if not to make the
Duke's title just, yet Harold's the more unjust, and to ground that quarrel
that in the conclusion laid the Duke's way open to the Crown. And for the
better varnish, the Duke would not be his own Judge, he refers his Title to be
discussed at the Court of Rome, and so flattered the Pope with a judicatory
power amongst Princes (a trick of the new stamp) whereby he obtained sentence
in his own behalf from the infallible Chair. The Pope glad hereof, laid up this
amongst his Treasures, as an Estoppel to Kings for times to come: And the King
made no less benefit of Estoppel against the English Clergy that otherwise
might have opposed him, and of assurance of those to him that were his friends,
and of advantage against Harold, M. Paris. 2.
that had gotten the Crown sine Ecclesiastica authoritate, and by that means
had made Pope Alexander and all the Prelates of England his Enemies.

But if all failed, yet the Duke had now a just cause of quarrel against Harold
for breach of Oath and Covenant; Hist. vit. Eadm. ^
wherein if Harold chanced to be vanquished, and the Crown offered it self
fair, he might without breach of conscience or modesty accept thereof, and be
accounted happy in the finding, and wise in the receiving, rather than unjustly
hardy in the forcing thereof. And this might occasion the Duke to challenge
Harold to single Combat, as if he would let all the World know that the quarrel
was Personal, and not National.

But this mask soon fell off by the death of Harold; and the Duke must now
explain himself, that it was the value of the English Crown, and not the Title,
that brought him over. For though he might seem as it were in the heat of the
chase to be drawn to London, where the Crown was, and that he rather sought
after his Enemies than it; yet as soon as he perceived the Crown in his power,
he disputed not the right, although that was Edgar's, but possessed himself of
the long-desired prey: and yet he did it in a mannerly way, as if he saw in it
somewhat more than Gold and precious Stones: for though he might have taken it
by ravishment, yet he chose the way of wooing by a kind of mutual agreement.
Thus this mighty Conqueror suffered himself to be conquered, and stooping under
the Law of a Saxon King, he became a King by lieve; wisely foreseeing, that a
Title gotten by Election, is more certain than that which is gotten by Power.

CHAP. XLV. That the Title of the Norman Kings to the English Crown was by
Election.
SOme there are that build their opinion upon passionate notes of angry
Writers, and do conclude that the Duke's way and Title was wholly by Conquest,
and thence infer strange aphorisms of State, destructive to the Government of
this Kingdom. Let the Reader please to peruse the ensuing particulars, and
thence conclude as he shall see cause.

It will easily be granted that the Title of Conquest was never further than
the King's thoughts, if it ever entered therein: else wherefore did he pretend
other Titles to the world? But because it may be thought that his wisdom would
not suffer him to pretend what he intended, and yet in practice intended not
what he did pretend; it will be the skill of the Reader to consider the manner
of the first William's Coronation, and his succeeding Government. His
Coronation questionless was the same with that of the ancient Saxon Kings; for
he was crowned in the Abbey of Westminster by the Archbishop of York, because
he of Canterbury was not Canonical. Hoveden. Eadmer. Hist. l. 1. p. 13. M.
Paris. vit. Gulielm. Malmsb. l. 3. fol. 154. Wigorn. An. 1066. Glossar. Ll.
Gul. Spicil. 190.
At his Coronation he made a solemn Covenant to observe those Laws which were
bonae, and approbatae, and antiquae legis Regni; to defend the Church and
Churchmen; to govern all the people justly; to make and maintain righteous
Laws; and to inhibit all spoil and unjust judgments. The people also entered
into Covenant with him, That as well within the Land as without, they would be
faithful to their Lord King William, and in every place to keep with all
fidelity his Lands and Honors, together with him, and against Enemies and
Strangers to defend. It is the self-same in substance with the fealty that the
Saxons made to their Kings, as will appear by the parallelling them both
together. The Saxons were sworn to defend the Kingdom against Strangers and
Enemies, together with their Lord the King, and to preserve his Lands and
Honors, together with him, with all faithfulness; so as by the Saxon way, the
Allegiance first terminated on the Kingdom, and then, as in order thereunto,
upon the King, with his Lands and Honors. But the Norman either wholly omitted
the first, as needless to be inserted in a municipal Law, it self being a Law
in nature; or else includes all within the words Lands and Honors, taking the
same in a comprehensive sense for the whole Kingdom, and so made up the sum of
the Saxon fealty in fewer figures. Which may seem the more probable of the
twain, because little reason can be rendered why the King should restrain that
defense to his private Lands (if he claimed all by Conquest) whenas all equally
concerned him; or why he should exclude the public, whenas both himself and
all he had was embarked therein, and it might subsist without him, but
contrarily not he without it, appears not to my understanding; nor did the
thing enter into the King's purpose, if the file of his purposes be rightly
considered: For speaking concerning Castles, Buroughs, and Cities, which are
in nature limbs of the Commonwealth, Ll. Gul. Spicil. 61.
he says that they were built for the defense of the people and Kingdom. Was
this the service of Walls and Fortifications, and not much rather of men within
those places of strength? Certainly the plain English is, that in time of
breach of public quiet and peace, the Subjects were bound to defend the
Kingdom, and in order thereto the people of the same, and of the King's right
included in the public defense; else it were a strange conclusion, that each
man in particular, and in their own personalone, was bound to defend the King's
right; but being imbodied, the Kingdom. And yet more clearly it is apparent, in
that the service of the order of Knighthood, which was the chief strength of
the Nation in those days, was determined upon the service of the King, and
defense of the Kingdom; or which is more plain, for the service of the King in
or for defense of the Kingdom, M. Paris An. 1100, 1213. Stat. 7. E. 1.
as the Statute of Mortmain expounds the same. But not to force the King's
sense by argument; if the King had purposely omitted that clause of the
Kingdoms safety, as of inferior regard to his own personal interest; it was
one of his rashest digressions, wherein he soon espied his error: for in the
midst of his strong and conquering Army he held himself unassured, unless he
had a better foundation than that which must change with the lives of a few at
the utmost. And therefore besides the Oath of fealty formerly mentioned, he
established a Law of Association, that all free men should be sworn Brethren;
1. To defend the Kingdom with their lives and fortunes against all enemies, Ll.
Gulielm. Spicil. 59.
to the utmost of their power. 2. To keep the peace and dignities of the Crown.
3. To maintain right and justice by all means, without deceit and delay. Join
then these two Oaths together, viz. that of fealty, and this of fraternity; and
it will easily appear, that the Allegiance of the English to the Norman Kings
was no other than what might stand with Brotherhood, and tender regard of the
public above all: and differing from the Saxon fealty on^y in this, that that
was in one Oath, and this in two. Wherefore whatsoever respects steered in the
rear of the King's course, it is less material so long as the van was right;
albeit that the sequel will prove not much different from the premises, as will
appear in the foot of the whole account.

Thus entered the first Norman upon the Saxon Throne; William Rufus.
and as he had some color of right to countenance his course, so had his Son
his Fathers last Will, and yet he had as little right as he. This was William
Rufus, that was of his Fathers way, but of a deeper dye; and therefore might
well be called William Rufus, or William in grain. He was exceeding happy in
the fear or favor of the people, for he had nothing else to make room for his
rising. True it is, he had the good will of his Father, but he was dead; and
probably the people as little regarded it, as he did them. Nor was it ever
observed that the English Crown was of so light account, as to pass by devise
of cestui que use; and therefore though it was designed to him from his Father,
yet both right and possession was left to the people to determine and maintain.
The Clergy first led the way, Eadmer. Hist. Wigorn. M. Paris.
having first taken a recognizance of him for his good behavior toward them;
which he assured, as far as large promises and protestations would serve the
turn; and within one year after, standing in need of the favor of the Commons
(to maintain possession against his Brother Robert) he gave them as good
security as the Clergy had; which he kept in such manner, that it was a wonder
that one of so small interest in the Title, but what he had by the peoples
lieve and favor, should rule in such manner, and yet die a King; the favor of
the people being like a Meteor, that must be continually fed, or it soon goes
out and falls: for evident it is, that the right of inheritance was his elder
Brother Roberts, who was the braver man, and more experienced Soldier; and
upon these principles had obtained the love of the Norman Barons (the flower of
his Fathers Chivalry) and the liking of the Clergy, M. Paris. An. 1088.
after they had found by experience the emptiness of their hope in his Brother
William; and was every way so superior to his Brother in advantages, as we are
left to believe that William got the day without any other ground, but only
that God would so have it. It is true, the English stuck close to him; but how
they were gained or contained, Writers speak not, but tell us of his promises,
which also they tell us were vain, and never had issue further than would stand
with his profit.

Exit William Rufus, Henry first.
and in comes his younger Brother Henry the first of that name; a Prince that
excelled in wisdom, and by it ruled his courage, which served him so far, as
his aims and ends reached: his Title was no better than his Fathers or
Brothers, but rather worse; for he had no color of last Will to propound him
to the people, and his elder Brother Robert was still alive, and by his service
of the Church in the War of Jerusalem, might merit that respect of the Clergy,
as not to permit him to be a loser by so well-deserving service, as in those
days that was accounted. Nevertheless the English look upon Henry as the fitter
man for their turn; being now at hand, and Robert at Jerusalem; and being a
native born in England, civilized into the English garb by education; and of a
wiser and fairer demeanor, and more inclining to peaceable Government, which
both Normans and English much inclined to, as being weary of thirty years
service in the Wars. And therefore it is not mavelous if they applied
themselves to him in a way of capitulation, Math. 1100. Eadmer. Speed.
and less wonderful if he hearkened thereunto; and yet neither unadvisedly
yielded unto by him, nor traitorously propounded by them, as some in zeal to
Monarchy conclude the point. The worst of the whole matter resting in this,
that the King bound himself to be just, that he might be great; and the people
to submit unto Justice, that they might be free, like as their Ancestors were,
and themselves by the Law established ought to be. For the capitulation was in
substance settled by the ancient Laws of the Saxons mixed with some additions of
Laws made by the Kings Father, with the joint advice of the grand Council of
the Kingdom; all which both the Norman Williams had often confirmed by solemn
protestations and promises; however their actions, Math. Paris.
upon sudden surprisal, were malae consuetudines and exactiones injustae, by
this Kings own acknowledgment. Thus these three Norman Kings made their way to
the Throne; the first by Arms, under color of Title; the second by a kind of
Title, under color of Arms; and the last by favor, but all entered the same by
capitulation, election, and stipulation; and for the general, had some regard
to suit their course in order of retaining the good will of their people,
although in a different measure, according to the differency of occasions.

CHAP. XLVI. That the Government of the Normans proceeded upon the Saxon
principles; and first of Parliaments.
THE principles which I mean, are these: First, the Legislative power, and
influence thereof upon the whole. Secondly, the Members of that Government,
with their several motions. Thirdly, the Laws and Customs, or Rules of those
Motions. And first concerning the Legislative power. Although it be true that
the first Williams great and most constant labor was to have and to hold, and
had but little time or liberty to enjoy; yet that time of rest which he had,
did apply it and himself in the settling of the Laws by the advice of
Common Council: I say, not by advice of his own heart, or two or three Norman
Lords, Spicileg. p. 5.
or of the Norman Nobility only, as some men take the confidence to aver, as if
they had been eyewitnesses to the actions of those days; but by the joint
advice of the grand-Council of the Lords, and wise men of the Kingdom of
England. I will not insist upon force of argument to show, that common reason
must of necessity sway the King into this course, but shall reserve that to
another place; the testimonies of Writers must now serve the turn: and herein,
the testimony of the Chronicle of Lichfield must have the first place, which
speaks both of a Council of Lords; and says, that by their advice he caused to
be Summoned a meeting of all the Nobles and wise men through all the Counties
of England, to set down their Laws and Customs. This was in the fourth year of
his Reign, or rather after his entry, and as soon as the Kingdom was brought
into any reasonable posture of quiet; and which, besides the intention of
governing the Kingdom according unto Law, does strongly pretend that the
Parliament had the Legislative power and right of cognizance, and judicature in
those Laws that concerned the Kingdom in general; and for the particular Laws
or Customs of several places or Precincts, it was referred to a Committee or
Jury in every County to set them forth upon Oath.

Secondly, that this Council had power to change Laws, may likewise appear in
that Act made concerning the introduction of the Canon Law, Spicil. 167. Fox.
Mart. l. 4.
which shows not only the power of that Council in Church Matters, but also
that the Canon was no further in force than the same would allow; and this was
also done by Common council, and the Council of the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, and all the Princes of the Kingdom; which connection shows plainly, that
there was a Council besides that of the Prelates and Princes.

Thirdly, in matters of general charge upon the whole body of the people, the
King used also the help of this Grand-council, as may especially appear in the
charge of Arms imposed upon the Subjects; Ll. Gulielm. c. 58. Spicil.
which was said to be done by the Common council of the whole Kingdom; as is
witnessed even by the Kings own Law. It may seem also, that the grand Officers
of the State were elected by such grand assembly of the wise men; for we find
that Lanfrank was elected to the Sea of Canterbury by the assent of the Lords
and Prelates, and of the whole people, that is, Antiq. Brit. fol. 110.
by the Parliament of England; and as probable it is, that Bishops were therein
also elected, for that the Bishop of Lichfield resigned his Bishopric in such
like Assembly, Baron. Annal. An. 1070.
if the meaning of Lanfrank be rightly understood, who says in his Letter,
that it was in conventu Episcoporum atque Laicorum.

Lastly, that one Law of the Kings, which may be called the first Magna Charta
in the Norman times, by which the King reserved to himself from the freemen of
this Kingdom nothing but their free service, Ll. Gulielm. c. 55.
in the conclusion says that their Lands were thus granted to them in
inheritance of the King by the Common Council of the whole Kingdom; and so
asserts in one the liberty of the freemen, and of the representative body of
the Kingdom. These footsteps of the Parliament find we in the Conquerors time,
besides other more general intimations scattered amongst the Historians; which
may induce opinion to its full strength, that this King, however Conqueror he
was, yet made use of this additional power of Parliament to perfect his
designs; and it may be, more often than either of his Sons, that yet had less
pretense of superlative power to countenance their proceedings.

William Rufus was a man of resolution no whit inferior, if not surpassing his
Father; and had wit enough for any thing but to govern his desires, which led
him many times wild, and might occasion conceit that he was almost a mad King,
though he were a witty man; and therefore it is the less marvail if he used not
the help of the Common Council more than needs must; where Kings many times are
told of that which they are loath to know. Nevertheless William the second could
not pass over thirteen years without a parley with his Commons and Clergy,
unless he meant to adventure a parley between them and his Brother Robert, who
like an Eagle eyed his posture, though he hovered afar off.

But Henry the first was more wise, and being trained up even from the Cradle
in the English garb, moralized by Learning, and now admitted into the Throne,
found it the wisest course to apply himself to the rule of an English King,
viz. To win and maintain the good opinion of the people, by consorting together
with them under one Law; and pledging himself thereto, by taking unto Wife one
of the English Blood Royal: by this means he refeised and reassumed the
English, in partnership with the Norman in their ancient right of Government;
and reconciled the minds of the people, under a lively hope of enjoying a
settled Government. Nor were they greatly deceived herein, for his course was
less planetary than that of either of his predecessors; and yet we find little
said of his parley with his people in a Parliamentary way, although more of his
Laws than of any of his predecessors. The reason will rest in this, that the
Writers of those times touch more upon matters of ordinary than political
observation, and regarded rather the thing, than the place or manner how. The
Laws therefore, Bid Hist. l. 3. c. 30.
although they are not entitled as made in Parliament, yet in the continuation
of the History of Bid, it is noted that the King renewed or confirmed the
ancient Laws in Concilio peritorum and proborum virorum regni Angliae; which
may give sufficient cause to suppose, that he declined not the ancient way, no
more than he did the ancient Law.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Franchise of the Church in the Normans time.
THE Canon Law, that ever since Austin's coming, like Thunder, rumbled in the
Clouds, now breaks forth with confusion to all opposers. It had formerly made
many fair proffers of service to this Island, but it was disaccepted, as too
stately to serve; yet by often courtesies received, it was allowed as a Friend
afar off. For the vast body of the Roman Empire, like a body wasting with age,
died upward, and left the Britains to their own Laws, before the second Beast
was grown; which being young, was nourished under the Imperial Law of the first
Beast, till it grew as strong as its Dam, and began to prey for it self. The
Empire perceiving its gray hairs, and the youthful courage of this Upstart, was
glad to enter mutual League with it, That to maintain the Ecclesiastical
Monarchy, and This again to support the Imperial: and so became the Canon and
Imperial Law to be united, and the Professors to be utriusque juris. But this
parity continued not long; the young Beast looked like a Lamb, but spoke like a
Lion; and contrarily, the Eagle had cast its Feathers, and could tower no more;
so as by this time the Pope was too good for the Emperor, and the Canon Law
above the Imperial; yet allowing it to serve the turn: And so the Professors
of both Laws became Students in the Civil, but Practisers of the Canon. This
Composition thus made beyond the Seas, the great work was how to transport it
over into this Isle: for the Emperor could entitle the Pope to no power here,
because none he had. Austin the Monk undertakes the work; he offers it to the
Britains under the goodly Title of Universal Bishop: but they kept themselves
out of Canon-shot. The Saxons allowed the Title, but liked not the power; the
Monk observed the stop, and left time to work out that which present cunning
could not, being content for the present that a League of Cohabitation should
be made between the two Swords, Ll. Edw. c. 3.
though the spiritual were for the present underling; not despairing that it
would work out its own way over the Saxon Law, as it had done over the
Imperial. Nor did his conceit altogether fail: for the Saxons by little allowed
much, and the Danes more; although the main was preserved until the Normans
came upon the Stage, who made their way by the Pope's lieve, and gave him a
color of somewhat more than ever any of their Saxon predecessors had done; and
to gain the more quiet possession of the Crown to themselves, allowed the Pope
the honor of their Council learned to draw the Conveyance: which, as some
think, was made advantageously for the Pope himself in point of tenure, but
more probably in the Covenants. For the Conqueror was scarce settled in his
seat, but the Canon Law began to speak in the voice of a Royal Law: Spicil.
167. Fox. Mart. l. 4.
First complaining of misgovernment, as if the Church were extremely wronged by
having the same way and Law of Trial with the Commons of England; and then
propounds four several Expedients, enough to have undone the whole Commonwealth
in the very entrance, had not the superstition of those times blinded both
Parliament and People, and rendered them willing to that which their successors
in future ages often repented of.

No offense against the Bishops Laws, shall be handled in the Hundred.

By the Saxon Law, Church Matters had the pre-eminence both in the Hundred and
in the County; and it was the Bishop's duty to join with the Sheriff in those
Courts, to direct and see to the administration of Justice: and yet the Canon
had been above three hundred years foregoing in the Negative.

No Case concerning the Regiment of Souls, shall be brought before the Secular
Judge.

The Regiment of Souls was a common place sufficient to contain any thing that
was in order thereunto: and so every one that has a Soul, must be no more
responsible unto the temporal Judge for any matter concerning it, but unto the
Ecclesiastical power: And this not only in case of scandal, as against the
moral Law or rule of Faith; but for disobedience done to the Canons, made afar
off, concerning any gesture or garb that may come within the savor of an
Ecclesiastical conceit.

That all Delinquents against the Bishops Laws, shall answer the Fact in a
place appointed by the Bishop to that end.

So as now the Bishop has gotten a Court by the Statute Law, that had formerly
no other Cards to show but that of the Canon; and a Court of such place as the
Bishop shall appoint, however inconvenient for distance or uncertainty it be.

That the trial of such matters, shall be according to the Law of the Canon,
and not according to that of the Hundred.

That is, not by Jury, but by Witnesses, in a clandestine way, if the Bishop
please; or without any Accuser, or by more scrutiny, or any other way that may
reserve the Layman to the breast of a prepossessed spirit of the spiritual
Judge. And thus the poor Countryman is exposed to the censure of an unknown
Law, in an unknown Tongue, by an unknown way; wherein they had no footing, but
by an implicit Faith. And herein the providence of God (I imagine) was more
manifest than the wisdom of Man, which was too weak to foresee events at so
great a distance: for questionless it was a point of excellent wisdom, for the
people (now under a King of a rugged nature, that would not stick to catch
whatsoever he could get) to deposit part of their Liberties into the hands of
the Clergy; from whom moderation might be expected, as from Friends and
Neighbors, and (as Partners in one Ship) mutual engagement to withstand the
waves of Prerogative of Kings, that seldom rest till they break all Banks, and
sometimes overreach their own Guard, and cannot return when they would. And
thus it fell out: for many times the Pope and Clergy became Protectors of the
peoples Liberties, and kept them safe from the rage of Kings, until the time of
restitution should come; and became not only a Wall of defense to the one, but
a Rock of offense to the other. For the Tripple-Crown could never solder with
the English, nor it with that; the strife was for Prerogative, wherein, if the
Clergy gained, the Crown lost; and no moderation would be allowed. For the
conquering King was scarce warm in his Throne, whenas the Pope demanded Fealty
of him for the Crown of England; Spicil. 164. Baron. Annal. An. 1068.
and the King's own good Archbishop and friend Lanfrank delivered the Message;
as also Anselm did afterward to William Rufus; which though these Kings had
courage enough to deny, yet it showed plainly that the Popes meaned no less
Game than Crown-glieke with the King and people; the Archbishops and Bishops
holding the Cards for the Pope, while in the interim he oversaw all. Eadmer.
Hist. l. 1. p. 25.
The Norman Kings thus braved, paid the Popes in their own Coin, and refused to
acknowledge any Pope, but such as are first allowed by their concurrence.

Thus have we the second bravado of the Canon Law; for as yet it was not so
fully entered, as it seemed. The words of the Act of Parliament, it is true,
were general; yet their sense was left to time to expound, and the course of
succeeding affairs nevertheless passed with a non obstante. For whereas in
those days the Clergy claimed both Legislative and Executory power in
Church Matters, the Normans would allow of neither, but claimed both as of
right belonging to the Imperial power of this Island, originally and only. As
touching the Legislative power, it is evident, that notwithstanding the Canon
that had long before this time voted the Laity from having to do with
Church Matters; yet the Norman Kings would neither allow to the Metropolitans
the power of calling Synods nor such meetings, but by their lieve, Eadmer.
Hist. p. 6. and 24. Spicil. 163.
although it was earnestly contended for. Neither could the Clergy prevail to
exclude the Laity out of their Synods, being assembled, nor from their wonted
privilege of voting therein; albeit that for a long time by Canon it had been
contradicted. The differences between the Clergy and the Kings, concerning
these and other matters, grew so hot, that Kings liked not to have any Synods
or meetings of public Council; Epist. ad Pascal. p. p.
and Archbishop Anselm complained that William Rufus would not allow any to be
called for thirteen years together: Which by the file of story, compared with
that Epistle, made up the King's whole Reign. And this was questionless the
cause that we find so little touch upon Parliamentary Assemblies in the Norman
times, Kings being too high to be controuled, and Bishops too proud to obey:
but necessity of State, like unto Fate, prevails against all other interests
whatsoever; and the wisdom of Henry the first in this prevailed above that of
his predecessors, as far as their Will was beyond his. For it was bootless for
him to hold out against the Church that stood in need of all sorts to confirm
to him that which common Right (as then it was taken) denied him; and therefore
(though it cost him much trouble with Anselm) he re-continued the liberty of
public Consultations, and yet maintained his Dignity and Honor seemly well. I
shall not need to clear this by particulars; for besides the public
Consultations at his entrance, and twice after that, for supply or aid for his
Wars, and the marriage of his Daughter with the Emperor, it is observed that
the Archbishop of Canterbury summoned a Council at Westminster, but it was
Authoritate Regia, Conten. Wigorn. An. 1127.
and that there assembled magnae multitudines Clericorum, Laicorum, tam divitum
quam mediocrium; and that upon the third day the Debate was de negotiis
saecularibus nonnullis: The issue of all was, that some things were
determinata, others dilata, and other matters propter nimium aestuantis turbae
tumultum ab audientia judicantium profligata. Out of which may be probably
concluded, 1. That the Laity as yet were present in Councils with the Clergy.
2. That they were all in one place. 3. That they all had votes, and that the
major number concluded the matter. 4. That certain persons used to determine of
the major number by the hearing, and that the Votes were still clamore non
calculis. 5. That they held an Order in debating of affairs, viz. on some days
Ecclesiastical, and on other days Secular. 6. That all matters concluded, were
attested by the King, who, as it is said, did give his consent, and by his
authority did grant and confirm the same. And upon the whole matter it will be
probable, that as yet Councils, and those now called Parliaments, differed not
in kind, although possibly there might be difference of names, in regard that
some might be immediately and mainly occasioned and urged by Temporal
Exigences, and others by Ecclesiastical; but whether Temporal or Ecclesiastical
the first occasion was, yet in their meetings they handled both as occasion
offered it self.

Secondly, as the Clergy could not attain the sole Legislative power, so
neither had they the sole Juridical power in Ecclesiastical Causes: for not
only in case of error in the Ecclesiastical Courts was an Appeal reserved to
the King's Court, as formerly in the Saxons time; but even those things which
seemed properly of Ecclesiastical cognizance, were possessed by the King's
Court in the first instance, as that of Peter pence, which was a
Church-tribute, and might be claimed to be properly the Church-cognizance much
rather than Tithes: Ll. Gulielm. c. 20. Spicil. 180.
and yet by the Law of this Kingdom in the Conquerour's time, it is especially
provided, That defaults of payment of that duty shall be amended in the King's
Court, and a fine for default was given to the King, albeit that the Bishop was
made the Collector, and the Pope the Proprietor. And many other particulars,
which were holden to be of Ecclesiastical cognizance, Kings would draw them
within the compass of maintaining the peace of the Church, which properly
belonged to them to defend; and so had the cognizance of them in their own
Courts, and fines for invasion of the Church-rights. But because this may seem
but colorable, and by way of flattery of the Churches right, and not in
opposition thereof; in other things it will appear plainly that Kings were not
nice in vindicating their own claim in matters which the Clergy held theirs
quarto modo; as namely in the case of Excommunication, a Weapon first fashioned
by the Churchmen, and in the exercise whereof themselves were in repute the
only Masters; and yet in this were mastered by Kings, Eadmer. Hist. p. 6. Ll.
H. 1. cap. 5.
whose Laws directed and restrained the swelling of that censure, and made it
keep measure; whose Tenants and Officers and Servants must not be meddled with
by this censure, but by the King's lieve; nor must they be called to answer but
in the King's Court. That Right still remained to them after the spoil made by
the Hierarchy upon the Rights of all the rest of the Freemen, and therefore
could not of right be called nova in the Historians sense; seeing that it was
no other than the ancient custom used amongst the Saxons before that the
Clergy had either purpose or power to reach at such a height as afterward by
degrees they attained unto. Furthermore, the Hierarchy, as they neither could
possess the Legislative nor Juridical power in Church Matters, so neither could
they possess themselves: for as yet they were the King's men, and the more the
King's men, because they now think a Bishopric but a naked commodity, if not
robed with a Barony. Nevertheless, before that ever they knew that honor,
whatever the Canon was for their election, yet both their Title and Power de
facto was derived to them from the Kings, who also invested them with Staff and
Ring; nor had the Pope as yet (though he had conquered the Hierarchy) possessed
himself of their colors: but during all the Norman times, the Kings maintained
that trophy of the right they had from their Predecessors, notwithstanding the
many assaults from Rome, and treacheries of the Cathedrals within the Realm.
Eadmer. Hist. l. 2. p. 53. and l. 3. and l. 4. Eadmer. Hist. l. 1. and l. 5.
Wigorn. An. 1128. Spicil. 142.
And albeit sometimes Kings were too weak to hold the shadow, yet the
convention of the States did maintain the substance, viz. the right of Election
without intermission, as the examples of Lanfrank unto the Sea of Canterbury,
and Anselm and Ralph his successors, and of Thomas into the Sea of York, and
Ralph Coadjutor to Thurstan Archbishop of the same See, and of Gilbert into the Sea of London, besides others, do sufficiently set forth. Whether it was
because the convention of States was more stout, or that the Bishops, now
wedded to Temporal Baronies, were so unquestionably interessed in the public
affairs of the Commonwealth, that it was against common sense to deny the
States their vote and cognizance of their Election, I cannot determine; yet it
is a certain truth, the more Baron, the less Bishop, and more unmeet for the
service of Rome: Politickly therefore it was done by Kings to hold these men by
a Golden hook* that otherwise had prostituted themselves to a foreign power,
and proved absolute deserters of their Countries Cause, which now they must
maintain under peril of the loss of their own honor.

In the next place, as they were the King's men, so their Bishoprics and
Diocesses were under the King's power to order, as by the advice of the Bishops
and Baronage should be thought most convenient; either to endow another Bishop
with part thereof, Eadm. l. 4. p. 95, 96.
and so to make two Diocesses of one, as befell in the case of the Diocese of
Lincoln, out of which the Diocese of Ely budded in the time of Henry the first;
or to endow a Monastery or other Religious foundation with part, and exempt the
same from all Episcopal or ordinary jurisdiction, as in the example of the
foundation of the Abbey of Battle in Sussex, in the time of William the
Conqueror, Spicil. 165.
may appear.

Lastly, whatever the first intention of this recited Statute were, it may
probably be judged, that it was but a noise to still the Clergy; and that it
never had more than a liveless shape, not only in regard of the
beforementioned particulars, but especially in regard of that subservient Law
of Henry the first concerning the County Court, which recites it as a custom
in his time used, that the Bishop and Earls, Ll. Hen. 1. ^.
with other the chief men of that County, were there present as Assistants in
directory of judgment. And that in order are handled first, matters of the
Church: Secondly, Crown-pleas: Thirdly and lastly, Common Pleas. However
therefore the Kings spoke fair, they either acted not at all, or so coolly, as
the current of the custom was too strong; but most probable it is, that the
Kings spoke fair till they were settled in their Thrones, and afterward pleased
themselves: for by the general thread of story, it may appear that the Clergy
in those times were more feared than loved, and therefore ridden with a strait
Rein. The Prelacy on the contrary grew unruly, yet too weak for the rugged
spirits of the Norman Kings; they are glad to be quiet, and the Pope himself to
drive fair and softly, as judging it expedient potestatem Regalem mitius
tractandam, Greg. Epist. l. 9.
and continued that course and posture till the calmer times of Henry the
first; wherein they mended their pace, Eadmer. Hist. l. 4. p. 95.
and got that without noise which they had long striven for, viz. the
pre-eminence and presidency in the Synods, though the King himself be present;
and (if the Historian writes advisedly) the whole ordaining, or Legislative
power, for so runs the style or phrase of the Author, Archiepiscopi and
Episcopi statuerunt in praesentia Regis, as if the presence of the King and his
Barons and People, were but as a great Amen at the Common Prayer (after the old
stamp) to set a good color upon a doubtful matter, to make it go down the
better. How the Kings brooked this draught, I cannot say; but it has made the
Kingdom stagger ever since, and it may be feared will hardly recover its
perfect wits, so long as the brains of the Clergy and the Laity thus lie
divided in several Cells.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the several subservient Jurisdictions by Provinces, Marches,
Counties, Hundreds, Buroughs, Lordships, and Decennaries.
HAD the Normans owned no other Title than that of Conquest, doubtless their
mother-wit must needs have taught them the expediency of preserving the
particular subservient Jurisdictions of the Kingdom entire and unquashed, if
they regarded either the benefit of their Conquest, or reward of their Partners
and Allies; unless it should be allowed unto Conquerours to be more honorable
for them to do what they will, rather than what is meet. But hereof there is no
cause of question in this present subject; for nothing is more clear than that
Wales enjoyed in the Conquerour's time, and for ages after him, its ancient
Liberties, Tribute excepted: nor did Conquest ever come so nigh to their
Borders, as to trench upon the Liberties of the Marches. For as it had been a
piece of State-nonsence to have holden two sort of people under conquest, and
their Marches in freedom; or to preserve them in good Neighborhood by Marches,
which by the Law of Conquest were made one: so was it no less vain, if all had
been once subdued by Conquest, to have raised up the Liberties of the Marches
any more.

And as they had less cause to have invaded the bounds and ancient limits and
partitions of the Counties, County-courts.
so, questionless, had they so done, they would have taken the old course of
the Micklemote, E^dmer. Hist. l. 4. p. 96.
as they did divide the Diocese of Lincoln into two Diocesses, by advice of the
Bishops, Princes, and other wise and holy men, and turned the Abbey of Ely into
a Bishop's See. But it was their wisdom to preserve the ancient Landmarks; Ll.
Hen. 1. c. 6.
and no less both wisdom and care, to continue their due Privileges and
Interests to each. Every County had its Court, and every Court its wonted
Jurisdiction: No complaint must be to the King's Court, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 41,
and 42.
if right may be done in the County; no distress must be taken but by Warrant
from the County, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 64.
and that must be after complaint thrice made. The County Court must be called
as our Ancestors have appointed: Such as will not come as they ought, shall be
first summoned, and in case of default distrained; at the fourth default, the
Complainant shall be satisfied out of the distresses so taken, and the King
also for his Fine. These are the express Laws of the Conquerour's own
establishment; Ibid. c. 64.
the last of which also Hen. 1. confirmed by another express Law, saving that
he would allow but of two Summons and two Distresses, before execution. And as
it was one principal work that he undertook to reduce the Laws into course,
which had been intermitted during the violent times of his Father and Brother,
(the first of whom never had liberty for reformation, and the latter never had
will) so amongst other Laws he settled those concerning the County Court;
namely, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 7.
1. That the Bishops, Earls, and chief men, should be present for direction. 2.
That it should be holden once each month. 3. That the Church Matters should
precede, and then the Crown-pleas. And lastly, the Common Pleas; besides some
other particulars concerning pleading, and proceedings in the handling of
Causes. Neither were these Causes of a petty regard only, but of greatest
concernment: One example I shall remind the Reader of, and not recite in
terminis, but refer to Mr. Selden's own Pen. The occasion was this: Odo the
Conquerour's half Brother, Spicil. 19^.
was by him made Earl of Kent, and therewith had the gift of a large Territory
in Kent; and taking advantage of the King's displeasure at the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Stigand.
possessed himself by disseism of diverse Lands and Tenements belonging to that
See. Lanfrank the succeeding Archbishop being informed hereof, petitioned to
the King that Justice might be done him secundum legem terrae: and the King
sends forth his Writ to summon a County Court. The Debate lasted three days
before the Free men of the County of Kent, in the presence of many chief men,
Bishops and Lords, and others skilful in the Laws; and the Judgment passed for
the Archbishop Lanfrank upon the Votes of the Free men. This County Court was
holden by special summons, and not by adjournment, as was allowable by the
Saxon Law upon special occasions: And this Suit was originally begun and had
its final determination in the County Court, and not brought by a Tolt out of
the Hundred-court, as is supposed by an honorable Reporter; nor by the ancient
Laws could the Suit commence in the Hundred, because the Lands and Tenements
did lie in several Hundreds and Counties. The upshot of all is, that the
County-courts in those days were of so great esteem, that two of the greatest
Peers of the Realm, one a Norman, the other an Italian, did cast a Title in
fifteen Manors, two Townships, with many Liberties, upon the Votes of the
Freeholders in a County Court, and that the Sentence was allowed and commended
by the King, and submitted to by all.

In the next place we are to come to the Hundred-courts, Hundred-court.
of which there are by the Normans allowed two sorts; the first whereof was
holden twice a year: This was formerly called the Torn, and was the Sheriff's
Court; hereof little notice is taken, Ll. Hen. 1. c. ^^
saving that by the Laws of Henry the first its work seems to be much designed
to the view of free pledges. But the more ordinary Court, is that which belongs
to the Lord of the Hundred, unto whom also belong the Fines in cases there
concerned. Ll. Gulielm. cap. 41.
This Court is to be holden once in each month; and no Suit to be begun in the
King's Court, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 7.
that regularly ought to begin in the Hundred. Ll. Gulielm. cap. 41.
No Distringas shall issue forth till three demands made in the Hundred. And
three Distresses shall then issue forth; and if upon the fourth the party
appear not, Ll. Guliem. cap. 42.
Execution shall be by sale of the Distress, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 64.
and the Complainant shall receive satisfaction.

But by the latter Laws of the same King, there are but two Summons allowed,
and then two Distresses; and in case no appearance be, Execution shall be for
the Complainant, and for the King's Fine.

Lastly, as the case concerned either persons or places, Ll. Hen. 1. c. ^.
sometimes they used to join several Hundreds together into one Court: but this
was by special Commission or Writ.

As touching inferior Courts of Towns and Manors, there is little observation
to be had, Courts of Towns and Manors.
being of too private a regard to come into fame in those rough times: yet in
Hen. the first's Laws it is ordered that Town-courts should meet every month,
Ll. Hen. 1, c. 7.
and that Lords should hold Pleas either in their own persons, or by their
Stewards; and that the chief man in the Parish, with four other of the chiefer
sort, and the Minister or Parish Priest, should join their assistance in that
work. But in nothing more did the Norman Kings show their paternal love to the
Commonwealth, than in the Law of Pledges or Decenners: for as of all other
Beauties, Decenners.
this suffered most blemish from the storm of the Norman Invasion; so was it
their especial care to renew the life thereof, not now amongst the Natives
only, but joining the Normans to the Saxons in the same bond of Brotherhood,
utterly drowned thereby all memory of Lordly power; and so of diverse peoples
making one, conquered even Conquest it self, if any were, and made all
joynt-partners in one common Liberty.

Every Freeman must be under Pledges to satisfy Justice, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 64.
in case of delinquency.

Over every nine persons under Pledges, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 8.
there must be one man in Authority.

View of free Pledges must be, to see that the Decennaries be full; and if any
be departed, to enquire the cause: and if any be come in, whether he be under
Pledges or not.

And thus the Norman Kings had their people under treble guard: one of Fealty,
the other of Association, and the third that of Pledges; and all little enough
to secure that which they in their own Consciences might have some cause to
question whether it belonged to them or not.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Immunities of the Saxon Freemen under the Norman
Government.
THE freedom of an Englishman consists in three particulars: First, in
ownership of what he has: Secondly, in voting any Law, whereby that ownership
is to be maintained: And thirdly, in having an influence upon that Judicatory
power that must apply that Law. Now that the English under the Normans enjoyed
all this freedom unto each Man's own particular, besides what they had in
bodies aggregate, may appear, as follows: The Freemen of England were such
as either joined in the War with Harold against the Normans; or such as
absented themselves from the way of opposition or enmity, and were either
waiting upon their own affairs, or siding with the Normans. And questionless
all the sadness of the War befell the first sort of the English, whose persons
and Estates (to make the ways of the first Norman William regular, and of one
piece) never fell so low as to come under the Law (or rather the Will) of
Conquest; but in their worst condition were in truth within the directory of
the Law of forfeiture for Treason against their Sovereign Lord, whose claim was
by Title, as has been already noted. The other sort either did appear to be
the Normans friends, or for ought appeared so were: and so never offending the
Law, never suffered any penalty; but held their persons and possessions still
under the patronage of Law, as anciently they and their Ancestors had done. And
that this was the Normans meaning, they publish the same to the World in a
Fundamental Law, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 55.
whereby is granted, That all the Freemen of the whole Kingdom shall have and
hold their Lands and Possessions in hereditary right for ever.

And by this being secured against forfeiture, they are further saved from all
wrong by the same Law, which provideth,

That they shall hold them well or quietly, and in peace, free from all unjust
Tax, and from all Tallage, so as nothing shall be exacted nor taken, but their
free service which by right they are bound to perform.

This is expounded in the Laws of H. 1. cap. 4. That no Tribute or Tax shall be
taken, but what was due in the Confessor's time.

Under the word Tax is understood monetagium commune per civitates, or
comitatus; so as aids and escuage are not included, for they are not charged
upon Counties and Cities, but upon Tenures in Knight Service; nor was Dane gelt
hereby taken away, for that was a Tax in the Confessor's time, and granted by
Parliament.

So then the Norman Kings claimed no other right in the Lands and possessions
of any of their Subjects, than under and by the Law or common right; and they
conclude the Law with a sicut, which I thus English, As it is enacted to them,
(or agreed by them) and unto them by us given and granted by the Common Council
of our whole Kingdom. Statutum est eis and illis a nobii datum and concessum
per commune concilium totius Regni Nostri.
I leave the words to be criticized upon as the Reader shall please; being well
assured, that the most strained sense can reach no further than to make it
sound as an Estoppel or Conclusion to the King and his Successors to make any
further claim unto the Estates of his Subjects than by Law or Right is
warrantable; under which notion Conquest never did nor can come, as shall more
fully be manifested hereafter. But the right genius of this Law will also more
evidently appear by the practice of those times, which, even when Justice it
self did most importune, so tenderly regarded the liberty of men's Estates, that
no Distress could issue without public Warrant obtained; and upon three
Complaints first made, Ll. Gulielm. c. 42, and 45.
and right not done. And when Rape and Plunder was in the heat, and men might
seem to have no more right than they had power to maintain; yet even then this
Law was refuge sufficient for such as were oppressed; Gloss. 227. Camb. Brit.
Norsf.
and was pleaded in bar against all usurpations and intrusions under pretext of
the Conquerour's right whatsoever; as by the Case of Edwyn of Sharneburn may
appear. Secondly, the Freemen of England had vote in the making of Laws, by
which meum and tuum was bounded and maintained, as may appear by what has been
already said; nor shall I endeavor further therein. Thirdly, they had an
influence upon the judicatory power: For first, the matter in fact was
determined by the votes of the Freemen, as the laws of the Conqueror, and of
Henry the first, do sufficiently manifest. Secondly, they had an influence in
the making of the Sheriff, who, as well as the Bishop, was by Election of the
people. Thirdly, Ll. Gulielm. c. 15.
they had an influence upon all Judges, by setting a penal Law upon them in
case of corruption; which if not so penal as to take away life, was
nevertheless penal enough to make an unjust Judge to be a living pattern and
example of misery, to teach others to beware.

Two things more must be added, though somewhat collateral to this purpose.
Concerning the right of the Freemen in the common Mint, and in their Villains.
Concerning the Mint, Ll. Aethelst c. 6
that the Saxons having made it as parcel of the demesues of the Kingdom, Ll.
Aetheldr. c. 22.
and leaving to the King only an overseership, reserved the control and chief
survey thereof to the Grand Council of the Kingdom, who had slated the same in
the Confessour's time. But after him the Normans changed the current according
to their own liking, till by Henry the first it was reduced into the ancient
course, Ll. Hen. 1.
allowing no money but such as was current in the days of the Confessor, whose
Laws also (with some alterations by the Conqueror, with common advice) he also
established. Concerning the Lords right to their Villains, it is observable,
first, Ll. Gulielm. c. 65. and 66.
that liberty of infranchisement was allowed; which could never have been, had
not the Liberty of the Subject been saved. Secondly, that Infranchisement
properly is the work of the people, or the body; and the Lord was to deliver
his villain by his right hand unto the Sheriff in full County Court, and
pronounce him free from his Service; and shall make room for him by free
passage and open doors, and deliver him free Arms, viz. a Lance and a Sword,
and then he is made a Freeman, as I conceive, to all intents and purposes.
Otherwise there might be manumission; as if the villain remained in a City, Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 66.
Borough, walled Town, or Castle, by a space of a year and a day, and no claim
made to his service by his Lord, he shall be thenceforth free from the service
of his Lord for ever: and yet this manumission could not conclude any but the
Lord, and his Heirs or Assigns; nor could it enforce the body to allow that
for a Member, which was none before. Thirdly, that notwithstanding they allowed
the Lords liberty of infranchisement, Ll. Gulielm. 65.
yet would they not allow them free liberty of disposing them as other
Chattels: nor by the Law of the Conqueror might they sell their Villains out
of the Country, or beyond Sea; for the King had right to the mediate service
of every Villain, though the Lord had the immediate; and therefore that Law
might hold in force: nevertheless the Ordinance that Anselm made, that no Lord
should sell his Villain, they would never allow for a Law, nor did it hold in
force.

CHAP. L. A recollection of certain Norman Laws concerning the Crown, in
relation to those of the Saxons formerly mentioned.
I Call them Norman Laws, because they were allowed by them, or continued in
force, although many of them had their original from the Saxons.

One God must be worshipped, and one faith of Christ maintained throughout the
whole Kingdom. First and second Commandments.


William published by Mr. Seldom, and was for substance in the Saxons time, Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 51.
saving that we find it not annexed to the Crown summarily until now; so as by
this Law Heresy and Idolatry became Crown-pleas. And the like may be collected
concerning Blasphemy, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 75.
concerning which it is said, as of the Servant's killing his Lord, that it is
impardonable: nor could any man offend herein, but it endangered his whole
estate. The trial of these crimes is not found particularly set forth. It might
possibly be in the meeting of the Clergy, and possibly in the County Court of
the Torn where the Bishop was present Jura divina edocere.



These are all Saxon Laws united to the cognizance of the Crown, as formerly
has been showed: Only the first William especially provided, that in case any
man worth Thirty pence in Chattels did pay four pence for his part, Ll.
Gulielm. 5. 18. etc. 20.
it should be sufficient both for himself and his Retinue, whether Servants or
Retainers; Ll. Hen. 1. c. 10.
and defaults in payment of these duties were finable to the King.

Invasion upon the right of Sanctuary fined. 3.


This I note, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 1.
not so much in relation to any such Law amongst the Saxons, as to the future
custom, which now began to alter, according to the increase or wane of the
Moon. I do not find this misdemeanour to be formerly so much taken to heart by
the Crown; nor possibly would it have been at this time, but that the King must
protect the Church, if he mean to be protected by it: and it was taken kindly
by the Churchmen, till they found they were able enough to defend their own
right by themselves. Amongst all the rest of Church-rights this one especially
is confirmed, viz. That any Delinquent shall have liberty of Sanctuary to enjoy
both Life and Member, notwithstanding any Law to the contrary. This privilege
was claimed by the Canons; but it must be granted by the Temporal power, or
else it could not be had; and though it be true that Kings formerly did by
their Charters of foundation grant such privileges in particular; yet could not
such Grants create such immunities contrary unto, or notwithstanding any
public Law of the Kingdom; and therefore the Monasteries had their foundations
confirmed by Parliament, or general assembly of wise men, if the first
foundation was not laid thereon.

Working upon the Feast-days punished by Fine. 4. Commandment.


Before this time no days for Solemn Worship of God were acknowledged by the
Law of the Kingdom but the Lord's days. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 10
By this all days celebrated or instituted by the Church for that purpose are
defended by the civil power, and breach of the holy observation of these days
made enquirable, and punished amongst other pleas of the Crown.

Breach of the Peace, Bloodshed, and Manslaughter, 6. Commandment.
punished by Fine.

This was the ancient Law of the Saxons, and was continued without alteration
till about Alfred's time, whose zeal against blood caused Murder to be
punished with death; but the Danes bringing in a moderation, if it may rightly
be so called, are now seconded by their kindred the Normans, who will not admit
of punishment by death, partly because being a warlike people, Ll. Gulielm.
cap. 67.
bloodshed might seem to rank itself under the Regiment of valor; and partly
because they owed much to that Title for the possession of all that they had
gotten in England. And to prevent scandal, entering upon the rear, opinion stepped
in, that a miserable life was more penal than death; and therefore in crimes of
the deepest die, they came to fine and loss of Member: and which course
prevailed most, Ibid.
either to stop or enlarge the course of that sin, was left to the disposition
of such as intended to make trial. But in matters of less malignancy, the purss
rather smarted than the body, wherein they proceeded so far as to punishment of
death by violence; yet was not the fine to be measured by the judgment of the
mercy or rigor of any person, Miror. 254. Ll. Gulielm. c. 8. 10, 12, 13, etc.
but only of the Law itself, which set down in certainty both the nature and
quantity of the fine; and left that memorial upon record of a good mind at
least to an equitable and just Government. In all these cases of breach of
peace, the King's Court becomes possessed of the right of cognizance, and the
peace is now called the King's peace; Ll. Gulielm. cap. 3.
not so much because that it is left only to his providential care to maintain,
as because the fines for most of those crimes pertained to the King: for
otherwise there is a sort of crimes that are contra pacem vicecomitis, as will
be more cleared hereafter.

I shall conclude this subject with these three Observations: First, that the
Laws in those ancient times of the Normans were so general, as they then made
no difference between places or persons; but whether the peace was broken upon
holy or common ground, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 10.
or upon a Layman, or one in orders, the Lay-power seized upon all. The second
is the care they had for apprehending of the offenders in this kind. If the
party slain were a Norman or Frenchman, the Lord of the Manslayer was charged
to have him forthcoming within a certain time, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 53.
or pay the Kings Fine of 46 Marks, so long as he had wherewith to satisfy,
and for what remained the whole Hundred was charged. But if the party slain
were of any other people, the Hundred was immediately charged with the
Manslayer, and must bring him to answer within a certain time, Ll. Gulielm.
cap. 26.
or pay the Kings fine. The third and last is, the care they had to prevent
breach of peace for the future; first in settling of night-watches by all
Cities, Buroughs, Castles, and Hundreds, in such manner as the Sheriff or
chief Officers by Common Council shall advise for the best safety of the
Kingdom. Secondly, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 56.
in forbidding entertainment of unknown persons above three days, Ll. Gulielm.
cap. 46.
without surety for their good abearance, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 8.
or becoming their pledge for the public safety, nor to let any persons pass
away without testimony under the Ministers and Neighbors hand of their good
carriage.

A Man committing Adultery with a Married Woman, 7. Commandment.
shall forfeit to his Lord the price of his life.

This made the crime enquirable at the Common Law, as an offense contra pacem
Domini; but afterward it was sinable to the King, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 14.
and enquirable amongst the pleas of the Crown by the Law of Henry the first.
Ll. Hen. 1. c. 10.


Force upon a Woman, to the intent to Ravish her, is finable; Ll. Gul. c. 19.
it shall be punished with loss of Member.

The crime and offenses against this Commandment were always punished in the
Temporal Courts, by Fine at the least; and are still in the Normans time
prosecuted in the same way, notwithstanding the growing authority of the Canon.

Robbery is finable.

The different Law between the Saxons, 8. Commandment.
Angles, and Danes, now by the Normans is settled in the more merciful way; and
in case the delinquent made flight, the pledge satisfied the Law for him. But
in the latter times of Henry the first the Law was again reduced to the
punishment of this crime by death, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 4.
and so has continued.

There shall be true weights and measures throughout the Kingdom, Glanv. l. 6.
c. 6. Hovedon.
and those shall be sealed. 9. Commandment.


And this was the constant Saxon Law. Ll. Gulielm. c. 57.


Perjury to be punished by fine, and as formerly still inquirable amongst the
Crown-pleas. Ll. H^n. 1. c. 10.


CHAP. LI. The like of Laws that concern common interest of Goods.
IF Cattle be taken by Distress, the party that will replevy them shall pay Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 6.
and give security to bring the Distress into the Court, if with within a year
and a day it be demanded.

This Law I take to be intended where the Cattle are taken damage feasant;
because nothing shall release the Distress in other cases, but obedience to the
Summons.

No Distress ad comparendum shall be taken but after three several Summons, Ll.
Gulielm. c. 42.
and in such case Distress shall issue by especial order from the County Court.

I noted this partly to show the difference of the Normans from the Saxons in
the delay of execution of Justice by so much mean process, and partly to show
the difference between the Norman times, and these days wherein men's Cattle lie
open to the distress of every oppressing or extorting Bailiff or unknown
person, and no Summons made at all, whereby many poor men's Estates are either
undone, or they must submit to the unjust demands of their adversary.

No manner of Goods of above four pence in value shall be bought, unless in Ll.
Gulielm. c. 43.
And the vendor shall satisfy out of his own Estate, if the sale be not
effectual, and in case the vendor have no warrant for such Goods by him sold.

No living Cattle shall be sold, but only in Cities, and before three
Witnesses; Ll. Gulielm. c. 60.


No Fairs or Markets shall be holden, but only in Cities, Boroughs,
Wall'd-Towns, Ibid. c. 61.


These Laws concerning sales and Markets were ancient Saxon Laws, and tend all
to the avoiding of cheating men of their Cattle by surreptitious sale of them
made by such as had no right.

Goods found shall be published by the Finder to the Neighborhood; and if Ll.
Gulielm. c. 7.
he shall have them, giving security to bring them into the Court, in case any
other shall within a year and a day make his claim thereto.

The Children of persons intestete shall equally divide the Heritage. Ll.
Gulielm. c. 36.


This is in terminis the Saxon Law; and therefore concerning it I shall refer
to the same formerly recited; only I shall add hereto the Law of Henry the
first, Ll. Hen. 1.
which may serve as an explanation of the former. Any Freeman may devise his
Chattels by will: and if he die intestate, his Wife, Children, Parents, or next
kin shall divide the same for his Souls good. The first branch whereof was
ancient, and doubtless in continual use; but the iniquity of the Norman rude
times was such, that the Lords under surmise of arrears or relief, would seize
all the personal estate after the Tenant's death, and so the right of last
Wills was swallowed up; but this restores the power of last Wills into it is
place, an^ in case the party died intestate, preserves a kind of nature of
descent, although they be more personal. Nor does that last clause of the Souls
good, disanul the same, although the words may seem to carry away the benefit
to some other hand. For the whole matter is left to the discretion of such as
are next to the Intestate.

CHAP. LII. Of Laws that concern common interest of Lands.
THe Laws that concern Lands, and peculiarly belonging to the Normans, are such
as concern principally the tenure of Lands; which if duly considered, although
savoured somewhat of the King, yet little of the Conqueror. For generally it
must be granted, that Tenures long before and after this time, were, as the
services, ordered according to the Will of the giver, in which as the King had
the greatest share, and he the most public person of all: so were his
Donations ordered chiefly to advance the public service; and in this regard
the Tenure by Knight service might more principally challenge the King's
regard, than the regard of all the great men besides. But this was not the
sore, yea, rather it was the beauty and strength of the Kingdom; and for which
the King deserved an honorable name above most of his progenitors, who had not
so much Land to dispose of as he had, and therefore could not advance that
service in any proportion equal unto him. The sore that caused so many sighs,
was the encumbrances raised upon this most noble and free service, which
through the evil of times by this means became the most burdensome, and the
only loathed and abhorred service of all the rest. I say through the evil of
times; for it cannot lodge in my thoughts but that in the Norman times the
encumbrances were nothing so great as of latter Ages, and that much has been
imputed to the Laws of the Conqueror, which they never deserved, as may appear
in these particulars, which the Laws of Henry the First have preserved in
memory.

Tenant of the King, 1. Relief. M. Paris. An. 1100. and 1213.
or other Lord, dying, his Heir shall pay no other relief than what by Law is
due.

That which by Law is due, is set down in the Laws of William the Conqueror.

The Relief of an Earl. Ll. Gulielm. c. 1^*

8 Horses sadled and bridled. 4 Helmets. 4 Coats of Mail. 4. Shields. 4 Spears.
4 Swords. 4 Chasers 1 Palfray bridled and sadled.
The Relief of a Baron.
4 Horses with Saddles and Bridles. Ibid. c. 23.
2 Helmets. 2 Coats of Mail. 2 Shields. 2 Spears. 2 Swords. 2 Chasers 1 Palfray
bridled and sadled.
The Relief of a Vovasor to his Lord.
His best Horse. Ibid. c. 24.
His Helmet. His Coat of Mail. His Shield. His Spear. His Sword. Or if he had
no Arms, then he was to pay s. 100
The Relief of the Countryman is the best Beast that is in his possession; Ll.
Gulielm. c. 29.
and of him that farmeth his Lands, a years rent.

These are the Reliefs due by Law, and now settled in Goods or Arms, but
afterward turned into Money; and it is likely that the ill customs in the
former times did extort both Money and Arms, or such sums of Money as they
pleased: and by the very words of the Law, it seems they had brought it to an
Arbitrary power, to take what they could get, and yet all against Law.

The Kings Tenant shall advise with the King in marriage of his Daughter,
Marriage.


The sense hereof in short is, that these might marry at their own will,
without paying Fine or Composition to the Lord; and yet must have the liking of
the Lord so far as to declare whether the man intended were his Enemy or not,
and fit to perform Knight Service. This Law was therefore grounded upon the
present distress of affairs, wherein the Nation was unsettled, and common right
having established a mutual trust between Lord and Tenant, found out this means
to preserve the same: for if the marriages of those that are related to the
Tenant in such manner as may inherit part of all his Lands, or have jointure
therein, should be left altogether at the liberty of the Tenant or his Widow*
it must needs follow, that the mutual trust between Lord and Tenant must fail,
and the public receive damage. And therefore if this custom were of Norman
birth, it was begotten upon a Saxon Law, and might the rather be owned by the
English.

The Widow of the King's Tenant, having Children, shall have her Dower Dower.


The portion here is in the Latin word maritagium, which I take to be the
Marriage portion given by the Husband according to the Saxon custom, whenas the
Dower in Land was not in use; whereof is spoken formerly in that Chapter of
Dower. And the Normans were necessitated to introduce this custom of theirs
with themselves, partly because it was a privilege which was their own by
birth, and it could not be waved without an evident wrong done to the Wives of
these men who had ventured their lives in that service; but principally because
it would not consist with the work in hand to disclaim that custom which must
needs be of infinite consequence in the effecting of what was principally
sought after, viz. the union of the two peoples, Normans and Saxons, into one:
I say, it was principally sought after by the Norman Conqueror, if not led
thereto by his own genius, yet necessitated thereto by force of reason of
State, as shall appear hereafter. And what could be imagined a more ready way
to stay the effusion of blood, and all other unhappy events of enmity, than by
taking away enmity it self? or a more speedy and certain course for union, than
to reduce the Men and Women of each people to mutual society, and to seal up
all by a lasting bond of Marriage? or greater encouragement for the comfortable
proceedings therein, than the settling of the constant maintenance of the Wife,
in case of survivorship, by the Law of Dower of the Lands and Tenements of the
Husband? Lindenburg. Council. Aenham. c. 19. Ll. Edm.
which was so full of contingencies and uncertainties in the portion of Goods
that was by the Saxon Law appointed to the Wife in such case. Nor was this all;
for by Marriage thus made to the Normans, they had a great hold, not so much
over the English, as in the English; and that not only during coverture, but
by reason of this title of Dower, the Women became Tenants, and under the Lords
wing, so as they durst not willingly and illegally offend their Lord in their
Widowhood, nor by Law nor reason match themselves and their Dowry to any other
that was not first allowed by the Lord to be in friendship with him: and thus
became the Tenants Widows to be at the liking of the Lord for their marriage.
And the like hereto may be said concerning the Husband in case of Tenant by the
courtesy; Miror. fol. 20.
and however by the Norman former practice it was much disturbed, yet by Henry
the first it was again reduced to its former right, rather than original
arising from his grant, as some hold, and proved advantageous for the ends
aforesaid. Now as touching their marriage-portion of Goods, because the Saxon
Law had already endowed them thereof, they could not be induced to lay down
their known ancient right, till they found the new Law of Dower to settle; and
so for some time both Laws were in force, until the more ancient Saxon law had
an honorable burial. Nevertheless for the present, the Law abridged that right
so far as to limit it to the Widow during Widowhood, according to the former
Saxon-law. Upon consideration of all which, it may well be conceived that the
power of the Lords in consenting or dissenting to the marriages of their
Tenants, Widows, and Wards, was not so much an usurpation upon the Common right
of the English Subjects, as a custom rationally, and with great wisdom, as the
course of affairs then stood, upholden and allowed amongst them, principally
for the speedy settling of a peaceable Government, and consolidating of two
Nations into one, and wherein England was then so happy as to come to a
conclusion in seven years, which cost their Ancestors night Two hundred years
experience with the Britains, besides a world of bloodshed that might have
been spared, e're they could find out the right way to a desired peace by
mutual marriages had between them.

Such Widow shall have the custody of the Lands of such Children, cap. 4.
or otherwise such other person as by right ought to have the same.

cum privilegio of a received Law, Wardship.
which, together with the former, declare the right custom of the Normans, and
thereby the injustas consuetudines quibus Anglioe regnum opprimebatur, M. Paris.
viz. Arbitrary Relief taken of the Tenant's Estate, arbitrary Marriages made
of their Peersons, and arbitrary Grants of Guardianship of their Lands: For as
yet oppression was not so high-flown as to cast the government of the persons
of their Wards out of the view of the Lords provisionary care, upon adventure
of the next in Law, whether man or woman, wise or unwise, under pretense to
train him up in military service fit for the Lord's own safety, and the
Kingdoms lifeguard: But it was the proper ground of the Lord's own seizure and
right of Wardship, he being looked upon by the eye of common reason as the
only meet man that both could and would effect that work, so as might be most
advantageous to the public; which seemed to be chiefly concerned herein. And
upon the same general ground the survey of fools accompanied the former, albeit
it was not in practice till Henry the First brought it in, Ll. Canut. 37.
as the Mirror of Justice says (fol. 258.) yet it came upon an ancient
foundation laid in the time of the Danes. For my own part, I will not dispute
the point whether this custom of Wardship was purely Norman, or whether it was
derived from the Saxons anciently, who possibly might have some respect to
Orphans, in such cases to train them up for the public service in point of
War; especially being possessors of a known right of Relief, Asser. Menev.
as well as Alfred the Saxon King did undertake the work for the training of
some such particular persons in Learning for the service of the Public, in
time of peace and civil Government. Yet thus much appears, that Guardianship
of Lands was a known Custom, enough to make and maintain a right; and that it
by Law was a right belonging to some persons before others; and that this had
been a custom before the former unjust customs crept into the Government of the
Conqueror, and principally of his Son Rufus. And though it be questionable
whether it settled first upon the Normans or the English, yet it is manifest
that if one people had it, the other people now coming into union with that
people, could not in reason except against that custom which the other people
had taken up upon so honorable grounds as reason of State, which as the times
then were, was evident and superlative; especially the customs being under the
regulating of Law, and not of any Arbitrary power; and can be no Presidents of
Relief, Marriage, and Wardship that after-ages usurped.

Tenants in Knight Service shall hold their Lands, cap. 5.
etc. acquitted of all Taxes, that they may be more able to provide Arms, and
be more ready and fit for Acquittal.


This Law, whether it be a renewing of a former custom, or an introduction of a
new Law, it is clear it was upon an old ground: That Tenants by Knight Service
must be ready for the service of their Lord, and defense of the Kingdom;
whereof afterward. But the Law is, that these men shall hold their Lands of
that Tenure acquitted of all Taxes, though legally imposed upon the body of the
Kingdom, which must be conceived to be for the public benefit, viz. either for
the preparation or maintenance of public War; for in such cases it has been
in all times held unreasonable, that those whose persons are employed to serve
in the Wars, should hold Lands doubly charged to the same service, viz. to the
defraying of their own private expenses in the War, and maintenance of the
public charge of the same War besides.

CHAP. LIII. Of diverse Laws made concerning the execution of Justice.
ALthough in proceedings in Cases of vindicative Justice Delinquents might seem
to be left rather to the fury than mercy of the Law; yet so long as men are
under the Law, and not without the Law, it has been always held a part of
Justice to extend what moderation might possibly stand with the honor of the
Law; and that otherwise an over-rigid and fierce prosecution of the guilty, is
no less tyranny than the prosecution of the not-guilty: and although violence
was the proper vice of these times, yet this point of honor must be given to
the Normans, That their Sword had Eyes, and moved not altogether by Rage, but
by Reason.

Ll. Hen. 1. c. 5.




By these two Laws of Henry the first, Ll. Hen. 1. M. Paris.
the Subjects were delivered from three great oppressions. First, in making
them offenders without Complaint or Witness. Secondly, in imposing immoderate
Fines. Lastly, in urging extraordinary Bail.

Miror. fol. 261.


The Normans had reduced the Saxon law in this case unto their own Last, which
stretched their desire as far as the estate would bear; but this being so
prejudicial to the immediate Lords, who were no offenders in this case, and so
contrary to the Saxon law, it was both done and undone in a short space by the
allowance of Henry the first.



This by Alfred's Law was punished by Talioes Law, Miror. fol. 254.
but now by a Law of Henry the first reduced to Mulcts.



This Law of Henry the first repealed the former Law of Canutus, Miror. fol.
141.
which must be acknowledged to be rigorous, although not altogether without
reason.



By imprisonment, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 5.
is intended close imprisonment, or imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize; for
otherwise it is apparent, that as well by the Saxon as Norman Laws, men were
brought to Trial by restraint.



Before this Law, Miror. cap. 2. Sec. 7.
Appeals were brought by any of the blood or kin of the party slain: but now by
Henry the first restrained. The ground seems to be, for that affection that
runs with the blood, grows so cold beyond the fourth degree, that the death of
the party is of so small account, as it can scarcely be reputed a loss of such
consequence to the party, as to expose the life or price of the life of the
Manslayer unto the claim of such an one. And thus the Saxon law that gave the
satisfaction in such case to the whole kindred, became limited to the fourth
degree, as I conceive, from the Ecclesiastical constitution concerning marriage.

Two things more concerning juridical proceedings may be noted; the one
concerning speedy course of Justice, wherein they may seem to justify the
Saxon way; but could never attain to their pace, in regard they yielded so much
time to Summons, Essoyns, etc. The other concerns election of Judges by the
parties; for this we find in the Laws of Henry the first.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the Militia during the Normans time.
THe power of Militia is either the Legislative or Executory power: the
Legislative power without contradiction rested in the grand Council of the
Kingdom, to whom it belonged to establish Laws for the government of the
Kingdom in time of peace. And this will appear in the preparation for War, the
levying of War, and managing thereof after it is levied. For the preparation,
it consists in levying men and munition, or of money. In all which
questionless will be a difference between raising of War by a King to revenge a
personal injury done to the King's own person, and a War raised by the whole
Kingdom, or representative body thereof, which is commonly done in defense of
public interest, and seldom in any offensive way, unless in recovery of a
right possession, either formerly lost, or as yet not fully settled. Now
although it be true, that seldom do injuries reflect upon the King's person
alone, but that the Kingdom will be concerned therein to endeavor a remedy;
yet because it may fall out otherwise, and Kings have taken occasion to levy
War of their own accord, in such case they could neither compel the persons of
their Subjects or their Estates to be contributary. And of this nature I take
the War levied by Harold against the Conqueror to be, wherein the greatest
part of the Kingdom was never engaged, nor therefore did it feel the dint of
the Conquerour's Sword at all; and in this case the Militia must be allowed to
such as bear the purse: nor can it be concluded to be the Militia of the
Kingdom, nor any part thereof, although the Kingdom may connive thereat. But to
set this consideration aside, as not co-incident at all with the Norman
engagements after they were crowned, and to take all the subsequent Wars to be
merely defensive of the right of the Crown, as in sober construction they will
appear to be: as touching the levying of money, it is evident that it lay only
in the power of the grand Council of the Kingdom; for otherwise the Laws were
settled that no Tax should be made or taken but such as were due in the
Confessor's time, as formerly has been showed. Secondly, for the preparing of
men and munition, it was done either by Tenure, or by special Law. As touching
Tenure, it was provided by way of contract, that those that held by
Knight Service should be ready with their Arms to assist the King for the
defense of the Realm: So as they were not bound by their Tenure to aid him in
any other cases. Ll. Gulielm. c. 57.
Others were also by especial Law of the Land bound to be ready for their
service in that kind: For all the Inhabitants of this Kingdom held their
Estates under a general service, which by common right they are bound to
perform, viz. in time of danger to join in defense of their Country: Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 59.
This is the common Fealty or Allegiance which all men owe; and which if
neglected or refused, renders the party guilty of Treason against his Country,
and his Estate under the penalty of forfeiture, according to the old Saxon Law
revived and declared by Henry the first. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 13.
Thus the Law made preparation for the War, both of Men and Arms. Castles and
Forts were likewise either first made by the order of the grand Council, or
otherwise allowed by them, for the defense of the Commons and the Kingdom; Ll.
Gulielm. cap. 61.
so was the Law of William the first. The levying and managing of the War must
not be denied de jure to belong to the representative body, so far as may
consist with the directory part, for that it is a main part of the Government
of the Kingdom in times of War: And therefore Henry the first, amongst his Laws
made in the ordinary course of Law-making, provideth for the ordering of men in
the Army in the field; and established a Law, that such as forsook their
Colors or Associates in the field, during the Battle, should be punished with
death, and forfeiture of his whole Estate. Nor yet can it be denied but that de
facto Kings of their own accord, and by secret Council, did direct therein;
either in the vacancy of Parliament, which was the general case of the first
times of the Norman Conqueror, and the whole Reign of William Rufus; or by
connivance of the grand Council, while they saw nothing done but what was well
done. Ll. Hen. 1. c, 13.
Nor can it be rationally said that Kings by such advice as they have (in the
recess of the grand Council) levying War in defense of the public according to
rules, do otherwise than their duty; or if the grand Council look on, see
nothing misgoverned, and say nothing, that they do other than is meet: For it
must be remembered, that Kings in their first original were rather Officers for
War than Peace; and so are holden by all Antiquity, and as Generals in War were
called Reges or Imperatores, by the Grecians, Romans, and Germans. And at such
times as War was concluded, at the general meeting of the people they chose
their Dux or Rex, call him which you please; and he being chosen, all bound
themselves to be at his command, and to defend his person. So as while a King
keeps within his place, in time of danger it is his duty first to stir
himself, and stir up the rest; to lead them and order them, as may be most for
the public defense, and to govern the Army by such Laws as are or shall be
established by order of the public Meeting, and in case of sudden exigencies
to use his own wits; and in all this is the common liberty no whit infringed,
in regard that all is for the public defense, to which the Knights are bound
by their Tenures, and all others by the Law. And this was this Kingdoms case in
the Normans time, that both Leaders and Soldiers, whether by election of the
people, or prescription, yet all served for the defense of the Kingdom. Nor
were they compellable to any other service inconsistent therewith, nor to stand
to any judgment in such cases differing from, or contrary to that of the
Parliament it self.

CHAP. LV. That the entry of the Normans into this Island, could not be by
Conquest.
THat in point of fact, the entry of the Normans into England was not by
Conquest, will sufficiently appear from what has been already noted. I shall
make one step further, and show, that as affairs then stood with the
Conqueror, it was impossible for him to merit that name against the stream of
Providence, that had pre-engaged him to three sorts of men, viz. the Normans,
the Clergy, and the Commons of England.

It must be taken for a ground, that Duke William must give all fair
correspondency to the Normans, considering they are Members of his own Body,
and the Arm of his Strength, without which he could do nothing. And it is not
less certain, that however the Sea divided the two Countries, yet long before
the arrival of the Army, M. West. An. 1072. Ll. Gulielm. cap. 55.
the Normans and Saxons were so well acquainted by the latter access of the
Danes, that partly by marriage and other interests, the Normans made so great a
party in England, as that party merited no less from the Duke in his entrance,
than those he brought with him: And therefore both they and their Allies in all
reason must expect such reward of their faithfulness to him, as the other had;
nor could the Duke deny the same, unless he had disclaimed his own interests,
whereof he had none to spare. Secondly, their merit from the Duke was
accompanied with no less mutual relation to his Army, being of the same blood
with themselves, and of ancient acquaintance; and as impossible it was for the
Duke to keep them from consociation with the mixed people, as to abstract the
mixed people each from other; one or both of which must be done, and the
Conquerours must be kept from incorporating with the conquered, or else the Law
of Conquest cannot hold. Thirdly, if these two had failed, yet had the Duke by
his manner of rewarding his Army, disabled himself from holding, however he
might seem to have by conquest. Thus was his gift of Manors, Lands, and
Franchises unto his Soldiers, completed with their ancient Rights and
Privileges in free service; otherwise it had been little better than a Trap to
bring his own men into bondage, who lately were free Soldiers under no better
than a Duke of their own election. And their Government in their own Country,
however big, yet had not brought forth a Sovereignty into the World; their Duke
no complete King, nor themselves so mean as Vassals; and it was equally
difficult for him to get up higher, as for them to stoop lower. And however, it
was dangerous now for the Duke to try masteries, unless he meant to hazard all,
and to change the substance for the shadow. Lastly, to lay them all aside, and
to take the Normans as in themselves considered, a People under such Laws and
Customs as were the same with the Saxon, and originally in them, and from them
derived into Normandy by Rollo, or some other; or take them as a People willing
to lay aside their own Law, as some Writers affirm, and more willing to take up
the Danish customs, which were also very nigh akin to theirs, and in part
settled by the Danes in that part of the Kingdom where themselves most resided:
It must be concluded, that a Government by Law was intended, and such a Law
that was no way cross to the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, but concurring
therewith; in every of which regards, the future Generations may justly claim
their Immunities as Successors and Heirs unto the Normans, albeit no Saxon
could have enjoyed or derived the same to Posterity.

A second sort of men that made the King incapable to hold by Conquest, was the
Clergy, a considerable part of the Kingdom in those days, whenas in every
Nation they grew checkmate; and in this Kingdom had well-nigh the one half of
the Knights fees, and thereby a principal part of the strength of the Kingdom,
besides the Consciences of them all: and for a Reserve, they had the Pope in
the rear, whose power in every Kingdom was little inferior to that of the
King's own, and therefore sufficient to stop an absolute Conquest, unless the
Clergy were first conquered. But the King came in upon great disadvantages in
both these regards: for whereas his pretense upon his entry was to advance
Justice principally toward the Clergy, who formerly were wronged by Harold, or
voiced so to be; this bound him from Injustice and Oppression. And furthermore,
the Pope had him in a double bond; one as Prince of the English Clergy, the
other as Judge of the Title of the Crown by the King's own Election; and that
by Sentence: for the King had merited of him, if not to hold the Crown it self
by Fealty to the Roman See, yet by such services, as that the Tripple-Crown
should be no loser. The King therefore must resolve to have no more to do with
the Church than will stand with the Pope's liking, unless he meaned to
adventure himself and all he had into the danger of the great Curse, of which
the King would seem more sensible than perhaps he was. Nor were those times of
the Church so moderate, as to bring forth Churchmen that would catch the good
will of the Laity by condescension; or Popes of that height of perfection, as
to part with one tittle of their great Titles, much less ought of that pitch of
power which they had griped, though it would save the World from Ruin. In all
which regards, the Norman Duke was too far inferior to attain by Conquest any
thing in this Kingdom, wherein the Pope or Clergy claimed ought to have or do.

A third sort of People avoided the dint of Conquest, either by timely siding
with the Norman, or by constant resisting of him, or by neutrality. Of the
first sort were many, both Lords and others, that by affinity and consanguinity
were become Englishmen to the Norman use; Hovedon l. 6.
others were purchased thereunto by the Clergy, that were zealous for the
Pope's honor, that was engaged in the Work. Of those likewise that were
resolute in the defense of the Liberty of their Country, Ingulfus 512.
there were not a few that purchased their Liberty, who otherwise might under
pretense of Treachery have forfeited the same to the rapacious humor of the
Conqueror. And this was not done only by Valor; for Normandy stood in a
tottering condition with their Duke, partly drawn away by the French, that
feared the Duke would be too strong for them; and partly declining their own
further aid, lest their Duke should be too great for the Duchy. It was
therefore wisdom in the Conqueror to settle the English aflairs in the fairest
way, to gain them for himself, who had been so brave against him. But the
greatest number, especially of the Commons, looked on while the game was
playing, as contented with the cast of the Dice, whatever it should be. These
were afterward by the King looked upon, not as Enemies (as the president of
Edwin of Sharneburn witnesses sufficiently) but such as either were, Gloss.
217.
or by fair carriage would be made his friends; and therefore he concluded them
under a Law of assurance, that they that had been so peaceable, should have and
enjoy their Lands as entirely and peaceably as they had formerly done before
his entry. To conclude therefore this point; if these three parties of the
English Normans, the English Clergy, the stout English, and the peaceable
English, be set aside from the Title of Conquest, it will be probable that not
one tenth part of the Kingdom were ever under other change than of the
Governor's own person.

CHAP. LVI. A brief Survey of the sense of Writers concernign the point of
Conquest.
THE clamours in story that the Conqueror altered and made Laws at pleasure,
brought in new Customs, molested the Persons and Estates of the People with
Depopulations, Extortions, and Oppressions, and others of that nature, have
made latter times to conclude his Government to be (as of a Conqueror) merely
arbitrary, and that he did what he list. How different this conclusion is from
the intent of those Writers, I know not; but if the King's Title and Government
was as a Conqueror, then was his Will the only Law, and can administer no
cause of complaint of wrong and oppression: and therefore if these be taken in
nature of complaints, they declare plainly that there was a Law in Title, or
else there could have been no transgression or cause to complain. But if the
Reader shall apprehend these passages in Writers to be no other than sober
Relations, then were it not amiss to consider from what sort of men these
Complaints or Relations do proceed, viz. from Writers that have been cloystered
men, little seen in affairs of State more than by common report and rumor;
prejudiced by the King's displeasure against their Cloisters, and therefore
apprehensive of matters in the saddest sense, and many times far beyond the
truth, and might as well be supposed to mis-relate, as to mistake. For if we
shall Normans as English, if the premises be rightly considered: and therefore
though somewhat be true of the plundering of houses of Religion, persecuting of
the English Nobility, deposing of Bishops and Abbots, whereof they speak; yet
all might be deservedly done in a legal way, and in execution of Justice,
whereof Histories are not altogether silent. Nevertheless, if in the
prosecution the King did show a kind of rage, and some rashness, it might be
imputed to the common infirmity of great men: for as Oppression upon those that
are inferior, makes them mad, so does Treachery against them that are
superior make them little other; especially if they be overtaken with a fit of
passion in the instant, or their minds wrapped into a whirlpool of affairs.

But the change of Laws makes the greater noise; wherein what change times, in
calling those things new, which were anciently used in England, before Normandy
was in a condition of a State. Yet if this should be granted, and that there
were such change of Laws as is pretended, it makes nothing to the point of
Conquest, so long as the new Laws are made by advice of Common Council, and for
the common good; and so long as they are established to be Rules for
Government. I remember it is affirmed by some of those ancient Writers, That
the Duke or King would have brought in the Customs of Norway, but the earnest
Mediation of the English prevailed against it: and this evinceth two things to
my opinion: First, that there was question made what Law should be established.
Secondly, that notwithstanding the interest that the Normans had in the
Kingdom, they could not prevail to bring in the whole body of their Law, or of
the Customs of Norway; which were not only the prima materia of their Law, but
also in kind had a settling at that very time in those places of this Kingdom
where the Danes had their principal seat: and therefore not altogether strange
to the Saxons themselves. The sum of which will be this, That upon debate a Law
must be settled, and that not the Law of the Conquerour's own Will, nor the Law
that suits with his Desire; but the ancient Law of the Kingdom: And therefore
if at any time the unquietness of some of the English brought the King to some
thoughts of Arbitrary Rule, and to shake off the clog of the Saxon Law, it was
long e're it stirred, and sprang up too late to raise the Title of Conquest,
and withered too soon to settle it.

As touching the change of Customs (for that also is imputed to the Conqueror)
it cannot be denied but some alteration might be in matters of smaller
consideration; yet are the Writers not without mistake in the particular
instances: For whereas they tell us that the Conqueror took away the custom of
Gavel-kind, and brought the custom of descent to the eldest Son; and that Kent
saved their Liberties, and continued this custom of Gavel-kind: I shall not
contend about the Liberties of Kent, but must, till I see better reason, hold
the opinion of the change of Inheritance to be a mere conceit. For (besides
what has been already said concerning that custom of Gavel kind) if we believe
Glanvil, the difference was between Lands holden by Knight's-service, and in
Socage; the first of which in his time, Lib. 7. cap. 3.
by ancient custom, always descended to the eldest: and those Lands that were
holden in Socage (if not partible by custom, in which case they went equally to
all the Sons) went by custom in some places to the eldest, in other places to
the youngest; so as the Rule of Inheritance in the Norman times was custom, as
well as in former times. And furthermore, if the custom of Gavel-kind had been
the general custom of this Nation, the King by his change had contradicted his
own Prerogative, and granted as great a Liberty to his Subjects as could have
been invented: For had the custom of Gavel-kind happened upon the Lands in
Knight Service, it had brought all the Sons under the Law of Wardship, and had
made a ready way to enthral all men of Worth, and undo all Husbandry; the first
whereof had been as advantageous to the King's private interest, as both
destructive to the public.

Nor is it clear from any Author of credit, that the Normans changed the
Tenures of Lands; albeit that it cannot be denied but such Lands as he had by
forfeiture, or otherwise, were in his own power to dispose upon what Tenure he
pleased: for as well before the Normans time, as long after, Tenures were like
as the Services were, all at the Will of the Donor; and were of as many
Individuals almost as the minds of the Owners. Some being of more general
regard and public use, are recorded amongst the grounds of English Laws;
Littlet.
none of which appear to me to be of Norman original, although they received
their names according to that Dialect.

The next thing objected, is the change of Language; which thing, some
Conqueror, as rather proves that he was put to his shifts. Nevertheless, the
thing tastes so much of Spleen, as it might occasion distrust of other
relations concerning this subject. For besides that it is nonsense for a
Conqueror to entitle himself by a cheat, where he has an elder Title by
Conquest; I shall in full answer to that calumny, insert a passage of an
Historian that was in the continual view of public affairs in those times, who
speaking of the Conqueror, Ingulfus.
says, That he commended the Confessor's Laws to his Justices, in the same
Language wherein they were wont formerly to be written, lest through ignorance
the people might rashly offend. And another Author says, M. Paris. fragm.
Gulielm.
That the King had a desire to learn the English Tongue, that he might the
better know their Law, and judge according thereto. It is probable
nevertheless, that the Laws were in the Norman Tongue; and it is no less likely
that the Pleadings, in real Actions especially, were also in the same Language;
else must the Normans be put to School to learn English, upon peril of loss of
their Estates. But that either the written Laws were wholly concluded into the
Norman Tongue, or that the public pleading of Causes by word of mouth in all
Actions where the issue was left to the Country, were in any other Language
than English, no advised Reader will conceive: seeing it had been a madness for
an English Jury to pass their Verdict in any case wherein it is likely many of
them understood scarce a syllable of the Norman Language, much less ought of
the matter upon which their Verdict should be grounded. Add hereunto, that it
is not likely but the Conqueror inhibited the use of the English Language in
all matters of public Record, inasmuch as the Charters made by him to
corporate Towns and Franchises, were sometimes in the Saxon, more generally in
the Latin, but seldom or never in the Norman Dialect; and that Pleadings and
Indictments were entered in like manner in the Latin Tongue, as formerly by an
old custom brought in by the Clergy was used: for the Clergy, who had gotten
the Key of Knowledge and Law into their own custody, laid it up it that
Language whereof the Commons had little knowledge, that they might thereby be
enforced to depend upon these men for Justice, as well as for Piety. The
Normans therefore either found it too hard to alter the former custom in such
cases, or else thought it the wisest way to choose the Latin as a third
Language, indifferent as well to the Normans as Saxons, and best understood of
any foreign Tongue besides: and yet endeavored to bring both Peoples into one
Language, as they were intended to be one People; and to press the use of the
Norman Tongue in public affairs, so far as might consist with good Government
and Justice, leaving time and occasion to work the issue; which doubtless was
much, and had been more, had the Norman Race continued in the Throne. But
falling out otherwise, the English blood prevailed in the head, and the
Language continued possession, mixed only with some Norman words, as the
people also were a mixed people: So as the Language was not changed, though it
was altered.

Normans did impose a new custom called Coverfeu; and it is thought by some to
be a mere Vassalage, that every man at the noise of the Bell every night, must
put out both Fire and Candle; and yet it is a matter of so small concernment,
that (being in its own nature convenient) Scotland received it without such
coercion: and it can be reputed for no other than a seasonable advice, which
any Corporation in time of danger might order within their own Precinct,
without transgressing the Liberty of the Subjects. Of less consequence is that
change, which is alleged was brought in by the Normans in the sealing of Deeds
of Conveyance, by setting a print upon Wax annexed to the Deed, which formerly
was wont to be by setting a print upon the blank at the end of the Deed; and
yet it is looked upon by some as a Trophy of Conquest or absolute Government.
Concerning which, I will not dispute whether the Normans first brought in this
course, but shall rest in this, That the King being about to complete the unity
of the Laws in the superstructure as well as in the fundamentals, if herein and
in some other particulars the English submitted to the Normans, they likewise
stooped to the English Law in other things: And therefore such Concurrences
ought not to be imputed unto a conquering power, but unto moderation amongst a
company of wise men.

Thus having glanced at the changes of Property, Laws, Tenures, Language, and
some Customs, we come to that which is the main occasion of all these
Complaints; I mean, unlawful Taxes, Afforrestings, and other such Oppressions
upon the Estates of the People: concerning which I purpose not to contend; for
much thereof is like to be true. The Norman Kings (especially the two Williams)
were under continual occasion of Expense, many Wars, more Provocations, which
kept them ever in Action, and that wrought their spirits into an immoderate
heat, little inferior unto Rage; and so they might soon out-reach their
bounds, and sit heavy on the People: and in such occasions no man escaped,
Norman nor English, Clergie-man nor Layman; nor did the Kings themselves come
off such gainers, but that they might sometimes put up their gettings into
their own eyes, and see never a whit the worse. And yet to do them right, they
were not always of such sad influence, but had their lucida intervalla;
especially he that had the least cause, I mean the Conqueror, who certainly
was a man of a serious regard; and did not only remit sometimes his Rigor in
exacting where he ought not, but also forbear to require that which he had some
color to demand: For whereas the Dane-guelt was left unto him in the nature of
an Annuity, he was contented to turn it into a sum in gross, and to demand it
only Cum ab exteris gentibus bella vel opiniones bellorum insurgebant; Hoveden.
and it was then done consultis magnatibus. These things thus considered, might
have mollified somewhat the Pens of angry Writers; and where they fail, may be
caution to Readers to consider occasions and dispositions of Princes; and so
long as Laws hold in Title, to construe the irregularities of Princes to be but
as steps out of the path to avoid a little dirt, that a man may get home the
more cleanly; and therefore rightly can derive no other Title of absolute
Sovereignty to their successors, than to hold by infirmity. And thus the
Government under the Normans, at the worst, was but like that of childhood,
following sudden and present desires, not wise enough to plot for absolute
Monarchy, nor to keep off a Polity, which still rooted underneath; though the
fruit, while it was now green, was harsh and unpleasant.

I shall conclude this Norman Discourse with this Advertisement: That
notwithstanding the words Conqueror and Conquest have often fallen from my
Pen, and hereafter may do the like; yet can I see no reason why diverse
succeeding Kings, coming to the Crown by argument of the Sword, and not by
right of Descent, may not deserve the Laurel as well as the first Norman King;
only because Fame has fancied him that Title, under a kind of prescription, I
do the like.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Government during the Reigns of Steven, Henry the 2.
Richard the 1. and John. And first of their Titles to the Crown, and
dispositions in Government.
I Have cut out this Portion of One hundred twenty and five years (containing
the Reigns of these Kings) apart from their Successors, in regard of their
Titles; all of them being under one general Climate, and breathing one air of
Election and Compact between them and the People. Now was the Issue male of the
Stock of Normandy quite wasted* I mean, in relation to succession by
inheritance: for although it was the lot of Henry the first to have many
Children, yet it was not his happiness to have many Lineal, nor to hold what he
had; nor of them all was there left above one that might pretend to the Crown,
and it a Daughter, who was the great Grandmother to all the succeeding Kings
till this day. Steven.
Only King Steven, like an unruly Ghost, coming in upon the Stage, troubled
the Play during his time. This Daughter of Henry the first was married to the
Emperor Henry the fourth: and surviving him, was in her Father's lifetime
acknowledged to be his Heir, the Sea having formerly swallowed up the remainder
of his hope: Unto her the Lords swear Fealty, as to the next Successor in the
Throne after the decease of her Father; being led thereto by the instigation of
her Father, whose Conscience told him, that the Title to the Crown by
inheritance was weakened by his own precedent, himself coming to the same by
Election of the People, contrary to the Title of his Brother Robert.
Nevertheless, this was not the first time that the English Crown refused to be
worn by practice; for Henry the first being dead, Steven, the younger Son to a
younger Sister of Henry the first, put up head; who being of the Royal Stem, a
Man, and a brave Soldier, by the ancient course of the Saxons, had Title
enough to be thought upon in a doubtful Succession. Besides, he was a rich man,
and had enough to raise up his thoughts to high undertakings; had a Brother a
Bishop and Legate to the Pope here in England, one who was of a high spirit,
and vast power; advantages enough to have quickened a much duller spirit than
his was, who was a Son of a Daughter to William the Conqueror. And to make him
yet more bold, he had the upper ground of the Heir, who was a woman,
disadvantaged by a whispering of wilfulness, and customary Government like an
Empress: which was too high a sail for an English bottom, wherein so precious a
Treasure as the Subjects Liberties was to be shipped. Thus provided, Steven
stepped up to the English Throne, and with protestations of good Government,
entered, and made up the match both for Crown and Scepter, the People waving the
Title both of Empress and Heir. The pretensions of the E. of Bloys elder
Brother to Steven, gave way to the common Law and Liberties of the Subject, to
fasten, root, and gather strength, after the violence of the Norman blasts was
out of breath; thus making way over Hedge and Ditch of all Oaths, till the King
was quietly settled in the Throne.

Quietly, said I? that I must retract; for he never had quiet during his life,
though generally he was victorious, and did as much as a King could do, that
had the passions of a man and Soldier, to give the Subjects content. The true
cause whereof, was an error in the tying of the Knot, wherein he neither
became theirs, nor they his; for the Fealty that was sworn to him, was but
conditional, and eousque: and yet the King's promises were absolute, and better
observed than the Peoples were, possibly because his Engagements were more. For
besides his Protestations, the King pledged his Brother the Legate to the
people, and mortgaged himself to his Brother; and to boot, gave both to the
Clergy and Barons liberty to build and hold Castles for their private
security: The issue whereof may remind, that too much countersecurity from the
King to the people, is like so many Covenants in Marriage, that make room for
jealousy, and are but seeds of an unquiet life. And thus it befell this King's
Reign. His first troubles are brought in by Historians, as if they dropped from
Heaven, yet probably came immediately from without, viz. from beyond Sea, where
the Empress was: for as the King's Engagements were in their first heat on the
one side, so was also the Empress's Choler on the other side; and therefore
might make the first assault. And the King's first success therein falling out
prosperously for him, gave him a conceit that he was strong enough to encounter
his own Covenant, although in truth he invaded but the skirts thereof; I mean,
that collateral security of Castles: for by experience he now feels that they
are blocks in his way, he must therefore have them into his own power. But the
Clergy (loath to forgo their pawn till they had their full Bargain; for now
they were working hard for investitures of the Mitred Clergy, under the
patronage of a Legate that had the King in bonds) acted their parts so well, as
they engaged the Nobility for their liberty of Castles; in which Achievement
the King was taken prisoner. The Empress betakes her self to the Clergy, and
by the Legate's means, procures a kind of Election to be Queen: But she sick of
the Woman's humor, and thinking too much of the Empress, and too little of the
Queen, and forgetting that the English Crown would not fit an Empress, unless
she could fit her head first to it, choked her own Title by Prerogative, and
so let the Crown slip through her own hands; which fell upon the head of Steven
again, who maintained it by his Sword, after by Composition, and then died a
King. And thus like a Vapor mounted up by the Clergy, tossed by Tempests for
a time, and at length falling, he gave way to the Crown to have its free course
to the Empress's Son by Geoffery Plantagenet.

This was Henry the second, Henry 2d.
the most accomplished for Wisdom, Courage, and Power, of all his Predecessors;
and one that wanted nothing but purpose, to have undone what the foregoing
Princes had done, in the settling of the Liberties of the People: for the
Subjects were tired with the unquiet former times, and the Clergy in
distraction through the Schism in the Popedom between Victor the fourth, and
Alexander the third; and very unfitting all were to dispute the point of
Prerogative with so mighty a Prince. And it was the wisdom of God to order his
affairs so, as that he was not very fit to dispute with the people in that
case: for his Title to the Crown was not very excellent, being neither Heir to
the last King that Reigned, nor to the last of that Title, I mean to Henry the
first; but Son only to the Empress, who was now alive, and by descent was to be
preferred before all other. His Title therefore is clearly by compact and
agreement made between the Lords, King Steven, and himself; all being then
ready to try the right by the Sword, to that, to which none of them had any
right at all at that time, but by the favor of the people. Nor did the King
ever after dispute the strength of this Title, although before he died, his
Mothers death conveyed over to him what right of descent soever was consistent
with the Law of the Crown: nor did occasion favor him thereto; for as it is
never seen that any man is honored by God with many advantages, without
proportionable employment for the same, so it befell with this King: His great
Territories in France brought jealousy in the rear; and thence strife and
contention with France, enough to turn his thoughts from waxing wanton against
his own people; and therefore his wisdom taught him to prefer peace at home to
the chief of his Prerogative; to become somewhat popular, and yet to lose
nothing of a King thereby. His way was to keep the Churchmen down, that had
during his predecessors time grown, whether more obstinate against the King, or
insolent over the people, is hard to judge; and in this he had the people to
friend, and might have prevailed much more than he did, but that the people
feared the threats of Rome more than he; and he (if not guilty of Becket's
death) more the conceit of Fame than there was cause. These concurring with
unnatural troubles from most unthankful Sons, made that spirit of his to fail,
that formerly knew no peer; as it is often seen that the most generous spirits
are sooner quelled with shame and grief, than with fear of any danger
whatsoever. Toward his Lay-Subjects he was more regardant for the settling of
Laws, and executing of Justice; so as some have thought him the first source of
our English Laws; others more truly, the first Mecaenas since the Conquest,
that brought on the springtime of a settled Commonwealth; and therefore left
this fair testimony, by his putting forth that Primrose of English Laws, under
the name of Glanvil; letting all men know, that thenceforth England would no
more veil itself in an unknown Law, but explain itself unto the World to be a
regular Government. Such was the King's Idea; yet was he touched with so much
of the common infirmity of Kings, as showed him to be a man; especially in his
old age, being laden with Military Affairs, wherein he had been long
exercised, he had contracted some shifting courses of a Soldier, in gathering
Money and Soldiers somewhat out of the roadway of an English King; and led an
ill example to future Ages; nor had he other salve for this wound, Hoveden. 348.
but that it was for the honor of Christian faith, and for the sake of
Jerusalem.

Next comes in Richard the first, Henry the Second's Son both in birth and
courage; Richard the First.
yet was his behavior to his Father such, that his meritorious Holy War could
never wipe it out of the Calendar of story. His entrance was upon an Election
made in his Fathers lifetime, and the same confirmed by receiving of Homage
from the Peers. The sad troubles that this Election amongst other things
occasioned to his Father in his old age, show plainly that Richard trusted not
to the Title of Inheritance; M. Paris.
nor the French King (that took his part) unto the English custom, for the
possession of the Crown, but all must be done in the Life of the Father; that
must secure the Government to the Son when the Father is dead. And thus is he
entered upon the Throne, not as Heir, but as Successor to his Father, yea rather
as Survivor, taking possession of what was by special compact conveyed to him
by the means of his Father in his lifetime, though sore against his will, if
Writers speak true. As his entrance was, it promised a better Government than
followed; for though it was for the most part hidden in the Womb, as himself
did subsist in another World; yet by a secret providence he was given over to
the election of ill Deputies; and therefore he was not well beloved, however
dear he was to this Nation. A third part of his Government was spent in a calm
with Pope, Clergy, Commons, and all Nations that were not Infidels, upon
conscience it seems that he ought not to be troubled, who adventured his person
so bravely in the Holy War. But above all, he was the Clergies darling, not
only for his adventure in the Holy Land, but now much more in his return by his
imprisonment in Germany; and therefore they sluck close to him in his absence,
not only in maintenance of his right to the C^own (whereto some made claim, and
his own Brother John did more) but emptied themselves to the utmost for his
delivery, which they effected, to the envy of the French, and such as longed
for his downfall here in England. The King comes like the Sunrising, scattering
his Brothers designs by his very view; then returns his thoughts for France,
where he spent the rest of a restless life: and as his entry upon the Throne
was unnatural (for he made his way upon his Fathers Hearse) so was his Reign
full of troubles, and his end not unlike; for it was violent, and by the hand
of his own subject; and so ended his Reign, that scarce had any beginning.

Next comes in King John to act his part, John.
according to his entry, hand over head; whether called by a people scared with
the noise of Succession by inheritance; or such as thought it not convenient
nor safe in a stirring time to have a Child to be their King; or lastly, led by
an interest that John the youngest Son of Henry the second had by woeful
experience obtained amongst the Lords, or some or all concurring; it is clear,
they crossed the way of inheritance, waved Arthur's Title, who was Heir to
Richard the first, and by him also appointed to succeed, being then but a
Child; and they chose John, a man of War, trained up in the Government of
Ireland, which made way for his active spirit; and well seen in the Government
of England, which might have made him wise; and under these conceits they were
willing to forget his oppression in Ireland, his Treachery against his Lord and
King in England, set the Crown upon his head; and in conclusion acted the
Tragedy of Abimelech in English, wherein the Cedar was rooted up, and the
Bramble trodden down.

The general temper of his Government shows, that though the King must be
thought sober, yet the man was mad, for he hawked at all manner of game,
France, Scotland, England, Laity, Clergy, spared not the Pope himself, scorned
to stoop to occasion; all which he did by the strength of the name of a King:
till at length, being well cuft and plumed, he was fain to yoke his lawless
will under the grand Charter, depose his Crown at the Popes foot, and instead
of a King, became little better than a chief Lord in England. Thus although
Richard the First forgot this man's disloyalty, yet God remembered it: for the
King having gotten the Pope upon the hip, and put him to his last shift to stir
up the French to set his curse on work, was by a hidden providence conquered in
the midst of a Royal Army, without view of Enemy, or other weapon than a mere
noise; his Nobility (either suspecting all would be gone to Rome, or expecting
that the King would not deny them their own, seeing he had been so profuse in
giving away that which was not his) demand that their Liberties might be
confirmed; but he being loath to be mated by his Nobles, though he was
overmatched by the Pope, arms himself with the Popes curse, and the Lords
themselves with the Frenchmens power; thus the Tables are turned, and the
French playing an after-game to gain to themselves the Crown of England, after
they saw the death of a Warlike King, discovered their design before it was
ripe; and in the conclusion were beaten out of the Kingdom by a Child.

It is not worth inquiry what the King allowed or disallowed; for it was his
course to repent of any thing done contrary to his present sense, and made it
his chief principle in policy to have no principle but desire; wherein he
triumphed too long, by reason of the contentions between the Clergy and the
Laity; which coming nigh unto the push of pike, and the King ready for the
spoil of both; the Barons and Clergy suddenly close their files, and like a
stone-wall stood firm to each other, till the King wearied with succesless
labor, was glad to give and take breath, confirmed the Liberties of the people
by his Charter, which is now called the Magna Charta, M. Paris. An. 1215.
for substance, and gave such collateral security for performance on his part,
as did let the World know the thing was as just, as himself had been unjust.
The worst point in the case was, that the people got their own by a kind of re
disseisin; a desperate remedy for a desperate condition, wherein the
Commonwealth then lay between life and death, upon the rack of the will of a
King, that would be controuled by nothing but his own appetite, and was in the
end devoured by it.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the state of the Nobility of England from the Conquest, and
during the Reign of these several Kings.
UNder the Title of the Nobility of England, I shall comprehend all such as are
of the greatest eminency for birth, or wisdom and learning, and advancement
into place of Government and Honor. These were in the Saxons times the flower
of the people, flourishing only from the honor that ascended from beneath;
their deportment then was full of cheer and safety to the people: after that
Royalty sprung up, the influence thereof upon them exhaled such a reciprocal
interest back again, as made them less regardful of their own root; whereas we
see the more mature flowers are the more propense to turn head and look
downward to their own original. This distemper was yet much worse by the coming
in of the Normans, whose Nobility, besides their Titles of honor in their own
Country, obtained by custom such command and power amongst the meaner sort,
being Soldiers under them in time of the service in the field, that (when the
Wars had breathed out their last) neither of them could forget, or were very
careful to lay aside. This was observed by Kings, and advantage espied to climb
to the top of Monarchy by the help of these great men; whom if they could make
their own, all would be theirs; and therein they had prevailed much more than
they did, if they had been wise enough to have maintained them in unity; but in
that failing, the Kings were necessitated to take parties, and serve the
Nobility to save the main: and thus continued they a considerable party in the
Government of this Kingdom from the Normans, for the space of two hundred years
well-nigh, to the prejudice both of the growth of the Prerogative of Kings, and
Liberties of the Commons; and benefit of none but the Lords, who in those
unquiet times were the chief Commanders in the field. This error of the Kings
was soon espied, but could not be avoided: it is natural to man to be proud,
and to such to fall into contention; another course therefore is taken, viz. to
raise up some so high as may overtop all, and keep them under: nor is it
altogether without reason, for Kings are no ubiquitaries, and some must bear
their power where they cannot be personally present; yet it is dangerous to
bestow too much upon one man, for there is no man fitting to be a King, but
himself that is a King; and where Kings are immoderate in bestowing power, it
many times works much woe to the people, and not seldom sorrow to the Kings
themselves. The place of the chief Justice was in show but one Office, yet in
these times was in nature of the Kings Lieutenant General throughout the
Kingdom. A power and work too great for any one man in the World, that can make
no Deputies to manage it; and yet in those times you shall meet with one man
made up of an Archbishop, a Legate, and chief Justice of England; Hoveden. 443.
375. Nubr. lib. 4. cap. 14.
or a Bishop, a Lord Chancellor, a Legate, and chief Justice of England: and a
strange kind of Government must that needs be, wherein the Servants Throne is
above his Masters, and a Subject shall have a plenitudinary power beyond that
which his Lord and King had, or, as the times then were, was capable of. By
these and such like pluralities, the great men of England kept the Commons
below, and themselves above; and probably rendered the temper of the Government
of this Kingdom more Aristocratical than in after-Ages. And if their personal
authority was of such value, how much rather in their joint assembly or court
of Council! concerning which I must agree, that as in their original in
Germany, they did consult and determine of the meaner matters, that is to say,
of matters concerning Property; and therefore were in their most ordinary work
Meetings of Judges, or Courts of Judicature, and also matters of defensive War,
because themselves were the Commanders: and lastly, in matters of sudden
concerment to the State, not only to serve as eyes to foresee, but to provide
also if they can, or otherwise to call in the aid of the peoples advice; so
also they continued this course, and it may be now and then (as all Councils
have done) strained their endeavors beyond their reach, especially since the
Normans entrance: and therefore I shall not deny but that they alone with the
King, and without the Commons, have made many Laws and Constitutions, some of
which now are called Statutes, (although many of them in truth are no other
than Rules for Judicature, which ordinary Courts may frame; or Judgments in
particular cases, such as are the constitutions at Clarindon in Henry the
Second's time) and many other Laws which are reported to be made between the
King and his Lords. Nor can I look upon such Laws otherwise, than as upon
Judgments in Courts of Justice in new points of controversy, grounded upon
ancient grounds, which properly are not new Laws, but the ancient Rule applied
to new particulars; and being so published to the World, may bear the name of
Laws, Ordinances, Constitutions, or Judgments; the word Statute being of latter
times taken up, and used in a more restrictive sense: of which, more in their
due place. Now that this Court was a settled Court of Judicature, and so used,
may appear, Hoveden. An. 1175.
in that Fines were levied therein, and Writs of Right determined; as in the
great Case between the two Kings of Navar and Castile, referred to the Judgment
of Henry the second, Ibid.
and tried in this Court, it is said, that the Trial was by Plea, and if need
were, by Battle. The Judges in this Court were the Baronage of England; for the
entry of Judgment in that great Case, is thus: Comites and Barons Regalis
Curiae Angliae adjudicaverunt, etc. So as though doubtless many were absent,
some being enemies, others discontented, others upon other occasions; yet all
might claim their Votes as Barons. The President over all the rest was the
Chief Justice, as if the King were present then himself; and by him was the
Sentence or Judgment declared, according to the entry in that Case aforesaid,
Habito Concilio cum Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus, adjudicavimus, etc. The
honor of this Court was great, so long as the Lords had liberty or care to
attend thereon: but when Kings began to have private interests, they would have
these to be more private Councils; which weakened the esteem of Conclusions that
there passed, and reduced the honor thereof scarce to the degree of a
Conventicle. And by this means the necessity of calling together the whole
Body-Representative, was made more frequent, the power of the Nobility of
England decayed, and this Court forfeited all its Juridical power to the three
Courts at Westminster, viz. the King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer;
saving still the supreme Judicature unto the grand Convention of Estates in
Parliament, where all the Lords had liberty of meeting, and free voting without
impeachment.

CHAP. LIX. Of the state of the Clergy, and their power in this Kingdom from
the Normans time.
IF the Prerogative of Kings prevailed not to its utmost pitch during the
Normans time, it did much less in these times succeeding, wherein the Clergy
took up the Bucklers, and beat both King and Commons to a Retreat; themselves
in the interim remaining sole Triumphers in the Field. In their first Adventure
they paced the Stage, no man appearing to oppose: Steven then was King by their
leave, and their Bond-servant; and they might have any thing, sobeit they would
suffer him to enjoy his Crown. His Brother the Bishop was the Pope's servant,
the Church-mens patron, and the King's surety; in whom the Clergies favor to
the King, and his good behavior toward them and all men, concentred. Besides
all this, the King was but so upon condition; and there being no better Title
than Election, Conscience in those times was well enough satisfied in the
breach of Covenant on their part, when on the King's part it was first broken.
All this the King saw full well; and therefore what can he deny to such
Benefactors? Vacancies of Churches he readily parts with; and his right of
investiture of the Mitred Clergy he dispensed: so as he opened the way to his
Successors of an utter dereliction of that Privilege. He sees his Brother the
Legate deflower the Crown of England, by maintaining Appeals from the Courts in
England unto the Court of Rome, and he says nothing; he is contented with the
stump of the Crown and (with Saul) if he be but honored above or before all
others of the people, it is enough: But the Clergy, like the barren Womb, has
not yet enough. The King has allowed them Castles; and too late he sees, that
instead of being Defenses against the Imperial power of the Empress, they are
now made Bulwarks against the lawful power of a King: he had therefore
endeavored to get them down, and gotten some of them into his power. The King
himself is now summoned to answer this before a Legatine Council, wherein his
Brother is President: That was a bold adventure in them; but it was extreme
rashness in him to appear and plead the Cause of the Crown of England before a
Conventicle of his own Subjects. And thus to secure Rome of Supremacy in
Appeals, he suffers a recovery thereof against his own person in a Court of
Record; and so loses himself, to save the Crown. Thus are Synods mounted up on
Eagles wings; they have the King under them, they will next have the Crown.
Within a while Steven is taken prisoner: The Empress perceiving the power of
the Clergy, betakes her case to them now assembled in Synod; they now proud of
the occasion (and conceiting that both Law and Gospel were now under their
decree) publish, That the Election of the King belongs unto them; and by them
the Empress is elected Queen in open Synod, Steven's Brother leading the game:
and had she been as willing to have admitted of the Laws as Steven was, she had
so continued, and had left a strange President in the English Government for
Posterity. But the Citizens of London, who had made the way to the Throne for
Steven, reduced the Synod to sober consideration, and helped the King's return
unto his Throne again; wherein he continued a friend to the Clergy during the
rest of his time.

Henry the second succeeded him: as brave a man as he, but beyond him in Title
and Power; and one that came to the Crown without preengagement by Promise or
Covenant, saving that which was proper for a King. A man he was that knew full
well the Interests in the Government, the growing power of the Clergy, and the
advantages lost from the Crown by his Predecessor: And to regain these, he
smooths his way toward these braving men, M. Paris. An. 1155.
speaks fair, profers fair; he would act to increase the bounds of the Church:
He would have the Pope's leave to do him a kindness; and sobeit he might gain
an interest in Ireland, he would take it from the Pope, who pretended, as Heir
of Jesus Christ, to have the Islands and utmost parts of the Earth for his
possession; and, as if he meaned to be as good to the Church as Steven was, and
much better, he desires the Pope's kindness for the confirmation of the
Liberties and Customs of his Crown and Kingdom; and no sooner desired than
obtained. This was a second Example of a King of England, but the first of an
English King, that sought to Rome for Right in the Crown; and thereby taught
the Pope to demand it as a privilege belonging to the Tripple. Crown. Nor was
Henry the second less benign to the Churchmen, till he found by his
dear-bought experience that he had nourished Scorpions; and would have
suppressed them, but was rather suppressed himself; as in that shameful success
of the death of Becket may appear, wherein he yielded the day up to the
Clergy, who formerly scorned to stoop to the greatest Potentate on Earth. The
State of Kings is to be pitied, who must maintain a politic affection above,
and sometimes against Nature it self, if they will escape the note of Tyranny
in their Undertakings, Constit. at Clarindon.
and of a feeble Spirit in their Sufferings: For the King having made Becket
Chancellor of England, and then Archbishop of Canterbury, he became so great,
that his Feathers brushed against the King's Crown; who begins to rouse up
himself to maintain his Honor and Prerogative Royal. The Bishops side with
Becket: the King intending the Person, and not the Calling, singles out the
Archbishop, and hunts him to soil at Rome; yet before he went, the King puts
the points of his Quarrel in Writing, and made both Archbishop and Bishops
sign them as the Rights of his Crown, and as the Consuetudines Avitae: But
Becket repenting, went to Rome and obtained the Pope's pardon and blessing, the
rest of the Bishops yielding the Cause.

The particulars in debate were set down in the nature of Laws or
Constitutions, commonly called the Constitutions at Clarindon; which show the
prevailing humor that then overspread the body of the Clergy in those days:
and therefore I shall sum them up as follows.

Rights of Advowsons shall be determined in the King's Court. cap. 1.


This had been quarrelled from the first Normans time, but could never be
recovered by the Clergy. Before the Normans time, the County-courts had them,
and there they were determined before the Bishop and Sheriff; but the
Ecclesiastical Causes being reduced to Ecclesiastical Courts, and the Sheriff
and the Laity sequestered from intermeddling, the Normans, according to the
custom in their own Country, reduced also the trial of rights of Advowsons unto
the Supreme Courts: partly because the King's Title was much concerned therein,
and the Norman Lords no less; but principally in regard that Rights require the
consideration of such as are the most learned in the Laws.

Rights of Tithes of a Lay-fee, cap. 2.
or where the Tenure is in question, belong to the King's Court.

Pleas of Debts by troth-plight, cap. 3.
belong to the King's Court.

These were Saxon Laws, and do intimate, that it was the endeavor of the
Clergy to get the sole cognizance of Tithes, because they were originally
their dues; and of Debts by troth-plight, because that Oaths seemed to relate
much to Religion, whereof they held themselves the only Professors.

The King's Justice shall reform Errors of the Ecclesiastical Courts, cap. 4.
and Crimes of Ecclesiastical persons.

Appeals shall be from Archdeacons Courts to the Bishops Courts, cap. 5.
and thence to the Archbishops Courts, and thence to the King's Court, and
there the Sentence to be final.

No man that ever was acquainted with Antiquity, Constit. at Clarindon.
will question that these were received Laws in the Saxons time; nor did the
Clergy ever quarrel them, till the Normans taught them by courtesy done to
Rome, to expect more from Kings than for the present they would grant; whereof
see Cap. 47. But King Steven that was indebted to the Clergy for his Crown,
and could not otherwise content them, parted with this Jewel of Supreme power
in Causes Ecclesiastical to the Roman cognizance, as has been already noted;
but Henry the second would have none of this Cheat at so easy a rate. This
struck so smart a blow, as though the Popedom had but newly recovered out of a
paralytick Schism, yet (seeing it so mainly concerned the maintenance of the
Tripple-Crown) Alexander the Pope having lately been blooded against a brave
Emperor, made the less difficulty to stickle with a valiant King; who is
conclusion was fain to yield up the Bucklers, and let the Pope hold what he had
gotten, notwithstanding against this Law, and all former Law and Custom. And
thus the Popes Supremacy in Spiritual Causes, is secured both by a Recovery and
Judgment, Constit. at Clarindon.
by confession thereupon.

The King shall have vacancies of Churches, cap. 6.
and power to elect by his secret Council: The Party elected shall do homage
salvo ordine, and then shall be consecrated.

This certainly was none of the best, yet it was a custom not altogether
against reason, although not suitable to the opinion of many; yet we meet two
alterations of the ancient custom. First, that the election shall be by the
King and secret Council; whereas formerly the election of Bishops and
Archbishops was of such public concernment, as the Parliament took cognizance
thereof; and (that which was worse) a Council was hereby allowed, called a
secret Council, which in effect is a Council to serve the King's private aims;
and unto this Council, power given in the ordering of the public affairs,
without advice of the public Council of Lords, which was the only Council of
State in former times. And thus the public affairs are made to correspond with
the King's private interest, which has been the cause of much irregularity in
the Government of this Island ever since. The second alteration rests in the
salvo, which is a clause never formerly allowed, unless by practice in Steven's
time, whenas there was little regard of the one or the other: Nor does it
concur with the file of story, Constit. at Clarindon.
that it should be inserted within these Constitutions, seeing that Writers
agree it was the chief cause of quarrel between him and Becket, who refused
submission without the clause, and at which the King stuck with the Archbishop
for the space of seven years, which was six years after the Constitutions were
consented unto, and concluded upon.

No Clergie-man or other may depart the Realm, cap. 7.
without the King's License.

It is a Law of Nations, and must be agreed on all hands, that no reason of
State can allow dispensations therein, especially in a doubtful Government,
where the Supremacy is in dispute: and this the wilful Archbishop never
questioned, till he questioned all Authority, but in order to his own; for but
the year before, when he went to Turonn to the general Council upon summons, M.
Paris.
he first obtained License from the King before he went.

No Sentence of Excommunication or Interdiction to pass against the King's
Tenant or any Minister of State, cap. 8.
without License first had of the King, or his Chief Justice in the King's
absence.

Till the Conquest, Constit. at Clarindon.
no Excommunication passed without Warrant of Law made by the joint assembly of
the Laity and Clergy; but the Conqueror having let loose the Canons, and the
Clergy having got the upper hand in Councils, made Canons as they pleased, and
so the Laity are exposed to the voluntary power of the Canon: vid. cap.
only as well the Normans, as until these times, Kings have saved their own
associates from that sudden blow, and upon reason of religious observance, lest
the King should converse with excommunicate persons e're he be aware.

The Laity are not to be proceeded against in Ecclesiastical Courts, cap. 9.
but upon proof by Witnesses in the presence of the Bishop: and where no
Witnesses are, the Sheriff shall try the matter by Jury in the presence of the
Bishop.

A negative Law, that implies another course was used upon light Fame or
Suspicion ex officio, although the Oath at that time was not born into the
World, and that all this was contrary to the liberty of the Subject, and Law of
the Land: And it intimates a ground of prohibition in all such cases upon the
Common Law; which also was the ancient course in the Saxons times, as has been
formerly noted.

Excommunicated persons shall be compelled only to give pledge, cap. 10.
and not Oath, or Bail to stand to the Judgment of the Church.

Upon the taking and imprisoning of the party excommunicate, Constit. at
Clarindon.
the course anciently was, it seems, to give Pledge to stand to Order. Of
this the Bishops were weary soon, as it seems; and therefore waved it, and
betook themselves to other inventions of their own, viz. to bind them by Oath
or Bail; both which were contrary to Law: for no Oath was to be administered but
by Law of the Kingdom; nor did it belong to the Ecclesiastical Laws to order
Oaths or Bail; and therefore this Law became a ground of prohibition in such
cases, and of the Writ de cautione admittenda.

Persons cited, cap. 11.
and making default, may be interdicted, and the King's Officer shall compel
him to obey.

If the King's Officer make default, he shall be amerced, and then the party
interdicted may be excommunicated.

So as the Process in the Spiritual Courts was to be regulated according to
Law. Nor did it lie in the power of such Courts to order their own way, or
scatter the censure of Excommunication according to their own liking. This,
together with all those that forego, the Archbishop upon his repentance
absolutely withstood, although he had twice consented, and once subscribed to
them, Constit. at Clarindon.
having also received some kind of allowance thereof even from Rome it self.

Clergymen holding per Baroniam, cap. 12.
shall do such services as to their Tenure belong, and shall assist in the
King's Court till judgment of Life or Member.

Two things are hereby manifest. First, that notwithstanding the Conquerour's
Law formerly mentioned, Bishops still sat as Judges in the King's Courts, as
they had done in the Saxon times; but it was upon causes that merely concerned
the Laity; so as the Law of the Conqueror extended only to separate the Laity
out of the Spiritual-Courts, and not the Clergy out of the Lay-Courts.
Secondly, that the Clergy, especially those of the greater sort, questioned
their services due by Tenure, as if they intended neither Lord nor King, but
the Pope only. Doubtless the use of Tenures in those times was of infinite
consequence to the peace of the Kingdom, and government of these Kings; whenas
by these principally, not only all degrees were united and made dependant from
the Lord paramount to the Tenant peravale, but especially the Clergy with the
Laity upon the Crown; without which, a strange metamorphosis in Government must
needs have ensued, beyond the shape of any reasonable conceit, the one half
almost of the people in England being absolutely put under the Dominion of a
foreign power.

Sanctuary shall not protect forfeited Goods, cap. 13, 14.
nor Clerks convicted or confessed.

This was Law; but violence did both now and afterward much obliterate it.

Churches holden of the King shall not be aliened without License. Constit. at
Clarindon. cap. 15.


It was an ancient Law of the Saxons, that no Tenements holden by service could
be aliened without License or consent of the Lord, because of the Allegiance
between Lord and Tenant. Now there was no question but that Churches might lie
in Tenure as well as other Tenements; but the strife was by the Churchmen, to
hold their Tenements free from all humane service; which the King withstood.

Sons of the Laity shall not be admitted into a Monastery without the Lord's
consent. cap. 16.


Upon the same ground with the former: for the Lord had not only right in his
Tenant, which could not be aliened without his consent, but also a right in his
Tenant's Children, in regard they in time might by descent become his Tenants,
and so lie under the same ground of Law: For although this be no alienation by
legal purchase, yet it is in nature of the same relation; for he that is in a
Monastery is dead to all worldly affairs.

These then are the rights that the King claimed, and the Clergy disclaimed at
the first; although upon more sober consideration they generally consented unto
the five last: But their Captain-Archbishop Becket withstood the rest, which
cost him his life in the conclusion; with this honorable testimony, that his
death, Sampson-like, effected more than his life: For the main thing of all the
rest the Pope gained to be friends, for the loss of so great a stickler in the
Church Affairs as Becket was.

In this Tragedy the Pope observing how the English Bishops had forsaken their
Archbishops, espied a muse through which all the game of the Popedom might soon
escape, and the Pope be left to sit upon Thorns in regard of his Authority here
in England. For let the Metropolitan of all England be a sworn servant to the
Metropolitan of the Christian World, and the rest of the English Bishops not
concur, it will make the Tripple Crown at the best but double. Antiq. Brit. 302.
Alexander the Pope therefore meaned not to trust their fair natures any
longer; but puts an Oath upon every English Bishop, Fox. An. 1179.
to take before their consecration, whereby he became bound 1. To absolute
allegiance to the Pope and Romish Church. 2. Not to further by deed or consent
any prejudice to them. 3. To conceal their Counsels. 4. To aid the Roman Papacy
against all persons. 5. To assist the Roman Legate. 6. To come to Synods upon
Summons. 7. To visit Rome once every three years. 8. Not to sell any part of
their Bishopric without consent of the Pope.


And thus the English Bishops that formerly did but regard Rome, now give their
Estates, Bodies and Souls unto her service; that which remains, the King of
England may keep: M. Paris. An. 1167.
And well it was that it was not worse, considering that the King had vowed
perpetual enmity against the Pope. But he wisely perceiving that the King's
spirit would up again, having thus gotten the main battle, durst not adventure
upon the King's rear, lest he might turn head: Baronius Annal. 1164. Sec. 11.
and so he let the King come off with the loss of Appeals, and an order to
annul the customs that by him were brought in against the Church, which in
truth were none.

This was too much for so brave a King as Henry the second, to lose the
scare-crow-power of Rome: yet it befell him as many great spirits, that favor
prevails more with them than fear or power: For being toward his last times
worn with grief at his unnatural Sons, a shadow of the kindness of the Pope's
Legate unto him, M. Paris. An. 1176.
won that which the Clergy could never formerly wrest from him in these
particulars granted by him: that,

No Clerk shall answer in the Lay-courts, but only for the Forest,

This savoured more of courtesy than Justice, and therefore we find not that
the same did thrive, nor did continue long in force as a Law, although the
claim thereof lasted.

Vacancies shall not be holden in the King's hand above one

This seems to pass somewhat from the Crown, but lost it nothing; for if the
Clergy accepted of this grant, they thereby allow the Crown a right to make it,
and a liberty to determine its own right, or continuing the same by being sole
Judge of the necessity.



In the licentious times of King Steven, wherein the Clergy played Rex, they
grew so unruly, that in a short time they had committed above a Hundred
murders. To prevent this evil, the King, loath to enter the List with the
Clergy about too many matters, let loose the Law of feud, for the friends of
the party slain to take revenge; and this cost the blood of many Clerks: The
Laity happily, being more industrious therein than otherwise they would have
been, because the Ecclesiastical Judge for the most part favored them. As an
expedient to all which, this Law was made, and so the Clergy was still left to
their Clergy, and Justice done upon such as sought their blood.



It was an ancient Law of the Saxons, and either by neglect worn out of use, or
by the valor of the Clergy laid aside, as resolving rather to adventure their
own blood, than to end their quarrel before the Lay-Judge by Plea: but grown
weary of that course, and likely also put hard to the pinch upon Complaints
made by them against Clerk-slayers, they are fain to have recourse to their
ancient Privilege.

Hitherto therefore it is manifest the Clergy were in their growing condition,
notwithstanding the policy and power of Henry the second, who was the Paragon
of that age.

After him reigned Richard the first, that must expiate his disobedience to his
Father, by obedience to his ghostly Father the Pope, in undertaking the holy
War; and being gone, left the Government in his absence so deeply entrusted to
the Clergy, as they could lose nothing of what they had gained, unless they
would; and might have gained much more than they did or should, had not the
Bishop that was the overseer of the whole Kingdom been drunken with vanity, and
spued out his own shame. However the success was, it was not contrary to the
principles of those times: for Richard had experience in the Emperor Frederick
and his Father's example, that the Pope and Clergy were too hard for all the
Potentates in Europe, and therefore might most safely trust them with all he
had at home, whilst he was in their service abroad. Nor were they short of what
was entrusted to them, but stuck close for the maintenance of his right to the
Crown, and emptied themselves even to the very consecrated Vessels, and
procured the Laity of all sorts to do the like, to save the Kingdom from the
rape of strangers and usurpers, who esteemed the King dead in Law, and as one
buried alive.

Thus passed they to King John the Government, supposing themselves well enough
assured of what they had gotten by their several achievements had under the
Reigns of three several Kings successively: And King John might well enough
have understood the times, if he had seriously considered them: but being
heightened all his lifetime with lawless Government, wherein he was trained up
in Ireland, he knew not how to stoop, till he stooped so low as the Legat's
Knee, and his Crown at the Pope's Foot; leaving an example to posterity to
beware of striving with the Clergy.

If then these sparks of ambition were so violent being alone, certainly in
their joint consultations much more. They had long striven now since the
Conquest to have excluded the Laity from their Synods, and about these days
effected it. And yet about Henry the second's time it may be supposed the thing
either was not yet done, or so lately, that the Law was not clear in that
point; for Petrus Blecensis, who was Archdeacon of Bath about those times, in
his Epistle to the Archbishop of York concerning the restraint of the growing
Sect of the Publicans, he advises in these words: Accipite clerum, congregate
populum, and ex eorum communi deliberatione, qui Spiritum Domini habent,
terribilis constitutio promulgetur, etc. And if the Historian does not mistake,
the proceedings against that Sect being only for errors in Religion, was in a
Council of Bishops and Lords. Nevertheless, whether present or absent, the
Laity sat there as Ciphers, making the number great, but not valuable by
themselves. For even in the Norman times they were brought so low, as the
Constitution made by the Clergy wrought more upon them, than civility it self
can work upon professors of Religion in these days. M. Westminster. An. 1127.
For it seems excess of long Hair was grown to that measure, that the Synod
cried out against it, and decreed that men should cut their Hair so as their
Eyes and laps of their Ears might be seen; and the King himself, I mean Henry
the first, submitted to this cut, and made all his Knights to do the like, and
exposed themselves to the then-odious by-names of Clowns or Priests, (like to
the roundheads of these days) who formerly marched under the title of Criniti
or Ruffians. This did but touch the Hair, but they went to the quick, when they
decreed that Lords should not sell their Villains, and that Outlawries should
pass in certain particular cases; as in the Constitutions of Archbishop Anselm
may appear. Afterward in these Kings times they flew at the Throat of the
Government, Antiq. Brit. 150. ibid. 155^
got all places of honor, or profit, or power, whether for Peace or War, under
their gripe; deposed and advanced as they pleased, even to the Royal Throne it
self; and that not only out of a sudden passion of State, but advisedly
concluded for a maxim. That the election of the King belonged to them; as in
the case of the election of Maude the Empress, Ibid. 127.
they did hold forth to all the World; and in which the King also then
flattered them, as holding their Election so necessary, that he kept the whole
Synod in duress to have their votes for the election of his Son to be his
Successor.

CHAP. LX. Of the English Commonalty since the Normans time.
THe dignity of the English Crown thus deflowred by the great men, was no loss
to the Common people: For as in all decays of Monarchy the great men get
nothing if they please not the people, so the King can hold nothing if they be
not contented. And yet contented or not contented, they could not gain much;
for as affairs stood then in the Christian world, the Politicians discourse of
three kinds of Government proved idle; neither could Monarchy, Aristocracy, nor
Democracy, attain any semblable condition in any place, so long as the Church
held its design apart, and prevailed to have the greatest share in all; not now
by the favor either of great or small, but by a pretended divine right,
through which they now had gotten to their full pitch of Lordship in the
Consciences of men. It must be acknowledged that this was a distemper in
Government; yet such it was, as kept humors low, and restrained the inordinate
excesses that in all kinds of Government are subject to break forth; so as
neither King, nor Lords, nor People could swell into larger proportion than
would suit with the ends of the Churchmen. But to mind the matter in hand:
somewhat the Commons gained in these stormy times: The Taxes that they were
charged with, were rather persuaded than imposed upon them; and generally they
were sparing in that work: and it is noted for the honor of King Steven, that
though he was seldom without War, yet he not only never charged the people
with any Tax, but released that of Dane-gelt, and acquitted the Subject for
ever of that Tax, which former Kings challenged as their right; all which show
him to be a brave King, if he was not a very rich man. Henry the second was
more heavy, because he had more to do: yet find we but one assessment, which
was Escuage, unless for the holy War, which was more the Clergy-mens than his.
Richard was yet a greater burden: his Reign was troublesome to him, and he
deserved it; for from the beginning thereof to the ending, could never the
guilt of his disobedience to his Father be blotted out: but it was more
troublesome to the people, because it cost so much treasure, was managed by
such ill Governors, (except the Archbishop of Canterbury) and was unsuccessful
in most of his undertakings; yet never invaded the liberties of the Commons by
any face of Prerogative But what wanted in him, was made complete and running
over in his Successor John, who (to speak in the most moderate sense of his
Government) being given over to himself, when he was not himself, robbed the
Lords of their authority, bereaved the Church of its Rights, trod under foot
the Liberties of the people, wasted his own Prerogative: and having brought all
things into despair, comes a desperate cure; the head is cut off to save the
body, and a president left for them that list to take it up in future ages. And
thus that which Steven gave, Henry the second lost, Richard the first would not
regain, and John could not; and so all were gainers but the Crown.

CHAP. LXI. Of Judicature, the Courts, and their Judges.
IT is no silent argument that the Commons gain, where Laws grow into course;
and it was the lot of these troublesome times to lay a foundation of a constant
Government, such as all men might learn, which formerly was laid up only in
the breasts of wise experienced men. The two most considerable points in
Government, is the Law, and the Execution; the latter being the life of the
former, and that of the Commonwealth. I say not that the Law was augmented in
the body of it, or that the Execution had a freer course than in the best of
the former times; but both were more and more cleared to the world in many
particulars, as well touching matters concerning practice of the Law, as
touching rules of righteousness. For the first whereof, we are beholding to
Glanvil in Henry the second's time; and for the latter, to King John, or rather
the Barons in his time, in the publishing of the Grand Charter, or an
enumeration of the Liberties or Customs of the people derived from the Saxons;
revived, continued, and confirmed by the Normans and their Successors: which
for the present I shall leave in lance dubio, to stand or fall, till occasion
shall be of clearing the point, in regard that King John soon repented of his
Oath, (the Bond of his consent) and to heal the Wound, got the Pope's pardon
and blessing thereupon: so easy a thing it was for a Son of the Roman Church
to pass for a good Catholic in an unrighteous way.

The execution of the Law was done in several Courts, according to the several
kinds of affairs, whereof some concerned matters of Crime and Penalty; and this
touched the King's honor, and safety of the persons of himself and his
Subjects, and therefore are said to be contra coronam and dignitatem, etc. The
second sort concern the profits of the Crown, or treasure of the Kingdom. The
third concern the safety of the Estates of the people. These three works were
appointed unto three several Courts, who had their several Judges especially
appointed to that work. Originally they were in one, viz. in the supreme Court
of Judicature, the Court of Lords, whereof formerly was spoken; but after,
through increase of affairs, by them deputed or committed to the care of
several men that were men of skill in such affairs, and yet retained the
Supremacy in all such cases still. And because that which concerned the public
Treasure was of more public regard than the other, the deputation thereof was
committed probably to some of their own members, Gloss.
who in those days were Barons of the Realm, and afterward retained the Title,
but not the Degree; and therefore were called for distinction-sake, Barons of
the Exchequer. The particular times of these deputations appear not clearly out
of any monument of antiquity; nevertheless it is clear to me that it was before
Henry the second's time, as well because Henry the first had his Judex
fiscalis, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 24.
as Glanvil so frequently touches upon the King's Court of Pleas, which cannot
be intended at the Court of Lords; for that in those days was never summoned
but in time of Parliament, or some other special occasion. But more principally
because the Historian speaking of the Judges itinerant, Hoveden.
recites some to be of the Common Pleas; which shows that there was in those
days a distinction of Jurisdiction in Judicatures. And it may very well be
conceived that this distinction of Judicature was by advice of the Parliament
after that the Grand Council of Lords was laid aside by Kings, and a
Privy Council taken up, unto whom could not regularly belong any juridical
power, because that remained originally in the grand assembly of the Lords.

Over these Courts, or two of them, one man had the prime Title of Chief
Justice, who then was called Lord Chief Justice of England, and whose office
was much of the nature of the King's Lieutenant in all causes and places, as
well in War as Peace; and sometimes was appointed to one part of the Kingdom,
and by reason thereof had the name only of that part, and some other of the
other parts. The greatness of this Office was such, as the man for necessity of
state was continually resident at the Court, and by this means the King's Court
was much attended by all sorts of persons; which proved in aftertimes as
grievous the King, as it was burdensome to the people. Other Judges there
were, which were chosen for their learning and experience, most of them being
of the Clergy, as were also the Underofficers of those Courts; for those
times were Romes hour, and the power of darkness.

Other Courts also were in the Country, and were Vicontiel or Courts of
Sheriffs, and Lords of Hundreds and Corporations, and Lordships, as formerly;
and these were settled in some place. But others there were, which were
itinerant, over which certain Judges presided, which were elected by the
Grand-Council of Lords, Hoveden.
and sent by Commission from King Henry the second throughout the Kingdom, then
divided into Six Circuits, unto each of which was assigned Three Justices; so
as the whole number of Justices then was Eighteen. The office was before the
coming of the Saxons over hither, but the assignation was new; as also was
their Oath, for they were sworn. But the number continued not long, for within
four years the King re-divided the Land into four Circuits, and unto each
Circuit assigned five Justices, making in the whole the number of Twenty and
one Justices; for the Northern Circuit had six Justices, Hoveden. 137.
which the King made Justices of the Common pleas throughout the Kingdom. Ibid.
445.
Neither yet did the first Commission continue so long as four years; for
within that time Richard Lucy one of the Justices had renounced his Office and
betaken himself to a Cloister, and yet was neither named in the first
Commission nor in the latter; nor did the last Commission continue five years;
Hoveden. An. 1184.
for within that time Ralph Glanvil removed from the Northern Circuit to that
of Worcester, as by the story of Sir Gilbert Plumpton may appear, though little
to the honor of the justice of the Kingdom, or of that Judge, however his book
commended him to posterity. I take it upon the credit of the reporter, that
this itinerary judicature was settled to hold every Seven years; Co. jurisd. c.
33
but I find no monument thereof before these days.

As touching their power, certainly it was in point of judicature as large as
that of the Court of Lords, though not so high: It was as large, because they
had cognizance of all Causes both concerning the Crown and Common Pleas.
Hoveden. Glanvil. l. 14. c. 7.
And amongst those of the Crown this only I shall note, that all manner of
falsehood was inquirable by those Judges, which after came to be much invaded by
the Clergy.

I shall say no more of this, but that in their original these Iters were
little other than visitations of the Country by the grand Council of Lords. Nor
shall I add any thing concerning the Vicontiel Courts and other inferior but
what I find in Glanvil; Glanv. lib. 1. cap. 2.
that though Robbery belonged to the King's Court, yet Thefts belonged to the
Sheriff's Court; and (if the Lords Court intercepts not) all batteries and
woundings, unless in the complaint they be charged to be done contra pacem
Domini Regis: Idem. lib. 9, and 10.
the like also of inferior Trespasses, besides Common Pleas, whereof more
shall follow in the next Chapter as occasion shall be.

CHAP. LXII. Of certain Laws of Judicature in the time of Henry the second.
ANd hereof I shall note only a few as well touching matter of the Crown as of
property, being desirous to observe the changes of Law with the times, and the
manner of the growth thereof to that pitch which in these times it has
attained.

We cannot find in any story, that the Saxon Church was infested with Heresy,
Heresy.
from their first entrance, till this present Generation. The first and last
Heresy that ever troubled this Island, was imbred by Pelagius; but that was
amongst the Britains, and was first battered by the Council or Synod under
Germanus; but afterward suppressed by the Zeal of the Saxons, who liked
nothing of the British breed, and for whose sake it suffered more happily than
for the foulness of the opinion. The Saxon Church, Hoveden. 585.
leavened from Rome for the space of above five hundred years, held on its
course, without any intermission by cross Doctrine springing up, till the time
of Henry the second. Then entered a Sect whom they called Publicans, but were
the Albigences; as may appear by the decree of Pope Alexander, whose opinions I
shall not trouble my course with: but it seems they were such as crossed their
way, and Henry the second made the first president of punishing Heresy in the
Kingdom, under the name of this Sect; Nubrig. lib. 2. cap. 13.
whom he caused to be brought before a Council of Bishops, who endeavored to
convince them of their error: but failing therein, they pronounced them
Heretics, and delivered them over to the Lay power; by which means they were
branded in the forehead, whipped, and exposed to extremity of the cold,
(according to the decree of the Church) died. Decret. Papae Alexand.
This was the manner and punishment of Heretics in this Kingdom in those days;
Hoveden. 585.
albeit in seems they were then decreed to be burnt in other Countries, if
that Relation of Cog shall be true which Picardus notes upon the 13th Chapter
of the History of William of Newberry, out of which I have inserted this
Relation.

Another Case we meet with in Henry the second's time, concerning Apostasy,
Apostasy.
for besides that one, Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 9.
we find no second thereto in all the file of English story. The particular
was, that a Clerk had renounced his Baptism, and turned Jew; and for this was
convicted by a Council of Bishops at Oxford, and was burned. So as we have
Apostasy punished with death, and Heresy with a punishment that proved mortal;
and the manner of conviction of both by a Council of the Clergy, and delivered
over to the Lay-power, who certainly proceeded according to the direction of
the Canon, or advice of the Council. These (if no more) were sufficient to
demonstrate the growing power of the Clergy, however brave the King was
against all his Enemies in the field.

Treason was anciently used only as a Crime of breach of Trust or Fealty,
Treason.
now it grows into a sadder temper, and is made all one with that of laesa
Majestas; and that Majesty that nowadays is wrapped up wholly in the person
of the King, was in Henry the second's time imparted to the King and Kingdom,
as in the first times it was more related to the Kingdom. Lib. 1. cap. 2.
And therefore Glanvil in his book of Laws, speaking of the Wound of Majesty,
exemplifies Sedition and destruction of the Kingdom, Lib. 10. c. 1.
to be in equal degree a Wound of Majesty, with the destruction of the person
of the King: and then he names Sedition in the Army, and fraudulent conversion
of Treasure-trove, which properly belongs to the King. All which he says are
punished with Death and forfeiture of Estate, and corruption of Blood; for so I
take the meaning of the words in relation to what ensues.

Felonies, of Manslaughter, Burning, Robbery, Ravishment, and Fausonry, are
Felonies.


This was the Law derived from the Normans, and accordingly was the direction
in the Charge given to the Justices itinerant in Henry the second's time, as
appears in Hoveden. But Treason or Treachery against the Oath, Ll. Hen. 1. c.
25.
Fealty, or Bond of Allegiance, as of the Servants against the Lord, was
punished with certain and with painful deaths: And therefore though the murder
of the King was Treason, yet the murder of his Son was no other than as of
another man, unless it arose from those of his own Servants. Ll. Hen. 1. c. 79.
The penalty of loss of Estate, was common both to Treason and Felony; it
reached even unto Thefts; in which case the forfeiture, as to the Movables,
Glanv. lib. 7. cap. 17.
was to the Sheriff of the County, unto whose cognizance the case did belong:
and the Land went to the Lord immediately, and not to the King. But in all
cases of Felony, and of a higher nature, the party (though not the King's
Tenant) lost his personal Estate to the King for ever, his Free-holds also for
a year and a day; after which, they returned to the Lord of the Soil, by way of
Escheat. It seems also, that the loss not only of Chattels and Goods, but
also of Lands, etc. extended to Outlawries (I conceive in case of Felony;) and
the King's Pardon in such case could not bind the Lord's right of Escheat,
although it might discharge the Goods, and the year and day whereunto the King
was entitled: which case alone sufficiently declares what power Kings had in
the Estates of their Subjects.



This was Law in Henry the second's time, although it crossed the Norman Law;
Manslaughter. Glanv. lib. 14. cap. 1. and 3.
and questionless it was upon good ground: for the times now were not as those
in the Conquerour's times, when shedding of Blood was accounted Valor, and in
most cases in order to the public service. And now it seems it was a growing
evil, and that cried so loud, as though in case of Treason bail might be
allowed, yet not in this case, ubi ad terrorem aliter statutum est, says the
Author.

Robbers shall be committed to the Sheriff, or in his absence to the next
Castelane, Robbery.
who shall deliver him to the Sheriff. And the Justices shall do right to them,
and unto Trespassers upon Land.

By the Conquerour's Law these Offenders were bailable; Ll. Gulielm. 4. Spicil.
174. Glanv. lib. 14. cap. 1.
and I conceive this was no Repeal thereof; and the rather, because Glanvil
allows of Pledges in all cases (except Manslaughter) yea in those Crimes that
did wound Majesty it self, although they concern the destruction of the King's
person, or Sedition in the Kingdom or Army thereof. The Justices herein
mentioned, were intended to be the Justices itinerant; and the Trespasses upon
Land, are meant such as are contra pacem Domini Regis, as riotous and forcible
Entries: for some Trespasses were against the peace of the Sheriff, as formerly
has been observed.

Fauxonry is of several degrees or kinds: some against the King, others against
other men; Fauxonry. Glanv. lib. 14. cap. 7.
and of those against the King, some are punished as Wounds of Majesty, as
falsifying the King's Charter: and whether falsifying of Money were in that
condition or not, I leave; or falsifying of Measures, yet more inferior, I
cannot determine; but it is clear by Glanvil, that falsifying of the Deed of a
private person, was of smaller consideration, and at the utmost deserved but
loss of Member.

Inheritances may not be aliened.

Inheritances were in those times of Lands or Goods; for it was the custom
Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 1. Ibid. c. 5.
that the personal Estate (the Debts deducted) was divisible into three parts;
one whereof belonged in right to the Wife as her reasonable part, the other to
the Heir, and a third to the Testator to make his Will of them; and of the
other two parts he could not dispose by Will. Concerning Lands, it was
regularly true, that no man could alien his whole Inheritance to the disherisin
of his Heir, either by Act in his lifetime, or any part thereof by his last
Will, without the concurrence of the Heir. But of purchased Lands he may give
part by Act executed in his lifetime, though he have no Lands by inheritance;
and if he has no Issue, then he may alien all. And where a man has Lands by
inheritance, and also by purchase, he may alien all his purchased Lands as he
pleases. If the Lands be holden in Gavel-kind, no more of the Inheritance can
be conveyed to any of the Children, than their proportionable parts will amount
unto. This Law of Inheritance was diverse, according to the Tenure: for the
Lands in Knights-service always descended to the Heir; but such as were holden
in Socage passed according to the custom, either to the eldest, or to the
youngest, or to all equally. And thus stood the general state of Inheritance
from the Normans time hitherto, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 88.
seeming somewhat too strait for the Free men, that by Law of Property might
challenge a power to do with their own as they pleased. But the Normans saw a
double prejudice herein: the first was the danger of ruin of many of their
Families, who now ingrafted into the English stock, and yet not fully, one
might expect a late check to their preferments from the Saxon Parents, after a
long and fair semblance made of their good Will. The second prejudice was the
decay of their Militia, which was maintained by Riches more than by multitude
of men; partly because that rich men are most fearful of offending, and
therefore ordinarily are most serviceable both with their Bodies and Estates
against public dangers; and partly because by their Friends and Allies they
bring more aid unto the public, by engaging them in the common Cause, that
otherwise might prove unsensible of the condition of their Country.

The Heir of a Freeman shall by descent be in such seisin as his Ancestor had
Vide Glanv. l. 7. c. 9.
doing service, and paying relief; and shall have his Chattels.

If the Heir be under age, the Lord shall have the Wardship for the due time,
and the Wife her Dower and part of the Goods.

If the Lord withold seisin, the King's Justice shall try the matter by
twelve men.

The first of these branches is declaratory of a ground of common Law; but
being applied to the last, is an introduction of a new Law of trial of the
Heir's Right by Assize of Mortdancester, where formerly no remedy was left to
the Heir, but a Writ of Right. If these three branches be particularly
observed, they speak of three sorts of Heirs; of Tenants by Knight Service,
viz. such as are Majors, or of full age; and such as are Minors, or under age;
and such as are of a doubtful age. Those that are of full age at the death of
their Ancestors, may possess the Lands descended, and the Lord may not disseize
him thereof; but may be resisted by the Heir in the maintenance of his
possession, so as he be ready to pay Relief, and do service that is due: and if
the Lord expel him, he shall have remedy by Assize. Those Heirs that are
Minors, shall be under the Lord's guardianship till they come to one and twenty
years. The Heirs of such as hold by Socage, are said to be at full age at
fifteen years, because at that age they were thought able to do that service;
but the Sons of Burgesses are then said to be of full age, when they have
ability to manage their Father's Calling, such as telling of Money, measuring
of Cloth, and the like: yet does not Glanvil, or any other, say that these
were their full age to all purposes; albeit that some Buroughs at this day
hold the last in custom to all intents whatsoever. The last branch provideth
the remedy to recover to the Heir his possession in case it be detained, either
through doubtfulness of age of the Heir, or his Title: and it directs the Issue
to be tried by twelve men. This trial some have thought to be of Glanvil's
invention; and it may well be that this trial of this matter, as thus set down,
was directed by him: yet he uses often in his book the word solet, and in his
Preface says, That he will set down frequentius usitata; and it is past
question, but that the trial by twelve men was much more ancient, as has been
already noted. One thing more yet remains, concerning the Widow of the
Tenant, whose Dower is not only provided for, but her reasonable part of her
Husband's personal Estate. The original hereof was from the Normans, and it was
as popular as that of Wardships was Regal; and so they made the English women
as sure to them, as they were sure of their Children.



This is called the Assize of Novel disseisin, or of disseisins lately made. It
seems that the limitation was set for the Justices sake, who now were appointed
to that work which formerly belonged to the County-courts; Glanvil. lib. 13.
cap. 33.
and to prevent intrenchments of Courts, a limitation was determined, although
the copy seems to be mistaken: for the limitation in the Writ is from the
King's last Voyage, or going into Normandy.



The Justices itinerant ended the smaller matters in their Circuits; the other
were reserved to the King in his Bench.



So as the Judges itinerant had the work of Escheators; and made their Circuits
serve as well for the King's profit, as justice to the Subjects. They used also
to take Fealty of the people to the King at one certain time of the year, and
to demand Homage also. These matters of the King's Exchequer made the presence
of the Judges less acceptable, and it may be occasioned some kind of
oppression. And as touching Castle-guard, it was a Tenure in great use in these
bloody times; and yet it seems they used to take Rent instead of the personal
service, else had that enquiry (how much?) been improper.



That one man may hold several Lands of several Lords, and so owe service to
them all, is so common, as nothing can be more: nevertheless it will not be
altogether out of the way, to touch somewhat upon the nature of this mutual
relation between Lord and Tenant in general, that the true nature of the
diversity may more fully appear. The foundation or subject of service was a
piece of Land, or other Tenement, at the first given by the Lord to the Tenant,
in affirmance of a stipulation between them presupposed, by the giving and
receiving whereof the Tenant undertook to peform service to the Lord, and the
Lord undertook protection of the Tenant in his right to that Tenement. Glanvil.
(...) c. 4.
The service was first by service solemnly bound, either by Oath, which the
Lord or his Deputy by the Common Law has power to administer; as in the case
of Fealty, in which the Tenant bound himself to be true to the honor and
safety of his Lords person, and to perform the service due to the Lord for the
Tenement so given; or otherwise by the Tenants humble acknowledgment, and
promise not only to perform the services due, but even to be devoted to the
Lords service, to honor him, and to adventure limb and life, and be true and
faithful to the Lord. This is called Homage, from those words, I become your
man Sir; and yet promises upon the matter no more but fealty in a deeper
complement, albeit there be difference in the adjuncts belonging to each. For
though it be true that by promise of being the Lord's man, a general service
may seem to be implied, yet in regard that it is upon occasion only of that
present Tenure, it seems to me that it is to be restrained only to those
particular services which belong to that Tenement; and therefore if that
Tenement be holden in Socage, although the Tenant be bound to homage, yet that
homage ties not the Tenant to the service of a Knight; Lit. lib. 2. c. 5.
nor contrarily does the homage of a Tenant in Knight Service tie him to that
of Socage upon the command of his Lord, though he professes himself to be his
man. Nor does the Tenant's homage bind him against all men, nor ad semper; for
in case he holds of two or diverse Lords by homage for several Tenements,
Glanvil. lib. 9. cap. 1. Lib. 7. cap. 10.
and these two Lords be in War one against the other, the Tenant must serve his
chief Lord of whom the Capital house is holden; or that Lord which was his by
priority, who may be called the chief Lord, because having first received
homage, he received it absolutely from his Tenant, with a saving of the
Tenant's Faith made to other Lords and to the King; who in order to the public
had power to command a Tenant into War against his own Lord. If therefore he be
commanded by the King in such cases unto War, Glanvil. lib. 9. cap. 1.
he need not question the point of forfeiture; but if he be commanded by a
chief of his other Lords into War, against a party in which another of his
Lords is engaged, his safest way is to enter upon the work, because of his
Allegiance to that Lord, yet with a salvo of his fealty to that other Lord.
Ibid. cap. 4.
But in all ordinary cases, Tenants and Lords must have regard to their
stipulation, for otherwise, if either break, the other is discharged for ever;
and if the fault be in the Tenant, his Tenement escheats to his Lord; and if
the Lord fail, he loses his Tenure, and the Tenant might thenceforth disclaim,
and hold over for ever. Nevertheless the Lords had two Privileges by common
custom belonging to their Tenures, which although not mentioned in the
stipulation, were yet more valuable than all the rest; the one concerning
matter of profit, the other of power: That of profit consisted in aids and
relief. The aids were of three kinds, Ibid. c. 8.
one to make the Lords eldest Son Knight, the other to marry his eldest
Daughter; the third to help him to pay a relief to his Lord Paramount; which in
my opinion sounds as much as if the Tenants were bound by their Tenures to aid
their Lord in all cases of extraordinary charge (saving that the Lord could not
distrain his Tenant Glanv. l. 9. c. 8.
for aid to his War) and this according to the Lords discretion; Ibid.
for Glanvil says that the Law determined nothing concerning the quantity or
value of these aids. These were the Norman ways, and savoured so much of
Lordship, that within that age they were regulated: But that of reliefs was an
ancient sacrifice, as of first fruits of the Tenement to the Lord, in memorial
of the first Lords favor in conferring that Tenement; and it was first settled
in the Saxons time. The Lords Privilege of power extended so far, as to
distrain his Tenants into his own Court to answer to himself, in all causes
that concerned his right; and so the Lord became both Judge and Party; which
was soon felt and prevented, as shall appear hereafter. Another privilege of
the Lords power, was over the Tenants Heir after the Tenants death, in the
disposing of the Body during the minority and marriage of the same. As touching
the disposing of the Body, the Lord either retained the same in his own power,
or committed the same to others; Glanv. 7. 10. Ibid. c. 12.
and this was done either pleno jure, or rendering an account. As concerning the
marriage of the Females that are Heirs, or so apparent, the Parents in their
lifetime cannot marry them without the Lords consent; nor may they marry
themselves after their Parents death, without the same: and the Lords are bound
to give their consent, unless they can show cause to the contrary. The like
also of the Tenants Widows that have any Dowry in the Lands of such Tenure. And
by suchlike means as these, the power of the Barons grew to that height, that
in the lump it was too massy both for Prince and Commons.



It is a received opinion, that at the Common Law no man could devise his Lands
by his last Will. If thereby it be conceived to be against common reason, I
shall not touch that; but if against custom of the ancient times, I must
suspend my concurrence therewith, until those ancient times be defined: for as
yet I find no testimony sufficient to assert that opinion; but rather that the
times hitherto had a sacred opinion of the last Will, as of the most serious,
sincere, and advised declaration of the most inward desires of a man; which was
the main thing looked unto in all Conveyances, Voluntas donatoris de caetero
observetur. And therefore nothing was more ordinary than for Kings in these
times, as much as in them did lie, M. Paris. An. 1216. Hoveden. An. 1199.
Malmsb. nov. l. 1.
to dispose of their Crowns by their last Will. Thus King John appointed Henry
the Third his Successor; and Richard the first devised the Crown to King John;
and Henry the first gave all his Lands to his Daughter; and William the
Conqueror by his last Will, gave Normandy to Robert, England to William,
Malmsb. l. 3.
and to Henry his Mothers Lands. If then these things of greatest moment under
Heaven were ordinarily disposed by the last Will, was it then probable, that
the smaller Free-holds should be of too high esteem to be credited to such
Conveyances? I would not be mistaken, as if I thought that Crowns and Empires
were at the disposal of the last Will of the possessor; nor do I think that
either they were thus in this Kingdom, or that there is any reason that can
patronize that opinion; yet it will be apparent that Kings had no slight
conceit of the last Will, and knew no such infirmity in that manner of
conveyance, as is pretended; or else would they never have spent that little
breath left them in vain. Glanvil. l. 7. cap. 1. and 5.
I have observed the words of Glanvil concerning this point, and I cannot find
that he positively denies all conveyance of Land by Will, but only in case of
disherison; the ground whereof is, because it is contrary to the conveyance of
the Law; and yet in that case also allows of a disposing power by consent of
the Heir; which could never make good conveyance, if the Will in that case were
absolutely void, and therefore his Authority lies not in the way. Nor does the
particular customs of places discountenance, but rather advance this opinion:
for if devises of Lands were incident to the Tenure in Gavel-kind, and that so
general in old time, as also to the burgage Tenures, which were the rules of
Corporations and Cities, Ll. Gulielm. cap. 61.
Vbi Leges Angliae deperiri non possunt, nec defraudari, nec violari, how can
it be said contrary to the common Law? And therefore those Conveyances of Lands
by last Will, that were in and after these times holden in use, seem to me
rather remnants of the more general custom, wasted by positive Laws, than
particular customs growing up against the common rule. M. Paris. An. 1181.
Hoved. An. 1181.
It is true, that the Clergy put a power into the Pope to alter the Law, as
touching themselves in some cases: for Roger Archbishop of York procured a
faculty from the Pope to ordain, that no Ecclesiastical persons Will should be
good, unless made in health, Decret. Alex. Pap. Hoveden. fol. 587. Glanv. l. 7.
cap. 5. and 16.
and not lying in extremity; and that in such cases the Archbishop should
possess himself of all such parties goods: but as it lasted not long, so was
himself made a president in the case; for being overtaken with death e're he
was provided, he made his Will in his sickness, and Henry the Second possessed
himself of his Estate. And it is as true, that Feme coverts in these days could
make no Will of their reasonable part, because by the Saxon Law it belonged
jointly to the Children. Nor could Usurers continuing in that course at the
time of their death make their Will, because their personal Estate belonged to
the King after their death, and their Lands to their Lords by escheat, although
before death they lie open to no censure of Law: but this was by an especial
Law made since the Conquerour's time; for by the Saxon-Law they were reputed as
Outlaws. Ll. Edw. 37.
Nevertheless, all these do but strengthen the general rule, viz. That
regularly the last Will was holden in the general a good conveyance in Law. If
the Will were only intended and not perfected, or no Will was made, Glanv. l.
7. c. 6. cap. 8.
then the Lands passed by descent, and the goods held course according to the
Saxon Law, viz. the next Kinsmen and Friends of the intestate did administer,
and as administrators, they might sue by Writ out of the Kings Court, although
the Clergy had now obtained so much power, as for the recovery of a Legacy, or
for the determining of the validity of the Will in its general nature, it was
transmitted to the Ecclesiastical Court.

CHAP. LXIII. Of the Militia of this Kingdom during the Reign of these Kings.
I Undertake not the debate of right; but as touching matter of fact shortly
thus much: that from the Norman times the power of the Militia rested upon two
principles; the one the Allegiance for the common defense of the King's person
and honor, and Kingdom; and in this case the King had the power to levy the
force of the Kingdom: nevertheless the cause was still under the cognizance of
the great Council, so far as to agree or disavow the War, if they saw cause; as
appeared in the defections of the Barons in the quarrel between King Steven and
the Empress, and between King John and his Barons. The other principle was the
service due to the Lord from the Tenant, and by virtue hereof (especially
whenas the liberty of the Commons was in question) the Militia was swayed by
the Lords, and they drew the people in Arms either one way or the other, as the
case appeared to them: the experience whereof the Kings from time to time felt,
to their extreme prejudice, and the Kingdoms damage. Nor did the former
principle oversway the latter, although it might seem more considerable, but
only in the times of civil peace, when the Lords were quiet, and the people
well-conceited of the Kings aims in reference to the public; which happiness
it was Henry the Second's lot to enjoy: for he being a Prince eminent amongst
Princes both for endowments of mind and of outward estate, not only gained
honor abroad, but much more amongst his own people at home, who saw plainly
that he was for Foreign employment of honor to the Kingdom; and not only
contented with what he had in England, but imbarqued together with the Laity
against the growing power of the Clergy, for the defense and honor of the
privileges of the Crown, wherein also the Liberties of the people were
included. They therefore were secure in the Kings way, and suffered themselves
to be engaged unto the Crown further than they or their Ancestors formerly had
been, out of pretense of sudden extreme occasions of the Kingdom, that would
not be matched with the ordinary course of defense. For the King (finding by
former experience that the way of Tenures was too lame a supply for his
acquests abroad, and that it had proved little better than a broken reed to the
Crown in case of dispute with the people) aimed at a further reach than the
Lords or Commons foresaw; and having learned a trick in France, brought it over
(although it was neither the first nor last trick that England learned to their
cost from France) which was a new way of levying of Men and Arms for the War,
Hoveden. 1181.
by assessing upon every Knights Fee, and upon every Freeman of the value of
sixteen Marks yearly, their certain Arms; and upon every Free man of ten Marks
yearly value, their certain Arms; and upon every Burgess and Freeman of an
inferior value, their certain Arms. 2. That these should be ready prepared
against a certain day. 3. That they should be kept and maintained from time to
time in the Kings Service, and at his command. 4. That they should not be lent,
pledged, sold, or given away. 5. That in case of death they should descend to
the Heir, who if under age, should find a man to serve in his stead. 6. That in
case the owner were able, he should be ready at a certain day with his Arms for
the service of the King, ad fidem Domini Regis and Regni sui. 7. That unto this
every man should be Sworn. I call this a new way of levying of Arms and Men,
not but that formerly other Freemen and Burgesses found Arms, albeit they held
not by Knight service; for it was so ordained by the Conquerors Laws formerly
used: but now the King thrust in two clauses (besides the altering of the Arms)
the one concerning the Oath whereby all men became bound; the other concerning
the raising and ordering of Men and Arms, which here seems to be referred to
the King only, and in his service; and this I grant may imply much in common
capacity, viz. that all the power of the Militia is in Henry the Second. But
this trick catched not the people according to the Kings meaning: for the words
ad fidem Regis and Regni still left a muse for the people to escape, if they
were called out against their duty to the Kingdom; and taught the doctrine
which is not yet repealed, viz. That what is not according to their Faith to
the Kingdom, is not according to their Faith to the King. And therefore they
could find in their hearts sometimes to sit still at home, when they were
called forth to War: as may appear in one passage in the days of King John, who
had gathered together an Army for the opposing of foraign Power, at such time
as the Pope had done his worst against him and the whole Kingdom; which Army
was of such considerable strength, as I believe none since the Conquest to this
day exceeded or paralleled it: But the King's mean submission to the Pope's
Legate so distasted the Nobles and People, as they left him to his own shifts;
and that in such manner, as although afterward he had advantage of them, and
liberty enough to have raised an Army to have strengthened himself against the
Nobles, yet the Lords coming from London, brought on the sudden such a party as
the King was not able to withstand; and so he came off with that conclusion
made at Renny mead, which though in it self was honorable, yet lost the King
so much the more, because it was rather gained from him, than made by him.

CHAP. LXIV. Of the Government of Henry the third, Edward the first, and Edward
the second, Kings of England. And first, a general view of the disposition of
their Government.
ONe hundred and ten years more I have together taken up, to add a period to
this first part of discourse concerning English Government; principally because
one spirit of arbitrary rule from King John, seems to breath throughout the
whole, and therewith did expire.

The first that presents himself is Henry the third, begotten by King John when
he was in the very first enterprise of oppression that occasioned the first
Barons bloody Wars, and which this King was so miserable as to continue for the
greatest part of his Life and Reign, and yet so happy as to see it ended about
four years before he died. Although the soul be not engendered from the parent,
yet the temperature of the body of the Child does sometimes so attemper the
motion of the soul, that there is in the Child the very image of the Father's
mind: and this Henry the third lively expressed, being so like unto his Father
John in his worst course, as if his Father's own spirit had entered into him,
and animated him in all his ways. He brought in with him the first president of
Conscience in point of Succession by inheritance in the English Throne; for the
stream of probabilities was against him. He was a Child, and the times required
a complete man, and a man for War. He was the Child of King John, whose
demerits of the State were now fresh in the minds of all men. He was also
designed to the Throne by his Father's last Will; M. Paris. An. 1216.
which was a dangerous president for them to admit, who had but even now
withstood King John's depositing of the Crown in the Pope's hands, as not being
in the power of a King of England to dispose of his Crown according to his own
will. Yet leaping over all these considerations, and looking on Henry the third
as the Child of a King, that by good nouriture might prove a wise and just
King, they closed about this spark, in hope it might bring forth a flame
whereby to warm themselves in stormy times. Nor did their hopes soon perish:
for, during his minority, the King was wise to follow good Counsel, and by it
purged out all the ill humors that the Kingdom had contracted in the rash
distempers of his Fathers government. Nor did he only follow the counsels of
others herein, but even at such times as their counsels crossed, he chose those
Counsels that suited with the most popular way; as is to be seen in the
different counsels of the Archbishop of Canterbury and William Briware. And yet
two things troubled much those times: M. Paris. An. 1223.
one, that they were times of parties; the other, that the Protector was
somewhat too excellent to be a mere servant; and it is hard for the English
Nobility to endure him to be greater; although it may seem reasonable that they
that are thought worthy to govern a King, should be much more worthy to govern
themselves. But the Pope put an end to all occasion of question hereabout; for
by his Brief he declares the King to be sixteen years old, and of age to govern
himself; and therefore all Castles are forthwith to be rendered up into the
King's hands. M. Paris. An. 1223, 1224.
This proved the rock of offense, whilst some obeyed the Pope, and were
impugners of those that put more confidence in the Castles than in the Kings
good nature. Hence first sprang a civil broil, thence want of money, then a
Parliament, wherein the Grand Charter of Englands Liberties once more was
exchanged for a sum of Money. Thus God wheeled about successes. But the King
having passed over his tame age under the Government of wise Counselors, and
by this time beginning to feel liberty, it was his hard condition to meet with
want of Money; and worse, to meet with ill Counselors, which served him with
ill advice, that the Grand Charter would keep him down, make him continually
poor, and in state of pupillage. To this giving credit, it shaped an Idea in
his mind that would never out for forty years after; and thus advised, he
neglects his own engagement, defies the Government that by his Royal word, and
the Kings his predecessors, in cool blood had been settled: and that he might do
this without check of Conscience, he forbad the study of the Law, that so it
might die without heir, and he have all by Escheat. This sadded the English,
and made them drive heavily: the King (to add more strengh) brought in
Foraigners and foraign Councils; and then all was at stand. The Councils were
for new ways. The great design was to get money to supply the King's wants;
and as great a design was to keep the King in want: otherwise it had been
easy for those at the helm to have stopped the concourse of Foraigners (other
than themselves) from abroad; the confluence of the Queens poorer Allies,
lavish entertainment, profuse rewards, cheats from Rome, and all in necessitous
times. But strangers, to maintain their own interests, must maintain
strangeness between the King and his Subjects. To supply therefore these
necessities, all shifts are used, as revoking of Charters, displacing of
Officers, and fining them, Afforestations, with a train of oppressions
depending thereon, Fines and Amercements, corrupt Advancements, Loans, and many
tricks to make rich men offenders, especially projects upon the City of London.
Nevertheless all proved infinitely short of his disbursements; so as at times
he is necessitated to call Parliaments, and let them know his wants. At the
first the people are sensible, and allow supply; but after by experience
finding themselves hurt by their supplies to the King, they grant upon
conditions of renewing the power of the Great Charter; and many promises pass
from the King to that end, and after that Oaths, and yet no performance: This
makes the people absolutely deny supplies. Then the King pretends Wars in
France, Wars in Scotland, and Wars against the Infidels in the Holy Land,
whither he is going: the people upon such grounds give him aids; but finding
all but pretenses, or ill success of such enterprises, they are hardened against
supplies of him for the Holy War. Then he seems penitent, and pours out new
promises, sealed with the most solemn execration that is to be found in the
Womb of Story, and so punctually recorded, as if God would have all generations
to remember it as the seal of the Covenant between the King of England and his
people; and therefore I cannot omit it.

It was done in full Parliament, M. Paris An. 1253.
where the Lords Temporal and Spiritual, Knights, and others of the Clergy, all
standing with their Tapers burning. The King himself also standing with a
chearly contenance, holding his open hand upon his breast, the Archbishop
pronounced this Curse ensuing.

By the authority of God omnipotent, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and of
the glorious Mother of God the Virgin Mary, and of the blessed Apostles Peter
and Paul, and of all the other Apostles, and of the Holy Martyr and Archbishop
Thomas, and of all the Martyrs, and of the blessed Edward King of England, and
of all Confessors and Virgins, and of all the Saints of God.

We Excommunicate and Anathematize, and sequester from our holy Mother the
Church, all those which henceforth knowingly and maliciously shall deprive or
spoil Churches of their right.

And all those that shall by any art or wit rashly violate, diminish, or
change, secretly or openly, in deed, word, or counsel, by crossing in part or
whole those Ecclesiastical liberties, or ancient approved customs of the
Kingdom, especially the Liberties and free Customs which are contained in the
Charters of the common Liberties of England, and the Forests granted by our
Lord the King to the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights,
and Freeholders.

And all those who have published, or being published have observed any thing
against them or their Statutes, or which have brought in any customs, or being
brought in have observed; and all Writers of Ordinances or Councils, or
Executioners, or such as shall judge by such things.

All such as are knowingly guilty of any such matters, shall ipso facto incur
this Sentence: such as are ignorantly guilty shall incur the same censure, if
being admonished he amend not within fifteen days after admonition.

In the same censure are comprehended all perturbers of the peace of the King
and Kingdom: for everlasting memory whereof, we have hereunto put our Seals.

And then all throwing down their Tapers extinguished and smoking, they said,
So let all that shall go against this curse be extinct, and stink in Hell. The
King all the while continuing in the posture abovementioned, said, So God me
help, I will observe all these things sincerely and faithfully, as I am a Man,
as I am a Christian, as I am a Knight, as I am a King crowned and anointed.

If we shall pare away the superstitious ceremonies, and consider divine
providence, we may search into all Histories of all ages, and we shall not find
a parallel hereunto; so seriously composed, solemnly pronounced, with an Amen
from the representative body of the whole Kingdom, put in writing under seal,
preserved to posterity; vindicated by God himself in the ruin of so many
opposers. And yet the dust of time has almost buried this out of the thoughts
of men; so as few even of such as know it, do seriously consider how far it may
yet and even now be charged upon the account of this Nation. Serious as it was,
it was soon forgotten: nor would the King be long holden with promises, some
unhappy Star struck him in his birth: he had been too hard for his promises;
and now having the Pope at his Elbow, he can dispense with his Oath, and bid
defiance to an Execration: and in flat defiance of the Grand-Charter professes
oppression, accumulates foreign Counselors, and foreign Guards, contemns his
own people, ushers in the Pope's Extortions upon them to fill up the measure:
thrives in nothing but in the match of his Son and Successor with a Sister of
Spain, and yet that also helps to hasten on the public poverty, and that a
Parliament that brought forth a bloody issue; although not by any natural
power, but occasionally. For the Barons mean now no longer to trust to
promises; strangers are banished the Realm, and others of the English blood
stepped into their places and Revenues. But this was not all, the King must
confirm the Grand-Charter; and thereto he adds not only his own Oath, but
causes the Prince his Son to confirm the same in like manner. It is likewise
propounded to him, that the chief Officers of the Kingdom may be chosen such as
the Parliament shall like of. And that other Laws meet for the government of
the Kingdom might be established: of all these the King made no bones. And to
make men believe that he was in good earnest, he was contented to disrobe and
disarm himself, (...)
and invest the Barons both with Sword and Scepter, retaining nothing but the
Crown for himself. This had been safety enough for the Kingdom, but that it was
a conclusion without an agreement; for as it was on the King's part made from a
principle of shame and fear, so it was determined in anger; for after that the
King had been thus dressed and girt for the space of Four or Five years,
(whatsoever he thought all the while it is no matter) he began first to stretch
his Conscience, and having the Pope's Dispensation to help, soon makes his Oath
to fly assunder (although his Son had for the present more Conscience.) But the
other girt held more stoutly, for the Lords had the Sword chained to their Arm
by the King's own grant. Liceat omnibus in regno nostro contra nos insurgere,
and ad gravamen nostrum opem and operam dare, ac si nobis in nullo fenerentur;
and the Lords maintained their hold, Dan. (...). 1258.
though not without some jealousies amongst themselves. And it is very probable
had the King been a little longer breathed with patience, he might have had his
will upon easier terms: for the Lords were not so jealous of one another as the
Commons were jealous of the Lords, that they meaned to rule only for
themselves. But the King now being in a wood, and bemired, so as he must now
resolve to get all or lose all, and so either satisfy his natural desires, or
the remainder of his politic power, entered the field with the aid of those
Commons that chose rather to be oppressed by one King than many Lords. And thus
the Lords received the first blow, and gave the first foil: Afterward being
worsted by their own divisions and jealousies, they left a victory to the King
that might have made him absolute, if he had been moderate; but pursuing
revenge too far, he was distasted of his own party that looked on him as a
Polyphemus that intended to devour the Enemy first, that he might more freely
feast upon themselves in the issue. This made victory follow the King afar off,
and taught the King that the end of Civil War must be attended with moderation
in the Conqueror, so far as may stand with public safety; or otherwise he
that is Conqueror to day by Sword, may be conquered to morrow by Jealousy.
Thus many humors consumed, and all parts tired after four years continual War,
the State comes to its right Wits. The King's gains in all this bloody sweat
may be summed up in two heads. First, that he had liberty to choose his
principal Officers of State by advice of the Lords, and them also to displace
by like Counsel. Secondly, in that he gained (though at a dear rate) wisdom to
observe the state of affairs, and to apply himself according to occasion: so
lived Henry the third for three or four years after these troubles; long enough
to let the World know that he was able to govern like an English King, and to
teach his Son by his own late experience to be a wise governor betimes.

For Edward the first being trained up in the Tragedy of a Civil War, Edward 1.
wherein he was one of the chief actors; and having expiated the bloody way of
his riotous youth by his Holy War, as they called it; now he betakes himself to
amends making, by Justice in Government; having found by his Father's
experience, that a Kingdom well governed (like good husbandry) preserves the
owner, but being neglected destroys both.

He came over in his third year in August, was crowned in September, summoned a
Parliament in February following, but adjourned it till after Easter: and then
it is found that the Church of late had been ill governed; the Clergymen
grieved by many ways, the people otherwise handled than they ought to be, the
Peace ill kept, the Laws less used, and Delinquents less punished than was
meet; and in the sense of these inconveniences were the Laws of Westminster
the first made; wherein the world may see the great difference between the
Prince and the King in one and the same man.

The most part of those Laws were little other than plasters applied to
particular botches of those times; wherein the King dealt with a tender hand,
as if he feared to ulcerate any part, and especially the Clergy, and therefore
delivered the last Law in a petitionary way to the Clergy, because it
concerned the execution of Justice in prohibited times, and yet bound up all
with a salvo to himself and his prerogative, like a wise King, that would
neither lose right, nor do rong; nor yet stickle to debate with his Subjects
now, whenas his eye was upon a further mark. For Leolin the Prince of Wales had
affronted him; Walsing. 46.
and though he could not endure affronts, yet could he dissemble them for
advantage; and so he suffered the Parliament to run its course, that he might
have done the sooner. Otherwise he had a seed of his Father's conceit that Laws
are not made for Kings, as appeared afterward: for after he had gotten his Army
into the field, he took a fifteenth which was granted to his Father, and this
was inaudito more: but there was no disputing with power, M. Westminster. An. 1276.
and therefore the Subject must be contented rather to score it up against the
future, than require present pay; so dangerous a thing it is for England, that
Kings should have occasion to gather Armies, though for never so honorable
employment.

The Welsh chase is hotly pursued, yet it did not rid much way; for it cost the
English a voyage of nine years travel before they could attain the shore,
although it had been often within their view. It may be the King found it
advantageous for his Government, to maintain an Army in the field under the
color of the Welsh War, that he might more bow his Subjects to his own bent:
for during these Wars, the King made many breathings, and took time to look to
the husbanding of his own Revenue, as those Ordinances called Extenta manerii,
and Officium Coronatoris, do witness, and the Statute of Bigami. But the people
were not altogether yet tamed; for the times being still in Wars, and they
occasioning much waste of Treasure, put the King to the utmost pitch of good
Husbandry, and one degree beyond the same: so as under color of seizing his
own, he swept up also the Privileges and Liberties of his Subjects; some
Authors reciting the complaints of the Churchmen, M. Westminster. Polyd. virg.
others of the Laity: so as it seems the King was no respecter of persons but
his own. This, and others not unlike, had almost occasioned another Combustion,
had not the meeting at Gloucester settled things for the present, by referring
the right of Franchises to debate in the Eyer, and ordering reseizure of such
Liberties into the Subjects hands, whereof they had been dispossessed by Quo
warranto, and Quo jure, under color of the fourth Chapter of the Statute of
Bigami.

Nevertheless, however debonair the King seemed to be, the sore between him and
his Subjects was not fully cured; nor did the Lords trust him further than
needs must: for whether they served in the Field, or met at Council, still they
were armed; and during this daring of each other, were many profitable Laws
made, whilst neither party durst venture bloodshed in touching too nigh upon
the Privileges of each other, principally because the affairs in Wales were
but laid asleep, and upon reviving, might turn the balance to either side.

The Wars awake again, and therein are consumed nigh five years more of the
King's Reign; so as whatever his intent was, he could have hitherto little
opportunity to effect any thing for the advancement of the Prerogative of the
Crown at home: Nor had he scarcely breathed himself and Army from the Welsh
Wars, but he found both France and Scotland his Enemies at once. The King faced
only the first, and fought the second; which held him work the remainder of
his days: and at the same time also he arrayed both the Clergy and Laity at his
own home, as if Providence had given him security for the good behavior; and
yet it failed him in the issue, and left him to the censure of the World,
whether his Justice was spontaneous, or by necessity; for as yet he held the
Grand Charter at parley, and therefore was rather eyed, than much trusted:
Albeit he was put upon confidence in the Subjects discretion for aid of him in
his continual undertakings: nor did they disclaim him herein, however
chargeable it was; for all seem willing he should be employed any where, so as
not within the four Seas.

It is probable the King knew it, and therefore having made a Voyage into
France, he changed the Scene of War, but to the other side as it were of a
River, in hope his Lords would follow; but it would not be. This angered him,
and he them: nor would his Clergy allow him any aid Papa inconsulto, and
therefore he outs them from his protection. These and his irregular
preparations by War, by summons not only of his Knights, but all other that
held Land worth 20 l. per annum, Walsing. 69.
and Taxes imposed by an arbitrary way, increased Rancor into a kind of
State-scoul, little better than a Quarrel. For appeasing whereof, the King
granted a consultation upon a prohibition, and unto both Clergy and Laity a
confirmation of the Grand Charter at the long run, and allowed it as the common
Law of the Kingdom; and seconded the same with many succeeding confirmations,
in the twenty seven and twenty eighth years of his Reign, as if he had utterly
renounced all thought of a contrary way. 25 Edw. 1.
But the Statute in his 28th year had a sting in the tail that was as ill as
his saving of ancient aids and prisals, which was in the Statute of
confirmation of the Charters, though it were omitted in this Statute; for the
saving was of such a sense as time and occasion would move the King's heart to
make it: and thus this Statute became like a Hocus Pocus, a thing to still the
people for the present, and serve the King's turn, that he might more freely
intend the conquest of the Scots; which once done, he might, if he would, try
masteries with England. But God would not have it so; the King in Scotland had
power to take, but could not overtake; and the Scots, like birds of the prey,
had wit enough to fly away, and courage enough to return upon advantages: and
so the King was left to hunt the wind, which made him to return.

He might now expect the applause of his people for his good success, and the
terror of those that had stopped the broad way of his extravagant Prerogative;
and therefore looks big, rubs up old sores, and (having his Army yet in the
field) sends for those Lords that would not follow him in his Wars in Flanders.
All come and submit, and as it were in so many words let the King know that all
England is now tame, and like to be ridden at his discretion. And now there is
nothing in his way but the fatal execration, which he feared, not in relation
to God's anger; but rather to the exasperated Clergy, and the dread of the
Pope's direful Thunderbolt. To avoid this storm, he procures a Dispensation
from Rome to perjure and oppress without sin; a trick that he learned of his
Father, and hid it within his breast, till now about two years before his end
he brings it forth, to tell all the world that hitherto he had been just
against his will. But having obtained his purpose, he nevertheless misseth of
his end; for a new King of Scots (our old good enemies) by divine providence
suddenly crossed his way before him; and now it boots not to contend for
arbitrary rule in England, and lose the Crown of Scotland, which he once
thought he had sure; he faces about therefore, and having spoken fair to his
people, for Scotland he goes. Thus if all were not in a Parenthesis, the King
intended a good period; but God only knows what his furthest reach would have
been if he had returned, for he was taken out of this world in Scotland, and so
left this his government somewhat like an imperfect sentence.

His Son Edward should have completed it, Edward 2.
but that he wanted his Father's sense, and had too much of his Grandfather's
superbient humor, that meeting with a stiff spirit, and a weak mind, brought
sudden fire into the course of government, till it consumed it self in its own
flame. For this King having newly slipped out of a bondage of wise Government
under his Father, ran the wild chase after rash desires, spending his former
time in inordinate love, and his latter time upon revengeful anger, little
inferior to rage; and so in his whole government was scarce his own man. His
love was a precedent of a strange nature, that commanded him from all the
contentments of his Kingdom to serve one man, a stranger, and prostitute to all
manner of licentiousness, merely for some personal endowments. It shows that
his judgment was weak, and his affections strong; and in that more weak,
because he discovered it before he was crowned: like some of the weakest of the
weaker Sex, the birth of whose minds are born as soon as they are conceived, and
speak as soon as they are born. It is true, that the bravery of spirit may work
after absoluteness in Kings, under the color of some kind of wisdom. But it is
one thing to rule without Law, and another to live without Rule; the one dashes
against the Law of an English King, and may put on the name of Policy, but the
other destroys the Law of mankind, and can bear no better name than of brutish
desire.

All the while Gaveston was in view, we find nothing concerning Commonwealth,
or monument of Parliament, saving two Ordinances made by the King, and such
Lords as suited to the King's way, rather than to his wants. 1 Edw. 2.
The first was that de militibus, the other de frangentibus prisonam; for all
the King's labor was to royallize Gaveston into as high a pitch as he could,
and so to amaze his own eyesight with contemplating the goodliness of his
person. So as Gaveston is become the Image of the King, and presents his beams
and influence into all parts of the Kingdom; and according to his Aspect they
often change and wane, and yet at the best were but as in a misty night.

The Barons liked not this condition of State-Idolatry; they were willing to
adore the King, but they could not bow to an Image: they desired nothing more,
than that their King might shine in his proper glory. Thrice is Gaveston
banished, thrice he returns; the last occasioned another Civil War, wherein
Gaveston lost his head. Thus the Lords removed the Eclipse, but (little the
better thereby) they find it a vain labor to compel the Sun to shine by force,
when it has no light. Though Gaveston be gone, the mist of foreign Councils
prevail; this was bred in the Blood, fed with Blood, and ended in Blood.
Through the Glass of foreign Councils all things seem of foreign color; the
King to the People, and the People to him. The King at length begins to see
himself undervalued, and that it began in himself; ventures himself into the
Wars with Scotland to win honor; goes with much splendor, but returns with
the greatest blot that ever English King suffered, confounded abroad, and
slighted at home. For the bravest men, by ill success, are lost in common
opinion; or, to speak in a higher strain, where God does not bless, man will
not. The King thus almost annihilated, catches hold of Rome, fawns on the
Clergy, passes to them the Ordinances of Articuli Cleri, and de prisis bonis
Cleri: which lost the Freemen no Right, although it concluded the Crown. And
to caress the Commons, made the Statute de Vice-comitibus, and the City of
London likewise by the Statute de Gavelletto. But God saw all sorts of men run
at riot, and sends in upon the Nation Plague, Famine, and other extraordinary
Testimonies of his displeasure, even to the wonderment of other Nations; and
this brought a kind of sobriety into Affairs, made all sorts tame, and for the
present only prepared them for better times. For the King's time of longing
again is come, and he must have new Play-fellows; finds the Spencers, or rather
was found of them; they grow in honor almost beyond the reach of the Nobles,
but not beyond their envy; and are more secure than Gaveston in this, that in
their first sprouting the King's Council served himself and them to keep in
with the Commons by making good Laws; such as the Statutes at York, of Essoyns,
Attaints of Jurors, Levying of Fines, and Estreats into the Exchequer, etc. all
of them promising good Government. The Barons nevertheless liked not the
Spencers greatness, and being by several occasions exasperated, join in one,
and occasion a new War: The King, aided by the Commons (who yet thought better
of the King than of the Barons, whom they saw prejudiced rather out of
self-apprehensions, than the public good) prevailed against the Barons, and
made them the first president of death upon the Scaffold.

Now the Spencers are Lords alone, thinking themselves above the reach of the
once formidable Barons, and the Commons too inferior for their respect. Thus
lifted up, they take a flight like that of Icarus. They had so much of the
King's heart, as they could not spare any part thereof to the Queen; and she
being as loath to spare so much for them as they had, retired with the Prince to
a relief which they brought from beyond Sea, and with whom both Lords and
Commons join. The favorites missing of their wonted wings, come down faster
than they ascended; and together with them, the King himself, all of them
irrecoverably. Thus favorites, instead of Cement between Prince and people,
becoming rocks of offense, bring ruin sometimes to all, but always to
themselves.

The King foresaw the storm, and thought it safest first to cry truce with the
people, and come to agreement with them by common consent, for the extent of
his Prerogative in certain particular cases questionable; Prerog. Reg. 17 Edw.
2.
and this summed up, became a Statute for future times, to be a ne plus ultra
between the King and people. Stat. de Homag.
The like agreement likewise was concerning services of Tenants to their Lords;
and an Oath framed to vindicate them from all encroachments. And something was
done to calm the Clergy for the demolishing of the Templar-Knights; Stat.
Templar.
but the wound was incurable; words are not believed, if actions do not
succeed; nor will Oaths now made to bind Kings, Bishops, Counselors of State,
Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, or Judges, to justice; nor directions for
regulating of Courts, nor Ordinances against false Moneys and Weights, nor all
of them, settle the people; but they adhere to the Queen, burning with
jealousy against the King, and both her self and the Lords with rage against
the Spencers. The King flies, and being forsaken of the people, the Lords, the
Clergy, his own Son, and the Wife of his own bosom, and of God himself, as the
most absolute abject that ever swayed the Scepter, lost the same; and being
made a monument of Gods revenge upon inordinate desires in a King, and of the
English people, being enraged, not long surviving his demise, he died a death
meet to be for ever blotted out of the thoughts of all Subjects, but to be had
in everlasting remembrance of all Kings. For if a Kingdom or Parliament
misleads the King, at the worst he is but misled by his Council; but if he be
drawn aside by favorites, he must thank his own lust: in the one, he has but
the least share in the burden; in the other, he must bear the whole.

CHAP. LXV. Of the condition of the Nobility of England, till the time of
Edward the Third.
NOw was Prerogative mounted up to the highest pitch, or endeavored so to be;
either through the weakness or power of these Kings, of whom the first and last
had little to ground upon but their own will; and the other, I mean Edward the
first, had more wisdom and power, but was otherwise distracted by foraign and
more urgent employments; so as the work fainted before it came to its full
period. The contest was between the King and Barons, who till those days were
rather the great and richer sort of men, than Peers, although they also were of
the number. I am not so sharp-sighted as to reach the utmost intentions of the
Lords: but their pretenses are to such public nature, as it is plain, that if
their private interest was wrapped up therein, they were inseparable: And I
shall never quarrel the Lords aim at private respects, whenas it is plain, the
public was so importantly concerned; and yet I will not justi^ie all that I
find written concerning their Words and Actions. The Speech of the E. of
Cornwall to his his elder Brother, M. Paris. An. 1227.
and King Henry the Third, I will neither render up my Castle, nor depart the
Kingdom, but by the judgment of the Peers: and of Simon the E. of Leicester to
the same King, that he lied, and were he not a King, the Earl would make him
repent his word; and of the Lords, that they would drive the King out of his
Kingdom, and elect another; and of the E. Marshal to Edward the first, that he
would neither go into Gascoine, nor hang; and such other, do savor of passion
(especially that of the E. of Leicester and the Lords) and may seem harsh and
unmannerly; and yet may admit of some allay, if the general rudeness of the
time, the King's injurious provocations, and the passions of choleric men, be
weighed together. Yet will not all these trench upon the cause, nor render the
state of the Lords too high, or disproportionable to their place in the policy
of the Kingdom of England, as things then stood: I say, it was not
disproportionable; for where the degree of a King was mounting up to such a
pitch as to be above Law, the Lords exceeded not their places in pressing him
with their Counsels to conform to the Laws; and in maintaining that trust that
was reposed in them, in keeping off such sinister Counsels and invasions as
might violate the Laws and Liberties, or hinder the current of Justice;
concerning which I shall shortly state the case, and leave it to the censure of
others. The Government of the people of this Nation in their original, was
Democratical, mixed with an Aristocracie, if any credit be to be given to that
little light of History that is left unto us from those ancient times.
Afterward, when they swarmed from their hive in Foreign parts, and came over
hither, they came in a warlike manner, under one conducter, whom they called a
King; whose power, whatever in the War, yet in time of peace was not of that
height as to rule alone; I mean, that whereas the Lords formerly had the
principal executory power of Laws settled in them, they never were absolutely
divested of that power by the access of a King; nor was the King ever possessed
of all that power, nor was it ever given to him; but the Lords did ever hold
that power, the King concurring with them; and in case the King would not
concur, the people generally sided with the Lords, and so in conclusion the
King suffered in the quarrel. From this ground did arise from time to time the
wanderings of the people in electing and deposing their Kings during the Saxon
times. Nor did nor could the Norman Williams shake off this co-partnership, but
were many times, as well as other ensuing Princes, persuaded against their own
minds and plotted desires. Nor can it otherways be supposed where Councils are
settled; for whereto serve they, if (notwithstanding them) the King may go the
way of his inordinate desire? If the Lords then did appear against these Kings
whereof we treat, in cases where they appeared against the Laws and Liberties
of the people; it was neither new, nor so heinous as it is noised, for them
(who are equally, if not more entrusted with the Commonwealth than the King,
by how much the Counselors are trusted more than the Counseled) to be true,
for the maintenance of their trust, in case the King shall desert his. But the
greater question is concerning the manner by Threats and War. It is as
probable, I grant, that the Lords used the one as the other; for it was the
common vice of the times to be rugged: yet if we shall add to what has been
already said, first, that Knight Service was for the defense of the Kingdom
principally. Secondly, that the greatest power of Knight Service rested with
the Lords, not only in propriety and ownership, but in point of direction for
the benefit of the Commonwealth; and lastly, that the state of the times now,
was such as the Kingdom was oppressed by strangers Counsels, and the Counsels
of the Kingdom rejected; that instead of Law, Garrisons of strangers ruled;
that no man could own his own; that the Subjects were looked upon as enemies;
and of all this the King made the principal instrument, who had ruled and
overruled in this manner, and so was resolved to continue. I shall leave it to
the better judgment of others, what other healing plaster was to be had for
such a sore. Albeit it cannot be denied, that more due respects might have been
tendered to Kingly dignity than was in those times practiced: And yet there was
a difference also in the occasions of War; for certainly that last War with
Edward the second, was more fatal, and yet less warrantable; and in the issue
declared that there was more of the Queen therein than of the Lords, who knew a
way of removing Favorites from the King, without removing the King from the
Kingdom, or driving him out of the World. In all which nevertheless, it cannot
be concluded that the Lords party was increased more than in the former Kings
times; for the loss of the field in Henry the Thirds time against the Prince,
kept them in awe all the succeeding Reign (although they were not then
tongue-tyed) and their second loss against Edward the Second, which was yet
more sharp, questionless quelled their spirits (although they lost no right
thereby) and increased the Kings party much by the access to the Crown of the
services of such as held of those Lords that were attainted or disinherited:
And yet by a hidden providence, the King was little the better when it came to
the pinch: For when Edward the second's Queen came from beyond the Seas, though
with but a small force, all forsake the King; neither regarding the former
terror of the Army of a King, nor the right or service, nor Oath of Fealty,
nor Promises, nor Laws, nor other Engagements; and so the King becomes a prey
to an enraged woman; or, which is worse, to a jealous Wife: So little can the
name of a King do, when his person is despised; and so vain for him to trust in
his Militia, that has already disarmed himself of the hearts of his Subjects.
The sum then of all the labors of the Nobles during these times will rest in
this, that they won the day, and yet lost the field: although they lost their
own bloods and Estates, yet they saved all to the people, and left Laws in
force, able to debate with Prerogative in the hand of any King that should
succeed. Thus stood the matter in fact upon such grounds as it had, the
validity whereof it is not my work to censure neither by the balance of Law or
Gospel, but leave it as a sore time, that scarce will endure touch, nor bear a
King further than he was good or brave.

CHAP. LXVI. Of the state of the English Clergy until the time of Edward the
Third: And herein concerning the Statute of Circumspecte agatis, Articuli
Cleri; and of general Councils, and National Synods.
IT was a time of much action throughout the whole Christian State; and Rome
now having attained to its full glory, began to be eyed on all parts, as an
irregular motion crossing all affairs, that it may like the sole Empress
command all, and be controuled by none; and this wrought some stirrings in
France, complainings in England, and facing between the Emperor and the Pope.
M. Paris. 720.
How chargeable this was to the Pope's Treasury it is not material, but it
occasioned, or was pretended to be the occasion, of all the intolerable
exactions ensuing; there being scarce one year passed over without some
extraordinary exaction levied upon the Churchmen, either by Provisors, Tenths,
Procurations, Levies for the Holy War, Quindizms, Benevolences, or other such
like; and where money was not to be had, by levies of Ornaments, or of rich
Apparel, by intimation, begging, persuading, commanding, threatening; and in
this course they continued till they had out-faced shame it self, and that the
whole Law of Rome became comprehended in this one, Quicquid libet licet. In
general therefore the Church of Rome cannot be said to thrive during these
extorting times, although Rome did; for if the Laity were pillaged by the King,
the Clergy much more both by Pope and King: if the one complained, the other
cried: the one sometimes found relief from the King, but the other was
helpless; for the Pope had no Ears to hear, nor the King Hands to help. M.
Paris.
He neither durst nor would cross the Pope, although the Clergy told him, that
by these exactions they were impoverished in such manner, as they were disabled
to do him service for their Lay-fees. Thus Rome becomes a burden to Rome, and
the Members weary of bearing their Head. Hereafter must the Pope beware of
falling out with Kings; for the English Clergy now, though late, see, that all
is not Gold that glitters; nor is it any great privilege to be the Pope's men,
further than the Pope will be a good Master, but this was not to be expected.
Popes were grown so excellent, as they could not amend; and England so
enamoured of them, as it is become their vere hortus deliciarum, M. Paris.
as the Pope called it, when he saw the rich vestments of the English
Churchmen; and therefore they must now be contented to be the Pope's viands as
often as his hungry maw does call, or otherwise they must fall out. An
excellent posture of affairs, and brave preparative to dispose the hearts of
all sorts for entertainment of the easy yoke of Christ's government, which was
now at the door, and ready to be revealed! Nevertheless, poor and mean as the
Clergy was, they had courage enough not only to stickle both with King and
people for their own liberties, but also to invade the liberties both of the
Crown and Commons; having this advantage, that they had to do with a King and
people that were two; and themselves well seconded by the Pope, that had no
less power in those times of public distraction, and was bound to serve the
Cattle well that yielded him so much milk. The particular matters of debate may
appear in their Paper of Grievances composed in Henry the third's time, and
their Resolutions thereupon: Vid. Addit. Baronius Annal. 1306.
their Complaints were renewed again in the time of Edward the first (if we may
give credit to Baronius) after the Statute of Circumspecte agatis. To the end
therefore that the whole may lie before us, I shall set down the matter or
substance of both these Papers severally, in regard they sound much alike; and
note the difference: all which I shall do, to the end that it may more plainly
appear what the Church-mens Idaea was, and how far the common Law and King's
Prerogative would agree thereto.

The Complaints are of this nature.
1. That the Church-possessions in their vacancies are wasted, and that
Escheators do not only seize the personal Estate of the Abbot or Prior
deceased, but such Corn in the Barn, and other Goods belonging to the houses,
for their maintenance; 2.
as also the profits of Churches impropriate. 3, and 4, and 5. Elections are
either disturbed by the King's Letters preceding, or by delay of the Royal
assent subsequent to the said Elections. 6. The Lay-power, without the advice
of the Clergy, do put in, eject, or restore Incumbents to Benefices void. 7.
Prelates are summoned to answer to the Lay-power, in the Writs Quare
excommunicavit, and Quare non admisit. 8. Clerks are distrained in their
Lay-fees, to answer before the Lay-power in Action of Debts, Trespass, or other
personal Actions; and in case they have no Lay-fees, the Ordinary is distrained
by his Barony to cause the Clerk to appear. 9. The Laity are forbidden to take
Oath, or to inform upon Oath before the Prelates, and to obey the Prelates
commands in such cases. 10. Persons taken and imprisoned upon Excommunication,
are ordinarily dismissed without satisfaction to the Prelate; and sometimes are
not taken by the Sheriff, 11.
notwithstanding the King's Writ: And as well the King as his Officers do
ordinarily communicate with such as are excommunicated, 12. and 33.
and likewise command others to communicate with them. 14. Clerks imprisoned
for Felony are refused to be delivered to the Ordinary, 13.
unless upon security to appear before the Justices in Oyer; and sometimes are
hanged before their Ordinary can demand them; and sometimes their heads are all
shaven, 15.
that they may not appear to be Clerks. 16. Justices itinerant do imprison
Clerks defamed for Felony, or otherwise outlaw them if they do not appear. And
otherwise proceed against Clerks after their purgation before the Ordinary. 17.
18. The Lay-power seizes upon the Estates of Clerks degraded for Crimes. 19.
Clergy are compelled to answer and give satisfaction for offenses against the
Forest-Laws before the Lay-power: 20.
And in case of default, the Bishop by distress is compelled to order
satisfaction, 21.
as well in such cases, as in personal Actions. 22. Privileges of Sanctuary
are invaded by force. 23. Executors of Bishops are hindered from administering
the Estate without License first obtained from the King. 24. The King's Tenants
Goods are seized after their decease by the King's Bailiffs. 25. Intestates
goods are seized by their Lords, and their Ordinary hindered from
Administration. 26. The King's prohibition passes in case of Tithes and
Chapels. 27. The like in cases of Troth plight, Perjury, Cerage, Heriet, or
other Church-duties, as money for reparations of Churches, and fences in
Churchyards, pecuniary punishment for Adultery, 28.
and costs of suit in Ecclesiastical Court, 40.
Sacrilege, Excommunication for breach of the Liberties of the Church, 29.
contrary to the Grand Charter. 30. In cases of prohibition, if the
Ecclesiastical Judge proceed contrary to the same, he is attached, and
compelled to show his Acts in Court; if the Lay-Judge determine the cause to be
Temporal, the Ecclesiastical Judge is amerced; if he proceed against the
prohibition, and it is tried by Witnesses of two ribaulds: and in case it be
found for the Ecclesiastical Judges cognizance, yet there is no costs allowed
for such vexation. 31.
32. That Jews in matters Ecclesiastical aforesaid, are by the King's
prohibition drawn from the Ecclesiastical Judge unto the Lay-Magistrate. 34.
Question about Lands given in Frankalmoin, are tried in the Lay-Courts; and by
reason of such Tenure, 35.
the owners, though Clergy men, are compelled to do suit at the Lay-Courts, 36.
and are charged with impositions, and are distrained hereunto, 37.
although the Lord have other Land of the Donor in Frankalmoin subject to his
distress. 38.
39. Prelates summoned to higher Courts, are not allowed to make Attorneys to
appear for them in the inferior civil Courts. 41. Grantees of Murage, or other
unwonted impositions, compel the Churchmen to pay the same. 42, and 43. The
Clergy are charged with Quarter, Cart-service, and purveying. 44. The Chancery
sends out new Writs contrary to the liberties of the Church, and the Law of
the Land, without the assent of the Council of the Kingdom, Princes and
Prelates. 45. The King does compel the Clergy to Benevolences to the King at
his Voyage into foreign parts. 46. Amercements granted to Clergymen, are
turned into Fines by the Justices, and by them taken. 47. Clergymen are fined
for want of appearance before the Justices itinerant, and of the Forest, upon
common summons. 48. Quo warranto's granted against the Clergy for their
Liberties, and the same seized, unless they be set down in express words in
their Charter, notwithstanding that by long custom they have enjoyed the same,
49.
and many times contrary to express grant. 50.

This is the sum of their Paper of Grievances; and because they found the King
either wilful or unconstant, they resolve upon a Remedy of their own, by
Excommunication and Interdiction, not sparing the persons of any principal or
accessory, nor their Lands, no not of the King himself: and for this they join
all as one man. Now what scare this made, I know not, but Henry the third in
the Stat. of Marlb. and Edward the first in his Stat. at Westminster, and other
Statutes: the first spoke fair, and seemed to redress some of these complaints:
as also did Edward the second; and yet the Common Law lost little ground
thereby.

That which Henry the third did, besides his promises of reforming, was done in
the Stat. of Marlbridge.

The successors of Abbots, Marlbr. c. 29.
Priors, and Prelates, etc. shall have an Action of Trespass for Trespasses
done nigh before the death of their decessors, upon the Estates of their
Corporations. And shall prosecute an Action begun by their Predecessors. And
also shall have an Assize against Intruders into any of the Possessions
belonging to the said Corporations whereof their Predecessors died seized.

This might seem a remedy provided against the first Malady complained of, and
questionless bound all but the King; and so might perchance abate somewhat the
edge of that Article. But it being the Clergies reach to grow rich, and the
Pope's cunning to help on that Work, that they might be as stores for supply of
his Treasury; and had forbidden Abbots and other Prelates, etc. the liberty of
disposing their Estates by last Will: Kings therefore as supreme Patrons to
these bodies in their vacancies, used to seize all the Estates of the Prelates,
with the Temporalities, to their own use, as well to preserve the Riches of the
Kingdom to it self, and the possessions of such Corporations from spoil, as to
be a cloak of their own covetousness. And under the Estates of the Prelates, or
Heads of these Corporations, all the Goods and Chattels belonging to the said
Corporations were comprehended, Fits. Abbe. 25.
in regard that all was by Law adjudged to be in the sole possession of such
Head, and without whom all the rest were accounted but as dead persons.

No Clergie-man is bound to attend at the Sheriff's Turn. Marlbr. c. 10


William the Conqueror first exempted the persons of the Clergy from
attendance upon Temporal Courts; yet they were still urged thereto, Gloss. p.
428.
and especially by a Law in Henry the first's time; but by this Law they are
discharged, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 31.
and in some measure a provision made against the grievance in the 39th Article
beforementioned. These amends we find made to the Clergy by Henry the third,
besides his confirming the Grand Charter: And his Son Edward the first pursued
the same course, especially in his first times, when he was but tenderly
rooted; as may appear in the Statute of West. 1.

Clergymen nor their Houses shall be charged with Quarter, West. 1. cap. 1.
nor their Goods with Purveyance or Cart-service, under peril of imprisonment,
and damages by action or imprisonment.

The great endowments of Lands, Rents, and Revenues given to the Churchmen by
the Laity, was for the maintenance of Hospitality and works of Charity. The
Founders and Benefactors hereby obtained a right of Corody or Entertainment at
such places, in nature of Free Quarter; which in the necessitous times of Henry
the third, became so common, that every one that had power never questioned
right, and the King above all the rest. By means whereof, the Church-revenues
were exceedingly wasted: for remedy whereof, all Offenders are by this Statute
made liable to fine and imprisonment, and double damages in case of Action of
Trespass; the King only excepted, against whom they had no defense, but would
rather have won him to have been their defense against the exactions from Rome
that continually plagued them.

A Clerk taken upon Felony, West. 1. cap. 2^
being demanded, shall be delivered to the Ordinary; but being indicted, shall
not be dismissed by the Ordinary without due purgation.

With due respects to the judgment of those grave and honorable persons of the
Law, Co. 2. instit. 164.
it seems to me that before the making hereof, the use was, Stams. 130.
that if a Clerk was defamed, or appealed by an Offender for Felony, before
Conviction, he was forthwith imprisoned. Nor could he be delivered unto the
Ordinary upon demand before Inquest taken, unless upon sufficient Security to
endure the Trial before the Judges itinerant; which thing was not easy to be
had for a Clerk, as times then were. This Law therefore was made in favor of
the Clergy, who required that such as were Clerici noti and honesti, should
forthwith upon their apprehending be sent unto their Ordinary; and those which
were vagi and incogniti, M. Paris. addit. fol. 200, 206, 207.
should upon demand be delivered to be judged by their Ordinary freely, and non
expectatis Justiciariis quibuscunque. Such wandering Clerks therefore the Clergy
will have delivered before Inquisition, if demand be made. Nevertheless,
because the Indictment passed many times before the Demand came; for by the
fifteenth Article of the Clergies Complaints foregoing, it appears that the
Lay-Judge made more than ordinary speed, for fear of stop: This Law provided
that such also should be delivered to their Ordinary, and that due purgation
should pass before the party were delivered; and in case the Ordinary neglected
his duty herein, he was liable to a Fine or Amercement. Briton. 4. f. 11.
Thus is Briton to be understood in this point; whereas Bracton speaking of
such as are convicted, Bracton, lib. 3. fol. 123.
affirms, That if demand be made of such as are not indicted (for of such he
speaks) they ought to be delivered without Indictment: I suppose he means
by the Church-Law; for till this Statute the Temporal Judges practice was
otherwise, as appears by the fourteenth Article of the Clergies Complaint
foregoing; and so by this Law, the fourteenth and fifteenth Articles of the
Clergies Complaint are answered.

Disturbers of the Freedom of Elections fined. West. 1* c. 5.


With submission to the judgment of others, I suppose that this was framed
principally for the satisfaction of the Clergies Complaints in the third,
fourth, and fifth Articles foregoing: and I am the rather induced hereto,
because as touching Elections into Temporal places of Government, several Laws
are especially framed; such as are Elections of Sheriffs and Coroners, whereof
the one is West. 1. cap. 10. the other Artic. super Cart. cap. 10. and no Law
is especially made as touching the Elections of the Clergy, if not this.

Ordinaries having the Goods of the Intestate, West. 2. c. 19.
shall answer his Debts.

Originally the Goods of the Intestate passed by a kind of descent to the
Children: afterward by a Saxon Law, the Wife had her part; and this continued
all the Normans time. But now the strength of the Canon Law growing to its full
pitch, after a long chase attached the prey. In Henry the first's time they had
gotten a taste; for although the Wife and Children, or next of kin, had then
the possession, yet it was for the good of the Soul of the deceased; and the
Ordinary had a directing power therein, and so was in the nature of an
Overseer, and somewhat more. Afterward in the time of King John, the Clergy
had drawn blood: for though the possession was as formerly, yet the dividend
must be made in the view of the Church; and by this means the dividers were but
mere instruments, and the right was vanished into the Clouds, or, as the
Lawyers term it, in Abeyance. But in Henry the third's time, the Clergy had not
only gotten the game, but gorged it: Both Right and Possession was now become
theirs, and wrong done to none but the Clouds. This was not well digested
before Edward the first recovered part of the morsel, and by this Law declared
the use to be for the benefit of the deceased. And thus the one was satisfied
in having what he used not, the other, in using what he had not.

But these are but gleanings; the Law of Circumspecte agatis brings in a Load
at once: For the Clergy being vexed with the passing of the Statute of
Mortmain (whereof hereafter when we come to speak of the Clergies losses) they
make grievous complaints of wrongs done to their privileges. And after six
years the King is at length won, and passed a writing somewhat like a grant of
Liberties, Antiq. Brit. 194.
which before-times were in controversy: and this Grant, if it may be so
called, has by continuance usurped the name of a Statute; but in its own
nature is no other than a Writ directed to the Judges, in substance as
follows:

Take good heed that you do not punish the Bishop of Norwich and his Clergy,
Circumspecte agaits.
if they hold plea in Court-Christian of things merely spiritual: for in such
cases the Ecclesiastical Judge has cognizance, notwithstanding the King's
prohibition.

It is therefore neither Grant nor Release, but as it were a Covenant, that the
Clergy shall hold peaceable possession of what they had, upon this ground, that
the King's prohibition, has no place in such things as are merely spiritual.
So as hereby the Clergy got a Judgment against the Crown by confession, and an
Estoppel, upon this maxim, Circumspect^ agatis.
that spiritual things belong to spiritual men, into which rank the King's
person cannot come: thus thought they; but what are spiritual causes, and why
so called? are they such as concern spiritual persons and things? this was the
old way: mark; but if we bring into this Category, Adultery, Fornication,
Incest, etc. we shall mar^all. Linwood tells us, that mere spiritualia are such
as are sine mixtura temporalium: there may be somewhat in this, though I cannot
find it; nor can I make out the sense of the term any other way, but to limit
it to such things which by common custom the Ecclesiastical Judge had
cognizance of: for otherwise neither King nor Law ever intended it to be
expounded by the Canon, nor was it the intent of this Writ, Law, or License
(call it what you will) thus to conclude, as the particulars following will
manifest.

Fornication, Adultery, and suchlike, punished sometimes upon the body, and
sometimes upon the purse.

These crimes the Saxons punished by the Temporal power, as I have already
showed. The Normans continued this course, if we may believe the Conqueror's
Laws, Ll. Gulielm. c. 14, 19, 371.
which gave the fine in such cases to the Lord of the Delinquent. And it is
confessed, that Henry the first and the second continued it; as the Clergies
own complaint, just or unjust, does witness. And what course was holden in the
time of King Steven and John, is to me unknown; nor is it much to be regarded,
M. Paris addit. fol. 201. art. 2^^
seeing the latter did he cared not what, and the former to gain the good will
of the Clergy regarded not what he did. The custom therefore cannot be made
good for the Clergy, much less to punish the bodies of Freemen in such cases,
it being contrary to the Grand Charter; never asked by the Clergy, formerly,
nor no complaint before now for denial: for my part therefore I shall not
apprehend it of a higher nature than the King's Writ, which in those days went
forth at random, if the 44th Article of the Clergies, complaints foregoing be
true. It being so contrary to the common sense of Parliament to give the bodies
of the Freemen to the will of the Clergy, Circumspecte agatis.
to whom they would not submit their Free holds. But the Writ proceeds in
enumeration of particulars.

Reparations and adornings of Churches, and Fences of Churchyards. Violence
done to a Clerk, Defamation to reform, not to give damage. Perjury, oblations,
payments of Tithes between Rector and Parishioner. Right of Tithes between two
Rectors to a fourth part of the value. Mortuaries due by custom. A Pension from
a Rector to a Prelate or Advocate.

The most of which were under the power of a prohibition in the time of Henry
the Third, who was King but yesterday, as the Articles of complaint formerly
set down do manifest. Nor had the Clergy ever better Title than connivance of
some such favorites as King Steven, whose Acts may, peradventure, be urged
against Kings, but not against the people, unless their own act can be produced
to warrant them. The learning, in the Princes case, will (I suppose) admit of a
difference: for it can never be made, out, that the King's Council in
Parliament was the Magnum concilium Regni, Coke lib. 8.
but only the House of Lords; and therefore whatever passed in Parliament by
their only advice might bind the King, but could never reach the Commons nor
their Liberties. And thus the Grand Charter in the first conception was
conclusive to the King, but was not the act of the Parliament; because the
Parliament cannot grant a Charter to it self of that which was originally
custom. And therefore this Law, however countenanced, can never be concluded to
be other than a Permission; not only because it was never the Act of the
Commons of England, but because it is contrary to the liberty of the Freemen.
And it is beyond all imagination, that the Commons should out themselves from
the protection of the Common Law, and yoke themselves, their Free-holds, and
Estates, under the bondage of the Canons; nor ought such a construction to be
admitted, without express words to warrant it. As for the conclusion, it is
worse, and not only dishonorable to the King in binding his Arms from
protecting his Subjects by the Common Laws, and so in some respects making them
Outlaws; but dishonorable to it self, whilst it makes Prohibitions grounded
upon Laws to be nullities, by a late trick of non obstante, which was first
taken up by the Pope, then by Henry the third, and by this King granted to the
Clergy: and thus are all set at liberty from any rule but that of
Licentiousness. Nevertheless, this Law did thrive accordingly; for we find
scarce any footsteps in story of any regard had thereof till it became
grey-headed. For it was not long e're the King stood in need of money, and was
necessitated to try the good wills of the Clergy more than once: this
occasioned them to be slow in answer, Antiq. Brit. vit. Winchelsie.
and in conclusion to deny that they should aid the King with any more money,
Papa inconsulto. The King hereupon disavows the Clergy, and leaves them to the
Romish oppressions, which were many; and then the Clergy rub up all old sores,
and exhibit their complaints to their holy Father, to this effect: Baronius
Annal. an. 1306.
1. That the King's Justices intermeddle in Testamentary causes, accounts of
Executors, and cognizance of Tithes, especially to the fourth part of the
Living. 2. That the Clergy were charged to the King's Carriages. That the
King's Mills were discharged from paying of Tithes. That Clerks attending on
the Exchequer, were necessitated to non-residency. And that after their
decease, their Goods were seized till their acounts were made. That
Ecclesiastical possessions were wasted during vacancies. 3. That Clerks were
admitted to free Chapels by Lay men. 4. That the King's Justices took
cognizance of Usury; Defamation, violence done to Clerks, Sacrilege,
Oblations, Fences of the Churchyards and Mortuaries. 5. That prohibitions are
granted without surmise. 6. That Clerks are called to answer in the King's
Court for crimes, and being acquitted, the Informers escape without penalty. 7.
That Clerks are not allowed their Clergy. 8. That after purgation made, Clerks
are questioned in the King's Court for the same offense. 9. That persons in
Sanctuary are therein besieged. 10. That the Writ de Cautione admittenda
issues forth, although the Church be not satisfied; and excommunicate persons
being imprisoned, are enlarged in like manner. 11. That Debts between Clerks
due, are determined in the temporal Courts. 12. That Bishops are compelled by
Distress to cause Clerks to appear in Lay-courts without cause. 13. That the
Church loses it is right by the ceasing of Rent or Pension by the space of two
years. 14. That Nuns are compelled to sue in the Lay-courts for their right in
possessions befalling by decease of their Kindred. 15. That Churches are
deprived of their Privileges till they show Quo warranto they hold them. 16.
That Ecclesiastical Judges are stopped in their proceedings by Sheriffs and
great men. 17. That Bishops refusal of Clerks presented are examined in the
Lay-courts. 18. That Patrons of Religious Houses do oppress them by extreme
Quarter. 19. That Bigamy and Bastardy are tried in Lay-courts. 20. That the
King suffers his Livings to be vacant for many years. 21. That the Clergy are
wronged by the Statute of Mortmain.


Here Is all, and more than all that is true; and more than enough, to let the
Reader see that the Writ Circumspecte agatis was but a face put on for the
present, after laid aside, and the Clergy left to the bare Canon. They likewise
show what the Clergy aimed at: and in that they did not obtain, it was to be
attributed to the resolution of the Laity, and not any neglect in themselves;
for the Archbishop died in the service, Antiq. Brit.
and it is thought that grief for these matters was no little cause thereof.
But the times within a while grew troublesome, and the King in pursuit of the
French Wars, being unadvised in his way, angered the people by his arbitrary
levy of Men and Money, Articuli Cleri.
as it brought forth a State-scoul, little inferior to a Quarrel. And to
pacify the Clergy, he granted them the Writ de consultatione habenda in all
matrimonial and testamentary cases, Stat. de consultat. 14. E. 1.
which were of their least doubted privileges; and this qualified the first
Article of complaint next foregowing, if such cause they had of complaint; and
this was all that the Clergy got at Edward the first's hands. Edward the
second was a man that was neither well-affected to Rome, nor weak in spirit;
and yet so unhappy, that his way neither promised good success, nor ever had
it; and so he became a Servant unto the humors of his Servants, to keep his
head above water; but especially after he was chased by the Scots, and quite
out of breath, he calls for help of all, but first of the Clergy, and bespeaks
them with the Ordinance of Articuli Cleri; wherein he gives some satisfaction
to the complaints formerly mentioned, which it seems by Baronius, were
exhibited in Parliament.

Ecclesiastical cognizance extends unto Tithes, cap. ^.
Oblations, and Mortuaries, and to pecuniary recompense.

In the first times, neglect or denial of Church-duties was punished in the
King's Court by Fine. Afterward the Bishop was joined in that Work, and the
Tythable Goods were seized; eight parts whereof were taken to the Lords and the
Bishops use by moyeties, Ll. Alfred. c. 9. Ll. Edw. c. 9. Ll. Canut. c. 8.
a ninth part left to the Owner, and the tenth to the Church. Nor had the
Bishops any peculiar Courts of cognizance of causes, till the times of the
Normans; nor as yet in those times had they power to all intents: For though it
be true, that the Roman Tribute of Peter Pence was allowed by the Conquerour's
Law to the Bishop's Court, yet we find no Law for Tithes and other profits to
be recovered by the Ecclesiastical Court, Ll. Gul. 20. c. Spicileg. 180.
till about the end of Henry the second's Reign, or King Steven's time. For at
a Council at London in Henry the second's time, it was ordained, that three
Summons in the Pope's name should be made to such as paid not their Tithes;
and in case they then refused, Binius, Tom. 7 fol. 661. An. 1173.
they should be Anathema. And after that time, in a Council at Oxford under
Steven Archbishop of Canterbury, it was decreed, that the Laity should be
entreated first to pay their Tithes, Articuli Cleri.
and then if necessity require, Baronius, Annal. 1222. cap. 19.
that they should be compelled by Ecclesiastical censure. So as their power
crept up by degrees in recovering of Church duties, as it did in Testamentary
matters; and at length Henry the third, worn and spent with the Barons Wars,
about his latter end yielded to Boniface the Archbishop his importunate
demands; and first gave liberty to the Clergy to be their own Judges: and yet
the Lay-Judges, although diverse of them were Clergy men, did not suddenly
forbear, till this Law came, which gave some satisfaction to the first and
fourth Articles of Complaint foregoing.

Ecclesiastical cognizance extends not to a fourth part of the Tithes of any
Living, cap. 2.
nor to pecuniary mulcts for sin, saving by way of commutation.

The Complaint of the Clergy in Henry the third's time, was against the King's
prohibition in case of Tithes indefinitely: for in those times, and afterward
in Edward the first's time, the King's Court had the cognizance of all Tithes;
and therefore in the Statute of West. 2. c. 5. the Writ of Indicavit was
allowed in case of right of any portion of Tithes; yet the Church still gained
ground, and about, or before the death of Edward the first, Artic. 1.
the Temporal Judge had yielded unto the Clergy the cognizance of a portion of
Tithes under the value of the fourth part: for in the Article next foregoing,
the Clergies complaint was, that the Kings Justices held cognizance of the
fourth part; and here they were confined thereto by this Law, which the Clergy
could never remove.

For violence done to Clerks the offender shall render damage in the Kings
Court; but Excommunication, cap. 3.
Penance, and Commutation shall be in the Bishops Court.

The Canon Law had an ancient claim to the protection of Clerks, both as
touching their persons and estates; and prevailed so far, as they were thereby
emboldened to offer violence unto others. But as I formerly showed, by a Law in
Henry the Second's time, the Temporal Judge resumed his original power; and
this became a sore evil between the Clergy and Laity: Articuli Cleri.
for though it were allowed that Clerks should not be sued but before the
Ecclesiastical Judge in such cases, yet it was no warrant for the Laity
likewise to be called before the Ecclesiastical Judge in such cases; and
therefore the Clergies complaints show that the matter was doubtful, and that
the Lay-Judge generally maintained his Jurisdiction, although sometimes he
disclaimed it; as it may appear in the case of a Trespass in the nature of a
riot committed upon the Priory of St. John's of Jerusalem, in the seventh year
of Henry the Third, Fits. Herb. 7 Hen. 3. prohibition 30.
when as it was adjudged per Curiam, that it belonged to the Ecclesiastical
Court to punish. But in Edward the First's time, by the Ordinance of
Circumspecte agatis, and Articles concerning prohibitions, the difference was
made between damages, and pro reformatione, and the same affirmed by this Law;
and so the matter settled, and the fourth Article of the Clergies complaint in
some measure was satisfied.

Defamation within Cognizance of the Ecclesiastical Court, cap. 4.
and corporal penance therefore, and Commutation.

The words are general and peremptory, with a non obstante the Kings
prohibition; and yet the Law afterward restrained the sense to defamation for
crimes, or offenses triable in the Ecclesiastical Court: and this gave further
satisfaction to the fourth Article of the Clergies complaint foregoing.

Tithes of new Mills may be recovered in the Ecclesiastical Court. cap. 5.


This Tithe of Mills was a new encroached Tithe never mentioned in any former
Law of this Kingdom, nor demanded by the Synod at London, Anno 1173. which
mentions Fruit Trees, young broods of living creatures that are tame, Herbage,
Butter, Cheese, with other particulars, but mentions not new Mills. It is true,
Bineus Tom. 7. 661.
that anciently Mills paid Tithes; but such they were, which were ancient, Ll.
E. c. 8. and 9. Articuli Cler^*
and had paid the same by custom; and such as by Law in the Confessors time
were declared to be given a Rege, Baronibus, and populo. But by the second
Article of the Clergies complaint next foregoing, it appears that the Kings
Mills refused to pay this Tithe: now whether the new Mills were called the
Kings Mills, as being made upon the public streams by the Kings license; or
whether the Mills newly made within the Demesnes of the Crown, it is not to be
insisted upon; but it is evident, that till this Law made, the new Mills would
not Tithe their labors.

One and the same matter may be tried at the Common Law, cap. 6.
after Sentence in the Spiritual Court, in diverse respects.

The great sore that was complained of, was, that the Clergy after purgation
in the Ecclesiastical Court made, were proceeded against in the Kings Court in
case of breach of peace or Felony, as may appear out of the 16th Article of the
Clergies first complaints, and the 8th Article of that taken out of Baronius.
Nevertheless, the present Law subjoyns an example of the questioning a Layman
in the Ecclesiastical Court, in case of violence done to a Clerk, as a matter
which may be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court, and yet reviewed by the Kings
Court.

The Writ de Excommunicato deliberando shall not issue forth, cap. 7.
but upon evident breach of the Kings Liberty.

This might be intended in satisfaction of the Tenth Article of the Clergies
complaint in Baronius, and the Tenth Article in the Clergies complaint first
recited; although that complaint both in the 10, 11, 12, and 33 Articles, seem
to be but clamor upon Officers, and not the Kings Court of Justice.

Clerks Officers to the Exchequer are to be corrected by their Ordinaries; cap.
8.
and yet not tied to residence during their attendance on the Exchequer.

This is in part an answer to the second Article of the Clergies last
complaint, and a justification thereof, as a thing that is pro bono publico.

Clergie-mens Goods shall not be Distrained either in the Highway, or
Sanctuary-grounds, Articuli Cleri.
unless such as have been of late purchase. cap. 9.


The complaint exhibited in Henry the third's time, and the 8th Article, was
only in ordinary personal Actions; but in the complaint made in Edward the
second's time, Article 12. is, that it is without cause that they are so
distrained. This Law yields them somewhat, viz. immunity from distress within
their ancient possessions, which had been by ancient custom privileged; but
yields nothing as touching their latter purchased Lands, because they had no
such custom.

Highways and Sanctuaries shall be free for such as abjure, so as they shall
neither be restrained from liberty, cap. 01.
nor necessaries kept from them. Felons may make free confession to the Priest
without danger.

The grievance in the 22th Article of the Clergies complaint in Henry the
Thirds time, and the ninth in that of the times of Edw. 2. are hereby relieved;
provided that the Delinquent keeps himself in due order.

Houses of Religion shall not be oppressed with Corodies, Pensions, cap. 11.
or entertainments of great men.

This answered the grievance in the 42. and 43. of the first complaint, and the
18th of the latter, and in effect little other than what was formerly settled by
West. 1. cap. 1.

The Kings Tenant may be cited before the Ordinary out of their own Town; and
if Excommunicated for want of appearance, cap. 12.
the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo shall be awarded.

A remedy this was against the grievances in the 12 and 33 Articles of the
first complaint, and in the 10th Article of the last schedule of complaints.
And thus the Clergy have gotten the day of the Kings Tenants, which they had
been striving for ever since the Conquest, as may appear by what has been
formerly said; and now the Kings Tenants are in no better condition than other
men, Articuli. Cleri.
viz. they may now be Excommunicated without the Kings license: nor is the
answer Nunquum fuit negatum to be referred to the point of Excommunication; for
that power was denied them but unto the citing them out of their own Parish,
which cannot be found to be denied to the Clergy, by any thing that yet
appears.

A Clerk presented and found unable by the Ordinary, cap. 13.
shall be tried again by the Ecclesiastical, and not the Lay-Judge.

Although the fitness or sufficency of the party presented, is to be examined
by the Ordinary, yet the Civil Magistrate has power in action brought to
enquire and determine whether the Ordinaries work was rightly done; and so the
17th Article of the last complaint answered.

Elections shall be free. cap. 14.


The Laws was of the same with this in the Stat. W. 1. cap. 5. which see
before; and it may be that the iniquity of the times continued notwithstanding,
and so occasioned the renewing of this Law.

A Clerk having taken Sanctuary shall not be compelled to adjure. cap. 15.


Nor after confession of the Crime, or appealing others before the secular
Judge, shall be denied his Clergy. cap. 16.


Although the Temporal Courts proceeded not so far as to pass sentence against
a Clerk that had taken Sanctuary; yet they proceeded to enquiry, as may appear
by what was said formerly concerning the Stat. West. 1. cap. 2. and therefore
though this Law in the 15th Chap. allows that a Clerk in Sanctuary shall
enjoy his Ecclesiastical liberty, yet the words legi Regni se reddens are
interposed; and the reason is, because the King upon Indictment found, had
right to the Delinquents goods, 7 E. 2. Fits. tit. forfaiture 34.
and profits of his Lands, until due purgation; and then his Lands were by a
Writ out of the Chancery to be restored to him again: nor could any purgation
regularly pass before the party was Indicted.

No Religious House shall be charged with Tax to any Superior without the
Realm of England; Stat. de asport. relig. 35. E. 1.
nor shall send to any visitation out of England.

This was neither at the request of the Clergy, nor act of kindness intended
unto them; but for the good of the Kingdom, to prevent the bleeding of the
Treasure of the Kingdom into Foraign parts.

Patrons of Abbeys shall have their custody during their vacancies. Mag. Charta
cap. 35.


This was the ancient Law, now revived by the Clergies consent, and intended
for the safeguard of the Revenues of the Houses, and their maintenance; and
therefore it is with a sicut superius dictum est, cap. 5.

The Goods of the Clergy freed from purveyance, unless they will. Stat. de
prisis Edw. 2.


It was a favor given by Edw. 2. to the Clergy, to gain their good will after
the death of Gaveston, the shameful defeat received in Scotland, and some
particular testimonies of God's displeasure, whereof he began to be somewhat
sensible.

Franchises holden by prescription or Charter confirmed, and Trials by Quo
Warranto allowed to be in Eyer. Stat. de Quo Warranto. 18 Edw. 1.


It was the common share of the great men, but especially of the Clergy, to
have their Franchises exposed to the prey of the Eagles, or to such as hawked
for them; and it is likely the King had not so easily for gone his prize, if
all the fat had fallen to his own share: but perceiving that more benefit came
to his instruments than was meet, and himself little the better thereby; he
sacrificed his Judges to the people, but it was to his own behoof, and so
gained both credit and favor from the people, and profit to himself; and in
some measure satisfied the 48, 49, 50. Articles of the Clergies complaint in
the time of Henry the Third, and the 15th Article of their last complaint.

Lands or Tenements aliened to a Religious house shall escheat to the Lord,
Mag. Charta cap. 37.
if the alienor take the same back to hold of that House.

The ground hereof principally was the prejudice done to the Lord by
destruction of the Tenure, albeit that it had been an ancient grievance
complained of in the Saxon times, That the Clergy were covetous, and swallowed
down estates, and thereby weakened the Kingdom. But now they are become even
cheaters, serving the turns of treacherous Tenants, that would give their Lands
by compact with the Churchmen, to receive them again from them to hold of the
Church; which was a liberty that men thirsted after in those times, wherein the
Churchmen were more adored than their Images. Bracton, lib. 1. fol. 13.
It seems this Law was made after Bracton's time, if that be true in the second
Institutes: for he says that a man may give his Lands to any one, Coke 2.
Instit. super Magna charta, cap. 36. p. 74. and 75.
whether Christian or Jew, or religious person, and nothing shall hinder it but
the special reservation of the donor; and yet he says that such gift or grant
takes not away the right of the Lord Paramount in his Tenure, Bracton. lib. 2.
cap. 10. fo. 27.
albeit the gift be in free Alms. Nevertheless it seems to be such restraint,
that the Templars and Hospitallers were fain to find out a new way, which was
to protect men's Tenements from execution of Law by levying crosses thereon,
albeit the right of the Lords was not barred; Stat. West. 2. cap. 33.
and therefore Edw. 1. provided a Law to make this also in nature of a Mortmain
within the Statute made in the seventh year of his Reign, Stat. de Religiosis 7
E. 1.
called the Statute de Religiosis; by which it was enacted, that in case of
such alienations in Mortmain, the Lord should have liberty to enter, if he
failed, then the Lord Paramount; or if he failed, the King should enter, and
dispose of the same; and that no license of Mortmain should be sued out, but by
the mean Lord's assent; and where part of the premises remain still in the
Donor, Stat. de Amortizandis terris.
and the original Writ mentions all the particulars. And thus at length was
this issue for the present stayed, which hitherto wasted the strength of the
Kingdom; M. West. An. 1280. Mag. Charta cap. 39.
and by continual current emptying it into the mare mortuum of the Clergy,
consumed the maintenance of Knight service, by converting the same to
Clerk-service.

No Judge shall compel a Freeman to make Oath without the Kings command.

So is the sense of the Law rendered by an ancient Author; Miror. Just. cap. 5.
sec. 3.
and I hope I shall not wrong the Text, if I affirm, that the Ecclesiastical
Judge was included within the equity, though properly he be not Balivus; for
the Law intends to show that it is a liberty that the Subject has, not to be
compelled to take Oath without the Kings especial command; and by consequence
it shows also, that the King at that time, and until then, had the directory
of Oaths; for it was an ancient Liberty given in the Kings Charters unto such
as they pleased, viz. to impose Oaths, and to punish for breach of Oath;
Malmsb. de gest. Reg. lib. 2.
and this passed under the word Athae or Athas; and so Edmund the Saxon King
gave to the Abbey of Glastenbury amongst other Athas and Ordulas; and the
Churchmen that first procured vacations from Suits of Law during holy times,
procured a Law also to be settled by Edward the Saxon King, Ll. Ed. cap. 9.
and Gunthurne the Dane, that Ordeal and Oaths should be forbidden upon the
holy Feasts and lawful Fasts. And a wonder it is how it escaped the gripe of
the Clergy so long, who catched at any thing that had but a glance of Gods
worship in it. And if this were the Subjects Liberty, not to be compelled to
Swear, surely much more not to be compelled to accuse himself, unless by the
Law he be especially bound; Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 7. fo. 106.
for it is Glanvil's rule, Ob infamiam non solet juxta legem terrae aliquis per
legem apparentem se purgare, nisi prius convictus fuerit, vel confessus in
curia. But the power of the Clergy now was grown strong, and they begin to
remember themselves; and that Oaths are of a holy regard, and they men for
holiness best able to judge when, and to whom they shall be ministered, and
therefore now they begin to enter their claim; and to make a sure Title, they
get a grant from Pope Innocent to Steven Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, of
a faculty of licensing administration of Oaths during the time of Lent; and he
accordingly enjoyed it during the mad time of Henry the Third. But Edward the
first quarrelled it, and left it questionable to Edward the Second, who being
in his condition as a lost man, had less care of such smaller matters, and
therefore allowed that his Judges of Assizes should be licensed by the
Archbishop to administer Oaths in their Circuits in the sacred times of Advent
and Septuagessima: Antiq. Brit. Eccles. 209.
and this course continued till Henry the Eighth's time. The Clergy having
thus gotten the bridle, gallop amain: they now call whom they will, and put
them to their Oaths to accuse other men or themselves, or else they are
Excommunicated. Henry the Third withstood this course, if the Clergie-mens
complaints in the times of that King, Artic. 9. be true; and notwithstanding
the same, the Law holds its course; and in pursuance thereof, we find an
attachment upon a prohibition in this form ensuing.

Put the Bishop of N. to his pledges, Regist. fo. 36.
that he be before our Justices, to show cause why he made to be summoned, and
by Ecclesiastical censures constrained Lay-persons, men or women, to appear
before him to swear unwillingly at the Bishops pleasure, to the great prejudice
of our Crown and Dignity, and contrary to the custom of the Kingdom of England.
And thus both King and Clergy were at contest for this power over the peoples
Consciences, to which neither had the right otherwise than by rules of Law.

Bigamists shall not be allowed their Clergy, Stat. Bigam. 4 Ed. 1. cap. 5.
whether they become such before the Council of Lions, or since; and that
Constitution there made shall be so construed.

Whatsoever therefore their Synods in those times pretended against the married
Clergy, it seems by this Law that they had Clergy that were married once
and again; and yet before and after the Council, were admitted as Clerks in the
judgment of the Law. But the general Council interposes their authority, and
deprives them that are the second time married, of all their privileges of
Clergy. It was it seems twenty years and more after that Council, before the
Churchmen in England were thoroughly reformed; for either some were still
Bigami at the making of this Law, or as touching that point it was vain; nor is
it easy to conceive what occasion should after so long a time move such
exposition, General Councils.
the words of the Constitution being, Bigamos omni privilegio clericali
declaramus esse nudatos. Now whether this slow Reformation arose from the
defect in Law, or in obedience thereto, may be gathered from some particulars
ensuing. First, it is apparent that the Canons of general Councils, eo nomine,
had formerly of ancient times gotten a kind of pre-eminence in this Nation; but
by what means, is not so clear. In the Saxon times, they were of no further
force than the great Council of this Kingdom allowed by express act. For the
Nicene Faith, and the first five general Councils, were received by Synodical
confirmations of this Kingdom made in the joint meeting both of the Laity and
Clergy; and during such joint consulting, the summons to the general Councils
was sent to the King to send Bishops, Abbots, etc. but after that the Laity
were excluded by the Clergy from their meetings, and the King himself also
served in the same manner; the Summons to the general Council issued forth to
the Bishops immediately, and in particular to each of them, and to the Abbots
and Priors in general; by virtue whereof, they went inconsulto Rege, Bineus
tom. 13 Ps. 2. p. 674. M. Paris.
and sometimes Rege renitente, and appeared either personally or by proxy.
Others came as parties, to give and receive direction, or hear Sentence in
matters tending to spiritual regards. And for this cause issued Summons even to
Kings; as at the Council of Lions aforesaid, M. Paris. An. 1245.
it is said, that the Pope had cited Regis terrae, and alios mundi principes,
and dictum principem, meaning Henry the third: the matter was for assistance to
the holy War, and to determine the matter between Henry the third and his
Clergy men. And as in that case, so in others of that kind, Kings would send
their Ambassadors or Proctors, and give them power in their Princes name
interessendi, tranctandi, communicandi and concludendi. First, of such matters
quae ad reformationem Ecclesiae universalis in capite and membris, Bineus tom.
3. P. 2. page 913 and tom. 4. p. 1. page 21.
then of such as concern fidei orthodoxae fulciamentum, Regumque ac principum
pacificationem, or any other particular cause which occasionally might be
inserted. So long then as Kings had their votes in the general Councils, they
were engaged in the maintenance of their decrees; and by this means entered the
Canon Law into Kingdoms. Nor was the vote of Kings difficult to be obtained,
especially in matters that trenched not upon the Crown; for the Pope (knowing
well that Kings were too wise to adventure their own persons into foraign parts
where the general Councils were holden, and that it was thrift for them to send
such Proctors that might not altogether spend upon the King's purse) allowed
Bishops and Clergymen to be Proctors for their Princes, that in the Negative
they might be pii inimici, and less active; but in the Affirmative zealous; and
so make the way wider, by the Temporal and Spiritual vote joined in one.
Neither did Kings only save their purse, but they also made their own further
advantage hereby; for by the engagement and respect which these their Proctors
had in Councils, they (being for the most part such as were had in best esteem)
obtained better respect to the cause that they handled, and speedier dispatch.

Nevertheless the case sometimes was such, as could not expect favor; and then
as the King's temper was, they would sometimes ride it out with full sail, and
to that end would either join with their Ecclesiastcal Proctors some of the
Barons and great men of their Realm, to add to the cry, and make their affairs
ring louder in the ears of fame (although the Pope had the greater vote) or
otherwise would send an inhibition unto their Proctors and their assistants; or
an injunction to look to the rights of the Crown, Fox Mart. P. 2. 263.
as Henry the Third did at the Council at Lions; and this sounded in nature of
a Protest, and (within the Realm of England) had the force of a Proviso, or
Saving. But if the worst of all come to pass, viz. that the Council passed the
cause against Kings without any Inhibition or Injunction, yet could it not bind
the Law of the Land, or Kings just Prerogatives, no not in these times of
Rome's hour, and of the power of darkness. For at a Synod holden by Archbishop
Peckham, An. 1280. the Acts of the Council of Lions were ratified, and amongst
others, a Canon against non-residency and pluralities; and yet neither Council
nor Synod could prevail; for in Edward the Second's time an Abbot presenting to
a Church vacant (as was supposed) by the Canon of pluralities, the King whose
Chaplain was disturbed, Antiq. Brit. Eccles. fol. 209
enjoined the Abbot to revoke his presentation upon this ground, Cum igitur,
etc. in English thus: Whereas therefore that Decree binds not our Clerks in
our service, in regard that the Kings and Princes of England from time to time
have enjoyed that liberty and prerogative, that their Clerks whilst they attend
upon their service shall not be constrained to undertake holy things, or to be
personally resident on their Benefices, etc.

And if this present Law be considered whereof we now treat, which took leave
to enact a sense upon a former Canon so long since made, and (which is all one)
to mak^ a general Council (will or nill it) to tread in the steps of an English
Parliament, or (which is more mean) to speak after the sense of an English
Declaration, that had not yet attained the full growth of a Statute, 30 ass.
pl. 5.
as was then conceived; it will evidently appear, that the power of a council
made up of a mixture of a few votes out of several Nations, or the major part
of them, being unacquainted with the Laws and Customs of Nations, (other than
their own) was too mean to set a Law upon any particular Nation contrary to its
own original and fundamental Law. And as the Voters sent to the grand Councils
from England were but few, so neither were the Proctors; as may appear from
this, that Pope Innocent, out of his moderation, if we may believe it, and to
avoid much expense, as he says, did order that the number of Proctors in such
cases should be few. But in truth, the times then were no times for moderation
amongst Popes and their Officers, and therefore it was another thing that
pinched; for multitude of Proctors, if their number had not been moderated,
might perhaps, if not prevail, yet so blemish the contrary party, that what the
Pope should get, must cost him loss of spirits, if not blood. And although the
Bishops being fast Friends to the Pope, by virtue of their Oath, did prevail in
power, and the Pope had the control of the Council: yet the exceeding number
of the Proctors, on the contrary, might render their conclusions somewhat
questionable in point of honesty, as being made against the minds of the
greater number of persons present, though their votes were fewer. To avoid this
difficulty therefore, for more surety-sake, the Popes enlarged the number of
Voters; for whereas it seems to be an ancient rule, that only four Bishops
should go out of England to the general Council, Hoveden. An. 1179.
in after-ages not one Bishop could be spared, unless in cases of great and
emergent consequence (as may appear by the Pope's Letter to Henry Third) and
the case required it: for the oppressions of the Pope began to ring so loud, M.
Paris. An. 1245.
as the holy Chair began to shake. Neither did Kings confine themselves to any
certain number of Proctors, notwithstanding the Pope's moderation; but as the
case required, sent more or less: as unto the Council at Pisa, for the
composing and quieting that great Schism in the Popedom, Henry the Fourth sent
solemn Ambassadors, and with them nigh eighty in all. But unto the Council at
Basil, Henry the Sixth sent not above twelve or thirteen, as Mr. Seldom more
particularly relates. Spicil. 215.
And unto the Council at Lions, formerly mentioned, the Parliament sent but six
or seven, to remonstrate their complaints of the extortions of the Court at
Rome, their Legates and Emissaries. The sum of all will be, that the Acts of
general Councils were but Counsels, which being offered to the sense of the
Parliament of England, might grow up to the degree of Laws, if the Parliament
liked them.

Nevertheless, National Synods in England undertook the quarrel of general
Councils: Synods.
for Archbishop Peckham, in a Synod, 1280. enjoined the Constitutions made in
the Council at Lions, to be observed under a curse, without consultation first
had with the Parliament, or before he knew whether they would be right or
wrong. And before him Boniface made Constitutions in opposition to the customs
of the Kingdom; so as the matter was now come to a kind of contest, whether
Synods or Parliaments should hold supremacy in doubtful cases concerning the
limits of the Ecclesiastical and Temporal power. For henceforth Kings must bid
adieu to the Synods, and sit no more amongst them; and Synods now think
themselves free to consult and determine what they please, without speaking
under correction; nor was there other remedy left to Kings but threats, Rot.
Pariiam. 18 H. 3. number, 17.
by Writs directed to the Bishops, firmiter inhibendo quod, sicut Baronias quas
de Rege tenent diligunt, nullo modo praesumant concilium tenere de aliquibus
quae ad coronam Regis attinent, vel quae ad personam Regis, vel statum suum,
vel statum concilii sui contingunt, quod si fecerint, Rex inde se capiat ad
Baronias suas.

And this prevailed so effectually, that the Bishops durst not adventure too
far, lest they should go beyond their guard; and therefore they come and ask
leave of the Parliament in cases that trenched upon the Law of the Kingdom;
Stat. Merton cap. 9.
as they did in the case of Bastardy, wherein they would have had their
consent, That Children born before Marriage might be made legitimate by the
Marriage subsequent. And yet they could not prevail; for they were answered,
Nolumus leges Angliae mutari, notwithstanding that the Canon Law and the Laws
of the Normans sided with them. And so they obtained not their desire, although
they still retained the Trial of general Bastardy unto themselves.

Nevertheless the times were such, as Kings being too weakly assisted by the
people, and the Clergy strongly seconded by the Pope, they took advantage of
those times of distraction, so as to hold themselves no farther obliged to the
King, than the Pope and their own covetousness would allow them: and to make
all sure, they had settled it so far as they were able, by a Constitution that
the Clergy were not bound to aid the King Papa inconsulto: A^tiq. Brit.
and they put it in practice in a Synod under Archbishop Winchelsie, Anno
1295. in the time of Edward the First; and although the King prevailed in the
conclusion at that time, yet from the times of Henry the Third, the Clergy for
future times granted their aids to the King by themselves, and apart from the
rest of the body of the Kingdom, and held themselves not bound by any aid
granted by the Parliament; albeit that their own aids granted in their Synods
were not obligatory unto the body of the Clergy in this Kingdom, unless first
allowed and confirmed by the Parliament. And thus is England become like a
two-bodied monster supported with one pair of Legs.

CHAP. LXVII. Mag. Charta.
Of the condition of the Freemen of England, of the Grand Charter, and other
Statutes, during the Reigns of these Kings.
SHattered asunder by broyls of Civil Wars, the Freemen having laid aside that
regard of the ancient mutual covenant, and bond of Decenners, are now become
weak, and almost enthralled to the lust of Kings, Lords, Pope, and English
Clergy: and therefore it is no wonder if Taxes and Tributes were many and new,
although most of them deserved not to march under any banner but the colors of
oppression; nor did any thing save them from the worst Tenure of all, but the
several interests of those superior powers which oftentimes did justle with
one another, and thereby gave the Commons liberty to take breath; so as though
for the present they lost ground, and hunted upon a cool scent, yet they still
retained the prey within their view. Sometimes they were cast far behind, other
times they recovered themselves: a Truce is cried, and Laws are made to
moderate all, and determine the bounds of every one; and thus comes the Grand
Charter upon the public Theater. The Historian says, it was the same with
that of King John's framing; and yet by comparing them together, we find them
disagreeing both in words and sense; and therefore shall sum the same up as
shortly as I can, observing the difference of the two Charters as I pass along.
The First Chapter concerned the Church, of which sufficient has been spoken.

The Freemen shall enjoy these Liberties to them and their Heirs for ever. cap.
2.


The Heir in Knight Service shall pay the ancient relief. cap. ^.


That Reliefs were settled by the Saxons, has been already showed, and also
that they were continued and confirmed by Henry the First: only in those times
they were paid in Horses, Arms, etc. But in aftertimes all was turned into
money, which was more beneficial for all.

Lords shall have their Wards bodies and Lands after homage received until the
full age, though the Ward be formerly Knighted. cap. 4. Vide Stat. de Wardis,
28 E. 1.


The Law of Wardship may seem more anciently seated in this Kingdom than the
Normans times; Glanv. lib. 6. c. 1, and 4.
for if the Statutes of Scotland bear any credit, that Law was in Scotland
before those times. The Lords were not to have the Wardship before they were
possessed of the Tenure, because it was theirs as a fruit of the Tenure,
according to the Saxon Law concerning distress, that it could not be in the
power of the Lord to distrain till he was possessed of the service. Stat.
Marlb. c. 6, and 7.
And if by fraudulent conveyance the Heir did hold the Lord out of possession,
a Writ of Ward did lie against him; and if he did not appear, the Lord might
seize the Lands, unless in case of Wardship, per cause de guard.

And in case the Lord would hold the Wardship longer than the full age of the
Heir, Stat. Marlb. cap. 16. and Prerog. Reg. c. 3.
an Assize did lie against the Lord; for the Heir could not enter without
Livery. But if the Heir were of full age at the time of the Ancestor's death,
the Lord could not enter the Lands; and yet he should have a Relief, and the
primer seisin.

And if the Heir entered the Lands before Homage done, he gained no Free hold,
though he were Knighted before, as this Law provideth. For it may seem that
these times of Civil War, Prerog. Reg. c. 13.
brought forth a trick of Knighting betimes, as an honorable encouragement for
young sparks to enter the field before they were complete men of discretion to
know whether the cause of War was good or evil. And yet reason might induce a
conceit, that he that was thought meet to do Knight Service in his own person,
might expect the maintenance fit for the ability of the person, and honor of
the service.

Grantees or their Assigns, or Committees of Wardships, Mag. Charta.
shall preserve the Land, etc. from Waste, and the Tenants from extortion.

They shall yield up the same stocked, cap. 6.
if they receive them stocked.

The first of these is the Law of common reason; for it is contrary to
Guardianship, to destroy that which by their office they ought to preserve. As
touching the words of the Law, the Grantees are omitted in the Charter of King
John; and also their Assignees, albeit that doubtless they were within the
intent and meaning of the Law. The matter declares plainly not only the
oppression of Lords upon their Wards, but also the corruption even of the Law
itself, that at the first aimed at the good of the Public, and honor of
Knight Service, but now was degenerated into the base desire of profit, by
making market of the Wards Estates and Marriages, that brought in strip and
waste of Estates, and niggardly neglect of the education and training up of the
persons of the Wards, and an imbasing of the generation of mankind, and spoil
of times. Nor did these times ever espy, or provide against the worst of these,
but only endeavored to save the estate by punishing the wasters in damages by
this Law, Stat. Gloc. c. 5.
and by forfeiture of the Wardship by a Law made in the time of Edward the
First; and this as well for Waste done during the time of the custody, as in
the lifetime of his Ancestors, by another Law in Edward the First's time.
Stat. de vasto. 20 E. 1.
And because the Escheators and their Underofficers used to serve themselves
out of the Estates of Minors, before they certified to the King his right; and
those were not within the Law of Magna Charta, Artic. sup. cart. c. 18.
or at least not so reputed: It was therefore afterward provided; that these
also should render damages in a Writ of Waste to be brought against them.

The marriage of Wards shall be without disparagement. cap. 7.


It was an ancient Law among the Germans, Tacitus mor. Germ.
and the Saxons brought it hither, and as a Law settled it, that Marriage must
be amongst equals; Mag. Charta.
but this the Danes and Normans slighted, and yet it continued, and was
revived. Now as the Lord had the tuition of the Ward instead of the Ancestor,
so had he the care of the marriage in such manner as the Ancestor might have
had if he had lived. For in case the Ward were stolen and married, the
Delinquent suffered fine and imprisonment. Or if the Ward married without the
Lord's consent, he shall have the double value, and hold the Land over till
satisfaction. Stat. Merton. cap. 6.
But in case the Lord marries the Ward within fourteen years of age to its
disparagement, he shall lose his Wardship thereby. cap. 7.
And if the Ward refuses to accept of a marriage tendered by the Lord before
her age of sixteen years, W. 1. c. 22.
the Lord shall hold the Lands till he have received the full value; and in
case where one Tenant holds of diverse Lords, the Lords by priority shall have
the marriage. These Laws were in use during the Reigns of those Kings, West. 2.
c. 16.
although it cannot be certainly concluded hereby, that the Wives portion
properly belonged to the Lord, as for his own benefit; partly because the
Female-Wards should have no advancement, if it belonged to the Lords; and
partly because this forfeiture was given to the Lords in nature of a penalty,
as appears by the frame of the Statute of Merton.

Widows shall have their Dower, cap 8.
inheritance, their inheritance which they have jointly with their Husbands,
Vide. Stat. Merton. cap. 1. and 2.
their marriage freely, and their Quarentine. Prerog. Reg. cap 4.


With due regard of the opinion of others, I shall propound my own. It seems
to me that the King is within this Law, as well as within the former Laws of
the Normans, and those of Henry the Second, that are of this kind; and as he is
within the compass of every Law of this Charter; and that it is called the
Grand Charter, as most immediately coming from the King to the people, and not
from the Lords. Nor is there any ground that the Law should intend to give
liberty to Widows of Wards belonging to inferior Lords to marry whom they
will, and that only the Kings Widows shall be bound. Nor did this suit with
the contest between the Barons and the King, that their Widows should be bound
unto the King, Mag. Charta.
and the Widows of their Tenants discharged from their tuition; and therefore I
conceive, by the word maritagium is not meant liberty of Marriage, but her
Marriage-portion, or rationabilis pars, according to the foregoing Laws of
Henry the First, and Henry the Second, and the Saxon Customs. But as touching
the liberty of Marriage, it is defined and expressed, cap. 9. Glanv. lib. 7.
cap. 12.
that the Widows shall not be compelled to marry; nevertheless if they shall
marry, they must marry with the Lord's liking; otherwise he might have an enemy
to be his Tenant, that might instead of homage and service, prove Traitor, and
be his ruin. Lastly, touching the Widows dwelling, the Law thought it
unreasonable that she should immediately after the death of her Husband be
exposed to be harbourless, and therefore ordained that she might continue in
her Husband's house Forty days, if it were not a Castle; and then she was to
have another dwelling assigned to her, because by common intendment she is not
supposed to be a person meet to defend a Castle: and this was called her
Quarentine; which I meet not with amongst the Saxon Laws, and therefore suppose
it to be of Norman original.

No Man's Land shall be seized for Debt to the King so long as the Personal
Estate will satisfy. cap. 10.
Nor shall his pledge be troubled, so long as the Principal is sufficient;
unless he refuse to satisfy, and then the pledge shall recover in value.

The first part hereof, was the issue of the Law concerning elegit, formerly
observed in the Saxon times; for the regard of Law principally extended unto
the person, next unto the Freehold, and lastly unto the goods. The latter part
of this Law was the Law of Pledges or Decenners in the same times; unto which
the Reader may resort for further light herein.

The City of London, cap. 11.
and other Cities, Buroughs, and Towns, and the Cinque Ports, and other Ports,
shall enjoy their ancient Liberties.

The whole Kingdom, and the Members thereof herein expressed, had all their
Liberties saved from the dint of Conquest by the Law of William the first; Mag.
Char.
upon which, although some of the succeeding Kings did invade, yet none of them
made any absolute disseisin, Seld. Spicil. fol. 192.
although disturbance in some particulars. But King John did not only confirm
them by his grand Charters, but by particular Charters to each Corporation,
with some enlargements; and in his grand Charter inserted one clause which in
the grand Charter of Henry the Third appears not, which thus ensues: Et ad
habendum commune concilium Regni de auxiliis assidendis, aliter quam in tribus
casibus praedictis; which if the barbarism of the Latin mislead me not, is
thus in English: And to have right of Common Council, or to be of the
Common Council of the Kingdom, for the assessing of aids, other than in three
cases aforesaid, viz. for redemption of their Captive King, for Knighting of
the Kings Son, and for his Daughters Marriage: because these three might be due
by the Common Law; the two latter by custom, the former by common right;
although mentioned from the late disaster of King Richard, which King John
might with shame enough remember, and expect the same measure from the censure
of an unquiet conscience. I shall not enter into debate concerning the omission
hereof in the later Charters; possibly it might seem a tautology. Nor
concerning the restriction, as if it did imply that the Burgesses had Vote only
in cases of general assesments, but shall leave it to the consideration of the
Reader.

No Distress shall be taken for greater service or other matter than is due.
cap. 12.


Distresses are in nature, no other than a summons in act, or the bringing of a
man to answer by seizure of part of his Goods; and it was used by the Saxons,
as has been showed: and because the rich men under color of seeking their
right, many times sought for wrong, and though they could not prevail in the
issue, yet prevailed so far, that the Defendant could not escape without charge
and hinderance; therefore the Law provided a Writ of remedy against unjust
vexation, Glanvil. lib. 12. cap. 9.
which Glanvil remembers us of: Mag. Char.
and yet because that remedy also carried with it matter of charge and
disturbance to the Plaintiff, and so the remedy might be worse than the
disease; therefore the Law defined distresses by circumstances of person,
matter, time, and place, under penalties of fine and amercement, Stat. Marlb.
cap. 1.
besides the recompense to the party; first, it must not be taken, Glanvil.
lib. 9. cap. 1. and 8.
but by leave from the Kings Court, unless in case of matters due by common
right, and upon complaint made by the Plaintiff. The King sent out a Summons in
this manner: Gloss. 215.
Henricus Rex Ang. Hominibus Abbatis de Ramsey, salutem. Precipio quod cito and
just reddatis Abbati Domino vestro quicquid ei debetis in censu, and firma,
and debitis, and placitis; quod si nolueritis, ipse vos inde constringat per
pecuniam vestram. And in all cases of matters due by common right, the distress
never was done in an arbitrary way, Glanvil. lib. 9. cap. 8. Stat. Marlb. cap.
2, 3, 4, 15.
but by Judicial Act in the Lord's Court. Secondly, no distress for suit shall
be made out of the Fee, nor against any person, but such as are of that Fee.
Nor shall any distress be made in the King's Highway or open street, but by the
King's Officer, and special Writ; because distress is incident to service, and
that is due as from the Fee: and therefore by common right the same must be
recovered from the Fee, and such as owe service in the same; but the Highway
or open street are more properly a Franchise belonging to the King, although
the Soil happily may be the Lords. And therefore it was an old Law, that they
should be under the King's safeguard, Ll. Inae.
Sit pax publica per communes vias; and no violence must be there tolerated but
by the King's special Writ, which presupposes the especial notice taken by the
King of the nature of the occasion. A moderation also must be observed in the
taking of the distress, for it must not be excessive; and also in keeping
thereof: for if the owner will, he may replevy the same, Marlb. c. 21. Glanvil.
lib. 12. cap. 12.
according to the ancient course; and the Sheriff must grant replevy if it be
demanded, although formerly no replevy was without special Writ; and yet that
also not always readily obeyed: for the times were such, as the Lords were bold
with the King's Courts and Ministers, and refused the order of the Law. Now in
such cases wherein the matter concerned contempt of the King's Authority, Mag.
Chart.
a Fine was set upon the Offender; but in case it concerned only a Tort done
to the party, he was amerced: The one is called Redemption, because the penalty
otherwise must lie upon the person, if it be not redeemed by pecuniary Fine;
the other is called Amercement, Mircr. cap. 5. Sect. 3.
which is originally a satisfaction unto the party wronged, by recompense out
of the personal Estate of the Delinquent. Thirdly, as touching the matter of
the distress, it must not be of Plough beasts or Sheep, Distric. Scac. Artic.
Mag. Cart. cap. 12.
unless in case of damage fesant, if other distress may be had; for the Law had
a care of such Cattle as were most of public concernment, and which was the
main stock of subsistence, so far as Justice would allow. And therefore the
unjust taking of any man's Cattle by any person whatsoever, is liable to the
same penalties that unjust distresses are. West. 1. c. 16.
Fourthly, concerning the using of the distress, it must not be sold, no not in
the King's case, till fifteen days be past, after it is taken; nor must it be
carried out of the County, Marlb. cap. 4. Distric. Scac.
but it must be so impounded as the owner may come to feed it; and it must be
discharged if the owner give security of satisfaction before the return of the
Writ. Artic. sup. Cart. cap. 12.
Fifthly, the intent of the distresses must be that which is just, and
therefore not for other suit than by the Feoffment is due, or else by
Prescription; and in case many are jointly seized, Marlb. cap. 9.
the suit shall be by one, and the rest shall contribute. Nor must any man be
compelled to show his Title to his Land by distress. cap. 22.


The Common Pleas shall be holden in one certain place. cap. 13.


The Office of Judge of the Common Pleas, was, in my opinion, distinct and
several from that of the Crown-pleas; nor though one and the same man might
execute both Authorities, does it therefore follow that it was by one and the
same power; as if being Judge, he had thereby power in all matters of the
Common Pleas, and also of the Crown. For though it be true that Bracton says,
Capitales Just. nostri.
The King has one proper Court wherein are the Chief Judges, which both by his
own Testimony, and Briton's also, did hear and determine Causes of all sorts;
yet is it true also, that it was by Appeal, or Writ of Error, as in case of
false Judgment; and that the King had plures curias, Marlb. cap. 20.
which doubtless had their proper work. And in the time of Henry the second, it
is clear that six were especially assigned for the Common Pleas throughout the
whole Realm; and yet by another especial Commission, or Letters Patent, the
same men might also have power to determine matters of the Crown, as at this
day, in their several Circuits. This Law therefore does not, as I conceive,
work any alteration, but only in this, that whereas formerly the Judges of
Common Pleas attended on the King's Court continually, as all other Judges did;
and whither the King removed, they did the like, which was a great uncertainty
and grievance unto the Commons; henceforth they are fixed to a certain place.

Assize of Novel Disseisin and Mortdancester shall be determined in the proper
County only, cap. 14.
and by the Justices itinerant sent by the King or his Chief Justices.

The Law was so declared in Henry the second's time, and was questionless put
in practice, so far forth as with convenience to the Judges might be; but now
the convenience of the people is preferred, and they must not be brought up to
the King's Court, but the Justices must come down to them. And yet in case of
difficulty, the Bench, where the Common Pleas are holden, must determine the
matter; and where the time in the Iter in one County is too scant, the Remanets
shall be adjourned over to be tried elsewhere in that Circuit: Westminster. c. 51.
which shows that the Judges itinerant had their time proportioned out to
every County. These Trials also were so favored, as in the then holy times of
Advent, and Septuagessima or Lent, they might be tried; which although it was
gained by Prayer made by the King to the Bishops, as the words of that Law are
concluded, yet it shows that the Parliament had so much light as to hold the
time not inherently holy, but merely sequestered by the Will of the Clergy. The
Plaintiffs also in Mortdancester may be diverse, Stat. Gloc. c. 6.
if there be diverse Heirs of one Ancestor by one Title. And if there be
joynt-Tenants, and the Writ be against but one, Conjunct. feofat. An. 34. E. 1.
and the same pleaded, the Writ shall abate; but if joynt-Tenancy be pleaded,
and the Plea be false, the Defendant shall be fined and imprisoned. And if in
the Action the Verdict be for the Plaintiff, he shall recover Damages.

Darrein presentment shall be taken only in the common Bank. cap. 15.


Trials in the common Bank, or other Courts at Westminster, have ever had an
honorable esteem above those in the County by Nisi prius, although all be
equally available. This might be one cause why the Titles of Churches were
still retained at the common Bank, whenas all other rode Circuit; for that
Churches affairs in those times were of high regard. Speed of Trial also was
not little regarded herein; for Justices by Nisi prius properly were but for
enquiry, till the Statute at Westminster, the second made them of Oyer and Terminer
in the cases of Quare Impedit, West. 2. c. 30.
and Darrein presentment, and gave them power to give Judgment. And thus the
Commons gained still in point of convenience.

Freemen shall be amerced according to the degree of the fault, cap. 16.
saving to them their Freehold, and to Merchants their main Stock, and to
Villains their Waynage; and Clergymen shall be amerced according to their
Lay-fee. Barons shall be amerced by their Peers, others by the Vicinage.

In this, regard is to be had first of the persons that are to be amerced, then
of the parties by whom, and lastly, of the nature and quantity of Amercements.
The persons amerced are ranked into four Classes; Barons, Clergy, Freemen,
and Villains. But in regard of the parties by whom they are to be amerced, they
are but two; Barons, and Freemen; for the Clergy, Villains, and Freemen, are
to be amerced by the Freemen of the Neighborhood. In what Courts these
Amercements shall be, the Stat. Marlbr. Marlb. cap. 19.
tells us, not before the Escheator, nor other that make enquiry by Commission
or Writ, nor before the Justices of Assize, or Oyer and Terminer, but only
before the Chief Justices, or Justices itinerant. The Statute of Westminster
adds a fifth Classis of Cities and Towns, Westminster. 1. c. 6.
by express words; which seems not so necessary, unless in pillaging and
oppressing times: for they were taken to be within the Statute of Magna Charta,
Miror. cap. 5. sect. 4.
though not therein named. The rule of the quantity of Amercements is now set
down in general, and left to the discretion of the Peers or Vicinage, which
formerly by the Saxons were specially set down in the Law. The rule in general
is with a ne plus ultra, viz. not further or more than that the party amerced
may spare, and yet hold on in the maintenance of his course, according to his
degree. And it must be also according to the quantity of the offense; for the
greatest Amercements must not be ranked with the least offenses: so as in every
degree the main sustenance of the party is saved; yea, the Villains (however
mean they be) they must have their maintenance. And this shows that Villains
had a maintenance, which was under the protection of the Law, and not under the
gripe of their Lords to all intents, unless they were the Kings Villains, who
it seems were merely under the Kings mercy, as being both their Lord and
King, against whom they could hold nothing as properly their own. And therefore
in all other cases, even then the Villains were born under a kind of liberty,
as in the Saxons time formerly has been declared; which the Law protected
against their own Lords.

No man shall be compelled to make, repair, or maintain any Bridges, cap. 17.
and 18.
Banks, or Causies, other or otherwise, than they were wont to be made,
repaired, or maintained in the time of Henry the second.

The limitation to the times of Henry the second, shows that his Justice was
such as maintained the common rights of men; but in the times of Richard the
first, Miror. cap. 5. sect. 2.
and more especially of King John, those Rivers, Waters, and Fishings formerly
used in common, were encroached upon, enclosed, and appropriated to particular
men's uses; which occasioned many Bridges, Banks, and Causies to be made and
repaired, to the great charge of private men: all which are discharged by this
Law.

No Sheriff, cap. 19.
Constable, Coroner, or other Bailiff, shall hold any Pleas of the Crown.

Escheators are also expressed in the old books of Magna Charta, and the
Abridgements, however it seems that it is within the intent of the Law, which
was made to avoid the extraordinary oppression that these Officers exercised
upon the people. For Escheators, under color of inquiry of Estates of men,
would enquire of matters concerning the lives of men; and Sheriffs that had
power of Trials in cases of Theft, Ll. Hen. 1. c. 8. Glanvil. lib. 1. cap. 2.
as has been already shown, abused the same for their own benefit, because in
such cases they had the forfeitures. This Law therefore takes away such
occasions, viz. from the Sheriffs and Coroners, and Bailiffs or Justices (other
than by express commission thereto assigned) all power to hold Pleas of the
Crown by trial, leaving unto them nevertheless, power of enquiry, of which
anciently they had the right.

If the Kings Tenant dies supposed in arrear, cap. 20.
an Inventory shall be made of his Stock by honest men, but it shall not be
removed till Accounts be cleared; and the overplus shall go to the Executors,
saving to the Wife and Children their reasonable part.

The first clause hereof was a Law in Henry the first's time, and a customary
Law in Henry the second's time, Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 5.
being a remedy against an old Norman Riot of the Lord's seizure of the whole
personal Estate of the party deceased, under color of a Law. The second part
concerning the overplus, has this additional subjoyned in the Charter of King
John: If any Free man die intestate, his Chattels shall be divided by his
Parents and his Friends in the presence of the Church, saving to every one
their proper debts. And thus since the Conquest, the Churchmen encroached by
degrees unto a great power in matters Testamentary; I say by degrees: for as
yet by this Law it appears, that they were but Overseers or Eyewitnesses;
for as yet right of ordering or disposing they had none, as may appear in that
case of a Bastard dying without Issue and intestate, Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 16.
the Lord shall have his personal Estate: And in all cases the Executor had
then nothing but bare Assets, and the overplus was assigned between the Wife
and Children, according to their reasonable part. Or if the party died
intestate, the next friends did administer, paying the Debts, and making
Dividend of the overplus into the reasonable parts; according to the ancient
Saxon custom still continued. Coke Instit. 2. page 33.
Nor does the testimony cited out of Bracton, prove any other than that the
Ancestor has free power to order his Estate as he pleases, and that the
Children shall have no more than is left unto them by their Ancestor, either in
his Will, or in case of dying intestate, by the custom or Law, which is, and
ever, was the rationabilis pars.

No purveyance for any Castle out of the same Town where the Castle is, cap. 21.
but present satisfaction must be made: and if in the same Town, satisfaction
must be made within forty days.

Purveyance was ancient provision for the necessities of the public, and so
far was commendable, seeing it is not the common case of all men to regard the
public above their own private interest; therefore the public must provide
for it self, by their means in whom the public is most concerned. And this was
in those elder times, but in two cases; viz. of Kings and Castles; in the one
of which the Government is principally concerned, in the other the public
defense. For it may be well conjectured, that Castles were either first made in
places commodious for habitation, and great Towns gathered to them for their
better safety; or that the Towns were first gathered in places of commodious
habitation, and then Castles were made for their better defense. Or if they
were imposed upon them by the Victor to keep them in awe, they were
nevertheless by continuance together become tractable, and conspired for the
mutual defense of each other. But as touching such Cittadels or Castles that
were set in solitary places, they may seem rather first intended for the
particular defense of some particular Man and his Family, and neighboring
Tenants; and therefore in the purveyance for Castles, it seems the proper Town
wherein it is, principally liable to that duty, because their safety is more
principally interested: and therefore Prizes there taken, may be paid at a day
to come; but in all other places immediately. Nevertheless this lasted not
long; for the Soldiers found out a trick of favoring their own Quarters, and
preserving them in heart against a back Winter, knowing that at such times it
is better to seek for provision nigh, than to be compelled to seek far off. But
this Stratagem was cut off by the next King, who inhibited all manner of
purveyance in any other Town, West. 1. c. 7.
than in the same Town wherein the Castle is seated. This was a charge that was
but Temporary and occasional: That which was more lasting and burdensome upon
the Subjects, was purveyance for the King; which nevertheless cannot be
avoided, by reason of the greatness of his Retinue, especially in those days;
and if they should have their resort to the Market, the same could not be free
to the people, for that the first service must be for the Kings Household, and
so what scraps will be left for the Commons, Artic. super cart. cap. 2.
no man can tell. It was therefore necessary for the Kings Family, to be
maintained by purveyance; and to avoid the many inconveniences which might and
did arise in those spoiling times, It was ordained, 1. That it should be Felony
for any Purveyor to purvey without Warrant. 2. That none but the Kings Purveyor
must purvey for the Kings house, and that he must purvey only for the Kings
house; and to purvey no more than is necessary; and to pay for the things they
take. And because Kings were oftentimes necessitated for removal from place to
place, purveyance of carriage was also allowed: West. 1. c. 32.
And in case the Subjects were grieved, either by more purveyance than was
necessary, or by non-payment for the Commodities so taken, or with composition
for the Kings debts; for such purveyance the Offenders were liable to fine and
imprisonment. Artic. super cart. cap. 2.
Or if they were grieved by Purveyors without Warrant, the Offender was to be
proceeded against as in case of Felony.

He that serves in Castle-guard, cap. 22.
is not liable to payment of Rent for that service; nor is be compellable to
either, so long as be is in the service in the Army.

By the ancient custom none but a Knight might be charged with the guard of a
Castle belonging to the King, for the letter of this Law mentions only such;
and therefore to hold by Castle-guard, is a Tenure in Knight Service. And it
seems that Rent for Castle-guard originally was consistent with
Knight Service, and that it was not annual, but promiscuously Knights might
either perform the service, or pay Rent in lieu thereof; and upon occasion did
neither, if the King sent them into the field. And lastly, that a Knight might
either do the service in his own person, or by his Esquire, or another
appointed by him thereto.

No Knights, nor Lords, nor Church-mens Carriages, nor no man's Wood shall be
taken against the Owners consent; nor shall any man's Carriages be taken, cap.
23.
if he will pay the Hire limited by the Law.

Churchmen were exempted from charge to the Kings Carriages, merely in favor
to the Canon, which exempted the Goods of the Clergy from such Lay-service;
nevertheless the complaints of the Clergy formerly mentioned, show that this
was not duly observed. Knights and Lords were discharged not only for the
maintenance of their Port, but more principally because they were public
servants for the defense of the Kingdom in time of War: and the Kingdom was
then equally served by themselves and their equipage, and their carriages, as a
necessary assistant thereunto.

The King shall have no more profit of Felons Lands than the year and a day,
cap. 24.
and the Lord is to have the remainder.

Anciently the Lords had all the Estate of Felons, being their Tenants, and the
King had only a Prerogative to waste them, Instit. 2.
as a penalty, or part thereof; but afterward the Lords by agreement yielded
unto the King the year and a days profit, to save the Lands from spoil: and in
continuance of time the King had both the year and day, and waste. Bract. lib.
3. fol. 137.
Fugitives also were in the same case, viz. Prerog. Reg. cap. 16.
such as deserted their Country either in time of need, or such as fled from
the Trial of Law in criminal cases: for in both cases the Saxons accounted them
as common Felons. Nevertheless the two customs of Gloucester and Kent are saved
out of this Law by the Statute; the first whereof saves the Land to the Heir
from the Lord, and the second saves the same to the Heirs Males, or for want of
such, to the Heirs Females; and to the Wife her moity until she be espoused to
another man, Prerog. Reg. cap. 14. Fits. 2. E. ^. Tit. Eschea. 11.
unless she shall forfeit the same by fornication during her Widow-hood. And by
the same Law also the King had all Escheats of the Tenants of Archbishops, and
Bishops, during the vacancy, as a perquisite. But Escheats of Land and Tenement
in Cities or Buroughs, the King had them in jure coronae, of whomsoever they
were holden.

All Wears shall be destroyed, cap. 25.
but such as are by the Seacoast.

The Lieutenant of the Tower of London, as it seemed, claimed a Lordship in the
Thames, and by virtue thereof had all the Wears to his own use, as appears by
a Charter made to the City of London, recited in the second Institutes upon
this Law; and this was to the detriment of the Freemen, especially of the City
of London, in regard that all Freemen were to have right of free passage
through Rivers, as well as through Highways; and purprestures in either were
equally noxious to the common liberty. And therefore that which is set down
under the example or instance of the Rivers of Thames and Medway, contained all
the Rivers in England; albeit that other parts of the Kingdom had not the like
present regard as the City of London had.

The Writ of precipe in capite shall not be granted of any Freehold, cap. 26.
whereby a man may be in danger of losing his Court thereby.

It seems that it was one of the oppressions in those times, that if a Suit
were commenced in the inferior or Lords Court, concerning a Freehold, a Writ
of precipe in capite might be had, upon a Surmise that the Freehold was holden
in capite; which might prove an absolute destruction to the inferior Court,
and was the spoil of the Demandants case: and therefore I think the Charter of
King John, instead of the word Court, has the word Cause.

There shall be but one known Weight and Measure, cap. 27.
and one breadth of Clothes, throughout the Realm of England.

This Law of Weights and Measures was anciently established amongst the Saxons,
Ll. Edgar. c. 8.
as formerly has been showed, and continued in the Normans times, and
confirmed by Richard the first and King John. And as touching the measure of
the breadth of Clothes, although it might seem to abridge the liberty of
particular persons, yet because it was prejudicial to the common Trade of the
Kingdom, it was settled in this manner to avoid deceit, and to establish a known
price of Clothes. And it seems that Wine was ordinarily made in England as
well as Ale; otherwise the Measures of Wine could not have been established by
a Law in England, if they had been altogether made in other Countries.

Inquisition of Life and Member shall be readily granted without Fees. cap. 28.


This was a Law of latter original, made to take away a Norman oppression; for
by the Saxon Law, as has been already noted, No man was imprisoned for Crime
(not bailable) beyond the next County Court or Sheriff's Torn: but when those
rural Courts began to lose their power, and the Kings Courts to devour Trials
of that nature, especially by the means of the Justices itinerant, which were
but rare, and for diverse years many times intermitted; during all which time,
supposed Offenders must lie in Prison; which was quite contrary to the liberty
of the Free men amongst the Saxons: This occasioned a new device to save the
common liberty by special Writs sued out by the party imprisoned or under bail,
supposing himself circumvented by hatred and malice; and by the same directed
to the Sheriff and others, an Inquisition was taken, and Trial made of the
Offense, whether he deserved loss of Life or Member; and if it were found for
the supposed Offender, he was bailed till the next coming of the Justices: and
for this the Writ was called the Writ of inquisition of Life or Member; and
sometimes the Writ de odio and atia. But these Inquests were soon become
degenerate, and subject to much corruption, and therefore as soon met with a
countercheck from the Law: Or first rather a regulation; West. 1. c. 11.
for it was ordained, that the Inquest should be chosen upon Oath; and that two
of the Inquest at least should be Knights, and those not interessed in the
Cause. Glocest. cap. 9.
But yet this could not rectify the matter; for it seemed so impossible to do
Justice and show Mercy this way, that the Writ is at length taken away, and men
left to their lot till the coming of Justices itinerant. But this could not be
endured above seven years; West. 2. c. 29.
for though the King be a brave Soldier, and prosperous, yet the people
overcome him, and recover their Writs de odio and atia again.

Lords shall have the Wardships of their Tenants Heirs, Mag. Charta. cap. 29.
although they hold also of the King in Petit Serjeanty, Socage, Burgage, or
Fee-farm.

Inferior Lords had the same right of Wardships with the King for their
Tenures in Knight Service, although their Tenants did hold also of the King;
unless they held of him in Knight Service, which was a service done by the
Tenant's own person, or by the person of his Esquire, or other deputy in his
stead. But as touching such service as was wont to be done to him by render, or
serving him with Arms, or other utensils; this was no Knight Service, Glanv.
lib. 7. cap. 9.
though such utensils concerned War, but was called Petit Serjeanty, as in the
Law Books does appear. Nevertheless Henry the Third had usurped Wardships in
such cases also, and the same amongst others occasioned the Barons Wars.

No Judge shall compel a Freeman to confess matter against himself upon Oath,
cap 30.
without complaint first made against him. Nor shall receive any complaint
without present proof.

This Law in the Original is set down in another kind of phrase in the first
part thereof, which is obscure by reason thereof: in express words it is thus;
No Judge shall compel any man ad legem manifestam; which implies, that the
matter was otherwise obscure, if the party that was complained of, or
suspected, did not manifest the same by his own declaring of the truth, or
matter enquired after; and therefore they used in such cases to put him to
Oath, and if he denied the matter, or acquitted himself, the Judge would
sometimes discharge him, or otherwise put him to his Compurgators; and this was
called lex manifesta, or lex apparens. And it was a trick first brought in by
the Clergy, and the Temporal Judges imitated them therein; and this became a
snare and sore burden to the Subjects. To avoid which, they complain of this
new kind of Trial; and for remedy of this usurpation, this Law reviveth and
establishes the only and old way of Trial; Bracton f. 106.
for Glanvil says, Ob infamiam non solet juxta legem terrae aliquis per legem
apparentem se purgare, nisi prius convictus fuerit vel confessus in curia: and
therefore no man ought to be urged upon such difficulties, unless by the
express Law of the Land. The old way of Trial was, first to bring in a
Complaint, and Witnesses ready to maintain the same; and therefore both Appeals
and Actions then used to conclude their pleas with the names of Witnesses
subjoyned, which at this day is implied in those general words, in their
conclusions, Et inde producit sectam suam; that is, he brings his sect or suit,
Seld. super Hengham.
or such as do follow or affirm his complaint; as another part also is implied
in those words, Et hoc paratus est verificare. For if the Plaintiffs sect or
suit of Witnesses did not fully prove the matter in fact, the Defendant's
Averment was made good by his own Oath, and the Oaths of Twelve men, and so the
Trial was concluded.

No Freeman shall be imprisoned or disseised of his Freehold or Liberties,
cap. 31.
outlawed, or banished, or invaded, but by the Law of the Land, and judgment
of his Peers. Nor shall Justice be sold, delayed, or denied.

This is a comprehensive Law, and made up of many Saxon Laws; or rather an
enforcement of all Laws, and a remedy against oppression, past, present, and to
come. And concerns first the person, then his livelihood; as touching the
person, his life, and his liberty; his life shall be under the protection of
the Law, and his liberty likewise, so as he shall be shut into no place by
Imprisonment, nor out of any place by Banishment; but shall have liberty of
ingress and egress. His Estate both real and personal, shall also be under the
protection of the Law; and the Law also shall be free, neither denied nor
delayed. I think it needless to show how this was no new Law, but a
confirmation of the old, and reparation added thereto, being much impaired by
stormy times; for the sum of all the foregoing discourse tends thereto.

Merchants shall have free and safe passage, cap. 32.
and trade without unjust Taxes, as by ancient custom they ought. In time of
War, such as are of the Enemies Countries shall be secured till it appear how
the English Merchants are used in their Countries.

That this was an ancient Law, the words thereof show, besides what may be
observed out of the Laws of Aetheldred, and other Saxon Laws. So as it
appears, that not only the English Freemen and Natives had their liberties
asserted by the Law, but also Forreiners, if Merchants, had the like liberties
for their persons and goods, concerning Trade, and maintenance of the same; and
were hereby enabled to enjoy their own under the protection of the Law, as the
Freemen had. And unto this Law the Charter of King John added this ensuing.

It shall be lawful for every Freeman to pass freely to and from this Kingdom,
saving Fealty to the King, unless in time of War; and then also for a short
space, as may be for the common good, excepting Prisoners, Outlaws, and those
Countrymen that are in enmity, and Merchants, who shall be dealt with as
aforesaid.

And it seems that this Law of free passage out of the Kingdom, was not
anciently fundamental, but only grounded upon reason of State, although the
Freemen have liberty of free passage within the Kingdom according to that
original Law, Sit pax publica per communes vias; and for that cause, as I
suppose, it was wholly omitted in the Charter of Henry the Third; as was also
another Law concerning the Jews, which because it left an influence behind it,
(after the Jews were extinct in this Nation) and which continues even unto
this day, I shall insert it in this short sum:

After death of the Jew's debtor, no usury shall be paid during the minority of
the Heir, though the debt shall come into the King's hand. And the debt shall
be paid, saving to the Wife her Dower and maintenance for the Children,
according to the quantity of the Debtors Land, and saving the Lord's service;
and in like manner of debts to others.

The whole doctrine of Usury fell under the Title of Jews; for it seems it
was their Trade, and their proper Trade hitherto. It was first that I met with,
Mag. Char. Council. Brit. 299.
forbidden at a Legatine Council nigh 300 years before the Normans times: but
by the Confessor's Law it was made penal to Christians, to the forfeiture of
Estate, and Banishment; and therefore the Jews and all their substance were
holden to be in nature of the King Villains, as touching their Estate; Ibid.
623. Glanvil. lib. 7. cap. 16.
for they could get nothing, but was at his mercy. And Kings did suffer them to
continue this Trade for their own benefit; yet they did regulate it as touching
Infants, as by this Law of King John, M. Paris. An. 1229. Merton cap. 5.
and the Statute at Merton, does appear. But Henry the Third did not put it
into his Charter, as I think, because it was no liberty of the Subjects, Stat.
de Judais. An. 18. E. 1.
but rather a prejudice thereto; and therefore Edward the First wholly took it
away by a Statute made in his time, and thereby abolished the Jews.

Tenants Lands, cap. 33.
holden of Lands escheated to the King, shall hold by the same services as
formerly.

In all alienations of Lands, cap. 34.
sufficient shall be left for the Lords distress.

Submitting to the judgment of the learned, Perog. Reg. cap. 7.
I conceive that as well in the Saxon times as until this Law, any Tenant might
alien only part of his Lands, and reserve the services to the alienor, because
he could not reserve service (upon such alienation) unto the Lord Paramount,
other than was formerly due to him, without the Lord's consent; and for the
same reason could they not alien the whole Tenancy, to bind the Lord without
his express license, saving the opinion in the book of Assizes, because no
Tenant could be enforced upon any Lord, 20 ass. pl. 17.
lest he might be his Enemy. Nevertheless, it seems that de facto Tenants did
usually alien their whole Tenancy; and although they could not thereby bar the
Lord's right, yet because the Lord could not in such cases have the distress of
his own Tenant, this Law saved so much from alienation as might serve for
security of the Lord's distress. But Tenants were not thus satisfied; the Lords
would not part with their Tenants, although the Tenants necessity was never so
urgent upon them to sell their Lands; and therefore at length they prevailed by
the Statute of Quia emptores to have power to sell all, 18 Edw. 1. West. 3. c.
1.
saving to the Lords their services formerly due: and thus the Lords were
necessitated to grant Licenses of alienation to such as the Tenants could
provide to buy their Lands. Nor was this so prejudicial to the Lords in those
days, when the public quiet was settled, as it would have been in former times
of War, whenas the Lord's right was maintained more by might, and the aid of
his Tenants; than by Law, which then was of little power.

The 35th Chapter I have formerly mentioned in the Chapter concerning the
Clergy. cap. 35.


No man shall be appealed by a Woman for the death of any but her own Husband.
cap. 36.


The right of Appeal is grounded upon the greatest interest. Now because the
Wives interest seems wholly to be swallowed up in her Husband, therefore she
shall have an Appeal of the death of him only; and such also was the Law in
Glanvil's time. How far this point of interest shall extend to the degrees of
Consanguinity, the Norman Law formerly has shown. And against whom Appeals did
lie, Mag. Chart. West. 1. c. 14.
the Statute at Westminister tells us, viz. not only against the principal,
but also against accessories; yet not against them till the principal be
attainted. And because it was ordinary for men of naught to appeal others in a
malicious way, it was by another Law established, West. 2. c. 13.
that if the party appealed was acquitted, the appealor should not only render
damages, but be imprisoned for a year.

The County Court shall be holden at the wonted time. cap. 36.


The Torn shall be holden at the accustomed place twice in the year, viz. after
Easter and Michaelmas.

The view of Frank-pledges shall be holden at Michaelmas.

The Sheriff shall not extort.

The Sheriff's Courts had now lost somewhat of their Jurisdiction, though for
time and place they are confirmed statu quo, to the end that through
uncertainty thereof the suitor might not make defaults, and be amerced. Yet
they lost much of their respect within the compass of these few years by two
Laws; Merton. c. 10.
the one of which, made at Merton, allowed all suitors to the rural Courts to
appear by Proxy or Attorney, which it seems had power to vote for the
Masters, in all cases public and private; and did not only themselves grow
into parties and maintenance of Quarrels, and so spoiled these Courts of their
common Justice, but rendered the Freemen ignorant and careless of the common
good of the Country, and given over to their own private interest. And though
the corruption of Justice was soon felt, and against it a Law was provided,
viz. That the Sheriff should not allow of such corrupt Attorneys; West. 1. c.
33.
yet this was no cure to the Freemen, who were still suffered to wax wanton at
home, albeit that they were discharged from doing their suit in all other
Hundreds but that wherein they dwell. Marlb. c. 10.
The second Law that took away much honor from these Courts, Ibid.
was that Law at Marlbridge, that discharged the Baronage of England and the
Clergy from their attendance at such service; and this also opened the door
wider to oppression. For where greatness is, it carries therewith honor from
the meaner sort, and a kind of awe and stop unto the minds of such men that
otherwise would riot without restraint: and though it might also be said, that
the pretense of great men in such Courts would oversway the meaner, and make
strong parties; yet it must also be acknowledged, that these parties being
greater are the fewer, and do not so generally corrupt all sorts, as the
corruption of the meaner sort do. It is said by the wise man, Where the poor
oppress the poor, it is like a raging rain that leaves no food. The last branch
in this Law is an inhibition to the Sheriff from extortion; and surely there
was great need, and much more need than ever, now that the Lords and Clergy are
absent. It was thought that the great occasion of the Sheriff's oppression was
from above; I mean from the King, that raised the values of the Farm of
Counties granted to the Sheriffs; Artic. sup. cart. cap. 13, 14 Stat. de
vicecom. An. 9. E. 2.
for in those days Sheriffs gave no accounts, as of later times they have done;
and therefore the Charter of King John, between the 17th and 18th Chap.
inserteth this Clause, Omnes Comitat. and Hundred. Wapentag. and Trethingi sint
ad antiquas firmas, absque ullo incremento, exceptis Dominicis Maneriis
nostris. But this did not work the work, although it took away occasion; for
the humor was fed from within, and turned to a sore upon that place that could
never be cured to this day. Mag. Chart.
Nor could the wisdom of times find other help to keep the same from growing
mortal, but by scanting the diet, and taking away that power and jurisdiction
which formerly it enjoyed.

The 37th Chapter has been already noted in the Chapter of the Clergy cap. 37.
next foregoing.

Escuage shall be taxed as was wont in the time of Henry the second. cap. 38.


The Charter of King John has superadded hereunto this ensuing provision:
There shall be no Escuage set in the Kingdom, except for the redeeming of the
King's person, making of his eldest Son a Knight, and on marriage of his eldest
Daughter; and for this there shall be only reasonable aid. And in like manner
shall the aids of the City of London be set. And for the assessing of Escuage,
we will summon the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and greater Barons of
the Kingdom, specially by our several Writs; and will cause to be summoned in
general by our Sheriffs and Bailiffs all other our Tenants in capite, to be at
a certain day after Forty days at the least, and at a certain place; and we
will set down the cause in all our Writs. And the matter at the day appointed
shall proceed according to the counsel of those that shall be present, although
all that were summoned do not come. And we will not allow any man to take aid
of his Freemen, unless for redemption of his body, and making his eldest Son a
Knight, and on marriage for his eldest Daughter; and this shall be a reasonable
aid only.

Thus far the Charter of King John concerning this point of Tax or Assessment;
M. Paris.
and if the History says true, the Charter of Henry the Third was one and the
same with that of King John, then either this was not lest out in Henry the
Third's Charter, in that Historians time; or if it was omitted in the original,
it was supposed to be included in the general words of the Law, as being
accustomed in times past. And then these particulars will be emergent: First,
that the Aids and Escuage in Henry the First's time, were assessed by the same
way with that in this Charter of King John; M. Paris. An. 1214, 1215.
for that all the quarrel between the Lords and King John, was concerning the
Charter of Henry the first, which the Lords swear to maintain. Secondly, 25
Edw. 1. c. 6.
that neither Aids nor Escuage were granted, or legally taken, 34 Edw. 1. c. 1.
but by Act of Parliament, West. 1. c. 36.
although the rate of them was settled by common custom, according to the
quantity of their Fee. Thirdly, that some Parliaments in those times, as
concerning such matters, consisted only of such men as were concerned by way
of such charge, by reason of their Tenancy: for Escuage only concerned the
Tenants by Knight Service, and therefore those only were summoned unto such
Parliaments as only concerned Escuage. Nor had the City of London nor the
Burgesses right to vote in such cases, it is said p. 258. And thus the
Forest-Laws that were made in the time of Richard the First, were made by the
consent of Archbishops, Hoveden. 44. ^.
Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, and Knights of the whole Kingdom: for what the
great men gained, they gained for themselves and their Tenants. And the truth
is, that in those times, although public damage concerned all, yet it was
ordinary for Kings to make a show of summoning Parliaments, whenas properly
they were but Parliamentary meetings of some such Lords, Clergy, and others, as
the King saw most convenient to drive on his own design. And therefore we find
that Henry the Third about the latter part of his Reign, Mag. Charta.
when his Government grew toward the dregs, he having in the Kingdom Two
hundred and fifty Baronies, Gloss. tit. Baron.
he summoned unto one of these Parliamentary meetings but Five and twenty
Barons, and One hundred and fifty of his Clergy. Nevertheless, the Law of King
John was still the same; and we cannot rightly read the Law in such Precedents,
as are rather the birth of will than reason. Fourthly, that no aids were then
granted, but such as passed under the title Escuage, or according thereunto;
for the words are, No Escuage shall be demanded, or granted, or taken, but for
redeeming the King's person, Knighting of his Son, or Marriage of his Daughter.
Nor is the way of assessing in these times different, saving that instead of
all the Knights, two only are now chosen in every County; the Tenure (as it
seems) first giving the Title of that Order, and both Tenure and Order now
changed into that Title taken up for the time and occasion. Fifthly, that it
was then the ancient custom, and so used in the time of Henry the First, that
the advice of those then present, was the advice of the whole, and that their
advice passed for a Law without contradiction, notwithstanding the King's
Negative voice; for the words are, The matter at that day shall proceed
according to the counsel of those that shall be present, although all do not
come; and therefore that clause in the King's Oath, quas vulgus eligerit, may
well be understood in the future, and not in the preter tense. Last of all,
though not gathered from the Text of this Law whereof we treat, yet being
co-incident with the matter, it is observable, that though the Clergy were now
in their ruffle, and felt themselves in their full strength, yet there befell a
posture of state that discovered to the world, that the English held not the
interest of the Clergy to be of such public concernment, or necessary
concurrence in the Government of the Kingdom, as was pretended. Walsing. An.
1297.
For the Clergy finding Assessments of the Laity so heavy, and that occasions
of public charge were like to multiply daily, they therefore, to save the main
stock, procured an Inhibition from Rome against all such impositions from the
Laity, and against such payments by the Clergy; and in the strength of this
they absolutely refuse to submit to aid Edward the First by any such way,
although all the Parliament had thereunto consented. And thus, having divided
themselves from the Parliament, they were by them divided from it; and not
only outed of all privilege of Parliament, but of all the privilege of
Subjects, into the state of praemunire: and thus set up for a monument to
future times, for them also to act without the consent of those men, as
occasion should offer. But Henry the Third not satisfied with this ancient and
ordinary way of Assessment upon ordinary occasions, took up that extraordinary
course of Assessment upon all the Freemen of the Kingdom, which was formerly
taken up only in that extraordinary occasion of redeeming of the King's or
Lord's person out of captivity, and common defense of the Land from piracy; and
under the Title of Dane-gelt, which was now absolutely dead, and hanged up in
chains as a monument of oppression. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied but that
in former times the Freemen were as deeply taxed, if not oppressed with
payments to their Lords at such times as they were charged over to the King in
the cases aforesaid, as by the latter words of the Law aforesaid of King John
does appear, and whereby it is probable that the inferior Lords were gainers.
The conclusion of the Charter of Henry the Third (the same suiting also with
the third observation foregoing) does not a little favor the same: for it is
expressly set down, that in lieu of the King's confirmation of the Charter of
Liberties aforesaid, Mag. Chart.
not only the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and
Knights, but also the Freemen, and all the Kingdom, gave a fifteenth of all
their movables.

And thus have I summed up and compared both the Copies of the Grand Charters
of Englands Liberties, (saving two particulars inserted into the Forest-Laws of
Henry the Third) wherein if any thing had been new and unreasonable, King John
might have color to except against them as extorted by force; M. Paris. An.
1227.
and Henry the Third might (as he was advised) plead nonage, and so they might
have been choked in their birth; but being all Consuetudines, as in the
conclusion they are called, and Kings ashamed to depend upon such frivolous
exceptions, it may be wondered what might move them to adventure so much
bloodshed, and themselves into so many troubles, to avoid their own acts;
unless the writing of them were an obligation acknowledged before the world;
and they resolving secretly to be under none, were loath to publish the same to
all men. It is a strange vanity in great men to pretend love to Justice, and
yet not endure to be bound thereto; whenas we see that God himself loves to be
bound by his word, and to have it pleaded, because he delights as much to be
acknowledged true in performing, as good in promising. But neither was King
John or Henry the Third of this spirit; fain they would undo, but could not. It
is true, it was at the first but a King's Charter of Confirmation; and had
Kings been patient therewith, it might have grown no bigger: but by opposition
it rooted deeper, and grew up unto the stature of a Statute, Marlb. c. 5.
and settled so fast, as it can never be avoided but by surrender from the whole
body.

Having thus summed up the Liberties of the Subjects and Freemen of England
under this Charter, I shall make some Appendix hereunto, by annexing a few
additionals in these times established; and although they come not within the
letter of the Grand Charter, yet are they subservient thereunto. And first
concerning the King; and this either as he is King, or as he is Lord. As King,
he had these Prerogatives above all Lords.

The King shall have the custody of Fools and Idiots Lands for their
maintenance, Prerog. Reg. cap. 9.
and shall render the same to their Heirs.

And concerning Madmen and Lunaticks, cap. 10.
the King shall provide a Bailiff for their maintenance, rendering account to
them when they are sober, or to their Administrators.

It is no less liberty or privilege of the People, that Fools and Mad persons
are to be ordered by Tutors, than Children; and therefore this may be annexed
to the rest of the Liberties, as well as the other. Nevertheless, it seems
that the Laws took them into their regard, in respect of their Estates, which
might be abused to the prejudice of the Public, rather than out of any respect
had to their persons. Now because there is a difference between the disability
of these persons, the one being perpetual, the other temporary; therefore is
there also by these Laws a difference in the disposal of their Estates: for the
Tutor had a right in the disposing of the one, and but a bare authority or
power in providing for the other. Secondly, the person of the Tutor is to be
considered: Anciently it was the next kindred, grounded, as I conceive, upon
the natural affection going along with the blood; and this so continued in
custom until these times: for though the Mirror of Justice says, that Henry
the First brought in that course of giving the custody of these disabled
persons to the King, as has been formerly observed; yet Bracton, that wrote
long after the time of Henry the First, Bract. lib. 5. cap. 20.
speaking of these kind of persons, says, Talibus de necessitate dandus est
tutor vel curator; not so much as mentioning the King in the case. Lib. 1. c.
10.
And in another place, speaking of such as are alieni juris, says, that some
are under the custody of their Lords, and others under their Parents and
friends. But let the time of the entrance of this Law be never so uncertain, it
is now a declared Law, that the King in such cases is the common Curator or
Tutor of all such persons, as he is a Chief Justice, rendering to every one his
right.

The King shall have the Wrecks of the Sea. Prerog. Reg. cap. 11.


What shall be called a Wreck, West. 1. c. 4.
the Statute at West. 1. declares, viz. Where the Ship so perishes, that
nothing therein escapes alive; and these are rather in their original
committed to the King as a Curator, than given him as a Proprietor; although
that Custom has since settled a kind of right, which may perhaps be accounted
rather a Title by Estoppel. For the fundamental ground is, that the right owner
cannot be manifested, and therefore the King shall hold it; and if the right
owner can be manifested, the King shall hold it till the owner does appear.

The Heir in Socage-tenure shall have an Action of Waste, Marlb. c. 17.
and an account against his Guardian for the profits of the Lands and Marriage.

The Heir in Socage being under age, Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 3^.
shall also be under custody of such Guardian of the next kindred, who cannot
challenge right of Inheritance in such Lands so holden: as if the Lands
descended from the Father's side, the Mother, or next of the kindred of the
Mothers side shall have the custody; and so if the Lands descend from the
Mother, the Father, or next kindred of the Father's side shall have the custody.
And this custody brings with it an Authority or Power only, and no Right, as
in case of the Heir in Knight Service; and therefore cannot be granted over as
the Wardship in Knight Service might, but the Guardian in Socage remains
accomptant to the Heir, for all profits both of Land and Marriage. The full age
of Tenant in Socage, is such age wherein he is able to do that service, which
is Fourteen years; for at such age he may be able by common repute to aid in
Tillage of the ground, which is his proper service. But the Son of a Burgess
has no set time of full Age, but at such time as he can tell Money, and
measure Cloth, and such work as concerns that calling.

Widows deforced of their Dower of Quarentine, Merton. c. 1.
shall by Action recover damages till they recover their Dower.

They shall also have power to devise their crop arising from her Dower. cap.
2. Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 40.


It was used that the Heir should have the crop with the Land; but this Statute
altered that former usage, and yet saved the Lord's liberty to distrain if any
services were due.

Writs de consimili casu granted in cases that fall under the same Law, West.
2. c. 24.
and need the same remedy; and such Writs shall be made by agreement of the
Clerks in the Chancery, and advice of such as are skilful in the Law.

It was none of the meanest Liberties of the Freemen of England, that no Writs
did issue forth against them, but such as were anciently in use, and agreed
upon in Parliament. And it was no less a grievance and just cause of complaint,
that Kings used to send Writs of new impression to execute the dictates of
their own wills, and not of the Laws of the Kingdom; as the complaints of the
Clergy in the times of Henry the Third do witness. M. Paris addit. Artic. 44.
Nevertheless, because many men's cases befell not directly within the Letter of
any Law for remedy, and yet were very burdensome; for want of remedy it is
provided by this Law, that such emergent cases that do fall within the
inconvenience, shall be comprehended within the remedy of that Law.

Aid to make the Son of the Lord a Knight, Westminster. c. 36.
and to marry his eldest Daughter, shall be assessed after the rate of twenty
shillings for a Knights Fee; and twenty shillings for twenty pounds in yearly
value of Socage-tenure.

The uncertainties of Aids are by this Law reduced and settled, as touching the
sum; and thereby delivered the people from much oppression which they suffered
formerly. Nor was only the particular sum hereby, but also the age of the Son
when he was to be made a Knight, viz. at the age of Fifteen years; too soon for
him to perform Knight Service, but not too soon for the Lord to get his money.
And the Daughter likewise was allowed to be fit for Marriage at Seven years of
age, or at least to give her consent thereto, albeit that in truth she was
neither fit for the one or other: and therefore it must be the Lords gain that
made the Law; and it was not amiss to have the aid beforehand, though the
marriage succeeded not for many years after; and if the Lord died in the
interim, the Executors having Assets paid it, or otherwise his Heir.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of Courts and their Proceedings.
BEsides the Courts of Justices itinerant, which were ancient, as has been
said, other Courts have been raised of later birth, albeit even they also have
been of ancient constitutions, and diverse of them itinerant also, and some of
them settled in one place. The work of the Justices itinerant was universal,
comprehending both the matters of the Crown and Common Pleas. That of Oyer and
Terminer is only of Crown-pleas originally commenced, and enquired of by
themselves, and granted forth upon emergent crimes of important consequence
that require speedy regard and reformation. Justices of Jail-deliver have a
more large work, that is, to deliver the Gaols of all criminal offenders
formerly indicted, or before themselves. Justices of Assize and Nisi prius are
to have cognizance of Common Pleas only, and for the most part are but for
enquiry. All which, saving the Justices itinerant in ancient use, were
instituted about these times; and therewith ended both the work and common use
of the ancient iters; and yet all these later Courts, jointly considered, have
not the like comprehensive power that the iters had, for they had the power of
hearing and determining all causes, both of the Crown and Common Pleas, albeit
in a different manner: That is to say, in the first times, promiscuously united
into one and the same person; but soon after the Norman times, and more clearly
in the time of Henry the Second, that power was divided into several persons,
some sitting upon the Common Pleas, others upon the Crown-pleas. The Judges of
these journeying Courts were specially assigned by the King, as in the case of
the Jail-deliver; or settled by the Law upon the Judges of both Benches at
Westminister, as in case of Oyer and Terminer, West. 2. c. 29.
and of the Assizes or Nisi prius, saving that in the last case they were
associated with Knights in the Counties for the taking of Assizes. Ibid. c. 30.


Now concerning the Courts that were settled: some were settled or annexed to the
King's personal residence, as the Chancellor's Court; for in these times it
began to have a judiciary power of eminent stature, and growing out of the
decays of the great chief Justice of England. Then also the King's Bench was
annexed by the same Law unto the Kings Court or personal residence, Fleta.
Artic. sup. cart. c. 15.
as it anciently ever had that honor; although it seems the endeavors were to
make it like the Common Pleas in that particular. Another and last Court that
was settled in this manner, was the Marshals Court, which in the original only
concerned the Kings household, but afterward compassed in a distance of the
neighboring places, 5 E. 4. sol. 129.
because the Kings attendants were many in those times, whenas the Courts of
Justice continually attended on his person: and this precinct was called the
Verge; and all cases of debt and covenant, where both parties were of the
Household, Artic sup. cart. c. 3.
and of Trespasses vi and armis, where one of them was of the Household, were
handled in the Court of the Verge, or the Marshals Court. And Inquests of death
within the same, shall be taken by the Coroner of the County with the Coroner
of the Household. Other Courts were rural, and affixed also to some certain
place, either of the County or Town, or other particular place. That of the
County suffered in these times great diminution, Stat. Glou^. c. 8.
even almost to destruction, by a Law restraining the power thereof only to
Trespasses of 40 s. value or under: for though formerly the Kings Justices
incroached upon the County-Courts, and contracted suits before themselves,
which by the ancient Law they ought not; yet it was ever illegal, and the
County-Courts held their right till this Law was made, which kept under those
inferior Courts, and made them of less account than formerly. Nevertheless,
the Kings Justicies, or Writ to the Sheriffs, oftentimes enableth the inferior
Court to have cognizance of cases of greater value. West. 1. c. 23.
Lastly, a rule was set to the smaller Courts of Corporations, Fairs, and
Markets, viz. That no person should be sued in any of them, which was not a
debtor or pledge there.

CHAP. LXIX. Of Coroners, Sheriffs, and Crown-pleas.
COroners shall be chosen in the County, Coroners. West. 1. c. 10.
from the wisest, greatest, and chief men of the Country.

Of these Officers formerly has been spoken, as touching their election,
qualification, and work: this Law brought in no change of any former Law, but
only of a former Custom gained by these degenerating times, which brought men
into place that were far unfit, who otherwise of poor and mean condition
maintained themselves by bribery and extortion, and being found guilty had not
sufficient to give recompense. This Law therefore revives the first Law, and
holds these men to their work of taking Inquests and Appeals, by Indenture
between themselves and the Sheriff; and these were to be certified at the next
coming of the Justices.

The Freeholders in every County, Sheriffs. Artic. sup. cart. c. 9.
if they will, shall elect their own Sheriff, unless the Sheriffwick be holden
in Fee.

This was indeed the ancient custom: as the Officers of the Kingdom were
elegible by the Common Council of the Kingdom, Mirror. cap. 1. sec. 3.
so were all the Officers of the County chosen by the County. But within a few
years, in the time of Edward the Second, Stat. de vic. 9 E. 2.
comes another Law, That the Sheriffs shall be appointed by the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Barons of the Exchequer, and the Justices. Which Law was made in
favor of the people, as by the file of that Statute does more fully appear:
for though at the first blush it may seem a privilege lost by the Freemen,
that these great men should have the election of the Sheriff; yet it proved a
great advantage to the common quiet of the people in those times of parties,
and was so apprehended: Otherwise as the case stood in those days of Edward the
Second, it was no time for him to gain upon the peoples Liberties. Nor had the
Statute of Articuli super cartas, whereof we how treat, been penned with these
words, if they will. And questionless in these days we now live in, if the
people had but a little taste of this seeming liberty of electing Sheriffs in
the County Court, as formerly it was used, it would be soon perceived that the
election of these chief Officers were better disposed in some other hand, if
rightly pursued.

Homicide by misfortune shall not be adjudged murder. Chancemedly.


That the Saxons made difference between Homicide by misfortune, and that which
was done felleo animo, or with a spirit of gall, formerly has been showed: now
what it was that altered the case, I cannot say, unless the violence, cruelty,
and oppression of the times. Formerly all kind of Manslaughter was finable, I
mean in the Norman times, and so might more rationally be ranked into one
degree; but now the punishment began to change from forfeiture of Estate and
loss of Member, to death and forfeiture of Estate; and therefore it was more
necessary to make the difference in the penalty (seeing in the fine formerly a
difference was observed) and this difference to assert by a Law, that might
limit the invenomed spirits of the Judges of those days.

Robbery punished by death. Robbery.


This crime hitherto was punished by fine and loss of member, at the utmost,
but is now made capital, and punished with death. One example whereof, and the
first that Story makes mention of, we find of an Irish Nobleman in the days of
Henry the Third, who suffered death for piracy; and it was a Law that then,
though rigorous, yet seasonably was contrived, to retard the beginnings, and
hasten the conclusion of a Civil War in a Nation who value their Estates and
Liberties above their own lives.

Rape, Rape. West. 1. c. 13.
upon the complaint of the party violated made within forty days, shall have
right. If the Delinquent be convicted without such complaint made, he shall be
fined and imprisoned.

Before this Law, this crime was but finable, unless the fact was committed
upon a Virgin, for then the member was lost. And this was the Saxons Law; but
the Normans inflicted the loss of the member upon all Delinquents in any Rape.
Nor was this made Felony by any Law or Custom that I can find, till about
these days. It is true, that Canutus punished it capitis aestimatione, by way
of compensation; which rather gives a rule of damages to the party wronged,
than imports a punishment inflicted for an offense done against the Crown, as
if it were thereby made capital. But for the more certainty of the penalty,
another Law provideth, that if the Rape be committed without the Woman's consent
subsequent, West. 2. c. 34.
she may have an Appeal of Rape. And though a consent be subsequent, yet the
Delinquent upon indictment found shall suffer death, as in the case of Appeal.
But if a Wife be carried away with the goods of her Husband, besides Action of
the party, the King shall have a fine. If the Wife elopeth, she shall lose her
Dower, if she be not reconciled before her Husband's death. All which
now-recited Provisoes are comprehended together in one Chapter, and yet the
Chapter is partee per fess, French and Latin. So far thereof as concerns
death, was written in French, being the most known Language to the great men in
general, many of whom were French, by reason of the interest that Henry the
Third had with France in his late Wars against the Barons. It was therefore
published by way of Caveat, that no person that understood French might plead
ignorance of the Law that concerned their lives. The residue of that Chapter
was written in Latin, as all the other Laws of that Parliament were, upon
grounds formerly in this discourse noted. One Proviso more remains, which is
also comprehended in the same Chapter with the former, viz. Any person that
shall carry away a Nun from her house, shall suffer imprisonment for three
years, and render damages to the house. This crime was formerly only inwombed
in the Canon Law, and now born and brought forth into the condition of a
Statute Law, rather to vindicate the right of the Freemen, Antiq. Brit. fol.
197.
than in any respect had to the Clergy, who had been very bold with the
liberty of the Freemen in this matter. For Archbishop Peckham, not a year
before the making of this Law, for this offense had excommunicated Sir Osborn
Gifford; nor could he get absolution but upon his Penance. First he was
disciplined with rods three times; once in the open Church at Wilton, then in
the Marketplace at Shaftsbury, and lastly in the public Church there: Then he
must fast diverse months. Lastly, he must be disrobed of all Military
habiliments, viz. Guilt Spurs, Sword, Saddle, golden Trappings, and to use no
brave garments but russet, with Lamb and Sheepskins; to use no Shirit, nor
take up his Order again, until he had spent three years Pilgrimage in the Holy
Land: and unto this Penance the Knight by Oath bound himself. A strange power!
and to repress which, it was time for the people to look about them, and rather
to punish Delinquents themselves, than to leave it to the will of such men as
never had enough.

Concealment, Concealment of Felons. West. 1. c. 9.
or neglect of apprehending of Felons, punished by Fine and Imprisonment.

In those ancient times, pursuits of Felons with Hue and Cry were made by Lords
of Manors, Bailiffs of Liberties, Sheriffs, and Coroners; whereas now they are
made by Constables. See more in the Chapter of Peace. West. 1. c. 3.
Escapes also were punished with Fine and Imprisonment: and in some places the
Lord had the Fine, in other places the Sheriff, and in some cases the King; yet
in no case was any Fine assessed or taken till the Trial before the Justices.

Persons defamed for Felony, Defamed Felons.
not submitting to Trial by Law, shall be committed to close and hard
Imprisonment. West. 1. c. 1.


It has been accounted an extreme construction of this Law, and questionless
so it is, that this Law should warrant that punishment of pressing to death,
which has been of later times more constantly used than former times ever knew
of: for though it be granted that some trick of torture was sometimes used,
even before the Normans times, and so might now and then leave some few
examples after the Norman times; yet did the Law never patronize such courses,
Miror. cap. 1. sec. 9.
especially if the death of the party suspected ensued thereupon, but accounted
it Manslaughter. And the end of this Law was not to put a man to death, but to
urge him to confess: Briton cap. 4. sec. 24.
and so Briton says, Such as will not submit to Trial, shall be put to Penance
till he shall pray to be admitted thereunto; and therefore the Penance then
used was such as did not necessarily infer death; nor was it a final Judgment
in the Trial, but only a means thereto: and therefore it might rather consist
in denial of conveniences, than inflicting of pain. Now in what cases it was
used, may be understood from the manner of the Indictments in those days,
whereof (besides Appeals by the party) some were of particular fact done;
others only of a Fame: and it may be conceived that the course in the second
was, Glanvil. lib. 10. cap. 1.
that if a man would not submit, but would stand mute, he was put to this kind
of Imprisonment; for the discovering Law was by Henry the Third taken away. But
if the Delinquent was positively accused of a Felony, and thereupon indicted by
a witness of the Fact, and then if the Delinquent would not submit to his Trial
by Law, in such case the final Judgment was to die, Onere, fame, etc. because
in the one was a Fact affirmed against him by a Witness, and in the other only
a Fame or suspicion, which is not pregnant against the life of a man. But this
manner of Indictment being now laid aside, and all proceedings being upon a
Fact affirmed against the party, I conceive this Law of no use at all in these
days.

Bail shall not be allowed to Outlaws fore-jured, Bail. West. 1. c. 15.
Thieves taken in the act, notorious Thieves, appealed persons, burners of
Houses, breakers of Prison; false Coyners, counterfeiters of the Broad-seal,
prisoners upon excommunication, open Malefactors, and Traitors against the King.

The six first are in nature of persons attainted either upon their own
confession, or such manifest Evidence as in common reason cannot be gainsaid;
all which were before this Law under bail; yea the last of all, although the
most heinous of all, Glanv. lib. 14. cap. 1.
was in the same condition. As touching breakers of Prison, in these times it
was Felony, for what cause soever they were committed; and therefore their
imprisonment was without bail: for whosoever makes no Conscience of breaking the
Prison, his credit will little avail. Yet it must be acknowledged, that the Law
imprisoned few without bail in those foregoing times, but in case of Felony or
Execution: but afterward the cases of commitment being ordinary, even in
matters of mean process, and because men's credits waxing weak by the weakness
of their Estates, now wasted by the Civil Wars; therefore in Edward the
Second's time a Law was made to restrain the Felony in such cases, only to the
breach of Prison by such as were committed for Felony. And as touching
Imprisonment upon Excommunication, it is manifest, that within five years
before the making of this Law, Addit. M. Paris.
it was complained that such were set at liberty by the King's Writ de homine
replegiando, without the Bishop's consent. But now the Clergy had gotten the
day of the Law, which did much decline from that guard of imprisonment, but
hated perpetual imprisonment. Nor was this complaint grounded upon any other
Law than that of the Canon; for the Common Law ever held the supreme cognizance
of Excommunication within its own power, as upon the Writ de quare
excommunicato may appear. Other crimes are yet also by this Law allowed bail,
such as are persons indicted of Larceny, before Sheriffs, etc. persons
imprisoned upon slight grounds, Receivers, and Accessories before Felony,
Trespassers, persons appealed by provers, after the death of the approvers. If
bail be granted otherwise than the Law allows, the party that allows the
same shall be fined, imprisoned, render damages, or forfeit his place, as the
case shall require. And thus the iniquity of the times was so great, as it even
forced the Subjects to forgo that which was in account a great liberty, to stop
the course of a growing mischief.

Publishers of false News, Spreaders of false News. West. 1. c. 34.
whereby discord or slander may arise between the King and his people, shall be
imprisoned till he produce the Relator.

It is therefore an offense against the Crown, to procure or maintain an ill
conceit in the King of the people, or an ill conceit in the people of the King;
and it is as well an offense against the Crown for the King to conceive ill of
his people, as for them of him. But all must be grounded upon falsehood; for
truth respects no man's person; and all men are equally bound by the woe, if
they call good evil, or evil good; although difference must be made in the
manner of representation. And upon this ground of maintaining strife, 33 Edw. 1.
was a Law made also against Conspiracy to make or maintain Indictment, Suit,
or Quarrel; and it was likewise finable.

Redisseisors and postdisseisors found upon verdict before the Sheriff, Merton.
c. 3.
Coroners, and Knights, shall be imprisoned.

Formerly Redisseisin was under no other Law than that of Desseisin, but by
this Law made a matter belonging to the Crown, and tried before the same Judges
that had the power of enquiry of all offenses against the Crown. Marlb. c. 8.
The penalty of imprisonment in this case, was to be without bail, but only by
the King's Writ de homine replegiando; and yet even thus the penalty was not
sufficient to restrain the offense, and therefore a Law was made to abridge the
power of that Writ, West. 2. c. 26.
as touching such offender; and they became irremediable as touching their
liberty by that Writ; besides that upon recovery had against them they lost
double damages.

Trespassers in Parks and Fish Ponds convicted within a year and a day,
Trespssers upon Parks. West. 1. c. 10.
shall render damages, suffer imprisonment for three years, and give security
of good behavior for time to come. If any Beasts be taken in a felonious
manner, he shall be proceeded against as a Robber.

From the times of King Steven, the Lords and great men endeavored to advance
their power and greatness so high above the meaner sort of Free men, as they
made Kings continually jealous of their power. Castles had been a bone of long
contention between them, but they being for the most part taken away, the
strife was about Prisons, and power to imprison offenders; and that also after
much opposition they laid aside. Yet the violence of these times being such, as
(though Felonies were somewhat dreaded) Trepasses of the highest nature were
little regarded, such as were riotous hunting in their Parks, and fishing in
their Waters; The Lords and great men made it their last request, that at least
in such cases they might have power to imprison such as they found so
trespassing; but this was also denied them, Merton. c. 11.
though by Henry the Third in his first time, when as yet the Government was
not worsted by projects of Arbitrary power, or corrupt Counsels of Foreigners,
nor himself a man able to sway with the Lords in matters that were of doubtful
prerogative. And to speak indifferently, it is better for the Liberty of the
Subject, that the power of imprisonment should be regulated only by the Kings
Writ ordered by Law, than by the Warrants of great men, especially in their own
cases; and therefore in this matter the Kings Prerogative was a patron to the
Free men's liberty. Nevertheless, these great men give not thus over their game:
for though in times of public calamities, little place is left for pleasure to
any man; yet when times are grown to more quiet, pleasure revives, and the
great men renew their motion: and though they could not obtain prisons to their
own use, as they endeavored at the meeting at Merton; yet now they obtain the
Kings prisons to the use of a Law that was as good as their own, and thereby
satisfied their own displeasure for the loss of their pleasure. And yet this
Law sufficed them not, but they obtain a further privilege, An. 21. Ed. 1.
that such persons as are found so trespassing, and refusing to submit, may be
killed without peril of Felony.

CHAP. LXX. Of the Militia during these Kings Reigns.
THe Soldiery of England may be considered, First, in regard of the Persons.
Secondly, their Arms. Thirdly, their Service. The persons were as formerly, not
only such as were milites, or Tenants in Knight Service, but also such as
served at the Plough; and concerning them both, it is to be considered what the
Law made by Edw. the 2 d. holds forth.

All such as ought to be Knights and are not, shall be distrained to undertake
the weapons of Knighthood, if they show not cause to the contrary.

Regularly all Tenants by Knight Service ought to be Knights, but de facto were
not; so as in these times there was a further work to make a man a Knight than
his bare Tenure; for such only were milites facti, who had both Lands
sufficient to maintain the Arms and state of a Knight, and also a body fit to
undertake the service in his own person, and whereof he had given sufficient
proof the field. Others that had Land, either had not sufficient maintenance,
or not habiliments of person, and as not expected were laid aside; of this sort
were many, by reason of the late Civil Wars, in which they had much impaired
both their bodies and Estates. This rendered the strength of the Kingdom and
Militia so much decayed, and the minds of men so wearied, that they began to
love ease before the times would brook it, and a cessation from Arms before
they had any mind to peace. The Parliament espied the danger, and how necessary
it was for the people to be well armed in these times of general broil; and
upon that ground allowed this Law to pass; That all such as had Lands worth 20
l. yearly besides Reprizals, should be ready (not to be Knights, nor, under the
favor of others, is there any ancient precedent to warrant it, but) to find,
or to enter into the field with the Arms of a Knight, or to provide some able
person to serve in their stead, unless they were under 21 years of age, and so
not grown up to full strength of body; nor their Lands in their own possession,
but in custody of their Lords or Guardians. Nevertheless, of such as were grown
to full age, yet were maimed, impotent, or of mean estate, and Tenants by
service of a Knight, it was had into a way of moderation, and ordered that such
should pay a reasonable fine for respit of such service; nor further as
concerning (...) persons were they bound. But as touching such that were under
present only, and not perpetual disabilities of body upon them incumbent, as
often as occasion called, they served by their deputies or servants: all which
was grounded not only upon the Law of Henry the Second, but also upon common
right of Tenure.

The Arms that these men were to find, are said to be those belonging to a
Knight; which were partly for defense, and partly for offense. Of the first
sort were the Shield, the Helmet, the Hauberk, or Breast Plate, or Coat of
Mail; of the second sort were the Sword and Lance: and unto all a Horse must be
provided. These Arms, especially the defensive, have been formerly under
alteration; for the Breast Plate could not be worn with the Coat of Mail, and
therefore must be used as occasion was provided of either: and for this cause
the service of a Knight is called by several names; sometimes from the Horse,
sometimes from the Lance, sometimes from the Helmet, and not seldom from the
Coat of Mail.

The power of immediate command, or calling forth the Knights to their service,
in its own nature was but ministerial, and subservient to that power that
ordered War to be levied: and therefore, as in the first Saxon Government under
their Princes in Germany, so after, Tacitus.
under their Kings, War was never resolved upon, but if it were defensive, it
was by the Council of Lords; if offensive, by the general Vote of the Grand
Council of the Kingdom. So by virtue of such Order, either from the Council of
Lords, or Grand Council, the Knights were called forth to War, and others, as
the case required, summoned to a rendezvouze: and this instrumental power
regularly rested in the Lords, to whom such service was due; and the Lords were
summoned by the Lord Paramount, as chief of the Fee, of which their Tenants
were holden, and not as King or chief Captain in the Field: for they were not
raised by Proclamation, but by Summons (...) forth to the Sheriff, with
distress; and this only against such as were within his own Fee, and held of
the Crown. The King therefore might have many Knights at his command, but the
Lords more; and if those Lords failed in their due correspondency with the
King, all those of the inferior Orb were carried away after them: so the King
is left to shift for himself as well as he can. And this might be occasioned
not only from their Tenures, by which they stood obliged to the inferior
Lords, but probably much more by their popularity, which was more prevalent, by
how much Kings looked upon the Commons at a further distance in those days,
than in aftertimes, when the Commons interposed intentively in the public
Government. And thus the Horsemen of England becoming less constant in
adhering to their Sovereign in the Field, occasioned Kings to betake themselves
to their Foot, and to form the strength of their Battles wholly in them, and
themselves on foot to engage with them.

One point of liberty these Soldiers by Tenure had, which made their service
not altogether servile; and that was, that their service in the Field was
neither indefinite, nor infinite, but circumscribed by place, time, and end.
The time of their service for the continuance of it was for a set time, if it
were at their own charges: and although some had a shorter time, yet the
general sort were restained to forty days. For the Courage of those times
consisted not in wearying and wasting the Soldier in the Field by delays, and
long work in wheeling about and retiring, but in playing their prizes like two
Combatants of resolution to get Victory by Valor, or to die. If upon
extraordinary occasions the War continued longer, then the Tenant served upon
the pay of the common Purse. The end of the service of the Tenant ( viz. their
Lord's defense in the defense of the Kingdom) stinted their work within certain
bounds of place, beyond which they were not to be drawn, unless of their own
accord: And these were the borders of the Dominion of the Crown of England,
which in those days extended into Scotland on the North, and into a great part
of France on the South. And therefore the Earl-Marshal of England (being by
Edward the first commanded by virtue of his Tenure to attend in person upon the
Standart under his Lieutenant that then was to be sent into Flanders, which was
no part of the Dominion of England) refused; and notwithstanding the King's
threats to hang him, yet he persisted, saying, He would neither go nor hang.
Not only because the Tenants by Knight Service are bound to the defense of
their Lord's persons, and not of their Lieutenants; but principally because
they are to serve for the safety and defense of the Kingdom: and therefore
ought not to be drawn into foreign Countries. Nor did the Earl-Marshal only
this, but many others also, both Knights and Knights fellows, having twenty
pounds per Annum; for all these with their Arms were summoned to serve under
the King's pay in Flanders. Walsing. f. 69. and 71.
I say, multitudes of them refused to serve, and afterward joined with the
rest of the Commons in a Petition to the King, and complained of that Summons
as of a common Grievance, because that neither they nor their Ancestors were
bound to serve the King in that Country: and they obtained the King's discharge
under his broad Seal accordingly. The like whereunto may be warranted out of
the very words of the Statute of Mortmain, which was made within the compass of
these times; Stat. Mort. 7 Edw. 1.
by which it was provided, That in case Lands be aliened contrary to that
Statute, and the immediate Lords do not seize the same, (...) King shall seize
them, and dispose them for the defense of the Kingdom, viz. upon such services
reserved as shall suit therewith: as if all the service of a Knight must
conduce thereto; and that he is no further bound to any service of his Lord,
than will consist with the safety of the Kingdom. This was the Doctrine that
the sad experience of the latter Government of Kings in these times, had taught
the Knighthood of England to hold for the future Ages.

No Tenant in ancient Demesnes, Stat. de Militib^s.
or in Burgage, shall be distrained for the service of a Knight.

Clerks and Tenants in Socage of other Manors than of the King, shall be used
as they have been formerly.

Tenants in ancient Demesne, and Tenants in Burgage, are absolutely acquitted
from foreign service; the one, because they are in nature of the King's
Husbandmen, and served him and his Family with Victual; the other, because by
their Tenure they were bound to the defense of their Borough, which in account
is a Limb or Member of the Kingdom, and so in nature of a Castle guard. Now as
touching Clerks and Tenants in Socage holding of a Subject, they are left to
the order of ancient use appearing upon Record. As concerning the Clergy, it is
evident by what has been formerly noted, that though they were importunate to
be discharged of the service Military, in regard that their profession was for
Peace, and not for Blood; yet could they never obtain their desire: for though
their persons might challenge exemption from that work, yet their Lands were
bound to find Arms by their Deputies; for otherwise it had been unreasonable,
that so great a part of the Kingdom as the Clergy then had, should sit still
and look on, whilst by the Law of Nature every one is engaged in his own
defense. Nor yet did the profession of these men to be men for Peace, hold
always uniform: some kind of Wars then were holden sacred, and wherein they not
only adventured their Estates, but even their own Persons; and these not only
in a defensive way, but by way of invasion, and many times where no need was
for them to appear. Tenants in Socage also, in regard of their service, might
plead exemption from the Wars: for if not the Plough must stand still, and the
Land thereby become poor and lean. Nevertheless, a general service or defense
of the Kingdom is imposed upon all; and Husbandmen must be Soldiers, when the
debate is, who shall have the Land. In such cases therefore they are evocati ad
arma, to maintain and defend the Kingdom, but not compellable to foreign
service, as the Knights were, whose service consisted much in defense of their
Lord's person, in reference to the defense of the Kingdom; and many times
policy of War drew the Lords into Arms abroad, to keep the Enemy further from
their borders, and the Knights then under their Lords pay went along with them:
and therefore the service of Knighthood is commonly called servitium
forinsecum. Of these Socagers did arise, not only the body of English Footmen
in their Armies, Council. Brit. 406.
but the better and more wealthy sort of them found Arms of a Knight, as
formerly has been observed, yet always under the pay of the common Purse. And
if called out of the Kingdom, they were mere Volunteers; for they were not
called out by distress as Knights were, because they held not their Land by
such service; but they were summoned by Proclamation, and probably were
mustered by the high Constables in each Hundred; the Law nevertheless remaining
still entire, that all must be done not only ad fidem Domini Regis, but also
Regni; which was disputed and concluded by the Sword. For though Kings
pretended danger to the public oftentimes to raise the people; yet the people
would give credit as they pleased. Or if the King's Title were in question, or
the Peoples Liberty, yet every man took liberty to side with that party that
liked him best; nor did the King's Proclamation sway much this or that way.

It is true, that precedents of those times cry up the King's power of arraying
all Ships and men without respect, unless of age, or corporal disability; but
it will appear that no such array was, but in time of no less known danger from
abroad to the Kingdom, than imminent; and therefore might be wrought more from
the general fear of the Enemy, than from the King's command: And yet those
times were always armed in neighboring Nations, and Kings might have pretended
continual cause of arraying. Secondly, it will no less clearly appear, that
Kings used no such course, but in case of general danger to the whole Kingdom,
either from foreign Invasion, 21 E. 1. rot. 81.
as in the times of King John, or from intestine Broils, as in the times of
Henry the third, and the two Edwards successively. And if the danger threatened
only one coast, the array was limited only to the parts adjacent thereunto.
Thirdly, it seems that general arrays were not levied by distress, 23 E. 1.
Memb. 5.
till the time of Edward the first, and then only for the rendezvouze at the
next Seacoast, and for defense against foreign Invasion; in which case all
Subjects of the Kingdom are concerned by general service: otherwise it can come
unto no other account than that Title Prerogative, and therein be charactered
as a trick above the ordinary strain. Fourthly, those times brought forth no
general array of all persons between the ages of sixteen years and sixty, that
was made by distress in any case of Civil War, but only by Sheriffs summons;
and in case of disobedience, by summons to appear before the King and his
Council: which shows, that by the common Law they were not compellable or
punishable. Lastly, though these arrays of men were sometimes at the charge of
the King, and sometimes at the Subjects own charge, yet that last was out of
the road-way of the Subjects liberty, as the subsequent times do fully
manifest. And the like may be said of arrays of Ships, which however under
command of Kings for public service, were nevertheless rigged and paid out of
the public charge. The sum of all will be, that in cases of defense from
foreign Invasion. Kings had power of array according to the order of Law; if
they exceeded that Rule, it may be more rightly said, they did what they would,
than what they ought.

CHAP. LXXI. Of the Peace.
WAR and Peace are two births by several venters, and may like the day and
night succeed, but can never inherit each to other; and for that cause they may
claim to belong to one Father, and that one and the same power should act in
both: and yet it is no good Maxim, That he that is the chief Commander in War,
ought to be the chief in the order of Peace. For it naturally befalls that War,
especially that which we call Civil War, like some diseases in the body, does
rather breed ill humors than consume them; and these must be purged by dieting
the State, and constant course of Justice, unto which the rugged Waves of War
have little or no affinity, if they have not enmity. Nevertheless, the wisdom
of our Ancestors thought it most meet to keep their Kings in work, as well in
time of Peace, as of War; and therefore as they anciently referred the
principal care thereof to the Lords, who together with certain select persons
in every County, did administer Justice in several Iters or Circuits: so when
Kings had once gotten the name of being chief in civil affairs, as they had it
in martial; they soon left the Lords behind them (who also were willing enough
with their own case) and had the name of doing all, notwithstanding it was done
by advice of the Lords, and directory of Ministers, or Commissioners thereto
deputed, And thus that Peace which formerly passed under the Titles of Pax
Domini, pax Vicecomitis, which is pax Regni, became by eminency swallowed up in
that which was called the Kings Peace; and the Justices called the Kings
Justices, and himself flattered into that Title of Fountain of Justice, which
belongs only to him that is The Most High or Chief Lawgiver.

The manner how this honorable care of the Safety and Peace of the Kingdom was
employed, may be referred to a double consideration; the one in execution of
Justice upon Delinquents, the other in preventing occasions of offense or
delinquency, by means whereof the public Peace might be endangered. The first
was acted diversely according to the present sense of affairs; for what was at
first done by the Princes in their Circuits, with one hundred of the Commons
called Comites, and that done per pagos, vicosque, Tacitus.
was afterward done by itinerant Judges, sent from the King for the greatest
matters; and by Lords in their Leets, Governors or chief Magistrates of Towns
in their Courts, and Sheriffs in their Torns, as Judices stati for the ease of
the people in matters of less moment. I say, I conceive it was in the Torn; for
I suppose no emergent Court, taken up upon occasion, 52 Hen. 3. Marlb. cap. 25.
could by the Law draw a necessity of a sudden appearance of all above twelve
years of age at the same. And for the same cause it seems, that one certain
Torn every year was holden for inquiries of Homicide, unto which all above
twelve years of age were to come, except Barons, Clergy, and Women, or
otherwise all such had been bound to attendance on every Torn. Nevertheless,
the work of the Torns continued not to hear and determine, as anciently they
had done. For in Henry the third's time, Miror. cap. 2. Sect. 9.
and formerly, diverse men had Prisons to their own use; some as Palatines,
others as Lords of Franchise, and others by power and usurpation, and had the
benefit of all Fines incident: and by this means many were fined that deserved
it not, and some also that deserved worse. Mag. Charta cap. 19.
To prevent which evil, Henry the third took away that power of holding
Crownpleas: And Edward the first took away their power to determine Escapes,
and left them only the power of inquiry, Glocest. cap. 8. West. 1. cap. 3.
and to certify at the next coming of the Justices.

But these injurious times had holden too long to be forgotten, or laid aside
by such cool pursuit. Men were still ordinarily imprisoned, and so continued
oftentimes, till the coming of the Justices itinerant. For whereas in case of
Bloodshed, the Writ de odio and atia was a remedy; the other had no remedy but
by procuring a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, which ordinarily was a cure
worse than the hurt. As a remedy hereof, Edward the first found out the new way
of making Justices of Peace, Stat. Wint. 13 Edw. 1.
as may appear by the Statute at Winton; which Law being purposely made for the
conserving of the Peace, providing for penalty of Crimes already committed (as
well as for the suppressing of future) ordains, That offenses against that
Law shall be presented to Justices assigned to enquire thereof; and though
these at the first might be itinerant, yet it soon made way to resiant. And
before that Statute, it seems the King had found out the way, if that Note be
true which is left revived into memory by that honorable Reporter, which
relating to the sixth year of Edward the first, Coke Inst. 4. p. 176.
says, That then prima fuit institutio justiciariorum pro pace conservanda.
And yet some semblance there is, that it was yet more ancient, even in the time
of Henry the first, if I mistake not the sense of that clause in his Laws
concerning Vagabonds; he orders that they shall be carried Justiciae quae
praeest, Hen. 1. cap. 58.
although the Language be not so Clerkly as to speak the sense out. Now though
their Work as yet was but in trial, and they were only trusted with power of
inquiry, yet it induced a new way wherein the Sheriff was not so much as
entrusted to intermeddle; and which not only intermitted the course of his
proceedings in such matters, but also led the way to the dispoiling of the
Sheriff's Torn, and Lord's Leet, of that little remainder that was left them of
Judicatory power in matters that were against the Peace, and made their
Inquisitory power less regardful, and eased the Justices itinerant of much of
their Work, in regard they were speedily to certify up to the King, and so
these matters should be determined in Parliament, according as those Justices
were elected in Parliament; who as it seems were jealous of giving the power of
determining those offenses into any sudden hand. To sum up then the first part;
as touching the punishment of offenses against the Peace, the wheel is now in
the turning, the Leets and Torns begin to be slighted, the labor of the
Justices itinerant lessened, the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer disused, by
the bringing in of a new Order of Justices for the Peace especially appointed;
and the Parliament, as the supreme Providers, left as the reserve for the
asserting and maintenance of the same; albeit that under it the power of
determining much rested upon Justices or Judges that attended the King's Court,
after that the Common Pleas were settled and confined to a certain place.

The preserving of the Peace for the future, consisted in preventing and
suppressing Riots, Routs, unlawful Assemblies, and in apprehending and securing
of such as were actors and contrivers of such designs, and other Malefactors.
And herein we are to consider, 1. The Laws: 2. The Means: 3. The executive
power. Concerning the first, there is no question to be made, but that the
power of making Laws for the maintenance of the Peace, rested in the
Parliament, although endeavor possibly might be used to settle the same in the
sole order of the King's own person; and therefore we find not only the assize
of Arms, but generally the substance of the Statute at Winton, to be formerly
taken up by Proclamation by Kings, predecessors to Edward the second, who first
that I can find, put the same into force of a Law by Parliament, finding by
experience that Proclamations may declare the King's Mind, but not command the
Peoples Wills; although peradventure the thing enjoined was of ancient use, and
little inferior to Custom or Common Law. Such are the Distempers of Civil
Broils, that bring up Peace in the rear, as a reserve when their own strength
is wasted, rather than out of any natural inclination thereto. A brief
recollection of the Laws thus ensue:

In case of Robbery or Felony committed, Stat. Wint. 13 Edw. 1. cap. 1.
and the Delinquent be not forthcoming or discovered, the County or Hundred
shall answer the damages.

Of this, more may appear from the Norman and Saxon Laws: the intent appears
by the Law it self, to stir up the people to use all means by pursuit with Hue
and Cry, and making inquisitions of the Fact with all speed, in Townships,
Hundreds, Franchises, and Counties.

Persons suspected shall not be entertained or harbored by any Inhabitant,
cap. 2.
unless he will undertake for him.

Of this also formerly, both in the Norman and Saxon Laws.

Walled Towns shall keep their gates shut from Sunset to Sunrising. The like
observed in Cities, cap. 3.
Buroughs, and Towns, from the Feast of Ascension to Michaelmas.

The power of the Watch was great: it might apprehend any Passenger and stay
him all night; and if he be a suspected person, he is to be committed to the
Sheriff; and if an escape be made, the party is to be pursued with Hue and Cry.
These two last Chapters were in effect in Henry the third's time, in course, by
way of the King's command by Writ, in the 36th and 37th years of his Reign, M.
Paris in Addit. and post. Adversar.
with some more particulars concerning the same.

Highways through every Lordship shall be kept clear on each side, cap. 4.
by the space of 200 foot, from Hedges, Ditches, Bushes, and Underwood.

Highway herein intended, are such as are from one Market Town to another; and
in such were always preserved the public peace or safety, for the maintenance
of Commerce, and freedom of Traffic: which is, of such public concernment,
that it has been of very ancient institution.

Every man between the age of fifteen years and forty, cap. 5.
shall maintain Arms in his house, according to the ancient Assize, for the
preserving of the Peace.

This Chapter brings into consideration the second thing propounded, viz. the
means of preserving of the Peace, which are two; First, by maintaining Arms: 2.
By certifying Defaults. In the first is to be considered the persons that are
to be assessed: 2. The Arms: 3. The end. The persons to be assessed to Arms,
are indefinitely set down, and comprehend all sorts, as well bond as free, and
others; for such are the expressions in the Commission of Henry the third. But
by the Assize of Henry the second, 36 Hen. 3. M. Paris. post adversaria.
Hoveden.
none were to be armed but Freemen, and they worth sixteen or ten marks in
Goods at the least; yet their ages are limited: by this Law they must be
between fifteen years and forty; but by the Commission in Henry the third's
time, all between fifteen and sixty years of age were to be armed. King John
arrayed all sorts, free, bond, and all others that have Arms, or ought to have,
or can carry Arms: and it seems by what has been formerly noted, M. Paris. An.
1213.
that those that were younger than their Tenure would bear them out, were
accepted into service, if they would offer themselves; but by these courses
they, though under one and twenty years of age, were not only accepted, but
compelled to War. Under this Title, Hoveded. Hen. 2. M. Paris addit.
we may also touch upon the persons that were the instruments to array these
men, or rather to arm them; and these were Justices itinerant, or one or more
Commissioners, such as the King found most meet of the service. And unto these
were Commissions with instructions sent; and sometimes Writs were directed
only to the Sheriffs, to take with them twelve Knights of the County, M. Paris
post adversaria.
and to go into every Hundred, and call before them all such persons as by the
Law ought to be assessed at Arms, and to cause them to be sworn to find and
maintain Arms in such manner as by the Law they then should be, or formerly
were assessed; and sometimes the establishment of Arms were set down in those
Writs, and sometimes published by Proclamation. For Kings found all means
little enough to prevail to bring in alteration of Arms, M. Paris. An. 1253,
and 1256.
and of their service; which was a thing not only troublesome, but chargeable,
and whereunto they could not easily prevail to bring the Freemen to consent.
And therefore sometimes the endeavors of Kings in such cases, did not only
meet dilationem, but also deletionem, as the Historian's words are, until the
way was found out to declare an establishment by Parliament, M. Paris. An. 1253.
by this Statute made at Winton.

Now for the nature of the establishment, we are to consider, that the people
of England were distinguished according to their Tenures, into such as held by
Knight Service, Ll. Gulielm. 58.
and such as held by Socage; and that none but those being Freeholders, could
be charged to find Arms, according as by the Laws of the Norman Conqueror may
appear. The establishment of Arms for the Knights, were established by their
Tenures in certainty, and therefore no need was either of Assessment or Oath to
tie them to find such Arms; but all the difficulty was, for such as were not
bound by other Tenure than as freeborn Subjects, all of whom do owe to their
Country defense, and so questionless had liberty to provide themselves of such
Arms as were by common and constant use held most advantageous against the
common Enemy, and for the public defense. And that these were put in
certainty, may appear by the Law of King William formerly noted, and by some
instances in the Saxon Laws anciently used; Ll. Aethelst. cap. 16.
amongst others, that Law of Aethelstane, That for every Plough, every man
should find two complete Horses. And another Order of Aetheldred nigh eighty
years aster, differing from it, assessed upon every eight Hides of Land, a
Helmet, and a Coat of Mail: And the Historian tells us, That a Hide is a
Plough-Land, or so much Land as one Plough can keep in till the end of one
whole year. Huntington. An. 1008. Ll. Canut. 97.
And the relief of the Noblemen of all sorts and ranks, in Horses, Helmets,
Coats of Mail, Lances, Shields, and Swords; the meanest of all which degrees
being called Mediocris Thainus, yielding a relief equal to the Arms of a
Knight, in the times whereof we now treat, viz. one Horse, one Helmet, one Coat
of Mail, one Lance, one Shield, one Sword: all comprehended under arma sua, as
if he had a certain proper Arms. And the Laws concerning the forfeiture of
Arms, do in effect affirm the thing, viz. that all men were armed; yet probable
it is, that laws were not then so often made for the enforcing this or that
particular sort of Arms, in regard that till the Normans time this Island was
troubled but seldom with any Enemies from foreign parts, that brought any new
sorts of Weapons into fashion; the Danes and Norwegians being no other than an
old Acquaintance of theirs. Neither were the Saxons as yet tamed by any Enemy,
so far as to beg a Peace, albeit that the Danes had gotten them under. But
after the Norman times, the English being somewhat over-matched in War,
inclined more to Husbandry, and began to lay aside their regard of Arms; and
this occasioned the Kings to make Assessments of Arms: yet having regard to the
ancient course of the Saxons, saving that they urged the use of the Bow more
than formerly was used, and thereby taught the conquered to conquer the
Conquerours in future ages. Of these sorts of Assessments before this Stature
at Winton, I find but two; the first made by Henry the second, and the other by
Henry the third; which, together with that of this Statute, I parallel thus
together, in their own words.

Hen. 2. Hen. 3. Stat. Wint. Lands. Goods. Knights Fee. 15 Librat. 60 Marks. 15
l. Land, 40 Marks Goods. Loricam Loricam Loricam Hauberk Cassidem Capellum
ferri Capellum ferri Shapel de fer Clipeum Gladium Gladium Espee Lanceam
Cultellum Cultellum Cotel Equum Equum Chival 16 Marks Chattels. 16 Marks Rents.
10 Librat. 40 Marks. 10 l. Lands, 20 Marks Goods. Halbergellum Halbergettum
Halbertum Hauberk Capelletum ferri Capellum ferri Capellum ferreum Shapel de
fer Lanceam Gladium Gladium Espee Cultellum Cultellum Cotel 10 Marks Chattels.
10 Marks Rents.
100 s. 20 Marks. 100 s. Land. Wanbais Perpunctum Perpunctum Purpoint
Capelletum ferri Capellum ferreum Capellum ferreum Shapel de fer Lanceam.
Gladium Gladium Espee Lanceam Cultellum Cotel Cultellum Betwixt 5 l. and 40 s.
9 Marks. Betwixt 5 l. and 40 s. Gladium Gladium Espee Cultellum Arcum and
sagit. Arc and setes Arcum and sagit. Cultellum Cotels Under 40 s. Under 9
Marks to 40 s. Under 40 s. Falces Falces Faulx Gisarmas Gisarmas, etc. Gisarmes
Cultellos, etc. Cotels Under 20 Marks Goods. Espees Cotels.

I have thus impaled these three, that the Reader may the better discern how
they relate each to other, and so may the better understand the matter in the
sum. And I must explain three or four words in them as they are set down,
before I can bring up the conclusion; because the mistake of the sense of the
words has made some mistake the intent of the thing, Lipsius de milit. Romans
lib. 3. Dialog. 6.
and forced the same to an unwarrantable issue. Lorica signifies that piece of
Armor that defends the breast, or forepart of the body; and sometimes is made
of plates of Iron, of which sort I conceive those of the old Germans were,
(whereof the Historian makes mention, Tacirus.
paucis loricae, he says the Germans had few Arms of defense of their
foreparts, and fewer Helmets or Head-pieces) for otherwise, if they had Iron
defenses for their heads, they would not have been content with defenses made
of Leather for their fore-parts, Cluer. Germ. p. 339. 34.
as in the first rude times they might have been. Sometimes it is made of links
of Iron, and commonly is called a Coat of Mail; but I conceive it cannot be so
meant in the assessments of Henry the Second, and Henry the Third, because that
those of the second degree are said that they ought to keep Haubergettum, or
Halburgellum, or Haubertum; all which are but several dialects of one name, and
are taken for a Coat of Mail: and therefore by the diversity of names in one
and the same assessment, I do conclude that the Armor was not of one and the
same fashion. But it is evident, that by Hauberk in the assessment of the
Statute at Wint. is meant a Coat of Mail, and is never taken for a Breast Plate
or Gorget, as has been taken upon trust by some that build more weighty
conclusions upon that weak principle, than it is able to bear: and for the
truth hereof, as the word is a French word, so I appeal to all French Authors,
and shall not trouble the Reader with the notation of the word, or further
about the meaning thereof. In the last place, as great mistake is that also of
the word Shapell de fer, which is taken by some to betoken a Breastplate of
Iron: For the truth whereof, the Reader may consider the Latin word Capellum,
or Capelletum, and he shall find that it is an Iron cap, or an ordinary
Headpiece: and in the Assize of Henry the Third, it holds the place of Cassis
in the Assize of Henry the Second. For the manner of all these, let the Reader
view the Sculptures of the several Norman Kings, armed for the Charge, in the
beginning of their several Reigns, as they are represented in Speed's History.
It may also be conceived, that there is as much mistake of that Weapon which is
called Cultellum or Cotel, whilst they translate it by the word Knife; for
though it be true that it is one signification of that word, yet it appears not
only by this Law, that it was a Weapon for a Knight in War, but in use at
Tornaments, as by that Statute that forbids the use of a pointed Sword, or
pointed Cotel, a Battoon, or a Mace, at that sport: and therefore it may seem
to be some Weapon of greater use, either a Cotellax, or suchlike Weapon;
otherwise to enjoin the finding of a Knife to a man as an offensive Weapon
against armed men in Battle, would serve to no use at all.

Now concerning the difference between the several Assizes aforesaid, it
consists either in the number of the several degrees or ranks of those that
are assessed: Or secondly, in the manner of their valuation: Or lastly, in the
particulars of their Arms assessed upon them. As touching the degrees in Henry
the Second's time, they were but Three, in regard that he only assessed
Freeholders: and certainly that was the ancient Law, as by the Law of the
Conqueror, and other Saxon Laws formerly mentioned, may appear. But Henry the
Third taking example of King John, who was the first founder of general arrays,
charged all but such as were men of nothing; albeit, I find not that such as
were of the inferior degree, were sworn to those Arms, but rather allowed to
have them. And though the Statute at Winchester holds to the same degrees in
Lands, yet in the value of Goods there is some difference, in favor of them
that only have stock and no Freehold. Secondly, there is some difference in
the manner of valuation of Lands with Chattels; and therein the Statute at
Winton favors the personal estates, more than Hen. 3. and he more than Hen. 2.
and yet all of them pretend one rule of ancient custom; I believe they mean,
that they had it in their eye, but not in their heart: For they would come as
night to it as they could, and yet keep as far from it as they durst. Thirdly,
as touching the difference of the Arms between these three assessments, it
seems so small, as in this they are most of them all one. For wherein Hen. 2.
leads, both Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. do imitate, saving that they add the Horse and
Sword; which questionless was to be understood as a granted case, that the
complete Arms of a man could not be carried and managed without a Horse, nor
defended without a Sword. As touching other alterations, it might be done upon
good advice, as not being deemed meet that such as were no Knights but in
Estate, should be armed in every respect like as the Knights were. And thus we
have an ancient custom of maintaining Arms by every Free man, for the defense
of the Kingdom, first made uncertain by the avarice of Kings, and negligence of
the Freemen, and brought into an arbitrary charge; at length reduced to a
certainty, upon all sorts of Inhabitants by a Statute Law (if so it then were)
unto which every man had yielded himself bound by his own consent. But to what
end is all this? I said it was for the defense of the Kingdom, and so it was in
the original; and yet also for the safety of the King in order thereunto, and
for the safety and maintenance of the peace of every member of the whole body.
This in one lump thus will not down with some, who will have this assessment
only to be for keeping of the peace against Routs and Riots, but not
sufficient nor intended to be supply for War, when Edward the First calls for
it; because Edward the First shall not have his power confined within the
compass of a Statute, but to be at liberty of array as he should think meet:
and it is not to be denied but the words of this Law run thus, viz. That the
intent thereof is for preserving of the peace; but those general words will not
bear the power of a restrictive sense: for certainly the peace is as well
preserved by providing against War, as against Riots; and against Foreign War,
as Intestine Mutinies. And that the Statute intended the one, as well as the
other, will appear, because it was made in relation to former precedents of
Henry the Third; and they speak plainly that their intent was to strengthen the
Kingdom against dangers from abroad. The words of the Historian are clear, that
Henry the Third charged all that had 15 libratas terrae, and upwards, should
undertake the Arms of a Knight, M. Paris. fol. 916.
ut Anglia, sicut Italia, militia roboraretur. And because he had threats from
beyond Sea, M. Paris. fol. 864.
by the defection of the Gascoigns, therefore he caused Writs to issue forth
throughout the Kingdom, Vid. post. Adversaria. M. Paris.
that secundum pristinam consuetudinem, assessment of Arms should be secundum
facultates; and in one of the Writs published by the Historian, the express
assessment of H. 3. formerly mentioned, is particularly set down. Nor are these
Arms thus assessed, so slight as men would pretend: for the Arms of the first
Rank were the complete Arms of a Knight, and their Estates equal thereunto; for
those 15 libratae terrae amounted to 780 Acres of Land, as the late publisher
of Paris his History has it: and is very nigh the reckoning of Henry
Huntington, who (as has been mentioned) lays a Helmet and Coat of Mail unto
eight Hides of Land, which according to Gervase of Tilburie's account comes to
800 Acres, Cap. penult.
every Hide containing one hundred Acres. These therefore were better than
Hoblers. And the succeeding Ranks found Arms also proportionable to their
Estates, as considerable as the times could find for such as were of constant
use, and might be supplied with other Weapons as occasion served, and as they
might be of most benefit for the service.

Furthermore, whereas it is said, that the wisdom of the Parliament might be
questioned, if they intended no better provision against an Enemy than against
a Thief or Rogue; I should desire the consideration of those men, whether are
those Thieves and Rogues, in Troops or bodies, and well armed, or are they a
sort of scattered Outlaws, lightly armed to fly away, when they have gotten
the prey? If they were in the former posture, I pray what difference in point
of difficulty of suppressing, between them and so many Enemies? and if it was
discretion in the Parliament to make this provision against the one, certainly
these, with the Knighthood of the Kingdom, with as much discretion, will be
sufficient provision against the other. But if these be looked upon in the
later sense, I fear the discretion of the Parliament would have been much more
questioned in arming all men that have any ability to suppress Thieves and
Rogues, against which the ordinary Watch and Ward of the Kingdom was an ancient
and approved remedy, and sufficient safeguard. And I would fain know of these
men, whether it be for the safety of Edward the First, or any other King, to
arm the whole body of the people, especially in times of jealousy, for
suppressing of Thieves and Robbers, whenas it may be done by a guard of known
men in every County, with much more ease, and less charge to the people.

Lastly, whereas it is endeavored to make this Statute but a temporary
provision, and taken up for the present condition of affairs, when Thieves and
Robbers went with great strength, and in multitudes: This might be, I grant, of
some efficacy, if it had been introductio novi juris; but it being grounded
upon a former Custom, the ground of that custom (which was defense of the
Kingdom) must be the warrant of the Law; otherwise the present inconvenience
might be remedied by a present Order, and needed not the help of a Law that
should rest upon former Custom, or provide for future generations.
Nevertheless, if all be granted, viz. that this Statute is but a present Order,
that the Arms therein are too slight to resist an Enemy, and the end thereof
was only to enable the Kingdom against Thieves and Robbers; yet could not
Edward the first pretend to have any power to assess Arms at pleasure upon
occasion of War, for the defense of the Kingdom; nor is there any precedent in
story that countenanceth it, seeing Henry the Third, and Henry the Second, in
their course used the rule secundum facultates, as had been formerly observed;
and the rule foregoing tended only to Freemen and their Lands. Nor did King
John disclaim the same, but pursued it; (and yet if there be any precedent of
Prerogative in story, which King John had not, that King will be looked upon as
a King of wonderment) I say, King John pursued it when he was in the strength
of his distemper, threatened by the Pope, provoked by the French King now ready
in the field, vexed by his people; and himself scarce himself, summons to
defend himself, themselves, and the Kingdom of England, all men that ought to
have Arms, or may have Arms, and such as have no Arms, and yet arma habere
possint, let them also come ad capiendum solidatas nostras; and accordingly
there came a vast number, not only of the armed men, but of the unarmed
multitude, who afterward were sent to their own home when victuals failed.
Hitherto therefore King John not above three years before his death, held
himself to the assessment to Arms only of such as had Lands; and at this time
of exigency, others unarmed were summoned to take Arms from the King with their
pay, or otherwise they must fight without Weapons.

I am now come to the last general point, which concerns the executive power
of matters concerning the peace within this Law, touching which the Statute
enforces this, That Constables in every Hundred and Franchise shall have the
view of Arms, and shall present defaults against the Statute of Justices
assigned, who shall certify the same to the King in every Parliament, and the
King shall provide remedy. Whereby it seems manifest, that hitherto no Law or
Custom was made against any for default of Arms, but only such as held by that
Tenure: and therefore they had a shift to cause them to swear to maintain Arms,
and so might proceed upon defaults, as in case of perjury; and that the
Parliament was still loath to set any certain rule for penalty, and absolutely
declined it, and left it under a general periculo incumbente, which it is
likely men would rather eschew by obedience, than adventure upon out of a
daring spirit, unless their case was very clear, within the mercy of common
reason. And therefore such cases were left to special order of the Parliament,
rather than they would deliver such a rod as determining power was, over into
any uncertain hand whatever. It is very true, that by the opinion of some, this
also has been controverted, as if all the executive power had been turned out
of the Parliaments Order, into the directory of Edward the First: which thing
reaches far; for then in order thereunto, the whole Militia of the Kingdom
must have been under his safe command. And whether it ever entered into the
conceit of that King I know not, but somewhat like thereunto, is not obscurely
urged to nourish and suggest such a kind of notion, and so derive it unto his
Successors, upon the words of a Statute de defensione portandi armorum, the
English whereof I shall render out of the French as follows:

It belongs to Us, (viz. Edw. 1.) and from Us by Our Royal Seigniory, to
defend force of Arms, and all other force against Our peace, at all times that
We shall please; and to punish according to the Laws and Vsages of this Realm,
such as shall oppose; and to this they (viz. Lords and Commons) are bound Us to
aid as their good Lord, always when need shall be.

Two things are concurrant with this, which is the body of the Statute, if such
it be. The one is the Preface, or the occasion: And the second is the
conclusion upon the whole body of the same. The preface first sets down the
inscription or direction of the Law; not to the people, but to the Justices of
his Bench; and so it is in nature of a Writ or Declaration sent unto his
Judges. Then it sets down the occasion, which was a debate between Edw. 1. and
his Lords, with a Treaty which was had before certain persons deputed thereto:
and it was accorded, that at the next Parliament, Order shall be taken by
common consent of the King* the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, that in all
Parliaments, Treaties, and other Assemblies which shall be had in the Kingdom
of England for ever after* all men shall come thereto without force, and
without arms, well and peaceably: and thence it recites, that the said meeting
at Parliament was had, and that there the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and
Commonalty being assembled to advise upon this matter; nous eiont dit, says
one Copy, and no^^ eions dit, says another Copy: so as whether this was the
Declaration of the King unto the Parliament, or of the Parliament to the King,
is one doubt, and a principal one it is in such a case as this. Then the
conclusion of all is, that the King commands these things shall be read
before the Justices in the Bench, and there enrolled; and this is dated the
30th of October in the Seventh year of his Reign, which was Ann. 1279. So as if
it were the Declaration of the King, then it implies as if it were not very
well accepted of the Parliament; and therefore the King would have it rest upon
Record in nature of a Claim or Protestando, for saving the Prerogative of the
Crown. But if it were the Declaration of the Parliament, the King held it so
precious a flower, that fearing it should fade, set it in a private Garden of
his own, that it might be more carefully nursed against the blast of Time; as
if the Parliament had not assented thereto, or (if they did) meaned not to hold
it forth to the world for future times to be a constant rule, but only by way
of concession, to ease themselves of the present difficulty, in making a Law
against wearing of Armor in ordinary civil affairs, and so referred it to the
King's care to provide against emergent breach of the peace, as an expedient
for the present inconveniences in affairs. And it will well suit with the
posture of affairs then in course: for the Welsh-Wars were now intermitted, and
a quiet of three years ensued; in the midst of which, Soldiers having liberty
to do nothing (and that is next to naught) but recreate themselves, used their
wonted guise, as if they were not dressed that day that they were not armed;
nor fit for counsel, unless (as their Ancestors) with Weapons in their hands;
nor worthy of the presence of a King under other notion, than as a General in
the field, and themselves as Commanders that are never A-la-mode but when all
in Iron and Steel. I say, to make a Law that must suddenly bind men from riding
or being armed, when no man thought himself safe otherwise, was in effect to
expose their bare necks to the next turn of the Sword of a King that they did
not overmuch trust, and the less in regard he trusted not them. I do not
wonder therefore if the Parliament liked not the work, but left it to the King
to provide for the keeping off breaches of the Peace, and promised their
assistance therein.

Lastly, supposing all that is or can be supposed, viz. that the Parliament had
given up the power of the Militia unto Edward the First; yet it was not to all
intents, nor did it continue: for besides the Statute of Tornaments, which
shows plainly that the ordering of Armor was in the power of the Parliament,
and which in all probability was made after that Law last beforementioned; the
Statute at Winton, made after this Law nigh six years space, orders the use
of the Trained bands in maintaining the peace, and reserveth the penalties to
themselves for any default committed against the said Act. And therefore,
notwithstanding any thing that yet appears to me out of any Law or History,
the chief Moderatorship of War and Peace, within the Realm of England, rests
hitherto upon the Parliament next unto God; and in the King no otherwise, than
in order to the Public, the rule whereof can be determined by no other Judge
than that which can be intended to have no other respect than the public good,
and which is the Abridgement of the large Volume of the Kingdom.

A Summary Conclusion.
ANd thus have I brought the shape of English Government (rude as it is) from
the first offspring of the Saxons, through the rough waves of the Danish
Tempests, the Rocks of Norman invasion, and of the Quicksands of Arbitrary
Government under Popes and Kings, to the Haven: much defaced it is, I confess,
by the rage of time, and yet retained the original likeness in proportion.

Kings first (about the Norman times) joining with the Lords for their joint
interest above the ordinary pitch, had mounted each other too high to be Lords
over Free men. Then by flattering of the Freemen into their designs, hovered
above them all; but not being able to maintain their pitch so long as the Lords
held together, stooped for a party amongst them, and soon obtained their
desire. For some Lords (more ambitious than others, and these again more
popular than they) seek several interests. And thus Kings (aided by their party
to a Supremacy which they were never born to; and raised by them into a
pre-eminence above their Peers, which neither Law nor Custom ever gave them)
are of Moderators in the Council of Lords, become Moderators of those Councils;
and so they obtained all that the Lords had, but no more. For though both they
and the Lords abused their power over the Freemen by extortion and oppression,
as Lords over Tenants; yet could they never prevail over them as freeborn
Subjects, to gain their consent to give their Right, or the Law, up to the
King's beck: but still the Law remained arbiter both of King and People, and
the Parliament Supreme Expounder and Judge both of it and them. For other
argument hereof there will be little need (besides what has formerly appeared)
than what we find in Bracton, Bracton, lib. ^^ cap. 16.
who wrote in the time of Henry the Third, to this effect: God is superior to
the King, and the Law by which he is made King, and his Court, viz. the Earls
and Barons: Earls (according to their name Comites) are the Kings Associates,
and he that has an Associate has a Master; and therefore if the King be
unbridled, or (which is all one) without Law, they ought to bridle him, unless
they will be unbridled as the King, and then the Commons may cry, Lo Jesus,
etc. This was the judgment of that famous Lawyer of the state of an English
King, in Henry the Third's time. I shall add hereto a concurrent testimony of a
Lawyer also in Edward the First's time. Miror. Just* P. 9.
Although (says he) the King ought to have no equal in the Land; yet because
the King nor his Commissioners (in case where the King intrencheth upon the
right of any of his Subjects) can be both Judge and Party, the King by right
ought to have Companions, to hear and determine in Parliament all Writs and
plaints of wrongs done by the King, the Queen, or their Children, and of those
wrongs especially, whereof otherwise common right cannot be had. Nor is this
the opinion only of Lawyers, but it is the Law it self unto which the Royal
assent was added, Edw. 2.
and the same sealed with an Oath in the solemn stipulation made by Kings at
their Coronation, with the people then present, in the name of the whole body:
the sum whereof is wont to be propounded to the King in this manner, Remonst.
Parliament. novem. l. 2. An. 1642.
though in a different Language.

1. Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of England
the Laws and Customs to them granted by the ancient Kings of England, your
righteous and godly Predecessors; and especially to the Clergy and People, by
the glorious King St. Edward your Predecessor?

The King's Answer: I do them grant and promise.

2. Will you keep to God and the Church, and the Clergy, and the People, Peace
and Concord sincerely according to your power?

The King's Answer: I will do it.

3. Do you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs, which the
Commonalty of your Realm shall have chosen, and to maintain and enforce them to
the honor of God after your power?

The King's Answer: I this do grant and promise.

In few words, the King promised to keep the Laws already made, the peace of
his Kingdom, and the Laws to be agreed upon by the Commonalty: the same in
substance with that of Henry the First, William the Conqueror, the Danish and
Saxon Kings formerly had, and in the foregoing discourse observed. And thus is
he led to the Throne in a Chain of Gold, a serious memorial of the King's duty
as he is a man, and a glorious ornament to him as a King. If then the King be
under the Law in case of direction, as by stipulation he is bound; if he be
likewise under the Law in case of transgression, to be judged by his Comites,
or Peers; Hitherto certainly an English King is but Primas inter omnes, and not
supra totum; and if at any time he skipped higher, he afterward fell lower:
for it was the lot of these times to have Lords that were bent to work the
people to regard their own Liberties, in which the Lords had first wrapped up
their own Claims. Thus come the counsels of such as have been notoriously
exorbitant to be scanned; and to bring these into frame, all run out of frame;
the Barons Wars arise, and thrive according as interests do concenter more or
less: the issue is like that of a drawn battle, wherein he that continues last
in the Field, is glad to be gone away, and so the Title is left to be tried
upon the next advantage that shall arise.

Yet had Kings gotten one step forwards to their design, which was, in that
they now had to deal with a divided Baronage. It was the birth of Ambition, and
it was nourished by the same milk; for those that side with the King are become
Magnificoes next to the King's person, and the sole managers of all the great
affairs of State, concurrent with their own designs under-board. But the other
Lords are in account rural, standing further off; and looking on at a distance,
are laid away as superfluous. And as they themselves are out of the game of
great men, so grow they mindless of their interest in the great affairs: yet of
these there is diversity; for some sport themselves in their condition; others
observe the irregular motions of those above, and watch their own time.

This was the first advance of that society, which was afterward called the
Privy Council; being a company of choice men according to the King's bent, unto
whom the consideration of all the weighty affairs of the Kingdom is committed;
but nothing can be concluded without the King's fiat, which regularly should
follow upon the premises, according to the major vote; but more ordinarily
suiteth with that which best suiteth with his pleasure. And now are Parliaments
looked on as fatal, or at the best but as heavy dull Debates, and inconvenient
both for speed and secrecy; which indeed are advantages for weak and
unwarrantable councils; but such as are well-grounded upon truth, and strength
of reason of State, are not afraid to behold the clearest noonday; and prevail
neither by speed nor secrecy, but by the power of uncontrolled Reason fetched
from truth it self. The Grand Council of Lords also are now no less
burdensome: For though they were not able to prevail against the private
designs of an arbitrary Supremacy, yet do they hinder the progress, tell tales
to the people, and blot the names of those that are of that aspiring humor;
which once done, like that of Sisyphus, they have no other end of their labor
than their toil.

Thus perished that ancient and rightly honorable Grand Council of Lords,
having first laid aside the public, then lost unity, and lastly themselves;
besides the extreme danger of the whole body. For the sense of State once
contracted into a Privy Council, is soon contracted into a Cabinet-Council, and
last of all into a Favorite or two; which many times brings damage to the
public, and both themselves and Kings into extreme praecipices; partly for
want of maturity, but principally through the providence of God overruling
irregular courses to the hurt of such as walk in them.

Nor were the Clergy idle in this bustle of affairs, although not very well
employed; for it is not to be imagined but that these private prizes played
between the Lords, Commons, and King, laid each other open to the aim of a
foreign pretension, whilst they lay at their close guard one against another.
And this made an Ecclesiastical power to grow upon the Civil, like the Ivy upon
the Oak, from being Servants to Friends, and thence Lords of Lords, and Kings
of Kings. By the first putting forth, it might seem to be a Spiritual Kingdom;
but in the blossom, which now is come to some luster, it is evident to be
nothing but a Temporal Monarchy over the Consciences of men; and so, like
Cuckows, laying their Eggs in nests that are none of their own, they have their
brood brought up at the public charge. Nevertheless, this their Monarchy was
as yet beyond their reach; it was Prelacy that they labored for, pretending to
the Pope's use, but in order to themselves. The Cripple espied their halting,
and made them soon tread after his pace; he is content they should be Prelates
without measure, within their several Diocesses and Provinces, so as he may be
the sole Praelatissimo beyond all comparison. And undoubtedly thus had been
before these times destroyed the very principles of the Church Government of
this Kingdom, but that two things prejudiced the work: The one, that the
Papalty was a foreign power; and the other, that as yet the Pope was entangled
with the power of Councils, if he did not stoop thereunto. The first of these
two, was the most deadly Herb in the Pottage, and made it so unsavory, that it
could never be digested in this Kingdom: For Kings looking upon this as an
intrenchment upon their Prerogative, and the People also as an intrenchment
upon their Liberties, both or one of them were ever upon the guard, to keep out
that which was without, and would be ruled neither by Law nor Counsel. And
therefore though both Kings and People, yielded much unto the importunity of
these men, and gave them many privileges whereby they became great, yet was
their greatness dependant upon the Law of the Land and Vote of Parliament; and
though they had the more power, they nevertheless were not one jot the more
absolute, but still the Law kept above their top. I deny not but they in their
practice exceeded the rule often, and lifted themselves above their rank; yet
it is as well to be granted, that they could never make Law to bind the
Churchmen, much less the Laity, but by conjunction of the Grand Councils both
for Church and Commonwealth-affairs; nor could they execute any Law in case
that concerned the Liberty or Propriety of either, but in a Synodical way, or
as deputed by the Parliament in that manner. And therefore I must conclude,
that in these times whereof we treat, the principles of Church Government, so
far as warranted by Law, were in their nature Presbyterial; that is, both in
making Laws and executing them, Bishops and Archbishops were never trusted
with the sole administration of them, but in and by consent of Synods, in which
the Clergy and Laity ought to have their joint vote. And all power more, or
contrary hereto, was at the best an usurpation colored by practice; which was
easily attained, where there was a perpetual Moderatorship resting in the
Bishop, and over all the Pope; the King, Lords, and Commons in the mean while
being buried in pursuit of several interests elsewhere.

To make all semblable, the Freemen met with the sad influence of these
distempers, as well from the King and Lords, as the Clergy. Kings to save their
own stake from the Pope, remitted of that protection which they owed to their
Subjects, and let in upon them a flood of oppressions and extortions from the
Romish and English Clergy, and so like a little ship cast out a Barrel for the
Whale to pursue, till it gets away: But this changed no right. The Lords by
their parties shattered them asunder, and dismembered their body by intestine
broils. The Clergy more craftily making some of them free Denizons of the Roman
See, and taking them into their protection, whilst others of the Freemen at a
distance, were exposed as a prey to the continual assaults of those devouring
times: All these conspired together to deface and destroy that ancient and
goodly bond of Brotherhood, the Law of Decenners, by which the Freemen,
formerly holden together like Cement in a strong Wall, are now left like a heap
of loose stones, or so many single men, scarcely escaping with their skin of
Liberties, and those invaded by many projects, and shifts in Government of
State Affairs. So must I leave them until some happy hand shall work their
repair, both for time and manner, as it shall please that great and wise
Master Builder of the World.

FINIS.
THE CONTINUATION OF THE Historical and Political DISCOURSE OF THE LAWS and
GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND, Until the end of the REIGN of Queen Elizabeth. WITH A
VINDICATION Of the ancient way of PARLIAMENTS In ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleet Street near
Temple Bar. M.DC.LXXXII.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Several CHAPTERS of this BOOK.
I. THe sum of the several Reigns of Edward the Third, and Richard the Second.
fol. 2 II. The state of the King and Parliament, in relation of him to it, and
of it to him. fol. 9. III. Of the Privy Council, and the condition of the
Lords. fol. 16 IV. Of the Chancery. fol. 21 V. Of the Admirals Court. fol. 24
VI. Of the Church-mens interest. fol. 27 VII. Concerning Trade. fol. 38 VIII.
Of Treason and Legiance, with some Considerations concerning Calvin's Case.
fol. 45 IX. Of Courts for Causes criminal, with their Laws. fol. 54 X. Of the
course of Civil Justice during these times. fol. 56 XI. Of the Militia in these
times. fol. 58 XII. Of the Peace. fol. 62 XIII. A view of the summary courses
of Henry the Fourth, Henry the Fifth, and Henry the Sixth, in their several
Reigns. fol. 68 XIV. Of the Parliament during the Reigns of these several
Kings. fol. 75 XV. Of the Custos, or Protector Regni. fol. 79 XVI. Concerning
the Privy Council. fol. 83 XVII. Of the Clergy and Church Government during
these times. fol. 86 XVIII. Of the Court of Chancery. fol. 95 XIX. Of the
Courts of Common Pleas, and Common Law. fol. 97 XX. Concerning Sheriffs. fol.
98 XXI. Of Justices and Laws concerning the Peace. fol. 99 XXII. Of the Militia
during these times. fol. 102 XXIII. A short Survey of the Reigns of Edward the
Fourth, Edward the Fifth, and Richard the Third. fol. 106 XXIV. Of the
Government in relation to the Parliament. f. 109 XXV. Of the condition of the
Clergy. fol. 112 XXVI. A short sum of the Reigns of Henry the Seventh, and
Henry the Eighth. fol. 113 XXVII. Of the condition of the Crown. fol. 118
XXVIII. Of the condition of the Parliament in these times. fol. 130 XXIX. Of
the power of the Clergy in the Convocation. f. 134 XXX. Of the power of the
Clergy in their ordinary Jurisdiction. fol. 136 XXXI. Of Judicature. fol. 141
XXXII. Of the Militia. fol. 143 XXXIII. Of the Peace. fol. 148 XXXIV. Of the
general Government of Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. fol.
152 XXXV. Of the Supreme power during these times. fol. 157 XXXVI. Of the power
of the Parliament during these times fol. 162 XXXVII. Of the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical during these last times. fol. 166 XXXVIII. Of the Militia in
these later times. fol. 168 XXXIX. Of the Peace. fol. 173 XL. A summary
Conclusion of the whole matter. fol. 174.
THE CONTINUATION OF AN Historical and Political Discourse OF THE Laws and
Government OF ENGLAND.
THE former times, since the Norman entry like a rugged Sea, by cross Winds of
Arbitrary Vapors, in and about the Crown; and by Foreign Engagements from the
holy Chair, made the true face of affairs cloudy and troublesome, both for the
Writer and the Reader.

Henceforward, for the space of Three hundred years next ensuing, Kings by
experience and observation finding themselves unequal to the double chase of
absolute Supremacy over the sturdy Laity and encroaching Clergy, you will
observe to lay aside their pretensions against the Peoples Liberties, and more
intentively to trench upon the Spiritualty, now grown to defy all Government,
but that of Covetousness.

Nor would these times allow further advantage to Kings in this work, they
being either fainted by the ticklish Title of the Crown, hovering between the
two Houses of York and Lancaster, or drawn off to foreign employments; as
matters of greater concernment for the present wellbeing of the Kingdom, or for
the spreading of the fame of such as desired to be renowned for valiant men.

It will be superfluous to recount the particular achievements formerly
attained by these Ecclesiastical men; the former Treatise has already said
what was thought needful concerning that. For the future, I shall even premise
this, that the ensuing times being thus blessed with a Truce, or stricter
League between the Kings and Commons; the errors in Government more readily do
appear; the corruptions in natures of men more frequently discover themselves;
and thereby the body of the Statute-Laws begins to swell so big, that I must be
enforced to contract my account of them into a narrower compass, and render the
same unto the Reader, so far forth only as they shall concern the general
stream of Government; leaving those of privater regard unto every man's
particular consideration, as occasion shall lead him. For whatever other men
please to insist upon, this I take for a Maxim, That though the Government of
a King is declared by his Actions; yet the Government of a Kingdom is only
manifested by ancient Customs, and public Acts of Parliament.

And because I have undertaken a general Survey of the Reigns of thirteen
several Kings and Queens of this Nation, (for I shall not exceed the issue of
Henry the Eighth) and to handle each of them apart, will leave the Reader in a
Wilderness of particulars, hard to comprehend in the general sum; I shall
therefore reduce them all into three heads, viz. Interest of Title, Interest of
Prerogative, and Interest of Religion; the last of which swayed much the three
Children of Henry the Eighth; the second as much in their two Ancestors, viz.
Henry the Eighth, and Henry the Seventh; and the first in the three Henry's of
Lancaster, and three succeeding Kings of the House of York. And because Edward
the Third, and his Grandchild Richard the Second, do come under none of these
Interests, I shall consider them jointly, as in way of Exordium to the rest,
although the course of the latter was as different from the former, as Lust
falls short of a generous Spirit.

CHAP. I. A sum of the several Reigns of Edward the Third, and Richard the
Second.
SEveral I may well call them, because they are the most different in their
ways and ends of any two of that race that ever swayed their Scepter; and yet
the entrance of the first, gave countenance to the conclusion of the last. For
the Scepter being cast away or lost by Edward the Second, it was the lot of his
Son Edward the Third, a youth of Fifteen years of age, to take it up: he
knowing whose it was, and feeling it too heavy for him, was willing enough it
should return; but being overswayed by Counsels drawn from reason of State, and
pressed thereto by those that resolved not to trust his Father any more, he
wisely chose to manage it himself, rather than to adventure it in another hand.
But that is not all: for as it is never seen that the Crown does thrive after
divorce from the Scepter, but like a blasted Blossom, falls off at the next
gale of adversity; such was the issue to Edward the Second, his power once
gone, his Honor follows soon after: he had ceased to be King, and within a
small time did cease to be Edward.

His Son, thus made complete by his Fathers spoil, had the honor to be the
Repairer of the ruins that his Father had made; and was a Prince which you
might think by his story to be seldom at home, and by his Laws seldom abroad.
Nor can it be reconciled without wonder, that Providence should at once bestow
upon England, a courageous People, brave Captains, wise Council, and a King
that had the endowments of them all. Otherwise it had out-reached conceit it
self, that this small Island, wasted by the Barons Wars, the people beaten out
of heart by all Enemies in the time of the Father, should nevertheless, in the
time of the Son, with honor wade through so many difficulties of mighty Wars
on every side abroad, and devouring Pestilence at home; and yet lay a platform
of an opulent, wise, and peaceable Government for future Generations.

Yet he had his failings and misfortunes; a great part whereof may be
attributed to infirmity of age, which in the first part of his Reign was too
little, and in the latter part too much. True it is, that Governors of the
persons of Kings may in some measure supply defects of Nonage; but seldom
where the Governors are many, and never if they be ambitious. And it was this
King's fate to miscarry in both; for he had in his Youth Twelve Governors by
constitution, and they, two supreme by usurpation, viz. the Queen and Mortimer,
till they were both consumed in the flame which themselves had kindled. And
this disparity wrought somewhat unsuccessfully in the King's first War: For the
generosity of his spirit (himself being young and active) minded his Council to
advise him employment in a foreign War, rather than they would adventure its
motion at home, lest it might prove circular; which is most dangerous for
Government, if the Prince be not under command of himself.

This first War was with Scotland, whose power was inferior to that of France;
the King young, and the danger nearer; and therefore though the last affront
was from France, that more fresh in memory, and more poinant, yet the King was
advised to give place, and speak fair, till he had tried masteries with
Scotland, and thereby secured his Rear. This he wisely hearkened unto, and met
with such a successful turn of Providence, that like an O Yes, before a
Proclamation, gives warning to Scotland that the Wheel is turned upon them; and
that there is somewhat more than humane motion in the matter, that exasperates
the English upon an enterprise so often crossed by Providence hitherto; and the
King also (being but a Soldier in hope as yet) to dare against those that had
so shamefully foiled his Father, and also put himself already once to the
Retreat.

And yet there did concur a kind of necessity of second Causes; for the King
found the Crown engaged, and the minds of the Scots so elate, as the
English-man's case was not to live to fight, but to fight to live; and so
imbittered against one another by the fierce Wars under the Barons, that
nothing could quench the fire, but the withdrawing of the Brands into Foreign
action; like some angry spirits, that spoil their own bodies, unless they chide
or fight it out with others.

In the first brunt with Scotland, the King gained nothing, but understanding
of the humors of some of his great Lords; which once purged out, he renews the
War, prevails, and after ten years stir (wherein he became a trained Soldier
against the Scots) he wan the Cross, and then goes to play his Prize in France,
to complete his Crown with the Flower-de-luce: Which was the great work of the
rest of his Reign, in which four parts of five were victorious; the fifth and
last was declining, like some Gamesters, that win at the first, and for want of
observation of the turning of the Dice, come off losers at the end.

For the King being rather satiated than satisfied with Victory and Honor,
returned home to enjoy what he had, leaving his Son, the Black Prince, to
pursue the War, and to act the Soldiers alone, who now began to honor his
Valor above his Father's. But the Tide is spent, the Prince of Chivalry dies,
the brave Commanders wasted; and the French, too sickle to continue subject to
the English longer than needs must, tack about for another adventure, and make
it plain, That France is too big to be Garrisoned by England, and that it will
cost England more to hold it than to have it.

His Religion was more to the purpose, than of any of his Predecessors since
the Norman times: He re^lected upon God in common events, more ordinarily than
the general stream of the Clergy did in those days. Antiq. Brit.
He loved, if not adored, devout men and their prayers, and yet intentively
disclaimed opinion of merits in the Creature. He saw the Pope through and
through, loved him but little, feared him less, and yet lost neither honor nor
power thereby.

His chief policy at home, was, to be much at home, great with his People, and
they great with him: what the Parliament did, he accounted well done; he never
questioned their power, though he was overreached in questioning their Wisdom.
For he that shall prefer his own wisdom above that of the Parliament, must
needs think himself extremely wise; and so much the more to know himself to be
such. But the worst of his fate was, to live to his Winter-age, and after fifty
years Reign, or more, to die in his minority under the rule of a woman of none
of the best fame, after he had enjoyed the honor of greatest note in the
Christian world in his days.

Such was not Richard the Second, Rich. 2.
though the only Son of that famous Chieftain, the Black Prince of Wales, a
renowned Son of a renowned Father; but (as a Plant transplanted into a Savage
soil) in degree and disposition wholly degenerate, retaining a tincture of the
light inconstancy of his Mother, and the luxuriousness of his great Grandfather
Edward the Second; and running his course, he came to his end.

His entrance, The. lib. 4. c. 21
however by color of Inheritance, yet was a greater adventure than his
Predecessors, that came in by Election; upon the designation of his Father by
his last Will, say some. For this man came in upon many disadvantages, both of
time and person: The times were very troublesome, the Kingdom new wrapped up in
a double War abroad, and (which is worse) flouded with distraction at home,
contracted partly by his Predecessor's weaknesses in his decrepit estate,
partly by a new interest of Religion sprung up against the Papal Tyranny, from
the Doctrine of Wickliff; all which required a very wise Man, and a brave
Commander; in both which the King failed.

Religion now began to dawn through the foggs of Romish Usurpations and
Superstitions, aided thereto by a Schism in the Triple Crown, that continued
forty years, with much virulancy abroad, and with as bad influence upon our
Myters at home. Some of whom were called Clementines, others Vrbanists; and yet
none of them all worthy of either of the names, in their proper signification.
The Laity, though lookers on, yet were not quiet: For though Liberty be a
hopeful thing, yet it is dangerous to them that are not a Law to themselves,
especially in matter of Opinion; for that arraigns the Rule, and lays the way
open to licentiousness. And now that the Liberty from the Keys began to be
taught as a duty of Religion, the inferior sort meet with Doctrines of
licentiousness, upon mistake of the notion; and will acknowledge no rule, now
they must be all at liberty: And thus sprang up the insurrection of the
Servants and Bondmen against their Lords and Masters under Cade and Straw;
that might have brought the Commonwealth into a hideous Chaos, had not the
Lords and Great men betimes bestirred themselves; and the King showed an
extraordinary spirit, or rather a kind of rage, that put it self forth beyond
the ordinary temper of his mind. Much of this mischief was imputed to
Wickliff's Doctrine; Hist. Eccles. Ang.
for it is an ordinary thing to proclaim all evils concurring with the very
joint of Reformation, to be the proper fruits thereof: But I look upon it as a
fruit of corruption, that endeavors to stop the breath of Reformation in the
birth. And there is somewhat of a hidden influence from above in the thing; for
it was not only the Cup of England to be thus troubled, Antiq. Brit. 262.
but France and other places had their portion suitable.

The King's minority rendered him unequal unto these contrary motions; he was in
his Eleventh year, when he entered the Throne; and (which was worse) his years
came on faster than his parts, but his work posted before them all. The common
help of Protectors left him yet more unhappy; for they were prepossessed with
strong engagements of particular Interests; and so were either not wise enough,
or not good enough for all. This brought forth a third inconvenience, the
change of Protectorship; and that change of Affairs and Interests, an uncertain
good that brings forth a certain evil; for variety of Instruments and Interests
move several ways, and though the end be one, the difference concerning the way
many times does as much hinder the Journey, as so many blocks in the way.

The Protectorship was thrice changed; the King's Uncles had the first essay;
any one of them was big enough for one Kingdom, but all of them together were
too great to make one Protector. The Duke of Lancaster would have done well
alone, if he had been alone, and minded that work alone; but he being somewhat
engaged with the Wickliffists, and so entangled with the Clergy, and other
restless spirits, and drawn off by his private aim at the Crown of Castile, saw
this work too much; and so he warily withdrew himself, leaving the Directory to
a Committee of Lords: a sovereign Plaster, questionless, where the times are
whole; but not for these distractions, wherein even the Committee it self
suffered its share. Thus the breach is made the wider; and for a cure of all,
the Government is committed into one hand, wherein the Earl of Warwick
acquitted himself well, for he was wise enough to observe such as the people
most honored. And thus passed over the two first years of the King's Reign.

The remainder of the King's minority, was rather in common repute than in true
account. For the King, however young, took little more from the Protector than
he saw meet, to color his own commands with opinion of Regularity; and so his
Will came to full strength before his Wisdom budded. Thus lifted up, he sets
himself above all interests of Parliaments, Protectors, Counselors, Uncles,
Wise men, and Law; leaving them all to be rules for those below. And so long as
the King's desire is thus served, he is content to be reputed a Minor, and be
as it were under protection of others, though not under their direction; and is
content to continue thus until his Two and twentieth year. Some might think him
very moderate, had he been moderate; but he forbears suing out his Livery, so
long as he may live without care, and spend without control. For by this time
the humor of his great Grandfather budded in him; he pawned his Heart to young
men of vast desires, and some say so inordinately, as he prostituted his
Chastity unto them. And it is no wonder if the Revenues of the Crown are
insufficient for such Masters. This the people soon felt, and feared their own
Free-holds: for they are bound, says he, not to see the Crown deflowred for
want of maintenance; it is very true, nor to see the Crown deflowred of its
maintenance. A Parliament therefore is called; in which diverse Lords associate,
and prepare Physic for the King's lavish humor; 11 Rich. 2. n 8. 13.
which being administered, wrought for Ten years after, till it had purged him
of his Life, and the Kingdom of their King.

It was an Act of Parliament that gave power to Fourteen Lords and others to
regulate the profits and Revenues of the Crown, and to do Justice to the
people; this was to continue for one whole year. The Parasites no sooner found
the effect hereof to their cost, but the King grows sick of it, and finds an
Antidote to overruled Acts of Parliament, by Acts of Privy Council; declares
this ill-favored Commission void, and the Contrivers, Advisers, and Enforcers,
Traitors. To make it more Majestical, he causes the Judges to subscribe this
Order, and so it becomes Law in repute. This foundation thus laid, he builds
in haste an Impeachment of these Commissioners of High Treason; and supposing
that they would not readily stoop, himself stoops lower; for he would put his
Right to trial by Battle, which was already his own by the judgment of the
Masters of the Law: For so they may be well called, seeing they had thus
mastered it. In this the King had the worst, for he lost his Honor and
himself: God has a care of common Right, even amongst Idolaters. Then comes
the Parliament of wonders, wherein the Kings Party are declared Traitors, and
the chief Judges with their Law judged by another Law. The King not meddled
with, thinks it high time to come out of his Minority, and assumes the
Government of the Kingdom, and himself, to himself, being now Three and twenty
years of Age; old enough to have done well, if he had cared for it. But
resolving to follow the way of his own will, at length it led him to his own
ruin. Only for the present two things delayed it, viz. the Authority, Wisdom,
and Moderation of his Unkles, especially of the Duke of Lancaster, now come out
of Spain; and the great affection which the King pretended to the Queen, who
had also gained a good opinion amongst the people. The benevolent aspect of the
people, not for their own advantage, but for the public quiet, procured many
Parlies and Interviews between the King and people, and many Laws for the
upholding of the Court and Government; although both War, Laws, Justice, and
Councils, all are faint, as all is faint in that man that has once dismann'd
himself. This he perceives well enough, and therefore Peace he must have by any
means. The Queen dies; himself being nigh Eight and twenty years old; takes a
Creature like a Wife, but in truth a Child of Eight years old, and this is to
get peace with France. It is no wonder if now he hunts after unlawful game, and
that being ill taken, brings all things out of order; For abused Marrige never
wants woe. Civil men are now looked upon as severe Cato's; and his Unkles,
especially the Duke of Gloucester, with a jealous eye; which accomplished his
death in the conclusion. The Dukes of Lancaster and York forsake the Court,
Favorites step into their rooms. The old way of the eleventh year is
reassumed; Belknap and others are pardoned, and made of the Cabinet. The
pardon of the Earl of Arundel is adnulled, contrary to the advice of the major
part; and the Archbishop, the Earl's Brother, is banished. The Lords forsake
the wilful King; still the King's Jealousy swells. The Duke of Hertford is
banished, or rather by a hidden Providence sent out of the way for a further
work. The Duke of Lancaster dies, and with him all hope of moderation is gone;
for he was a wise Prince, and the only Cement that held the Joints of the
Kingdom in correspondency: And he was ill requited, for all his Estate is
seized upon. The Duke of Hertford and his party are looked upon by the people
as Martyrs in the Common Cause, and others as Royalists. Extremities hasten on;
and Prerogative, now upon the wing, is towering above reach. In full
Parliament, down goes all the work of the tenth and eleventh years Parliament:
which had never been, if that Parliament had continued by adjournment. The King
raises a power, which he calls his Guard, of Cheshire-men; under the terror
of this displaying Rod, 21 Rich. 2. cap. 9.
the Parliament and Kingdom are brought to Confession. Cheshire for this
service is made a Principality; and thus goes Counties up, and Kingdoms down.
The King's Conscience whispers a sad message of dethroning; and well it might
be, for he knew he had deserved it. Against this danger he entrenches himself
in an Act of Parliament, 21 Rich. 2. cap. 3.
that made it Treason To purpose and endeavor to depose the King, or levy War
against him, or to withdraw his Homage, hereof being attainted in Parliament.
And now he thought he was well guarded by engagement from the Parliament; but
he missed the right conclusion, for want of Logic: For if the Parliament it
self shall depose him, it cannot be made a Traitor, or attaint it self, and
then has the King gained no more than a false birth.

But the King was not thus quiet, the sting of guilt still sticks within, and
for remedy he will unlaw the Law; and gets it enacted, That all procurers of
the Statute of 10 Richard the Second, and the Commission and procurers of the
King's assent thereto, and hinderers of the King's proceedings, are adjudged
Traitors. All these reach only the Branches, the Root remains yet, and may
spring again; and therefore in the last place have at the Parliament it self.
For by the same it is further declared, That the King is the sole Master of the
Propositions for matters to be treated in Parliament, and all gainsayers are
Traitors.

Secondly, That the King may dissolve the Parliament at his pleasure, and all
gainsayers are Traitors.

Thirdly, That the Parliament may not proceed against the King's Justices, for
offenses by them committed in Parliament, without the King's consent; and all
gainsayers are Traitors. These and the like Aphorisms once voted by the
Cheshire-men, assented unto by the Parliament, with the Kings Fiat, must pass
for current to the Judges; and if by them confirmed or allowed, will in the
King's opinion make it a Law for ever, That the King in all Parliaments is
Dominus fac primum, and Dominus fac totum. But the Judges remembered the Tenth
year, and Belknap's entertainment, and so dealt warily; their opinion is thus
set down: It belongs to the Parliament to declare Treason; yet if I were a
Peer, and were commanded, I should agree. So did Thorning under-write; and
thereunto also consented Rickill, and Sir Walter Clopton* the last being
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, the first Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
and the second another Judge of the same Bench. The sum in plainer sense is,
that if they were Peers, they would agree; but as Judges, they would be silent.
And thus the Parliament of England by the first of these four last-mentioned
conclusions attainted themselves; by the second yielded up their Liberties; by
the third their Lives; and by the last, would have done more, or been less: And
to fill up the measure of all, they assigned over a right of Legislative power
unto six Lords, and three Commons; and yet the King, not content, superadded,
that it should be Treason for any man to endeavor to repeal any of their
determinations.

The Commonwealth thus underneath, the King tramples upon all at once; for
having espied the shadow of a Crown fleeting from him in Ireland, he pursues
it, leaves the noble Crown of England in the base condition of a Farm, subject
to strip and waste by mean men, and crosses the Irish Seas with an Army. This
was one of England's Climacterical years, under a Disease so desperate, that no
hope was left but by a desperate Cure, by sudden bleeding in the Head, and
cutting off that Member that is a principle of motion in the Body. For it was
not many Months e're the wind of affairs changed; the King now in Ireland,
another steps into the Throne. The noise hereof makes him return, afar off
enraged; but the nigher he comes, the cooler he grows; his Conscience revives,
his Courage decays; and leaving his Army, his Lordship, Kingdom, and Liberty
behind, as a naked man, submits himself to release all Homage and Fealty; to
resign his Crown and Dignity, his Titles and Authority; to acknowledge himself
unworthy and insufficient to reign; to swear never to repent of his
resignation: And thus, if he will have any quiet, this wilful man must be
content for the future, neither to will nor desire. And poor England must for a
time be contented with a doleful condition, in which the King cannot rule, and
the Parliament will not, and the whole body like a Chaos capable of any form
that the next daring spirit shall brood upon it.

CHAP. II. Of the State of the King and Parliament, in relation of it to him,
and him to it.
A King in Parliament is like the firstborn of Jacob, The excellency of
Dignity, and the excellency of Power; but alone, unstable as water. Examples of
both these we have in these two Kings, Whereof the first was Crowned by the
Parliament, and Crowned it; the latter also Crowned it, but with Thorns; and
yet the Parliament in all held on that wise way, that it neither exceeded its
own bounds, nor lost its own right.

I shall enter into the consideration of particulars under these heads: First,
In relation more immediately to the interest of the King: Secondly, To the
interest of the Kingdom in general. The King, though higher than all the people
by the head, and so has the Prerogative of Honor as the most worthy, yet his
strength and abilities originally do rise from beneath; otherwise, he is but
like a General without an Army, the Title big, but airy; and many times his
person subject to so much danger, that instead of drawing the Eyes of all the
people to look upon him with admiration, they are drawn to look to him with
observation; and in this respect he may be said to be less his own man, and
more the Kingdoms, than any of the inferior sort. This befell in both these
Kings in a special manner; each entering upon the grand Government of a Kingdom,
before they were able to understand the work, or govern themselves: and
therefore were under power of Protectors for the guard of their Persons and
their Education, and of the Parliament for Counsel and Direction in Cases
relating to the Kingdom. The child of a mean man, when its Parents are dead, is
Filius Amici; but a King is Filius Populi, to be by them trained up in such
manner, that he may be Pater Populi when he is come to age. In the mean time,
though he be a King, yet his Person like a precious Jem must not out of the
Ring, but must be directed by Council, though under some kind of restraint, and
the Counselors all the while no Offenders in such cases against the
Prerogative Royal. 1 E. 3. Stat. 1.
And therefore, though it be true that Kings grow faster than other men, and
sooner come to full age than they; yet Edward the Third, now in his sixteenth
year, might not pass over Sea into France, though it were for restoring of
Peace, but by direction of the Parliament: nor is it meet in such cases, that
Kings should stand upon the Prerogative of a Negative. Secondly, it may
likewise be said, That his Family is less his own, as he is a man, than other
men's: For private Families are no further under the public Law, than in
relation to the public Peace, to punish after breach made; but the Families of
Kings are looked upon by all in relation to the honor and profit of the
Public; not only because the King's servants have, by their nigh attendance
upon his person, a more powerful influence into his actions, which may reflect
a malevolent Aspect upon the whole course of affairs, if they be not better
ordered that are so nigh him; but more especially in regard that the government
and order of the Royal Family trencheth deep upon the Honor of the Kingdom,
and Purses of the People, who are concerned to see the same accommodated
suitable to the State and Port which the Nation would bear forth to the World.
And therefore for the Parliament to intermeddle in the King's Family, is not
foreign nor new. Alice Piers was a Familiar, if not of the Family of Edward the
Third; yet both her self, and others of that Family, were complained of as a
grievance. Richard the Second was once a young man, and ever a young King; and
what Edward the Third wanted only in his Youth, and in his infirm old Age,
this man ever wanted: for he that knew not how to govern himself, how much less
could he govern his Family? And if in this condition the Parliament become his
Stewards, to set a yearly Survey and Check upon his Servants and Family, in
order to the good order of the same and Kingdom, other wise men must conclude,
9 Rich. 2. n. 31.
it did that which was just; though Richard the Second, and those of his mind,
11 Rich. 2. n. 23.
think not so. But this is not all; Kings have not only such as serve the
outward man, but some that serve their Consciences, of old time called
Confessors; in these days without name, for fear of Superstition; yet the thing
remains still in some well-favoured Chaplain, and their work is to lead the
King's Conscience in dark ways, or rather into them. Commonly he has a devout
outside, and that is the King's Idol: but if while his eye be toward
Jerusalem, his mind be toward the dead Sea, the King is his; and then the
blind leads the blind: Like some Ignis fatuus, to such as know it not. No man
is so well known by his company, as Kings are by these men, and these men by
their actions. Although some have been so witty as to cheat the whole
Generation of Mankind, by entertaining holy men to be their Chaplains;
themselves the mean time without any spark of that holy Fire: Yet this King was
not so cunning; he had a Confessor of his own choice, and according to his own
heart, who was complained of as a grievance, 5 Rich. 2. n. 17, 18.
and the Parliament removed him. So nigh they ventured, even to invade the
King's own Conscience, if it may be called Conscience, that will acknowledge no
Law but that of its own mind.

Thirdly, the King's Revenue was under the check and control of the
Parliament; for it befalls some Princes, as other men, to be sometimes poor in
abundance, by riotous flooding treasure out in the lesser currents, and leaving
the greater channels dry. This is an insupportable evil, because it is
destructive to the very being of affairs, whether for War or Peace. For the
King's Treasure is of a mixed nature, much of it being intended for public
service, as himself is a public person. And for this cause he has Officers of
several natures attending upon his Treasury: Some for Land, some for Sea, some
for the general Treasure of the Kingdom, some for that of the Household, and
some for the Privy Purse. The common end of all being to maintain State in time
of Peace, and Strength against time of War. Because it is no easy matter to
maintain the just proportions for each of the said ends, it is the less wonder
that such a brave Prince as Edward the Third should labor under want for
maintenance of the Wars; and so lavish a Spendthrift as Richard the Second,
should labor under more want to maintain his port and countenance in peace.
And therefore, though it be true that the public Treasure is committed to the
King as the chief Steward of the Realm; yet it is as true, that he is but a
Steward, and that the Supreme survey of the Treasure rests in the Parliament,
who are to see that the Treasure be not irregularly wasted, to reduce the same
into order; and for that end to call the Treasurers and Receivers to account,
to see to the punishing of such as are unfaithful, and encouraging of others
that are faithful. For when by extravagant courses the Treasure is wasted, by
extraordinary courses it must be supplied; which ever is out of the Subjects
Purses. And in such cases it is great reason that they should observe which way
the course lies of such Expenses. If then in such cases sometimes the
Parliament has stayed the issuing out of the King's Revenue for some time, or
otherwise viewed and examined the same, 2 Rich. 2. n. 12.
charged it with conditions, 22. E. 3. n. 29. 14 R. 2. n. 15. limited it to
certain uses, 9 Rich 2. n. 4. or 41.
and in case of misuser, refused to levy or make payments; the case will be
without dispute, 14 E. 3. n. 6.
that the Parliament ordered the public Treasure as they saw most need. 27 E.
3. n. 8.
But much more, if we consider how the greatest part of this Treasure was
raised. 9 R. 2. n. 40.
viz. not from the old Revenues of the Crown, 15 E. 3. n. 16.
but by new Impositions, Levies, and Assessments laid upon the People, even
what they pleased, and in what manner they thought meet, and not otherwise.
Aids are lawful, if they be legally given by common consent of Parliament.
Taxes, if legally given by Parliament, are no less lawful; 14 E. 3. cap. ^0
yet they must be collected in such manner, and by such means as the
Parliaments Order does direct. Loans of moneys to the King may be made by them
that will; but the King must not demand them, because the Subject has no means
to recover the debt. 25 E. 3. n. 16.
This trick had been lately tried by Edward the Second, much money he got, and
it was repayed by the Order of the Parliament. But of all the rest, nothing
showed more absolute Authority in the public Revenue, than the care that was
had of the Demesnes of the Crown: 1 E. 3 v^t. 1.
for whereas the Expxences of Kings grew so vast, that neither the yearly
Revenue could suffice, nor Aids, Assessments; and Taxes could satisfy, however
ordinary they in these times were become; rather than Kings would contain
themselves, they would invade their own Demesnes, by pawning, selling, and
giving them away, either for love or money: and thus was poverty treasured up
against the future, both for King and Crown. The Parliament espying this leak
that was like to undo all, applied a speedy remedy, undoing what was done, and
undoing some by an Act of Resumption; and thereby taught Kings to look to their
Honor better for the future, 1 Rich. 2. n. 48.
and People also to take heed of meddling with such ticklish matters, and to
know that he that has such in his possession, has them by a cracked Title,
that cannot be amended but by Act of Parliament.

Fourthly, an English King is no Outlaw; nor can he do any wrong, though the
man may. He has a double relation, one as a King, the other as a Man; and the
uniting of both in one person, has cheated many a man of his judgment in the
case of Prerogative. He has a double Will, and these many times contrary,
equally as in other Relations; and in this contrariety, sometimes the King
overcomes the Man, and sometimes the Man the King: so as if any man, the King
has much more cause to cry out, O miserable man! These diverse Wills are
generally led by diverse Rules: One of a man, which many times reaches no
higher than the Affections; and if the man be weak, they deserve little better
name than Lusts. The rule of a King is Law, or Councils, of these in place; and
unto these in all prudentials, he must submit his Judgment and Will, as he is a
King. Nor can he do otherwise, unless he will presume to be wiser than his
Council. Suitable hereunto does that clause in one of the Statutes of these
times conclude, 25 E. 3. Provisor.
viz. That the King is bound by his Oath, to pass all Laws that are for the
good of the Kingdom. For were the power of Election, or determination of the
point, only in the King, then were the Oath in vain; nor is the Parliament at
all (in case of the King's dissent) to judge of the convenience or
inconvenience of Proposals made for the good of the whole body, 21 E. 3. n. 64.
according to that power which is exercised in these times. 3 Rich. 2. n. 38.
Nor is it rational to infer here from that, 2 Rich. 2. n. 38.
if Law and Council be the Rule of a King, then the Obedience of the People
unto this King must be in order to Law and Council, otherwise the Disobedience
cannot be determined to be against the King, but against the Man; and though
against the private Will of the Commander, yet not against the Law; nor
therefore can it be said illegal or unjust. The Parliament in these times held
forth this Doctrine plainly to the World, 15 E. 3. n. 6, 7.
That it is their proper work, in Cases needful, to do right to such as are
wronged by the King: his Command is no Warrant in such Cases. 1 E. 3. Vet. 1.
If a man be wrongfully imprisoned by him, he shall be released and set at
liberty by them. 15 E. 3. cap. 3.
Let his Act be never so authentical under the Broad Seal, 11 Rich. 2. n. 11,
12, 15, 17.
it can take no man's Right away. Richard the Second did his utmost to satisfy
and quiet the tumultuous Rabble under Cade and Straw, and granted store of
Manumissions to the Bondmen by Declaration, 5 Rich. 2. n. 8, 12, 13.
and by his Letters Patent; but not one of them good enough to deprive any one
of the meanest of the Freemen of their Rights in those Bondmen. The
privilege of showing mercy, and granting pardon, has been anciently betrusted
to the King, as an Overseer of the execution of Law; yet he has not that
Prerogative, To have mercy on whom he will have mercy. Ever since this Nation
had learned to read the Bible, Murder has been excepted from mercy; nor did
the Law ever allow any King that Prerogative to pardon that. Edward the Third
did not challenge any such, 10 E. 3. cap. 2
not only bound thereto by his Coronation Oath, but by public Acts of State
declaring the same: 14 E. 3. c. 15.
yet because the Parliament was not always sitting, 2 E. 3. cap. 2.
and Kings were ever subject to this Temptation, to favor Servants by granting
mercy to Malefactors; a general Rule of Inhibition is made against all pardon
to be granted by the King in case of Felony, but only in cases allowed by
advice of the Council. It is true, that in the first times of Richard the
Second, he liked not to be thus girt in his power, which he pretended was more
at liberty in his Predecessors; 13 Rich. 2. St. 2. cap. 1.
possibly he meaned King John, and Edward the Second, who many times did what
they listed: yet under his favor, no Law was so shameless, as to hold forth
such a power, till Richard the Second's Law countenanced it. 11 Rich. 2. n. 3.
6.
But why do I call it a Law, which is only a Declaration by consent of the
Lords, such as then were? the Commons would never own such an Opinion: 21 Rich.
2. n. 35.
And therefore it soon proved abortive; for within three or four years, by
public Act of Parliament, it is peremptorily declared, That the King's Pardon
shall not extend to Murder. So as upon the whole matter it is plain, That it
is not the King's Will, though supported by the Council of Lords, and backed by
the Opinion of the Judges, that must be a Rule for the Government of this
Kingdom; nor does any Allegiance bind Obedience thereunto, in case where
Justice or the Liberty of the People is concerned.

Three things yet remain which Kings have claimed to be their own, viz.
Conferring Titles of Honor, and Places of Trust, and the Legislative Power.
The first is but a Feather, and not worthy of regard; yet it is plain that
these times produce many precedents of Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, made in
Parliament; and possibly it may be apparent, that the first motion of any such
Title of Honor, did first fetch its original thence, if not in the Field: but
it is not worthy of the labor. The second is more considerable; viz. The power
of conferring Places of Public Trust: This Kings have pretended unto, although
in course of congruity it will be thought more meet, that it belongs rather
to that chief and grand Trust of the whole Kingdom committed to the Parliament:
And the practice of these times is not much discrepant, whether we regard such
as are for advice or execution. Of the first of these, are those whom we
commonly call, the Privy Council, whose advice in course touches first upon
the King's Person, but by reflection works strong impressions upon the
People, so far as the influence of the King's power extends. And therefore it
is not beyond the Sphere of the Parliament to interpose and qualify that
influence, so as it may be for the general good of the whole Kingdom. For many
times Kings are either above or beneath themselves; and in such cases, if the
Council be of the King's suit, he is of the deeper dye, and proves more
Malignant to the People. Edward the Third, growing into great opinion in the
World, his proportion exceeds his own portion, and the Peoples good wills to
boot; 14 E. 3. n. 55.
they think the fault is in the Privy Council, and an Inquisition is set upon
it. 50 E. 3. n. 10.
So also they do in his fiftieth year, when he grows downward. 1 Rich. 2. n. 51
And the like in the beginning of Richard the Second's Reign, he being now a
Youth, and therefore unstable in his Resolutions, and unable to make Election.
So as upon the whole matter, if the King fall short in point of Judgment or
Resolution, or inordinate in his Affections; 3 Rich. 2. n. 34.
but more especially where they observe the major, or more considerable part of
the Council to draw toward a design; 5 Rich. 2. n. 17, 18, 28.
in such cases as these, 6 Rich. 2. n. 19.
the Parliament, as its own duty, undertook to settle a good Council about the
King's person, that might advise him during their recess. For the Privy Council
is never more it self, than when it is an Epitome of the Common Council of the
Kingdom. In like manner such Officers as concern execution of Law and Counsel,
are as narrowly to be enquired into: for if their motion be irregular, it is
less material what the rule be. The Parliament therefore held it their duty to
interpose in the Election of grand Officers of the Kingdom, such as are the
Chancellors, Judges, and Justices; or to confirm or displace them, or bind them
by Oath. The Rolls of the eighth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and thirty-sixth years
of Edward the Third; and the sixth, tenth, and eleventh years of Richard the
Second, do manifest this sufficiently.

I have done with the Subject Matter, or work of the Parliament, in the mutual
relation of the King and it; the manner of proceeding was either jointly with
the King, or without him; and either jointly with the two Houses, or severally;
and either immediately by themselves, or their Committees. As touching the
first, it is evident, that in all matters wherein gain arises to the Crown
from the people, by Subsidy, or otherwise, the strength of the Grant by Act of
Parliament rests in the two Houses; and that the King's Assent is but pro
forma, as touching that matter; and therefore such Grants have been made as
tended in some measure to derogate either from the King's Wisdom, care, or
fidelity; yet even these have passed with the Royal Assent, though the full
Assent or good will of the person of the King was not correspondent thereto: as
in these Cases formerly noted, where Subsidies were given with Limitations and
Conditions, and upon rendering account to the people. And it is as evident, that
where the King's person is disabled to understand, 37 E. 3. n. 34.
(as in case of Infancy) there the Royal Assent can bear little weight with it;
1 Rich. 2. n. 5.
but most of all in the King's absence, 5 Rich. 2. n. 75
where either the Assent is put thereto by Commissioners, that know not the
King's particular mind, or the Act is done only by the Houses, in nature of
Ordinances; and yet these of force to bind all parties but the King. But
nothing more debased the Royal Assent in these times, than a trick that Edward
the Third played in the midst of the fullest strength of his Government. It was
in time of War, which never is time of good Husbandry and laying up, nor of
sober advice in laying out, nor of equity in levying and collecting moneys for
the Nerves of War. This forward Warrier, in the heat of his Achievements,
finds his strength benumbed for want of money; he leaves off, comes home, rages
against his Archbishop, to whom he had committed the care of provision for his
War; and the Archbishop as hotly falls upon some of the Treasury in the Army on
the one side, and upon others in the Country; 15 E. 3. c. 3.
whose oppressions, says he, instead of bringing in money, made the people to
give a stop thereto. A contest hereupon thus had, it was concluded by the power
of the Parliament, that such men should be questioned, Antiq. Brit. Eccles.
and that the Parliament from time to time should call all Officers of State to
account: and thereupon ensues a calm. After the Parliament ended, the King
repeats the matter; it makes his heart sick; he disgorgeth himself by a
Proclamation, made by advice of Nobles, and Wise men, as he says; and tells
all the World he dissembled with his Parliament; and what he did was done by
duress of mind, to please for the time, 15 E. 3. 50.
and to gain his ends; which being now had, he by his Proclamation revokes what
he had done in Parliament, or endeavored it. And thus is England put to School
to learn to dissolve three hard knots: First, Whether a King can dissemble with
his Parliament? Secondly, Whether Edward the Third his dissembling assent makes
a Law? Lastly, Whether by a Proclamation, by advice of Nobles and Wise men, he
can declare that he dissembled with his Parliament, and therein not dissemble
the Royal Assent, so as to bring all the Laws made in any Kings time into
question, at least during his Life? However the result may be, it is evident,
the Royal Assent gets no honor hereby, and the Statute as little, that has
suffered this Proclamation all this time to pass among the number of the
Statutes in Print as a Law, whenas many Statutes that are Laws of not, are left
out as useless.

Although in the general, the two Houses joined in every Act Ad extra, yet Ad
intra, and in relation one to another, they had their several operations; the
House of Commons intermedled more in the matter of Fact, the House of Lords in
matter of Right; although in either of these there is a mutual aspect from
both. In matters of Judicature, much rested with the Lords, and therefore it is
ordained, that, The House of Lords shall remedy all offenses contrary to the
Law of Magna Charta. And in cases where no remedy is left, 15 E. 3. c. 1. 15 E.
3. c. 3, 4.
nor Judgment by the Law, the matter shall be determined in Parliament, and
the King shall command execution to be done according to the Judgment of the
Peers. Which Laws seem to be but declarative of the former Law, and in the
nature of reviving that power into Act which was formerly laid asleep; and does
strongly imply that the ultimate act in Judicature rested with the Lords, in
relation not only to the House of Commons, but also in relation to the King,
whose work in such cases is, not to judge above or with the Peers, but to
execute their sentence. And that carries with it a List, whereby the power of a
King may appear not to be so Supreme in making of the Law, as some would have
it: for if his Judgment and Conscience be bound by the Votes of the Peers in
giving a Law, in case of a particular person where the Law was not formerly
known, let others judge of the value of this Negative Vote, in giving Law to
the whole Kingdom. It is true, that this Parliament was quarrelled by the King,
and he kept it at a bay by a Proclamation that pretended Revocation, as far as
a Proclamation could revoke an Act of Parliament; but it effected nothing, nor
did the contest last long. Now though this Jurisdiction thus rested in the
House of Lords, in such cases, as well as in others; yet is it not so
originally in them, as to be wholly theirs, and only as they shall order it.
For the Commons of England have a right in the course and order of
Jurisdiction, which (as the known Law) is part of their Liberty; and in the
speedy execution of Justice, as well as they have right to have Justice done.
And therefore, whereas in Cases of Error, 14 E. 3. c. 5.
and delays, the Appeal was from the inferior Court to the Parliament; which
immediately determined the matter, and now the trouble grew too great by the
increase of pleas: For remedy hereof, a kind of Committee is made, of one
Bishop, two Earls, two Barons, who by the advice of the Chancellor, Treasurer,
and the Judges, shall make good judgment in all Cases of Complaint of delay in
Judgment: which Committee is not made by Order of the Lords alone, which they
might have done, in case Jurisdiction had been wholly and only shut up in
their custody; but by Act of Parliament, and joint concurrence of the Commons
with the Lords. For as the Commons challenge speedy Execution of Justice, as
one of their Liberties: so also to be under the Jurisdiction of such Judges,
and Courts, as the Laws (in the making whereof, themselves challenge a vote) do
establish and appoint.

I will conclude this Chapter with the Constitution of the Parliament in these
times. For, the difficulties that befell between the Kings and their people, or
Houses of Parliament, wrought two sad effects, viz. A propensity to decline
calling of Parliaments so often as was used and expected; and when it
assembled, as great a propensity in the Members to decline their attendance:
Walsing. An. 1315.
by means whereof, as the Historian tells us, the Parliament was sometimes
enforced to adjourn it self for want of number sufficient. The first of these
arose from want of good will in the Kings; the other, from want of Courage and
Zeal in the people. The first of these was fatal and destructive to good
Government: for though in distempered Parliaments it is good to withdraw, yet
in distempered times it is necessary to meet, and gain a right understanding of
all parties; and therefore these times were so happy as to bind themselves by
public Acts of State to re-continue the assembling of Parliaments. For the
face of the Times represented unto all, that agitations were like to be quick,
violent, and to continue for some succession of time. It is therefore safe, if
not necessary, that every eye should be open, and Councils ready for every
occasion. A Law at length is agreed upon, that A Parliament shall be holden
once every year, 4. E. 3. c. 14.
or more, if need be But in Thirty years the power of this Law is wasted out of
mind, and the evil reviving, 36 E. 3. c. 10.
revives also the Statute; and yet they had Thirteen or Fourteen Parliaments in
Thirty years space, and not above Three, or but once Four years distance of
time between any Two of them in Succession. This was the sense of the Members
of the Houses in their meeting; but at home, they had homely conceits; and it
is found no less difficult to bring them to the meeting, than to continue the
meeting according to the Law; being either loath to adventure their thoughts
into the troublesome affairs of the Public, or their persons to expense and
hazard. But the public must be served; and therefore an Act of Parliament is
made, 1 Rich. 2. c. 4.
That all such Members as decline their appearance at the Parliament, after
Summons made, shall be amerced, and the Sheriffs likewise that shall neglect
return of Summons. And the Statute implies that it was no introduction of a
new Law, but a reviving of former Law now or lately disused, or a Custom now
out of custom. And to take away all objection in point of charges and expenses,
another Law was made to establish the Assessments, 12 Rich. 2. c. 12.
and levying of their wages, upon the Lands that anciently were chargeable
therewith, in whose hands soever the same shall come.

I shall conclude with this, That the Parliament, though, like a Garment, it
sometimes covers the goodly feature and proportion of a wellcomposed body, yet
it keeps the same warm, and as a Shield is first in all dangers, and meets with
many a knock which the body feels not; this is their work and reward. It is
true, that in the wearing it is felt heavy; but it is the easier born, if it be
duly considered, that it is better to be so clothed, than to be naked.

CHAP. III. Of the Privy Council, and Condition of the Lords.
THe latter must make way for the former; for according to their personal
esteem in their own Countries, such is their Authority at the Board in joint
Councils. And it was one point of happiness in a sad time of War, that all men
looked one way. The Lords were much addicted to the Field, and could do much
with Edward the Third, who was a brave Leader; and more with the people, who
had been so long time used to the rough Trade of Soldiery, that they loved not
to be at home about matters of Husbandry, wherein they had so little
experience. And having so fair a Garland in their eye as France, it is no
wonder if domestic designs seemed meaner, or more dangerous. Thus did God do
England a good turn, although it was made for the present thereby, neither so
rich or populous as it might have been in a time of Peace. This French heat
wasted many a tumultuous Spirit, and ennobled the Fame of the King and Lords;
not only abroad, but won them much Honor and Repute of those that remained at
home; and so by congregating Homogeneals, and severing Heterogeneals, rendered
the body of the people more Univocal; which tended much to the settling of the
Joints of this distracted Nation. A timely birth hereof, doubtless, was the
peaceable entry of Richard the Second upon the Throne, and quiet sitting there;
whilst as yet he was but a Child, the Princes of the blood many; and they of
generous, active, and daring Spirits: yet do we not meet with a whisper in
story of any turbulent or aspiring humor in them or the people, during those
tenderer times of that King's Reign. But after that he came to know more in
himself than was to be found; and to outreach his abilities, having some of the
Lords ready at his Elbow to help him, these changed the King's course, although
the general part of that noble Band kept still their Array; and retaining the
body of the people in due composure, thereby declared themselves to be the
King's Friends, though the others were Richard's Favorites; so as he was fain
to stoop to occasion, and submit to be a King, that would have otherwise been
more or less. And thus the Lords were become Supporters to the Crown, Studds to
the Throne, and a Reserve to the People, against the violent motions of an
unbridled mind in their King; who seeing them so united, and endeavoring to
break them into parties to obtain his desire, lost both it and himself. It is a
degree of cleanly modesty, to impute the miscarriages of unruly Kings, to their
Council. For however during their minority, Counselors are more rightly
Officers of State; yet when Kings will be their own men, their Counselors are
no other than the breath of the King's own breast; and by which a King may be
more truly discerned, than any man by his Bosom-friends. Edward the Third was a
man of a public Spirit, and had a Council suitable to his aim. Richard the
Second, a man that desired what him pleased, would have what he desired; and a
Council he had that served him in all. For God answers the desires of men's
hearts in Judgment as well as in Mercy; and a sore Judgment it is both to
King and People, when the corrupt desires of the King are backed by a
flattering Council.

It must be granted, that the Privy Council of Kings has been an old Ginn of
State, that at a sudden lift could do much to the furthering of the present
estate of public Affairs. Nevertheless, through the Riot of Kings, their
designs generally tended to make more work for the Parliament, than to
dispatch; to do much, rather than well; like works for sale, rather than for
Masterpiece; and sometimes to undermine, yea, to outface the Parliament it
self, like some unruly Servants that will put away their own Masters. Nor can
it otherwise be expected, unless the King's elected ones be turned into the
Parliaments Committee; or that constant annual Inquisition by Parliament be
made into their actions: for occasional inquiries breed ill blood, though no
attainder be; nor are they easily undertaken, whereas constancy in such cases
makes the worst to be resolved but into a matter of common course.

The natural and original power of the Privy Council is very obscure, because
there are several degrees of them that occasionally have been used, all of whom
may deserve the name of Privy Council, in regard of the Parliament, which is
the most public Council of all the rest, and always has a general interest in
all Causes in the Kingdom.

The first of these, is that which was called The Grand Council of the King,
which, as I think, was not the House of Lords, who are called by Summons, and
were only to attend during the Parliament; but a body made up of them, and
other wise men of his own Retinue: And of this, it seems, 16 Edw. 3. Memb. 5.
in Dors.
there was a constant body framed, that were sworn to that service; for some in
these times were sworn both of the Grand Council and the Privy Council, and so
entered upon Record.

The second of these Councils was also a great Council, and probably greater
than the other; but this was called only upon occasion, and consisted of all
sorts, like a Parliament, yet was none. An example whereof we have in the
Ordinances concerning the Staple, which at the first were made by the King,
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Great men of the Kingdom, one out of every
County, City, and Borough, called together, for that end; their results were
but as in point of trial for six Months space, 27 E. 3. stat. 2. 28 E. 3. c.
13.
and then were turned into Statute Law by the Parliament. These two are Magna
Concilia, yet without power, further than as for advice; because they had no
ancient foundation, nor constant continuance. Another Council remains more
private than the other, of more continual use, though not so legally founded;
and this is called the King's Privy Council, not taking up a whole House, but
only a Chamber, or a Table; signifying rather communication of Advice, than
power of Judicature, which more properly is in Banco. And yet the power of this
grew as virile and Royal, as it would acknowledge no Peer but the Parliament,
and usurped the representative of it, as that had been of the whole Kingdom.
The ambition thereof has ever been great, and in this most notoriously
evident, that as it had swallowed up the Grand Council of Lords, it seldom can
endure the mention of a Parliament, but when Kings or Affairs are too rugged
for their own touch. The Platform of their power you may behold in this their
Oath.

1. That well and lawfully they shall counsel the King according to their best
care and power, Mag. Chart. Vet.
and keep well and lawfully his Counsels. 2. That none of them shall accuse
each other of any thing which he had spoken in Council. 3. And that their
lawful Power, Aid, and Counsel, they shall with their utmost diligence apply to
the King's Rights. 4. And the Crown to guard, and maintain, save, and to keep
off from it, where they can without doing wrong. 5. And where they shall know
of the things belonging to the Crown, or the Rights of the King, to be
concealed, intruded upon, or subtracted, they shall reveal the same to the
King. 6. And they shall enlarge the Crown, so far as lawfully they may, and
shall not accounsel the King in decreasing the Rights of the Crown, so far as
they lawfully may. 7. And they shall let for no Man (neither for love nor hate,
nor for peace nor strife) to do their utmost (as far as they can, or do
understand) unto every man, in every Estate, Right, and Reason and in
Judgment; and doing right shall spare none, neither for Riches nor Poverty. 8.
And shall take of no Man without the King's leave, unless Meat or Drink in
their Journey. 9. And if they be bound by Oath formerly taken, so as they
cannot perform this without breaking that, they shall inform the King, and
hereafter shall take no such Oaths without the King's consent first had.
All which in a shorter sum, sounds in effect, that they must be faithful
Counselors to the King's Person, and also to his Crown; not to decrease the
true Rights, but to enlarge them; yet all must be done lawfully. And Secondly,
that they shall do right in Judgment, to take no Fees, nor any other Oath in
prejudice of this.

The first of these concern the public only at a distance: and yet the point
of increasing and diminishing of the Crown in the sixth Section is captious,
and may sound as if there is a legal enlarging of the Crown, whereof he that
takes the Oath is to judge. A matter which only and properly concerns the
Parliament to order and determine, or else farewell all liberty of the people of
England.

The second concerns immediately the King in his politic capacity, but
trencheth upon all Laws of the Kingdom, in the executive power; and all the
motions in the whole Kingdom, either of Peace or War, following in the Rear,
either immediately, or mediately, are under this notion interested into the
transaction of the Privy Council, to debate and determine the King's Judgment
therein, unless it will determine alone. And how easy a thing it is for such
as have power of determining the Action by the Law, to slip into the
determining of a Law upon the Action, and so to rule by Proclamation,
experience taught succeeding times sufficiently. Nevertheless, in these times
Parliaments were every moment upon the wing, and kept this Noble Band in awe,
by taking them into their Cognizance, placing and displacing some or all of
them, directing and binding them by Oath, as they saw occasion; of which the
Records are full and plentiful. I say, these times thus constituted, added yet
further encouragement to them, by giving them powers by Statute Law, over and
beyond what by ancient Custom they had obtained.

The King, and Council of Lords, had anciently a power of Jurisdiction, that
has been in the first Part of this Discourse already observed; yet it is very
probable, that it was not any select company of Lords, but the whole
Association. For it is granted by all, that they had originally a principal
hand in the Jurisdiction; and it is hard to conceive how any private number
should catch such a power, if not by usurpation. But the manner of acquiring is
less materal; the principal consideration rests upon the quality of this
Jurisdiction. For it is evident that much difference has been, both concerning
the place and manner of exercising this Authority. In general, it must be
granted, that all Pleas Coram Rege, were grounded upon Writs first purchased,
and returnable either in Banco, 22 Ass. pl. 52.
or in Camera, or in Cancellaria. And no difference at all will be concerning
the Jurisdiction in Banco; for that was by the course of the Common Law, and
the people held it one of their Liberties to have one known course of Law, for
determining matters of right and wrong. As touching these Pleas, which were
holden by Writs returnable in Camera, they were properly said to be Coram Rege
and Concilio, whose meeting was in the Council Chamger, in those days called
the Star Chamber. For other returns of Writs in the Star Chamber do not we
find, but such as were in Camera; nor Prohibitions from thence, but under the
notion of the King's Council; and this Camera, as I said, was the place of the
joint meeting of the Council, 41 E. 3. Rot. Claus. 16 Rich. 2. Memb. 11. in
Dors.
as well of those of the Chancery and Benches, as of those that attended upon
matters of State. Now the influence of Society in point of Judicature,
principally aspected upon some Pleas belonging to the Crown: although even
these also properly were determinable in the King Bench. Nor can I observe any
rule to bound the powers of these two Judicatories, but this, that the
Council Table would pick and choose, and prohibit the Kings Bench as they
pleased; and to that end would order Originals out of the Chancery, as they
thought most meet. Fleta, li. 2. cap. 34.
For it is observed by Fleta, that the King's Bench has no jurisdiction of it
self, but by special Warrant; that is to say, by Original Writs returned
thither. Nevertheless, it may seem that such Crimes as are contrary to common
honesty, or the public profit or peace, in a more exemplary way than ordinary,
and therefore may be called Crimina laesi Regni, or against the State; these, I
say, might more properly belong to the sublime Judicature of the Council Table;
as knowing better how far the public State was interested, or endamaged in
such Cases, than the other Judges that were experienced only in ordinary
matters of a more private concernment.

To recite the particular Cases upon record, concerning racing of Records,
Forgeries, 38 E. 3. Rot. Pat. Ps. 1. Memb. 13. 39. E. 3. Ps. 1. M. 13. 12 E. 3.
Rot. claus. Memb. 8. in Dors. 2 Rich. 2. Rot. Pat. Ps. 1. 12 Rich. 2. cap. 12.
43. Ass. Pl. 38.
and other crimes of Falsehood, Conspiracies, Combinations, to abate and level
the prices of Commodities, Riots, and suchlike, will be supersluous. In all
which, and others of that Cognizance, the Sentence exceeded not Fine and
Imprisonment, or Ransom. Neither yet were the Common pleas so rural, but the
Council Table could relish them also, and digest them well enough; and
therefore did not stick to prohibit the Courts of Common Law, under color of a
strange maxim; That it is neither just nor honest for a man to be sued at the
Common Law, for a matter depending before the King and his Council: No, though
the Court of Common Law had the precedence. And therefore, although the right
of Tithes being depending at the Common Law, Co Inst. 4. c. 5. 22 Ass. pl. 75.
the Archbishop in opposition to the Jurisdiction, sueth before the Kings
Council; and the proceedings at the Law are thereby stayed. And no wonder; for
the Council Table challenged to hold the balance of all Courts of Law within
their own Order: and so if any doubt concerning the Jurisdiction depended, the
Council Table gave the word, 13 Rich. 2. 12. Tit. Prohibition.
and all stooped thereto. But enough of the Subject Matter; the manner follows:
a new form of Process is taken up, that the Common Law and ancient Custom never
knew; and which grew so noisome to the people, that complaints are made thereof
as of common grievance, and remedies are thereto applied by the Laws of these
times. 5 E. 3. c. 9.
For whereas by the Grand Charter nothing could be done in Judgment, but
according to the Laws of the Land; and in affirmance thereof, a Law was made in
these times, that no Accusation, nor Attachment, nor forejudging of Life or
Member, nor seizure of Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels, should be against
the form of the Grand Charter, and Law of the Land: This course of affairs grew
so stale, that amongst other innovations, a trick of a new kind of Trial is
brought forth, by suggestions upon Articles exhibited against any man before
the Council Table; and thereupon issued forth Attachments against the party
complained of; by means whereof, and other courses, (for they could also
sequester) much vexation arose unto the people. Hereunto, upon complaints
multiplied, a remedial Law is made; whereby it is Enacted, 37 E. 3. c. 17.
That all such suggestions made, shall be carried to the Chancellor, Treasurer,
and the King's Grand Council; and the Informer shall find Surety to prosecute
with effect; and to incur the like penalty intended for the Defendant, if the
Plaintiff's proofs be not complete: and then the Process of Law shall issue
forth, and the Defendant shall not be taken against the form of the Great
Charter; that is, he shall not be taken until first the fault appear upon
Record, by Presentment, or by due Process, or by original Writ, 25 E. 3. c. 4,
5. 42 E. 3. c. 3 and 4.
according to the ancient Law of the Kingdom. Either therefore the
Privy Council had no power to hold any Pleas at all, or else no power of Trial.
The first of these was concluded in open Parliament; 1 Rich. 2. n. 87
and the second as good as so: for if the first, then the second will come on
undeniably. But suppose all this be given up, yet was this Liberty to hold
Pleas so qualified, that the person could not be touched, till the thing did
appear by Inquisition, and then in a legal way. Such proceeding was had upon
suggestion made against the City of London, in Henry the Third's time: Fabian
Vit. Hen. 3. Anno 1141.
for one of the Judges was first sent into the City to find the suggestion by a
Jury; and then the Lord Mayor appeared before the Lords, and traversed the
matter, and in a manner appealed, or rather demanded to be tried according to
the custom of the City. And the like course do we find observed in our
Law-Reports of these times, 43 Ass. pl. 38.
in a Case concerning the price of Wool, by a false Report. The foot of the
whole account will be this; That the work of Judicature of the Privy Council in
these times in cases of Crimes, was to receive Articles, and award
Inquisitions; and after return in nature of a Grand Inquest, to Recover,
Traverse, and to order Trial at the Common Law; and upon Verdict returned, 43
Ass. pl. 38.
to Fine and Ransom. In other Cases either of Right or Equity in matters of
private property, they were determined either by Judges of the Bench, or
Chancery, although possibly the suit was Coram Concilio, for that all the said
Judges were of the King's Council. And yet, as I dare not affirm, so I cannot
deny, but it might also be possible that some matters, especially these of a
greater consequence, either in their own nature, or in regard of the persons
whom they concerned, were determined by the major Vote of the whole Council, in
a prudential, or rather arbitrary way. But this was, Invita Minerva, and used
so rarely, as the path is grown out of view; saving some few footsteps here and
there remaining, which show that the Grand Council of Lords had been there.

CHAP. IV. Of the Chancery.
IT is the birth of the King's power in Judicature, and may deserve the name of
the firstborn. For though it had no better Title in these later times than
Officium, Mirror. cap. 4. Sect. 2. Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 13.
because amongst other of the King's Escripts, it formed Writs remedial, for
such as had received wrong; yet even by that work, it was in repute for so much
skill in the Law of the Land, that by the consent of all, it was as well able
to advise a remedy, as to advise the Complainants where to have it. And yet it
had one advantage further, that it was an Office of remembrance to the King,
(who is a person of great trust in the Law, and gave such credit to all acts
done before him) as being entered into the remembrance, became of the highest
nature of Record, against which no Plea did lie. Amongst these, matters of debt
and contract coming into the account, this Office taking notice of the Record,
took cognizance of the thing, and for the executing thereof: and thus in these,
and suchlike Cases, granted Judicial Writs, and so found out a way of
Judicature, to as many Causes as the State would trust it with. Fleta, lib. 2.
c. 13. Sect. 8.
And because it pretended cognizance only of matters of Record before them,
they found out a way of examining of Witnesses by Commission, and returning
their Depositions in writing; which being become a Record before them, they
gave their Sentence upon the whole matter, without the ancient ordinary Trial
per pares. It becomes a kind of peculiar, exempting it self from the ordinary
course in manner of Trial, and from the ordinary rules of Law, in giving of
Sentence; and as a Backdoor for the King's Arbitry, in case of Judicature in
matters of Common Pleas; as the Council Table was in Crown-pleas. They both are
looked upon with a very pleasing eye of Majesty, which loves not to be
strait-laced; yet all is embattelled under the Colors of Equity, Honor,
Convenience, and Conscience; like a Monopoly, that is bred under the wings of
the public, but feeds it self upon it.

That this had attained the Title of a Court so anciently as in King Steven's
time (as the Honorable Reporter notes) I much question, Instit. 4. c. 8. fol.
78.
by the Title that Fleta gives it in later times; nor, under his favor, will
that Testimony cited out of the History of Ely warrant it, but upon a mistaken
ground of misplacing the note of distinction. For I take the words to be thus
translated: King Etheldred determined and granted, that the Church of Fly
should for ever in the King's Court hold the dignity of the Chancery, and not
hold the dignity of the King's Court of Chancery. Nevertheless, it is clear
that these times brought it to that condition, that it might well carry that
name, if formerly it had not: For it grew very fast both in honor and power;
and this not by Usurpation, (though it did exceed) but by express donation from
the Parliament.

Yet is this power much darkened in the limits and extent thereof, chiefly in
regard that the Chancellor is betrusted with many things, whereof there is no
evidence for the Chancery to claim any cognizance. For he was in these times a
person of many interests and relations, being one of the Quorum in the
Star Chamber, of the King's Council, chief in the Chancery, most commonly a
Clergyman, and therewith Legate a Latere; and in these several Relations might
act directly, and yet in several Courts. And therefore, though he had power
with others, to punish neglects of Execution of the Statutes of Wines, 4 E. 3.
c. 12. 9 E. 3. cap. 1. 14 E. 3. c. 5.
by Act of Parliament; and also of the Statute concernign Victual, and to
determine matters of controversy between parties in Cases depending before the
Parliament, and in some matters that concern the King's Revenue; yet cannot
these be said to be the proper work belonging to the cognizance of the
Chancery, but to the Chancellor by special Commission in another Relation.
Albeit, I cannot deny but the Court it self had cognizance in matters of as
strange a nature, Viz. To punish disturbances of Merchants in their Trade, 27
E. 3. c. 26. 36 E. 3. c. 9. and cap. 13.
to see to the executing of the Statutes of Purveyors, and to remedy grievances
contrary to other Statutes: Which general words let in a wild liberty to that
Court to intermeddle in Laws which were never intended for their touch; to
punish Nusances according to discretion, 12 R. 2. c. 12. 27 E. 3. c 24.
to give remedy to Merchants upon the Statute of Staple; so that it is clear
enough the Parliament intended it should be a Court, and gave their Seal to
their power of Judicature. Nor, as it seems, was this any regret to the
Courts of Common Law, but as a thing taken for granted. For the Reports tell
us, That if the King grants Tithes, arising from without the bounds of any
Parish, the Patentee shall sue in the Chancery by Scire Facias, and shall there
proceed to Issue or Demurrer; and then to the Common Law; where upon Trial, if
the Defendant make default, 22 Ass. pl. 25.
the Plaintiff shall have Judgment and Execution. And if the Heir be in Ward
to the King, the Mother shall sue and recover her Dower in the Chancery. And
they tell us, Bro. scire fac. 154. 24 E. 3. 73.
that it had power to prohibit Spiritual Courts, and Courts of Common Law, yea,
to overruled or reverse Judgments: and yet the Common Law held it is ground
when it was concerned: for neither were all suits there by Bill, 43 Ass. pl. 32
24 E. 3. pl. 35. 39 E. 3. fo. 14. 21 E. 3. fo. 47.
as in cases of Equity, nor determined according to such rules; nor did the
power of Judicature rest in the breast of one Chancellor, but in him jointly
with other Council of the King, which were also learned Judges of the Law. For
the Report informs that Edward the Second had granted a Rent in Tail to the
Earl of Kent, who dying, his Son under age, and Ward to the King, Edward the
Third seized, amongst other Lands, the Rent, and granted it to Sir John Molins:
Upon Petition, the King refers the matter to the Archbishop, and others of the
Council, calling to them the Chancellor. A Scire Facias goes forth to Sir John
Molins; he upon appearance pleaded to the jurisdiction, as a case belonging to
the Common Law; but it would not be allowed, because it was to repeal the
King's Charter.

And whereas it was objected, that the reference was to the Archbishop and
others, and therefore the cause ought not to be determined in the Chancery; it
was resolved that it did properly belong to the Chancery, by the Law: And in
the argument of the case, it appears clearly that the King's Council there, 43
Ass. pl. 35.
were learned in the Law. And the same is yet more evident by the Title of
Bills in those days exhibited in the Chancery, which was directed to the
Chancellor, and the King's Council, and the Rule given Per tout les Justices.
Which I rather note, for the shortness of the form of Bills in those days, far
different from these times, wherein the substance of the complaint, however
small in it self, is oftentimes blown out into so great a bubble, that it
breaks to nothing: And the Statutes formerly mentioned do assert the same
thing, as touching the King's Council. For though they speak of the Council or
Chancery in the English Tongue, yet in the original the words are, Conceil en
Chancery.

Having thus touched upon the matters under the Judicatory of the Chancery, and
Judges in the same: In the next place, the manner of proceedings comes to
consideration. For it seems they had been formerly very irregular; and that
contrary to the Grand Charter, upon a bare suggestion in the Chancery, the
party complained of was imprisoned, and no proceedings made thereupon. For
remedy whereof, it was ordained, That upon suggestions so made, the Complainant
was to find Sureties to pursue the Suggestions; and that the Process of Law
should issue forth against the party without imprisoning him; and that if the
Suggestions were not proved true, the Complainant should incur the like penalty
that the Defendant should have done, in case he had been found Guilty. 37 E. 3.
c. 17.
But afterward this later Clause was altered by another Statute, because it
was full of uncertainty; and it was ordained, that in such case the Complainant
shall be imprisoned, 38 E. 3. c. 9.
until he shall satisfy the Defendant of his Damages: and furthermore, shall
make Fine and Ransom to the King. But because that the Defendant many times
held his advantage, 17 Rich. 2. c. 6.
even to extremity, this course lasted not long; but a new Law was made, which
put the power of awarding Damages in such cases into the Chancellor, to do
according to his discretion. And thus the Chancery obtained power to award
Damages, which they never had formely; 43 Ass. pl. 32.
and the Chancellor a Precedence both in the Chancery, and of the Council in
the Court of Star Chamber, and in many cases in the Exchequer. By the first he
had a power in matters of Meum and Tuum; by the last, in matters Mei and Regis;
and by the other, in matters Mei and Regni. A considerable man certainly he was
in the motions of Government; but how much more, if he be made Archbishop of
Canterbury, Cardinal, and Legate a Latere; or Archbishop, Lord Treasurer, and
Legate a Latere; as these days had diverse times seen? Extraordinary
advancements bestowed upon the Nobility, brings Honor to the Throne; but if
they be not men of noted Worth and Uprightness, they make the Scepter stoop, by
stirring up envy in the Nobility, and indignation from the people. For seldom
is it seen, that Advancements are fed from the Crown, though they be bred from
thence; but either maintained by new supplies from the peoples Purses, or the
ruin or decay of some Officers more ancient than themselves, or both. And such
was the condition of the Chancellor; he sucked fat from beneath, and Blood and
Spirits from the Grand Chief Justiciar of England, and so reduced that
Honorable Potentate unto the degree of Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
leaving scarcely unto him the Name or Title of Lord. One thing more remains,
touching the election or nomination of this Great man. At the first, he was no
better than a Register, or the King's Remembrancer, or Secretary, having also
the Honor to advise the King in such matters as came within the circuit of the
Writings in his custody; and questionless, Eo usque, it is suitable to all the
reason in the World, that he should be of the King's sole Nomination and
Election. But when it befalls, that instead of advising the King, his word is
taken to be the Rule, and a Judicatory power put upon that; and unto this is
superadded that honorable trust of keeping and governing the Great Seal of the
Kingdom, with the continual growing power occasionally conferred upon him by
the Parliament: He is now become no more the King's Remembrancer, but the Lord
Chancellor of England, and Supreme Officer of State. And it seems but
reasonable that he should hold his place by public Election, as well as the
Grand Justiciar (whose Plumes he borrowed) and other Grand Officers of State
did before him. For he that will have his Servant to work for another, must
give the other that Honor of Electing him thereto; nor was this laid aside nor
forgotten by these times, but a claim was put in for the Election or allowance
of this principal Officer amongst others; 15 E. 3. n. 10. 15.
the Parliament obtaining a Judgment in the case by the King's Confession; and
so the thing is left to the judgment of future ages, 15 E. 3. c. 3. 10 Rich.
2. n. 16. 10.
Viz. Whether a King that can do no man wrong, can dissemble the Royal Assent
in Parliament; or declare himself legally in that manner by Proclamation?

CHAP. V. Of Admirals Courts.
THis is a third Court that maintained the King's Judicatory power, in a
different way from that which is commonly called the Common Law; and by many is
therefore supposed to advance the King's Prerogative, but upon mistaken
grounds. It is very true, that the way is different from the common Road, both
in it is original, and in the course of proceedings; nor could it otherwise be,
considering the condition of the Nations, and the people of the same,
interested in common Traffic. The people thus interested, as much differed
from the other sort of Dry men (if they may be so called) as Sea from Land, and
are in nature but as March-men of several Nations, that must concentre in some
third way for the maintenance of Commerce for peace-sake, and to the end that
no Nation may be under any other Law than its own. The condition of the Nations
in the times when civilized Government began to settle amongst them, was to be
under the Roman Emperors, who having settled one Law in the general grounds
throughout all Nations, made the Sea likewise to serve under one rule, which
should float up and down with it, that men might know upon what terms they held
their own, wheresoever they went; and upon what terms to part with it for their
best advantage. In its original therefore, this Law may be called Imperial, and
likewise in the Process, because it was directed in one way of Trial, and by
one Law, which had its first birth from the Imperial power; and probably it had
not been for the common benefit of Europe to have been otherwise, at other
time, or by other directories formed. Nevertheless, this became no Gem of
Prerogative to the English Crown; for if England did comply with foreign
Natives for its own benefit (it being an Island full of the Sea, and in the
common Road from the most parts of Europe that border upon the Sea, and of
delight in Merchandise) it is but suitable to its self: and it did so comply,
as it saved the main Stake, by voluntary entertaining those Laws without being
imposed upon by Imperial power. For the Saxons came into this Kingdom a free
people, and so (for ought yet appears to me) continues to this day: I say,
that in those first times, they did take into the consideration of Parliament
the regulating of the fluctuating motions of Sea-laws: nor were they then, or
after, properly imposed by the King's Edict. For though it were granted, that
Richard the First reduced the Sea-Laws in the Isle of Oleron, yet that the same
should be done without advice of Parliament in his return from the Holy land,
is to me a Riddle, considering what Histories do hold forth concerning his
return through Germany; nor can that be good evidence to entitle Kings of
England to a power to make and alter Laws according to their private pleasure
and interest. Nor does that Record mentioned in the Institutes, Instit. 4. cap.
22. fol. 142. and 144.
warrant any such matter, but rather on the contrary groundeth the complaint
upon Laws, Statutes, Franchises, and Customs, established; and that this
Establishment was by the King and the Council.

This Law was of a double nature, according to the Law of the Land; one part
concerning the pleas of the Crown, and the other between party and party; for
properly the King's Authority in the Admiralty is but an Authority of
Judicature, according to Laws established, which both for process and sentence
are different from the Common Law, as much as the two Elements do differ, yet
not different in the power that made them. I shall leave the particulars to be
enquired into, by them that shall mind it elsewhere, and only touch so much as
shall reflect upon the main Government. This power was executed by Deputies
diversely, according as the times and opportunities were, for War or Peace, and
either transitu or portu. What was done in time of War, or whilst the Ship is
out of the English Seas, comes not to our purpose; and therefore I shall not
meddle with that, further than this, that in the first times Kings were wont to
divide the work of Judicature and of War into several hands. The power of War
and Peace they committed unto men of approved Courage and Skill in that
service; and therefore generally, not to the men of highest rank, who had
neither Mind nor Skill for a work of such labor, diet and danger. This power
passed under diverse names; sometimes by grant of the custody of the Seacoasts,
sometimes of the parts and Sea coasts, sometimes by being made Captain of the
Seamen and Mariners, and sometimes Admiral of the Ships. It was a great power,
and had been much greater, but that it suffered a double diminution; the one in
the time, for three or four years commonly made an end of the command of one
man, and at the best it was, Gloss. fol. 16.
quam diu Regi placuerit: the other diminution was in circuit of the power, for
all the Maritine Coasts were not ordinarily under the power of one man, but of
many; each having his proper precinct upon the South or North, East or Western
shores; and under the Title of Admiral in the times of Edward the First, and
forwards, who brought that Title from the Holy Land. Nevertheless, about the
end of the times whereof we now Treat, the custody of the whole Sea began to
settle in one hand, under the Title of Admiral of the English Seas; and the
place was conferred upon men of the greatest rank, and so continued ever
afterward. The power of Jurisdiction or Judicature all this while remained
distinct, and it seems was settled in part in the power of the Sheriff and
Justices. For by the Law the Sheriff and Justices had cognizance of matters
between the high water and the low water mark; and what was done Super altum
mare, was within the directory of the Admiral; these were but few things, and
of small consideration: the principal of them being concerning War or Peace,
and those only within the English Seas. But after Edward the Third had beaten
both the French and Spaniards at Sea, the people grew much more toward the
Sea, and became so famous, that the greatest Lords thought the Regiment of
Sea-affairs worthy of the best of their Rank, and were pleased with the Title
of Admiral, whilst they left the work to others; and so the Admiral became a
person of more honor and less work than he had been formerly. The greatness of
the honor of this place thus growing, soon also began to contract greatness of
power beyond what it had formerly; and this was principally in matter of
Jurisdiction. For not contented with the power of a chief Justice of War and
Peace within the Seas, which was his proper dominion, the Lord Admiral gained
the same within the low water mark, 15 Rich. 2. c. 3. Dier. 15, and 16. El.
mic. pl. 2. 8 E. 3. Coron. 199.
and in the main streams below the next Bridge to the Sea, and in all places
where Ridels were set; and yet these places were within the body of the County.
Nor did he endeavor less to gain in matters of distributive Justice: for
although he had a legal Jurisdiction in things done upon the Sea, so far as to
defend, order, determine, and cause restitution to be made, in cases of damage
done unjustly; yet was it no less difficult to keep this power within its own
bounds, than the watery Element upon which it sloated; but it made continual
waves upon the Franchise of the Land; and for this cause, no sooner had these
great men savoured of the Honor and Authority of that Dignity, but comes a
Statute to restrain their Authority in the Cognizance of Cases, only unto such
matters as are done upon the main Sea, 13 Rich. 2. c. 5
as formerly was wont to be. And within two years after, that Act of Parliament
is backed by another Act to the same purpose, 15 Rich. 2. c. 5
in more full expressions, saving that for Manslaughter, the Admirals power
extended even to the high water-mark, and into the main streams. And this
leads on the next consideration, viz. What is the subject matter of this
Jurisdiction and Authority. I shall not enter into the depth of particulars,
but shall reduce all to the two heads of Peace and Justice.

The Lord Admiral is, as I formerly said, a Justice of Peace at Sea,
maintaining the Peace by power, and restoring the Peace by setting an Order
unto matters of Difference, as well between Foraigners, as between the English
and Foraigners; as may appear by that Plea in the fourth Institutes formerly
mentioned.

Secondly, That point of Justice principally concerns matters of Contract,
and Complaints for breach of Contract; of these the Admiral is the Judge, to
determine according to Law and Custom. Now as subservient unto both these, he
has Authority of command over Seamen, and Ships that belong to the State, and
over all Seamen and Ships in order to the service of the State, to arrest and
order them for the great voyages of the King and Realm, 25 Rich. 2. c. 3
and during the said voyage; but this he cannot do without express Order,
because the determining of a voyage Royal, is not wholly in his power.

Lastly, the Lord Admiral has power, not only over the Seamen serving in the
Ships of State, but over all other Seamen, to arrest them for the service of
the State; and if any of them run away without leave from the Admiral, 2 Rich.
2. c. 4.
or power deputed from him, he has power by enquiry to make a Record thereof,
and certify the same to the Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. who shall cause
them to be apprehended and imprisoned. By all which, and diverse other Laws, not
only the power of the Admiral is declared, but the original from whence it is
derived, namely from the Legislative power of the Parliament, and not from the
single person of the King, or any other Council whatsoever. But enough has
been already said of these Courts of State, in their particular precincts. One
general interest befalls them all: That as they are led by a Law much different
from the Courts of Common Law, so are they thereby the more endeared to Kings,
as being subservient to their Prerogative, no less than the Common Law is to
the peoples liberty. In which condition being looked upon as Corrivals, this
principal Maxim of Government will thence arise, That the bounds of these
several Laws are so to be regarded, that not the least gap of intrenchment be
laid open each to other; lest the Fence once broken, Prerogative or Liberty
should become boundless, and bring in Confusion instead of Law.

CHAP. VI. Of the Church-mens Interest.
BUt the Church-mens interest was yet more Tart, standing in need of no less
allay, than that of the King's Authority, for that the King is no less
concerned therein, than the people; and the rather, because it was now grown to
that pitch, that it is become the Darling of Kings; and continually henceforth
courted by them; either to gain them from the Papal Jurisdiction, to be more
engaged to the Crown; or by their means to gain the Papal Jurisdiction to be
more favorable and complying with the Prerogative Royal. The former times were
tumultuous, and the Pope is gained to join with the Crown to keep the people
under; though by that means, what the Crown saved to it self from the people,
it lost to Rome. Henceforth the course of Affairs grew more civil, or (if you
will) graced with a blush of Religion: and it was the policy of these times
whereof we now treat, to carry a benign Aspect to the Pope, so far only as to
slave him off from being an enemy, whilst Kings drove on a new design to
ingratiate and engage the Church men of their own Nation unto it is own Crown.
This they did by distinguishing the Office or Dignity of Episcopacy, into the
Ministerial and Honorable Parts; the later they called Prelacy, and was
superadded for encouragement of the former, and to make their work more
acceptaple to men for their Hospitalities sake; for the maintenance whereof,
they had large Endowments and Advancements. And then they reduced them to a
right understanding of their Original, which, they say, is neither Jus Divinum,
nor Romanum, 25 E. 3. Stat. 6.
but that their Lordships, power, and great possessions, were given them by the
Kings, and others of this Realm. And that by virtue thereof, the Patronage and
custody of the Possessions in the vacancy ought to belong to the Kings, and
other the Founders; and that unto them the right of Election into such
advancements does belong, and not unto the Pope; nor could he gain other Title
unto such power, but by usurpation, and encroachment upon the right of others.
But these great men were not to be won by Syllogisms; Ordinarily they are
begotten between Ambition and Covetousness, nourished by Riches and Honor; and
like the Needle in the Compass, turn ever after that way. Edward the Third
therefore labors to win these men, heaped Honor and Privileges upon them,
that they might see the gleanings of the Crown of England, to be better than
the vintage of the Tripple Crown. Doubtless, he was a Prince that knew how to
set a full value upon Church men, especially such as were devout; and it may
be, did somewhat outreach in that course: For though he saw God in outward
events, more than any of his Predecessors; and disclaiming all humane merits,
reflected much upon God's mercy, even in smaller blessings: yet we find his
Letters reflect very much upon the Prayers of his Clergy; he loved to have
their Persons nigh unto him, put them into places of greatest Trust, for Honor
and Power, in Judicature; and not altogether without cause; he had thereby
purchased unto his Kingdom the name and repute of being a Kingdom of Priests.
But all this is but Personal, and may give some liking to the present
Incumbents, but not to the expectants: and therefore the Royal Favor extended
so far in these times, as to bring on the Parliament to give countenance to the
Courts and Judiciary power of the Ordinaries, by the positive Law of the
Kingdom, although formerly the Canons had already long since made way thereto
by practice. I shall hereof note these few particulars ensuing.

Ordinaries shall not be questioned in the King's Court for Commutation, 15 E.
3. cap. 6.
Testamentary Matters, or Matrimonial Causes, nor other things touching
Jurisdiction of Holy-Church.

Things formerly bred by the Canon, nourished by continual practice, allowed by
Ordinance of Parliament, or Grant from Kings in Parliament, are now confirmed
by solemn concurrence of the whole Representative Body of the Kingdom, to have
and to hold with Warranty. And yet the sense is not so general as the words,
nor does it seem much other, than a Confection made for the Archbishops
appetite, 22 Ass. pl. 70. 45 E. 3. 24. Fis. consultat. 5.
to cure a distemper between him and the King: for the Civil Judge lost nothing
hereby, nor would the Crown, as may appear by a Law of equal Authority with the
former; 31 E. 3. cap. 4. 25 E. 3. Stat. 3. cap. 9.
for though an Executor or Administrator may cheat, yet it tells us, that
Ordinaries only can oppress, and extort from dead men; and therefore in such
cases does provide remedy by enquiry, and Indictment before the King's Justices.

They shall have Cognizance of Usury during the Delinquent's Life, 15 E. 3. c.
5.
and the King after the Delinquent's death.

The difference arises from the different end; the first being to reform the
Person by Church Censures, and to urge him to restitution; the latter is for
the King's Fine or Forfeiture. For as touching the Usurer's estate, Miror.
Just. cap. 5. Sect. 1. 51 H. 3. petit. cleri. Artic. 16. 50 E. 3. n. 158. 6
Rich. 2. n. 57 14 Rich. 2. n. 24.
the offense was in the nature of Felony, forfeiting both Lands and Goods to
the King, after the Delinquent's death: And it seems the manner was to Indict
the Delinquent during his life; and that stuck to him as a deadly Arrow in his
side, till he died. Nor did it lie in the power of the Ordinary, by
Ecclesiastical censure, so to reform the Of^ender, as to clear him to the King,
unless the party offending made his peace with the King by Composition. Instit.
3. c. 70. 6 E. 3. coram Rege, Rot. 130 Porff.
And thus the Law continued, for ought appears to me, till the time of Henry
the Eighth.

They shall have Cognizance of avoidance of Benefices of Right: 25 E. 3. c. 8.
pro clero.
They shall certify Bigamy; and Bastardy had beyond the Sea; 18 E. 3. c. 2. 15
E. 3. Stat. 2. 9 Rich. 2. c. 4.
and whether a Prior be perpetual, or Dative.

The first of these concerning avoidance of Churches, it seems was somewhat
doubtful in point of practice, for that the Civil Judge used to determine all
manner of avoidances, as well in Fact, as of Right; but by this Statute they
are restrained only unto avoidances in Fact, so as after this Statute it is
holden, that avoidances by death shall be tried by the Country; but if the
avoidance be by Deprivation, Resignation, Creation, Bro. quar. imp. 85.
or otherwise, it shall be tried by the Ordinary: because by common intendment
he is more conusant of the thing, than Countrey-people. But as touching the
point of Bigamy, the matter is more doubtful, in regard that commonly the
Marriage of a second Wife, or Widow, is a matter in Fact, done in the face of
the people; and of which they take notice, especially where the life of man is
concerned, which rather requires the Judgment of his Peers, than where the
outward maintenance only is engaged. Nevertheless, because the main point is,
whether the party be a Clerk or not, and the same anciently rested upon the
Certificate of the Ordinary: It is by this Law again allowed to him to try and
certify this point of Bigamy also, although the Statute of Bigamists might
seem to Entitle the Civil Magistrate thereto, 8 E. 3. cap. 8.
as the Law was holden to be before this Statute was made. In the next place,
although it cannot be denied but the Trial of Bastardy beyond the Sea might as
well lie in the cognizance of the Lay-Magistrate, as in that of the
Ecclesiastical; yet seeing the Clergy had already attained the cognizance of
the thing, the place proved but a matter of circumstance; especially they
having the advantage of the Civil Magistrate in this, in regard that the
Ecclesiastical persons beyond the Sea, had also obtained the cognizance of that
matter amongst themselves, their Testimony or Certificate would come with more
credit to the Clergy in this Kingdom, than to the Magistrate, whose cognizance
in such cases they did disallow.

Lastly, concerning Priories, whereas some were presentative, and filled by
Induction from the Ordinary; and others were Donative, having their Priors
merely at the will of the Abbot, to be placed and displaced as he thought most
expedient: If then the point in issue depends upon this knot, this Law
refers the Trial unto the Ordinary, who by common presumption best knows
whether any Institution and Induction had passed his Registry and Seal, or not.
And thus, though a kind of Judicial power seems to be carried along herewith,
yet is all in a ministerial and subservient way unto the Civil Magistrate; and
nevertheless, with such credit and authority, that the main hinge of the
Judicatory, in such cases, depends upon the dash of their pen.

No Bishop, 18 E. 3. c. 1.
nor Archbishop, shall be Impeached before the Civil Magistrate, without the
Kings express Warrant.

The former particulars concerned matter of Authority; this and others ensuing,
concern matter of immunity, which, or most of which were formerly for a long
time within the fancy of the Canon, but never came to the height of
Parliamentary approbation or Authority till now, that it comes in as a
peace offering to pacify the quarrel between the Archbishop Stratford and the
King. For he being engaged in the French Wars, so resolved to continue; and
therefore to maintain distempers at home, he held neither Honorable nor safe.

Their Temporalties shall not be wasted, during the vacancy: Nor shall they be
seized, 14 E. 3. c. 2.
but by Judgment of the Court.

The first of these was an ancient Law, grounded upon great reason; although
dulled by time, and by covetousness of the needy Patrons, next to laid aside,
if not quite put out of countenance. So as a new Law must be made to revive it,
and to abolish that corrupt custom or practice of depredating those possessions
given to a holy use in common supposal, contrary to the trust by them
undertaken, and the use still continuing. But the second Branch is in nature of
a Law of Restraint set upon the Common Law: for the persons of these
Spiritualized men were of so airy a constitution, as they could not be holden
by hands made out of the Clay, such as the rude Laity were; and therefore the
Civil Magistrate, upon all occasions used to lay hold upon that, whereof there
was some feeling, which were called Temporalities, and thereby drew them to
appearance at the Lay-Courts; for however Spiritual the Clergy were, they would
not easily part with their Lay-Fees. But now by this Law, the times are so
attenuated, that the very Temporalities are made so Spiritual, as not to be
meddled with by the Lay-Magistrate, unless upon judgment first obtained against
them. And suitably thereunto, within twelve years following, another Law was
made more punctual, That their Temporalties should not be seized upon for
contempts, 25 E. 3. c. 6.
but that their persons should be seized: yet within twenty years after that,
this Law begins to be out of countenance, and the Opinions of the Judges began
to grow bold upon the ancient rule, that their Temporalities were Temporal,
though their persons were Spiritual; and that it was more dangerous to imprison
the person of a Clergyman, than to attach his possessions. And therefore they
held, 44 E. 3. fol. 35, 36. Per Thorpe. 7 H. 4. fol. 41. Per Gascoign.
That if the Ordinary remove not the Incumbent when the King's Writ commands
him so to do, his Temporalties should be seized. And if the Ordinary should
certify one to be a Clerk which is none, the like course is to be taken.

They shall depute the next and most lawful Friends of the Intestate to
administer his Goods. 3^ E. 3. c. 11.


The Statute at Westminster the second, having given formerly a kind of
allowance that the Ordinary should be Administrator to the Intestate, West. 2.
c. 19.
so far as to answer the Intestate's Debts, lent him thereby an opportunity to
possess himself of the whole, to all intents and purposes. Which being observed
by the Parliament, by this Law they made way for Administration to fall through
the hands of the Ordinary into the Lap of Administrators made by the Authority
of the Parliament; but of the Ordinaries nomination, according to the Authority
hereby to him given. These Administrators thus made, had a greater power than
ever the Ordinary had, or could give. For though the Ordinary by the Statute at
Westminster was bound to pay the Debts of the Testator, yet could he never
bring Action, as the Administrator to all intents by this Law is enabled to do.
And though it be true that the Administrator is by this Law ordered to account
to the Ordinary, yet does not that entitle the Ordinary to any interest in the
personal Estate; but only gives him a bare Authority to take the account,
without any compulsory power by Ecclesiastical censures to enforce him thereto.

Secondly, it is such an account as is no Evidence in any Court of Record. And
lastly, if upon the foot of the account, any arrere remained, or surplusage of
Estate; the Ordinary could neither recover, nor order the same; because by the
Law anciently, the next friends had the sole interest therein: and being by
this Statute made Administrators, the whole power of ordering the Estate is
vested in them.

To conclude, this Statute was made in favor, and for the ease of the
Ordinary, if they would please so to take it, for they could get no benefit by
executing the Administration in their own persons, if they intended to
Administer according to the Law.

The persons of the Clergy are privileged from Arrests, 5 E. 3. cap. 5.
during the Holy Actions of the Officiating.

This was plotted since Anselm's time; he and his Successors endeavored by
Constitution and Canon, continually to mind the Civil Magistrate thereof, but
could never nurse it up to the degree of a Law till now; they gained the
advantages of the times, growing into a more tender apprehension of Devotion
than formerly. 1 Rich. 2. c. 15
The penalty of transgressing this Law is left in general, and therefore did
the less scare; but within three years after, it was confirmed with a certain
penalty of Fine and Imprisonment, as to the King's suit; and damages to the
party offended: and the Privilege was enlarged, for, and during their
continuance in the Consecrated ground, in order to such services, and not upon
Fraud or Collusion to avoid Arrests. But by neither of these Laws was the
Arrest (although contrary to them) made void, as touching the Process.

The Goods of the Clergy are discharged from Purveyance, 14 E 3. Stat. 3 cap. 1.
and their Houses from Quarter.

The latter of these was an Encroachment upon the greater Clergymen. For under
the Title of Hospitality, which the Prelates were obliged to by their great
Possessions and Revenues conferred upon them to that end, Kings used to quarter
Messengers to and from Scotland; the King's Horses, Dogs, and Hawks, etc. But
the point of Purveyance was an ancient Prerogative belonging to Kings; and by
no Custom were the goods of any man discharged therefrom, till it was by Act of
grace first confirmed by Edward the First, West. 1. cap. 1. Stat. de prisis.
and afterward by grant of Edward the Second; yet by reason of the rudeness of
the times, did not those Acts prevail to that settlement that was promised,
till now Edward the Third renewed the Law. Nevertheless, could not this Law of
Edward the Third perfect that work, because it was but a bare command till
Richard the Second made a remedial Law, 1 Rich. 2. c. 3.
giving thereby the Clergy that were wronged a right of Action of Trespass
against the Purveyors, and to recover treble damages; whereas formerly they
were liable only to a Fine to the King, which many times was as soon pardoned
as asked.

These condescensions might have wedded the English Clergy to the English
Crown, but that it was coy, and expected further gratuities. Besides, they
beheld their old Step-dame Rome now in its full Splendour and Power, and deeply
interested in the sway of affairs in this Kingdom: and above all the rest, the
nigh affinity between the Prelate and the Pope was such, that they sucked one
Milk, breathed one Air, and like the Philosophers Twins, lived in each other.
The latter of these was not discerned by those dim-sighted times, and therefore
they could do nothing toward the dissolution of that knot, but left it to
future times, who found no other way than to cut it asunder. But Edward the
Third and his Successor espied the first, felt the inconvenience thereof, and
applied themselves to such remedy as they found most ready at hand. All things
that are subject to time, are also subject to change; which comes commonly
slower upon Governments that are less Ecclesiastical: for Churches continue
longer in a growing condition, than in their complete estate; like a Christian,
that seldom endures long after his full ripeness. Thus in England it is
hitherto above a thousand years since the Gospel came to the Saxons, and
well-nigh a thousand years since the Pope set his foot amongst us; ever
approaching nigher the Throne, and ascending thereunto; but finding it full of
a King that would not remove, he sits down in his Lap; a heavy burden
questionless he was, considering his claim of Jurisdiction, his provisions,
pensions, exemptions, impositions, and such like oppressions; and therefore it
is no wonder if the King feeling the encumbrance, gives a lift at the Popes
power, by stoping the current of Money from England, Rome-wards. To this end,
the Statute made at Carlisle is revived, whereby the Clergy are inhibited from
conveying Treasure beyond the Seas: 4 E. 3. c. 6. 5 E. 3. c. 3.
but the Pope knew how to ride, and will not so easily forgo his saddle.

The Roman Eagle had made many a fair flight in England, and had not yet fully
gorged himself; he grants ten thousand Marks yearly out of Taxes laid upon the
Church Livings in England unto two Cardinals, neither of which did, nor by the
Canon could live in England; the Treasurership of York also to another
Cardinal, after that the King had conferred the same elsewhere. He proceeds
also further to invade the undoubted rights of the Crown, by making an Election
of the B. of Norwich, and causing him to be invested Rege renitente. The King
spent eight years in the recovery of his right, and was deluded in the
conclusion: he now sees it bootless to stand always upon his defense, and
receives affron^s; he resolves therefore to enter the lists, and makes seizure
of the Deanery of York, which formerly by usurpation the Pope had conferred
upon a Cardinal; Rot. Parl. 10. E. 3. Arch. Reg. 18 E. 3. tit. 38. Fox. 388. 25
E. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 22. Fox. Sect. 1.
and of all Church Livings given by the Pope to aliens. Then a Law is made more
sharp than those in the eighteenth year, wherein Provisors of Abbeys and
Priories are made liable to a Proemuniri, and Provisors of other Ecclesiastical
Livings and Dignities (whereby the presentation of the rightful Patron is
disturbed) to be fined and imprisoned until the fine and damages to the party
wronged be paid. And all such as draw men to plead out of England, in cases
that belong to the cognizance of the Kings Court, 27 E. 3. c. 1.
and all obtainers of provisions in the Court at Rome, these were also subject
to a Proemuniri. For whilst these things were thus in action, the Pope
bestirred himself notably with Citations, Excommunications, Interdictions, and
such other birds of prey, not only against mean men, but Judges, Bishops, and
the King's Council; as amongst others, the case of the Bishop of Ely, at the
solicitation of some of some of inferior regard, as I remember, a Clerk or
some such thing. Yet as these Bull-drivers or Summoners to the Romish Court,
Antiq. Brit. Eccles. 247.
were no late upstarts, so were not these times the first that took them to
task: for before the Statutes of Proemuniri, we find provision was made against
Provisors, and that some Statute did precede those in Print, which punished a
disturber of the King's Incumbent by a Bull from Rome, with perpetual
Imprisonment, or at the King's will. Besides, the party wronged was allowed an
Action for his Damages, 21 E. 3. fol. 40.
Qui tam pro Domino Rege quam pro seipso sequitur. And before that time also,
bringers of Bulls from Rome were imprisoned; although in all these cases
aforesaid, the liberty of the Persons, both of Lords and Prelates, was saved.
And thus all the while King Edward the Third kept the Field, 38 E. 3. c. 1.
he gave the Pope cuff for cuff; but retiring himself to take his ease, he
waxing wanton, waxed weak, and more slowly pursued the vindication of his own
Right, and his Subjects Liberty. The Laws are laid aside, and Rome had further
day given to plead, and in the mean time Execution is staid: the double mind is
double dyed, and advantage is soon espied; above sixty Church Livings more are
suddenly catched and given to the Favorites at Rome. Rot. Parl. 51. E. 3. tit.
35.
The Parliament rings herewith, yet the King delays the remedy; and in this
Eddy of affairs Edward the Third dies, and Richard the Second takes up the
place, who had wit enough to observe what concerned his own interest, and
courage enough to pursue it: but neither wit nor courage to overruled his
Lusts, which in the conclusion overruled all rule, and brought himself to
destruction. He found the people at his entrance into the Throne irritated with
the Pope's oppressions, and vexed at his Grandfather's desidiousness; his
spirit is also stirred within him, and himself thereby pressed to tread in his
Grandfather's former ways, and to outrun him in his latter. He made the
penalty of Proemuniri to extend to all Farmers, 3 Rich. 2. c. 3.
or others, in nature of Bailiffs, that held any Church maintenance to the use
of any Alien; 7 Rich. 2. c. 13. 12 Rich. 2. c. 15.
and unto all Aliens that are Purchasors of such Provisions to any use; and
unto all Lieges, that shall in like manner purchase such Provisions.

But as touching such as shall accept such Provisions, he ordained Banishment
for their Persons, 13 Rich. 2. Stat. cap. 21.
and Forfeiture of their Estate. Notwithstanding all this, the Roman
Horse-leech would not so give over. The King grew into displeasure with his
Subjects, and they with him, and with one another; they see the Pope still on
horseback, and fear that the English Clergy, their own Countrymen, if not
Friends and Abettors, yet are bu^ faint and feigned Enemies to the Pope's
Cause. Nor was it without cause that their fear was such: for as the Pope had
two hands to receive, so they had two hearts, making show of forming blows at
the Pope, but then always at a distance, or when without the Pope's Guard; and
thus the Laws begin to stammer, and cannot speak so plain English as they were
wont. The people hereat offended, resolve to put the Clergy into the Van, and
to try their mettle to the full.

At the last parliament that Richard the Second did hold, both the Lords
Temporal and Spiritual are opposed one by one. 16 Rich. 2. c. 5.
The Lords Temporal (like themselves) resolve and enter their Resolutions to
defend the Right of the Crown in the Cases of Provisors; although even amongst
these great men, all were not equally resolute; for Sir William Brian had
purchased the Pope's Excommunication against some that had committed Burglary,
Antiq. Brit.
and he was committed to the Tower for his labor. But the Prelates answer was
ambiguous, and with modifications, which was all one to cry (as men use to say)
Craven: yet was the Statute made peremptory, according to what was formerly
enacted. And though the Prelates cautionary way of proceeding might be a
principal reason why the Pope's power held so long in England, in an usurping
way; yet Kings also much conduced, thereto, by seeking too much their personal
ease above the honor of their place; and the Pope's blessings, and opinion of
his favor, more than their own good, or the peoples Liberty: for there was no
other balm for a distracted mind, than that which dropped from the Pope's Lips.
In like manner, Richard the Second being already, at least in purpose,
estranged from his people, sought to get friends at Rome, to hold by the
Spiritual Sword, what he was in danger to lose by laying aside the Sword of
Justice, which is the surest Tenure for Kings to hold by. And though the
Popedom was now under a Schism between two Popes, 2 Rich. 2. c. 7.
Clement and Urban, yet he was so far won for Urban, that he not only engaged
himself, and the Parliament, to determine his Election, and uphold the same;
but also, Ex abundante, did by Implication allow to him an Indefinite power to
grant provisions; and so at once he lost the Die, and gained a Stake, that like
a bubble looked fair, but soon vanished away.

Nevertheless, these two Comrades, whilst they were togather, resolved to make
the most of each other that they could; and therefore though the Popedom liked
not the King, yet the Pope had his love so far, as he could deny himself; for
he had already denied his Kingdom. And (if the Articles exhibited against the
King by Henry the Fourth be true) the Pope had his Faith also: Antiq. Brit. ^72.
For (that he might be rid of his reputed Enemy, Archbishop Arundel) he trusted
the Pope with that Complement of making Walden Archbishop of Canterbury in
Arundel's stead; which the Pope took so kindly, as he made it a Precedent for
Provisors for the future. Nor did the King stick in this one Singular, but made
it his custom in passing of Laws (especially such as the King was most devoted
unto) to put more confidence in the Pope's Amen, than in all the prayers of his
Commons, with his own Soit fait to boot. The sum then will be, that the Prize
was now well begun concerning the Pope's power in England. Edward the Third
made a fair blow, and drew blood: Richard the Second seconded him, but both
retired. The former left the Pope to lick himself whole; the later gave him a
salve, and yet it proved a Gangrene in the conclusion.

The second means used to bring down the power of the Pope in this Nation, was
to abate the power or height of the English Clergy. For though the times were
not so clear as to espy the root of a Pope in Prelacy, yet experience had
taught them that they were so nigh engaged that they would not part. And
therefore, first, they let these men know that Prelacy was no essential Member
to the Government of the Kingdom; but as there was a Government established
before that rank was known, so there may be the like when it is gone: For
Edward the Third being troubled with a quarrel between the two Archbishops of
Canterbury and York, concerning Superiority in bearing the Cross, and the
important affairs of Scotland so urging, summoned a Parliament at York, which
was fain to be delayed and adjourned for want of appearance, and more effectual
Summons issued forth. But at the day of adjournment none of the Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury would be there; and upon this occasion the Parliament
was not only interrupted in their proceedings, but an ill Precedent was made,
for men to be bold with the King's Summons, in such Cases as liked not them;
and thereupon a Statute was made to enforce Obedience upon Citizens and
Burgesses, 15 E. 3. Stat. 3. cap. 6.
and such Ecclesiastics as held per Baroniam. Nevertheless, when the matters
concerning provisors began to come upon the Stage, which was within two years
after that Law was made, the Clergy found that matter too warm for them, and
either did not obey the Summons, or come to the Parliament; or if they came,
kept aloof; or if not so, would not Vote; or if that, yet order their Tongues
so, as nothing was certainly to be gathered, but their doubtful or rather
double mind. These Prelates thus discovered, the Parliament depended no more
upon them, further than they saw meet. At six or seven Parliaments determined
matters without their Advice; and such matters as crossed the principles of
these men, and therefore in a rational way might require their Sense above all
the rest, had they not been prepossessed with prejudice, and been parties in
the matter. Nor did Edward the Third ever after hold their presence at so high
Repute at such Meetings; and therefore summoned them, or so many of them, as he
thought meet for the occasion, sometimes more, sometimes fewer; and at a
Parliament in his forty and seventh year, he summoned only four Bishops, and
five Abbots. And thus the matter in fact passed in these times, albeit the
Clergy still made their claim of Vote, and desired the same to be entered upon
Record.

And thus the Parliament of England tells all the world, Antiq. Brit. 23. Co.
that they hold themselves complete without the Clergy, and to all intents and
purposes sufficient to conclude matters concerning the Church, without their
Concurrence. Thus began the Mewing time of Prelacy, and the principal Feather
of their wings to fall away, having now flourished in England nigh eight
hundred years. And had future Ages pursued the flight as it was begun, these
Lordings might have beaten the air, without making any speedy way, or great
work, saving the noise.

A third step yet was made further, in order to the reducing of the power of
the Popedom in England, but which stumbled most immediately upon the greatness
of the Prelates. For it was the condition of the Spiritual powers, besides
their height of Calling, to be set in high places, so as their Title was from
Heaven; but their Possessions were from Men, whereby they gained Lordship,
Authority, and power, by way of Appendix to their Spiritual Dignities. This
addition however it might please them, yet for a long time before now, it had
been occasion of such murmr and grudge in the Commons against the Clergy, as
though it advanced the Clergy for the present, yet it treasured up a
back-reckoning for these men, and made them liable to the displeasure of the
Laity, by seizure of their great places: whenas otherwise their Ecclesiastical
Dignities had been beyond their reach And of this, these times begin now to
speak louder than ever, 25 E. 3. Rot. Palm. 22. n. 15.
not only by complaints made in Parliament by the people, but also by the Lords
and Commons in Parliament to the King, That the Kingdom had been now long, and
too long governed by the Clergy, to the disherison of the Crown; and therefore
prayed, that the principal Offices of the Kingdom might henceforth be executed
by the Laity. And thus the stir arose between the Lords Temporal and Spiritual,
each prevailing or losing ground, as they had occasion to lay the way open for
them. The Duke of Lancaster being still upon the upper ground, that as little
regarded the Popes Curse, as the Clergy loved him.

But the worst, or rather the best, is yet behind: outward power, and
Honorable places, are but under-setters, or props to this Gourd of Prelacy,
that might prove no less prejudicial by creeping upon the ground, than by
perking upward. For so long as Error abides in the Commons, Truth can have
little security amongst Princes; although it cannot be denied, but it is a good
sign of a clear morning, when the Sunrising gloryeth upon the top of the
Mountains. God gives Commission therefore to a Worm, to smite this Gourd in the
Root; and so at once both Prelate and Pope do wither by undermining. This was
Wickliff, that had the double honor of Learning in Humane and Divine
Mysteries. The latter of which had for many years passed obscurely, as it were
in a twilight amongst the meaner sort, who had no Endowments to hold it forth
amongst the throng of Learned or great men of the world.

And though the news thereof did sound much of Holiness and Devotion, Themes
unmeet to be propounded to an Age scarce civilized: yet because diverse of them
were more immediately reflecting upon the policy of the Church, wherein all the
greater sort of the Churchmen were much concerned, but the Pope above all the
rest; the access of all, the matter was made thereby more easy to the
consideration of the great Lords and Princes in the Kingdom, who out of
principles of State, were more deeply engaged against the Pope, than others of
their Rank formerly had been. Duke John of Gant led the way in this Act, and
had a party amongst the Nobility, that had never read the Canon Law.

These held forth Wickliff and his Learning to the world; and Edward the Third
himself favored it well enough, but in his old Age desiting his ease, was
contented to look on, whilst his Lords Temporal and Spiritual played their
prize; yet giving his plaudite rather to his Son, than his Spiritual Fathers,
as if led by principles of Nature, rather than Religion. This was the
blossoming part of the Wickliffists; but the principal strength was from
beneath, where the roots spread and fastened exceedingly, especially in the
South and Eastern parts of this Kingdom. To tell of the Usurpations of the
Clergy, the Idolatry of their costly Worship, the vanity of their Curses, etc.
was exceeding welcome news to an oppressed multitude; especially where these
things were rightly understood. The issue soon manifested it self to the world;
no Parliament passed without reflections at Prelates, Rome, or some such thing;
and not only the persons and practices of these men, but even their Laws and
Canons were begun to be had in contempt, 51 E. 3. n. 46, 47.
and their Missives slighted. And thus these men pretending patronage, both
from Right drawn from Heaven, and derived from men, fail in their Evidence,
unless the people do still believe more than they are able to understand.

No marvel if Rome be now rowzed, and that sort of men that formerly were
Wolves in Sheeps clothing, become now red and fiery Dragons, taking up a new
course of establishing their power by persecution. This was a way of power
indeed; but it is a touchy thing to have to do with fire, lest it gets too
high. It is therefore holden a point of discretion by the Prelates, not to
meddle with the Lords or the common people; the former were too great, the
latter too many; the one sort would not hear, the other would not understand:
the Teachers therefore being the Velites, at them they give fire. Wickliff
their Leader comes on bravely, and notwithstanding they all made at him, he
routs them, and in despite of them all comes off fairly, Antiq. Brit.
and dies in his bed by the course of nature. Then an Ordinance is levelled at
the rest of the Teachers: this was made of an old Canon, the nature whereof was
to this purpose.

That upon complaint of the Bishop, 5 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. c. 5.
the King's Writ shall be granted to apprehend Preachers of Heresies, Errors,
and matters of Slander, tending to Discord and Dissension between the States of
this Realm, with their Factors and Abettors; and to imprison them till they be
acquitted according to the Law of the Church.

This Law (for such it yet appears) gives occasion to consider of these
particulars, viz. The Crime, the Delinquents, the manner of Inquisition, and
the Penalty. For the first, (not to trouble my way with Debate about the right
of liberty of preaching) the matter in fact was, that men did publicly Preach
without Authority, matters of Theology, tending (as it is said) to sow discord
and discention; so as they are under consideration and censure of the
Churchmen and Canon Law, in one regard; and of the Laws of the Kingdom and
Civil Magistrate as disturbers of the peace, on the other side. And thus the
Subjects Liberty is cast into a mysterious, cloudy, and doubtful posture, by
matters of Opinion.

Secondly, the persons Delinquent are also left to an indefinite Construction;
for they are not only Preachers in public, which might be an Order of Men
within the Church-cognizance, as things then stood, in regard it was permitted
to the Church to Authorize men to Preach; but also their Factors and Abettors,
words that might comprehend any other person whatsoever, according to the
passion or discretion of the Churchmen.

Thirdly, the manner of this Inquisition must be according to the Canon, and
then the people are at the Church men's mercy, to return complaints against whom
they please, upon such grounds as they shall think meet. The persons that must
make this Inquisition by this Law, are the Ordinaries, or any one of them; and
for ought appears, the same might be done by Pope, Council General, National,
Provincial, Diocesan, or their Delegates, according to the Canon: although the
last precedent that I met with, was executed by a Grand Council of Lords and
Prelates, in the time of Henry the Second. But now the Clergy finding the
Laity began to swell against the Canon, they thought it high time to get the
Civil Sword to join in the work, to be as their Hands to apprehend, and Goalers
to hold in custody, such as they should complain of, without any other Legal
Conviction. Although hereby they not only disclaimed the exercising of their
own power of Imprisoning, which they by the Canon formerly claimed to have in
such cases, but also acknowledged to receive their power Judicatory in such
cases from the Parliament.

Thus was this Ordinance levelled, as I said, but the shot fell short; for this
Law attained no further perfection than a mere shape, and was complained of by
the Parliament, within few months after its first noise; 6 Rich. 2. Artic. 52.
That it was made and published without the Commons consent or knowledge, and
that the nature thereof was directly contrary to the Liberties of the people,
and therefore they prayed that it might be repealed; and the same was done
accordingly; although the times have been such as would not suffer the same to
come into the public Book of Statutes in print. But whether Statute, or no
Statute, they tell the King plainly, That they will not further be bound or
justified by the Prelates, than they or their Ancestors were anciently used to
be; and besides that, they thought somewhat more, which they laid up against
future times; nor was it long ere they discovered it. For a Subsidy being
offered to the King by the Laity, under a Proviso, That the Clergy would grant
a Tenth; the Clergy took this Articulating of the Commons in snuff, and
protested that the Laity should not charge them. The Commons hereat begin to
bid battle to the Temporalties of the Clergy, and had not the King been a fast
Friend in good earnest unto the Clergy, the Laity had won the Field. Thus were
these times like the motion of the Balance unto the Churchmen, sometimes up,
sometimes down; getting somewhat which they formerly had not; with less
assurance in what they had.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Trade.
KINGS hitherto had lived upon the main stock, improving the same to the utmost
penny; few of them laid up for the future, much less endeavored to advance the
principal for their Successors.

There had now been Ten Kings of this Nation since the Conquest, all of them
spending what they had, or could get from the people, in the maintenance of
their Patrimony, or their own Lusts; if any overplus was either gained by, or
saved from the game, their Executors might be the better for it, their Heirs
were not. But Edward the Third had a new game to play, he must gain his right
by his Sword, or he must lose it: his Spirit was too big to sit still and bear
blows; and yet pre-advising himself about the poverty of the people, and that
their patience would be spent soon after their supplies, if they continually
saw much going out, and nothing coming in; he had a rule upon his private
expenses, a good gloss upon the public, and a platform for the augmenting of
the Treasure of the Kingdom, as well for the benefit of the people as of the
Crown. In order to the first, it is considerable, that the Royal Family was
great and numerous above all his Predecessors; that besides the King and Queen,
who were of a gallant and accomplished deportment, they had a Son, a Prince of
as great renown as ever Prince had, and he also a Family suitable to his
generosity; that they had other Children, every one like their Father both for
War and Peace; and that for the maintenance of all these, the expenses must be
in reason larger than formerly they were wont to be. Nevertheless, because
purveyance for the King had already swelled so big, that all other oppressions
seemed to be swallowed up into that one, 4 E. 3. c. 4. 14 E. 3. c. 19. 34 E. 3.
cap. 2. 36 E. 3. c. 2, 5, 6.
the King to moderate the rigor thereof made nigh twenty Statutes, first
excluding all servants at wages, and Horses and Dogs which were put to board
with the Sheriffs; then reducing the purveyance only to the Families of
himself, his Wife and Children, then to the Families of himself, the Queen, and
Prince; and in the levy hereof, some men's Estates were absolutely privileged,
14 E. 3. c. 1. 24 E. 3. c. 6. and 15.
and some kind of Goods, as Sheep before shearing, and Trees about the dwelling
house. Nor is the settling of the manner less considerable. It must be levied by
Authority in writing under the Seal; and it must not be taken against the
owners will, 4 E. 3. c. 4. 14 E. 3. c. 19. 36 E. 3. c. 3. 4 E. 3. cap. 3. 28 E.
3. c. 12.
or upon malice; nor must be spared for reward; the price must be the same with
the true Market-price, the measure according to the common measure stricked,
and the payment must be immediately, if the price be under Twenty shillings; if
above, it must be made in a quarter of a year; and no man must charge more
carriage than is necessary. 36 E. 3. c. 2.
And thus was this wild Ivy of Purveyance, that like some kinds of Plants
spreads over all, by rooting up and cutting down, brought into some kind of
fashion; that if it did no good, it might do the less hurt unto the people.

Secondly, Although it be true that Edward the Third was a King of many Taxes
above all his Predecessors, yet cannot this be imputed as a blot to the honor
of the Law, or Liberty of the people; for the King was not so unwise, as either
to desire it without evident cause, or to spend it in secret, or upon his own
private interests; nor so weak and irresolved, as not to employ himself and his
Soldiers to the utmost to bring to pass his pretentions; nor so unhappy, as to
fail of the desirable issue of what he took in hand. So as though the people
parted with much money, yet the Kingdom gained much honor and renown, and
becoming a terror to their Neighbors, enjoyed what they had in fuller
security, and so were no loosers by the bargain in the conclusion. Secondly,
although they parted with much, yet nothing to Prerogative, but in a
Parliamentary way; and so it was not taken, but given. Thirdly, though the
Taxes were frequent, yet but light: for frequent light Taxes steal insensibly
without regret; and as they grow into matters of course, so they meet with
acceptance of course. Two things made them of light account. First, they were
not Taxes altogether of Money in kind, but of Goods, such as the Sheaf and
Fleece, and suchlike things, whereof the ownership is visible; 5 E. 3. cap. 6.
whereas many are supposed to have Money which have it not, but must borrow it,
or sell their goods at an underrate many times to accomplish it for the payment
of their Taxes. Secondly, these Taxes are assessed by the Neighborhood, and
not upon extremity of Survey by Commissioners, who many times are subject to
miscarry upon grounds of private Interest, or for want of due information, or
by making more haste than good speed.

These Taxes likewise were reduced to the ancient rule, according to the
Statute of Westminster the first. And thus did this King show himself truly
Royal in demanding his Taxes upon evident grounds of State, 25 E. 3. c. 11.
levying them with a tender hand, and employing them to their right end.

Thirdly, that which digested all, and bred good blood, was, in that the people
had quid pro quo, by the advance of Trade, wherein the King showed himself the
Cape-Merchant of the world. Certainly, men's parts in these times were of vast
reach, that could manage such Wars, settle such a Government, and lay such a
foundation of a Treasury by Trade; a thing necessary to this Island, next unto
its own being, as may appear, not only in regard of the Riches of this Nation,
but in regard of the Strength thereof, and in regard of the maintenance of the
Crown; the two latter of which being no other than a natural effluence of the
former, it will be sufficient to touch the same in order to the thing in hand.
Now as touching that, it is evident that the riches of any Nation are supported
by the Conjuncture of three regards.

First, That the natural Commodities of the Nation may be improved.

Secondly, That the poorer sort of people be set a work.

Thirdly, That the value of money be rightly balanced.

For as on the one part, though the people be never so laborious, if the
natural Commodities of the Island be not improved by their labor, the people
can never grow much richer, than barely for subsistence during their labor; so
neither can the improvement of the natural Commodity enrich the Kingdom, so
long as many mouths are fed upon the main stock, and waste the same by idleness
and prodigality. Nor though both these should concur, yet cannot the Kingdom be
said truly to be rich, unless by intercourse and Traffic there be an emptying
out of the superfluity of such Commodities by way of Barter, or otherwise, for
such Foreign Commodities whereof this Nation slandeth in most need for supply of
all occasions. For God has so attempered the whole Regiment of the earth, in
such manner, that no one Nation under Heaven can well and comfortably subsist
in and by it self, but all must give and receive mutual Commodity from each
other: otherwise superfluity would make any Commodity (though in it self never
so precious) vile; and little conducible to the enriching of the Nation.

Now for the compassing of all these, the Wise men of these times first took
into their consideration the principal Commodities of this Kingdom; and because
they found them impounded in the Staple, they set all at liberty to buy and
sell the same as they pleased. 2 E. 3. c. 9.
And thus began a Free Trade of Wool throughout the Realm, and matter for
employment by every man that would: but this continued not long. The people
soon had Commodity enough for work; and Kings liked too well of the restraining
of that liberty in order to their own benefit; and soon found out occasions to
reconcile the reason of State with their own Interests, and at length settled
the Staple in certain places in several parts of the Kingdom. 27 Rich. 2. c. 3.
But this extended only unto the Commodities of Wool, Leather, and Lead; for
as yet the Manufactures were not come to maturity.

Secondly, the endeavor was to advance Manufacture, and principally such of
them as are made of the Staple Commodities, amongst all which Wool had the
precedence, as being the most principal and ancient Commodity of the Kingdom;
and the Manufacture of Wool of long use, but had received little encouragement
before these times, for that it formerly had been the principal flower in the
Flemish Garden, and nourished from this Nation, by the continual supply of Wool
that it received from hence, which was the principal cause of the ancient
League between the House of Burgundy and this Crown. But Edward the Third was
now too well acquainted with the Flemings affairs, by a joint engagement with
them in the Wars of France; and therein had gained so good an opinion amongst
them, that he might adventure to change a Complement for a Courtesy. The
Staples beyond the Sea were now taken away, he now inhibiteth the Importation
of foreign Clothes; ^ E. 3. c. 2, 3, 5.
and having gained these two steps onward of his way, he represents to the
Flemings their unsettled condition by these bordering Wars with France, the
peaceable condition of England, and Freedom of the people; then propounds to
them an invitation to come over into England, promises them share and share
like with his own people, with such other Immunities, as they take his offer,
come over, and brought their Manufacture with them, which could never after be
recalled. So as now the Wool and Manufacture dwell together; and, like to Man
and Wife, so long as they care for one another, both will thrive; but if they
come to play their Games apart, both will be losers in the conclusion.

The third step to the advance of Trade, was the Exportation of the Surplusage
of the Staple Commodities that remained over and besides that proportion that
should suffice for the Manufactures; to which end it was ordered, that no Wool
should be exported till it had remained at the Staple by the space of Fifteen
days. 31 E. 3 c. 8.
That time was necessary, and longer time might have been convenient, but that
the Markets beyond the Sea could not be delayed longer time, without much
damage to the Merchant and Owner; for as much as Wintertime is no time to
prepare Wool for the Manufacture; and by overlong continuance of the Commodity
upon the hand of the Merchant or Owner, both the Commodity and the Manufacture
might surfeit, lie in despair, and Trade choked thereby. For it is a necessary
preparative to Trade, to keep the Nation in some kind of hunger after the
Staple-Commodities, so as the main Stock be not too great to occupy, and yet to
leave enough to use. But because this Nation formerly had been, and as yet
were, used too much to foreign Manufactures, the importing of which did debase
the home-made Manufactures, and discouraged that work; therefore the Law was
made to reduce the vanity of Apparel (which infected these times) to more
Sobriety.

Some delight in foreign Commodities and Manufactures, is, doubtless, profitable
both for Trade and Shipping; so as what is Imported exceeds not what is
Exported. For too much of that, makes the Domestic Commodity contemptible, the
Nation poor, and the people want work; because it is a noted vanity of this
Nation, That they love things far fetched, 43 E. 3. c. 1.
and dear bought. As a cure therefore to this disease, English Cloth by Law is
enjoined to be worn by all persons under the degree of a Lord; 11 E. 3. c. 2, 3.
and so the former Inhibition of Importation of foreign Clothes was strengthened
thereby. And because the English Clothiers should not take advantage hereby to
raise the price of their Clothes to their own covetous pin; therefore the Law
also settled a certain Price and Measure, 27 E. 3. c. 4.
and the same before sale was to be allowed upon view: 7 Rich. 2. c. 9.
and for the goodness of the Clothes, 17 Rich. 2. c. 2.
and perfect working thereof, 50 E. 3. c. 7.
Laws were likewise made against Exportation of all such as were not perfectly
made.

A fourth step to the advancement of Trade, was the compelling men to work; for
when public employment calls men forth for service in the Field, their minds
once in commotion, or upon the Wing, can hardly settle any where, or stoop to
the Perk again, unless upon hope of prey or gain to be gotten thereby. Such
were the times of Edward the Third, wherein partly for that cause, and partly
for the scarcity of men left from the Sword and Pestilence, not only Workmen
were scarce and dear, but even the Mass it self was grown stately, the private
delights of Kings and great men, and scarce vouchsafing to be seen by common
gaze, but at a great distance. The Priests had little Charity, and the Poor had
as little Money; so as no Penny, no Pater Noster. A sick and very crazy time
questionless was it, when the Clergy were stately, and the Poor idle. The
Priests Wages for this cause are now settled; 36 E. 3. c. 8.
and they that would get much, must get many littles, and do much. But the
greater sore was amongst the poorer sort; either they would not serve, or at
such wages as could not consist with the price of the Cloahts, 23 and 25 E. 3.
and the subsistence of the Clothier. 2 Rich. 2. c. 8.
L^aws therefore are made to compel them to work, and to settle their Wages; so
as now it is as beneficial to them to serve the meaner sort of Clothiers as the
richer sort: for the Master must give no more, nor the Servant take more; and
thus became labor current in all places.

A fifth means to advance Trade, was the settling of a Rule upon Exportation and
Importation; this wrought a double effect, viz. The enriching of this Kingdom
with foreign Commodities, and the maintaining of Shipping; which was and is a
principal means, not only of strength unto all Sea-bordering Countries,
especially regard being had to these three Considerations.

First, That Importation does bring in more profit than Exportation disburseth.

Secondly, That both Exportation and Importation be made by Shipping belonging
to this Nation, so far as may consist with the benefit of this Nation.

Thirdly, That Exportation be regulated to the Overplus, saving the main Stock
at home. The truth of the first will be evident from this ground; That no
Nation can be rich, that receives more dead Commodities from abroad than it
can spend at home, or vend into foreign parts, especially if it be vended in its
proper kind, and not in Money. And therefore the Laws provided, 27 E. 3.
that no Merchant should Export more Money than he Imports; and what he does
Export must be of the new stamp, which it seems was inferior in value to the
old: yet the times may prove so penurious, that this rule may be waved for a
season.

The second is no less beneficial; for as it is in War, so in all Trades; the
greater the number is that is employed, the more effectual the issue will be:
And therefore though it in the general be more beneficial, that all Exportation
and Importation might be by our own Shipping; yet in regard times may be such
as now they were, that the Shipping of this Nation is more than ordinarily
employed for the service of the State: And that every Nation striveth to have
the benefit of Exportation by Vessels of their own.

And Lastly, in regard the case may be such, as Importation may be at a cheaper
rate by foreign Vessels, and Exportation likewise may for the time be more
prejudicial to this Nation, if done by our own Shipping, than those of other
Nations: Therefore the course must be changed, so far forth as will stand with
the occasions of the State, and common profit of this Nation. And for these
causes, and suchlike, in the times whereof we now treat, 27 E. 3.
the Laws often varied. Sometimes no Staple-Commodity must be Exported in
English bottoms; 43 E. 3. c. 1.
sometimes all must be done by them; 5 Rich. 2. c. 3.
and within a year again that liberty was restrained; 6 Rich. 2. c. 8.
and after that, 14 Rich. 2. c. 5.
liberty given to Foreiners to Export as formerly.

The third and last Consideration is as necessary as any of the former: for if
Trade be maintained out of the main Stock, the Kingdom in time must needs be
brought to penury, because it is their Magazine. And for this cause it was
provided, 31 E. 3. c. 8.
That all Wool should remain at the Staple 15 days, to the end it might be for
the Kingdoms use: if any one would buy, they must do it within that time,
otherwise it might be exported.

The sixth means of advancement of Trade, was the settling of the Staple; for as
it was an encouragement to the first establishing of the Manufacture, that the
Staples were let loose; so when the Manufactures had taken root, the Staple
especially now fixed to places within this Kingdom, brought much more
encouragement thereto.

First, For preserving a full Market. For whilst the Commodity lies scattered
in all places, the Market must needs be the leaner; partly in regard the
Commodity lies in obscurity, and partly because when it is known where, yet it
is not easily discovered whether it be vendible or not; and besides, small
parcels are not for every man's labor, and the greater are not for every man's
money.

Secondly, Staples are convenient for the slating of the general price of the
Commodities, in regard the quantity of the Commodity is thereby the more easily
discovered, which commonly makes the price. And the quantity of the Commodity
thus discovered, will not only settle the price to it self, but also balance
the price of the Manufacture.

Thirdly, The Staple having thus discovered the quantity of the Commodity, will
be a ready way to settle the quantity of the main Stock that must be preserved,
and regulate Exportation as touching the overplus. But it cannot be denied that
the first and principal mover of the making of the Staple, was the benefit of
the Crown: For when the Commodity was gone beyond the Sea, it imports not to
the Subjects in England, whether the same be sold at one place, or more, or in
what place the same be settled, until the Manufacture was grown to some stature;
and then the place became litigious. The benefit of Exportation, pretended much
interest in the settling thereof beyond the Sea; but in truth it was another
matter of State. For when it was beyond Sea, it was a moveable Engine to convey
the King's pleasure or displeasure, as the King pleased; for it was a great
benefit to the Country or place wherever it settled; or else it moved or
stayed according to the inclination of the People where it was, either for War
or Peace. But on the contrary, the Interest of the people began to interpose
strongly. And for these causes the Parliament likewise intermeddled in the
place; and thus the Scene is altered: Sometimes it is beyond the Seas, in one
place or in another: sometimes in England. 43 E. 3. c. 1.
In Edward the Third's time, we find it sometimes at Calis, 12 R. 2. c. 16.
sometimes in England. In Richard the Second's time, we find it again beyond
the Seas at Middleburgh; 14 R. 2. c. 11.
thence removed to Calis; and after into England. Where at length the people
understood themselves so well, that the Parliament settled the same; it being
found too burdensome for the Manufactures to travel to the Staple beyond the
Seas, for the Commodity that grew at their own doors; besides the enhansing of
the price, by reason of the Carriage, which falling also upon the Manufactures,
must needs tend to the damage of the whole Kingdom.

This was one way indeed, and yet possibly another might have been found. For
if a Computation had been made of the main Stock, and a Staple settled within
the Kingdom for that, and the overplus exported to a Staple beyond the Sea, it
might have proved no less commodious, and more complying. It is very true, that
there are many that call for the Liberty of the people, that every man may sell
his own Commodity as he pleases; and it were well that men would consider
themselves as well in their Relations, as in their own Personal Respects. For
if every man were independent, his liberty would be in like manner independent;
but so long as any man is a Member of a Commonwealth, his liberty must likewise
depend upon the good of the Commonwealth; and if it be not good for the Nation
that every man should sell his own Commodity as he pleases, he may claim the
liberty as a Freeman, but not as an Englishman. Nor is that liberty just, so
long as his Country has an interest in his Commodity for its safety and
welfare, as in his own person. I do not assert the manner of buying the
Staple-Commodities by Merchants of the Staple, to sell the same again in kind
for their private advantage. Diverse limitations must concur, to save it from an
unlawful engrossing; nor does it appear to me that the Staplers in these times
used such course, or were other than mere Officers for the regulating of the
Staple, in nature of a Court of Piepowders belonging to some Fair or Market.
Nevertheless, I conjecture that it may well be made evident from principles of
State, that Marts, Markets, and Staples of Commodities, that are of the proper
Offspring of this Nation, are as necessary to Trade, as Conduits are to places
that want Water.

The seventh and last means that was set on foot in these times for the advance
of Trade, was the regulating of the Mint, and the current of Money. This is the
life and soul of Trade: for though exchange of Commodities may do much, yet it
cannot be for all, because it is not the lot of all to have exchangeable
Commodities, nor to work for Apparel and Victual. Now in the managing of this
trick of Money, two things are principally looked unto: First, That the Money
be good and current. Secondly, 25 E. 3. stat. 5. cap. 13.
That it should be plentiful. As touching the excellency of the Money, 6 E. 3.
c. 2. and 3.
several Rules were made, as against embasing of Money, against foreign Money
not made current, against counterfeit and false Money. For according to the
goodness of the Money, so will the Trade be more or less: For the Merchant will
rather lose in the price of his Commodity in Money, than in exchange for other
Commodity; because the value thereof is less certain, and the Transportation
more chargeable.

Secondly, as touching the plenty of Money, that is as necessary to the advance
of the Trade, as of the goodness of it. For according to the plenty thereof
will be the plenty of the Manufactures, because Handicrafts-men having no
Commodities but their labor, cannot work for exchange, nor can exchange supply
Rents and maintenance to the greater sort of people. 6 E. 3. c. 2, 3.
To this end therefore it is provided against melting of Money, 17 Rich 2. c. 1.
and Exportation of Silver and Gold. And yet, to encourage or not discourage
Importation of Silver and Gold, liberty was given to every man to Export so
much as they did Import, provided that what they carry away must be of the new
stamp, or Minted in this Nation. By this means Bullion came in with probability
that much thereof would remain in the Nation in lieu of Commodities exported;
27 E. 3.
or if not the greater part, yet at least the Mint gained, and that was some
benefit to the Nation.

Thirdly, for the fuller currance of the Money, the Issue was established in
several parts of this Kingdom, according to the ancient custom; and this was
advantageous both to the Mint, and to the Stock of Money in the Kingdom. 18 E.
3. c. 6.
This establishment was with this difference, that though the Mint was settled
by the Parliament, yet the Exchange was left to the Directory of the King and
his Council. Because the Exchange is an uncertain thing, 18 E. 3. c. 6.
subject to sudden alteration in other Nations, 25 E. 3. stat. 5. c. 12.
and it is necessary that in this Country it be as suddenly balanced with the
Ex^change in other Countries, or in a short time the Nation may receive extreme
damage. In regard whereof, and many other sudden exigencies in Trade, it
seems to me convenient, that a particular Council were established for
continual influence into all parts of these Dominions, to take into
consideration the quantity of the Staple-Commodities necessary to be retained
as a Stock at home, for the use of the people, and the Manufactures; and
accordingly to balance the trade of Exportation and Importation, by opening
and enlarging, or shutting and straitning the Stream, as occasion does require.

And lastly, to watch the course of the Exchange in foreign parts, and to
parallel the course thereof in this Land thereto. For otherwise the public
must necessarily suffer, so long as private men seek their own particular
interests only in their course of Trade.

CHAP. VIII. Of Legiance, and Treason, with some Considerations upon Calvin's
Case.
AS Times change Manners, so do Manners change Laws. For it is the wisdom of a
State, when it cannot overruled Occasion, to pursue and turn it to the best
issue it can. Multitude of Laws therefore are not so much a sore to the people,
as a symptom of a sore people. Yet many times Laws are said to be many, whenas
they are but one, branched into many particulars, for the clearing of the
peoples understanding, (who usually are not excellent in distinguishing) and so
become as new Plasters made of an old Salve, for Sores that never brake out
before. Such sore times were these whereof we now treat, wherein every touch
made a Wound, and every Wound went to the Heart, and made the Category of
Treason swell to that bigness, that it became an individuum vagum, beyond all
rule, but the present sense of timorous Judges, and a touchy King. Thus were
many of the ignorant and well-meaning people in an hideous danger of the gulf
of forfeiture, before they found themselves nigh the brim.

All men do agree that Treason is a wound of Majesty; but all the doubt is,
where this Majesty rests originally, and what is that Legiance which is due
thereto, the breach whereof amounts to so high a censure: for some men place
all Majesty in one man, whom they call an absolute Monarch: Others, in the
Great men: And others, in the People; and some in the concurrence of the King
and body of the People. And it is a wild way to determine all in one
Conclusion, whenas the same depends wholly upon the constitution of the Body.
Look then upon England in the last posture, as the rigider sort of Monarchical
Politicians do, and Majesty will never be in glory, but in the concurrence of
the King and Parliament, or Convention of Estates; and so upon the whole
account it will be upon the People, whose welfare is the supreme Law. Rome had
Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemviri, and Tribunes, long before the Orator's
time; and he saw the foundation of an Empire, or perpetual Dictatorship, in the
person of the first of the Caesar's: any of all which might have challenged the
supremacy of Majesty above the People. And yet the often change of Government
showed plainly that it rested upon another pin; and the Orator in express words
no less; when speaking of the Majesty of that Government, he allotteth it not
to those in chief command, but defines it to be magnitudo populi Romani.
Afterward, when the pride of the Emperors was come to its full pitch in the
times of Augustus and Tiberius, an Historian of those times, in the Life of
Tiberius, Cic. partit. Orat. Si quis majestatem populi Romani minuisset, Tacit.
An. 1.
tells us, That he declared the bounds of Treason to be determined in Three
particular instances; of Treachery against the Army; Sedition amongst the
People; and violating the Majesty of the People of Rome: In all which, men were
not punishable for words, but for actions and endeavors. I do not herein
propound the Government of the Roman Empire as a model for England, but a
majori may conclude, that if the proper seat of Majesty was in the people of
Rome when Emperors were in their fullest glory, it is no defacing of Majesty
in England to seat it upon the whole body, from whom the same is contracted in
the Representative, and so much thereof divided unto the person of the King, as
any one Member is capable of, according to the work allotted unto him. These
several seats of Majesty making also so many degrees, do also imply as many
degrees of wounding: for it is written in Nature, That the offense tending to
the immediate destruction of the whole body, is greater than that which
destroys any one Member only; and when the written Law makes it Treason to
compass the destruction of the King's Person, it leaves it obvious to common
sense, that it is a higher degree of Treason to compass the destruction of the
Representative; and above all, to destroy the whole body of the people: Crimes
that never entered into the conceit of wickedness it self in those more innocent
times; much less saw they any cause to mention the penalty by any written Law.
Nevertheless, because many sad examples had occurred within the memory of this
present Age, of the danger of the person and honor of Kings; and yet on the
other side they saw that in such cases of Treason the King's honor was made of
reaching Leather, and might easily be strained within the compass of a wound of
Majesty: therefore Edward the Third, imitating Tiberius, reduced the crime of
wound of Majesty in the Person of the King, into certain particular instances,
out of the compass whereof the Judges of the Law in ordinary course must not
determine Treason. These concern either the safety of the Person of the King,
25 E. 3. stat. 5. c. 2.
or of the Succession in the Royal Throne: Or lastly, the safeguard of the
public Right by the Broad and Privy seal, the value of Money, and by persons
in matters of Judicature judicially presiding; all of them reflecting upon the
King, considered in his politic capacity. For otherwise many crimes might have
been mentioned, more fatally reflecting upon the King in his natural capacity,
which nevertheless are omitted, as not worthy of so high a censure. Other
Treasons are left to the determination of the Parliament as occasion should
offer it self, 17 R. 2. n. 20, 21.
whereof diverse examples of a new stamp occurred within forty years next
ensuing, 3 R. 2. n. 18.
which were of a temporary regard, 22 Ass. pl. 29. Stat. 11 R. 2.
and lived and died with the times.

To these two notions of Majesty and Treason, I must add a third, called
Legiance; for it is that which makes Majesty to be such indeed, and lifts it
into the Throne, and whereof the highest breach makes Treason. And because that
which has been already said reflecteth upon an Opinion, or rather a knot of
Opinions (for I find them not punctually adjudged) in Calvin's Case, I must a
little demur to them, because as their sense is commonly taken, it alters the
fundamental nature of the Government of this Nation from a Commonwealth to a
pure Monarchy. In handling of this Case, the honorable Reporter took leave to
range into a general discourse of Legiance, although not directly within the
conclusion of the Case; and therein first sets down the general nature thereof,
That it is a mutual bond between an English King and his people; and then more
particularly sets forth the nature of this bond in the several duties of
obedience and fealty, fol. 5. a. and those also in their several properties,
viz. Natural, Absolute, fol. 7. a. due to the King omni, soli, and semper, fo.
12. a. in his natural and not public capacity, fol. 10. a. Whereas he says,
this bond is natural, he means that it is due by birth, fol. 7. a. By
absolute (if I mistake him not) he means, that it is indefinite, fol. 5. b.
viz. not circumscribed by Law, but above Law, and before Law, fol. 13. a. and
that Laws were after made to enforce the same by penalties, fol. 13. b. and
therefore he concludes that this legiance is immutable, fol. 13. b. and fol.
14. a.

Thus having slated the point as truly as I can, both for the nature of
Legiance, and the object thereof, viz. the King, and not the People, otherwise
than in order to the safety and honor of the King's person, considered in his
natural capacity as he is a man: I shall in the next place examine the grounds
as they are severally set down, and therein shall lead the Reader no further
than the Reporters own concessions. Not troubling the Reader with any doubt,
whether this Bond consists in obedience only, or in that fealty: and in all,
shall ever be mindful of the honor of that Pen with which I have to deal.

First, whereas it is said, that English Legiance is natural, and grounded upon
the birth of each party within the Kings Dominions and protection, it needs
no debate, so as the same be taken sano sensa, viz. for a qualified Legiance,
without those sublimities of absolute, indefinite, immutable, etc. for
otherwise if such a high strain of Legiance be due from every English man by
birth; then all the Magna Charta, or Laws concerning the Liberties of the
people, come too late to qualify the same, because they cannot take away the
Law of Nature, fol. 14. a. And thus the party once born English, must for ever
remain absolutely obliged to the King of England, although happily he lives not
two Months under his protection all his ensuing lifetime.

Secondly, the Legiance of an Englishman to his King, arises from that civil
Relation between the two Callings of King and Subject, and therefore it is not
a natural bond which cannot be taken away. The first is true, by the Reporter's
own concessions; Protectio trahit subjectionem, and subjectio protectionem; so
he says, fol. 5. a. fol. 9. b. and therefore though it be granted that
Magistracy in general is from Nature, as he says, fol. 13. a. yet of weak
birth is that inference which he makes, viz. That English Allegiance is a
principle in Nature. Unless it be also admitted, that all men on Earth that
submit not to English Legiance do sin against Nature. The difference then will
stand thus; Magistracy is founded in Nature, therefore Legiance also. But
English Magistracy is from Civil constitution, therefore is English Legiance of
the like nature. In the next place the Reporter says, that before any
Municipal Law was made, Kings did dare jura; and he mounts as high for an
example as the Trojans Age, by the Testimony of Virgil. But I believe he
intended not much strength in this, seeing it is well known by any that knows
the Scriptures, that there were Municipal Laws given, and that concerning the
Office of a King, by Moses, which were more ancient than those of Troy, and
long before the time of Virgil, who neither tells us in what manner those
Trojan Laws were made, though the Kings gave them: nor if all were according to
the Reporter's sense, is the testimony of a Poet (who sometimes uses his
Poetica licentia) to be taken in terminis.

In the next place, the Reporter voucheth the Testimony of Fortescue, c. 12,
and 13. which is as absolutely opposite to the main point in hand, as any Pen
can declare: For he tells us of diverse sorts of Kingdoms, some gotten by
Conquest, as those of Nimrod and Belus, etc. But, says he, There is a Kingdom
politic, which is by the association of men by consent of Law, making one
chief, who is made for defense of Law, and of his Subjects Bodies and Estates,
and he cannot govern by any other power; and of this nature, faith he, the
Kingdom of England is, fol. 30. 31, 32. A second piece of the foundation of
this opinion of the Reporter is taken ab inani; it is a vain thing, says he,
to prescribe Laws, but where by Legiance foregoing, people are bound to obey.
But this compared with the words of Fortescue, formerly mentioned, falls of it
self to dust; and therefore I shall not further enlarge concerning it.

Thirdly, The Reporter brings in, to help the matter, the consent of the Law in
elder times, by certain Cases vouched to that purpose; the first concerning the
Legiance of Children to Parents; which comes not to this case, because it is a
Legiance of Nature; and this Legiance whereof we speak, is yet under a
litigious Title: And I suppose will in the conclusion be found to rest only
upon a Civil constitution; therefore I leave that. The second is, That a man
attainted and outlawed, is nevertheless within the King's protection; for this
(says the Reporter) is a Law of Nature, Indelebilis and immutabilis, and
neither Parliament nor Statue can take this power away, fol. 13. b. 14. a. And
therefore the Reporter concludes, That as well the Legiance of the Subject, as
the Protection of him by the King, are both of them from the Law of Nature. An
opinion that speaks much mercy, yet it seems strange, considering the Pen: for
if it be a Law of Nature, and immutable, for the King to protect persons
attainted, then must no such person suffer; for if he be under the King's
protection, that being by a Law of Nature, cannot be changed by any positive
Law, as the Reporter says; nor can the King be so bound by any such Statute,
but by a non obstante be can set himself at liberty when he pleases: and then
the issue will be this, The King has a natural power to protect the persons of
Law-breakers from the power of the Law, therefore much more their Estates; and
then farewell all Law, but this of the Kings natural Protection. I say that
these are of a high strain, considering what the Reporter speaks elsewhere.
But to pursue his instance, he says, That the King has power to protect an
attainted person: That if any man kill him without warrant, 11 Co. fo. 88.
he is a Manslayer; 8 Co. fo. 20.
and yet this person attainted has lost the legal protection. 4 Co. fo. 35.
It is true, 7 Co. fo. 36.
yet not to all intents; for by the Sentence of the Law, his life is bound up
under the Law of that Sentence, 35 H. 6. 63.
viz. That he must not suffer in other manner than the Sentence determines,
nor before Warrant of Execution issue forth to that end. And notwithstanding
the Sentence, yet the Law leaves him a liberty of Purchase, or Inheritance,
though to the use of the Crown; and therefore in some respects the Law protects
his person so long as he lives, and the King's natural Protection is in vain in
such cases.

Lastly, suppose the King has a power of Non ohstante, if the same be allowed
to him in a limited way by the Law, it is no Argument to prove the King's
natural power, which is driven at under natural Legiance, much less if it
cannot be made forth that the Law does allow any such power of Non obstante at
all; but by the iniquity of the times, permits the same to subsist, only to
avoid Contention, as it came into this Kingdom by way of Usurpation. And thus I
have only discovered the Foundation of this first Qualification, which I shall
only leave naked, supposing that no man seeing it, will build at all thereupon.

The second Property that comes to be considered is, That English Legiance is
absolute, fol. 5. b. fol. 7. a. which is a word of a vast extent, serving
rather to amaze men's apprehensions than to enlighten them. And therefore the
Reporter did well not to trouble himself or the Reader in the clearing or proof
thereof, but lest the point rather to be believed than understood; nor shall I
in the Negative. For God himself can have no other Legiance from an Englishman,
than absolute Legiance; and Kings being (as other men) subject to err,
especially in this point of Prerogative are much rather subject thereto, being
misled by such Doctrines as these are. The Scripture determines this point,
Act. 14. 19.
and cuts the knot in sunder.

The third property of English Legiance which the Reporter insisteth upon, is,
that it is indefinite; which he explaineth to be Proprium quarto modo, so as it
is both Universal and Immutable, fol. 5. b. fol. 12. and neither defined by
Time, Place, or Person. As touching the Time and Person, the Reporter enlarged
not at all, therefore I shall only leave the Reader to chew upon the point,
supposing himself in the first times of Edward the Fourth, when Henry the Sixth
was then alive; and let him resolve to which of them his Legiance had been due,
considering them both in their natural capacity, as the Reporter would have it.
But as touching the place, it is reported that English Legiance is not only
due from an English man to an English King in England; but in all places of the
Kings Dominions, though otherwise Forem, as to the power of the Law of England.
Yea, says the Reporter, as far as the Kings power of protection does extend.
And yet this had not been enough, if the Premises be granted: For if this
Legiance whereof we speak be absolute, and omni, soli, and semper, then it is
due to the King from an English man ubivis Gentium. Nevertheless, to take the
Reporter in a moderate sense, it is worth consideration, whether English
Legiance in the days of Edward the Third extended as far as the Kings power of
Protection, whenas he had the Crown of France in a Foreign right to that of
England. In this the Reporter is extremely positive, upon many grounds which he
insisteth upon.

First, he says, that Verus and Fidelis are qualities of the mind, and cannot
be circumscribed within the predicament of Vbi; and upon this ground he might
conclude, that this Legiance is due to the King from an English man all the
world over, as well as in all the King's Dominions. But concerning the ground,
it may be denied: for though simply in it self considered as a notion, Verity
or Fedility are not circumscribed in place; yet being qualities of the Soul,
and that being in the Body, in relation thereunto, it may be in the predicament
of Vbi: for wherever that Body and Soul is, there is Faith and Truth
according to its model; which though not absolute and indefinite, yet if
according to the Laws of the place wherein the man is, he is truly said to be
Verus and Fidelis.

Secondly, The Reporter argues, that the King's Protection is not local, or
included within the bounds of England, therefore also is not the Legiance: for,
Protectio trahit Legiantiam, and Legiantia Protectionem. Had this reason been
formed into a Syllogisim, it had appeared less valuable; for the Protection of
an English King, qua talis, of an English man, is local, and included within
the bounds of the Kingdom. But if the same King be also King of France, or Duke
of Aquitane, and an English man shall travel into those parts, he is still
under the same King's protection, yet not as King of England, but as King of
France, or Duke of Aquitane. Otherwise, let the party be of France, or
Aquitane, or England, all is one, he must be (whether French or English) under
an unlimited absolute Protection, without regard had to the Customs or Laws of
the place; yea, contrary to them, which I believe the Reporter never intended
to affirm.

Thirdly, The Reporter salleth upon the matter in fact, and tells us, that the
King of England did many times, De facto, grant Protections to persons in
places out of the English Consines; and it will not be denied. But never was
any absolute and indefinite Protection so granted: for the Protection extends
to defense from injury, and all injury is to be expounded and judged according
to the Laws of the place. Nor do any of the Precedents vouched by the Reporter
clear, that the King of England did grant, as King of England, Protection to
any Englishman in any parts of the King's Dominion beyond the Seas, which was
not qualified according to the Laws and Customs of that place. Especially it
being apparent, that an English King may hold Dominion in Foreign parts, in
Legiance under a Foreign King; as Edward the Third held the Duchy of Guien;
and therefore cannot grant absolute Protection in such place, nor receive
absolute Legiance from any person there being.

Fourthly, The Reporter says, That the King of England has power to command
his Subjects of England to go with him in his Wars, as well without the Realm
of England, as within the same; therefore the Legiance of an Englishman to his
King, is indefinite, and not local, or circumscribed by place, or within the
Kingdom of England. Although the first of th^se be granted, yet will not the
inference hold; for possibly this may arise from the constitution of a positive
Law, and not from natural or absolute Legiance; nor does any Authority by him
cited, justify any such Legiance. But I cannot agree the first; for it is not
true, that the King has any such power from his own personal interest; nor
does the authority of former Ages warrant any such matter. For a fuller
disquisition whereof, I shall refer the Reader to the Eleventh Chapter ensuing,
because the whole matter concerning the Militia comes there to be handled in
course.

Fifthly, To close up all the rest, the Reporter brings The Testimony of the
Judges of the Common Law, out of the Testimony of Hengham; wherein an Action
was brought by a French woman against an English man, who refused to answer,
because the Plaintiff was a French woman, and not of the Legiance or Faith of
England. This was disallowed by the Judges, because Legiance and Faith was
referred to England, and not to the King. Thereupon the Defendant averred, that
the Plaintiff is not of the Legiance of England, nor of the Faith of the King:
And upon this Plea thus amended, the Plaintiff gave over her Action. The
Reporter from hence observes, that Faith and Legiance is referred to the King
indefinitely and generally, and therefore it is so due to him. The reason might
have had more force, had the Object of Allegiance, or the nature thereof, been
the point in question; but neither of them coming to debate, and Allegiance
being subjected to England, and Faith to the King, I see not what more can be
concluded from hence, but that Allegiance from an English man is due to
England, and Faith to the King; which I suppose must be intended to be in order
to that Allegiance; because by the former Plea England had them both, and the
King was wholly left out in the Case. Nevertheless, I rather think that the
present point in controversy will receive little light herefrom on either part.

We are now come to the fourth property of English Legiance, that it is due to
the King's Natural Capacity, and not to his Politic Capacity or due to the
Office of a King, in regard of the Person of the Man, and not to the Person in
regard of the Office, fol. 20. And because this is of no small importance,
neither easily understood, nor granted: Therefore he backeth his Opinion by
many reasons.

First, he says, that the King swears to his Subjects in his Natural
Capacity, therefore the Subjects swear to him in his Natural Capacity. This
reason was intended to be taken from Relatives, and then it should have been
thus: A King does swear to his Subjects in their Natural Capacity, therefore
Subjects swear to a King in his Natural Capacity. But it being otherwise, it is
mistaken, and proves not the Point. Yet if we should take the Reporter, in sano
Sensu, there is no question but the Oath is made to the Natural Capacity; yet
not Terminative, more than the Oath of the Tenant to his Lord, which this
Author pleases to couple with the mutual dependence between King and Subject,
fol. 4. b. 5. a. Nor does the Oath of an Englishman bind him to the Obedience
of all, or any Commands, which the King shall give in relation only to his
Natural Capacity, or in opposition to his Politic Capacity: Nor will the
Reporter himself allow that the Politic Capacity of the King, can be separate
from his Natural Capacity, fol. 10. And yet it is evident that a King may in
his Natural Capacity command that, of which his Politic Capacity cannot give
Allowance.

The second reason of this Opinion, is taken from the nature of Treason, which
says the Reporter is committed against the Natural Person of the King; and
this is against due Legiance, according to the form of Indictments in that Case
provided. This is not demonstrative, because that crime which is done against
the Natural Person of a Man, may as well extend to it in relation to his Place
or Office; and so may Treason be plotted against the Natural Person of a King,
as he is King: neither is there any other difference between the murder of a
King, and a private Man, but only in regard to the Place and Office of a King,
which makes the murder of him Treason. For which cause all Indictments that do
conclude, Contra Legiantiae debitum, do as well also conclude Contra Coronam
and Dignitatem, etc.

The third reason is this; A body politic can neither make nor take Homage,
33. H. 8. Bro. tit. Fealty: Therefore cannot the King in his Politic Capacity
take Legiance. The first must be granted only sub modo: for though it cannot
take Homage immediately, yet by the means of the Natural Capacity, it may take
such service. And therefore that Rule holds only where the Body Politic is not
aggregate, and not one Person in several Capacities; for the Tenant that
performs his service to his Lord, performs the same to his Lord in his Natural
Capacity, but it is in relation to his Politic Capacity, as he is his Lord.
For Lord and Tenant, King and Subject, are but Notions, and neither can give
nor take service; but that Man that is Lord, or Tenant, or King, or Subject,
may; even as the power of protection is in a King, not as he is a Man, but as a
King.

The fourth reason is this: The King's Natural Person has right in the Crown
by Inheritance, therefore also in the Legiance of the Subject. This is the
strength (as nigh as I can collect) of that which is set down as a sixth
reason; but I make it the fourth: because the third, as I conceive, is but an
illustration of the second; and the fifth is upon a supposal of a Fides ficta;
whereas that Faith of an English Subject, which is according to Law, is the
truer of the twain. But to the substance of this fourth reason: If the first be
granted, yet the Reporter cannot attain his conclusion; for the King may in his
Natural Capacity have right to the Crown by Inheritance, and yet not right in
the Legiance of his Subjects, otherwise than in the right of the Crown. As in
the case of Lord and Tenant, the Lord may inherit the Lordship in his Natural
Capacity, but the service is due to him as Lord, and not as by Inheritance in
the service in the abstract. And though it be granted, that the Legiance to a
King is of a higher strain than that of a Tenant to his Lord, fol. 4. b. 5. a.
yet does the Reporter bring nothing to light, to prove them to be of a
different Nature in this regard.

The fifth and last reason that comes to consideration, is, from a Testimony
of the Parliament; for it is said, That this damnable Tenet of Legiance to the
King in his Politic Capacity, is condemned by two Parliaments: But in truth I
can find but one under that Title, that mentions this Opinion, and that is
called Exilium Hugonis, which is sum is nothing else, but Articles containing
an enumeration of the particular offenses of the two Spencers against the
State, and the Sentence thereupon. The offenses are, For compassing to draw the
King by Rigor, to Govern according to their Wills: for withdrawing him from
harkening to the advice of his Lords: for hindering of Justice, and Oppression;
and (as a means hereunto) they caused a Bill or Schedule to be published,
containing, That Homage and Legiance is due to the King, rather in relation to
the Crown, than absolutely to his Person; because no Legiance is due to him,
before the Crown be vested upon him: That if the King do not Govern according
to Law, the Lieges in such case are bound by their Oath to the Crown, to remove
him either by Law or Rigor.

This is the substance of the Charge; and upon this exhibited in the Lords
House, the Lords, super totam materiam, banish them before their Case is heard,
or themselves had made many appearance thereto. So as to the matter of this
Schedule (which contains an Opinion suitable to the point in hand, with some
additional aggravations) the Parliament determines nothing at all: but as to
the publishing of the same, to the intent to gather a party, whereby they did
get power to act other enormities mentioned in the Charge. And in relation to
those enormities, the Lords proceeded to sentence of Banishment; all which was
done in the presence of the King, and by his disconsent, as may appear by his
discontent thereat, as all Historians of those Affairs witness. And it is not
probable that the King would have been discontented with the proceedings of the
Lords in asserting the Prerogative of a King, in that manner of the Schedule,
if he had perceived any such thing in their purposes. Add hereunto, that the
Lords themselves justified the matter of the Schedule in their own proceedings,
all which tended to enforce the King to govern according to their Counsels, and
otherwise than suited with his good pleasure. By force they removed Gaveston
from the King's presence formerly, and afterward the Spencers, in the same
manner: So they removed the King from his Throne, and not long after out of the
World.

Last of all, I shall make use of one or two Concessions, which has passed the
Reporter's own Pen (in this discourse of his) for the maintaining, that the
Legiance of an Englishman, is Neither Natural, nor Absolute, nor Indefinite,
nor due to the Natural Capacity, but qualified according unto Rules.

The first is this: Englishmen do owe to their Kings, Legiance according to
their Laws; therefore it is not Natural, or Absolute, or Indefinite. The
inference is necessary: for the latter is boundless, and Natural; the former is
limited, and by civil Constitution. If any breach therefore of English Legiance
be bounded by Law, then the Legiance of an English man is circumscribed, and
not Absolute, or Natural. The major proposition is granted by the Reporter, who
says, that the Municipal Laws of the Kingdom, have prescribed the order and
form of Legal Legiance, fol. 5. b. And therefore if by the Common Law, the
Service of the King's Tenant, as of his Manor, be limited, how can that
consist with the absolute Legiance formerly spoken of, which binds the
Tenant, being the King's Subject, to an Absolute and Indefinite Service? Or if
the Statute-Laws have settled a Rule, according to which each Subject ought to
go to War in the King's service beyond the Sea, as the Reporter grants, fol.
7. and 8. then cannot the Legiance be absolute to bind the Subject to go to War
according to the Kings own pleasure.

Secondly, An English King's protection of his Subjects, is not Natural,
Absolute, Indefinite, nor Originally extends unto them in their Natural
Capacity: therefore is not the Legiance of an English Subject to his King,
Natural, Absolute, Indefinite, nor Originally extends to the King, in his
Natural Capacity,

The dependence of these two rests upon the Reporters own words, who tells
us, that Protectio trahit Subjectionem, and Subjectio Protectionem; Protection
draws with it Subjection, and Subjection draws with it Protection, so as they
are Relata, and do prove mutually one another Nature, fol. 5. a. And in the
same Page (a few lines preceding) he shows why this Bond between King and
Subject is called Legiance, because there is a reciprocal, and double Bond: for
as the Subject is bound in Obedience to the King, so is the King bound to the
Subject in protection: But the King is not Naturally bound to protect the
people, because this Bond begins not at his Birth, but when the Crown settles
upon him.

Thirdly, This Protection is not absolute, because the King must maintain the
Laws, fol. 5. a. and the Laws do not protect absolutely, any man that is a
breaker of the Laws.

Fourthly, This protection is not Indefinite, because it can extend no further
than his power, and his power no further than his Dominions, fol. 9. b. The
like also may be instanced in continuance of time.

Lastly, The King's protection extends not originally to the Natural
Capacity, but to the politic Capacity; therefore till a Foraigner comes
within the King's Legiance, he comes not within his protection: And the usual
words of a Writ of Protection shows, that the party protected, must be in
Obsequio nostro, fol. 8. a. The sum then is, that as protection of an English
King, so neither is Legiance, or Subjection of an Englishman, Natural,
Absolute, Indefinite, or terminated in the Natural Capacity of the King. And to
make a full period^ to the point, and make the same more clear, I shall
instance in one Precedent that these times of Edward the Third produced. The
former English Kings had Title to many Territories in France, but Edward the
Third, had Title to all the Kingdom. And being possibly not so sensible of what
he had in possession, as of what he had not; He enters France in such a way,
and with that success, that in a little time he ^^ns the highest seat therein,
and so brought much honor to the English Nation; and more than stood with the
safety of the Kingdom. For in the union of two Kingdoms, it is dangerous for
the smaller, lest it be swallowed by the greater.

This was foreseen by the English, who knew England did bear but a small
proportion to France, and complained of that inconvenience; and thereupon a Law
was made, that the people of England should not be subject to the King, 14 E.
3. Stat. 4.
or his Heirs, as Kings of France. Which manifestly imports, that an English
King may put himself in such a posture, in which Legiance is not due to him;
and that this posture is not only in Case of Opposition, but of diversity,
when he is King of another Nation, and does not de facto, for that Time and
Place, rule an English King. Which if so, I suppose this notion of Natural,
Absolute, and Indefinite Legiance to the King in his Natural Capacity is out of
this Kingdom, if not out of the World: and then the foot of the whole Account
will be, that the Legiance of an Englishman, is Originally according to the
Laws; the sum of all, being comprehended in the joint safety of the people of
England.

CHAP. IX. Of Courts for Causes criminal, with their Laws.
THe great growth of Courts founded upon Prerogative, derogated much in these
times from the Ancient Courts, that formerly had attained the Sovereignty over
the people, and in the hearts of them all, This was a hard lesson for them to
learn, but especially of the King's Bench, that was wont to learn of none; and
yet must be content to part with many of their Plumes to deck the Chancellor,
much of their work to busy the Prerogative Courts holden Coram Rege, and more
to those holden Coram Populo, I mean, The Courts of Oyer and Terminer,
Jail-delivery, and Justices of Peace. Those of Oyer and Terminer, were now
grown very common, but less esteemed, as being by men of mean regard nominated
for the most part by the party that sued out the Commission, which for the most
part was done in behalf of those that were in danger, and meaned not to be
justified by Works, but by Grace. These escapes, though small in the
particulars, yet in the full sum made the matter so foul, as it became a common
grievance; 2 E. 3. c. 2. ^ 7.
and a Rule thereupon set by the Parliament, for the regulating both of the
Judges of such Court, and the Causes. The Commissions for Jail-delivery
likewise, grew more mean and ordinary: The chief sort of Men in the several
Counties, had formerly the power, but were found to savor too much of
Neighborhood and Alliance. The leading of the work therefore, is now committed
to the Judges at Westminster, and the other made only Associates to them. But
above all, the Courts of Sheriffs, Coroners, and Leets, were now grown sour
with Age, having attained courses by common practice, differing from Oppression
only in Name; and yet were the times so unhappy, as by these courses they had
obtained favor and respect amongst the great men, and so gained more power
from above, to abuse them below. These men loved to be Commissioners of Oyer
and Terminer, and having learned how to make capital offenses pecuniary,
found-such sweetness, as they used not to be weary of their places, though the
Country grew weary of them; and therefore disliking uncertaintes, in such
matters of benefit, they cannot rest till they obtain more certain settlement
in their places; some for Years, others for Life, and some for ever.

The Disease thus contracted by degrees, the Cure must be accordingly: First,
the Sheriffwicks, much dismembered to please the Court-favourites, and fill the
Kings privy Purse, and all raised to the utmost penny of the full, and beyond
the just value: A Law is made to restore the several Hundreds, 4 E. 3. c. 12,
and 15.
and Wapentakes, to the Sheriffs and their Counties, and all of them are
reduced to the old Rent: And it is likewise provided, that none shall execute
that place in County or Hundred, who shall not then have sufficient Lands in
that County to answer damages for injustice by them done. 2 E. 3. c. 4.
And that no Sheriff shall serve in that place above one year; and then not to
be chosen again for that service till three years be past: 4 E. 3. c. 4.
which latter clause was only a medium taken up for the present occasion, in
regard that men of ability became very rare in these times, 1 Rich. 2. c. 11.
especially in some of the Counties.

The election of the Sheriff is likewise not to be forgotten; for though the
Counties had the election of Coroners, in regard they looked that no man should
come nigh their blood but whom they trusted; 28 E. 3. c. 6.
yet the Sheriff came not so night their skin, nor yet so nigh their Free-holds
as anciently they had done, for that their power in Judicature was much abated,
and so not worthy of so high regard; yet in respect he was still to be a
Minister of Justice, and his place valuable more than formerly, it was holden
convenient that such as had the chief power of Judicature at Westminster, 14 E.
3. c. 7.
viz. the Chancellor, Treasurer, Chief ^aron, and the two Chief Justices,
should nominate the man that should be their Servant; and in the Parliament
nevertheless they interposed in that Election as often as they saw cause.

Secondly, As touching Causes criminal, which more ordinarily come within the
cognizance of these Courts. They generally held the same regard in the eye of
the Law in these times, that they had done formerly; nevertheless, in two
crimes these times wrought diversely, urging the edge of the Law against the
one, and abating it as to the other. The latter of these is commonly called
Petit Treason, which is a murder destructive to the Commonwealth, in an
inferior degree, and at a further distance, because it is destructive to that
Legiance by which Families do consist, and of whom Kingdoms are derived.

In former times it extended unto the Legiance between Lord and Tenant, Miror
Just. c. 2. sect. 13. 21 E. 3. fol. 17. b.
and Parents and Children: But by this Law of 25 E. 3. it is reduced to the
Legiance only of Man and Wife, Master and Servant, Clerk and his Ordinary; the
last of which was now lately taken up, and might have been as well laid aside,
as diverse others were, but that in these times much is to be yielded to the
power of the Prelacy, who loved to raise the power of the Ordinary to an
extraordinary pitch, that themselves might be the more considerable.

This reducing of Treason into a narrower ground, made the Regiment of Felonies
to swell. A hard thing it was in a Warring time, for men to conceit themselves
well dressed, until they were completely armed. Some used it for a Complement,
and amongst others, honest men had as good cause to use it, as some that were
ill-affected had a bad; and of the last sort, some did aim at private revenge,
though many aimed against the public quiet. But however the intentions of men
thus harnassed might be different, the looks of them all are so sour, that it
is hard to know a man for Peace, from a man for War. And therefore the people
were now so greedy after Peace, as they are ready to magnify or multiply all
postures of armed men into the worst fashion, being well assured that the
readiest way to keep themselves from the hurt of such men, is to have none of
them at all. But Edward the Third had more need of them than so, and will
therefore allow men to ride armed, 25 E. 3. c. 2.
but not to Troop together, to rob, kill, or imprison any man; and if any
person did otherwise, it should be Felony, or Trespass, but not High Treason.

All this was in favor to the people, and yet it was not all; for when Mercy
grows profuse, it becomes Cruelty. Murder is very incident to times of War,
yet is an Enemy to the Peace, of so high a nature, that though the King's
Pardon may do much, yet both King and People declare it an impardonable crime,
by the Common Law, and that the King's Prerogative shall not extend so far as
to pardon the same. This Justice done to the party dead, was a mercy to them
that were alive; a means to save blood by bloodshed; and not so much by the
King's Grant, as by his Release. One thing more in these cases of blood the
people obtained of the King, which they had not so much by Release as by Grant,
and that was the taking away of Englishire, an ancient Badge of the Imperial
power of the Danes over the Saxons; and which had either continued through the
desidiousness of the Saxons in the times of Edward the Confessor, unto the
Normans time, or by them taken up again, and continued until these times, that
Edward the Third was so far desirous to declare his readiness to maintain the
Liberties of the people, as to be willing to restore them where they failed,
and in particular took away the manner of presentment of Englishire, blotting
out the Title and Clause concerning it, 14 E. 3. c. 4
out of the Articles of Inquiry for the Judges Itinerant. And thus, whether
Native or Foreiner, all men are now made in death equal, and one Law serves all
alike.

Next unto blood, these times grew more sensible of Ravishments than former
times had done. For though they had determined a severe penalty against so foul
a crime, and made it in the nature of a Felony capital, which was enough to
have scared any man from such attempts; yet for the proof of the matter in
Fact, much rested upon the will of the Woman, which for the most part grounded
upon self-respects, and private prudence, labored to conceal that which could
not be made whole by revealing; and by after-consent, skinned over the sore as
to themselves, which corrupted inwardly, and endangered the whole Body. To cure
which, 6 Rich. 2. c. 6.
a Law is made to restrain such late connivance in the Woman, by depriving her
both of her Jointure and Inheritance, 5 E. 4. fol. 58.
which otherwise had been saved to her by such compliance, as after-consent
unto such violations.

CHAP. X. Of the Course of Civil Justice during these times.
HOwever the course of the Law concerning matters of the Crown, passed in a
troubled Wave; yet in matters of Common Pleas, it passed in a Calm and full
Channel, as the Reports in Print do sufficiently witness; nor was there any
change of Principles, but only some alteration tending to a clearer
manifestation of the same. I will not touch upon every particular, but only
upon two, which reflect somewhat upon the public Policy; the one touching the
course of Inheritance in some particular cases, the other touching pleading in
the Courts of Civil Justice.

The first of these was occasioned from Conjuncture of Affairs, the case being
such, that Edward the Third had now gotten himself a new Kingdom unto that of
England, and must look to maintain that by power, which he obtained by force;
and conducing thereunto, must have continual employment of the English in that
Service, as being most trusty to his Cause. And that it is unreasonable, that
such English as had devoted themselves to his Service in this Cause, and in
order thereunto, had transported themselves and their Families into those
foreign parts, should thereby lose the benefit of Lieges in the Birthright of
their Children born in those foreign parts. 17 E. 3. n. 19.
Upon consideration had thereof, and of a former leading Opinion of the Lawyers
and Parliament, a Declarative Law was made: 25 E. 3. Stat. 2.
That all Children born without the Kings Legiance, whose Father and Mother, at
the time of their birth, shall be under the Faith and Legiance of the King of
England, shall have the benefit of Inheritance within the same Legiance, as
other Inheritors have. These are the words of the Statute, and do occasion a
double observation; one from the matter, the other from the manner of the
Expression.

The Subject matter is so delivered, not as an Introduction of a new Law, but
as a Declarative of the old, that lay more obscurely hidden, for want of
occasion to reveal it; and the substance thereof rests only in this: To
enable the Children of English Natives, born beyond the Seas; not the Children
of those that are of foreign birth, though within the Kings Territories in
those parts, as the Opinion has been. Nor does any ancient Precedent or Case
warrant the same; as might be at large manifested, if it might conduce to the
end of this Discourse. And for the same cause, after this Statute, whenas the
Commons would have had a general Naturalizing of all Infants born beyond the
Sea, within the Kings Segniories; the same would not be granted, 42 E. 3. c. 10.
otherwise than according to the former Statute, and the Common Law.

That which in the next place concerns the manner of Expression, is this:
That a Child is said to be born out of the Kings Legiance, and yet the Father
and Mother at the same time to be of the Faith and Legiance of the King of
England. It seems to me, that it intends only those Children of English
Parents, born within the Kings Territories beyond the Seas, because the words
ensuing, concerning Certification of Bastardy of such Children, are, That the
same shall be made by the Bishop of such place, upon the Kings Writ directed to
him; which could never have passed into those places that are not of the Kings
Territories: And so the Issue will be, That the Legiance of those born in those
parts, though they are Leiges to the King, yet they are not of the Legiance of
the King of England, but as Lord of that Territory.

The other matter to be observed concerning pleading in the Courts of Civil
Justice, is this: That whereas anciently, from the Normans time, till these
times, 36 E. 3. c. 1^.
the pleadings were in the Norman Tongue, they shall be henceforth in English;
out of an inconvenience, I believe, rather supposed than felt. For though some
kind of knowledge of Law-terms may be increased thereby, yet unless that shall
be professedly studied, it will breed nothing but Notions, and they an
overweening conceit, which many times sets men to Suits in Law to their own
loss; like some weak influence of the Celestial Bodies, that are strong enough
to stir up humors, but not to expel them, or draw them out. However, even thus
in part is the reproach of Normandy rolled away, like that of Egypt from the
Israelites at Mount Gilgal.

CHAP. XI. Of the Militia in these times.
WAR is ever terrible, but if just and well governed, Majestical: the one may
excite resistance and defense, but the other conquers before blow given;
because it convinces the Judgment, and so prevails upon the Conscience. For
that heart can never be resolute in its own defense, that is at War with its
own understanding; nor can such a heart consider such a War otherwise than as
Divine, and bearing the face of an Ordinance of God; and then how can the Issue
be unsuccessful? It is no strange thing for Kings to miscarry in their Wars,
because it is rarely seen that they are under good Counsel; but if a Christian
Counsel miscarry, we may conclude it extraordinary in the efficient cause, and
no less wonderful in the issue and end. Upon this ground it concerns a
Christian Nation, not only in point of honor, but of safety and continuance,
to settle fundamental Laws of War, against time of War; as of Peace in time of
Peace. Neither was England deficient herein, saving that ancient times were
more obscure in the particulars, and these days revealed them at such a time,
wherein we may say, that Edward the Third approved himself not only King of
England, but of himself, above the ordinary strain of expectation. For being
now become a famous Commander and Conqueror, having also an Army inured to
fight and overcome, and so might have given a Law; he nevertheless received the
same, submitting both it and himself to the Directory of the Parliament in
making a War with France, which was three to one against him in very respect,
but in the Title, besides the disadvantage from Scotland, that lay continually
beating upon his Rear. The like may be observed of his War with Scotland; in
both which he evidently tells the World, that he held it unreasonable to
enter upon the managing of an offensive Foreign War, without the concurrence of
the common consent of the People; and that not only for the thing it self, but
also for his own Personal Engagement in the Service. For a King, though he be
the Generalissimo, yet is he so from the People; and his Person being of that
high value, is not to be exposed to every occasion that may provoke War,
without due advice first had with the public Council; because in his Person
the People adventureth as well as himself. And in this manner were the Wars in
France by Edward the Third, and in Scotland, concluded upon debate. In the next
place, as touching the Arrays of Men for War, I find no footsteps of any power
which was claimed as peculiar to the King therein, and acknowledged by the
Parliament; but many instances do I meet with in the opposite; all which do
plainly tell us, 13 E 3. n. 15 17, 18, 37, 38.
that the old shifts of Jurati and Obligati ad arma, 14 E. 3. n. 14, 15, 16,
19, 42, 53.
could do little either in the calling of men forth, or arming them for the
War. But in case of public defense against Foreigners, men were summoned upon
their Legiance as anciently was used. 20 E. 3. n. 14.
And this was by both King and Parliament fully declared, and all such
Obligations by writing called in and damned as dishonorable to the King. In
foreign service the course was no less regular: if the War was by special
direction of the Parliament, they likewise ordered the manner of the raising of
Soldiers, viz. ^ E. 3. c. 15.
so many out of a County, and so many out of a Borough; all which are by the
express words of the Statute said to be granted by the Knights and Burgesses.

But if it was only upon the King's particular instigation, and not by order
or consent of the Parliament, 4 E. 3. c. 5.
the King in such case being Voluntier, all the Soldiers were in like manner;
unless some particular Law or Tenure otherwise obliged them. As touching the
arming of Soldiers, the Law was yet more certain and particular. If the
Soldiers were men of Estate, they were armed according to the ancient rule,
asserted by the Statute at Winton; or otherwise were especially assessed by the
Parliament, or by virtue of their Tenures. The first of these is confirmed by
Edward the Third in Parliament, wherein he wills, that no man shall be urged
to arm himself otherwise than he was wont in the times of his Ancestors Kings
of England. 1 E. 3. cap. 5. Stat. 2.
The two latter were likewise confirmed by another Law, made in the same Kings
time, whereby it was ordained, That no Man shall be constrained to find Men of
Arms, Hoblers, nor Archers, other than those which hold by such services, if it
be not by common consent and grant made in Parliament. 25 E. 3. Stat. 5 cap. 8.
By Men of Arms, meaning those which we now call Curiassieres, or complete
armed; by Hoblers, meaning those now called light Horsemen. The Archers served
on Foot, and were principally armed with Bows, although they had also Swords,
or other such offensive portable Weapons.

The first of these concerns only the arming of a man's own person, the
other the finding of Soldiers, and arming of them, and both together
sufficient for the safeguard of the Rights and Liberties of the People, invaded
in those times by Commissions of Array, and such other expressions of
Prerogative Royal: for as touching the arming of a man's own person, the
Statute of 1 Edward 3. formerly mentioned; is clear in the point. And though
the Statute of 25 Edward 3. does not in the latter direct, as touching the
finding Arms for others, as is urged in his Majesty's Answer to the Declaration
of the Parliament concerning the Commission of Array, July Fol 418.
4. 1642. yet is it therein granted, that a complete Soldier is within the
Letter of the Statute; and seeing the person of the Soldier is not in the
power of any private person in such cases to command him to the service, it
seems clear to me, that the Statute must intend the arming of him with
complete Arms, and not the armed person of the man. The Soldiery thus arrayed,
Par. Rot. 3 E. 3. n. 18.
they are in the next place to be called to their Rendezvous; Regist fol. 192 a.
the Knights by Summons sent to the Sheriff, but the rest by Proclamation. If
the Knights appear not, a Fine is set upon them: if others run away from their
Conduct, a Writ issued to the Sergeant at Arms to apprehend them; if they were
not arrayed, then the Recognizances of such as undertook the work, are
estreated. All plunder or spoil committed by the Soldiers in their Conduct, 4
E. 3. cap. 5.
was to be satisfied by the Conductor or Commander that received their Pay, 50
E 3. n. 62.
or Charges for their Conduct. And although the Charges for Conduct had
formerly de facto been defrayed sometimes by the County by virtue of
Commissions that issued forth, both for the raising and conducting of them; yet
was this no rule, nor did Edward the Third claim any such duty, but disclaimed
it, and ordained by Act of Parliament, That both the Pay and Conduct-money,
should be disbursed by the King, 1 E. 3. c. 7.
from the time of their departure from their several Counties. For to this end,
18 E. 3. c. 7.
and for the safeguard of the Realm, and for the maintenance of the Wars of
Scotland, France, and Gascoign, the King had supply from Aids, Reliefs,
Wardship^, Marriages, Customs, 14 E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 1.
and Escheats: Nor did the Parliament grant any particular Aid by the
Assessment or public Tax, but when they evidently saw the burden of War to be
extraordinary; as it befell in the Conquest of so great and potent a Realm as
France was. Wherein although the Taxes were many, yet so well ordered were
they, and with that compliance from the King, that the people endured them with
much patience, so long as the King lived. Lastly, in all these Cases of Foreign
Wars (for of such Cases only these Laws are to be understood) 1 E. 3. Stat. 2.
cap. 5.
it was especially provided, That no man should be distrained, or urged against
his will, to go out of his County. But in case of defensive War, the course was
otherwise: for all men in such cases are bound by the Law of Nature to defend
their own Country from Invasion, in order to the safety of their own Estates
and Habitations. They were arrayed, or gathered together by Commission of Array
from the King, armed according to the Laws formerly mentioned, and not by
Arbitrary order of the Commissioners. And by virtue of such Commissions, they
were drawn forth and led to places where need required. Sometimes to one Coast,
sometimes to another, yet not altogether at the Kings pleasure: for the
Parliament upon occasion set rules of Restriction, 13 E. 3. n. 18.
and generally exempted the North-parts beyond Humber, from being drawn
Southward, and left them as a reserve for the defense of the Marches bordering
upon Scotland; and sometimes ordered the Array should be executed only in some
particular Counties, and other times wholly exempted the County adjacent, ^0 E.
3. n. 14.
within six miles of the Seacoast. And because the King might under color of
a defense, array the people, where no such occasion led the way, and command
them out of their Counties, 1 E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 5.
a Statute is made that states the Case wherein such Array shall be; the words
whereof are variously set forth in the Books in print, whether determinatively,
or carelessly, I cannot tell; but all of them to differ in sense one from
another, and from the Truth.

Some of the common Books have the words thus: None shall be distrained to go
out of their Counties, unless for cause of necessity, and of sudden coming of
Strangers or Enemies into the Kingdom. Others read it thus: But where necessity
requires, and the coming of strange Enemies into the Kingdom. Fol. 422.
The Kings Answer to the Parliaments Declaration concerning the Commission of
Array, would read it thus: Unless in case of Necessity, or of sudden coming of
strange Enemies, etc. But the words in the Roll are these: Et que nulls ne
soient distresses d'aller horse de les Countees, si non pur Cause de necessity,
de sudden venue des Stranges Enemies en Reyaulme. In English thus, word for
word: And that none be distrained to go out of the Counties, if not for cause
of Necessity, of sudden coming of strange Enemies into or in the Kingdom: which
words determine the point. That none shall be by Commission of Array drawn out
of their County, but in case of necessity. And secondly, that this case of
necessity, is only the coming of strange Enemies into or in the Kingdom; so as
probably the Invasion must be actual, before they be drawn out of their
Counties, and not only feared; and it must be a sudden Invasion, and not of
public note, and common fame foregoing; for then the ordinary course, either
of Parliament or otherwise must, be used to call those that are bound by
Statute or Tenures, or Volunteers, to that service, seeing every Invasion is
not so fatal as to require a Commission for a General Array. Against what has
been thus noted, the judgment of Sir Edward Coke in Calvin's Case lies yet in
the way, who affirms, that the Subjects of Fol. 7. b.
England are bound by their Legiance to go with the King in his Wars, as well
within the Realm, as without; and this Legiance he tells us, is that natural
Legiance which, he says, is absolute and indefinite, etc. and not local; which
if not so, then were not the English bound to go out of England; an inference
that is neither necessary, nor is the thing affirmed certain. It is not
necessary, because English men may be bound to go out of England; by virtue of
their Tenures, particular Contract, or else by special Act of Parliament, and
not by virtue of that natural Legiance which in truth is nowhere.

Now for the maintenance of the point, the Reporter alleges two Statutes
affirming the thing, and common practice; and lastly, Authorities of the Judges
of the Common Law. 12 H. 7. c. 1. 2 E. 6. c. 2.
As touching the Statutes, one in Henry the Seventh's time, and the other in
Edward the Sixth's time, I shall speak of them in the succeeding times, when we
come at them, for they are no Warrant of the Law in these times whereof we now
treat; much less is the modern practice of these later days, a demonstration of
the Law in the times of Edward the Third, nor of the nature of the Law in any
time, seeing that it is obvious to times, as well as particular persons, to do
and suffer things to be done which ought not so to be; and therefore I shall
for the present lay those two Considerations aside. But as touching the
Opinions of the Judges of the Common Law, two Cases are cited in the
Affirmative, which seem in the Negative; and the rest conclude not to the point.

The first of the two Cases, is the opinion of Justice Thirning in the time of
Henry the Fourth, 7 H. 4. Protect. 100.
word for word thus: A Protection lies for the Defendant in a Writ upon the
Statute of Laborers, and yet the Defendant shall not have such matter by way
of Plea, viz. That the King has retained him to go beyond the Sea: for the
King cannot compel a man to go out of the Kingdom; that is (as the Reporter
says) Not without Wages; intimating thereby, that if the King shall tender
Wages to any Man, he must go whither the King shall please to send him; which
is not only destructive to the opinion of Thirning concerning the Plea, but
also (though granted) is destructive to the Reporter's Judgment in the main
point. For if an English man may refuse to go without Wages, then is he not
bound to go by any natural absolute Legiance, as the Reporter would have it.
And as touching the second Case, which is Bigot's and Bohun's Case, it clears
the same thing; for it was resolved, that they ought to go but in manner and
form according to the Statutes; then is not the ground in the absolute
Legiance, for that is not qualified but in the positive Statute Law, which
tieth only in manner and form, and that by voluntary consent in Parliament.

The rest of the Cases do neither conclude the main point, nor the particular
thing that the Reporter intends: For he would imply to the Reader, that
English men were anciently used to be imprested for the Wars in France: and
hereunto he voucheth one Authority out of ancient Reports of Law in Edward the
Third's time, 44 E. 4. fol. 12.
one Anthority in the time of Henry the Fourth, 12 H. 4. 7. 32 H. 6. fol. 4. 17
H. 6. Protect.
and three in the time of Henry the Sixth; none of all which do speak one word
concerning Impresting. And that in Edward the Third does imply the contrary; 19
H. 6. 35.
for the Case is, that in a Praecipe quod reddat, a Protection was offered by
the Defendant, as appointed to go beyond the Sea with the Duke of Lancaster;
and the Plaintiffs Counsel alleged, That the Defendant had been beyond Sea
with the Duke, and was returned. To this the Defendant's Counset answered, That
the Duke was ready to return again; and for this cause the Protection was not
allowed. Yet a Quere is made upon this ground, that it might be that the
Defendant would not go over with him, nor was it proved that he would; which
shows plainly, the party was not imprested; for then the thing had not been
in his power to will or nill.

The last instance that the Reporter produces, is that of Forinsecum
Servitium, or Foreign Service, and that seems to be Knight Service to be
performed abroad. But this falls short of the Reporter's intention in three
respects.

First, Though it belongs to the King, yet not to him only, but to other
chief Lords; Bract. li. 2. fol. 36, and 37.
so says Bracton.

Secondly, It is not due from every English man.

And lastly, It is a Service due by virtue of Tenure, and then the Conclusion
will be, That which is due by Tenure of Lands, is not due by natural and
absolute Legiance: and so this Foreign Service arising merely by compact and
agreement between Lord and Tenant, and not by the natural duty of an
English-born Subject, (which is the thing that the Reporter drives at in all
his discourse) will be so far from maintaining the Reporters opinion, as it
will evidently destroy the same.

And thus the posture of this Nation in the Field remains regular in the
rule, whatever has been said against it; notwithstanding that in the very
instant of Action there may be some irregularity, which no doubt both was, and
ever will be, in stormy times. Nor did it conquer the Law: For though War may
seem to be but a sickness of the State, yet being in Truth, as the Vltimum
refugium, and only reserve unto Law, beaten to a retreat by opression; it is
no wonder if this motion, or rather commotion, that brings on the Law of Peace
in the Rear, be still and ever subject to rule of Law, how unruly soever it
self seems to be. Now because Law imports execution, and that presupposes a
Trial, and it a Court; therefore did our Ancestors (amongst other Courts not
regulated by the Common Law) form a Court for the service of War, called the
Court-Marshal, or the Constables Court, according as the Office of one or the
other had the pre-eminence. The proceedings herein were ordered, as I said, not
accordiag to the Common Law, for that is like the Land, much distant from all
other Nations; and the Negotiation of this Island with other Nations (as in
time of Peace, so of War) requires a rule common to all those Nations, or
otherwise no Negotiation can be maintained. And for this cause the proceedings
in this Court were ever according to the rule of the Civil Law. The work of
this Court is principally Judicial, and in some cases Ministerial.

The first reflects upon cause Foreign and Domestic, and both of those are
either Criminal, and such as concern the common Peace of the place of War, or
more civil, relating only unto private interest. As touching the first of
these, I suppose it is no Bull, to speak of a common Peace, in the place of
War. For a common Peace must be in each party within it self, or otherwise no
party at private variance can subsist within it self, much less make War with
the other; and therefore in order unto War, there must be a Law of Peace, for
the Trial of Offenders, and punishing them for offenses committed against the
good Government of the War: Such as are breaking of Ranks, deserting the
Standard, running away from the Colors, Mutinies, Murders, Rapes,
Plundering-private Quarrels, disobedience to command, and suchlike; all which
do bear the show of crimes against the common Peace of the Army and the Country.

Of the second sort, are matters concerning Quarter, and Contracts in order to
the government of the War, saving such as are made before either part be
enrolled for the War. For if a man does covenant to serve in the War, 13 Rich.
2. Stat. 1. c. 20. 8 Rich. 2. n. 31
and keepth not his day at the first Rendezvous, he is to be attached by Writ
at the Common Law. 8 Rich. 2. c. 5. Regist. fo. 191. 2.
Causes Domestical likewise fall under the like division: for whatsoever cause
may be Foreign, may also be Domestic; because the Army is ever embodied within
the Kingdom, and must be under the Directory of the Martial law upon the first
forming thereof. Now though the particular Laws of the Army, for the government
thereof, be ordinarily according to the prudence of the General, yet certain
Fundamentals have been ab Antiquo, made by Custom, and the Parliament, against
which the course of Judicature must not go. And as the Parliament saw need, 50
E. 3. n. 33. n. 161. 3 R. 2. n. 27.
it set also particular directions; as for the payment of Soldiers Wages for
remedy of wastings and plunderings in their own Country, and other such
emergencies. But the execution of all these Laws Originally was in the Marshal
of the Army. And because that the Army was generally dissolved, or such persons
engaged in such matters of controversy departed from the Army before the same
were concluded, therefore the Marshals Court continued, in order to the
determining of these matters. And in continuance of time, other matters also
crowded into that Society, although sometimes under the Directory of the
Constable of England, as well as at other times under the Marshal; more
particularly, that power of determining matters concerning Torniament; a sport
that like a Sarcasm tickles the fancy, but wounds the heart; and being of as
little use in a Commonwealth as of benefit, therefore is laid aside; nor need I
to speak any more concerning it. There is one thing more somewhat like a
Torniament, but that it is in good earnest, and that is called Duel. This
comes likewise within the Cognizance of this Court, but in a Ministerial way,
and as subservient to the Common Law, in cases of Appeal and Right. Hereof
needs likewise little more than the naming, and therefore I shall leave the
Reader, that would understand the particular managing thereof, unto the
discourse compiled by the Duke of Gloucester in Richard the Second's time.
Gloss. 129.


Lastly, As touching the antiquity of this Court, though it may be great, yet
the power thereof was doubtful, and scarce taken notice of in any public Act
of State, till about these times; whenas a complaint was made by the Commons
for the encroachment of that Court upon the Liberty of People, and bounds of
the Courts of Common Law. Nor is it strange, that such unquiet times brought
forth such Precedents; but much more strange, that the Common Law held up its
head against such violent irruptions of War.

CHAP. XII. Of the Peace.
YOu have seen the Kingdom in Armor, now see it in Robes, and you will say
that its Majesty therein is as grave, as it was in the other brave. It is true,
the tempers are so contrary, as it may be wondered how one and the same should
be wise and willing for both: but when God will do much, he gives much, and can
make a People as one man, like unto Caleb, fitted both for War and Peace.
Besides, the Times were now much conducing hereto. It is vain to endeavor to
allay Humors in the Body which are maintained by Agitation; they must be
purged out, or the whole will still be endangered: and therefore, although
Kings hitherto did endeavor to establish a peaceable Government, yet being led
by ill Principles of private Interests, they labored to little purpose. But
now the Scene is altered, and one wise moderate King, that was as wise as
valiant, did more than they all. And first set a rule upon his own desires,
contenting himself with the condition of an English King; and then upon his
people, making them contented with the condition of English men.

The order herein was no less observable; for the former wrangling Times having
trained up the minds of men in a tumultuous way nor could they skill to pace
in the steps of Peace, the King led them into Foreign parts to spend their
heat, till being either weak or weary, they are contented to return home, and
study the happiness of a quiet Life. These men thus ordered, the rest at home
are made more cool, like a Body after Physic, and all are now contented to
submit to Law and Magistracy. (...) fitting time now it was for Justices of
Peace to come upon the Stage in their best garb. For though the work was more
ancient, yet like some loose Notes laid aside in several places, it was not to
be found, but at a distance, and after long delay. But Edward the Third sums up
all into one brief, and brings a complete Model thereof into the World for
future Ages to accomplish, as occasion should lead the way. The course was now
established to have Justices settled in every County, there to be resident and
attending that Service. First, they were named Guardians, or Wardens of the
Peace; 1 E. 3. c. 16.
but within a few Years altered their Title to Justices. First, they were
chosen out of the good and lawful men of each County: 1 E. 3. n. 5.
After that, 17 E. 3. n. m.
they were two or three chosen out of the worthiest men, and these were to be
joined with Lawyers. 1 E. 3. c. 6.
Then was one Lord, and three or four in each County of the most worthy men, 18
E. 3. c. 2.
adjoined with Lawyers. Afterward, 34 E. 3. c. 1.
in Richard the Second's time, the number of the Justices in each County might
attain to the number of Six, and no Steward of any Lord to be admitted into the
Commission; 12 R. 2. c. 10.
but within half a year all is at large, so be it that the choice be out of the
most sufficient Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of the County. Again, within
two years, 14 R. 2. c. 12.
the number in each County is set at Eight; yet in all these the Judges and
Sergeants were not reckoned, so as the work then seems not so much as now a
days, although it was much of the same kind; and yet it grew up into that
greatness which it had by degrees. Before they were settled by Edward the Third,
there were Custodes pacis, which might be those whom we now a days call the
High Constables of the Hundred, whose work was purely Ministerial.

Afterward, about the second year of Edward the Third, the Guardians of the
Peace had power of Oyer and Terminer, in matters of riding armed, upon the
Statute 2 Edw. 3. 2 E. 3. c. 3.
After that, they have power of enquiry by Indictment in certain Cases; 4 E. 3.
c. 2.
within four years after, they have power of Oyer and Terminer in Cases of
false Jurors, 8 E. 3. n. 67.
and Maintenance: and about ten years after that, 18 E. 3. c. 2.
they obtained like power in matters of Felony and Trespass. 17 R. 2. c. 10.
The way of Commissions in case of Life and Member, thus opened, another
occasion of Commission offers it self for a determinative power, in case of
offenses against the Statute of Laborers; and the Cognizance hereof is soon
settled upon Commissioners in the Counties specially chosen for that Service; 25
E. 3.
which questionless, Stat. 1. c. 7.
as the Times then stood, 34 E. 3. c. 11.
was as commendable work as it was necessary. For Soldiers were so many, that
Laborers were very few; and those that once are accustomed to Arms, think ever
after meanly of the Handicraft; nor will they ever stoop thereto, after their
Spirits are once elevated by mastery of Adventures. And secondly, those few
Laborers that remained of the Sword, Plague, and other disasters of these
wasting times, understood their advantage, and set a value upon their Labors,
far above their merit; apprehending that men would rather part with too much of
a little, than to let their work lie still that must bring them in all they
have. But these Commissioners lasted not long, though the work did. The
Justices of Peace are looked upon as meet for that service; and it is a vain
thing to multiply Commissions, 42 E. 3. c. 6.
where the work may be done by one, that before this time had obtained an
additional Cognizance of all Causes of Riots, Batteries, wandering dangerous
persons, and offenses in Weights and Measures, 34 E. 3. c. 5, 6.
and in Purveyance. To them, I say, all this work concerning Laborers is also
committed by the Parliament; and herewith a way was laid open for Crimes of
greatest regard under Felony, to be determined by Trial in the Country,
according to the course of Common Law.

The issue of all which was, not only ease to the people, but a great escape
from the rigor of the Council Table in the Star Chamber, and the Kings Bench
at Westminster, on the one side; and also from the gripe of the Clergy on the
other; who hitherto held the Cognizance of the Markets in Weights and Measures
to themselves. This model so pleased all men, that Richard the Second, that was
pleased with nothing but his own pleasure, gave unto the Justices of Peace yet
further power to execute the Statute at Northampton against riotous ridings, 14
R. 2. c. 12.
and to settle the Wages of Laborers and Servants, to punish unlawful Huntings
by the meaner sort of people, and regrators of Wool, false Weights in the
Staple, 13 R. 2. c. 8. cap. 13.
unlawful wearing of Liveries, and unlawful Fishings contrary to the Statute at
Westminster 2. 14 R. 2. c. 4.
Thus was the power of Justices of Peace grown to that height in these and
other things, 16 R. 2. c. 4.
that it undermined, 17 R. 2. c. 9.
not only the Council Table and Kings Bench, but the Commissions of
Jail-deliver and of Oyer and Terminer; so far forth, as their work was much
less than formerly. For Neighbors, in cases of crime, are better trusted with
the Lives and Estates of men, than Strangers; so as in all this, the people are
still the gainers.

The manner of Judicature by these Justices of the Peace still remains: nothing
appears by any Statute in these times, 15 R. 2. c. 2.
that one Justice of the Peace might do alone, but record a forcible Detainer;
although questionless, in point of present security of the Peace and good
Behavior, by the intent of the Statutes he might do many things; but in Cases
of Oyer and Terminer all must be done in public Sessions, which the Justices
of the Peace had power to hold by Commission only, until the Thirty sixth year
of Edward the Third; 4 E. 3. c. 1.
and ever after that, they held their Sessions by virtue of the Statutes, 6 R.
2. c. 4.
and had power to determine diverse things in their Sessions according to
discretion. These were remedies after the Fact; now see what preventing Physic
these times afforded.

One thing that much irritated the spirits of men into discontents, was false
News, or slanderous reports, raised and spread amongst the great men. For in
these Times the Lords were of such a considerable power, as the vexation of one
Lord, proved the vexation of a multitude of the meaner sort. And though the
Statute of Westminster the 1. formerly had provided against such Tales, yet it
touched only such as concerned discord between the King and people, although
by implication also it might be construed to extend further. But Richard the
Second, willing to live in quiet, that he might enjoy his pleasure, would have
the people know their duties in plain words, 2 R. 2. c. 6.
and agreed to a Law, That all such as published such false News, 12 R. 2. c.
11.
tending to sow strife between the Great men, should be imprisoned until the
first mover was found; and if he were not found, then the Relator should be
punished by advice of the Council: So much power was then given to the Council,
whatever it was.

Thus the seed was choked, or was so intended to be, though every passion was
not thus suppressed. For some angers conquer all fear, and will hold possession
come what will. In the next place therefore, provision is made against the
first Actings in sorting of parties by Tokens and Liveries; utterly inhibiting
the meaner sort of the people from giving of Liveries to maintain quarrels,
upon pain of Fine and Imprisonment, and the Trial to be before the Justices of
Assize; 1 R. 2. c. 7.
which it seems was in affirmance of former Laws, as by the Preamble of the
Statute does appear, though the Laws themselves are not extant. About Fifteen
years after, it was by sad experience found that the Lords maintained quarrels
by multitude of Liveries; and therefore another Law was made, inhibiting the
Lords to give Liveries to any but their menial Servants: 16 R. 2. c. 4.
and it is ordered, that the Justices of the Peace shall make enquiry of such
offenses, and punish them according to their discretion.

A third prevention was provided against gathering together of Parties, after
they are sorted: For the humors may so abound, as nothing will keep them in;
they must either break out into a sore, or a long sickness of State will
certainly follow. To this end therefore, the Statute made at Northampton is
again revived, 2 E. 3. c. 3.
expressly forbidding all persons to ride armed, unless in some particular
cases* 7 R. 3. c. 13.
of executing Justice, or guarding the person of the King, 20 R. 2. c. 1.
or his Justices, and suchlike. And if men will be so adventurous as to
out^dare Law by public force, Troopings together, and riotous Ridings, another
course is taken, not by Commission of the Peace, but rather of War, directed
unto valiant persons in every County, and they have power thereby to apprehend
such Offenders, and imprison them until the Jail-deliver, though no Indictment
be found thereof, until the Jail-deliver shall be. By this Commission
therefore power is given of Posse Comitatus, in nature of a Commission of
Array, with an additional power of fighting and destroying; so as though the
King grants the Power by the Commission, yet the Parliament gives the Power
to the Commission; and be it a Commission for Peace, or War, it is originally
from that power.

The fourth and last prevention, was the taking away means of continuance and
supporting such Riotous ways, 13 R. 2. c. 15.
Viz. Castles and Gaols out of the Custody of private hands, and restoring them
to their Counties. For Gaols and Castles are taken promiscuously for places of
security, in times of Peace to keep ill persons from going out, and in times of
War from getting in. Amongst these, some belonged to the King, and were
committed to such as he favored, who commonly (in such times of Oppression and
Violence) grew too big for Justice, usurping a Gaol delivery, and making such
places of strength, many times, even to the innocent, a Prison to keep them
from the Law; but unto guilty persons, an Asylum to defend them against the
Law. And these thus belonging to the King, were under no Law, but of
Prerogative; whereas other Castles of private persons were under the yoke of
the Statute, 13 E. 1. For remedy of all which, the Kings Castles are once more
returned to the Sheriff's Custody, by Act of Parliament; who questionless have
the power to dispose of all places of strength, whether in order to Peace or
War; and could not dispose them into a more safe and indifferent hand than the
Sheriff's, who is as well the King's Officer, as the Kingdoms Servant; and much
entrusted by the Law, in the execution of its own power. And thus is this
Nation now prepared for a settled Peace; a condition that is long in ripening,
and soon rotten, unless it be well fenced and overawed by a good Conscience.
But Richard the Second was neither so good, nor so happy; his Heart affected to
be high, but his Head could not bear it; he turns giddy, and runs far wide.
Those that would reduce him, he enforces into Foreign Countries; and himself
holds on his career over Hedge and Ditch into Ireland; where under pretension
of holding possession of that Kingdom, he lost England: and whilst he plays his
game in that Country, another plays King by your leave, in this, and steps into
the Throne; teaching the King thereby this Lesson, though too late; That
Non-residency is dangerous for a Priest, but unto a Prince fatal, unless his
Subjects be fast to him when he is loose to them.

CHAP. XIII. A View of the Summary Courses of Henry the Fourth, Henry the
Fifth, and Henry the Sixth, in their several Reigns.
HE that played this prank, was the banished Duke of Hertford, Son of John of
Gaunt, and by his death now become Duke of Lancaster by Title; and as the Times
then were, it proved not hard to get more. For in uncertain Commonwealths, it
is an easy thing for a man of opinion, that has less than his due, to get
more than he ought. As Son of John of Gaunt, this Duke had the peoples good
wishes: he (a wise and a brave man, and under oppression) gained the more upon
the people, by how much they love brave men, and compassionate such as suffer
wrong; especially from such persons from whom they all found the like measure.
All these concurring with the King's absence, invited the Duke to adventure
himself upon the influence of the peoples favor, to gain his own right, and
what more the people would allow him; and if no more, yet his Honor is saved;
he came for his own, and attained his end.

Thus then he comes over without Army, or Foreign Power, or other help, saving
the advice and interest of Archbishop Arundel, who was his Companion in
suffering, Partner in the Cause, and no less welcome to the Clergy, than the
Duke himself was to the people; and so gained power to the Duke, though he
brought none. Upon their arrival, the Aspects of all are benign, the Dukedom
waits for him; and in that, as in a Mirror, he beholds the way fair and easy;
yet further, it pities him to see the Kingdom so torn in pieces and spoiled.
The people knew him able, and hoped him willing to amend all: they offered him
their Service; which he accepts, and therewith the Crown. So hard a thing it is
for to put a stop to a Conqueror in his career.

By this time was the Duke of Hertford thus become Duke of Lancaster, and King
of England, under the name of Henry the Fourth, by a design that in the proof
was more easy than commendable: and which being effected, cost more skill to
make that seem fair which was so foul, than to accomplish the thing. He
therefore first heaps together Titles, enough to have buried the clamor of
Usurpation, if it would have succeeded. Conquest was a Title freest from
Dispute whilst Power holds; but it looks better from a Foreign Enemy, than one
sworn to the English Crown; and therefore after that had served his turn, he
disclaimed it; as that which was, though meet enough to have, yet unmeet to
hold.

His right by Designation from his Predecessor he glanced upon, but durst not
adventure it too deep into the peoples consideration, whose Ancestors had
formerly overruled the Case against King John. He then stayed upon a concealed
Title from a concealed Son of Henry the Third, of whom they who listed might be
persuaded, but few believed the thing, nor did himself; but thence takes his
slight up to a Jus Divinum, or some hidden Fate that called him to the work;
but even there his Wings failed him, and so he falls flat upon the Peoples
Election, De been esse. Some of these, or all together, might make Title enough
for a great Man that resolved to hold by hook, what he had got by crook; and
therefore trussing them up all together, he enters his claim to the Crown, As
coming from the Blood Royal from King Henry, and through the Right that God his
Grace has sent me; with the help of my Kin and Friends to recover the same,
which was in point to be undone for want of good Governance, and due Justice.
The extract of all is, that he was chosen by the People and Parliament then
sitting. And albeit that by the Resignation of Richard the Second, the
Parliament might seem, in strict construction of Law, to be expired, together
with the Kings power who called them together; yet did not that Parliament so
apprehend the matter, but proceeded not only to definitive Sentence of
deposing him, but declared themselves by their Commissaries, to be the Three
States, and Representative of the People of England; maintaining thereby their
subsistency by the consistence of the Members together, although their Chief
was for the present like a head in a Trance, till they had chosen Henry the
Fourth to succeed in the Throne; by this means preventing the conceit of
discontinuance in the very Bud of the Notion.

Much like his entry was his continuance, a continual tide of Foreign and
Domestic War and Conspiracy, enough to exercise his great Courage; although he
was more wise than warlike, being loath to take up Arms; (for well he knew, that
a sick Title never sleeps but in a Bed of Peace) and more loath to lay them
down: For besides Victory, whereby he gained upon his Enemies in time of War,
he knew how to make advantage of them in time of Peace, to secure his Friends,
to keep others in awe, to enforce such Laws as stood with reason of State, and
the present posture of Affairs; and where Laws failed, to fill up the period
with Dictates of his own Will. And upon this account the Product was a
Government full of Ulcers* of Bloodshed, without regard of persons, whether of
the Lay or Religious Order, without Legal Trial, or privilege of Clerk. So was
Archbishop Walden dethroned, Archbishop Scroop put to death, and Dukes were
dismounted without Conviction or Imputation, saving of the Kings displeasure.
Taxes multiplied, although begotten they were upon the Parliament, like some
monstrous Births shown to the World, to let it know what could be done; Walsing.
but concealed by Historians, to let it know what may not be done. Yea, the
Privileges of Parliament invaded in point of Election: A thing that none of
his Predecessors ever exemplified to him, nor none of his Successors ever
imitated him in. Nor had he purposed it, but that he was loath the People should
know more of the Government than needs must.

To keep off Foreign Troubles, he made Peace with France for longer time than
he lived; yet was ever infested with the Sword of St. Paul, in behalf of
Richard the Second's Queen; and with the Factions between the Houses of Orleans
and Burgundy, in which he had interested himself to preserve the Foreign
Neighborhood in Parties one against another, that himself might attend his own
security at home. He would have moved the Scots, but they were already under
English Banners; nor could he reach so far, having so many Enemies even in his
own bosom. The Welsh were big with Antiquity, and Mountains of Defense; they
begin to bethink themselves of their Ancient Principality, hold the Kings Arms
at hard duty, 2 H. 4. cap. 12.
till by Laws Enacted in Parliament, they lost their Liberties of bearing
Office Ministerial, 4 H. 4. cap. 26, 32. and cap. 19, 20, 28, 31.
or of Judicature, of holding Castle, of Convention without the Kings License,
yea, of Purchase; and by degrees were brought down from the height of a Free
Principality, to be starved in their power, and inferior to a Free People. And
thus the Welsh on the one side, the discontented Lords on the other, and
Mortimar's Title in all, so busied the King, as though he lopped off the Tops
as they sprang up, yet they sprang forth as they were lopped; nor was it the
Kings lot all this while to find out the root of All, or to strike at that.

Lastly, when time had made all Troublers weary, yet he still sits upon Torns;
he was jealous of his Subjects, jealous of his Son, yea, jealous of himself: it
being ever the first and last of his thoughts, how to keep his Crown. For the
most part of his Reign, he was troubled with the walking Ghost of Richard the
Second; ever and anon he was alive, he was here, he was there, and so the
peoples minds were always kept at random; but when all these Spirits are
conjured down, Richard the Second's Ghost is yet within Henry's own breast. So
ruled Henry the Fourth, an unhappy confident man, that durst undertake more
than he would, did more than he ought, was successful in what he did, yet never
attained his end, to be sure of his Crown, and quiet of mind. For a Plaster to
this Sore, he turned somewhat toward Religion; but showed it more in zeal to
Churchmen, than in works of Piety: and therefore may be thought to regard them
rather as his best Friends in right of Archbishop Arundel, than as in relation
to Religion. Yet, Hist. Eccles. Ang. 618.
as if he overlooked that, he desires their Prayers, becomes a strict observer
of superstitious Rites, is fiery zealous against the Lollards, intends a
Journey into the Holy Land, and War against the Infidels; the common Physic of
guilty Kings in those days. Briefly, he did will to do any thing, but undo what
he had done; and had done more, had his Journey to the Holy Land succeeded. But
(whether hastened or delayed by a Prophecy of the ending of his days, falls not
within my Pen to censure;) entering upon the Work he died, in the beginning of
his purposes, in the midst of his fears; never came to the Holy Land, and yet
yielded up his last breath in Jerusalem.

The Parliament was then sitting, and was witness of the death of Henry the
Fourth, Henry the Fifth.
as it had been of his entrance upon the Throne, as if purposed to see the
course of the Crown in the doubtful current between the two Houses of Lancaster
and York; and to maintain their own Honor, in directing the Scepter according
to their warranty upon a late Intail by Act of Parliament. Yet did not all rest
upon this: for the Heir of Henry the Fourth was a Man every inch of him, and
meant not to Moot upon the point: His Father died a King, and he his Heir had
the Crown, and was resolved to hold it. A rough young man he had been formerly,
and bold enough to outface small doubts in point of Succession; for he could
(for need) outface common Civility it self. This might have lien in his way;
for he that cannot govern himself, can much less govern a Kingdom. Yet a hidden
providence concluded quite contrary, and rendered him a clear Testimony of a
strange change by the anointing Oil, like that of Saul, that forthwith had the
Spirit of another man. So though not hammered thereto by Affliction, as was
Edward the First, yet was he his parallel in Government, and superior in
Success. Being seated in the Throne, all men thought it dangerous to abide the
adventure of the Turn of this Kings Spirit. The Clergy had but yesterday tried
the Mastery with the Laity, and gained it but by one Vote: there was no dealing
with the Clergy whilst Archbishop Arundel lived, nor with him whilst Henry the
Fourth lived, or his Merits were in memory; but now they both are dead, the
Clergy and the Laity are upon even ground. This might make the Clergy now not
over-confident: The Lords looked on the King as a man like enough to strike him
that stands next. The wise men saw he would be doing; all men were tired with
Intestine Quarrels; and jumped in one, That he that would be in action, should
act abroad; where he might get Renown, and a Purchase big enough for his Spirit.

Scotland was a Kingdom yet incompetent to the King's Appetite. France was the
fairer Mark, and better Game; and though too big for the English gripe, yet the
Eagle stooped, and sped himself so well, as within six years he fastened upon
the Sword and Scepter, and a Daughter of France, and might have seized the
Crown, but chose to suffer a blur to lie upon his Title derived from Edward the
Third, rather than to incur the censure of Arrogance over a stooping Enemy, or
to pluck the fruit from the Tree before it was fully ripe; which in time would
fall unto his lap by a better Law than that of the Sword: Otherwise it might be
well conceited, that he that has both Right and Power, and will not seize,
disclaims. Besides, the King was as well Inheritor to his Father's Fate as
Crown: still he had success, but the end was so far distant, that he died in
the way thereto. The brave Dauphine of France maintaining War (after his Father
the French King had yielded up the Bucklers to Henry the Fifth) till Henry the
Fifth died, and the English did forgo what they had formerly gotten in France
by the Sword of that great Commander. Nor did the English gain any thing in the
conclusion of this War, but an honorable windy repute of being one of the five
Chief Nations of Christendom, (if honor it be to be reputed amongst the
Nations) a Conqueror of France, the chief Leader unto the dethroning of three
Popes at once, the Election of Pope Martin, and of giving a Cure to that deadly
Wound of the Popedom which had spent the blood of two hundred thousand men's
lives lost in that Quarrel.

These Foreign Engagements made the King less sollicitous of the point of
Prerogative at home; and the rather, because he knew the way to conquer his
private Enemies Arms, and his Subjects Hearts; without loss of Honor in the
one, or Reverence in the other. He loved Justice above the rank of his
Predecessors, and in some respects above himself; for he advanced Gascoign for
doing Justice, though to the King's own shame. He liked not to intrude himself
into Elections, and therefore, though requested by the Monks of Canterbury, he
would not nominate a Successor to Archbishop Arundel, Antiq. Brit.
but left the whole work to them. In the Authority of his place he was
moderate, and where his Predecessors did matters without the Lords consent;
when he made his Uncle the Marquess of Dorset, Duke of Exeter, and had given
him a Pension to maintain that honor, Walsing.
he asked the Lords consent thereto. To the Clergy he was more than just, if
not indulgent; led thereto by his Father's example, as being wrapped up in the
same Interest as I conceive, rather than out of any liking of their ways, now
growing more bold upon Usurpation than in former times. Or it may be, that
having prevailed in that work in France, which to any rational man must needs
appear above the power of the King, and all the Realm of England; he looked
upon it as more than humane, and himself as an instrument of Miracles. And was
stirred up in his Zeal to God, according to his understanding in those dark
times, to give the Clergy scope, and to pleasure them with their liberty of
the Canon Law, that began now to thunder with Fire and Terror in such manner,
Antiq. Brit. 285.
that neither greatness nor multitude could withstand the dint; as was
evidenced in that Penance inflicted upon the Lord Strange and his Lady in case
of Bloodshed in Holy Ground; and their hot pursuit of the Lord Cobham unto a
death of a new nature, for somewhat done which was sometimes called Treason,
and sometimes Heresy. And thus became Henry the Fifth baptized in the Flames
of the Lollards, as his Father had sadly rendered up his spirit in the same. I
say, in this he is to be looked upon as one misled for want of light, rather
than in opposition against the light: For in his last Will, wherein men are
wont to be more serious and sincere, amongst his private regards, he forgets
not to reflect upon Religion to this purpose. We further bequeath (says he) to
the redundant Mercy of the Most Excellent Savior, the Faith, Hope, and
Charity, the Virtue, Prosperity, and Peace of the Kings our Successors, and of
our Kingdom of England; that God for his goodness sake would protect, visit,
and defend them from Divisi^^s, Dissentions, and from all manner of
decitfulness of Heretics. And thus the Piety, Justice, and Moderation of Henry
the Fifth, adorned and crowned the honor of his Courage and Greatness, with
that honorable Title of Prince of Priests: And had he been blessed with a
clearer light, he might as well under God have obtained the Title of Prince of
Princ^s, wanting nothing that might have rendered him a precedent of Fame.

But the time is now come, Henry the Sixth.
that the Tide of England's Glory must turn, and the sudden Conquest in France
by Henry the Fifth, not unlike the Macedonian Monarchy, must disgorge it self
of what it had hastily devoured, but never could digest. Three things concurred
hereunto; one dangerous, the other two fatal to the flourishing condition of
any Nation.

First, The King is a Minor in the least degree that ever any Prince sat on
English Throne. He entered thereinto, neither knowing what he did, nor where he
was; and some say, he sat therein in his Mothers Lap: for his Life had been
more in the Womb than abroad. A sad presage of what followed! for many men
think that he was in a Lap all his days. Nor are the chief men to be blamed
herein: for it is a certain Truth, That it is much better that the Election of
a King should be grounded upon a rule that is known, though it be by descent of
Inheritance, than upon none at all. For if a Child should succeed, or a
Lunatic, yet where the Principle of Government rests upon the Representative
of the people, there is the less cause of Complaint; the Government being still
the same, both for Strength, Wisdom, and Uniformity, though it may be the
Nation not so active and brave: For a Commonwealth can admit of no Minority,
though a Monarchy by descent may.

Secondly, This deficiency in Nature might have been supplied, but that these
times were unhappy in the great power of the Lords; to please whom, the
Government is parcelled out into two shares: One is made Protector of the
King's person, the other Protector of the Kingdom; too many by one: For let
their persons be never so eminent for Abilities, if they be not as eminent for
Humility and Self-command, their hearts will soon overruled their heads into a
Faction. And therefore though the Earl of Warwick was a wise man, and the Duke
of Gloucester a wise man, yet the Earl of Warwick with the Duke of Gloucester,
were not wise. On the other side, the Protectorship of the King's person being
in the Duke of Exeter, and that of the Realm in the Duke of Gloucester, things
succeeded passing well; for they both had one public aim, and the Duke of
Exeter could comply with the Spirit of the Duke of Gloucester, who otherwise
was not so pliant. But after five years, the Duke of Exeter dying, and the
Government of the King's person devolving to the Earl of Warwick, who sided
with the proud Cardinal of Winchester against the Duke of Gloucester, and so
not only consumed the rest of the Kings Nonage in a restless disturbance of
Affairs, but also despoiled Henry the Sixth of the spirit of a King for the
future, and so the Kingdom of a King. For it was not the condition of Henry the
Sixth, to be endowed with a spirit of such height, but might well have been led
by Advice, and needed not the Earl of Warwick's rugged Brow to overlook him;
who was not content to have the King only attendant upon his Advice, but must
likewise have him under his Rod, to be corrected for his Faults; and that by a
Commission under the King's own Hand, and Seal, dated in the Eleventh year of
the King's Reign: and so under color of curbing, he killed that spirit in the
King, which otherwise doubtless had both spirit and pride enough to act himself
above his due height, and could not have been so long a Child, and so little a
Man as he was.

It is very true, that Henry the Fifth by Will, seemed to countenance his
Brothers; and it cannot be denied but the Duke of Gloucester was of such noble
parts, that they could hardly dilate in any work inferior to the Government of
a Kingdom. Nevertheless, to yield much to the Will of a diseased King in such
cases, is as ill a preceden^ as the making of a King by Adoption. And it had
been better for the people to have adhered to the Duke of Gloucester alone,
than by joining him with another, bring into a precedent such a luxuriant
Complement of State, as a Protectorship of a Kingdom, which is of such little
use to a Commonwealth, and of so bitter Fruit to the Party, as must needs bring
Repentance when it is too late. For he that can manage the Protectorship of a
Realm, without anger of good men, or envy of bad men, is fitting to live only
with Angels, and too good for the World. Nor did the Duke of Gloucester meet
with better measure how wise soever he was, and truly devoted to the good of
the Realm. For after four and twenty years Government, so wisely and faithfully
carried on by him, that Justice it self could not touch his person; unjustice
did, and he received this reward from his Nephew Henry the Sixth, that he died
in the dark, because the Cause durst not endure the light.

Now is Henry the Sixth persuaded that he is of full Age, he had laid aside his
Guardian the Duke of Gloucester; but forgetting to sue out his Livery, he
betakes himself from the Grace of God, into the warm Sun, (as the Proverb is)
changing the Advice of a faithful experienced wise Counselor, for the
Government of an Imperious Woman, his Queen: who allowed him no more of a King,
than the very Name; and that also she abused, to outface the World. And after
she had removed the Duke of Gloucester out of the way, undertook the sway of
the Kingdom in her own person, being a Foreigner, neither knowing nor caring
for other Law than the Will of a Woman.

Thus the Glory of the House of Lancaster goes down, and now a Star of the
House of York appears in the rising, and the people look to it. The Queen
hereat becomes a Soldier, and begins the Civil Wars between the two Houses,
wherein (her English party growing wise and weary) she prays Aid of Ireland; a
Nation that like unto Crows, ever wants to prey upon the Infirmities of
England. The Wars continue about sixteen years by ^its, wherein the first loss
fell to the English party, the pretensions being yet only for good Government.
Then the Field is quiet for about four years; after which, the clamor of ill
Government revives, and together therewith a claim to the Crown by the House of
York is avouched. Thereupon the Wars grew hot for about four years more; and
then an ebb of as long Quiet ensues. The Tide at last returns, and in two years
War, Comin. lib. 1. cap. 7.
ends the Quarrel, with the death of Fourscore Princes of the Bloud-Royal, and
of this good man, but unhappy King.

Unhappy King, I say, that to purchase his Kingdoms Freedom from a Foreign War,
sold himself to a Woman, and yet lost his Bargain, and left it to Observation,
That a Conscientious man that marries for by-regards, never thrives. For France
espied their advantage; they had maintained War with England from the death of
Henry the Fifth, with various success. The Duke of Bedford being Regent for the
English; for the space of fourteen years mightily sustained the fainting
condition of the English Affairs in those parts; and having crowned his Master
Henry the Sixth in Paris, in the ninth year died; leaving behind him an
honorable Witness, even from his Enemies: That he was a brave Commander, a
true Patriot, and a faithful Servant to his Lord and Brother Henry the Fifth,
and to his Son Henry the Sixth. But now the Duke of Bedford is dead; and though
France had concluded a Peace with the English, yet they could not forget the
smart of their Rod, but concluded their Peace upon a Marriage to be had with a
Woman of their own blood and interest. And what they could not effect by Arms
in th^^r own Field, they did upon English ground by a Feminine Spirit, which
they sent over into England to be their Queen; and in one Civil War (shedding
more English blood by the English Sword, than they could formerly do by all the
men of France) were revenged upon England to the full, Comin. lib. 3. cap. 8.
at the English-mens own charge. For what the English gain by the Sword, is
commonly lost by Discourse.

A Kingdom is never more befooled, than in the Marriage of their King: if the
Lady be great, she is good enough, though as Jezabel, she will neither
reverence her Husband, obey her Lord and King, nor regard his people. And thus
was this Kingdom scourged by a Marriage, for the sin of the wise men, that
(building upon a false Foundation) advised the King in the breach of Contract
with the Earl of Arminiack's Daughter. And thus the King also, for that
harkening to such Counsel, murdered the Duke of Gloucester, that had been to
him a Father; yielded up his Power to his Queen, (a masterless and proud woman,
that made him like a broken Idol without use) suffered a Recovery of his Crown
and Scepter in the Parliament from his own Issue, to the Line of York; then
renewing the War (at his Queens beck) lost what he had left of his Kingdom,
Country, and Liberty; and (like the King that forgot the kindness of Jehojada)
lost his Life by the hand of his Servant.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Parliament during the Reigns of these Kings.
THe Interest of the Parliament of England is never more predominant, than when
Kings want Title or Age. The first of these was the Case of Henry the Fourth
immediately; but of them all, in relation to the pretended Law of the Crown:
but Henry the Sixth had the disadvantage of both; whereof in its due place.

The pretended Law of the Crown of England, is to hold by Inheritance, with
power to dispose of the same, in such manner, by such means, and unto such
persons as the King shall please. To this, it cannot be denied, diverse Kings
had put in their claims, by devising their Crown in their last Will: but the
success must be attributed to some power under God, that must be the Executor
when all is done; and which must in cases of Debate concerning Succession,
determine the matter by a Law best known to the Judge himself.

Not much unlike hereunto, is the Case of Henry the Fourth, who like a Bud
putting up in the place of a fading Leaf, dismounts his Predecessor: First,
from the peoples regard, and after from his Throne; which being empty,
sometimes he pretended the resignation of his Predecessor to him, other whiles
an obscure Title by descent; his Conscience telling him all the while, that it
was the Sword that wrought the work. But when he comes to plead his Title to
Foreign Princes by protestation, laying aside the mention of them all, he
justifies upon the unanimous consent of the Parliament, and the people, in his
own only person. And so before all the World, confessed the Authority and
Power of the Parliament of England, in disposing of the Crown in special Cases,
as a sufficient Bar unto any pretended Right that might arise from the House of
Mortimar. And yet because he never walks safely that has an Enemy pursuing him
still within reach, he bethinks himself not sure enough, unless his next
Successors follow the dance upon the same foot: To this end an Act of
Parliament leads the Tune, whereby the Crown is granted or confirmed to Henry
the Fourth for life, and entailed upon his Sons, Thomas, John, and Humphrey, by
a Petition presented 5 Hen. 4.

Thus Henry the Fourth, 7 H. 4. cap. 2.
to save his own stake, brought his Posterity into the like capacity with
himself, 8 H. 4. n. 38.
that they must be Kings, or not subsist in the World, if the House of York
prevails. And so he becomes secured against the House of York treading on his
heels, unless the Parliament of England shall eat their own word. However, for
the present the House of Lancaster has the Crown entailed, and the Inheritance
is left in the Clouds, to be revealed in due time. 39 H. 6. n. 18.
For though this was the first precedent of this kind, yet was it not the last
wherein the Parliament exercised a Power by Grant or Confirmation, to direct
the Law and Course of the Crown as they pleased.

The due consideration hereof, will make the things that follow less strange.
For the Parliament, according to occasion, as the Supreme Power of this
Kingdom, exercised Supreme Jurisdiction in order to the safety of the Kingdom,
1 H. 6. n. 12, 13.
as if no King had been to be found, in issuing forth Writs under the Great
Seal; concluding of matters without the Royal Assent; 6 Hen. 6. n. 22.
treating of Peace with Foreign Nations, and of other matters; and determining
their Resolves before discovery made to the King of their Counsels; 1 H. 6. n.
2. 4.
making Ordinances, 9 H. 4. n. 21.
and ruling by them, 3 H. 6. n. 29. 2 H. 6. n. 27. 8 H. 6. n. 12. referring
matters determinable in Parliament, to be determined according to their
directions Authoritate Parliamenti; confirming Peace made by the King; 4 H. 6.
n. 15. Cir. 3. and 4. H. 5. n. 14.
protesting against Peace made without or against their consent; making
Ambassadors with power to engage for the Kingdom; 3 H. 6. n. 19.
making Generals of the Army, 1 He^. 6. n. 16. and 4 H. 6.
Admirals at Sea, Chancellors, Barons, and Privy Counselors, and giving them
instructions, 8 H. 4. n. 73. 8 Hen. 6. n. 27.
and 76. and 31. 5 H. 4. n. 57. 31 H. 6. n. 21. and binding them to observance
upon Oath, 28 H. 6. n. 51.
11 H. 4. n. 19, 2^ H. 6. n. 51, 52.
39. ordering the person of the King, denying his power of Judicature in
Parliament, and ordering his Household and Revenue; 17 H. 6. n. 11.
besides many other particulars. 8 Hen. 4. n. 71.


Now if such as these things were thus done, not by one Parliament, which
possibly might be overswayed by Factions, but by the course of a Series of
Parliaments, that mightily labored against Faction, and unworthy ends and
aims; that man who shall determine the same to be unjust or indiscreet, should
himself first be determined to be very just, and exceeding wise. Nor was the
Parliament partial in all this; but being in a way of Reformation, it set upon
the work of reforming it self.

Some that are very zealous in the point of Arbitrary and Absolute Government
of Kings in this Nation, and in all other, amongst other grounds rest upon this
one, That an English King has power to call Parliaments, and dissolve them; to
make and unmake Members as he shall please. I do easily grant, that Kings have
many Occasions and Opportunities to beguile their People; yet can they do
nothing as Kings, but what of right they ought to do. They may call
Parliaments, but neither as often or seldom as they please, if the Statue-Laws
of this Realm might take place. Nor if they could, is that power necessarily
and absolutely arising from Supremacy; seeing it is well known that such power
is betrusted by the Superior States in other Nations, to the Inferior, who
daily attend on public Affairs; and therefore can discern when the general
Conventions are most necessary. As touching the dissolving of Parliaments
against the wills of the Houses, it is true that sad precedents have been of
later times in that kind; and so for want of due attendance, Parliaments have
been enforced to adjourn, to prevent a worse inconvenience: but these are
infirmities better buried in silence, than produced as Arguments of power;
seeing it is evident that Kings themselves were no greater gainers thereby,
than an angry man is by his passions. It is true al^o, that Kings may make
Lords and Corporations that may send their Burgesses to the Parliament; and
thus the King may make as many as he will, (as the Pope did with the Bishops in
the Council of Trent) yet cannot he unmake them when he pleases, nor take the
Members from the Parliament, without attainder and forfeiture, according to the
known Law. Neither can all these Instances prove, that the Kings of England
have the sole and supreme power over the Parliament: Nor did the Parliament in
these times allow of any such Authority, and therefore proceeded for the
reforming of themselves by themselves, in many particulars, as the Statutes do
hold forth.

And first in the point of Elections, (for an error in that, is like an error
in the first Concoction, 7 H. 4. c. 15.
that spoils the whole Nutriment) they ordained, that the Election of Knights
shall be at the next County Court after the Writ delivered to the Sheriff. 23
H. 6. c. 15.


That in full Court, between the hours of eight and nine in the morning,
Proclamation shall be made of the day and place of the Parliament. That the
Suitors duly summoned, and others there present, shall then proceed to the
Elections; notwithstanding any Prayer or Commandment to the contrary. That the
names of the persons elected (whether present or absent they be) shall be
returned by Indenture between the Sheriff and the Elizors; and that a Clause to
that end shall be added to the Writ of Summons.

This was enough to make the Sheriff understand, 11 H. 4. c. 1.
but not to obey, 8 Hen. 6. c. 7.
till a penalty of one hundred pound is by other Laws imposed upon him, 23 H.
6. c. 15.
and a years imprisonment without Baibor Mainprise, besides damages for false
return in such cases; and the party so unduly returned, fined, and deprived of
all the Wages for his service. Thus the manner of Election is reduced; but the
persons are more considerable: for hitherto any man of English blood
promiscuously had right to give or receive a Vote, although his Residency were
over the wide World.

But the Parliament in the time of Henry the Fifth, 1 Hen. 5. c. 1.
reduced these also (whether they were such as did choose, 8 Hen. 6. c. 7.
or were chosen) unto their proper Counties, or else rendered them incapable to
vote or serve for any County. And the like Order was made for the Buroughs,
That no person must serve for any City or Borough, 23 Hen. 6. c. 15*
nor give vote in Electing such as shall serve for that Town, unless they be
both free, and resiants within that City or Borough: A Law no less wholesome
than seasonable. For the times of Henry the Fourth had taught men to know by
experience, That a King that has Soldiers scattered over the Kingdom, can
easily sway the County-courts, and make Parliaments for their own Tooth. Yet
this was not enough; for all Elizors, though of the meanest sort, yet are still
able to do as much hurt with their Vote, as those of the best sort, both for
wisdom and public mind, can do good by theirs. This made Elections much
subject to parties and confusions, and rendered the Parliament much less
considerable.

A remedy hereunto is provided, in the minority of Henry the Sixth, viz. That
no man should give his Vote in Elections in the County, 8 Hen. 6. c. 7.
unless he has forty shillings yearly in free Lands or Tenements; and this is
to be testified upon Oath of the party. And more plainly it is orderded,
(within two years after) that each Elizor shall have Frank-Tenement of that
value within the same County. And thus the Freemen yielded up their liberty of
Election to the Freeholders, 10 Hen. 6. c. 2.
possibly not knowing what they did; nevertheless, the Parliament well knew
what they did: this change was no less good than great.

For first, These times were no times for any great measure of Civility: The
Preface of the Statute shows, That the meanest held himself as good a man, as
the greatest in the Country; and this tended to Parties, Tumults, and Bloodshed.

Secondly, Where the Multitude prevail, the meaner sort are upon the upper
hand; and these (generally ignorant) cannot judge of persons nor times, but
being for the most part led by Faction or Affection, rather than by right
Understanding, make their Elections; and thereby the general Council of this
Nation, less generous and noble.

Thirdly, There is no less equity in the change, than policy: For what can be
more reasonable, than that those men only should have their Votes in Election
of the Common Council of the Kindom, whose Estates are chargeable with the
public Taxes and Assessments, and with the Wages of those persons that are
chosen for the public Service. But above all the rest, this advancing of the
Freeholders in this manner of Election, was beneficial to the Freemen of
England, although perchance they considered not thereof; and this will more
clearly appear, in the consideration of these three particulars.

First, It abated the power of the Lords and great Men, who held the inferior
sort at their Devotion, and much of what they had by their Vote.

Secondly, It rendered the Body of the People more brave; for the advancing of
the Freeholder above the Freeman, raises the spirit of the meaner sort to
public regards, and (under a kind of Ambition) to aspire unto the degree of a
Freeholder, that they may be somewhat in the Commonwealth. And thus leaving
the meanest rank sifted to the very bran, they become less considerable, and
more subject to the Coercive power, whilst in the mean time the Freeholder,
now advanced unto the degree of a Yeoman, becomes no less careful to maintain
correspondency with the Laws, than he was industrious in the attaining of his
degree.

Thirdly, But this means now the Law makes a separation of the inferior
Clergy and Cloistered people, from this service, wherein they might serve
particular ends much, but Rome much more. For nothing appears, but that these
dead persons in Law, were nevertheless Freemen in Fact, and lost not the
liberty of their Birthright by entering into Religion, to become thereby either
Bond, or no Free Members of the people of England.

Lastly, 23 H. 6. c. 15.
As a binding Plaster above the rest; First, a Negative Law is* made, that the
persons elected in the County, must not be of the degree of a Yeoman, but of
the most noted Knights, Esquires, or Gentlemen of the County; which tacitly
implies, that it was too common to advance those of the meaner sort. Whether by
reason of the former wasting times, Knights and Esquires were grown scant in
number, or (by reason of their rudeness) in account; or it may be the Yeomanry
grew now to feel their strength, and meant not to be further Underlings to the
great Men, than they are to their Feathers, to wear them no longer than they
will make them brave. Secondly, the person thus agreed upon, his Entertainment
must be accordingly; 23 H. 5. c. 11.
and therefore the manner of taxing in full County, and levying the rate of
Wages for their maintenance, is reformed and settled. And Lastly, their persons
are put under the protection of the Law in an especial manner; for as their
work is full of reflection, so formerly they had met with many sad influences
for their labor. 11 H. 6. c. 11.
And therefore a penal Law is made, against force to be made upon the persons
of those Workmen of State, either in their going to that Service, or attending
thereupon; making such Delinquents liable to Fine and Imprisonment, and double
damages. And thus however the times were full of Confusions, yet a foundation
was laid of a more uniform Government in future times, than England hitherto
had seen.

CHAP. XV. Of the Custos, or, Protector Regni.
KIngs, though they have vast Dimensions, yet are not infinite, nor greater
than the bounds of one Kingdom; wherein, if present, they are in all places
present; if otherwise, they are like the Sun gone down, and must rule by
reflection, as the Moon in the night. In a mixed Commonwealth they are integral
Members, and therefore regularly must act Per deputatum, when their persons are
absent in another Legialty, and cannot act Per se: Partly because their Luster
is somewhat eclipsed by another Horizon; and partly by common intendment they
cannot take notice of things done in their absence. It has therefore been the
ancient course of Kings of this Nation, to constitute Vicegerents in their
absence, giving them several Titles, and several Powers, according as the
necessity of Affairs required. Sometimes they are called Lord Warden, or Lord
Keeper of the Kingdom, and have therewith the gegeral power of a King; Rot.
Pat. 24 E. 1. m. 4.
as it was with John Warren Earl of Surrey, appointed thereunto by Edward the
First, who had not only power to command, but to grant; and this power
extended both to England and Scotland. And Peter Gaveston (though a Foreigner)
had the like power given him by Edward the Second over England, to the reproach
of the English Nobility; Rot. Pat. 1. E. 2. m. 2.
which also they revenged afterward. Sometimes these Vicegerents are called
Lieutenants; which seems to confer only the King's power in the Militia, as
a Lieutenant general in an Army. And thus Richard the Second made Edmund Duke
of York his Lieutenant of the Kingdom of England, to oppose the entry of the
Duke of Hertford (afterward called Henry the Fourth) into England, during the
King's absence in Ireland. And in the mean while the other part of the Royalty
which concerned the Revenues of the Crown, was betrusted to the Earl of
Wiltshire, Sir John Bush, Sir James Baggot, and Sir Henry Green, unto whom (men
say) The King put his Kingdom to farm. But more ordinarily the Kings power was
delegated unto one, under both the Titles of Lord Guardian of the Kingdom, and
Lieutenant within the same; such was the Title of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln,
and of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, Rot. Pat. 4. E. 2. Ps. 1 m. 18.
and of Audomar de Valentia Earl of Pembrooke; all of them at several times so
constituted by Edward the Second, as by the Patent-Rolls appears. So likewise
did Edward the Third make his Brother John of Eltham twice, and the Black
Prince thrice, and Lionel Duke of Clarence, and his Brother Thomas, each of
them once, in the several passages of Edward the Third beyond the Sea, in the
third, fifth, twelfth, fourteenth, sixteenth, 10 Hen. 5. p. ^. m. 9.
nineteenth, and thirty third years of his Reign; concerning which, see the
Patent-Rolls of those years. And Henry the Fifth gave likewise the same Title
and Authority to the Duke of Bedford, upon the King's Voyage into France; 7 H.
5. m. 23.
and afterward that Duke being sent over to second the King in the French Wars,
the Duke of Gloucester obtained the same power and place. But Henry the Sixth
added a further Title of Protector and Defender of the Kingdom and Church of
England; this was first given to the Duke of Bedford, 1 Hen. 6. p. 2. m. 3.
and afterward he being made Regent of France, it was conferred upon the Duke
of Gloucester: And toward the latter time of Henry the Sixth, 32 H. 6. m. 7.
it was granted by him to Richard Duke of York. This Title carried along with
it a power different from that of a King, only in honor; and the person so
adorned, may be said to sway the Scepter, but not to wear the Crown. And
therefore in the minority of Henry the Sixth, whenas the Government was ordered
by the Parliament, and to that end a Protector was made, and he well guarded
with a Privy Council, and they provided with Instructions; one of them was,
That in all matters not to be transacted ordinarily but by the King's express
consent, the Privy Council should advise with the Protector: But this is not so
needful, in regard that it concerns the power of executing of Laws, which by
right of the liberty of the Subject, is the known duty of the Scepter, in whose
hands soever it is holden. And therefore I shall pass to the Legislative Power,
wherein it is evident that the Protector's power was no whit inferior to the
King's power. For First, the Protector, Ex Officio, by advice of the Council,
did summon Parliaments by Writs, even as the Kings themselves, under their own
Test; and if they did not bear the Royal Assent, yet did they direct the same,
and received Petitions in Parliament to them directed as to Kings, and every
way supplied the room of a King, in order to the perfecting, publishing, and
enforcing of Law to Execution. Secondly, the Parliaments holden by Protectors,
and Laws therein made, are no whit inferior to those by the King, whether for
Honor or Power. And therefore if a Parliament be holden by the Lord Warden,
and sitting the Parliament the King in person shall arrive, and be there
present, neither is the Parliament interrupted thereby, nor the power thereof
changed at all; though the power and place of the Wardenship of the Kingdom
does utterly vanish by the personal access of the King: because in all places
where the King is subservient to the Kingdom or the Commonwealth, the Lord
Warden in his absence is conservient unto him, being in his stead, and not
under him; for the very place supposes him as not, because not present.

And this was by a Law declaratively published at such time as Henry the Fifth
was Regent of France; 8 H. 5. c. 1.
and therefore by common presumption, was likely to have much occasion of
residence in that Kingdom; a^^ it holds in equal force with all other Laws of
the highest size: which is the rather to be noted, because it is (though under
a Protector) obligatory to the King, and makes his personal presence no more
considerable than the presence of his shadow: For the King spent three whole
years in the French Wars, and during that time never saw England; where
nevertheless, in that interim, three Parliaments had been holden, one by the
Duke of Bedford, and two by the Duke of Gloucester; in the last of which this
Law was made. And in truth, if we look upon this Title of the Kingdoms
Guardianship in its bare Lineaments, without lights and shadows, it will appear
little better than a Crown of Feathers, worn only for bravery, and in nothing
adding to the real ability of the governing part of this Nation: Neither were
the persons of these Magnificoes so well deserving, nor did the Nation expect
any such matter from them. Edward the First was a wise King, and yet in his
absence chose Edward the Second to hold that place, he being then not above
fourteen years of age. Afterward Edward the Second's Queen, and the Lords of
her party, were wise enough in their way, and yet they chose Edward the Third
to be their Custos Regni, then not fourteen years old; his Father in the mean
time being neither absent from the Kingdom, nor deposed, but only dismissed
from acting in the administration of the Government. Rot. Pat. 5 E. 3. p. 1. m.
16.
Edward the Third follows the same example; he first makes his Brother John of
Eltham Custos Regni; and this he did at two several times; once, when he was
but Eleven years old; afterward, when he was about Fourteen. Then he made his
Son, the Black Prince, upon several occasions, three times Lord-Warden of the
Kingdom; once, he being about Nine years old; and again, when he was Eleven
years old; and once, when about Fourteen years old. Lastly, Edward the Third
appointed his Son Lionel Duke of Clarence unto this place of Custos Regni, when
as he was scarce Eight years old; all which will appear upon the comparing
their Ages with the several Rolls of 25 E. 1. and 3, 5, 12, 14, 26. 19 E. 3. If
therefore the work of a Custos Regni be such as may be as well done by the
Infants of Kings, as by the wisest Counselor, or most valiant man, it is, in
my opinion, manifest, that the place is of little other use to this
Commonwealth, than to serve as an attire to a comely person, to make it seem
more fair because it is in fashion; nor does it advance the value of a King one
grain above what his Personal endowments do deserve.

Hitherto of the Title and Power; the next consideration will be, of the
original Fountain from whence it is derived; wherein the Precedents are clear
and plain, that ordinarily they are the next and immediate Offspring of Kings,
if they be present within the four Seas, to be by them enabled by
Letters Patent or Commission. But whether present or absent, the Parliament
when it sat did ever peruse their Authority; and if it saw need, changed,
enlarged, or abridged both it and them. Thus was the Duke of Gloucester made
Lord Warden in the time of Henry the Fifth, (he being then in France) in the
room of the Duke of Bedford. The like also in Henry the Sixth's time, when as
the King was young: for then the Parliament made the Duke of Bedford Lord
Warden, and added unto that Title the Title of Protector. Afterward, at the
Duke's going over into France, they committed that service to the Duke of
Gloucester (if I forget not the nature of the Roll) during the Duke of
Bedford's absence, and with a Salvo of his right. Not unlike hereunto was the
course that was taken by the Parliament in these sullen later times of Henry
the Sixth; whereof more hereafter in the next Paragraph.

Lastly, The limitation of this high power and Title, is different according to
the occasion; for the Guardianship of the Kingdom by common intendment, is to
endure no longer than the King is absent from the Helm, either by voluntary
deserting the work, or employment in Foreign parts, though united they be under
the Government of the same King, together with this Nation, such as are these
parts of France, Ireland, and Scotland, then under the English Fee. This is
apparent from the nature of the Statute of Henry the Fifth formerly mentioned:
for if there was need to provide by that Statute that the Kings arrival and
personal presence should not dissolve the Parliament assembled by the authority
of the Custos Regni, then does it imply, that the personal presence of the
King, by and upon his arrival, had otherwise determined the Parliament, and
that Authority whereby it sat. But the Precedents are more clear, all of them
generally running in these or the like words, In absentia Regis, or Quamdiu Rex
fuerit in partibus transmarinis. It is also to be granted, that the King's will
is many times subjoyned thereunto, as if it were in him to displace them, and
place others in his absence: yet do I find no Precedent of any such nature,
without the concurrence of the Lords or Parliament; and yet that the Parliament
has ordered such things without his consent. For when Richard the First,
passing to the Holy Land, had left the Bishop of Ely to execute that place
during his absence in remote parts; the Lords finding the Bishop unfaithful in
his Charge, excluded him both from that place and Kingdom, and made the King's
Brother John, Lord Warden in his stead.

But in the Case of the Protectorship, which supposes disability in the person
of the King, the same by common intendment is to continue during the King's
disability; and therefore in the Case of Henry the Sixth, it was determined, 8
H. 6. n. 2.
that the Protectorship does Ipso facto cease at the King's Coronation; because
thereby the King is supposed able to govern: although in later times it has
not so been holden. For Kings have been capable of that Ceremony, as soon as of
the Title; and yet commonly are supposed to be under the rule of necessity of
Protectorship, till they be Fourteen years of age, or (as the Case may be)
longer. For although Henry the Sixth was once thought ripe when he was eight
years old, yet in the issue he proved scarce ripe for the Crown at his two and
twentieth year. Nevertheless, the default of Age is not the only incapacity of
Kings; they have infirmities as other men, yea more dangerous than any other
man; which though an unpleasant Tune it be to harp upon, yet it is a Theme that
Nations sometimes are enforced to ruminate upon, when God will give them Kings
in his Wrath, and give those also over to their own lusts in his Anger. In such
cases therefore this Nation sometimes have fled to the refuge of a Protector;
and seldom it is that they can determine for how long. When Henry the Sixth was
above Thirty years old, Richard Duke of York was made Protector, and Defender
of the Realm, and of the Church. It was done (if the Record says true) by the
King himself, Authoritate Parliamenti. It was further provided by the
Parliament, that though this was to continue Quamdiu Regi placuerit, yet the
Duke should hold that place till the Kings Son Edward should come to years of
discretion, and shall declare that he will take that place upon himself.

The ground hereof is said to be, Rot. Par. 32. H. 6. m. 7.
that the King was Gravi infirmitate detentus; which could not be intended of
any bodily distemper: for neither does any such thing appear by any Author or
Record. Nor if such had been, yet had it been an irrational thing in the
Parliament to determine the same upon the Princes discretion, and acceptance of
the Charge upon himself. It seems therefore, that it was Gravis infirmitas
Animi, and that this way of the Parliament tended to a tacit sliding him out
of the Government of the Kingdom, by a moderate expression of a general
incapacity in his person.

The Conclusion of all that has been said concerning this Title, is double:
One, that both the Custos Regni, and Protector, are not subsistent, but
consistent with that of a King, because it supposes a King under incapacity.

Secondly, That they tend to teach the people a necessity of having one Chief,
although it may, in truth, seem to be but a trick of State; like some pretty
carved Cherubims in the Roof of a Building, that do seem to bear it up, whenas,
in truth, it is the Pillars that support both it and them.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning the Privy Council.
NAtions do meet with their Exigences, as well as persons; and in such
condition, resolutions taken up by sudden conceit, are many times more
effectual than more mature deliberations; which require more time in composing,
are more slow in conclusion, let slip opportunities, and fall short of
expectation in the end. Such are the ways of debate in the Grand Representative
of the Kingdom. Add hereunto, that in putting the Laws in execution, greater
discretion is required than can enter into the head of any one man, and greater
speed than can stand with debate amongst many. And therefore it is beyond all
doubt, that the Conventicles of Council are no less necessary in their degree,
than the Assembly of the Estates of this Nation in their Grand Convention.

Yet with this Caveat, that one Genius may move in both; for otherwise the
motions of Government must needs be inconstant, inconsistent, and like that of
an Hypocrite, one way abroad, another way at home; neither comfortable to it
self, nor confiding to others. And therefore cannot these Privateer-Councils,
by any proportion of Reason, be better constituted, than by the Representative
it self, that it may be a Creature made in its own Image, one and the same with
the Image of the maker.

This was the wisdom and the practice of these times, 5 H. 4. n. 57. 8, n. 31.
11 n. 44.
more ordinarily than in the former: for the Parliament was no less jealous of
the power of Henry the Fourth, 2 H. 6. n. 15, 16
than of the infirmities of Henry the Sixth; nor more assured in the aims of
any of them all, 31 H. 6. n. 31.
than themselves were in in their own Title to the Crown.

Neither was this sufficient: for the Parliament looked upon themselves as a
body that sometimes must retire to rest; and upon the Privy Council, as
Watchmen subject to change; and therefore they not only give them
instructions, 8 H. 6. n. 8, 1, 2, 14, 26.
but engage them unto observance. Their instructions were sometimes occasional,
but some more general; of which I shall instance only in two, which were to be
of everlasting regard. First, That they should hold no pleas before them, that
is to say, at the Council Table, or at the Privy Council; nor before any of
them, unless as Judges in the Chancery, 8 H. 4. n. 7, 6.
Exchequer, or Benches at Westminster; so as whatsoever misscarriages were had
by the Privy Council in Cases of Judicature in the Star Chamber formerly, are
now reduced. The second rule was this, That no dispatches should be made at the
Council Table of any matters there agitated, 5 H. 4. n. 37.
but by general consent. Unity gives life to Action, 8 H. 4. n. 73.
carrying therewith both Authority and Power; and, when all is done, must
derive its original from without, and in all good ends from above. And
therefore, as a Seal to all the rest, it was wisely done by the Parliament to
draw the minds of the Privy Council together, and to present them jointly
before God, by an Oath, obliging themselves to a solemn and constant observance
of their instructions, 11 H. 4. n. 14, 39.
and to perievere therein. For the unchangeable God can only stamp a lasting
Image upon the mind, and bind the same, that is so subject to change, to an
unchangeable Law, whereby the people may be made as happy for continuance, as
for Righteousness and Peace.

The Privy Council thus settled, dressed, and girt, becomes of high esteem, both
for Trust and honorable Employment in great matters. The Mint is the very
Liver of the Nation, and was wont to be the chief care of the Parliament it
self in all the dimensions thereof. Now the Mint is two ways considered, viz.
either in the value of the Metal and Money, or in the Coinage.

The first of these, and things most immediately concurring therewith, the
Parliament still retains to its own immediate Survey; such as are the
inhibiting of exportation of Gold and Silver, and of melting of Coin into Plate
or Bullion; the regulating of the current of Foreign Coin, the reducing of
money, both Foreign and Domestic, imbased by Counterfacture, Clipping,
Washing, etc. the regulating of Allay of Gold and Silver; the regulating
Exchange, and such like: concerning all which, the Reader may please to peruse
the Statutes 2 H. 4. cap. 5, 6, 11, 13. 4 H. 4. cap. 16. 3 H. 5. Stat, 1. and
4. cap. 6. and 9. cap. 11. and 2 H. 6. cap. 6.

The second Consideration touching the Mint, 1 H. 6. c. 1.
concerned the election and government of the Officers, 9 H. 5. c. 6.
touching the Mint and Exchange, or the places where they shall be holden;
which, with some other matters of inferior nature, were left to the Order of
the Privy Council, either with the King, or alone, in case of the King's
absence or disability.

A second power given to the Privy Council, was in point of Trade and
Merchandise: Formerly they had somewhat to do therein, but still the Parliament
set out their bounds. In Richard the Second's time, the people had liberty of
Trade in some Commodities by way of Exportation, but the Privy Council might
restrain them upon inconvenience to the public. Now the same is confirmed; 17
R. 2. c. 7.
and though it concerned Corn only, yet it was a Precedent that led the way to
a much larger power in the Trade of the Staple Commodities of this Island, 4 H.
6. c. 5.
to enlarge or straiten it as they though meet. And so they became in a fair
way to have a principal power over the Revenues and Riches of this Nation. But
this lasted not long; 15 H. 6. c. 2.
for within ten years these Licenses of Transportation cost the Merchant so
much, 20 H. 6. c. 6.
as he could make little gains of all his care and pains; and therefore a rule
is set to a general allowance of all Transportation of Corn, till the price of
Wheat came to a Noble, and Barley at Three shillings, 23 H. 6. c. 5.
and no longer. This being first made Temporary, was afterward made Perpetual;
and so gave a restraint unto the power of the King and Council. But where no
positive restraint was made by any Statute, the King and Council seemed to have
the sole power left unto them, to open and shut the passes of Trade as they
pleased. For whereas the Commodity of Butter and Cheese was made Staple, the
King and Council had power to stop the sale thereof; 18 H 6. c. 3.
notwithstanding that the Law gave full liberty to the Subjects to bring all
their Staple-Commodities to the Staple. Nevertheless, this power in the King is
not primitive, but derived from the Parliament; for they had power over the
Kings Licenses and Restraints in such cases, as by the several Statutes do
appear.

A third power given to the Privy Council, was a power of Summons and Process
against Delinquents in cases of Riots, Extortions, Oppressions, and grievous
Offenses. 31 H. 6. c. 2.
The Summons to be by Privy Seal, the Process, Proclamations; and for
Nonappearance, Forfeiture, if the Delinquent be of the degree of a Lord; if of
inferior rank, then a Fine or Out-lawry. At the first view, the Statute has
an ill favored Aspect, as if it raised up a new Court of Judicature; but the
time is to be considered with the occasion; for it was made for the securing of
the peace in a turbulent time. And besides, the Law carries along with it two
restrictions, which puts the right of Cognizance in the Privy Council to the
question.

First, It saves the Jurisdiction of other Courts, and provideth further, That
no matter determinable by the Law of this Realm, shall be by this Act
determined in other form than after the course of the same Law in the Kings
Court, having determination of the same: which implies, that some kinds of
Riots and Extortions are of so high a nature, that though determinable in the
Kings^Court, yet are they to be determined before the Lords.

In the next place this Law provideth, That such offenses as are determinable
by the Law of the Realm, that is by Jury, shall still be so tried.

Secondly, 13 H. 4. c. 7.
If Conviction be upon Confession, or by Certificate, in case where (by reason
of parties and partakings) Inquisition by Jury cannot be had, there the Lords
shall immediately determine the same.

Lastly, If the Certificate be traversed, then the same shall be tried in the
King's Bench.

But there is another Restriction that undoeth all in effect in point of right;
because what this Law setleth therein, it setleth but for seven years, and
leaves the Privy Council to the limits of the Common Law for the future. In
the mean time, the Privy Council may be thought terrible, and very high, both
by this Law, and the greatness of the Lords. Kings Unkles, and Kings Brothers,
are Subjects indeed, but of so high a degree, that if a little goodness of
nature, or public spirit shine in them, they soon become the Objects of
admiration from the Vulgar, and gain more from them by their vicinity, than the
King can do at a distance. For the Commons of England, by the fair demeanor of
popular great men, are soon won out of their very Clothes; and are never more
in danger to part with their Liberties, than when the Heaven is fair above
their heads, and the Nobility serve the King, and flatter them. Nevertheless,
as I said, the season must also be considered of this power thus by this Law
contracted: for what the Lords gained not by their popularity, the Queen did
with her power; who now, mindful of her contemned beauty, and opposition from
the Duke of Gloucester against her Marriage, removes him out of the way, gets
the reins of Government into her hand, and like a Woman drives on in full
career.

The Duke of York, and other Lords, not liking this gallop, endeavor to stop
her pace; but are all overborn, the Duke taken prisoner; and doubtless had
pledged the Duke of Gloucester, but that the Heir apparent of the House of York
steps in to rescue. And new troubles arise in Gascoign; to put an end to which,
the Queens party gains, and takes the Duke of York's word for his good
behavior; gets this Law to pass, expecting hereby, if not a full settlement at
home, yet at least a respit to prevent dangers from abroad during the present
exigency. And thus upon the whole matter the Lords and Privy Council are
mounted up by the Commons to their own mischief.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Clergy, and Church Government, during these times.
IT was no new thing in the World, for Princes of a wounded Title to go to the
Churchmen for a Plaster; and they are ready enough to sing a Requiem, so as
they may be the gainers. The Princes therefore of the House of Lancaster had
offended against common sense, if they had not done the like themselves, being
not only guilty in their Title, but also by a secret Providence drawn into one
interest together with the Churchmen to support each other. For Henry the
Fourth and Archbishop Arundel meeting together under one condition of
Banishment, become Consorts in sufferings, and Consorts in honor: for Society
begotten in trouble is nourished in prosperity, by remembrance of mutual
kindnesses in a necessitous estate; which commonly are the more hearty, and
more sensible, by how much other contentments are more scant. But the
Archbishop had yet a further advantage upon the Heart of Henry the Fourth;
though he was no man of power, yet he was of great interest; exceedingly
beloved of the English Clergy, and the more for his Banishment-sake. Now
whatsoever he is, or has, is the Kings, and the King is his; the sweet
influence of the Archbishop and the Clergy enters into his very Soul; they are
his dearly beloved for the great natural love (as he says to the World) they
bear to him: what he could he got, what he got he gave to the Church. Thus the
Family of Lancaster becoming a mighty support unto the Clergy, Roman as it
was, they also became as stout maintainers of the cracked Title of that younger
House. So was fulfilled the old Prophecy of the Oil given to Henry the First
Duke of Lancaster, wherewith Henry the Fourth was anointed, That Kings anointed
with that Oil, should be the Champions of the Church. Now for the more
particular clearing of this, we are to consider the Church absolutely, or in
relation to the Political Government of the people. Concerning the latter, many
things did befall that were of a different piece to the rest, in regard that the
Lords for the most part were for the Clergy, and they for themselves; but the
Commons began to be so well savoured with Wickliff's way, that they begin to
bid defiance at the Clergies self ends and aims: and because they could not
reach their Heads, they drive home blows at their Legs.

A Parliament is called; and because the King had heard somewhat, feared that
the people were more learned than was meet for his purpose, and that the
Parliament should be too wise; he therefore will have a Parliament wherein the
people should have no more Religion than to believe; nor Learning, than to
understand his Sense; nor Wisdom, than to take heed of a Negative Vote. But it
befell otherwise: for though it was called the Lack-learning Parliament, yet had
it skill enough to discern the Clergies inside, and Resolution enough to enter
a second claim against the Clergies Temporalties; and taught the King a Lesson,
That the least understanding Parliaments are not the best for his purpose. For
though the wisest Parliaments have the strongest sight, and can see further
than the King would have them, yet they have also so much wisdom as to look to
their own skins, and commonly are not so venturous as to tell all the world
what they know, or to act too much of that which they do understand. But this
Parliament, whether wise or unwise, spoke loud of the Clergies superfluous
Riches; and the Kings wants are paralleled therewith; and that the Churchmen
may well spare enough to maintain Fifteen Earls, Fifteen hundred Knights, Six
thousand two hundred Esquires, and one hundred Hospitals more than were in his
Kingdom.

This was a strong temptation to a needy and courageous Prince; but the
Archbishop was at his Elbow. The King tells the Commons that the Norman and
French Cells were in his Predecessor's time seized under this color, yet the
Crown was not the richer thereby; he therefore resolves rather to add to, than
diminish any thing from, the maintenance of the Clergy.

Thus, as the King said, he did, though he made bold with the Keys of St.
Peter; for he could distinguish between his own Clergy and the Roman. The
people are herewith put to silence, yet harbor sad conceits of the Clergy
against a future time; which like a hidden fire, are not only preserved, but
increased by continual occasions; and more principally from the zeal of the
Clergy, now growing fiery hot against the Lollards. For that not only the
people, but the Nobles, yea, some of the Royal Blood, were not altogether
estranged from this new old way; whether it was sucked from their Grandfather
Duke John, or from a popular strain, of which that House of Lancaster had much
experience, I determine not. These were the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester.
Bedford was first at the helm of affairs at home, whilst the King acted the
Soldiers part in France, as ill conceited of by the Clergy, as they slighted
by him. At a Convocation once assembled against the Lollards, the Duke sent
unto their Assembly his Dwarf, as a great Lollard, though he was a little man;
and he returned as he went, even as Catholic as any of them all; Non tam
despectus a Clero, quam ipse Clerum despiciens atque eludens. This, Antiq. 278.
and some other sleights, the Clergy liked not; they therefore find a way to
send him into France, to be a reserve to his Brother: And in his room steps
forth Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, that was no less cool for the Roman way than
he. Henry the Fifth was not more hearty in Romes behalf: for although he was
loath to interrupt his Conquest abroad with contests at home; yet he liked not
of advancements from Rome; insomuch, as perceiving the Bishop of Winchester to
aspire to a Cardinals Hat, he said, That he would as well lay aside his own
Crown, as allow the Bishop to take the Hat. Nor was he much trusted by the
Clergy, who were willing he should rather engage in the Wars with France, than
mind the Proposals of the Commons concerning the Clergies Temporalties; which
also was renewed in the Parliament in his days. Above all, as the Lancastrian
House loved to look to its own; so especially in relation to Rome, they were
the more jealous, by how much it pretended upon them for its favor done to
their House. And therefore Henry the Fourth, the most obliged of all the rest,
looked to the Provisors more strictly than his Predecessors had; and not only
confirmed all the Statutes concerning the same already made, 9 H. 4. c. 8.
but had also provided against Provisors of any annual Office, 2 H. 4. c. 3, 4.
or Profit, or of Bulls of Exemption from payment of Tithes, 7 H. 4. c. 7, 8.
or from Obedience Regular or Ordinary, and made them all punishable within the
Statute. 5 H. 5. c. 4.
And further, made all Licenses and Pardons contrary thereto (granted by the
King) void against the Incumbent; and gave damages to the Incumbent in such
vexations: for the former Laws had saved the right to the true patron both
against Pope and King.

And thus the English Kings were Servants to the Church of England at the
charges of Rome, whilst the Popedom being now under a wasting and devouring
Schism, was unable to help it self; and so continued until the time of Henry
the Sixth, at which time the Clergy of England got it self under the power and
shadow of a Protector, a kind of Creature made up by a Pope and a King. This
was the Bishop of Winchester, so great a man, both for Birth, parts of Nature,
Riches, Spirit, and Place, as none before him ever had the like: For he was
both Cardinal, Legate, and Chancellor of England, and had gotten to his aid the
Bishop of Bath to be Lord Treasurer of England. Now comes the matter concerning
Provisors once more to be revived.

First, More craftily by colloguing with the Nobility, who now had the sway in
the Kings Minority; but they would none. An answer is given by the King, that
he was too young to make alterations in matters of so high concernment; yet he
promised moderation. The Clergy are put to silence herewith, and so continue
till the King was six years elder; and then, with Money in one hand, and a
Petition in the other, they renew their suit, but in a more subtle way: For
they would not pretend Rome, but the English Churches Liberties; they would not
move against the Statutes of Praemuniri, but to have them explained; it was not
much they complained of, 16 Rich. 2. c. 5. Antiq. Brit.
for it was but that one word Otherwhere, which, say they, the Judges of the
Common Law expound too largely, not only against the Jurisdiction of the Holy
See, but against the Jurisdiction of the English Prelacy, which they never
intended in the passing of those Laws. Their Clonclusion therefore is a Prayer,
That the King will please to allow the Jurisdiction of their Ecclesiastical
Courts, and that Prohibitions in such Cases may be stopped. But the King,
either perceiving that the Authority of English Prelacy was wholly dependant on
the Sea of Rome, and acted either under the shadow Legatine, or at the best
sought an Independent power of their own: Or else the King doubting that the
calling of one word of that Statute into question that had continued so long,
might endanger the whole Law into uncertainty, declined the matter, saving in
the moderation of Prohibitions. Thus the English Clergy are put to a retreat
from their Reserve at Rome: all which they now well saw, yet it was hard to
wean them. The Cardinal of Winchester was a great man, and loath to lay down his
power; but his own Tribe grew weary of him and his power. For the greater some
Churchmen are, unless they be better than men, the inferior and better
Churchmen are worse than men. At length therefore the Cardinal is Vnlegated,
and that power conferred upon the Archbishop of Canterbury; a man formerly well
approved, but by this very influence from Rome rendered suspected, Which he
perceiving, protested against the exercise of the Jurisdiction Legatine without
the Kings allowance, and so mannerly crept into the Chair.

The English Kings and Clergy having thus attained the right discerning of
each other, begin to take up a new way of policy; which was to hold nothing of
the Popedom, but the Form of Worship and Discipline; but as touching
Jurisdiction, they held it a high point of wisdom, either to fetch it nigh at
home, or to be silent in the matter; having now found a main difference between
the Popes Will, and the Church-Law; and therefore as formerly the Convocation
and Parliament joined in excluding of Foreigners from Church Livings, Holl.
under the notion of Intelligencers to Enemies abroad: So neither now will they
allow any provisions for English men; and upon this ground, the Dean and
Chapter of York refused to admit the Bishop of Lincoln to the Sea of York,
although assigned he was thereto by Pope Martin, and he the darling of Nations,
being by joint consent advanced to the Triple Crown, that had been formerly
tripled amongst three Popes, and troubled all Europe. And whereas during the
Tripapalty much money had been levied here in England, to serve for the
recovery of the Popedom to one of English interest; now by joint consent the
same is seized upon and stopped, as fuel from the fire, and spent by Henry the
Fifth in the recovery of a Kingdom in France, that should have been employed in
recovery of a Popedom at Rome. These things concurred to give a wound to the
Popedom, that was never cured to this day.

Nevertheless, the English Clergy was no loser by all this, but gained in the
whole sum. For as it made them more depending on the Crown, so it made the
Crown more fast to them, from which they had received more real immunities and
power, than the Pope ever did, or was able to give them; and might expect to
receive many more. What personal respects these three Kings showed them, has
been already touched. Henry the Sixth added one favor, which made all the rest
more considerable. Hitherto they had used to meet in Convocation as upon the
interest of Rome, and little notice was taken of them; now the Nation owns
them, and in some respects their work; and it is granted, That the Clerks of
Convocation called by the Kings Writ, 8 H. 6. c. 2.
and their Menial Servants, shall have such privilege in coming, carrying, and
going, as the Members of the Parliament have. So as though they be not Members,
yet they are as Members, if they assemble by the Kings Writ, and not only by
the power of the Legate or Metropolitan. 4 Inst. c. 74.
The antiquity of this Court is great, yet not so great as has been supposed;
nor is it that Court of the Ordinary called the Church Gemot, mentioned in the
Laws of Henry the First, as not only the works thereof, therein set down, do
sufficiently declare; but also it is evident, that in Henry the Second's days,
the Grand Councils of this Kingdom were jointly mixed both of Clergy and
Laity. Nor could the Clergy shut the Laity from their Councils, till about the
times of Richard the First, or King John. From which time forward, the Laity
were so far from protecting of them, that (till these times now in hand) all
their care was to keep them from violating the Liberty of the people. That they
were many times notwithstanding called together by the Kings Writ before these
times, Mr. Will. Pry^.
has also been cleared by another Pen. That their work at such times was to
advise concerning such matters as should be propounded to them by the King in
Parliament, their Summons do show; the particulars whereof, for the most part,
concerned supplies of Money from the Churchmen. And yet sometimes matters of
great moment were debated therein. As in a Convocation summoned by Henry the
Fifth in his ninth year, the pre-eminence of Pope Eugenius above the Council of
Bazil was debated; and as much as they could, they determined the same. The
credit of their decisions in former time, I believe was not much amongst the
people; because the men were looked upon with an evil eye. Now that the
Parliament seems to own them in their way, and to protect them; their
determinations are somewhat. The Churchmen espy their opportunity, and whilst
the benevolent influence of the State is in its first heat, they improve it in
this manner. The times were now come about wherein light began to spring forth,
conscience tobestir itself, and men to study the Scriptures. This was imputed
to the idleness and carelessness of the Clergy, who suffered the minds of young
Scholars to luxuriate into Errors of Divinity, for want of putting them on to
other Learning, and gave no encouragement to studies of humane Literature, by
preferring those that were deserving. Antiq. Brit.
The Convocation taking this into consideration, do decree, That no person
should exercise any jurisdiction in any Office, as Vicar General, Commissary,
or Official, or otherwise, unless he shall have first in the University have
taken Degrees in the Civil or Canon Law. A shrewd trick this was to stop the
growth of the study of Divinity, and Wickliff's way: and to imbellish men's
minds with a kind of Learning that may gain them preferment, or at least an
opinion of abilities beyond the common strain, and dangerous to be meddled
with. Like some Gallants that wear Swords as Badges of Honor, and to bid men
beware, because they possibly may strike, though in their own persons they may
be very Cowards. And no less mischievously intended was this against the rugged
Common Law, a Rule so nigh allied to the Gospel-way, as it favors Liberty;
and so far estranged from the way of the Civil and Canon Law, as there is no
hope of accommodation till Christ and Antichrist have fought the field.

Thus much of the Church of England, in relation to the State, now as it is
absolutely considered, in regard of the several degrees of persons therein.
Although these three Kings were much endeared to the English Clergy, yet the
difference between the Laity and them growing high, the King's principal care
is now, to keep an even hand between them both: for he that will back two
Horses at once, must keep them even, or put his joints to the adventure. First,
Henry the Fourth grants, That no more shall be paid to Rome for the
first fruits of Archbishops and Bishops, than has been anciently used. 6 Hen.
4. c. 1.
The occasion hereof was, to prevent the horrible mischief, and damnable custom
of Rome; for such are the very words of that Statute, unto which the Clergy
gave their Vote, if not the first Vote: and therefore certainly did neither
believe, nor honor that infallible Chair as their own Mother; nor did they
bear her Yoke, further, than their own benefit and reason of State did require.
For though the immediate benefit of this Law did descend upon the Prelacy, yet
it also much concerned the interest both of the honor and benefit of the
Nation, that the Clergy should not be at the Pope's pleasure to tax and assess
as he thought good.

Secondly, 2 Hen. 5. c. 1.
Henry the Fifth added unto the Prelacy some kind of increase both of Honor
and Power, viz. to visit Hospitals that were not of the King's own foundation,
and to reform abuses there: for the Patrons either had no power to punish, or
will or care to reform them. And thus upon the point, although they lost a
Right, yet they gained ease.

Thirdly, 3 Hen. 5. c. 8.
The same King confirmed by a Statute unto Ordinaries, the cognizance of
Accounts of Executors for their Testators Estates; which formerly was granted
by the Canon Law, but they wanted power to execute, and a Right to have and
receive. In all these the Clergy or Prelacy were the immediate gainers. In as
many other things the people were made gainers, and yet the Clergy were no
losers, otherwise than (like the Kite) of that prey which was none of their own.

First, They refused formerly to grant Copies of Libels, either thereby to
hinder the course of Prohibitions, or to make the Copies the moredear, and
Money more cheap with them. Henry the Fifth, finding this a grievance to the
people, passes a Law, That all Ordinaries shall grant the Copies of Libels at
such time as by Law they are grantable.

Secondly, As the probate of Wills had anciently belonged to the Ordinary by
the Canon Law, 2 H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 1.
and formerly also confirmed to them by the Parliament; so it also regulated
and settled the Fees for such Service. But the Clergy having been ever under
the noutriture of their Mother Rome, that loved to exceed, they likewise
accounted it their liberty to take what they could get. But the nigher they
come to engage with Kings in their Government according to Law, the more
reformed they grow. Formerly Edward the Third had settled their Fees, but they
would not hold to the rule. Now the Law is doubled by Henry the Fifth, with a
penalty of treble damages against Delinquents. Furthermore, the very Priests
could not contain their Pater-Nosters, Requiems, Masses, 3 H. 5. Stat. 2. c. 8.
and such Wares they had engrossed, and set thereof what price they pleased.
The Market was risen to that height, that Edward the Third undertook to set a
rate upon those Commodities: but that also would not hold long; Henry the Fifth
he sets a certain stipend somewhat more than Edward the Third had done, 2 H. 5.
Stat. 2. c. 2.
and yet less than the Priests had formerly.

Lastly, Some Laws were made, wherein the Commonwealth gained, and the Church
were losers. First, Whereas the Churchmen formerly held all holy things proper
and peculiar to their own Cognizance, especially such as concerned the Worship
of God; the Parliament now began to be bold with that, and never asked leave.
It had now for a long time, even since the Saxon times, been the unhappy
condition of this Church of England amongst others, to decay continually in
Piety and right Devotion; but through the light that now revived, and God's
goodness, it in these times came to pass, that the people did entertain some
sense of their duty toward God more than formerly, and begin to quarrel the
abuses done to the Lords day in the manner of the keeping thereof. London has
the honor for beginning this Reformation by an Act of their Common Council. 27
H. 6. c. 5.
The Parliament within seven years after that engage the whole Kingdom in that
service (though therewith also are adjoined other holy Feasts then holden) and
all Fairs and Markets are enjoined to cease on that day, under pain of
forfeiture of Goods exposed to sale; excepting Victual, and excepting the four
Sundays in Harvest. And thus though places had their Consecration allowed by
the Parliament, and immunity from trading in Fairs and Markets by the space of
a hundred and sixty years before this time; yet that time which God by his own
Law had reserved to his own self, never came under regard to be allowed till
now; and yet not by the motion of the Clergy, nor by their furtherance. For by
their thrusting in the Holy days, they made them equal with the Lords day; and
in Harvest-time superior, by preserving them in force, whenas the Lords days
were set aside. So God had somewhat of these men, but the Pope more. Secondly,
As the Churchmen lost in the former, so the Prelacy in this that follows.

The Prelates had long since obtained the Trial of Bastardy, and therein could
strain themselves so far, as to put the case of Inheritance into danger, where
the point otherwise was clear enough. And this grew to that height, that it
endangered the disinheriting of the Heirs of the ^arl of Kent. ^ H. 6. c. 11.
It is therefore now provided, that before the Ordinary in such Cases proceeded
to Trial, Proclamations shall be made in Chancery, to summon all pretenders of
Interests or Titles to come before the Ordinary to make their Allegations; and
all Trials of Bastardy otherwise made, shall be void; so as whatever the Canon
did, the Parliament would not trust to the Ordinaries Summons, nor allow of
their power in any other manner than the Parliament thought meet. One thing
more remains, wherein the true Church of Christ seemed to lose, and yet
gained; and the Clergy, joining with the King, seemed to gain, and yet lost:
this was the point of Worship which had long stumbled the minds of the people;
and was now grown to that strength* that nothing but an Act of Parliament can
keep it under. This opinion concerning Worship was at the first so young, that
it was not yet baptized with any proper name, but called, Opinion contrary to
the Church-determinations, or Catholic Faith. And against this the Clergy now
stormed more than ever formerly; because it was grown to such a height, as if
it meaned to overtop theirs. To this end they procured an Act to pass,

That all Preachers, ^ H. 4. c. 15.
Teachers, Writers, Schoolmasters, Favorers, or notoriously defamed persons
for* the maintenance of such Opinions, shall be (upon conviction before the
Ordinary, according to the Canons) imprisoned in the Diocesans Prison, and
Fined according to the Diocesans discretion.

If upon Conviction, he shall not abjure, or shall relapse, he shall be
delivered unto the Secular power, and be burned.

And that Preachers without, License of the Diocesan, should be restrained.

Concerning which Law, I shall first show what change in the Laws of this
Kingdom was endeavored, and what was really effected.

First, 4^ E. 3. c. 3.
It is an undeniable ground. That no Freeman can be put to answer before any
Judge, but upon presentment, or other matter of Record foregoing, and by due
Process of Law. And yet it had been ruled, that strong presumption, and
complaint of credit after it is entered, is sufficient Record to ground
proceedings in this Case, to attach the party to Answer. 10 H. 7. fol. 17.
But by this Law a Trial is introduced, that neither resleth upon any
peremptory Accusation, or proof of Witness, but merely upon Inquisition, upon
the Oath and Conscience of the party suspected* which in the latter days has
been called the Trial upon the Oath Ex Officio. For such was the Trial allowed
by the Canon in these times; as appears in the Constitutions of Otho, Otho de
Jur. Jur. Calumn.
and the Decrees of the Archbishop Boniface; by whom it was endeavored to be
obtruded upon the Laity, about the times of Henry the Third, or Edward the
First: but even the Clergy then withstood it, as Lindwood confesses. And Otho
in his very Constitution does hold this forth by that clause of his, Lind. de
Jure Juran. 2.
Non obstante obtenta consuetudine.

Seconly, This Law does endeavor to introduce a new Judge, with a power to
Fine* and Imprison according to discretion; and a Prison allowed to him as his
own peculiar, and yet the Writ De cautione admittenda* still held its power, to
regulate that discretion as formerly it had done; which by the way may render
the power of this Law suspicious.

Thirdly, The Clergy are not content to have the Estates and Liberties of the
bodies of the people at their discretion; but they must also have their Lives.
Although no Freeman's life could by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom come
to question, but by the Judgment of his Peers; nor could the Clergy by their
own Canons interesse sanguini, viz. They cannot put any man to death: but by
this Law they may send any man to death by a Sentence as sure as death,
Tradatur potestati seculari: And such a death, not as the Civil Magistrate is
wont to execute, by a speedy parting of the Soul from the Body, by loss of
Blood, stop of Breath, or such like; but the Clergy must have Blood, Flesh,
Bones, and Life and all, even the edge of non entity it self, or they are not
satisfied: and thus the Writ De comburendo Hoeretico entered into the World.
True it is, that some sparks of this fire are found in former times; and
Bracton touches upon such a Law, in case of a Clerk convict for Apostasy;
Primo degradetur, and post per manum Laicalem Comburatur; which was indeed the
Canon, and that by his own Confession; for it is grounded upon one, Secundum
quod accidit, in the Synod at Oxford under Archbishop Becket. But that Case
concerns a Clerk, who by his profession has put himself under the Law of the
Canon; and it was only in case of Apostasy, himself being turned Jew; and this
also done upon a sudden pang of zeal and power of an Archbishop that would know
no Peer. Nor do we find any second to this Precedent by the space of Two
hundred years next ensuing: Lind. lib. 5. de Apostat.
neither does the Decree of Archbishop Peckham, who was not long after Becket,
treating about Apostasy in Laymen, mention any other punishment, than that
they are to be reclaimed Per censuras Ecclesiasticas. Nor yet that of
Archbishop Arundel, amongst the Constitutions at Oxford, not long before this
Statute; who treating about the crime of Heresy, lays the penalty upon
forfeiture of Goods* with a Praesertim, as if it were the grand punishment.
Lind. lib. 5. de Heret. fol. 1^^.
And Linwood in his Gloss upon that place, setting down the Censures against
Heresy, Hodie sunt (says he) damnandi ad mortem; as if it were otherwise, but
as yesterday.

Fourthly, the next endeavor is to bring the cognizance of all, wholly to the
Ecclesiastical Court, without further Appeal; for so the words concerning
Conviction of Heresy are: Whereupon evidence shall be given to the Diocesan of
the same place, or his Ordinary in that behalf.

These changes, I say, were endeavored to be brought upon the Government of
this Kingdom; and yet the Law, for all this, suffered no change; nor did the
House of Commons (however the name is thrust into the English Ordinary Print)
ever yield unto the passing of the same; but in the Parliament next ensuing,
complained thereof, and protested they would not be bound by such Laws whereto
the House of Commons had not given their consent. And this dashed the Law quite
out of countenance; (although it holds the place still amongst the number) for
within four years after, the Clergy bring in another Bill of the same nature
in general, though varying in some particulars; 8 H. 4*
but the same was again rejected.

All the strength therefore of this Law rests upon the King and House of
Lords, engaged by the Clergy, (whom they trusted for their Religion; for
Book-learning was with them of small account) and no less by the King; who knew
no better way to give the Clergy content, that gave him so much, as to set the
Crown upon his Head; nor to discharge his Royal Word, Antiq. Brit. ^^3.
passed by the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, in his behalf unto the
Convocation, viz. That they were sent to declare the Kings good will to the
Clergy and Church-Liberties; and that he was resolved to defend all the
Liberties of the Church by his Kingly power, and to punish Heretics and the
Churches Enemies in such manner as the Clergy should think meet; and therefore
desired their daily prayers for his own and the Kingdoms safety. Walsingham,
Ypo. Neustr. 157.
And yet for all this, the people were not of this mind; no small part of the
Kingdom being overspread with these opinions.

After Henry the Fourth comes Henry the Fifth, and he also makes another essay;
the former opinions, then known only by the general names of Heresy, are now
baptized by the new name of Lollardry, and grown so overspreading, that all the
troubles of these times are still imputed to them. It was indeed the Devils old
and common trick, thus to inrage earthly powers against these men; although he
be hereby but an instrument in the hand of the chief Builder, that in laying a
sure Foundation, does as well ram down as raise up; for the malice of these men
made the people of God to multiply. Henry the Fifth also published a Law to
this same purpose.

That all persons in place of Government, 2 H. 5. c. 7.
shall swear to use their diligence to destroy all Heresies and Errors, called
Lollardries.

That all Lollards convict by the Clergy, (left to the secular power,
according to the Laws of Holy Church) shall forfeit their Lands and Tenements
to their Lords: And the King to have the Year and Day, and Waste, and all his
Goods and Chattels.

If the Lord be the Ordinary, the King shall have all.

No forfeiture to be, till the Delinquent be dead.

They shall be found by Indictment before the Justices of the Peace.

This Indictment being found, shall be sent to the Ordinary with the Prisoner.

The Indictment shall not be for Evidence, but only for Information.

These are the principal things contained in this Law, which by the manner of
the composure, seems to be of an uncertain color, neither made by the
Clergy, nor Laity, but spoiled between them both. The intent thereof seems
to be principally to draw on the House of Commons to pass the Law, under hope
of gain by the forfeitures; for the penalty is like that of Felony, though the
crime be not expressly declared to be Felony. But the intent fell short in event.

For first, The nature of the Crime is not defined, nor declared by any Law;
and therefore can no man by Indictment be found to be such.

Secondly, No penalty of death has been by any former, or by this Law,
determined upon such as are guilty; for it is not enacted by any Law, that such
persons shall be delivered to the Secular power, etc.

Thirdly, This Statute determining the forfeiture to be not till death; and
neither that, nor any other Law of this Kingdom determining death; then is no
forfeiture determined.

Fourthly, Though this Law takes it for granted, that Heresy and Errors
belong to Ecclesiastical Cognizance, yet the same allows of no further
proceedings than Ecclesiastical censures.

Lastly, By this Law there can be no proceeding, but in case of Indictment,
(for otherwise without Record no forfeiture can be) therefore where no
Indictment is, there is no forfeiture. In all which regards, it is evident that
the Clergy could by this Law neither get fat nor blood. Fox. Marturol. 589.
And therefore at their Convocation, in the next year following, they took
another course, and ordered that three in every Parish should make presentment
upon Oath of such persons as are defamed for Heretics, and the truth so far as
they can learn. Which puts me in mind of a Presentment that I have seen by some
of St. Mary Overies in these times: Item, We saine, that John Stevens is a man
we cannot tell what to make of him; and that he has Books we know not what
they are. This new course shows plainly, that the former held not force as they
intended it: So God blasted the practices of the Clergy at this time also;
rendering this Law immaterial that had the form, as the other missed in the form
and had the matter.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Court of Chancery.
IT often befalls in State Affairs, that extraordinary exigencies require
extraordinary remedies, which having once gotten footing, are not easily laid
aside, especially if they be expedient for Prerogative. The Privy Council in
the Star Chamber pretends default of the Common Law, both in speed and
severity, in Cases whereby the State is endangered: The Chancery pretends
default by the Common Law in point of equity and moderation. The people taken
with these pretenses make that Rod more heavy, which themselves had already
complained of. What the Chancery was in times past has been already showed;
still it is in the growing and gaining hand.

First, 4 H. 4. c. 8.
In the Judicatory power it prevailed in relation to the Exchequer; exercising
a kind of power to survey the proceedings thereof, in cases of Commissioners
distrained to account for Commissions executed, or not executed. For it was no
easy matter to execute Commissions from the Exchequer in those times of
parties; nor were men willing with such unwelcome occasions between Friends and
Neighbors; and, it may be, they grew weary of embroiling themselves one
against another; and of being Instruments of the violent countermotions of
Princes and great men.

Secondly, It gained also upon the Admiralty, which by former Laws had
Jurisdiction in all cases incident upon the great Sea. But now either through
neglect of the Admiral, or the evil of the Times, occasioning Piracies to grow
epidemical, the ill government upon the Sea became dangerous to the State,
trenching upon the Truce made between this and other Nations.

For a remedy whereof, 2 H. 5. c. 6.
first Conservators of the Truce were settled in every Port, who had power
committed to them to punish Delinquents against the public Truce, both by
Indictment at the Kings suit; and according to the course of the Admiralty by
complaint, saving matters of death to the cognizance of the Admiral. But this
was soon found defective; for Justice done in the dark is many times more
respective, and less respected; 2^ H. 6. c. 2.
and therefore within a few years it is provided, That Offenders against the
Kings Truce upon the Sea, or in any of the Ports, shall be proceeded against in
the Chancery before the Chancellor; who has power given him of calling to his
assistance some of the Judges to execute the Statute of 2 H. 5. foregoing, 14
H* 6. c. 8.
by a handsome contrivance. For that Statute was once and again suspended, ^*
H. 6. c. 11.
for the rigor that was used by the former Conservators, who being borderers
upon the Sea, for their own peace, spared as few as they could; which had so
discouraged the Seamen, that the Kingdom had been almost utterly bereaved of
its strength at Sea. Nevertheless, all this while, these Laws were but penal,
and not remedial for the parties wronged: and therefore another Law is made to
give the Chancellor and Judges power to make restitution and reparation. 31 H.
6. c* 4.


Thirdly, The Chancery gained upon the Ecclesiastical Court. For whereas by the
Canon the Churchmen were to be judged by their Superiors, according to
Ecclesiastical and Ordinary Jurisdiction; and the iniquity of the times was
again returned to that height, that Parents could not enjoy their own Children,
but the little ones were allured, stolen away, and detained in Cloisters; nor
did the Churchmen afford remedy in such cases: 4 H. 4. c. 17.
A Law was made, that upon complaint hereof made to the Chancellor, the
Provincial should be by him sent for, and punished according to his discretion.

Lastly, The Chancery encroached upon the Common Law: For whereas the stirs
between the two Houses of York and Lancaster began to rise, men made their
dwellings in places of security and strength; Women likewise and other persons
flying thither for refuge; especially such of them as had most to lose; these
were, contrary to the Law of common honesty, urged to engage their Estates unto
the desires of such to whom they had fled for refuge; and sometimes compelled
to marry, before they could gain their liberty: 31 H. 6. c. 9.
It was now provided that all such complaints should be heard and determined by
the Chancellor.

Secondly, 4 H. 4. c. 3.
As touching the Ministerial power of the Chancery, this likewise was enlarged,
13 H. 4. c. 7.
in making of Process to compel appearance in cases of forcible Entries, 2 H.
5. c. 9.
Murders, Manslaughters, Robberies, Batteries, Assemblies in nature of
Insurrections, Riots, and Plunder, committed by Servants upon their Masters
goods, before their Masters death, and suchlike offenses now grown common, and
in need of sudden remedy.

Thus as the work and power of the Chancery grew, so did the place and person
of the Chancellor grow more considerable; raised now from being the Kings
Secretary (for no better was he in former times) to be the Kingdoms Judge; and
of such trust, that although the King might make election of his own Secretary,
yet the Parliament would first know and allow him that must be trusted with the
power over the Estates of so many of the people; And therefore did in these
times both place and displace him as they saw expedient.

In a word, 2 H. 4. c. 11.
he is become the Kingdoms Darling, and might be more bold with the Common Law
than any of his Peers.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Courts of Crown-Pleas, and Common Law.
AS the Chancery on the one side did swell and increase, so was the King's Bench
in an ebb: the Council Table in the Star Chamber on the one side, and the
Itinerant-Courts in the Country intercepted, and drew away much to their own
shares; making themselves fat, the King's Bench lean, and the Rural Courts for
Crown-Pleas almost to starve. The Crown-Pleas formerly had been determinable in
the King's Bench, Jail-deliver, Oyer and Terminer; and many of them by Justices
of the Peace, Coroners, and Sheriff. The Jail-deliver was afterward united to
the Judges of Assize; and if one of them were a Clergyman, then to the other,
and chief men of the County. This was useful for the Public, but not
beneficial for some men; and therefore they labored for Commissions,
especially directed to parties that they thought would partake: but these were
found soon to be dangerous, 2 E. 3. cap. ^*
soon taken away, and the Gaol delivery restored to the Judges of Assize, as
formerly. The Commissions of Oyer and Terminer were sued forth upon
extraordinary Emergencies and Offenses, wherein the State was much concerned
for speedy Execution. In former times, both these and Gaol-deliveries were but
rarely had, and then granted unto some that perchance knew more of the Case,
than beforehand was meet to be known. Edward the Third amended this Error,
and ordered that no Commissions of Oyer and Terminer should issue forth, 34 E.
3. c. ^.
but unto Commissioners named by the Court, and not by the party complaining.
But the Judges of Assize are now on the growing hand, both for Honor, Use, and
Power; the rather, because their persons are of high repute in the Benches at
Westminster, which are the Masterpieces of Judicature, and their Iters are
constant and ordinary. Nevertheless, the Judges of Assize, though they have the
Jail-deliver annexed to them, yet have they not that absolute power of the
King's Bench; but are still under the rule of their Commission, which is not
alterable but Parliament; and which by it was altered by way of adding new
powers as new crimes arose, that required the eye of the State to provide. And
so the Judges of Assize by degrees grew to be the ordinary Administrators of
Justice throughout the Kingdom, yet holding still forth to them a limited
power, 11 H. 4. c. 1.
to hear and determine in some Cases; but in others only to enquire, and
certify, as in the case of false Returns by the Sheriff of persons elected for
the Parliament. And also in cases concerning the Statutes of Laborers, and
unlawful Games and Pastimes; in which case the Certificate is to be made to the
Chancellor. 2 H. 4. c. 21.
And also in cases concerning Liveries, 13 H. 6. c. 3.
contrary to the Statutes wherein the Certificate is to be made to the
King's Bench; which power in this last case, continued in that manner by the
space of thirty years; 8 Hen. 6. c. 4.
and then by another Statute they had the power to determine such cases before
themselves. 4 Hen. 5. c. 7.
In like manner they had power to hear and determine cases of falsehood, in
counterfeiting and corrupting of Money, by washing, clipping, etc. And also
defaults committed by Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and their Officers, against the
Statutes of Forcible Entries, 8 Hen. 6. c. 9.
and of wearing of Liveries, as aforesaid.

These were signs of much confidence and trust in them; and yet
notwithstanding, not in these, nor in these, were the Penalties by Fine left to
the Arbitry of the Judges; no nor to the Justices of the King's Bench, but were
by the very Letter of the Law determined. 1^ H. 4. c. 2.
Nor would the Parliament trust these men with doing Justice in the cases
aforesaid, in their own Counties where they dwelled; nor did it think expedient
to allow the Chief Justice of the King-bench unto that service in any of them
all, but only once in the County of Lancaster, and then only at the King's
pleasure. Otherwise it was to be as was used by the space of one hundred years
foregoing; 5^ E. 3. ^. 113.
possibly because his power was too great to be trusted amongst the people. 8
Rich. 2. c. 2.


Lastly, West. 2. c 3^
the Judges of Nisi Prius were anciently made by Edward the First, by whom also
the Assizes were settled at certain times of the year; and afterward by the
Statute of York, 12. E. 2. c. 3.
the Nisi Prius in smaller cases was granted before one Justice of the Bench
where the Plea depends, and one substantial man of the County; but those of
greater concernment were to be had before two Justices of that Bench; or in
case they were wanting, 14 E. 3. c. 16.
then before Justices of the other Bench; or in default of them, before the
chief Baron, if he were a man of Law; and in default of that, before the Judges
of Assize. Therefore in those days the Justices of the Benches in their Iters
in the Counties, were divided in their power; some being for Assizes, others
for Nisi Prius; and in some times and cases, some were for both. For in those
times of Edward the Third, Judges of Assize had power to enquire in some
matters that concerned the Crown, 4 E. 3. c. 11.
or to try Nisi Prius. Nor were these powers united, till in Henry the Sixth's
time, Justices of Nisi Prius had the power of Oyer and Terminer annexed to them
in all cases of Felony and Treason.

What was formerly provided by Edward the Third, and Richard the Second, 2 E.
3. c. 8.
for instruction to these Judges, and to bind them thereto by solemn Oath, 14
E. 3. c. 14.
I shall not particularly mention, 2^ E. 3. c. 1.
but shall leave the consideration of the Original of the whole Judicature of
this Nation, 8 R. 2. c. 3.
unto the Readers observation upon the premises. 5 R. 2. c. 1.


CHAP. XX. Concerning Sheriffs.
HEnry the Fourth, after a small rest in his Throne, though he always sat
loose, sought after the civil Peace, as the cornerstone of his subsistence,
and that by a way of Justice; which found more acceptance with the Vulgar, than
the common Education of the greater number in these times could promise: for
the worst of men cannot endure to suffer Injustice, though themselves will do
it. Now because where Kings are reputed to be the Fountain and Life of Justice,
Sheriffs may be reputed to be the breath thereof; and by their Irregularities
do render the Government of the King as loathsome, as unsavory breath does the
person whose it is: Therefore Henry the Fourth chose rather to be a loser in
his Farm^^ts of the Sheriff-wicks, than to occasion the Sheriffs to save their
bargains by oppression. 1 H. 4. c. 11.
And to this end he took away the course of farming of Sheriff-wicks, and made
the Sheriffs bare accountants for the Annual profits; 4 H. 5. c. 2.
and as touching the casual profits, the Sheriff discharged himself upon Oath.
This was a good security to the King; but yet the People was not herewith
satisfied: For though the Sheriffs might not take to Farm, yet what they had,
they might let to Farm; and then wherein are the people the better for these
Laws? seeing it is all one for them, to be oppressed by the Sheriff
immediately, as by the Proxy.

For preventing of this inconvenience, 4 H. 4. c. 5.
another Law is made, That the Sheriff shall not let his Bailywick to Farm, nor
be Non-resident; and to this he must bind himself by Oath. So as now the
Sheriff is double girt, and may be fairly ridden, without danger to the King or
People. But men ride Horses for ease and pleasure; and he that must bend his
mind always to watch his Horses motion, will choose rather to go on foot. And
therefore Henry the Fifth renewed the Law of Richard the Second, 1 H. 5. c. 4.
that Sheriffs shall be but for one year; and then not to be chosen again, nor
serve for three years next following. This Order continued for the space of
eight years; within which time, 9 H. 5. c. 5.
War and Pestilence had consumed so many of the richer sort of people, that a
Dispensation is granted, that Sheriffs may continue in their places for four
years. And it was above twenty years after, e're the Stock was recruited again;
after which time the substance of the former Statutes of Edward the Third, 23
H. 6. c. 8.
Richard the Second, and 1 Henry the Fifth, is revived again; with a penalty
upon the Sheriff, his Deputy, or Clerk, that shall execute that place above one
year. So the custom of holding that Office ten or twelve years, by occasion of
the Dispensation for four years, was laid aside. But the Cure would never be
perfect, so long as Sheriffs held by Inheritance: for it was easy to find new
Deputies, but not to lay down old Customs; nor could it be lasting, unless the
penalties also had been annexed to the particular Crimes.

For a Sheriff, before he is a year old, by experience formerly had, becomes
too cunning for all these Laws; 4 H. 6. c. 1. 6. cap. 4. 15.
and therefore Laws are made also against the ordinary corruption of these
places; such as are extorting of Fees, cap. 5. 18. c. 14.
false making of Juries, false returns of Writs, etc. and damages in such cases
given to the party wronged: 23. cap. 10.
and when all is done, he is not trusted with taking of Indictments. 28 E. 3.
c. ult.
Thus, with much ado, a Sheriff is made a tolerable Officer; and his place by
degrees so hedged in, that what was in former times hard to pluck up, is now
become hard to set.

CHAP. XXI. Of Justices and Laws concerning the Peace.
THE faint Title of Henry the Fourth to the Crown, made him ever tender of the
Civil Peace; without breach whereof, he was sure to be quiet in the Throne. He
undertook not this work by any superlative power from and by himself, but uses
the help of the Parliament and Laws; wherein he was industrious; pretending
love of Unity amongst his people, which nevertheless he liked not, unless in
order to quiet between himself and them. 1 H. 5. c. 10.
The former way of Justices of Peace he followed close, 18 H. 6. c. 11.
reducing the persons to their ancient qualifications. The most sufficient
persons, Inhabitants in the County, worth at least twenty pound yearly, unless
they be Lawyers, 2 H. 5. Stat* 2^ cap. 1.
or such as are Justices in Corporations. Nor is the King troubled or trusted
with the naming or electing of these men, but the Chancellor, or the Kings
Council; so as now by Law the King can neither be Justice, nor make Justice
Jure proprio, but as his interest with the Council is more or less prevalent:
and that power that first gave it to the Crown, the same power took it away, or
imparted, and placed it else where. 2 H. 5. c. 4. 3. cap. ^.
But as touching the Work or Power of the Justices themselves, it grew
exceedingly; much whereof was only of enquiry, and to make Certificates, 4 H.
^. c. 1.
as of Heresy, ^ H. 4. c. 3.
Treason, Falsehood of Sheriffs, etc. But more of Oyer and Terminer, ^ H. 4. c.
^.
as in case of Watches, deceitfulness in Trades; as of making Arrowheads,
guilding of Metal, ^ H. 5. c. 3.
tanning of Leather, imbasing of Silver, selling of Waxen Images and Pictures,
^ H ^. c. 7, 14.
etc. For the superstition of these times was such, as these petty Gods were
not set at so high a price by the Seller, but a higher price by the Buyer. The
Parliament therefore set a true value of them, viz. For the Wax, so much as the
Wax is worth by weight, and but four pence for the godhead: So as it seems the
Parliament was not very superstitious in their House, whatever they were at
Church. Furthermore, the Justices of the Peace had power to punish deceit in
Measures, Weights, 1 H. 5. c. 1^.
Forcible Entries, and Detainers. In many of which cases, the penalty being
Fine and Imprisonment, 9. (...) 2. c. 8.
became a snare to many of the Justices, 2 H. ^. c. 11.
especially such as were of the greater and higher rank, who having Castles of
their own, 11 H. 6. c. 8.
under color of Justice imprisoned Delinquents in their own Castles, 13 H. 4.
c. 7. and 2.
and ransomed them at their own pleasure; which proved a great oppression to
the people, 4 H. 5. c. 8.
and occasioned a Law, that no Justice should commit any Delinquent to other
than the County-Gaol, saving Franchises to the Lords. 5 H. 4. c. 12.
Those times are happy, when Justice waits not altogether at Court, but grows
up in the Fields; and Justices of Peace, as the Kings Arms upon the Royal Mace,
are terrible only to the bad; and not as they are pictured before an
Ale-house-door, to invite men to transgress.

The Laws for the preservation of the peace, concern either punishment of
Crimes committed, or prevention of them from being committed. There is a
succession of crimes, as of Men and Ages; because the Scripture tells us, that
the hearts of all are fashioned alike; yet it is with generations as with men,
some incline to some crimes more than other; and that is the reason that the
title Treason, sometimes is set forth in Folio, sometimes in a lesser Volume.
It is evident is Story, that the violent times of Richard the Second, had
raised the value of that, amongst other offenses, above measure; not long
before his time, his Father had reduced that wild notion of Treason to a
certain rule, that formerly wandered in a Wilderness of opinions. But Henry the
Fourth, either to save his own stake, or to take the people, or both, reduced
it again to the Statute-rule of Edward the Third, 1 H 4. c. 10.
and made void that Statute of his Predecessors; which had made a former Act of
Parliament, and all the service thereby done, Treason. The Dimensions of
Treason thus clearly limned and declared, taught ill-disposed minds to keep out
of the Letter, and yet to be bold with the Scene: Counterfeit Money they durst
not; yet to diminish the same, they thought came not within the Circle; and so
it became a common grievance, 3 H. 5. c. 6.
till a Law was made, That all purposed impairing of Money should be Treason.
And so the Parliament held forth to all men, that they had a power to declare
Treason, without the bounds of the Statute of Edward the Third. The like power
it held forth in the time of Henry the Sixth; for men knew that Burglary and
Robbery were mortal crimes, they would no more of that; now they devise a way
to spoil, and prey for themselves, and yet neither to rob, nor break House. To
this end they would scatter little Scrolls in writing, requiring the party that
they intended to prey upon, to leave so much money upon such a day, at such a
place; 8 H. 6. c. 6.
and this was Sub poena of burning the parties House and Goods: which many
times did ensue upon default made. This practice was at once made Treason, to
prevent the growth of such an evil. And the like was done with Robberies and
Manslaughters, 14 H. 6. c. 8.
contrary to the Kings Truce and safe conduct.

As many or more new Felonies were also now created.

One was the cutting out of men's Tongues; 5 H. 4. c. 4.
and plucking out of Eyes; a strange cruelty! And that showed the extreme
savageness of those times; so much the more intolerable, by how much the poor
tortured creature could hardly be either Eye or Ear-Witness of the truth of his
own wrong.

A second Felony was, 18 H. 6. c. 15.
the customary of carrying of Wool, or Wool-fells out of the Realm, to other
places; except Calis.

Another Felony concerns Soldiers, which I refer over to the next Chapter.

The last was, 33 H. 6. c. 1.
Servants plundering their Masters Goods, and absenting themselves: if upon
Proclamation made, they appear not, this was also made Felony.

In the next place, as touching Forcible Entries, and Riots, the remedies so
often inculcated, and new dressed, show plainly the nature of the times. These
kind of crimes commonly are as the light Skirmishes in the beginning of a War,
and follow in the Conclusion also, as the faintings of a Battle fought till
both sides be weary.

I shall not enter into each particular Statute, diverse of them being little
other than as asseverations annexed to a Sentence; to add credit, and stir up
minding in men, that otherwise would soon forget what is said or done. The
remedies formerly propounded, are now resined, and made more effectual.

First, In regard of speed, which is as necessary in these forces, as the
stopping of the breaches of Waters in the first act; and therefore one Justice
of the Peace may proceed upon a holder by force, or breaker of the Peace, 8 H.
6. ^ ^
with a Continuando: but Riots are looked upon as more dangerous; and the first
opposition had need be more stiff, lest being uneffectual, it aggravate the
violence; and therefore it is required that two Justices and the Sheriff should
join in the work, to carry on the work with more Authority and Power. And what
they cannot do in the punitive part, they must certify to the King and his
Council, or to the Kings Bench, 31 H. 6. c. 2.
if Traverse be made. So as though the power of the County be annexed to the
Sheriff Jure ordinario to maintain the Peace, 2 H^ ^^ c. 9.
yet the Parliament did delegate the same upon Justices, as it thought most
expedient.

To maintain and recover the Peace when it is broken, shows more Power; but to
prevent the breach, shows more Wisdom; and therefore to all the rest, the
Wisdom of these Times provideth carefully.

First, For Guards and Watches, according to the Statute at Wint. and committed
the care thereof to the Justices of the Peace.

And Secondly, ^ H. 4. c. 3.
Against the gendring of parties; for it is commonly seen, that such as the
admired for excellencies of person, are so far idolized of some, as that their
Gestures, Actions, and Opinions are observed: Tokens of favor (though never so
small) are desired from such; and the Idol likes it well; gives Points,
Ribbons, it may be Hats; and with these, men are soon gained to be Servants in
the fashion, and not long after to be Servants in Action, be it War, or
Treason, or any other way. This manner of cheat, the former times had been too
well acquainted with; Knights and Esquires, are not to be feared in times where
the word Lord carries the wonderment away; their offenses against the Statutes
of Liveries, are all great, though in themselves never so small; and therefore
are sure of Fine, 1 H. 4. c. 7.
and Ransom; and it is well if they escape a years imprisonment without Bail
or Mainprize. 8 H. 6. c. 4.
Lords may wear the King Livery, but may give none. Knights and Esquires may
wear the Kings Livery in their attendance upon his person, but not in the
Country. The King and ^^ince may give Liveries to Lords, 2 H. 4. c. 21.
and menial Servants. The sum is, that Liveries may be given by the more
public persons, for state, not to make parties; and men may wear Liveries in
token of Service in Peace, and not in Arms.

One thing must be added to all, which may concern Trial in all, Viz. A Law was
made, that Noble Ladies shall be tried by their Peers. 20 H. 6. Stat. ^ c. 6.
A Law now of the first stamp; and strange it is, that it never came before now
into the breast of the Law; but that it came now, it is not strange. No meaner
person than the Duchess of Gloucester is first charged with Treason; when that
could not appear, then for Necromancy; very fitly, that she might be tried by
the Ecclesiastical way of Witnesses. She is found guilty, and a Sentance of
Penance* and Imprisonment, or Banishment passed thereupon; after such a wild
way, as both Nobles and Commons passed this Law, for the vindication of that
noble Sex from such hudling Trials for the future.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Militia during these times.
THe Title of Henry the Fourth to the Crown, was maintained principally by his
Tenures, which the Courtiers call Knight service; but the Common people, force
of Arms: And that which destroyed many a man, was the principal means of his
subsistence. Otherwise it is clear, that his Title was stark naught; nor could
he outface Mortimer's Title, without a naked Sword, which he used warily: for
he had Enemies enough to keep his Sword in hand; and Friends enough to keep it
from striking at random. For coming in by the peoples favor, he was obliged to
be rather remiss than rigorous: yet his manner of coming was by the Sword, and
that occasioneth men much to debate about his absolute power in the Militia, as
supposing that what power he had, other Kings may De jure challenge the same.
And let that be taken for granted, though it will not necessarily follow in
true reasoning: And let it also be taken for good, That Henry the Fourth entered
the Throne by his Sword; yet is there not any Monument in Story or Antiquity,
that favors any absolute right in him over the Militia; but the current is,
I think, somewhat clear against it.

First, Because Henry the Fourth, De jure, could not compel men to serve beyond
the Seas, but raised them by contract; and therefore by Act of Parliament, 4 H.
4. c. 13.
he did confirm the Statute 1 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 5. which Statute was
purposely made to that end. And the same also is countenanced by another
Statute made in these times, 18 H. 6. c. 19.
whereof we now Treat; by the words whereof appears, that the Soldiers for
the Foreign Service were levied by Contract between them and the Captain, who
undertook to levy them by Wage; so as none were then compelled to enter into
Service by Impressed, or absolute Command. Nor is there any Authority amongst all
those cited in Calvin's Case, that does mention any such thing; 7 H. 4.
Fitzherb. Protect. 100.
but contrarily, that Opinion of Thirning is express, That the King cannot send
men beyond Seas to Wars without Wages; and therefore no man is bound to any
such service, by any absolute Legiance, as the Reporter would understand the
point: but if he receives Wages thereto, he by that Contract binds himself.

Secondly, It seems also to be granted, that such as went voluntarily in the
Kings Service, ever had the Kings Pray, after they were out of their Counties,
if the King ruled by his Laws. For by the Statute formerly mentioned, the King
did likewise confirm the Statute of 18 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 7. which is
express in that point; and the matter in fact also is evident upon the Records.

Thirdly, Touching the arming of those that were thus levied, as there was a
certain Law, by which all men were assessed to certain Arms, either by the
Service and Tenure of their Lands, or by Parliament; for such as were not bound
to find sufficient Arms by their Tenure, according as is contained in the
Statute 25 Edw. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 8. 4 H. 4.
So did Henry the Fourth, by the Statute formerly mentioned to be made in his
time, confirm that Law of Edward the Third. In the argument of Calvin's case it
is much insisted upon, to prove the Legiance of an English man to the King, to
be absolute, because he has power to send men to War at his pleasure; and he
has the only power to make War; and if so, then has he absolute power in the
Militia. As touching the power of sending men to War, has been already spoken;
but as touching the power to make War, there is no doubt, 19 E. 3. f. ^
but where a King has made a League with another King, he only can break that
League, and so make War; and that Opinion of Brian must be agreed for good in
that sense. But if a League be made by Act of Parliament, or if the King will
have War, and the Parliament will make a League without him; no Authority does
in such case avouch, that it is the right of the King, or that he has a legal
power to break that League as he pleases. Neither in the next place, has the
King any Right or legal Power to make War with his own Subjects as he pleases,
but is bound to maintain the Peace, not only by his Oath at his Coronatiion,
but also by the Laws whereto he is bound, if he will reign in right of an
English King. For every man knows that the grounds of the Statutes of wearing
of Liveries, was for the maintaining of the public Peace. And Henry the
Fourth, amongst other provisions made against that trick, 1 H. 4. c. 7.
has this; That the King shall give only his Honorable Livery to his Lords
Temporal whom shall please him, and to his Knights and Esquires menial, and to
his Knights and Esquires which be of his retinue, and take of him their yearly
Fee for term of Life; and that no Yeoman shall take or wear any Livery of the
King, nor of none other Lord. 2 H. 4. c. 21.
And another Law was made within one year ensuing, confirming the former, and
providing that the Prince may give Liveries to such Lords as he pleases, and to
his menial Gentlemen; and that they may wear the same, as in the Kings Case. By
both which, the King and Prince are both in one Case, as touching the power of
giving Liveries; if the one has absolute power, then has the other the like;
if one be under the Directory of Law in that point, then is also the other: For
it is clear, that the King is intended by the Statute to be bound from giving
Liveries, and the people from wearing them, otherwise than in especial Cases.
And then the conclusion will be, that if the King may not give Liveries to the
prejudice of the Peace, then may he much less break the Peace at his pleasure;
or levy Men, Arms, and War, when he shall think most meet. Take then away from
the King absolute power to compel men to take up Arms otherwise than in case of
Foreign Invasion, power to compel men to go out of their Counties to War, power
to charge men for maintenance of the Wars, power to make them find Arms at his
pleasure, and lastly, power to break the Peace, or do ought that may tend
thereto; and certainly the power of the Militia that remains, though never so
surely settled in the Kings hand, can never bite this Nation.

Nor can the noise of the Commission of Array entitle the King unto any such
vast power as is pretended. For though it be granted, that the Commission of
Array was amended by the Parliament in these times; and secondly, that being so
amended, it was to serve for a Precedent or Rule for the future: yet will it
not follow, that Henry the Fourth had, or any Successor of his has any power
of Array originally from themselves, absolutely in themselves, or
determinatively to such ends as he, or they, shall think meet.

First, As touching the amendment of the Commission, it was done upon complaint
made by the Commons as a grievance, that such Commissions had issued forth, as
had been grievous, hurtful, and dangerous: And the King agrees to the
amendments. upon advice had with the Lords, and Judges. Exact. Collec. p. 406.
And if it be true that the amendments were in the material clauses (as it is
granted) then it seems that formerly a greater power was exercised than by
Law ought to have been; and then has not the King an absolute power of Array;
for the just power of a King can be no grievance to the Subject.

Secondly, If the Commission of Array thus mended, P. 407.
was to serve as a rule of Array for the future; then there is a rule, beyond
which, Henry the Fourth, and his Successors, may not go; and then it will also
follow, that the power of Array is not originally, nor absolutely, in the King;
but from, and under the Rule and Law of the Parliament: which rule was not made
by the Kings own directions, Ibid. fol. 406.
but (as we are told) beyond expectation, alterations were made in material
parts of the Commission, and the powers in execution there, whereof no
complaint of grievance had been made. The issue then is: If the King had an
Universal power in the Array, the Parliament likewise had a general liberty,
without any restriction to correct that power.

Lastly, Suppose that this power of the Parliament is executed, and concluded,
by the Commission thus amended, and that thereby the Kings power is
established; yet can it not be concluded, that this power is originally or
absolutely in the King. It is not absolutely in him, because it is limited in
these particulars.

(First.) It is not continual, because it is only in case of eminent danger.

(Secondly.) It is not general upon all occasions, but only in cases of a
Foreign and sudden Invasion and attempts.

(Thirdly.) The powers are not undefined, but circumscribed. 1. To Array such
as are armed, so as they cannot assess Arms upon such. Collect. 4. 24.
2. To compel those of able Bodies and Estates to be armed; and those of able
Estates and not able Bodies, to arm such as are of able Bodies and not Estates:
but this must be Juxta facultates, and salvo Statu. 3. Whereas they strain
themselves to make the Statute of Henry the Fourth, and the Commission of
Array, to consist with the Statutes of 13 E. 1. 1 E. 3. and 25 E. 3. thereby
they affirm so many more restrictions unto this power of Array, as those
Statutes are remedial in particular cases: yet do I not agree to their Glosses,
but leave them to the debate already published concerning the same.

Secondly, As this power was not absolutely in the Kings, so was it not
originally from themselves, because they had not the Legislative power
concerning the same; but the same was ever, and yet is, in the Parliament.
Hereof I shall note only three particular instances.

First, The Militia is a posture that extends as well to Sea as Land: That
which concerns the Sea, is the Law of Marque and Reprizal, granted to such of
the people of this Nation as are pillaged by Sea, by such as have the King's
Conduct, or public Truce. 4 H 5. c. 7.
And by this Law the party pillaged had power to recompense himself upon that
man that had pillaged him, or upon any other Subject of that Nation, in case
upon request made of the Magistrate in that Nation, satisfaction be not given
him for his wrong: it was a Law made by the Parliament, whereby the Chancellor
had power to grant such Letters or Commission upon complaint to him made.

This was grounded upon the Statute of Magna Charta, Mag. Charta. c. 32.
concerning Free Trade, which had been prejudiced by the rigor of the
Conservators of the Truce, against the Kings Subjects; although what was by
them done, was done in their own defense. And by which means the Foreigners
were become bold to transgress, and the English fearful in their own Charge;
and many laid aside their Trade by Sea, and thereby the strength of the Kingdom
was much impaired. Nor is the equity of this Law to be questioned; for if the
Magistrate upon complaint made grants not relief, the offense becomes public,
and the Nation chargeable, in nature of an Accessory after the Fact, and so the
next man liable to give satisfaction, and to seek for relief at home.

The King then has a power to grant Letters of Marque by Sea or Land, and this
power is granted by Parliament; and this power is a limited power only in
particular cases, in regard that many times these prove in nature of the first
light skirmishes of a general War.

Two other instances yet remain concerning the Order and Government of the
Soldiers in the Army; the one concerning the Soldiers pay, Viz. That Captains
shall not abate the Soldiers Wages, 18 H. 6. c. 18.
but for their Clothing, under peril of Fine to the King. The other concerning
the Soldiers service, That they shall not depart from their Colors without
leave, before the time of their service be expired, unless in case of sickness,
cap. 19.
or other good cause testified and allowed by the Captain; and such as shall do
otherwise, shall suffer as Felons. Which Laws could not have holden in force,
had they not been made by Parliament, in respect that the penalties concern the
Estates and Lives of men, which are not to be invaded but by the Law of the
Land. So as both Captains and Soldiers, as touching the Legislative power, are
not under the King in his personal capacity, but under the Law of the
Parliament.

Lastly, As the rule of War was under the Legislative power of the Parliament,
so was the rule of Peace: for whilst Henry the Sixth was in France, which was
in his Tenth year, from St. George's day till February following; the Scots
propound terms of Peace to the Duke of Gloucester, he being then Custos Regni;
Hall. 10. H. 6.
which he referred to the Order of the Parliament, by whom it was determined,
and the Peace concluded, in the absence of the King; and was holden as good and
effectual by both Kingdoms, as if the King had been personally present in his
full capacity.

CHAP. XXIII. A Survey of the Reigns of Edward the Fourth, Edward the Fifth,
and Richard the Third.
THe Reign of Henry the Sixth, was for the most part, in the former parts of
it, like Fire buried up in the Ashes; and in the latter parts, breaking out
into a Flame: In the heat whereof, the Duke of York, after Fealty given by him
to Henry the Sixth, and Dispensation gotten from the Pope to break his Faith,
lost his life; and left his Son the Markgrave to pursue his Title to the Crown;
which he claimed by Inheritance, but more especially by Act of Parliament made
upon the agreement between Henry the Sixth and his Father. This was Edward the
Fourth, who nevertheless reserved himself to the Election of the Lords, and was
by them received, and commended to the Commons in the Field. By which means he
gaining the possession, had also encouragement to maintain the same; yet never
held himself a King of full Age, so long as Henry the Sixth lived, which was
the one half of his Reign. Nor did he, though he held many Parliaments, scarce
reach higher than at reforming of Trade; which was a Theme well pleasing to the
people, next unto their Peace, which also the King carefully regarded. For
although he had been a Soldier of good experience, and therewith successful,
yet as one loath to trust too far, either the constancy of the people of his
own Opinion, or the fortune of War with his neighboring Princes, he did much
by brave countenance and discourse: and yet gained repute to the English for
valor, after the dishonorable times of Henry the Sixth. He had much to do
with a wise King of France, that knew how to lay out three or four calm words
at any time, to save the adventure of his peoples blood; and make a show of
money, to purchase the peaceable holding of that which was his only by force,
until the wind proved more fair to bring all that continent under one head.

In his Government at home, he met with many cross Gales, occasioned
principally by his own rashness, and neglect of the Earl of Warwick's approved
friendship, which he had turned into professed enmity; and so weakened his own
cause thereby, Com. lib. 3. c. 4. and 5. and 6.
that he was once under water, his Kingdom disposed of by new intail upon the
Heirs of Duke Clarence; and so the Earl of Warwick remained constant to the
House of York, though this particular King was set aside. Nor did he in all
this gain any thing but a Wife, who though his Subject, and none of the
greatest Family, neither brought any interest unto her Lord and Husband amongst
Foreign Princes, brought nevertheless a Pearl, which was beyond all; which was,
the purchase of the Union between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, and a
peaceable succession in the Throne for a long while to come. It must be
granted, that there fell therewith an unhappy inconvenience in the raising of a
new Nobility of the Queens Kindred, of whom the ancient Stock of Nobility
thought scorn; and yet they were so considerable as to be envied. A Wound hard
to be cured, and yet easily avoided by such as know how to deny themselves: And
therefore can be no prejudice unto that conclusion, That for an English King to
marry his own Subject, is more safe for the King, and beneficial for the
Kingdom, than to marry a Stranger.

But Edward the Fourth did not long lie underneath; upon the next fair Gale, he
comes from beyond the Sea, and (like his first Predecessor of the House of
Lancaster) claims only his Duchy; which no man could in reason deny to be his
right, and therefore were the sooner engaged with him in that accoust. This was
an act that in the first undertaking seemed modest; but when it was done,
appeared too bold to adventure it upon the Censure of Henry the Sixth; and
therefore they were not more ready to engage, than slack to dis-engage, till
they were secure in the Kings Interest; which not long after ensued, by the
death of Henry the Sixth. Thus Edward the Fourth recovered the Crown, to save
his Duchy. His Government was not suitable: for he came in by the People, but
endeavored to uphold himself by Foreign Dependencies; as if he desired to
spread his Roots rather wide than deep. How ill this Choice was, the event
showed: for Plants that root wide, may be strong enough against an outward
Storm; but they soon grow old, barren, and rot irrecoverably from beneath. Such
was the end of this man's Government; himself lived and died a King, and left
Issue both Male and Female; the one tasted the Government, the other kissed it;
but neither of them ever enjoyed further than a bare Title. Nor was the
Government of Edward the Fourth so secured by the Engagements of Foreigners:
Comin. lib. 3. c. 4.
for as he sought to delude, so he was deluded, both by Burgundy and Scotland,
to the prejudice of all three. Toward his own people his carriage was not so
much by Law, as by Leave: for he could fetch a course out of the old way of
rule, satisfy himself, dissatisfie others, and yet never was called to
account. What was done by Entreaty, no man could blame; and where Entreaties
are countenanced by Power, no man durst contradict. Thanks to his Fate, that
had brought him upon a People tired by Wars, scared by his success, and loath to
adventure much for the House of Lancaster, in which no courage was left to
adventure for it self. The greatest error of his way, was in the matter of
Revenue; the former times had been unhappy in respect of good Husbandry; Comin.
lib. 3. c. 5.
and Edward the Fourth was no man to gather heaps. His occasions conduced
rather to diffuse, and his mind generally led the way thereto; so as it is the
less wonder if he called more for accommodations, than the ordinary Treasury of
the Crown could supply. Hereto therefore he used expedients, which in his
former times were more moderate: for whilst Henry the Sixth lived, he did but
borrow by Privy Seal, and take Tunnage and Poundage by way of hire. 12 E. 4. c.
2.
Afterward, when no Star appeared (but what was enlightened from his own Sun)
he was more plain, and tried a new trick, called Benevolence. Unwelcome it was,
not only in regard of its own nature, but much more in the end: for it was to
serve the Duke of Burgundy in raising a War against France in the first view,
Comin. lib. 4. cap. 1.
but in the conclusion to serve his own Purse, both from Friends and Foes. And
yet this also passed without much control; for when displeasure was like to
ensue, he could speak fair, and feast, and, if need was, kiss away all
discontent. Toward his end, as stale drink, he grew sour: For as in the first
part of his Reign he had been supplied by good will against Law; so in his
latter times, he had gotten a trick of supply by Law against good will. This
was by penal Laws, which are a remedy if they be used Ad terrorem; but if
strained beyond that, the Remedy proves worse than the Disease. In their first
institution, they are forms of courtesy from the people to the King; but in
the rigorous execution of them, are trials of mastery of the King over the
people, and are usually laid up against days of reckoning between the Prince
and them.

Those penal Laws are best contrived, that with the greatest terror to the
Delinquent, bring the least profit to the King's Coffers. Once for all, this
King's Acts were many, his Enterprises more, but seldom attaining that end
which they faced. He was a man of War, and did more by his Fame than his Sword;
was no sooner resolved in good earnest, but he died, left a Kingdom unassured,
his Children young, and many friends in show, but in truth very few.

Now, if ever, was the Kingdom in a Trance. Edward the Fourth left a Son, Edw.
5. Rich. 3.
the Prima materia of a King, and who lived long enough to be enrolled amongst
English Kings, yet served the place no further than to be an occasion to fill
up the measure of the wickedness of the Duke of Gloucester, and a monument of
Gods displeasure against the House of Edward the Fourth; whether for that
breach of Oath, or treachery against Henry the Sixth, or for what other cause,
I cannot tell. But at the best, this Prince was, in relation to his Uncle the
Duke of Gloucester, little other than as an Overseer to an Executor, that might
see and complain, but cannot amend. For the Duke ruled, overruled, and
mis-ruled all, under the name of Edward the Fifth; and left no monument of good
Government upon record, till he changed both the Name and Person of Edward the
Fifth to Richard the Third: his Fame had lifted him up, and might have
supported him, Market. de Gallat. Imper. lib. 3.
had he regarded it. But as no man had more honor before he ascended the
Throne, so no man ever entered and sat thereon with less. His proceedings were
from a Protector to an Usurper, and thence to a Tyrant; a Scourge to the whole
Nation, especially the Nobility; and lastly, an instrument of Gods Revenge upon
himself, a man made up of Clay and Blood, living not loved, and dying
unlamented. The manner of his Government was strained; having once won the
Saddle, he is loath to be cast: knowing himself guilty all over, and that
nothing could absolve his Fame but a Parliament; he calls it, courts it, and
where his Wit could not reach to apologize, he makes whole by recompense; takes
away Benevolences; he is ready to let them have their present desires, 1 R. 3.
c. 2.
what can they have more? He promises good behavior for the future; which he
might the better do, because he had already attained his ends. Thus in one
Parliament (for he could hold no more) he gave such content, as, even to
wonderment, he could as soon find an Army in the field to fight for him, as the
most meritorious of his Predecessors. Hi^ ill Title made him very jealous, and
thereby taught his best Friends to keep at a distance; after which time few
escaped that came within his reach; and so he served God's Judgment against
his adjutants, though he understood it not. Amongst the rest, against the Duke
of Buckingham his great Associate, both in the Butchery of the two young
Princes, and usurpation of the Royal Scepter. He lived till he had laid the
Foundation of better times in the person of Henry the Seventh, and then
received his reward. But an ill Conscience must be continually fed, or it will
eat up its own womb.

The Kings mind being delivered from fear of the Sons of Edward the Fourth, now
dead, torments himself with thoughts of his Daughter alive: ashamed he is of
Butchery of a Girl; he chooses a conceit of Bastardizing the Children of
Elizabeth Gray, 1 Rich. 3. c. 15.
that calls her self Queen of England; but this proved too hard to concoct.
Soon after that, he goes a contrary way: The Lady Elizabeth Gray is now
undoubted Wife of Edward the Fourth, and her eldest Daughter as undoubted Heir
to the Crown. And so the King will now be contented to adventure himself into
an incestuous Marriage with her, if his own Queen were not in the way, only to
secure the Peace of the Kingdom; which he, good King, was bound in Conscience
to maintain, though with the peril of his own Soul; and in this zeal of
Conscience, his Queen soon went out of the way, and so Love is made to the
young Lady. But Henry Earl of Richmond was there before; and the Lady warily
declined the choice, till the golden Apple was won, which was not long after
accomplished; the King losing both the Lady, his Crown, and own Life together,
put an end to much wickedness, and had the end thereof in Bosworth-Field.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Government in relation to the Parliament.
THe seasons now in Tract were of short continuance; lives passed away more
speedily than years; and it may seem useless to enquire what is the nature of
the Government in such a time, whenas the greatest work was to maintain Life
and Soul together; and when all is done, little else is done. For though the
Title of the House of York was never so clear against that of Lancaster; yet it
had been so long darkened with a continual ^uccession of Kings of the Red Rose,
that either by their Merit had gained a Throne in the peoples Hearts, or by
their Facility had yielded their Throne up to the peoples will, as it proved
not easy to convince them that liked well their present Lot, and were doubtful
of change; or to make them tender of the right of Edward the Fourth above their
own quiet. Above Threescore years now had England made trial of the Government
of the Lancastrian Princes, and thereof about Thirty years experience had they
of Henry the Sixth; they saw he was a gentle Price. On the other side, Edward
the Fourth, newly sprung up out of a Root watered with blood, himself also a
man for the Field.

This might well put the minds of the people to a stand, what to think of this
Man, whose Nature and ends are so doubtful, and brought nothing to commend him
to the good wills of the people, but his bare Title; which the common sort
usually judge of, according as they see it prosper more or less. Add hereunto,
that Divine Providence did not so clearly, nor suddenly, determine his secret
purpose concerning this change, by any constant success to either part; by
means whereof, the one half of Edward the Fourth's Reign was spent, while as
yet Henry the Sixth was in view, and the minds of men left unassured, neither
trusting much to Edward the Fourth, nor he to them. And after that Henry the
Sixth was gone out of the way, Edward the Fourth could not readily change his
posture; used Arguments of force and power, and for the most part, looked like
a man in Arms, with his hand on his Sword, ready to draw upon the next man that
stands in his way.

Thus are the people partly driven, (...)
and partly drawn, into an Oath of Allegiance unto Edward the Fourth, under
peril of Attainder; and the Parliament assured unto him once more. For
immediately upon the departure of Edward the Fourth beyond Sea, after Ten years
of his Reign, the Parliament (never staying for the issue of Providence)
declared the Throne void of Edward the Fourth, and Henry the Sixth King. The
Judges likewise of the Courts of Westminster determined the same thing, as may
appear by the Law-Reports of those times in Print: wherein reattachments were
often granted by them upon discontinuance of Process by this Demise of Edward
the Fourth. And thus Henry the Sixth is once more King for six Months, viz.
from October to April, at which time the Balance turns; Edward the Fourth
returns, gets into the Throne; Henry the Sixth is again Dethroned; all things
are as they were, and all confirmed by Act of Parliament. For that Body is ever
wise enough to side with Power, rather than to spend much time upon fruitless
Orders and Votes that will pierce no Armor; and therefore, like the times,
must needs be subject to fits of distemper at the coming in of every Tide; and
did build, and pull down, enact, and disenact, turn and return the English
Crown from York to Lancaster, and back again; and in conclusion, for some time
did do little but undo. Nor can they be justly censured herein; for Councils of
men are not ordained to hinder divine Providence, or overruled Fate; but to
foresee, and close with Occasions, in the most advantageous way for the public
good; and when both Winds and Currents are uncertain, to ride at flote, till
they can discern the most commodious Haven to Winter in. To impute therefore
fault unto the Parliament in such Cases, for want of Uniformity, and
Immutability of Councils, is somewhat like the Notion that Batchelors conceit
of Wives; they would have, but they do not know what other (...) an Idea of
their own fancy.

Now if it be enquired which course prevailed, in order either to the Kings
Royalty, or the peoples Liberty, I shall answer, Neither of these: but the
House of York prevailed to hold the Crown, and might have advanced the
Authority thereof, had they not fallen out amongst themselves for the spoil;
and Edward the Fourth was not altogether disposed thereto. The success that he
had in the Field, and his Soldiery, made him look big like a King of the
greater size; but Kings sleep not securely upon such Pillows. When the Militia
is on Horseback, it is as ready to be a Guard upon the King, as for him; and
when it is most sober, not so easily governed as a Commonwealth. And therefore
Edward the Fourth, now in Arms, though he found it a hard Notion to maintain
the peoples Liberty where no man is free from the Soldier, yet he inclined
thereto. We read of a multitude of Taxations of all sorts; and of Benevolences,
the worst of all those sorts. For Soldiers must have money; or if not, they
will have it: but the King would not force things so far as his power could
reach; he will have Money, but it shall be by order of the Parliament. He might
have pretended much upon the Commission of Array; yet did it not, 12 E. 4. n. 8.
but chose rather to be Lord of the Seas. And because it was too great a Farm
for his private Purse, he prays aid of the Parliament by the way of Tumage and
Poundage, 12 E. 4. c. 3.
which was in demand nine years before the Parliament granted it. And when it
was granted, it was with such restrictions, that it is evident the King
preferred the right of the Parliament therein, above his private honor.

Secondly, Titles of Honor are but windy Notions; and every one knows what
claim is made by Kings, to have the sole interest in conferring the same. This
Edward the Fourth neglected so far, 17 E. 4. n. 10. 16.
as he interested the Parliament, both in the conferring of them, and resuming
the same.

Thirdly, The course of Trade was now more especially looked to, not by the
King and Privy Council, but by the Parliament. And because it was much decayed,
partly by reason of the ill government thereof, and partly by the excessive
lavishness of these times, many Laws are made for remedy of both. 3 E. 4. c. 1.
And first, the Staple was settled sometimes at Calis alone, sometimes at it and
Middleborough; 4 E. 4. c. 2.
and by this means, England gained Trade from both Nations; 14 E. 4. c. 3, 5.
but the principal thanks is to be given to the interest between the King and
the House of Burgundy. Then course is taken for the bringing of the Staple.
Commodities only to those places, 3 E. 4. c. 1.
and the return to be made in Money, and not Commodity by exchange. Then for
the well making of Staple-Manufactures, and restraining Importation of Foreign
Manufactures of such kinds. 1 R. 3. c. 12.
Then against transporting of English Coin, 4 E. 4. c. 1, 2, 3.
and importing of Foreign Coin, 17 E. 4. cap. 1.
other than Bullion.

And as touching the second grievance, it seems, gallantry or vanity of Apparel
was a sore Disease of these times, which were become times of Fashions, and
wherein the King led the way by his own example. For he desired to be brave;
and that he might be more brave, 3 E. 4. c. 5.
he passed Laws that the people should be less brave, 22 E. 4. c. 1.
assessing a sort of Apparel for every degree, and therein stooped so low, 17
E. 4. c. 1.
as to define the fashions of their very shoes.

Fourthly, The Parliament retained their ancient right of reducing the course
of Judicature. For whereas Sheriffs had hitherto holden their course of Trial
of the moaner sort of Felonies, and Trespasses, and Offenses, determinable
only by Imprisonment, or Fines and Amerciaments; whereby men's Estates did lie
under the continual pillage of these covetous and extorting Officers: 1 E. 4.
c. 2.
It was established by the Parliament, that these men should have for the
future, only power of enquiry, and to certify at the next Sessions, and there
the Trial to be; and Fines and Amerciaments to be set, Taxed, and Estreated
unto the Exechequer, and from thence to be levied, and thereof the Sheriff give
account. This was a great security to the peoples Estates, but gave them not a
full remedy: For though the Trial was now more fair, yet these Officers were
Judges of suspicion, and had still power upon suspicion to imprison their
persons, and seize their Estates, under color to save them for the King, in
case Conviction followed.

For remedy hereof, 1 R. 3. c. 3.
the Justices of the Peace have now power given them to Bail, in Case of light
suspicion; and it is further declared, that no man's Estate shall be first
seized, till Conviction and Attainder first be had. And because Escheators grew
no less burdensome in their way, it was therefore ordered, that no man shall
be allowed in such Office, unless he has Lands to the value of Twenty pounds
per Annum; and that he shall be responsible for such wrong done by himself, 12
E. 4. c: 9.
or by his Deputy and Farmer.

Thus Edward the Fourth quitted himself like a King in many regards; but soon
ran himself out of breath, gave his Lamp to his Son, that was too weak to hold
it; a Third snatches it away, and for two years carrying it exceeding well,
yielded up all encroached Royalty to the people, 1 R. 3. c. 2.
and his Crown and Life to his Successor.

CHAP. XXV. The condition of the Clergy.
IF any gains were had in these uncertain times, the Churchmen might seem to
have them; having now this advantage, that the Commonalty was distracted with
uncertain interests of the Succession of the Crown: And themselves only united
under the Popedom, now freed from all Schism; and the Popedom managed by Sixtus
the Fourth, who had the hap to be accounted more virtuous than any of his
Predecessors had been, and to have all the Christian Princes Naucler.
wholly at his devotion.

And lastly, Both the Clergy and the Kings were now jointly engaged against
the rising power of Religion, then called Heresy; in order whereunto, the
Clergy leading the way, had the applause of them that followed, upon an
implicit Faith, that whatsoever was done, was exceeding well done.

Nor was it wisdom for Kings that sat loose in their Thrones, to stumble the
good Opinions of so considerable a party toward them. And therefore Edward the
Fourth, in his first entrance, granted to the Clergy, that which could never
be by them obtained from any of the foregoing Kings, Antiq. Brit. 294.
Viz. Free liberty of Process in all Cases Ecclesiastical, and in Tithes of
Wood above twenty years growth; and in case they were troubled upon the
Statutes of Provisors, they should have their remedy in the Chancery against
those Judges, and their Proceedings in such Cases there to be cancelled. This
was done by Charter, 9 H. 6. fol. 56. Pe^ Pasion.
and was sufficient to show what the desire of the Clergy, and the intention
of the King was, Viz. At once to favor the Church, and under color of favor
done to the Clergy, to cancel both Common and Statute-Laws of the Kingdom, by
the power of the Chancellor's Decree: Nevertheless, all this was but the King's
breath; the policy changed never a whit the more. For the Common Law held on
its course, not only in Cases depending before the Holy Chair, but also even
before the Bishop of the Diocese at home; 5 E. 4. fol. 6.
so as neither the King was concluded from his Suit, 9 E. 4. fol. 3.
nor the party endamaged from his Action by any such Charter. And so far were
the Judges of the Common Law from being bound by the Chancery in such Cases, 7
E. 4. fol. 2. Per Littleton.
that they professed they would not delay to grant the Habeas Corpus, 22 E. 4.
fol. 37.
to deliver any Prisoner by Decree of the Chancellor in any Case triable at
the Common Law. Much less did the Parliament favor these men so far, as to
give them any countenance in any way of gain upon themselves; but rather made
bold with what the Churchmen in former times challenged as their own; and upon
this account, whereas formerly it had inhibited Fairs and Markets upon the
Lord's Day, Now it inhibited the sale of Boots, Shoes, etc. upon that day,
though done never so privately; which they did at the first only within the
City of London, and three miles thereof. I suppose it was made only by way of
Trial, it being dangerous in such times to give a stop to all England at once;
otherwise it might be wondered, why God's Honor should be better regarded in
London than in all the Realm besides. Of this encroachment we find no complaint
made by the Churchmen; another touched them to the quick, although it befell
only the Archbishopric of York, that hitherto held ordinary Jurisdiction
over all the Bishops of Scotland, as being their Provincial. Now it is
disclaimed by them all; and they are backed therein by their King, under
pretense of great inconvenience to his Bishops in their so far Travels; but in
truth, not unlike to Jeroboam, though he pretended it was too much for them,
yet he thought it unsafe for himself that his Bishops should owe Canonical
obedience to the Subject of another Prince; and upon this ground prevailed with
Pope Sixtus the Fourth to make the Divorce, and left it to future Ages to try
the validity thereof, if they would.

This is all that I shall observe of the Government of these three Kings, whose
Reigns in the whole, exceeded not Twenty six years; and their complete power
therein, not much above half so many.

CHAP. XXVI. A short sum of the Reigns of Henry the Seventh, and Henry the
Eighth.
THe course of English policy hitherto wandering in the different Currents,
springing from the double head of Monarchy and Democracie; and in them
likewise often tossed up and down, partly by the blasts of windy Titles and
pretensions, and partly by the raging Tides from the Roman See, now begin to
come to anchor within view of Shore. Happy England, if the same prove good
Harbourage for a fainting Nation! Two Kings now undertake the Steerage; the
work of the first, was to still the Winds, the other the Seas, and so to bring
the Adventure safe home. Henry the Seventh happened upon a good preparative for
this work, in that he delivered the Kingdom from a Tyrant, whose irregular and
bloody way was so odious to the people, that it set a foil upon his Successor's
Government, and made his Wisdom, Valor, and Justice appear greater than
possibly it was. His Valor made way for the other two; he had enough thereof
to serve a wise man in case of extremity: at other times he made more use of
his Majesty than Manhood; being confident that the people knew not where to
mend themselves, but would be at his Devotion, so long as he was better than
his Predecessor, though he cared not how little. His Wisdom was his greatest
part, of which, upon all occasions, he made the greatest improvement he could,
without reflecting upon Conscience, or Religion, whereof he had tasted no more
than would render him a civil man; whereunto his Education did lead the way.
Thus, though his Valor brought him to the Crown, yet it was his Wisdom that
settled him in the Throne. For though he loved himself so well; that he was loath
to pretend allowance of any access of Foreign help to his own achievement in
his Title, or that he was guilty in the least manner in his entry upon the
Throne; yet to keep danger far off, he provided one guard for his Person, and
many for his Title.

That of his Person, he only pretended as a ceremony of State brought from the
French Court; and yet it is strange that it went so well down with a Free
people. For that Prince that will keep Guards about his Person in the midst of
his own people, may as well double them into the pitch of an Army, whenever
he pleases to be fearful; and so turn the Royal power of Law, into force of
Arms. But it was the French fashion, and the King's good hope to have all taken
in the best sense.

His Title (setting aside the saying of Philip the Hardy, That Kingdoms only
belong to them that can get them) would hardly endure the touch, Thevet. lib.
4. cap. 32.
till Pope Innocent by his Bull confirmed the Crown to him, to hold by a
six-fold right, Viz. Of Inheritance, of War, of Espousals, of Election, of Gift
by Parliament, and lastly, of Pontifical Benediction; which the King liked
marvelous well; and the rather, because his Title by Marriage was buried up in
the middle, and so made the less noise. For though it was his best guard, yet
he liked not that it should be so reputed, lest his Title should seem rather
conferred upon him, than gained by him; and so should hold by a Woman, or at
the best by the courtesy of England, if the Peoples favor should so far
extend the Law in that point; by both which he holds the honor of a complete
King diminished. His Title by Inheritance is much disputable, if the right
Heirs of John of Gaunt be enquired after: And much more that of War; for
although that brought the Possession, yet no right or Title, but by wrong;
which may indeed be plaistered over by Election, or Act of Parliament; but then
he must be Tenant to the People. As touching the Pontifical Benediction,
himself took that but as a redundancy, that might sway with the Clergy, and do
his Title no hurt. Nevertheless, what severally they cannot do, by joint
concurrence he accounts so fully done, as if he were a King against all the
World, Jovius Brit.
and more. Yet is he not sure enough, but as one jealous is more tender, so is
his eye ever upon his Title; there is his guard, and regard; as if it were the
outworks of his Crown, which once lost, the Crown cannot hold out long. In this
work he minded so much his Greatness, that he lost the repute of his Goodness.
Then casting his eye upon the Government, and finding it of a mixed temper,
wherein if Royalty prevails not, Popularity will; like a good Soldier, whilst
his strength is full, he sallies upon the peoples liberties, in regard of their
persons, with such cunning conveyance, as he taught the People to dance more
often and better to the tune of Prerogative and Allegiance, than all his
Predecessors had done. Nor did the People perceive it, till they were over
their Shoes; and then they clearly saw their condition, and that it was in vain
for them to wrangle with their own acts; of which more particularly in the next
Chapter. The Legiance of persons of the People once gained, their Estates more
easily follow: And therefore though in the former he wrought by Ambuscado, in
this he may be more brave, and charge them in the Van. Yet this he did also by
degrees; first by light skirmishes of borrowing smaller sums of money (possibly
when he had no need) and paying them again, thereby to gain credit for greater
sums, of which he intended not so sudden return. Then he charges them home with
Benevolences; (a trick gained in right of his Wife from her Father) for he
hoped that the person of Richard the Third was now become so abominable, as his
Laws would be the less regarded. But in this course he gained nothing but Wind.
Then (as Edward the Fourth) he falls upon Malevolences of Penal Laws; things
made in terrorem, to scare men to obedience, rather than to compel them; but
are now executed Ad angorem; and the people find that he is but a word and a
blow with them: and thus, serving his Prerogative with Power, and his Purse
with his Prerogative, he made all serve his own turn, Jovius Brit. fol. 9.
Humanitatem omnem vincente periculo.

In the Field he always put his Wisdom in the Van; for as he was parsimonious
in expenses of Money, so much rather of Blood, if he could prevail by Wit.
Generally he was the first in Arms, to make men believe he was more ready to
fight than they. Thus he many times gained the advantage of his Adversaries,
and sometimes came off without blows. In the Battle he did put on courage as he
did his Armor, and would dare to adventure just as far as a General should; as
if he had ever regard of his Crown, rather than of the honor of a forward
Soldier; which nevertheless was also so dear to him, as he is seldom found in
the Rear, although his Judgment commanded in chief, rather than his Courage.
In the Throne he is much more wise, because he was willing it should be known.
In doing Justice he is seldom suspected, unless where himself is party; and yet
then he is also so shame-faced, as he would ever either stalk behind some Law
that had a semblance to his ends, or when he meant to step out of the way, he
would put his Ministers before; not so much that his fineness might be known,
but his Royalty. For the Lion hunts not its own prey, nor is it Regal for a
King to be seen in catching of Money, though he be understood. Besides, it was
needless; he had Lords, Bishops, Judges, and other instruments of malevolent
aspects, as so many Furies, outwardly resembling men for the Commonwealth, but
working for the common mischief; like some Pictures, one way looking right, and
another way looking wrong. And thus the King comes lawfully by what he catched,
though his instruments did not; and must be still holden for a good King,
though it be his hard hap to have ill servants. Take him now amongst the
people, he is alike to all, yea in some things that might seem to brush upon
the King's own train; for he had some of his suit that were not altogether of
his mind, and these he would spare to the course of Justice if need were. As it
befell in the case of the Duke of Suffolk, whom he suffered to be tried at the
Kings Bench-bar, for a Murder done upon a mean person, and by such means
obtained the repute of a zealous Justiciar; as if Justice had been his
principal virtue. All this suited well with his main end; for he that will milk
his Cattle, must feed them well; and it encourages men to gather and lay up,
when they have Law to hold by what they have.

His Religion, I touch upon in the last place, as most proper to his temper;
for it was the last in his thought, though many times the first in the acting.
But where it stood in his way, he turned it behind him; he made Churchmen his
instruments, that the matter might better relish; for who will expect ought
save well from men of Religion? and then if the worst come, he was but misled
by such, as in common reason ought to be trusted. And it is his unhappiness to
meet, with Clergymen to serve a turn, and a Pope to give his Benediction to
all. Nor was this Gratis; for there were as many mutual engagements between the
Clergy and him, as any of his Predecessors of the House of Lancaster besides.
Lastly, It may well be supposed, however wise this King seemed to be, that many
saw through him; which procured him a troublesome Reign; though many times
occasioned by his own interposing in Foreign Interests, wherein he suffered
more from others than they from him. Amongst the rest, the Duchess of Burgundy
(though a Woman she were) mated him with Phantomes and Apparitions of dead
Bodies of the House of York; the scare whereof put the King and all his people
in alarm; and striking at idle shadows, slew one another. All which, together
with the appearances of Collections, Taxes, and other accoutrements to furnish
such employments, were enough to disturb that ease and rest that the King aimed
to enjoy; make him burdensome to his people, and both himself and them weary
of each other. And so he went down to the Grave with but a dry Funeral; leaving
no better testimony behind him, than that he was a cunning man, rather than a
wise English King. And though he died rich, yet is he since grown into debt to
the Penmen of his story, that by their own excellency have rendered him a
better King than he was.

Henry the Eighth was a Conception in whom the two Bloods both of York and
Lancaster did meet, Henry 8.
both of them unconquered, both of them predominant; and therefore no wonder if
he was a man beyond the ordinary proportion of other men in stature of Body,
and in qualities of Mind not disproportionable. It is regularly true, that
great Bodies move slowly; but it holds not where much Spirit is: and it was the
condition of this Prince to have a Spirit of the largest size, that acted him
into motion with no less speed than mighty power. This himself understood right
well, and therefore might be haughty upon a double Title, both of Purchase and
Inheritance. Nor did he fail of expectation herein; for he could not endure
that man that would own his right in competition with King's aims, and
therefore would have his Kingdom be like his Doublet, to keep him warm, and yet
sit loose about him, that he might have elbow-room. Suitable hereunto were his
undertakings, invited thereunto by the inordinate motions, or rather commotions
of his neighboring Princes: For it was now full Sea in all Countries; and
though England was inferior to some of them, yet the King held it
dishonorable for him not to adventure as far as the bravest of them; and in
the end outwent them all. What he wanted in number, he supplied in courage;
wherein he so exceeded, that he avoided dangers rather out of Judgment than
Fear. His thoughts, Resolutions, Endeavors, and Actions, were all the birth of
Occasion, and of each other; as if he had obtained a general Pass from
Providence, with warranty against all Counter-guards whatsoever.

His Wisdom served him to epsy present opportunities, rather than to foresee
them; and therefore was not so crafty as his Father in preventing occasions,
yet more dexterous in giving them the rout. For he could manage his hand and
foot better than his Father, strike downright blows; and rather than he would
fail of his ends, would make one, as many times he did.

Another advantage he had of his Father: for considering the times, he was a
learned King, which made his Actions carry more Majesty, and like a
well-feathered Arrow from a strong had, drive through the wind steadily to the
mark: Whenas his Father, like a weak Archer, must raise his compass, and crave
aid of the Wind to help him to be right in the end.

It is affirmed by some, that Henry the Eighth was courteous, and debonair; if
so, he must thank his Education: but it may be rather supposed, that upon
occasion he used the art of Insinuation, which he might learn both from the
Father-side and Mother-side; but he neither practiced it much, nor did he rely
upon that skill; for his resolution led him to cut the knot that he could not
untie. His Learning led him most to Divinity, and therein showed him light
enough to see much into the Mystery of Iniquity, which he did explain to the
World passing well; but as touching Devotion, he left that to the care of the
Churchmen.

He was very well accommodated with Money: First, from the full Coffers left by
his Father, much whereof he spent in Pastimes and Gallantry, as he was Heir to
Edward the Fourth; and much also in his Devotion to the Pope, as he was Heir to
Henry the Seventh; in lieu of all which, he was rewarded with a Title, Defender
of the Faith; and so of much ill gotten, was much ill spent. But a better
supply he had when Rome and he parted asunder, and the Current of the Riches of
the Clergy was stopped from running at waste, and returned into the Kings own
Treasury; and so might have died the richest Prince in the World, but that he
wanted the main Clause in the Conveyance, To have and to hold. The Wisdom of
God so ordered it; for these felicities were too great and many for any
moderate spirit to bear gently, much more for the King's Spirit, that was ever
on the Pinnacle, and grown to that height, that like an embossed Stag, none must
cope with him, he must run and outrun all; none must cross him under extreme
peril; no good is to be done, but by following afar off. Nor is it a full
wonder, if in this his heat he knows neither faithful Servant, Counselor, nor
Wife, but strikes at all that stands in his way. Nevertheless, in his cool
temper, and when he was entangled with some perplexed occasion, he could use
the advantage of good Counsel, and the wits of others that were more crafty
than himself. Wherein it was his good hap to have some ever nigh him that were
for his turn, and unto them committed much, that himself might be at ease to
hear good news of successful dispatches.

In his youth he was served by the wise Counselors trained up by his Father;
and he then willingly enough, for his pleasure, was contented by their advice
to serve his people for a time, that they might be his Servants for ever. The
two great Conduit-Pipes of this Treasury, which he had from his Father, he cut
off at his peoples request, as if he loved his People above all his Riches. And
after that, he laid aside his pleasures and youthful company, to apply himself
more closely to the affairs of his Kingdom, as if he loved that above all
pleasure: which nevertheless stuck to him so long as he lived, and swayed too
much in the greatest Affairs of his Government.

Thus the first heat of his course was run well, so long as the Privy Council
continued moderately poised. But no sooner began one of them to put up beyond
his place, and to bid adieu to the advice of all the rest, but he gets the
uppermost seat in the King's Head, makes a Footstool of the King's Heart, and
then it is two to one that the people in such cases must bear the greater
burden: For whoever first said it, he said most true, That Prerogative in the
hand of a King, is a Scepter of Gold; but in the hand of a Subject, it is a Rod
of Iron. The Reign of this King Henry the Eighth, serves us with much
experience of this kind; for if the consideration of the Affairs of this
Government should be divided, the same would be double: the one under the
Regiment of Cardinal Wolsey; the other of the King, by Cromwell, Cranmer,
Gardener, and others interchangeably. I call that of Wolsey a Regiment; for he
was in the nature or condition of a Pro-Rex, during the Kings Juvenility. This
fortune thus super-induced upon a Cardinal, (raised from mean degree to be
Legate a Latere, courted by Foreign Princes, Thuan. lib. 1.
slattered by the Emperor with Titles of Son and Cousin) made him lead a
dance, that the King (however active he was) is put to his career to hold him
company; which the King perceiving, tripped up his heels, and left the
Archbishop, the Chancellor, the Cardinal, the Legate, and many more with him,
lying on the ground. No pride like to that of the Clergy, whose parts are more
sublime, and apprehensions clear. If God adds not a superior Work to rule
over all, a little honor will blow up all with powder. The King having thus
matched the Cardinal, forgot his former natural pace; and once in a heat, could
cool no more till death cooled him. He knew by experience, that the Cardinal
could overawe the people; why should not the King do as much? if the Lords
stooped to the Cardinal, why not much rather to the King? The Cardinal pulled
down, reared up, turned square to round; why should he be less than his
Subjects? Such conceits as these soon wound up the Kings mind to that height,
that it is death to him to stoop one inch lower to more moderate advice, though
he loved their persons never so well: but all must be content with the weight
of his arm, though it were no small one; and yet in point of Religion, affairs
tended to a kind of Reformation all this while.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the State of the Crown.
THat the Crown of England now abounded more in Flowers than Crosses, the Face
of Story does hold forth to ordinary Observation; and yet few are satisfied,
either in the true nature of the particular advantages, or in the manner how
they were obtained, or in the continuance. I must therefore make a little stop
upon them, because in the true discerning of them, the discovery of the nature
of the Government in latter days does much depend. Hitherto the Crown came
short of absolute power over the people, upon two grounds in observation: one
relating to the Clergy, the other to the Laity.

The Churchmen were heretofore under a Foreign power, and a Foreign Law;
against which, Kings durst not deeply engage: either not being assured of their
own Title, or employed in pursuit of other game; or being of a weak Spirit,
were scared with the Thunderbolt of the Pope's Curse. But the Laity were under
another Law, and such an one, as by clear and unquestionable Custom, had
established bounds, between the way of Kings, and the Rights of the People.
Neither did Kings directly invade those Borders, either led thereto by a kind
of Conscience in such of them as were morally inclined, or in others by a kind
of fear of raising up Earthquakes from beneath, which commonly do overthrow
high Towers sooner than Winds from above. But now such interests are laid
aside, fast asleep, by two Kings: Whereof one cared not much for Fear, and
neither of them for Conscience. For Henry the Seventh, having leisure to study
the Nature, and contemplate the Fashion of the English Crown, dislikes the
Model in some particulars. It was not rich enough, nor well poised to his mind,
which ever was, not to be poor, but toward his latter time to be exceeding
rich; as supposing that to be the only way to be more desirable to Friends,
formidable to Enemies, and absolute over his People. And this opinion of his
missed in the main end, though it attained his immediate desire. For by
mistaking the right way, it made a rich King, but not a rich Crown. He
delighted more in the riches of his People, than in a rich People: And this
bred no good blood, because the People thought that the Law was not on his side
in that matter. They suffered him to visit their Purses; but are loath it should
prove customary, lest they should lose their Common Right. They therefore chose
rather to give him power by Act of Parliament, to revoke Letters Patent, and
Grants, and make resumptions of Offices, Fees, Annuities, and the like; that he
might rather repossess his own, than possess theirs. Many Penal Laws likewise
of a limited and Temporary regard are made; and as Cheese after a full Dinner,
they close up all with Subsidies. For it was evident to all men, that the Royal
mind of the King served no further than to take what was given; provided that
the People would give, what else would be taken. By this means Henry the
Seventh left rich Coffers to descend to Henry the Eighth, but the Crown was
still the same in price.

In this Act of the Play, the People carry away the plaudite. The second Act
was the point of Allegiance, wherein both parts carry themselves so cunningly,
as it is hard to adjudge the Garland; yet it may be thought the King observed
it rather, because he offered all the play, whilst the People did only lie at
their close guard. The whole project consisted in this, to gain a more absolute
Allegiance from the English to their King. And because this is exemplified
partly in War, and partly in Peace, that part which concerns War, will more
properly fall under the consideration of the Militia: and therefore I shall
refer the same to that head, in the 32 Chapter ensuing; and will come to the
second consideration of Allegiance in relation to Peace, and therein touch upon
the Kings power in making of Laws, and of Judicature according to those Laws.
As touching the making of Laws, the ingenuity of Henry the Seventh, could not
suffer him to make any claim thereto in any positive way; yet his actions
declare that his heart was that way. For being beset with troubles, he could
often fancy dangers, and arm himself; then call a Parliament, who were wise
enough to grant as readily as he asked, rather than to be compelled thereto. So
he had Laws made according to his own Will, though he made them not.

The matter of Judicature comes next; and therein he made his Judges appear,
and not himself; though they did not only represent his person, but his mind:
so things were done according to his mind, though he did them not. And thus his
Excellency seemed more eminent in finding and making instruments fitting to do
his work, than in doing his own work. Nevertheless, all this was but from hand
to mouth; no Fundamental Law is altered all this while: If the Laws were made
by Parliament, the King made them not: If the Judges turned the Law to the
King's ear, the Law was still the Crown, though the King wore it. But Henry the
Eighth was no such man, he had not this skill of undermining, nor desired it;
he was tender of the least diminution of his Honor, industrious in finding out
the occasion, and a most resolved man to remove it out of the way, though it
reached as high as the Triple Crown. A man underneath many passions, but above
fear. What need he care for pretenses? his Father loved Riches, he Power. When
he came to traverse his ground, he found quickly where the Churchmen
trespassed upon him; and began with them, resting upon the wisdom of his
Father, and the infallibility of the Pope. Henry the Eighth had taken to Wife
Katherine his Brothers Dowager, and continued in that condition Eighteen years
without wrinkle of Fame, till the great Success of Charles the Fifth, the
Queens Brother, against the Pope and French, scared the King into a jealousy
of his greatness; and the Emperor's failing in courtesy to Cardinal Wolsey,
the King's Achates, stirred the Cardinals spirit to revenge, for the loss of
his hopes in the Popedom. For the Cardinal finding the King's mind to linger
after another Bedfellow, by whom he might have a Son, he made the French
Ambassador his Instrument to mind the King of his unlawful Marriage with the
Queen, and to mention unto him Margaret D' Alanson a Princess of France, Thuan.
lib. 1.
both in Blood and Beauty. The King liked the notion of Divorce, but disliked
the motion concerning the French Lady, himself being prepossessed with a fair
Object at home, the Lady Anne Bullen, Jov. hist. fol. 31.
then attending upon the Queen. And thus being moved, he entered into a scrutiny
concerning the condition of his Marriage; wherein he had been formerly touched,
both by the French and Spaniards themselves, upon several motions made.

First, Between Charles the Fifth, and afterward between the Dauphine and the
Lady Mary, Fox. Sleidan. lib. 9.
afterward Queen. Hereat the Cardinal winked all the while, till the
infallibility of the Chair of Rome came upon the Stage; then bestirring his
Wits, he lodged the Case upon Appeal thither, as he hoped beyond all further
Appeal; and so held the King there fast, till himself might accomplish his own
ends. But the Wheel once set a running, would not stay. The King espies the
Cardinal in his way, and bears him down: Then finding the fallacy of the
infallible Chair, he hearkens after other Doctors, follows their light: and
being loath to hear what he expected from Rome, he stopped the way to all
Importation of such Merchandise as might be any ways prejudicial to the
Prerogative Royal, with the penalty of the loss of Land, or Liberty and Fine;
the two latter being formerly warranted by Law. The first served as a scare:
for (though it were but by Proclamation) men might justly fear that he who was
so stout against the Pope, would not stick to scourge his own Subjects out of
his way in the time of his heat.

The King thus entered the Lists both against Pope and Cardinal now under
Praemuniri, (whereof he died) meets the English Clergy (thus losing their
Top-gallant) standing up in the Rear against him, and talking at large.
Nevertheless, the King stops not his career, puts them to the rout for
maintaining the power Legatine. They soon submit, crave pardon, give a sum of
Money, and perfume their Sacrifice with that sweet Incense of Supreme Head of
the Church of England. 1531. An. Antiq. Brit.
This was done, not by way of Donation, (for the Convocation had no such power)
but by way of acknowledgement, in flat opposition to the Jurisdiction of the
Pope. It became the common subject of discourse amongst all sorts, Jovius.
Brit. fol. 20.
but of wonderment to the Pope. Yet for fear of worse, Sleidan lib. 9.
he speaks fair; for he was not in a posture to contest: but all would do no
good. The Queen had appealed to Rome; the Pope by Wolsey's advice makes delays.
The Parliament espying the advantage, at once took all Appeals to Rome away, 24
H. 8. c. 1^.
and established all Sentences made or to be made within this Land,
notwithstanding any Act from Rome; and enjoined the English Clergy to
administer the several Acts of public Worship, notwithstanding any Inhibition
or Excommunication from any Foreign pretended Power. The grounds upon the
Preamble of the Law will appear to be Two.

First, That the King of England is Supreme Head in rendering Justice within the
Nation in all Causes therein arising; which is more than the Recognizance of
the Clergy, two years before this Act, did hold forth. Yet this
acknowledgement is not absolute, but in opposition to Foreign pretensions.

Secondly, That the Clergy in England having power, may in matters Spiritual
determine all doubts without Foreign help, and administer such Duties as to
their place do belong. Not hereby determining that the Churchmen ever had such
power by Law, nor that they ought originally to have such power. They never had
it; for no sooner were they dis-joyned from the Laity in these affairs, but
immediately they were under the Pope, and received their power from him. And,
de Jure, they cannot challenge such power, but by a positive Law, such as this
Law of Henry the Eighth, which also gives but a restrictive and limited power,
viz. In matters Testamentary, of Divorce, Matrimony, Tithes, Oblations, and
Obventions. So as if they will challenge such power, they must thank the
Parliament for it, and use the same accordingly as persons deputed thereunto;
and not in their own right, or right of their places. In all this the King's
Supremacy is but obscurely asserted, and rather by implication showing what in
reason may be holden, than by declaration of what was; making way thereby

First, Into the Opinions of men, before they were enjoined to determine their
Actions: but within Two years ensuing, or thereabout, the Law is made positive.

The King shall be taken and accepted the only Supreme Head on Earth of the
Church of England; 26 H. 8. c. 1.
and have power to visit, correct, repress, redress, reform, restrain, order,
and amend, all such errors, heresies, abuses, offenses, contempts, and
enormities, as by any manner of Spiritual Authority, or Jurisdiction, ought or
may lawfully be reformed.

Which in the Preamble is said to be made to confirm what the Clergy in their
Convocation formerly had recognized. The corpse of this Act is to secure the
King's Title, the King's Power, and the King's Profit. As touching the King's
Title, it is said, that in right it did formerly belong to him; which is to be
granted by all, so far as the power is rightly understood. But as touching the
King's Profit, it cannot be said that the whole lump thereof did belong to the
King, because much thereof was not so ancient, but, De novo, raised by the
Pope's extortion; and therefore the true and real profits are by particular
Acts of Parliaments ensuing, in special words devolved upon him. The nature of
this power is laid down in this Statute under a threefold expression.

First, It is a visitatory, or a reforming power, which is executed by enquiry
of Offenses against Laws established, and by executing such Laws.

Secondly, It is an ordinary Jurisdiction; for it is such as by any Spiritual
Authority may be acted against Irregularities: And thus the Title of Supreme
Ordinary is confirmed.

Thirdly, It is such a power as must be regulated by Law, and in such manner as
by any Spiritual Authority may lawfully be reformed. It is not therefore any
absolute Arbitrary Power; for that belongs only to the Supreme Head in Heaven.
Nor is it any Legislative Power; for so the Law should be the birth of this
power, and his power could not then be regulated by the Law: nor could every
Ordinary execute such a power; nor did Henry the Eighth ever make claim to any
such power, though he loved to be much trusted.

Lastly, This Power was such a Power as was gained formerly from the King by
Foreign Usurpation, which must be intended De rebus licitis, and once in
possession of the Crown, or in right thereto belonging according to the Law.
For the King has no power thereby to confer Church Livings by Provisorship, or
to carry the Keys, and turn the infallible Chair into an infallible Throne. In
brief, this power was such as the King has in the Commonwealth; Neither
Legislative, nor Absolute in the executive, but in order to the Unity and Peace
of the Kingdom. This was the Right of the Crown which was ever claimed, but not
enjoyed further than the English Scepter was able to match the Romish Keys. And
now the same being restored by Act of Parliament, ^^ H. 8. c. 10. 35 H. 8. c. 1.
is also confirmed by an Oath enjoined to be taken by the people, binding them
to acknowledge the King under God supreme head on earth of the Church of
England, 35 H. 8. c. 3.
Ireland, and the Kings Dominions, in opposition to all foreign Jurisdiction.

And lastly, by a Law which bound all the people to maintain the Kings Title of
Defender of the Faith, and of the Church of England and Ireland, in Earth the
supreme Head, under the peril of Treason, in every one that shall attempt to
deprive the Crown of that Title.

We must descend to particulars; for by this it will appear that these general
Laws concerning the Kings refined Title, contained little more than matters of
Notion, otherwise than a general bar to the Popes future interests: And
therefore the Wisdom of the State (as if nothing had been already done) did by
degrees parcel out by several Acts of Parliament the particular interests of
the Popes usurped Authority, in such manner as to them seemed best.

And first, concerning the Legislative Power in Church Government. It cannot be
denied but the Pope, De facto, had the power of a Negative vote in all
Councils; and unto that had also a binding power in making Laws, Decrees, and
Decretals out of his own breast: but this was gotten by plunder; he never had
any right to headship of the Church, nor to any such Power in right of such
preferment; nor was this given to the King as Head of the Church, but with such
limitation and qualifications, that it is evident it never was in the Crown, or
rightly belonging thereto.

First, Nigh three years after this Recognition by the Clergy in their
Convocation, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
it is urged upon them and they pass their promise, In verbo Sacerdotii.

And lastly, It is confirmed by Act of Parliament, That they shall never make,
publish, or execute any new Canon, or Constitution Provincial, or other, unless
the Kings Assent and License be first had thereto; and the offenses against
this Law, made punishable by Fine and Imprisonment: So as the Clergy are now
holden under a double Bond; one the honor of their Priesthood, which binds
their Wills and Consciences; the other the Act of Parliament, which binds their
powers, so as they now neither will nor can start. Nevertheless, there is
nothing in this Law, nor in the future practice of this King, that does either
give or assert any power to the King and Convocation to bind or conclude the
Clergy or the People, without an Act of Parliament concurring, and enforcing
the same. And yet what is already done, is more than any of the Kings
Predecessors ever had in their possession.

A second Prerogative was a definite power in point of Doctrine and Worship. 32
H. 8. c. 26.
For it is enacted, that all Determinations, Declarations, Decrees,
Definitions, Resolutions and Ordinations according to Gods Word, and Christ's
Gospel, by the Kings Advice and Confirmation by Letters-patent under the Great
Seal, at any time hereafter made, and published by the Archbishops, Bishops,
and Doctors now appointed by the King, or the whole Clergy of England, in
matters of the Christian Faith, and lawful Rites and Ceremonies of the Same,
shall be by the People fully believed and obeyed, under penalties therein
comprised: Provided that nothing be done contrary to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm. A Law of a new birth, and not an old Law newly revived or restored.
This the present occasion, and the natural constitution of the Law, do fully
manifest. The occasion was the present perplexity of the people; for instead of
the Statute Ex officio, which was now taken away, 25 H. 8. c. 14.
the Six Articles, commonly called the Six-Stringed Whip, were gotten into
power by a more legal and effectual Original. The Parliament had heard the
cries of the People concerning this; and having two things to eye at once; 31
H. 8. c. 14.
one to provide for the Peoples Liberty, and further security against Foreign
pretensions; the other (which was more difficult) for the liberties of the
Consciences of multitudes of men of several Opinions (which could not agree in
one judgment, and by discord might make way for the Romish party to recover
its first ground.) And finding it impossible for them to hunt both games at
once, partly because themselves were divided in opinion, and the bone once cast
amongst them might put their own co-existence to the question; and partly
because the work would be long, require much debate, and retard all other
affairs of the Commonwealth, which were now both many and weighty: In this
troubled wave, they therefore wisely determine to hold on their course in that
work which was most properly theirs, and lay before them. And as touching this
matter concerning Doctrine, they agreed in that wherein they could agree, viz.
To refer the matter to the King and persons of skill in that mystery of
Religion; to settle the same for the present, till the Parliament had better
leisure, the people more light, and the minds of the people more persuaded of
the way. Thus the Estates and Consciences of the people for the present must
endure, In deposito of the King and other persons, that a kind of Interim might
be composed, and the Church for the present might enjoy a kind of twilight,
rather than lie under continual darkness, and by waiting for the Sunrising, be
in a better preparation thereunto. For the words of the Statute are, That all
must be done without any partial respect or affection to the Papistical sort,
or any other Sect or Sects whatsoever. Unto this Agreement both parties were
inclined, by diverse regards. For the Romanists, though having the possession,
yet being doubtful of their strength to hold the same, if it came to the push
of the Pike, in regard that the House of Commons wanted Faith, as the Bishop of
Rochester was pleased to say, in the House of Lords; and that liberty of
Conscience was then a pleasing Theme, as well as liberty of Estates, to all the
People.

These men might therefore trust the King with their interests, having had long
experience of his Principles; and therefore as Supreme Head, they held him most
meet to have the care of this matter: for still this Title brings on the Van of
all these Acts of Parliament. On the other side, that party that stood for
Reformation, though they began to put up head, yet not assured of their own
power, and being so exceedingly oppressed with the six Articles, as they could
not expect a worse condition, but in probability might find a better; they
therefore also cast themselves upon the King, Sleidan. lib. c. Anno 1535.
who had already been baited by the German Princes and Divines, and the
outcries of his own People; and possibly might entertain some prejudice at
length, at that manner of Worship, that had its original from that Arch-enemy
of his Head-ship of the Church of England. Nor did the issue fall out
altogether unsuitable to these expectations: For the King did somewhat to
unsettle what was already done, and abated in some measure the flame and heat
of the Statute, although nothing was established in the opposite thereto, but
the whole rested much upon the disposition of a King subject to change.

As touching the constitution of this Law; that also shows that this was not
derived from the ancient Right of the Crown now restored, but by the positive
concession of the People in their representative, in regard it is not absolute,
but qualified and limited diversely.

First, This power is given to this King, not to his Successors; for they are
left out of the Act, so as they trusted not the King, but Henry the Eighth, and
what they did was for his own sake.

Secondly, They trusted the King, but he must be advised by Counsel of men of
skill.

Thirdly, They must not respect any Sect, or those of the Papistical sort.

Fourthly, All must be according to Gods Word, and Christ's Gospel.

And Lastly, Nothing must be done contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm. And thus though they trusted much, yet not all, nor overlong. For it
was but a temporary Law, and during the present condition of affairs. Nor did
the King or People rest upon this Law; for within three years following,
another Law is made to confirm what was then already done by the King; 34 and
35 H. 8. c. 1.
and a larger power granted to the King, to change and alter as to his Wisdom
shall seem convenient. Thus the Kings Injunctions already set forth were
established, all opposal to them inhibited; and the King has a power of Lawing
and Unlawing in Christ's Kingdom, and to stab an Act of Parliament in matters
of highest concernment. And the reason is, the King will have it so, and who
dares gainsay it? as Cranmer said, The King loves his Queen well, but his own
opinion better: For new things meeting with new love, Antiq. Brit.
if it be once interrupted in the first heat, turns into a displeasure as hot
as the first love. Nor had either party great cause to boast in their gainings;
for none of them all had any security, but such as kept close to a good
Conscience.

All this, though much more than any of his Predecessors ever attained, was
nevertheless not enough till his Title was as complete. The Pope had fashioned
him one now above twenty years old, for his service done against Luther, and
others of that way, and sent it to him as a Trophee of the Victory; this was,
Defender of the Faith; which the King then took kindly, but laid it up till he
thought he had deserved it better; and therefore now he presents it to the
Parliament; 35 H. 8. c. 3.
who by a Statute annexed it to the Crown of England, for ever now made triple,
by the Royalizing of that of Ireland amongst the rest.

A third Prerogative concerned the Kings power in temporal matters. And now
must England look to it self; for never had English King the like advantage
over his People as this man had. His Title out-faced all question; left rich by
his Father, trained up in the highest way of Prerogative, absolute Lord of the
English Clergy, and of their Interest in the People; of a vast spirit, able to
match both the Emperor and French abroad, and yet more busy at home than all
his Predecessors. A King that feared nothing but the falling of the Heavens;
the People contrarily weary of Civil Wars, enamoured with the first tastes of
Peace and Pleasures, whiles as yet it was but in the blushing childhood,
overawed by a strange Giant, a King with a Pope in his belly; having the
Temporal Sword in his hand, the Spiritual Sword at his command. Of a merciless
savage nature, but a word and a blow, without regard even of his
bosome-Companions; What can then the naked relation of a Subject do with such
an one? if Providence steps not in, and stops not the Lions mouth, all will be
soon swallowed up into the hungry maw of Prerogative. To set all on work, comes
Steven Gardener from his Embassage to the Emperor: sad apprehensions are
scattered, that the motions abroad are exceeding violent and sudden; that the
Emperor and French King are fast in nothing, but in change according to
occasion; that like the Eagle they make many points before they stoop to the
Prey; that if the motions at home do wait upon debates of Parliament, things
must needs come short in execution, and the affairs of this Nation extremely
suffer. A dangerous thing it is, that the King should be at disadvantage either
with the Emperor or French King, for want of power in these cases of sudden
exigencies, and for some small time, during the juncture of these important
affairs, that seeing likewise at home the point concerning Religion is coming
to the Test, the minds of men are at a gaze; their Affections and Passions are
on their Tiptoes. It is reason the King should steer with a shorter Rudder,
that this care might meet with every turn of Providence, which otherwise might
suddenly blow up the Peace and good Government of this Nation. These and the
like represented a fair face to that which followed, and made way for the King
without shame to ask what no King before him suffered ever to enter into
conceit, I mean a Legislative power, to this effect, That Proclamations made by
the greater part of the King for the time being, 31 H. 8. c. 8.
and his Council, whose names hereafter follow, with such penalties as by them
shall be thought meet, shall be of equal force by an Act of Parliament,
provided it shall not extend to the forfeiture of Estates or Privileges, nor
to loss of Life (but in cases particularly mentioned in the Law) Provided no
Proclamation shall cross any Statute, or lawful or laudable Custom of this
Realm. All which at length comes to be demanded by a formal Bill, with as
ill-favored a Preface as the matter it self; which was much worse, e're it was
well liked in the House of Commons; and when all was done, proved a Bare still.
Whatever it was, it passed in manner abovesaid, neither much to the desire of
the Commons, that so much was given; nor to the good liking of the King, that
there was no more: For instead of a Legislative power, which he grasped at for
himself, he received it in common with his Council; and so becomes engaged
neither to alter nor destroy that Brotherhood, if he intended to reap any fruit
of this Law; leaving the point in doubt whether his Gain or Loss was the
greater. For this Law, thus made for this King, these Counselors, and these
times and occasions, can be no Precedent to the future, unless to inform Kings
that the Parliament has a power to give more Authority and Prerogative to
Kings than they or the Crown have by common Right; and to give it with such
limitations and qualifications as seems good to them.

And secondly, That even Henry the Eighth acknowledged that the Legislative
power was not in the Crown; nor was the Crown capable thereof, otherwise than
it was conferred by the Parliament. Only Steven Gardener might glory in this
Achievement, having for the present obtained much of his ends, by persuading
the King that Foreign Princes estranged from him, not so much for his departure
from the Pope, as for some apprehensions they had of his departure from that
way of Religion and Worship, which they apprehend every Christian ought to
maintain. And therefore if he meaned to gain better correspondency amongst
these Princes, he must engage more resolvedly to the Fundamentals of the
Worship, though he shook off some slighter Ceremonies with the Romish
Supremacy; for he knew that they were willing enough with the latter, though
the other could not go down with them. Thus did Foreign Correspondency float
above, whenas the Church, as then it stood, was underneath, and gave the
tincture to every Wave. And it was holden more safe by the Romish party to
trust the King (thus attempered) with the Legislative power in the
Church Matters, than the rough Parliament, whose course steered quite wide from
the Roman shore, as if they never meant to look that way any more: though
Cranmer, and the chief Officers of State, and of the Household, were by the Law
Judges of the matter in fact, as well as the King, yet in the conclusion the
King only was of the Quorum. All this yet further appears in the penalty; for
by a Proviso it is moderated, as to all forfeitures of Life, Limb, or Estate;
and in the conclusion extended only to Fine and Imprisonment, unless in some
cases mentioned, and excepting offenses against Proclamations made by the King
or his Successors, concerning Crimes of Heresy. For it is the first Clause of
any positive Law, that ever intimated any power in the King of such Cognizance
and punishment of Heresy. Too weak a principle it is to settle a Prerogative
in the King and his Successors, as Supreme Head of the Church, thus by a
side-wind to carry the Keys of Life and Death at their Girdle; and yet a better
ground cannot I find for the Martyrdom of diverse brave Christians in those
times, than this touch of a Law glancing by. All which passing Sub silentio,
and the Parliament taking no notice thereof, made way for the Statute 38 H. 8.
c. 26. formerly mentioned, to come more boldly upon the Stage.

This was one wound to the Legislative power of the Parliament, thus to divide
the same. Another ensues, that in its consequences was no less fatal to that
power which remained; and it was wrought by some Engine that well saw that the
Disease, then so called, grew to be epidemical amongst the more considerable
party in the Kingdom; that the Lady Jane Seymor (now Queen) was no friend to
the Romanists; that she was now with Child; which, if a Son, (as it proved to
be) was like to be Successor in the Throne, and be of his Mothers Religion, and
so undo all, as in the issue all came so to pass. To prevent this,
nevertheless, they fancy a new conceit, that Laws made by English Kings in
their minority, are less considerately done, than being made in riper years.
And so by that one opinion, countenanced a worse; which was, that the
Legislative Power depended more upon the judgment of the King, than the
debates and results of the Parliament: a notion that would down exceeding well
with Kings, especially with such an all-sufficient Prince as Henry the Eighth
conceived himself to be. Upon this ground a Law is made, to enable such of the
Kings Successors, by him appointed, as shall be under the age of Twenty and
four years when Laws by him are made, 28 H. 8. c. 17.
to adnul the same by Letters Patent, after such Prince shall attain the said
age of Twenty four years. Thus the Arms of the Parliament are bound from
settling any Reformation, let them intend it never so much; a Muse is left open
for the Romish Religion still to get in, when the Season proves more fair. The
Parliament was now in its minority, and gives occasion to the Reader to bewail
the infirmities of the excellency of England.

A fourth advance of Prerogative, concerned the Executive Power in Government
of the Church. This had formerly much rested in the Prelacy, and that upon the
chief Praelatissimo at Rome; now there is found in England a greater Prelate
than he; the Pope was already beheaded, and his head set upon the Kings
shoulders: To him it is given to nominate all Bishops and Archbishops within
his Dominions, 25 H. 8. c. 20.
by Conge d'eslire; and that the party once elected shall swear Fealty, and
then shall be consecrated by Commission, and invested: but if upon the Conge
d'eslire no Election be certified within Twelve days, the King shall by
Commission cause his own Clerk to be consecrated and Invested. The occasion
that first brought in this President, was the access of Cranmer to the Sea at
Canterbury: for though the Headship had been already by the space of Two years
translated from Rome to England, yet the course of Episcopizing continued the
same as formerly it had been. I mean, as touching the point of Election: For
though in their Original, Bishops were merely Donatives from the Crown, being
invested by delivery of the Ring and Pastoral Staff; Rot. Par. 17 Joh. 35 E. 1.
St. Carl. 25 E. 3. De provis. 13 R. 2. c. 2.
and until King John's time, the Canonical way of Election was disallowed; yet
King John by his Charter, De communi consensu Baronum, granted that they should
be eligible; which also was confirmed by diverse public Acts of Parliament in
aftertimes, and now by this Law last recited; and with this way the King was
contented for the space of Six years: for the Reformation intended by the King,
was not done at once, but by degrees; and therefore though this course of Conge
d'eslire was brought into use; yet the Parliament being of Six years
continuance, (a necessary thing in times of so great change of Policy) began
this course of Election, Antiq. Brit. vit. Cranmer.
by giving the King power to nominate, and allowing of the Pope power to grant
to such his Bulls or Pall at his own will; otherwise they should be Consecrated
by Commission without his consent. And thus at the first the Pope's Concurrence
was not excluded, though his Negative was. In this posture of affairs, comes
Cranmer to be consecrated Archbishop. And being nominated thereunto by the
King, the wily Pope knowing the Kings aim, meaned not to withstand, lest he
should lose all, but granted the Pall as readily as it was desired; so as
Cranmer is thus far Archbishop of Canterbury without all exception: yet he must
go one step farther, and take the old Oath to the Pope; which the King allowed
him to do, Pro more; and which he did, renitente Conscientia, say some, and
with a Salvo, say others; and all affirm it was done Perfunctorie, like some
worn Ceremony, or civil Complement. Nevertheless it was not so soon turned
over; the Archbishop loved not the Office, the King loved not Partnership in
this matter; and it was evident to all, that no man could serve these two
Masters any longer: an agreement is soon concluded in Parliament to exclude the
Popes Power quite out of this game, and all is left to be done by the King and
his Commissioners, by the Law formerly propounded. In all this, the Pope is
loser, the English Clergy the savers; for the Pall cost Cranmer Nine hundred
Marks: And the Crown is the great gainer; for hereby the King got the men sure
to him, not only by their own acknowledgement and submission, but also by a
Statute Law.

And lastly by Oath, which to make sure, was treble twined; once upon their
first submission in, the Kings Twenty second year, when they had been under
Praemuniri.

Secondly, Soon after the decease of Queen Katherine Dowager, in the Twenty
sixth year; which Oath was more complete than the former; containing,

First, A Renunciation of all Fealty to the Pope, or any Foreign Power.

Secondly, An Obligation to adhere to the Cause of the King and his Successors.

Thirdly, A Disavowing of the Pope, otherwise than as another Bishop or fellow
hrother.

Fourthly, An Engagement to observe all Laws already established against the
Pope's power.

Fifthly, A Disavowing of all appeals to Rome.

Sixthly, An Engagement to inform the King of all Messages or Bulls, sent from
Rome into England.

Seventhly, An Engagement not to send, or be privy to the sending of any
Message to Rome for any such purpose.

The third Oath was that of Fealty; which anciently was due to Kings, and now
revived, to be taken by all Bishops upon their admission. And thus the English
Prelacie, having been sworn Slaves to the Papacy ever since Becket's time, are
now preferred to a more Royal Service; and the pursuit by Kings after their
right, being laid aside by the space of 300 Years, is now renewed, and the prey
seized upon by the Lion; who found it upon a better Title, and in better
condition by much, than when at the first it was lost: For it was upon some
semblance of Reason, that the Archbishop and Clergy gained it; but being
afterward dispossessed thereof by the Pope, and yet without any other shadow
of Title, but the power of his own gripe, for the present he is the Occupant,
and becomes Proprietor by prescription: till now the Felon being apprehended,
the stolen Goods are the Kings in Right, and by Remitter; whereunto the
Parliament by the Statute adding their Conveyance, establishes the same by an
unquestionable Title. Nevertheless their service is no less servile to this
Crown, than it had been to the Romish Miter; formerly they asserted the Pope's
Infallibility, now the King's Supremacy. They are now called by the King, made
by the King, sent by the King, maintained by the King; whatsoever they are,
whatsoever they have, all is the King's. He makes Bishops; he makes new
Bishoprics, and divides or compounds the old as he pleases, 31 H. 8. c. 9.
by a power given to Henry the Eighth by Parliament. Which Oath was never in
any Prince before or after him, that I can find; so as the Crown had it not,
but the man, and it died with him.

The King thus laden with Power and Honor, above all his Predecessors, (if
without proportionable Maintenance to support the one, and act the other) must
needs consume himself (as one in a Tympanie) by growing great. For though he
was left rich by his Father's Treasure, yet his Zeal to Rome in its now poor
captivated condition under the Imperial power, stirring up in him great
undertakings abroad, (besides his own Pleasures and Gallantry at home)
exhausted that; and doubtless had starved these his grand designs, had he not
found the hidden Treasures of the Cells and Monasteries; the sight whereof so
rouzed up his Spirits, that he adventured upon the purchase; though he knew
difficulties enough to have stopped his undertakings, if he had not resolved
both against fear and flattery. It was not done without deliberation; for the
thing was felt as a grievance before the Norman times, and complained of in
Parliament above a hundred and forty years ago, and diverse times since; but
Kings either understood not, or believed not, or durst not give remedy, or had
much else to do. But now the King is beyond all his Predecessors; he knows
much, dares do more, and is at leisure. He will go as far as Emperor or French
King, and beyond them also; but would not try masteries with either, for they
were all Cocks of the game.

The first occasion that discovered the work feasible, was a president made by
Cardinal Wolsey, whose power was enough to dissolve some petty Cells, and no
opposition made. The King might well expect the work would be as lawful for
him, and not much more difficult; or if any Storms ensued, the people that had
so long complained, and felt the burden of these excrescences of the Clergy,
would soon find out a way to calm them: the King need do no more than speak,
and the people will do. This opened the door; but that which brought the King
in, was the hold the Pope had in this Kingdom by these Cloistered people, who
were persons dead in Law, and dead to all Law but the Canon. And upon this
account the King's Ancestors had possessed themselves of the Cells, in the
hands of Foreigners, in times of War; and now a deadly feud is stirred between
Henry the Eighth and the Pope their holy Father. The Children cannot expect to
thrive, whenas their Father is cast out of doors; and so all must out together.
Yet the manner is observable, they must not be cast out, but must go out: the
inferior and greater part are dead persons, have learnt obedience; they can
neither bark nor bite, and therefore they may sleep; and what is done, must be
done with such of them as are alive. Upon a Visitation, these are brought under
the Test, and found in such a condition, that they had better give way, and
voluntarily surrender, than abide the Trial. Once more the smallest are picked
out, 27 H. 8. c. 27.
whilst the greater stand by and wonder; but either do not foresee, or (in
despair of altering the King's Resolution) do nothing but expect the sad hour,
which within Four years comes upon them all, 31 H. 8. c. 13.
every one of them choosing rather to surrender, and expect the King's Mercy
for maintenance during life, than adventure against the dint of his Justice and
Power, and so lose all; for they were ill befriended amongst all sorts of the
people. Thus came the personal Estate and Stock of these Houses to the Kings
immediate Treasury, and their yearly maintenance to the disposing of the Crown.
Which might have advanced the same well-nigh to the value of Two hundred
thousand pounds yearly, but that the King intended to let the people enjoy the
fat as well as he, that they might be mutually engaged to maintain hold of the
Prey that they had jointly gotten. Out of all which nevertheless the Crown had
a small rent, or service annual, 26 H. 8. c. 23.
for the acknowledgement of their Tenure; besides the First Fruits of Spiritual
Dignities, and the Tenths; both which he formerly had already obtained.

The first whereof was but casual, and occasional in the payment, arising only
at the entrance of the party into his Promotion; and which was gained by the
Pope from Edward the First; Fox Mart. fol. 322.
although at his Parliament at Carlisle, in his Thirty fourth year, he
withstood the same. This was above Three hundred and twenty thousand pounds in
the whole sum. The latter was Annual, and amounted to above Thirty thousand
pounds. And thus the Popes Usurpations are turned into duties to the Crown; but
were much lessened, in regard that these Cells and Monasteries were accounted
amongst these Ecclesiastical Promotions, which by their dissolution fell off in
that account. Nevertheless, the advancement that might by a parcimonious King
have been made of the fall of this Cedar, was such, that the Crown might have
been rendered of it self absolute and all-sufficient. But Henry the Eighth was
not thus minded; the Affairs of Europe were gotten into a high pitch; Princes
generally over-active; Henry the Eighth inferior to none of them; what comes
in, goes out; and he is a rare example of that divine Proverb, As Riches
increase, so do the Mouths of them that eat; he still stands in need of his
peoples Love, Purses, and Power. So Divine Providence orders the matter, that
Kings can never attain further end of their undertakings without the aid of the
people than their labor, lest they should be too big to be Christians, and the
people too mean.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the condition of the Parliament in these Times.
THey are no good Expositors, that consider their Text by piecemeal only; nor
they good Historians, that will tell you the bare Journal of Action, without
the Series of Occasion. Such as these will speak much of the actions of Henry
the Eighth, what advancement he brought to the Crown; and make a complete
Monarchy, wherein the King may act what he resolves, resolve what he pleases,
and please what he lusts; whenas in truth the thing is nothing so: For though
many of his actions, in relation to particular persons, cannot be justified by
any Law: so in truth did they never proceed from any Law, but merely from the
passion or will of the man, and connivance of the people, who could bear that
from this King, that their Ancestors would never endure under any other. And
yet in all the grand concernments of the Nation, the Law kept still upon the
top; nor did the King enter into any competition therewith, or lead the way
thereunto, other than by especial allowance of the Parliament.

For first, It is evident, though the King was Supreme Head of the Church; yet
this was not like the head of a mad man, led by fancy, without the Law of
reason, or reason of Law; But it was defined, circumscribed, and formed
thereby, with Qualifications and Limitations, as has been already expressed in
the former Chapter.

Seondly, It is no less clear, that the Legislative Power rested in the
Parliament, and not in the King, when he was in his greatest height. For as
Head of the Church, he had no such power in Church Matters; or if he had such a
right, it was taken away by the Acts of Parliament. Nay, when the Pope was yet
possessed of this Headship, the Parliament did determine the manner of the
Worship of God, 4 Edw. 4.
in some particular cases; as in the keeping of the Lord's Day, the Statute of
Edward the Fourth, to the Honor of God, did provide for the observing thereof;
and to the Honor of God, it was taken away by a Statute in the time of Henry
the Eighth, 15 H. 8. c. 9.
if the words of either Statute may be believed. But more especially, after
that this Headship was translated to the King, the Parliament provided, that
the Canons should be examined and allowed by the King, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
and Thirty two persons, one part of the Clergy, the other of the Temporalty,
chosen by the King. And those that shall be assented unto, and confirmed by the
King, and the Thirty two persons, or the Major-part of them, shall be obeyed,
and put in execution; the residue shall be void: Provided nothing shall be done
against the Kings Prerogative, or the Laws and Customs of this Realm. So as the
King had much, but he had not all; 27 H. 8. c. 15. 35 H. 8. c. 16.
and what he had, the Parliament gave him by a Law, that was executory all the
days of Henry Eighth, by diverse continuances; and was not any power devolved to
the Crown under the Title of Supremacy, nor by virtue of the Act of Parliament
concerning it; but by the continual influence from the Parliament upon the
Crown, as well before that Act as after, derived upon it. The King has then
this right of Law making, but it is with the Thirty two he has it, but not his
Successors.

And lastly, he has it but by a derivative power from the Parliament, and a
Committee for that service. And in a word, he has the Power, but the
Parliament has still the Law of that Power.

The second Privilege of the Parliament hitherto, concerns only Laws
concerning Church Government. In the next place comes to be considered the
Legislative power in point of Doctrine; which doubtless issues from the same
principle of Power with the former. For if the Church (which as a pillar and
ground holds for the Truth) be the company of professing Believers; then
ought it not to seem strange, if these in their representative do intermiddle
with this Power, or rather duty. And for the matter in fact, neither did the
King challenge this Power, nor did the Parliament make any difficulty of
Conscience in executing the same; and yet there were many Learned and
Conscientious men of that number.

They therefore, as touching the Doctrine, proceed in the same way with that
formerly mentioned concerning the Discipline: And a Committee also is by them
made of the King and Learned men, to set down rules for Faith and Obedience, 32
H. 8. c. 26.
and for the order of the public Worship of God, according to the Word of God.
And these rules are confirmed by a Statute, so as the King has a power in the
point of Doctrine, but it is a derivative power; it is a limited power to
himself, and not to his Successors; and to himself, and others joined with him.

And lastly, nothing must be done contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom.

Secondly, The Parliament has not only a right to grant and limit this power
unto others, but also to execute the same immediately by its self. And
therefore before they granted this power to this Committee, (whereas formerly
the Pope usurped the power to be the Omega to the resolves of all Councils) the
Parliament intercepted that to their own Jurisdiction, in flat opposition to
the infallibility of the Roman Chair, 5 H. 8. c. 14.
so far as to disherize some Opinions, which by the sentence of that infallible
mouth, had been marked with that black brand of Heresy. And what they did
before this Act of Delegation to the King, and other Committees for this work,
34 H. 8. c. 1.
they did afterward, as not concluding their own power by any thing that they
had so done; as may appear, by their Censure of the Translation of the Bible
made by Tindall: By their establishing another Translation: By their ordering
and appointing what persons might read the same: 35 H. 8. c. 3.
By their qualifying the fix Articles; and the like. The Parliament then has a
power which they may grant, and yet grant nothing away; they may limit this
power in others as they will, and yet not conclude themselves. And the King by
accepting this limited power, must disclaim both the Original and absolute
Right, and cannot claim the same by right of Headship or Supremacy. This was
one great Windfal which the Parliament had from the ruins of Rome, not by way
of Usurpation, but re-seizure: For their possession was ancient; and though
they had been dispossessed, yet that possession was ever under a continual claim,
and so the right was saved.

A second, that was no less fatal unto that See, was the loss of all power over
Ecclesiastical persons in this Kingdom. For whereas the Popedom had doubly
rooted it self in this Nation, one way by the Regulars, the other by the
Seculars; the Parliament by the dissolutions of Monasteries, etc. consumed one
to ashes; and by breaking the fealty between the other and the Pope, parted the
other root and the stock asunder: and thence ensued the down fall of this tall
Cedar in this Nation; and Prelacie now left alone, must fawn elsewhere, or lie
along; a posture wherein that rank of men can never thrive. Up again they peep,
and espying a King that loved to tower aloft, they suddenly catch hold,
promising their help to maintain his flight; and so are carried up, and like a
Cloud born between Heaven and Earth, making the Commons beholding to them for
the Kings Sunshine, and the King for their interests in the people, and for his
superlative advancement above them all. Now though the English Prelates may
think their Orb above the Winds, yet were they herein deceived. The Parliament
had power in their Election, before the Pope usurped that to himself: now that
they are discharged, Kings are possessed of them by Conge d'eslire; but it is
not by way of restitution: For Kings were never absolutely possessed of any
such power, but as Committees of Parliament, and by delegation and concession
from them; and therefore must render an account to them, and abide their
judgment when they are thereto called.

Thirdly, The Parliament had the disposing and ordering of all the
Church-Revenues, as the Laws concerning Monasteries, Sanctuaries, Mortuaries,
First fruits, Tenths, Annates, and suchlike, sufficiently manifests.

Fourthly, The Parliament had the power of granting Licenses, Dispensations,
and Faculties; setting a Rule thereunto, as in case of Non-residency; and
delegating the power to Committees; 21 H. 8. c. 13. 25 H. 8. c. 16. 28 H. 8. c.
13.
whereof see more in the Chapter following, concerning ordinary Jurisdiction.

Fifthly, The Parliament reserved the Cognizance of all Appeals for final
Sentence unto themselves, and disposed of all the steps thereunto, as unto them
seemed most convenient. For though it be true, in some cases the Archbishop of
Canterbury had the definitive Sentence, 24 H. 8. c. 12.
and in other cases the Convocation; yet was this but by a temporary Law, and
this also granted to them by the Parliament; which took it away from the Pope,
and never interested the Crown therein, but made the Archbishop and the
Convocation their immediate Delegates so long as they saw good. Afterward,
when they had done their work, viz. The determining the Appeal and Divorce of
Queen Katherine, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
and some other matters, the same hand that gave that power, took it away, and
gave it (not to the King or Crown) but to Delegates from the Parliament from
time to time to be nominated by the King; and may as well alter the same, and
settle the power elsewhere, when they please. And therefore after the Appeal of
the Dowager thus determined, and the Sentence definitive thus settled upon
Delegates; the Parliament nevertheless determined the other Causes of the
Marriages of the Lady Anne Bullen, and the Lady Anne of Cleve, the jurisdiction
of the Crown never intermedling therein. So as upon the whole, it must be
acknowledged, that however the King was Supreme Head of causes Ecclesiastical,
yet had he not the definitive sentence in Appeal, nor absolute Supremacy, but
that the same was left to the Parliament.

Sixthly and lastly, what attempts the Parliament had met with; partly from the
designs of some great men that sought their own ends, and partly from the
endeavors of these Kings that sought their own height and greatness above
their peoples good, has been already related: and the utmost issue had been
truly stated, viz. That the gains have come to the Kings persons, and not to
their Crown; and that therein they have put their Seal to the Law, and made
their submission to the Parliament, as touching both their persons and power.
Add hereunto, that however Henry the Eighth aimed much at himself in his ends,
in two other main interests that most nighly concerned him; yet the chief gain
came to the Parliament.

The once concerned his own Wife, which however so nighly related to him, as
next to his own person, and under the determination of the immediate Law of
God; yet was so cast upon their Sentence, as if he durst adventure his own Soul
at their direction.

The other concerned the Crown, to which he ought relation above his own
person; which he laid down at the feet of the Parliament, seeking to their
power to fulfill his own pleasure. The Ball is tossed up and down, sometimes
amongst the issue between the King and the Lady Anne Bullen, 25 H. 8. c. 22.
another while amongst the issue between him and the Lady Jane Seymor, 28 H. 8.
c. 27.
or such as the King should nominate by Letters Patent or last Will. After
that, to the Ladies Mary and Elizabeth, to perform conditions declared by the
King's Letters Patent, 35 H. 8. c. 1.
or his last Will. The King then is trusted, but he has his trust from the
Parliament; the Crown is entailed, (as it has been ever since Richard the
Second's time) but it is done by Parliament. The reversion is in the Clouds,
but the right of Inheritance much more. The Conclusion of all is this, The
Parliament by serving these Kings turns, turned their turns into their own.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the power of the Clergy in their Convocation.
THe Convocation of the Clergy, like some froward Children, loves not new
dressing, though it be a gainer thereby. Before the Pope and Henry the Eighth
were fallen asunder, their masters, their minds, th^^r work, all was double;
their Councils uncertain, their Conclusions ^ow in Production, and slight in
their Fruit and Consequence; sometimes displeasing to the Pope, sometimes to
the King, generally to themselves. Who naturally lingering after their own
interests, were compelled to feed that body that breathed in them, rather than
that wherein themselves breathed; and so like hunted Squirrels, from bough to
bough, were ever well tired, yet hardly escaped with their own Skins in the
conclusion. Now Henry the Eighth tenders them better conditions, both for ease
and Honor, and more suitable to their own Interest; yet they are loath to
accept, because they had been Slaves by Prescription.

Formerly, they were troubled with multiplicity of Summons, sometimes from the
King, sometimes from the Pope, sometimes from the Metropolitan, and always over
dripped by a Foreign power, that they could propound nothing for the good of the
Souls of themselves or others, but must be blasted from without; their labors
lost, their undertakings vain, and themselves, in the conclusion, sit down
choked in their Consciences and Desires. Now they are at no man's call but the
King's, and that by Writ; Provincial, and Legate a Latere, ^^ H. ^. c. 1^.
must meddle no more.

Formerly, it is taken for granted, that Kings have no Vote in matters
Ecclesiastical, though themselves be interested therein; and therefore if he
will accept of a Disme, 21 E. 4. fol. 46.
he must accept it Statu quo, it is granted; nor can he interpose his Dissent;
nor do they much care for his consent: But whether the King be concerned or not
concerned, what they conclude they must maintain, Vi and Clavibus, although in
right his Prerogative is above theirs. Now by the Statute, the Kings Vote is
asserted, and a Negative Vote restored, and himself made as well Head of the
Convocation, as the Church. 25 H. 8. c. 15.
Nothing can pass there without his concurrence, nor come to the consideration
of the Parliament without his pleasure; and thus the King has a double Vote in
every Church-Ordinance: One as in the Parliament, to pass the same as an Act of
Parliament, of which I conceive the Opinion of the Honorable Judge is to be
understood; the other, as a Member of the Convocation, Instit. 4 fol. 323.
to pass their advices to the Parliament: and therefore he might either sit in
person amongst them, or by his Vicar, as Henry the Eighth did by the Lord
Cromwol. By the first, the whole Kingdom was engaged: By the Second, the
Convocation only, and that as a Court only, and not the representative of the
Clergy; because as they had a Spiritual relation, so also they had the Common
Right of Freemen, and therefore could not be bound without the Common Consent
of the Freemen.

Thirdly, As their power of Convention, and power in Vote, 3.
so their original Right of the Law-making suffered a change. Formerly they
depended wholly upon a divine Right, which some settled originally in the Pope,
others in the Prelacie, and some in the Clergy. But now they sit by a
derivative power from the Act of Parliament, from which, as from their head,
they receive life and power.

Fourthly, They suffered some change in the very work of their Convention; 4.
for though formerly they claimed power to meddle only with Ecclesiastical
matters, yet that notion was ambiguous, and they could many times explicate it
more largely than naturally. It is not to be denied, but the matters concerning
the Service and Worship of God, are of Spiritual consideration; but that such
should be so strictly deemed to lie in the way of Churchmen only, is to bring
all Spirits within the Verge of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and to leave the
Civil power to rule only dead Carcasses: Much less can any other thing, which
by prescription has not been of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, be called Spiritual.

But to come to particulars, because generals edify not. The Convocation
claimed formerly power, as originally from its self, to impose Rules for
Government upon Churchmen, and Church Officers; and upon the Laity, so far as
extended to their Service of God: And also to charge the Estates of the
Clergy; and concerning Matrimonial and Testamentarie Causes. They claimed also
a power to determine Doctrine and Heresies. Yet de Facto, diverse of these they
never acted in that right wherein they claimed to hold Cognizance.

First, As touching the charging of the Estates of the Clergy. If it was for
the King's Service, they were ever summoned by the King's Writ; yet was not
their act binding immediately upon the passing of the Vote, till the Parliament
confirmed the same; and therefore the old form of granting of Dismes, was, Per
Clerum and Communitatem, as by the pleading in the Abbot of Waltham's Case
appears. 21 E. 4 fol. 45.
For without their concurrence they had no power to charge any Freeman, nor to
levy the same, but by their Church Censures, which would stand them in no
stead. And in this, the Convocation suffered no alteration, either in Right or
Power, by the change thus wrought by Henry the Eighth.

Secondly, As touching imposing Laws upon the Laity, 22 H. 6 fol. 14. Per
Neuton.
in points of Worship and Doctrine, it is evident, though they claimed such
power, they had it not. For when all is done, they were contented at length to
get the support of the Statute-Laws of this Kingdom, as may appear in the
particular Laws concerning the Lords day, and proceedings against Her^ticks,
settling the Popedom in the time of the great Schism, etc. But now all Title of
claim is quite taken from them, and all is left in the Supreme Legislative
power of this Nation, as formerly has been already manifested.

Thirdly, As touching Matrimonial Causes, their former power of making Laws
concerning them, and Testamentary Causes, is now absolutely taken away; only
concerning Matrimonial matters, they had so much of the Judicatory power
concerning the same put upon them, as might well serve the Kings own turn; and
that was for determining the matter between himself and the Lady Katherine
Dowager, 24 H. 8. c 12.
depending before the Archbishop Cranmer. For the King supposed the Pope a
Party, and therefore meaned not that he should be his Judge. And thus, though
the Clergy had acknowledged the King to be their Supreme Head; yet in this he
was content to acknowledge their Supremacy above him, to judge between himself
and his Queen, and in other matters concerning himself. So as upon the whole
matter, the Convocation were gainers in some things; in other things, they were
only losers of that which was none of their own.

CHAP. XXX. Of the power of the Clergy in their Ordinary Jurisdiction.
THose Spirits are truly degenerate, that being sensible of misery, cannot
stir up desires of Change, although the way thereto lies open before them: And
this shows the nature of the Romish Yoke, that it lay upon the Spirits of men,
did intoxicate, and make them drunk with their condition. Otherwise, the
Usurpations, Oppressions, Extortions and Encroachments of the Popedom upon the
Bishops Sphere, and the people under their charge, could never have provoked
such complainings amongst all sorts, in several ages from time to time. And now
that Henry the Eighth undertakes to set them free, so as they would acknowledge
his Supremacy, they all are struck dumb, till a Praemuniri taught them to
speak; and so were scared into a better condition than they would have had, and
into a more absolute Estate of Jurisdiction than they received from their
Predecessors. The Pope had now usurped a power supra-ordinary over all Appeals,
gained the definitive Sentence to the Roman See, and had holden this power by
the space of four hundred years; and the King finding the root of all the
mischief to his Crown from abroad, springing from that Principle, meaned not to
dispute the point with the Casuists, but by one Statute took away all Appeals
to Rome; 28 H 8. c. 12.
and determined Appeals from the Bishops Court, in the Archbishops Court; and
the Appeals from the Archbishop's Commissarie, in the Court of Audience. So as
though in the Kings own Case, the Convocation had the last blow; yet in matters
concerning the Subjects, the Archbishop was either more worthy, or more
willing with that trust. For though the Convocation might have determined all,
as well as the Pope; yet for dispatch sake of a multitude of Appeals now
depending at Rome, and to prevent long attendance on the Convocation, that now
had much to do in matters of more public nature, the utmost Appeal in such
cases is made Provincial. This (whether privilege or prejudice) the
Ecclesiastical Causes gained above the Civil, whose definitive Sentences was
reserved to the Parliament. And thus is the Archbishop made Heir to the Pope,
in the greatest privilege of a Pope; to be chief Judge on Earth in matters
Ecclesiastical, within his own Province. A trick that in my opinion much
darkened the Glory of the Kings Title of Supreme Head, which the Churchmen had
formerly offered up to the honor of the Crown of this Realm. For be it so,
that the Title is in the Crown by Remitter; yet cannot the same carry along
with it any more than a lawful power, and whether all the Pope's former power
allowed him by the Canon, or gained by Usurpation and Custom, shall be said a
lawful power, or whether the power of Review by Appeal, shall be derived to the
Crown, under the general Notion of Supreamacy upon the Clergies submission, is
to me a doubt (albeit, I must give honor to the Judgment in Print) in regard
that after the submission of the Clergy, the matter concerning the Divorce of
the Lady Katherine Dowager, Inst. 4. fol. 344.
came before the Pope by Appeal, and there depended, the King himself also
waiting upon that See for Justice, and a definitive Sentence in that matter;
and thereby acknowledged the Pope's power De facto: Notwithstanding the
Clergies foregoing submission; and being occasioned by the delay at Rome, he
procured this Statute concerning Appeals to be made; whereby at one breath he
took the Appeals to Rome away, and settled them as formerly has been mentioned;
all which was done two years before the Title of Supremacy was annexed, or
declared for to be to the Crown by Act of Parliament.

And therefore, as to me it appears, the power of Supreme Cognizance of
Appeals, was not in actual possession of the Crown by the Clergies submission;
so was it actually vested in the Archbishop, before the Title of Supremacy was
confirmed by Act of Parliament; and so it never was in the Crown actually
possessed, much less had the Crown the same by Remitter. For the King's turn
once served by the Convocation, and the matter of the Divorce of Queen
Katherine settled, the King perceiving the slow progress of the Convocation, the
Members of the same not being yet sufficiently tuned to the present Affairs:
And moderate Archbishop Cranmer, likewise foreseeing, that the Odium of these
Definitive Sentences would be too great for him to bear; another Appeal is
provided, more for the honor of the Crown, to be from the Archbishop to
Delegates, to be appointed by the King, his Heirs and Successors; so as though
their Nomination be the Kings, yet their power is deduced immediately from the
Parliament, which took the same from the Archbishop, and conferred it upon them.

A second advantage not inferior hereto, which the Archbishop gained out of
the ruins of the Popedom, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
was the power of Licenses and Dispensations, or Faculties. In the Pope, it was
a transcendent power without any rule, but what was tuned to him by the Bird in
his own breast; and was the ground of much license, or rather licentiousness in
the world: But in the Archbishop, they seem to be regulated.

To be First, in Causes not repugnant to the Law of God.

Secondly, 25 H. 8. c. 21.
such as are necessary for the Honor and Security of the King.

Thirdly, such as were formerly wont to be remedied at the Sea of Rome; yet in
truth left as much scope for the Conscience of the Archbishop to walk in, as
the Pope had in former times. A large Teather, and greater privilege than ever
the Crown had; by which, although the King himself be like Saul, higher by the
Head than all the people, yet in many things Samuel is higher than he. The
moving cause hereof is not difficult to find out: the King had but lately
married the Lady Anne Bullen; a thing that many startled at, and the King
himself not extremely resolved in; he would therefore have his way like that of
the Zodiac, broad enough for Planetary motion of any one that could not
contain himself within the Ecliptic line of the Law, and so shipped over the
Popes power to the Chair of Canterbury, and had made a Pope instead of an
Archbishop, but that the man was not made for that purpose. What the Ordinary
Jurisdiction got or lost, we come in the next place to observe.

First, they had still their Courts and Judicatory power, but upon what right
may be doubted. Their first foundation was laid by the Civil power of a Law, in
the time of William the first Norman King; yet the power of the Pope and Bishop
growing up together, they came to hold the power of the Keys by a Divine Right,
and so continued, until these times of Henry the Eighth, wherein they have a
Retrospect to the Rock, from whence they were first hewn; and many seem to
change their Tenure, and therewith therefore are in right to change the Style
of their Courts, and Title of Summons; but the times not being very curious,
and the work of reformation but in fieri; the more exact lineaments must be
left to time to finish and beautify. A greater blow did light upon the Law of
these Courts, which was left as doubtful as the Canons; all which are now put
to the question, and to this day never received full resolution, but were left
to the Parliament to determine them at leisure; and in the mean time to the
Judges of the Common Law, to determine the same Lawful or Unlawful, as occasion
should require. Nevertheless, the Courts still hold on their course, according
to their old Laws and Customs, for their form of Proceedings; some say by
Prescription, yet more rightly by Permission; it being a difficult matter to
make Prescription hold against a Statute Law. As touching the matters within
their Cognizance, the Law settled some, and unsettled others.

First, As touching Heresy, the Churchmen formerly thought scorn the
Lay-Magistrate should intermeddle; but not being able to stop the growth
thereof by their Church Censures, prayed aid of the Civil Magistracy; so by
degrees arose the penalties of Imprisonment and Burning, which brought the
whole matter into Cognizance before the Civil Magistrate, because no Free man
might be proceeded against for loss of Life or Liberty, but by the Laws of the
Nation; and for this cause the Civil Magistrate granted the Writ of Habeas
Corpus, Mag. Chart.
and relieved many times the party imprisoned wrongfully, Instit. 3. fol. 42.
or granted Prohibition as they saw cause. And therefore it cannot be said
rightly, that the sole or supreme Cognizance of this crime of Heresy belonged
to the Clergy before these times. Nor did their proceeding upon the Writ of
Burning warrant any such thing; partly because till these times the Canon Law
was the best ground that these proceedings had, and the course therein was not
so uniform as to permit the Title of a Custom to warrant the same: Conviction
being sometimes by Jury, sometimes according to the Canon, sometimes before the
Ordinary, sometimes before the Convocation, sometimes before the King,
sometimes before special Delegates, as the Histories of the Martyrs more
particularly set forth, and no Act of Parliament positive in the point. But the
time is now come, when nighest Reformation, that the thing is settled more to
the prejudice of Reformation than all the endeavors foregoing; like to the
darkness of the Night, that is at the Superlative degree when nighest break of
Day. A Statute is now made, that indeed quite blotted out the very name of the
Statute of Henry the Fourth, De Haeretico comburendo, 25 H. 8. c. 14.
but made complete that Statute of 5 Rich. 2. and the other of 2 Hen. 5, both
which were formerly neither good in Law, nor effectual, otherways than by
Power; and gave more settlement to the Ordinaries proceedings in such Cases.
For the Delinquent might be convict before the Ordinary by Witnesses, or might
be indicted at the Common Law, and the Indictment certified to the Ordinary as
Evidence. Yet did the Parliament carve them out their work, and in express
words declared; That Opinions against the Authority and Laws of the Bishop of
Rome were not Heresy; and by the same reason might have done more of that
kind, but that was enough to tell all the world, that the Parliament could
define what was not Heresy, although they did not then determine what was
Heresy. And thus the judgment of the Romish Church is called into question,
in one of their Fundamentals, and the Clergy left in a Muse concerning the
rule upon which they were to proceed against this crime.

The Parliament, within six years after, undertakes, though somewhat unhappily,
to determine and define certain points of Controversy, which had some relation
to the Worship of God, and the public Peace, and declared the contrary to
these determinations to be Heresy, and the punishment to be Death and
Forfeiture, 31 H 8. c. 15.
and the Trial to be before Commissioners by Jury or Testimony of two
Witnesses, or by examination in the Ecclesiastical Court, or inquisition in the
Leet, or Sessions of the Peace. Upon the whole matter therefore the Ordinary
had a particular Power to determine Heresy; but the Parliament determined such
Heresies as were punishable with Death and Forfeiture, by enumeration in the
six Articles. This was the Clergies Primer, wherein they employed their study,
as making most for their design, and laid aside thoughts of all other Heresies
as dry notions, or old fashions laid aside, and not worthy the setting forth to
the common sale.

Secondly, The Lesson concerning Marriage was no less difficult for the Clergy
to take out. They were put by their former Authority derived from abroad, and
their ancient rule of the Canon Law. With the Kings leave they do what they do,
and where they doubt they take his Commission. 35 H. 8. Rat. Pat. p. 15.
So did the Archbishop of Durham in the Case between John and Jane Fisher: In
the Kings Case, the determining part is put to the Parliaments conclusion; and
for a rule in other cases, some persons are enabled to marry, 15 H. 8. c. 8.
which formerly were not, viz. Masters of the Chancery, 37 H. 8. c. 17.
and Doctors of the Civil Law; and some forbidden Marriage, as all Priests, by
the Statute of the six Articles. 28 H. 8. c. 7.
And unto the rest concerning degrees of Consanguinity, 32 H. 8. c. 38.
or Affinity, a particular enumeration is appointed to be observed; within
which Marriage is declared unlawful, all other further off are made lawful. In
all which regards the Cognizance of Matrimonial Causes is theirs only by leave.

Thirdly, Residency, and Non-residency, was a Theme formerly learned from the
Canon Law, in which, as also in the thing it self, the Clergy were the only
skilful men. The rule of the Canon Law was strict enough, considering the
times, but it was not ^^eel to the back. The Parliament now undertakes the
Cause; and though it gave, in some respects, more liberty than the Canon, yet
stood it better to its tackling, and kept a stricter hand upon the reins, than
was formerly used; and by giving a general rule for Dispensation, 21 H. 8. c.
13.
took away all arbitrary Dispensations and Licenses, 25 H. 8. c. 16.
which were formerly granted beyond all rule, but that of Silver or Gold; 28 H.
8. c. 13.
and made all practices contrary to the rule, damageable to the party. Thus far
concerning the matters in Cognizance; now touching the power of the Keys.
English Prelacy having laid aside the pretentions of Rome, they put the world
to a gaze, to see which way they would go. In the innocent infancy of Prelacy,
it was led by the hand by the Presbytery, and would do nothing without them;
afterward, having gained some degree of height and strength, they entered
themselves to be Chariot-horses to the Roman Sun, till they had set all on
fire. Now unharnest, it is expected they should return to their former Wits;
nevertheless forgetting their ancient Yoak-fellows, the rural Presbyters, they
stable with the King; use his name sometimes, but more often their own; serving
him with Supremacy, as he them with authority beyond their Sphere. They raise
him above Parliament, he them above Councils; so as they do what they list,
Antiq. Brit.
let the Plebeian Presbyter will or nill; they are the only numeral Figures,
and the other but Ciphers to make them Omnibus numeris absoluti. Nevertheless
the Canon still remains the same: Episcopi se debent scire Presbyteros, non
Dominos, Distin etc. c. 5. Esto and 3. c. Ead. Did. Episcopus.
nec debent in clerum dominari; Episcopus se sedente non permittat Presbyterum
stare. Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam dispensatione Presbyteris
majores. Kings may make them Lords, but as Bishops they hold their former rank
assigned by the Canon: as Lord s, the King never gave them the Keys; and as
Bishops, the Canon did not; yet as under the joint Title of Lord-Bishops, they
hold themselves privileged to get what power they can. Two things they reach
at, viz. The absolute power of Imprisonment, and of Excommunication in all
causes Ecclesiastical. The Common Law would never yield this; Instit. 3. fol.
40.
some Statutes in some Cases did pretend.

First, As touching Imprisonment, the Statute of Henry the Fourth concerning
Heresy does lisp some such power: of what force the same Statute is, 1 H. 7.
c. 4.
has been already observed. In case of incontinency of Churchmen, it is more
directly given them by a Statute in Henry the Seventh's time; before which
time, the Statute it self does intimate, that an Action did lie against them
for such Imprisonment; which Law also was made useless by another in Henry the
Eighth's time, who gave a way to Statutes for the punishing them at the Common
Law.

First, with Death, which continued for some Months; and that being found too
heavy, 31 H. 8. c. 14.
it was punished by another Law with Forfeiture and Imprisonment. 32 H. 8. c.
10.
And the same King likewise gave way to a Law for the like punishment in case
of Heresy. By that Law that revoked the Statute of Henry the Fourth formerly
mentioned, although till Trial, the same was bailable: And thus continued till
the time of Edward the Sixth.

But as touching Excommunication, it was to no purpose for them to struggle:
the Common Law would never permit them to hold possession quietly; 24 H. 4. c.
12.
but did examine their Authority, granted Prohibition, enjoined the Ordinary to
grant Absolution where it saw cause. 30 E. 3. Ass. 19.
Nevertheless in some cases Henry the Eighth gives way to some Statutes, 22 E.
4. f. 29. Hill. 13. H. 7. pl. 15.
to allow them this power, 26 H. 8. c. 3.
as in the ^evying of Tenths. In the next place, the Prelacy had not this
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in themselves, so as to grant it to others; but the
Parliament did dispose thereof, not only to Bishops, but to Chancellors,
Vicars general, Commissaries, being Doctors of the Law, and not within holy
Orders, 37 H. 8. c. 17.
and limiting their Jurisdiction in cases concerning the Papal Jurisdiction;
and their manner of sending their Process and Citations, to draw men from their
proper Diocese, 23 H. 8. c. 9.
and also their inordinate Fees in Cases Testamentary. 21 H. 8. c. 9.
The Prelates therefore might possibly make great claim hereof; for generally
they were still of the old stamp, loved to have all by Divine Right, and lived
they cared not by what wrong: But the Laity enclining too much to the new
Religion, as then it was termed, refused to yield one foot unto their
pretentions. And so like two Horses tied together by their Bits, they endeavor
after several courses, ever and anon kicking one at another, yet still bestrode
by a King that was joynted for the purpose; and so good a Horseman, that
neither of them could unhorse him, till Death laid him on the ground. And thus
was the Roman Eagle deplumed, every Bird had its own Feather; the great men the
Honors and Privileges, the meaner men the Profits; and so an end to Annates,
Legatine levies, Peter Pence, Mortuaries, Monasteries, and all that Retinue;
the vast expenses by Bulls, and Appeals to Rome; to all the cares, expenses,
and toil in attendance on the Roman Chair: The beginning of all the happiness
of England.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Judicature.
THese two Kings were men of towering Spirits, liked not to see others upon the
Wing; in which regard it was dangerous to be great, and more safe not to be
worthy of regard. Especially in the times of Henry the Eighth, whose motion was
more eager: and there was no coming nigh to him, but for such as were of his
own train, and would follow as fast as he would lead; and therefore generally
the Commons had more cause to praise the King for his Justice, than the
Nobility had. Both the Kings loved the air of profit passing well, (but the
latter was not so well breathed) and therefore had more to do with Courts which
had the face of Justice, but behind were for the Kings Revenue. Such were the
Court of Requests, of mean Original, mean Education, yet by continuance
attained to a high growth: The Court of Tenths and First Fruits: The Court of
Surveyors: The Court of the Lord Steward of the Household: The Court of
Commission before the Admiral: The Court of Wards: The Court of the President
of the North: The Prerogative Court: The Court of Delegates: The Court of
Commission of Review: Others of more private regard: And (that which might have
given the name to all the rest) the Court of Augmentation. Besides these, there
were some in Wales; but that which concerned more the matter of Judicature, was
the loss of that grand Liberty of that Country, formerly a Province belonging
to this Nation, 28 H. 8. c. 3.
and now by Henry the Eighth incorporated into the same, and made a Member
thereof, and brought under the same Fundamental Law; a work that had now been
long a doing, and from the time of Edward the Third brought on to perfection by
degrees.

First, by annexing the Tenure of the Marches to the Crown: Then upon occasion
of their Rebellion, by loss of many of their wonted Liberberties. Afterward
Henry the Eighth defaced the bounds of diverse the ancient Counties, and settled
them anew, and the bounds of the Marches also, and appointed Pleas in Courts of
Judicature to be holden in the English Tongue.

And last of all, reunited them again to the English Nation, giving them vote
in Parliament, Rot. Claus. 20 E. 2. M. 3.
as other parcel of the English Dominions had. True it is, that from their
first submission, even unto Edward the First, they were summoned unto
Parliament, 15 E. 2. in Dors. M. 13.
and had vote there; but only in order to the Interests of their own Country,
now and henceforth they possess one and the same vote as English men. Secondly,
as Courts and Judicatories multiplied, so some also of those that were ancient,
enlarged their Jurisdiction, especially such of them as most nighly related to
Prerogative: Amongst others the Privy Council leads the way; who now began to
have too much to do in a double capacity, one at the Council Table, the other
at the Star Chamber: For now their power began to be diversely considered. In
their first capacity they had too much of the affairs of the Common Pleas, in
the latter they had too much of the Crown-Pleas; both of them serving rather to
scare men from doing wrong than to do any man right. And therefore though some
men might seem to have some recompense, yet the greatest gain fell to the King
and his Courtiers; and thus became Majesty, or State, or Prerogative, to be
more feared than beloved. What the power of the Council was formerly, has
already been manifested, that which both these Kings conspired in, and whereby
they gained more power over the people than all their Predecessors, was this,
that other Kings stood too much upon their own Legs; these leaned much upon the
Lords, and gained the Lords to stick close to them; and in this they had both
the Kings Love, and the Peoples Leave, who now disjoynted upon several
Interests, especially that of Religion, must be contented to let go that which
they had no heart to hold. And thus they obtained a Judicatory power over the
people; like that of great men whose censures are commonly above capacity, and
not like to that of the Peers. This was begun in Henry the Seventh's time, who
taking occasion to complain of corruption and neglect in ordinary Trials of the
Common Law, gets the people to yield to the Council, or some of them, a power
of Oyer and Terminer, by examination upon Bill, or information in matters
concerning Maintenance, Liveries, Retainders, Embraceries, corruption in
Sheriffs and Juries, Riots, and unlawful, Assemblies, crimes all of them of the
same blood with Rebellion, which the King as much hated as the thought of his
Title to the Crown; 3 H. 7. c. 1.
and therefore would have it feared, as much as the punishment by such a mighty
power; and a Trial of a dreadful nature could effect. A Trial, I say, wherein
both the guilty and the guiltless adventure their whole Estates, against the
edge of the arbitrary wills of great men of unknown Interests, in an unknown
way, at unknown places; having no other assurance, how, or when to come off,
but a Proclamation to tell the people, 4 H. 7. c. 12.
that the King above all things delighted in Justice. A bitter Pill this was
for the people to swallow; yet it was so artificially composed, that at the
first taste it gave a pretty relish, the King delights in Justice, the
Chancellor has his Conscience, the Archbishop brings Religion, the Judges
bring Law; so as it is probable nothing will be done, but according to Justice,
Conscience, Religion, and Law; a very fair mixture, but that there was a
Treasurer in the case. Yet the success answered not expectation, the persons
offended were many times inferior, and their Estates not great, the Offenders
more mean, and of desperate fortunes; for great men were too wise to try this
new way, or to taste of their entertainment. Therefore within nine years the
Judges of Assize are betrusted with all, and that Court so continued for as
many years more; and then the King marked out one crime amongst the rest for
his own tooth, belonging to the great men only; 11 H. 7. c. 3.
for they are only to commit the crime, and to give recompense suitable to the
King's Appetite. It is giving of Liveries, and Retainders; a sore evil in the
eyes of a jealous King, tending to draw the inferior sort to honor and
admire, and be of the suit of those of the greater sort; and then beware the
Crown. These therefore must be tried before the King himself and his Council,
that he may know whom he is to fear, and of whom to take heed. And hereupon is
a strange power given, 19 H. 7. c. 41.
to summon upon a mere Suspicion: To proceed without Information: To examine
the Defendant upon Oath, and make him his own accuser: To punish according to
discretion by Fine and Imprisonment. And thus the King and his Council have
gotten a power under color of Liveries and Retainders, to bring the whole
Kingdom to be of their Livery, or else they can suspect whom they please,
apprehend whom they suspect, put him presently to the rack of confession, and
so into Prison, till he has satisfied both displeasure and jealousy, and
covetousness it self. Never was England before now in so low a degree of
thraldom, bound under a double knot of self-accusing, and arbitrary censure;
and this out-reached, not only in matters merely Civil, tending to the common
Peace, but was intruded also into matters Ecclesiastical in order to the peace
of the Church. All bound unto the good Behavior, both in Body and Soul, under
peril of loss of all that a man has dear to him in this world.

The plot of all this was laid by Henry the Seventh, and was followed by Henry
the Eighth, who put that into practice. (which his Father had in design) being
led thereto by such a skilful Guide as Cardinal Wolsey was, who, though of mean
Birth, yet of a Spirit above a King, and equal to the Popedom, strained the
string of Prerogative to its utmost height, and then taught the King to play
thereon; which he did after his blunt manner till his dying day. And thus
though the Clergy are brought a peg lower, and the Nobility advanced higher,
yet was it the policy of these Kings to make them all of their own Livery and
Retaindership, to keep them in an upper region, looking on the poor Commons at
a distance far below; and well it was for the Commons thus to be, till the
influence of these blazing Stars grew cooler.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Militia.
IT may fall within the verge of Opinion, that the guilty Title of Henry the
Seventh to the Crown of England, gauled his mind with jealousy, the greatest
part of his Reign. Whether it were that he had not declared himself so fully
upon his Title by his Wife, or that as yet he feared some unknown Plantagenet
would arise and put his Crown to the question. This made him skilful in the
point of Fortification (wherein he likewise spent the greatest part of his
Reign) not so much by force of Arms (for he cared not much for that noise, well
knowing that Peace is the safer condition for a King that comes in by power)
but principally by way of gaining Concessions and acknowledgement from the
Subjects: a Music that he much delighted to hear, well knowing it would
conclude those amongst them that knew too much, and instruct them that knew too
little; and so in time he should pass for current amongst them all. It was no
hard matter for the King to accomplish this, the greater part of the Kindom
being pre-ingaged unto his Title, and of them many depending upon him for
livelihood, if he failed, they must look to lose all. But the present occasion
urged more importantly; the Title to the Crown was already put to the question,
by the pretentions of one that named himself Duke of York: And it is now high
time for the Law to declare it self, to direct the people in such a Case. What
shall the people do where Might overcomes Right; or if days come like those of
Henry the Sixth, wherein the Subjects should be between Two Millstones, of one
King in Title, and another King in possession, for whom must they take up Arms?
If for Edward the Fourth, then are they Traitors to Henry the Sixth: If for
Henry the Sixth, then are they Traitors to Edward the Fourth. And so now, if
for Henry the Seventh, then they may be Traitors to the Duke of York: If for
the Duke of York, then are they Traitors to Henry the Seventh. For though the
Duke of York was said to be but a contrivance of the House of Burgundy, yet a
great part, both of the great men and others, were of another opinion; and the
King himself was not very certain of his condition for the space of six years
thereby. This puts the Title of Allegiance, and that power of the Militia, to
the touch: at length both King and Parliament come to one conclusion,
consisting of three particulars.

First, That the King for the time being (whether by right or wrong) ought to
have the Subjects Allegiance; like to that of the wise Counselor of that brave
King of Israel, Whom the Lord and his People, and all the men of Israel choose,
his will I be. And this is not only declared by the express words in the
Preface of the Law, 11 H. 7. c. 1.
but also by the Kings own practice: For he discharged such as aided him
against Richard the Third then King, 1 H. 7. c. 6.
by pardon by Parliament; but such as aided him being King by declaration of
the Law.

Secondly, That this Allegiance draws therewith engagement for the defense of
that King and Kingdom.

Thirdly, That the discharge of this Service, whereto the Subjects are bound by
Allegiance, ought not to be imputed unto them as Treason: Nor shall any person
be impeached or attained therefore. The first and the last of these need no
dispute.

The Second is more worthy of consideration, in the particular words set down
in the Statute, viz. That the Subjects are to serve their Prince in his Wars,
for the defense of him and the Land, against every Rebellion, Power, and Might,
reared against him; and with him to enter and abide in Service in Battle.
Wherein two things are to be considered, the Service, and the time or occasion.

The Service is, to serve the Prince in his Wars, and with him to enter and
abide in service in Battle: which is the less to be stood upon, because there
is a condition annexed, if the case so require; which must be determined by
some Authority, not particularly mentioned: Albeit, that whatsoever is therein
set down, is only by way of supposal in a Preface annexed to the Law by the
King, and permitted by the Commons, that were as willing the same should be
allowed, as the King himself; both of them being weary of Wars, and willing to
admit this Conclusion, for the better security of them both in these doubtful
times. But to lay all these aside: for the Case is not stated, till the Cause
be considered; all this must be only when and where the King's Person and
Kingdom is endangered by Rebellion, Power or Might reared against him. So as
the King's Person must be present in the War for the defense of the Kingdom, or
no man is bound by his Allegiance to hazard his own life. And then this point
of Allegiance consists only in defending the King in the defense of the
Land, or more particularly in defending the King's Person, he being then in the
defense of the Land; and defending him in order to the defense of the Land. So
as no man can rationally infer from hence, that the King has an universal
power of Array when he pleases; because the King, when he pleases, may not levy
War, nor make other War than a defensive War, when the Land is endangered, 11
H. 7. c. 18.
or when need shall require; as another Statute has it. But who shall
determine this need or danger, neither in these or any other Laws is mentioned;
either out of want of occasion, or by reason of the tenderness of the times,
wherein both Prince and People were willing to decline the Question.

Secondly, the persons that are to do this service, are to be considered of;
and although they are indefinitely set down under the word Subjects, it may be
supposed that the word is not to be taken in so large a sense, as to comprehend
all of all Ages, Sexes, Callings, and Conditions; in regard that even by the
Common Law, some of each of these sorts are discharged from such service. But
it may seem, the King was neither satisfied with the expressions of this first
Law concerning the occasion or time of this service; nor did he see sufficient
ground, under the notion of bare Allegiance, to desire more. New ways are by
him found out; his Patentees were not a few: and although few or none could
ever boast much of any cheap Purchases gained from him (for he was wont to be
well paid beforehand for his Patents, either by Money, or that which was as
beneficial to him,) yet he was resolved, that their holding should be no less
advantageous to him, than their having. And therefore in plain words he lets
them know, that notwithstanding former consideration, upon which they had their
Patents at the first, they must fight for him, 11 H. 7. c. 18.
if they will live upon him; and either adventure their Lives or their Benefit,
choose they which: and if they find fault with their condition, he touches them
with the Law of their Allegiance. And thus he makes way to intimate a claim of
a more absolute Allegiance: for being to show the Equity of the Law, in regard
of their Allegiance, he tells them, That every Subject is bound by his
Allegiance, to serve and assist his Prince and Sovereign Lord, at all seasons,
when need shall require. General words, that affirm nothing in certainty, yet
do glance shrewdly upon an absolute and universal assistance. Then coming to
drive the Nail home, it is said, that the Patentees are bound to give their
attendance upon his Royal Person, to defend the same when he shall fortune to
go in his person to Wars, for the defense of the Realm, or against his Rebels
and Enemies. (And as another Statute adds) Within the same Realm, or without,
and according to their Allegiance; and not to depart without especial License,
or until general Proclamation of dismission. In short therefore, here is a new
Militia, as touching the King's Patentees; they must attend the King's Person
whither ever the King will lead them, either within the Realm, or without;
whether against such as he will suppose to be his Enemies abroad, or if he will
mistake his Subjects for his Enemies at home. And this under the color of
Allegiance, published in doubtful expressions, as if it were not meet that
Henry the Seventh (that loved not to yoke himself to the Law) should yoke his
Laws under the Laws of plain Language: Or rather, that he held it a point of
Policy to publish his Laws in a doubtful style, that such as durst question his
Laws, might have no positive Charge against them; and such as dared not to
enter into the Lists with him, might not be bold to come nigh the breadth of
them.

Nevertheless, neither does the glance of Allegiance in the Preface of the
former, 11 H. 7. c. 18.
nor in the body of the later Statute, any whit confirm, that what is in them
enacted, 1^ H. ^ c. 1.
is done upon the ground of Allegiance; but contrarily, whenas the first
Statute comes to the point, it startles from the ground of Allegiance, and
flies to the ground of a kind of Equity or Reason. And the second resorteth to
the first as its proper ground, as being a supplement thereunto in Cases
forgotten, and so omitted; though it may be rather thought that the King
creeping up into his height by degrees, made the former only as an Essay to
prepare the way for the later; like the point of the Wedge, that makes way for
the bulk and body thereof. The truth of this Assertion will be more manifest,
from the nature of both these Laws, being limited both in regard of time and
person. In regard of time; for both these Laws are but temporary, and to
continue only during the Life of Henry the Seventh, in regard the advancements
therein mentioned, as the moving Cause, are only the advancements made by
himself. In regard of the person; for all persons that received Advancements
from him, are not bound thereby; namely those that come into such Advancement
by purchase for Money: Neither are Judges and other Officers excepted persons
in the said Statutes. If therefore Allegiance had been the ground of these
Laws, it had equally bound all who are under the Bond, and no Equity could have
given a general Rule of discharge unto such condition of men. It had likewise
bound as well formerly and afterward, as during this King's Reign; and
therefore whatever semblance is made therein concerning Allegiance, there had
been no need of such Law, if Allegiance could have done the deed, or if the
power of Array had been of that large extent, as it has lately been taken. In
my conceit therefore, these two Laws do hold forth-nothing that is new, but a
mind that Henry the Seventh had to fill his Coffers, though his mind would not
so fill. He would have Soldiers, but they must be his Patentees; not for any
skill or valor in them above others, but he hoped they would compound with him
for Licenses to absent, rather than to adventure themselves; and so he might
get the more Money, that could find pay for Soldiers more and better than they
were or would be. For otherwise the Patentees might by the Statute have been
allowed to serve the King by their Deputies; which would have done the King
better service in the Wars, than themselves could have done. And for this very
purpose, much use was made of these Statutes, as well by Henry the Seventh, as
Henry the Eighth, both for Licenses and Pardons, for composition in such Cases,
as their Records do plentifully show.

Secondly, Let the Claim of Kings be what they will, yet the matter in fact
shows plainly that they never had possession of what they claimed. Both these
Kings pretended a Foreign War, each of them once against one and the same
Nation, and to that end advanced to one place with their Armies; although the
one went in good earnest, the other in jest. Their Armies were not gathered by
Prerogative, but of Volunteers: This not only the Records, but also the
Statutes do clearly set forth. Some Soldiers served under Captains of their
own choice; and therefore the Law inflicteth a Penalty upon such Captains as
bring not their number complete, according to their undertaking: 7 H. 7. c. 1.
other Soldiers are levied by Commission, by way of Impressed, which in those
days were Volunteers also, and expecting favor from the Public; the rather,
because they devoted themselves thereto, without relation to any private
Captain; they willingly therefore received Imprest-money. And of this course
the State saw a necessity, both for the better choice of men, and for the more
public owning of the Work. For such as had been usually levied by the
Captains, were fit only to fill up room, and make up the number; and yet many
times there was a failing in that also: and this manner of raising the
Infantry, 5 H. 8. c. 5.
was continued by Henry the Eighth, as by the like Law in his time may appear.
As touching the levying of the Horse, although diverse Statutes were made for
the maintenance of the breed of Horses, and Persons of all degrees of ability
were assessed at the finding and maintaining of a certain number of Horses; yet
do none of them tell us, that they shall find and maintain them armed
completely for the Wars, nor shall send them forth upon their own charge; and
therefore I suppose they were raised as formerly. 32 H. 8. c. 13.
These two Kings had the happiness to be admired; the one for his shrewd
cunning Head, 33 H. 8. c. 5.
the other for a resolute and courageous Heart: And it was no hard matter to
find men that loved to ingratiate themselves, and endeavor to catch their
favor, though with the adventure of their Lives; especially if they looked
after Honor and Glory, which as a Crown, they say, pitched at the Goal of
their Actions.

Thirdly, Concerning the Pay of the Soldier, the Law was the same as formerly,
the same was ascertained by the Statute Law: the payment was to be made by the
Captain, 7 H. 7. c. 1.
under peril of Imprisonment, and forfeiture of Goods and Chattels; 3 H. 8. c.
5.
and the true number of the Soldiers to be maintained and listed, under the
like peril.

Fourthly, As touching the Soldiers service, the same course also was taken as
before; if they desert their Colors, they should be punished as Felons, and
the manner of trial to be at the Common Law.

Fifthly, For Fortifications, the power properly belongs to the Supreme
Authority to give order therein. For the People may not fortify themselves
(otherwise than in their particular Houses, which are reputed every man's
Castle) because public Forts are Enemies to the public Peace, unless in case
of public danger; concerning which, private persons can make no determination.
And furthermore, no Fortifications can be made and maintained, without
abridgement of the Common Liberty of the People; either by impairing their
Freehold, or exacting their Labor, or other Contribution; none of which ought
to be done, but by public Law. And therefore when the Inhabitants of the
County of Cornwall were to make defense against Invasion and Piracy from the
Coast of Little Britain, in regard they were a long slender County, and upon
sudden surprizals People could not so readily flock together for their joint
defense, they obtained an Act of Parliament to give them power to fortify the
Seacoasts according to the direction of the Sheriff and Justices of the Peace.
4 H. 8. c. 1.


Lastly, Wars once begun, must be maintained at the charge of the undertakers.
If they be the Kings own Wars, he must maintain them out of his own Treasury,
till the benefit of them do prove to the common good; and in such cases the
charges have been sometimes provided before the work, by Act of Parliament, and
sometimes after.

Henry the Seventh, and Henry the Eighth, both of them at their several times
went to Boloigne with their Armies. Henry the Seventh with an intent to gain
profit to himself by an advantageous peace; and had his ends therein, and was
ashamed to ask aid of the people toward the charges of that War.

Henry the Eighth went upon his own charge also with his Army, trusting to the
Parliament for consideration to be had of his employment (wherein his
expectation did not fail) and in his absence made Queen Katherine General of
all the Forces of England in his absence, and gave her power, with other five
Noble Personages, to take up Money upon Loan, as occasion should require, and
to give security of the same, for the maintaining and raising of Forces, if
need should require; as is more particularly set forth in the Patent-rolls of
these times. Nevertheless, the War at Sea Infra quatuor Maria, was ever reputed
defensive as to the Nation, and under the public charge; because no War could
be there, but an Enemy must be at hand, and so the Nation in imminent danger;
and therefore the maintenance of the Navy-Royal in such cases, was from the
public Treasury.

To conclude therefore, if the Parliament and Common Law in all these Cases of
Levies of men for War, 7 H. 8. c. 2.
payment of Soldiers, and their deportment, in cases of Fortifications, and of
maintenance of Wars at Sea, 23 cap. 7.
and the deportment of such as are employed therein; 32 cap. 14.
I say, if they give the Law, and carry the Supreme Directory, then certainly
the Law rules in that, which seems most lawless; and though Kings may be chief
Commanders, yet they are not the chief Rulers.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Peace.
PEace and War originally depend upon the same power, because they relate each
to other, as the end to the means; and receive motion from one and the same
Fountain of Law, that rules both in Peace and War. It is very true, that
several Ages hitherto have been troubled with arbitrary Exhalations; and these
very times whereof we now treat, are not altogether clear from such an air. Two
Kings we have at once in view, both of them of an elate spirit; one working
more closely by cunning, the other more openly by Command, yet neither of them
pretending so high as to do all, or be all in all. Peace suited more with Henry
the Seventh, than with his Son, who delighted to be accounted terrible, rather
than good; yet both of them were glad enough to be at peace at home, and were
industrious to that end, though by several means. Henry the Seventh pretended
Justice and Peace, (a welcome news to a people that formerly accounted nothing
theirs but by the leave of the Soldier) and therefore sets upon the
Reformation of the Sheriffs Courts, 11 H. 7. c. 15.
in the entering of Plaints, 19 H. 7. c. 16.
and making of Juries suitable to that present time, wherein men of Estates
were very scarce, and much of the Riches of the Nation evaporated into the Wars
both Civil and Foreign. Although the continuance of that order concerning
Juries in the succeeding times of opulency, has brought these Courts into
contempt, and made way thereby for the Kings Courts to swell in Glory, and to
advance Prerogative even above it self.

Secondly, he reforms Goals, as well in their number as their use. During the
Civil Wars, every small party of men that could get a strong place, made the
same not only a Castle, but a Goal, and usually imprisoned and ransomed at
their own pleasure. 19 H. 7. c. 10.
For remedy whereof, Henry the Seventh restores all Goals to the Sheriffs,
saving such as hold by Inheritance; and gives power to two Justices of the
Peace, 3 H. 7. c. 3.
one being of the Quorum, 3 H. 7. c. 1.
to take Bail in cases bailable, and Recognizances of the Peace, to be
certified at the next Sessions or Jail-delivery.

Thirdly, both Kings concur in providing against such disorders, as more
immediately did trench upon the public Peace, and reached at the Crown it
self, by laboring to prevent by severe punishing; and lastly, by regulating
the proceedings of Judicature in such cases.

These disorders were two; inordinate wearing of Liveries, and unlawful
Assemblies: The first being in nature of unlawful assembly of minds and spirits
of men; the second, of their bodies and persons. Both these had formerly been
provided against; but the Judges of the Common Law, unto whose Cognizance these
Crim^ were holden, did restrain their punishments to the rule of the Common
Law, then thought to be too facile and mean for disorders that did fly at so
high a pitch; and therefore they are reduced before a higher Tribunal, as
matter of State, as has been already mentioned. 3 H. 7. c. 1.
The severity of punishment consisted not so much in aggravating the Pain, 19
H. 7. c. 14.
as the Crime; matters of injury being made Felonies, and those Treasons.

This Crime of Treason, at first it concerned matters acted against the Nation;
afterward it reached to matters acted against the King; now it reaches even
to the very thoughts and imaginations of the heart; not only of bodily harm to
the King, 26 H. 8. c. 13.
but of the Queen, or their Heirs apparent, or tending to deprive them of their
Title of Name of Royal Estate. 3 H. 7. c. 13.
This Crime was formerly made but Felony by Henry the Seventh, and then only
extended to such offense committed by one of the Kings Household against the
Person of the King, or a Lord, or any of the Council, Steward, Treasurer, or
Controller; so as the Person of the Queen was not then in the case, and yet
then newly Crowned, and at that instant bearing in her Womb the Royal Seed,
which was then the only earnest of the stability and glory of England; and
therefore it is a subject of wonderment, unless it were out of extremity of
Jealousy, lest he should seem to make too great account of her Title, and
thereby disparage his own. And then is it a piece of wit, but not without
weakness; for he that is jealous of the slightings of other men, shows himself
unresolved in his own pretensions. Now Henry the Eighth not only raised the
price, but added to the thing; and not only puts the Queen, but the Prince
or Heir apparent into the Case, making the same Treason. So as it implies,
that English Allegiance tieth the Subject, not only to the safety of the
Person of the King, but also to the Queen and Heir apparent; otherwise the
offense is made and declared Treason against the King.

Secondly, The Election of the Object is to be considered: for whether the one
or other Statute be observed, it will appear, that although the King was the
next object expressed, yet a further was intended; and that the Crime is not
intended, in regard of his natural Capacity as a man, but of his politic
Capacity, and in relation to the Common good of the Nation. And this is
evident, not only from the several Prefaces of the Laws, but also from the
manner of Election, whereby the Title of Heir apparent is taken up, and not the
Eldest Son or Daughter, or these, and not the other Children, all which are
equally dearly beloved in natural regard.

Thirdly, Though at the Common Law Treason be properly a Crime against
Allegiance, yet as in Cases of Felony crimes may be by the Statute made as
Treason, which at the Common Law are not against the Legiance of an English
man; for this remains ever one and the same: but one and the same fact may be
made Treason, and unmade, by the Statute Law, as befell this Law of Henry the
Eighth, by a Law within twenty years after; like as also in former times, one
and the same fact has many times received the like measure. 28 H. 8. c. 18.
Other Treasons besides these already mentioned, were by Henry the Eighth
created; as Marriage with any of the Kings Sisters, Daughters or Aunts of the
Father's side, or the Daughters of his Brethren or Sisters, without consent
first had of the King: 4 H. 7. c. 18.
Counterfeiting current Money, not of the Kings Coynage, was likewise made
Treason by Henry the Seventh, who was well seen in that Mystery or Money-trade:
27 H. 8. c. 2.
and the like also became of Counterfeitures of the Kings Privy Signet and Sign
Manual.

And lastly, 22 H. 7. c. 9.
that horrid trick of Poisoning was reduced to this Category, rather that the
Penalty might be more terrible in the Death (which was by boiling) than for any
Tincture in the Nature of the Crime, or in any Forfeiture of Estate.

The policy of these times thus irritated against Treason, 33 H. 8. c. 8.
had proved very irregular, if the same had not been as rigid in cases of
Felony. Diverse new ones of that kind are also dubbed; amongst which Conjuration
or Witchcraft comes first; an old Felony in the Saxons time, but since had
gotten its Clergy, now well-nigh for the space of Five hundred years, and they
it; so as it never walked abroad amongst the Laity, but under the favor of the
Cloistered people; nor ever came before the Civil Power, till now Henry the
Eighth brought it forth into its own ancient and proper Regiment. Other crimes,
being those of the season, are made into the same degree: 3 H. 7. c. 2.
Such as were taking of Women into Captivity; 1 H. 7. c. 1.
unlawful Huntings with disguises; 22 H. 8. c. 11.
malicious breaking of the Dikes and Banks in Marshland; 21 H. 8. c. 7.
Servants embezzelling their Masters Goods to the value of Forty shillings or
upward, which (besides that of Heresy, whereof formerly) though of a new
stamp, yet of so good a constitution, that they remain unto this day under the
same brand.

But let the Laws be never so severe, if they have not free liberty to walk at
large, they are soon ghostless; and therefore these two Kings, especally the
later, gained that Honor above their Predecessors, that they gave the Law a
free and full scope over all persons but themselves and their Assignees, and in
all places. First, concerning places, every one knows the Notion, but few
considered the extent of Sanctuary ground in England, that could sanctify any
crime or criminal person in such manner, that though the eye of Justice could
see, yet the hand of Justice could never reach them, till Henry the Eighth
plundered them of all their Sanctity, and made all places common. So as no
Treason could hide it self, but where the Act of Parliament did appoint, 26 H.
8. c. 13.
and turned their names from Sanctuaries to privileged places. 27 H. 8. c. 19.
The sanctity of the person was yet more mischievous and hard to be reformed;
32 H. 8. c. 12.
it had been often attempted before these times, with little success. Henry the
Seventh gained some ground herein beyond his Ancestors; the Delinquent might
have his Clergy once, but not the second time, (though he fled to the horns of
the Altar) and was ever after known by a brand in the hand. 4 H. 7. c. 13.
Thus far did Henry the Seventh go, and would have done more, even as far as
unto those in Holy Orders. But Henry the Eighth coming on, in point of Treason,
made all persons common, 23 H. 8. c. 1.
without respect of their Orders or Profession. Death makes an equal end of
all. 4 H. 8. c. 12.
In cases of Murder, Robbery, Burning of Houses; Felonies done in holy Ground,
Highway, or Dwelling House; refusal of Trial; 2^ H. 8. c. 3.
peremptory challenge of above twenty of the Panel; Servants embezzelling
their Masters Goods in value Forty shillings, or upwards; in all these Cases no
Clergy could be allowed, but to persons in Holy Orders, 23 H. 8. c. 1.
and those also to be perpetually imprisoned in the Ordinaries Prison. And yet
this exception held not long in force, but these men also were equally wrapped
up in the same course, to have their Clergy, 32 H. 8. c. 3.
and endure the brand even as other men.

Two difficulties yet remain, which hindered the execution of the Laws against
Treason. One, concerning the Place; the other, the Person.

The Place many times of the plotting and beginning of the Treason befalls to
be without the walk of the Kings Writ; in which Case by the Common Law it
cannot be inquired or tried: or it may be, that the men of the place be
generally disaffected, and then no hope of finding out the matter. 28 H. 8. c.
15.
In such Cases therefore it is provided, that be the crime wheresoever the
Delinquent will, 33 H. 8. c. 22.
it shall nevertheless be inquired, and tried where the King will.

The Person of the Delinquent also many times changed its condition; it might
be sober at the time of the Delinquency, and afterward upon discovery prove
Lunatic, and thereby avoid the Trial; this, whether in jest or earnest, 35 H.
8. c. 2.
by a Statute is made all one; and it is ordained, That in case the Fact be
confessed by the Delinquent before the Lords of the Council, at such time as
the party accused was of sound mind, and the same be attested under the hands
of four of those Lords, the same shall be a good ground to proceed to
inquisition before Commissioners; and the same being found, to try the
Delinquent without answer or appearance, saving unto Barons their Trial by
their Peers. And thus however in their Fits, the Will of the Persons of these
Kings was too hardy for the Kings to manage according to rule, yet the Law
still in Title kept the Saddle, held the Reins, and remains the chief
Arbitrator unto every man.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the general Government of Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and
Queen Elizabeth.
WE are at length come within sight of the shore, where finding the Currents
various and swift, and the Waves rough, I shall first make my course through
them severally, and then shall bring up the general Account of the Reigns of
One King and Three Governors.

The King was a Youth of about Ten years old, yet was older than he seemed by
Eleven years; for he had all the Ammunition of a wise King, and in one respect,
beyond all his Predecessors, that made him King indeed, By the Grace of God. He
was the only Son of Henry the Eighth; yet that was not all his Title, he being
the first President in the point of a young Son, and two elder Daughters by
several venters; the eldest of whom was now thirty years old, able enough to
settle the Government of a distracted Nation; and the Son so young, as by an
Act of Parliament, he was disabled to settle any Government at all, till he
should pass the Fifteenth year of his Reign. But the thing was settled in the
lifetime of his Father, whose last Will, though it speak the choce, yet the
Parliament made the Election, and declared it. The condition of this King's
Person was every way tender; 28 H. 8. c. 5.
born and sustained by extraordinary means; 35 H. 7. c. 1.
which could never make his days many, or Reign long. His spirit was soft and
tractable, a dangerous temper in an ill air; but being fixed by a higher
principle than nature yielded him, and the same beautified with excellent
endowments of Nature, and Arts, and Tongues, he out-went all the Kings in his
time of the Christian world. His Predecessors provided Apparel and Victual to
this Nation, but he Education; and thereby fitted it to overcome a fiery Trial,
which soon followed his departure.

The Model of his Government was as tender as himself, scarce enduring to see
his Funeral; ready for every change, subject to tumults and Rebellions; an old
trick that ever attends the beginning of Reformation, like the Wind the
Sunrising. The diversity of Interests in the Great men, especially in point of
Religion, for the most part first set these into motion; for some of them had
been so long maintained by the Romish Law, that they could never endure the
Gospel: and yet the different Interests in matters of State made the greater
noise. All was under a protector fitly composed to the Kings mind, but ill
matched with rugged, humorous, aspiring minds; whereof one that should have
been the Protectors great Friend, became his fatal Enemy; and though he were
his Brother, to prejudice his Interest, pawned his own blood. The other, which
was the Duke of Northumberland, had his will, but missed his end: for having
removed the Protector out of the way, and gotten the chief power about the
King, yet could he not hold long what he had gotten; for the King himself,
after Sixteen months decaying, went into another world, and left the Duke to
stand or fall before some other Power; which came to pass upon the entry of the
next Successor.

The greatest trouble of his Government arose from the prosecution of a design
of his Grandfather, Henry the Seventh, for the uniting of the two Crowns of
England and Scotland by marriage, and settling an enduring Peace within this
Isle: and unto this Work all were Aiders in both Nations, but the Enemies of
both. But God's ways are not as Man's; it is a rare Example, to find out one
Marriage that did ever thrive to this end. England meaned well, in proffering
Love; but the Wooing was illfavouredly carried on, by so much Blood.

Lastly, As the Government was now tender, so was it carried with much
compliance with the People: which ever gives occasion to such of them that are
irregular, to be more; and such as are well governed, to be less; because,
though pleasing it be, yet it is with less awe and spirit: which renders their
obedience, at the best, but careless and idle; unless such as are very
conscientious be the more careful over their own ways, by how much their
Superiors are the less.

NOT thus was Queen Mary, Q. Mary.
but (like a Spaniard) she overruled all Relations and Engagements by Design:
she was about Forty years old, and yet unmarried, when she came to the Throne;
it may seem she wanted a mind to that course of life, from natural abstinency,
or was loath to adventure her Feature (which was not excellent) to the Censure
of any Prince of as high degree as she held her self to be; Thuan. vol. 1. lib.
13.
or her value was not known: so as to persons of meaner Interests, she might
seem too much above; and to those of greater, too much beneath. Or possibly her
Father was loath to let the world know her Title to the Crown, till needs must;
or to raise up a Title for another man, so long as he had hope of a Son of his
own to succeed him; and yet had formerly designed her for a Wife to Charles the
Fifth, Thuan. vol. 1. lib. 1.
and afterward to the Dauphine of France. Or it may be her self had set a
command of her self, not to change her Estate, till she saw the course of the
Crown either to or fro. However, the time is now come, that she must marry, Fox.
or adventure her Womanhood upon an uncertain and troublesome state of Affairs.
She liked the Lord Courtnee above the Prince of Spain, but feared he would not
design with her. She held him not unmeet for her degree: for she feared he was
good enough for her Sister, that then also had the Title of a Kingdom waiting
so nigh her person, as she was an Object of Hope to her Friends, and Fear to
her Enemies. And yet Queen Mary married the Prince of Spain: It may be it ran
in the Blood, to marry into their own Blood; or rather, she was thereto led by
reason of State, partly to enable her with greater security in the resetling of
her Kingdom in the Popish Religion, wherein she knew she had to do with a
People not easy to be reduced, where Conscience pretended Reluctance; and
partly to assure her Dominion against the Outworks of the French and Scottish
designs. And so she yielded up the Supremacy of her Person to the Prince of
Spain, but (thanks to the Nobility) the Supremacy of the Kingdom was reserved
to her own use: for it was once in her purpose to have given up all to the man,
rather than to miss of the man. And yet their condition was not much
comfortable to either: The Peoples dislike of the Match sounded so loud abroad,
that when the Prince was to come over, the Emperor his Father demanded fifty
Pledges for his Sons safety during his abode in this Land; which was also
denied. When he was come over, the English fear the Spanish Tyranny; and the
Spanish, Bodin. Rep. lib. 6.
the old Saxon entertainment of the Danes. So both lie at their close guards;
as after some time the King and Queen did no less: for the Queen was either
never earnest in her affection, or now much less; finding his Body diseased,
and his Mind lingering after unlawful game. On the other side, the King not
finding that content in her Person (especially after her supposed Conception)
that he expected, looked to his own Interest apart from hers, and thereby
taught her to do the like. And this she thought cost England the loss of
Callis, and he Spain the loss of many advantages that might have been obtained,
and was expected from this Conjunction. Thus by the several Interests between
the King Regnant and the Queen Regent, the Government of England became like a
Knot dissolving, neither fast nor loose.

Toward the People she might well be reserved, if not rigid: for she knew her
entry was not very acceptable, though accepted; and that her Design was
contrary to her Engagements: and therefore it was vain to think to please her
self, and pleasure them. Nor did she much busy her thoughts therewith: that
abominated trick of Impost upon Merchandise she brought into fashion, which had
by many public Acts been damned for the space of two hundred years. This was
done without either shame or fear: C. 2. Instit. fol. 61.
for if the People turned head, she knew she had a good reserve from Spain; and
the People might very well consider of that, though for her part she desired
not much to improve that Foreign Interest; because she might well see that
Spain designed to keep England so far beneath, that France might not get above:
And that Philip neither loved the double Crown of England, no, nor the Triple
Crown at Rome, otherwise than in order to that of Spain.

This distance between her and her King, wrought her to a more nigh dependency
upon her Council and English Nobility; and so became less discerned in her
Government; although questionless she did much, and wanted not Wisdom or
Courage to have done more, but that she was not wholly her own Woman. All men
do agree that she was devout in her kind of Profession, and therein as deeply
engaged as her Brother Edward had been in his; though it may be he out of
tenderness of Conscience, but she out of a Spanish kind of gravity, that
endures not change: and whereunto she was well aided by her Clergy, who were
her beloved for her Mothers sake; and now also so much the more sour, by how
much the nigher to the bottom. It is the less wonder therefore, if the Zeal of
these times burnt into a flame, that at length consumed even those that kindled
it. In one thing more, above all the rest, she acted the part of her Sex,
rather than that of her Place; and the same contrary to the advice of her
Ghostly Fathers, and all Rules of Policy, and the Agreement between her King
and self upon Marriage; which was the engaging of England in the War at St.
Quintins, against the French, contrary to the National League formerly made.
Nevertheless, the Issue was but suitable: for though the English obtained their
part of the Honor of that day, yet in the consequence they lost Callis, the
last foot that the English had in France; henceforth England must be content
with a bare Title. As this was deserved, so was it also reserved by the Queen,
to make the world believe that she died for grief therefore as a Mother of her
Country; although her bodily Disease, contracted by a Conception, wherein she
beguiled both her self and the world, concurred thereto. In sum, the worst that
can be said of her, is this, That she was ill-principled; and the best, That
she acted according to her Principles: And so lived an uncomfortable Life,
shaped a bloody Reign, and had but a dim Conclusion.

The Night was now spent, and Queen Elizabeth, Q. Elizab.
like the Morning Star, rising into the Throne, sent forth the benignant
Influence of both her Predecessors, and many ways excelled them both. She was
begotten in a heat against Rome, wherein also she was born and trained up by
her Father and Brother Edward's Order; and saw enough in her Sisters course, to
confirm her therein: for Queen Mary was not very Catholic in her Throne,
though she was in her Oratory. Nevertheless, Queen Elizabeth's course hereunto
was very strange, and might seem in outward respects to lead her quite wide:
for her youth was under a continual yoke; her Mother dead whiles she was at the
breast; her Father owning her no further than as his Child born of a rebellious
woman, never intending her for the Crown, so long as any hope was left of any
other. With her age the Yoke grew more heavy; her Brother Edward being but of
the half-bloud, except in point of Religion, might respect her at a distance
beyond his Mothers Family. But this lasted not long; her Sister Mary comes
next, of a stranger blood to her than her Brother was; looking ever back upon
her as one too nigh her heel, and more ready to tread upon her Train than
support it. The difference in Religion between them two, added yet further
Leven; and this occasioned from her Sister to her, many sour reflections,
bitter words, harsh usage, concluding with Imprisonment, and not without danger
of Death. All which Queen Elizabeth saw well, made the less noise in Religion,
walked warily, and resolved with patience to endure the brunt: For she might
perceive by her Father's Will, that her way to the Crown, if ever she arrived
at the end, must be through a Field of Blood; and though she knew her change of
Religion might make the way more plain, yet God kept her in a patient waiting,
until the set time was come. Thus passing over her Minority with little
experience of youthful Pleasures, she had the happiness to have the less sense
of youthful Lusts; which meeting with natural Endowments of the larger size,
rendered her the goodliest Mirror of a Queen Regent that ever the Sun shone
upon; God adding thereto both Honor and Continuance, above all that ever sat
in that Throne. Her entrance was with more joy to others than her self; for she
kept her pace as treading amongst Thorns, and was still somewhat reserved, even
in matters of Religion, though she was known to be devout. She had observed,
that the hasty pace, both of her Brother and Sister, brought early Troubles,
before either of them were well settled in their Throne. And therefore whereas
her Sister first set up the Mass, and then endeavored to settle it by
Disputes, she contrarily first caused the point to be debated, and thereby
gained liking to lay it aside. It is true, the Moderatorship in that Dispute,
was imposed upon a Layman (as their term is) but his work being to hold the
Disputants to order in debate, and not to determine the point in Controversy
(which thing was left to the Auditory) might therefore more rationally be done
by him, than censured by an Historian, that shall undertake to judge them all.

The first step thus made, one made way for another, till the whole became
levened. Her proceedings against Opposers were with much lenity, rather
overlooking, than looking on; and such as stood more directly in her Path, she
would rather set aside than trample down; and be fair to all (without respect
to difference of Religion) that would be fair to her. Forcat. de Gal. imp. l. 7.
Much of her happiness depended upon Election of her Council, more in observing
their advice; that whether she did rule, or were ruled, or did rule by being
ruled, might deserve some consideration. This she did, to give satisfaction to
such as took prejudice at her Sex, rather than out of any sense of imbecility
in her own Intellectuals: for therein she equalled the best of her
Predecessors, and in learned Endowments exceeded them all. Generally she was of
a public mind, if not popular; she loved to be seen of the People, and yet
kept her distance. Her Sex taught her to use her Tongue much, Quint, lib. 1.
cap. ult.
and her Education to use it well and wisely: That, with a reserved Carriage,
was her Scepter, winning thereby Applause from the inferior sort, and Awe from
the greater. A wise man that was an Eyewitness of many of her Actions, and of
those that succeeded her, many times has said, That a Courtier might make a
better Meal of one good Look from her, than of a Gift from some other King.
Another Felicity she had beyond others of her place; She loved not to be tied,
but would be knit unto her People. To them she committed her confidence under
God, and they to her their chiefest Treasure on Earth, viz. Their hearts to her
Parliament, which was the most considerable Party that she had to deal with.
She could personate Majesty equal to any Emperor; and advise, commend, yea,
and chide if she saw occasion: And yet ever had a trick to come off with a kind
Conclusion, without blur of Honor. So as of thirteen Parliaments called during
her Reign, not one became abortive by unkindness; and yet not any one of them
passed without Subsidy granted by the People, but one wherein none was desired.
And sometimes the Aid was so liberal, that she refused the one half, Bodin.
rep. l. 6.
and thanked the People for the remnant; a Courtesy that rang loud abroad, to
the shame of other Princes. She would often mention her Prerogative, and yet
not hold her self wise enough, either to interrupt the Judges in their way, nor
the Bishops in theirs: Albeit, she spared not also, as she saw occasion, to
check the best of them for their Irregularities. She had no Beloved, yet
entertained Favorites at a cheaper rate, and in better order, than Kings use
to do. For she had a preferment within her power beyond the reach of them all,
and Passion also soon at command, or rather sometimes beyond command; yet if
calmly taken, it ever proved good for that Party (that suffered) in the
conclusion.

However, her love she held under her own power, and therein excelled her
Forefathers. She had the Precedent of her Sister (that adventured upon a Prince
for her Bed, and missed what she expected, and lost what she had) and thereby
learned to call into question the possibility for her to gain the private
Contentments of a married Life, and therewith maintain her public Interest in
the Kingdom; and therefore resolved rather to sit alone, than to sit below; and
to refuse the help of any Consort, rather than to part with any one jot of her
Interest in the People. So she remained above the People and her self, and
thereby enjoyed both. But Custom in Government growing, together with
Infirmities of Age, made her Regency taste somewhat stale and spiritless, and
gave occasion to men's minds to wander after the next Successor. Before she had
been nine years Queen, this scrutiny was once begun; but it received a fair
answer of delay, because it was then taken as done in love: now the
apprehensions hereof, according to her age, are more fad; she thinks them weary
of her, and thereupon she is weary of her self and them. She supposes she can
no longer give them content; the Lords have the power, they will not be ruled:
and such like dark thoughts working upon an aged body, weakened with other
infirmities, wasted her spirits, and hastened a conclusion unto a weary life,
her self not unwilling herewith, and her Courtiers less; who expecting more
from Successors than they find, lived to dis-desire and unwish their former
choice, by late repentance. Thus making the ending of her days, she renewing of
her Reign in the hearts of all that observed her alive, or consider her (now
dead) in the written Registers of her Fame.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Supreme Power during these Times.
THE Supreme Power, but erewhile monstrous in the two former Kings times for
Greatness, now suffers as great a diminution, over-shadowed by Infancy,
Womanhood, and Coverture; and gives the People breath to beware for the future,
Ne potentes si nocere velint non possent. Nevertheless, the loss was only of
the Hydropical humor, and the Government came forth more clearly like it self.
In the point of Infancy, Edward the Sixth bears it forth, being the seventh
President of Infancy ruling under Protectorship since the Norman times; yet
beyond all the rest in managing his Supremacy in Church Matters, which none of
them all did ever engage upon before him.

English Prerogative and Supremacy, are Notions of a sublime nature, and
commonly looked upon as the Holy Mount at the delivery of the Law, at a great
distance, for fear of death or undoing; and yet it is such a thing as a child
may handle without hurt done either to the Estates, Persons, or Consciences of
any man; because it is presupposed he does nothing but what the Law first
dictates by his Council unto him. There is then no Infancy in the Crown, though
in the Person, because the wisdom of the Crown is not intended to rest in one
Person, but in the Counsels of many, who are equally wise, whether the Person
of the King be old or young. And the Statutes made by Henry the Eighth, 28 H.
8. c. 17.
by which this King had power by his Letters Patent, after the age of 24
years, to adnul any Act of Parliament made by him before that time, was not
grounded either upon Principles of Law, or general Reason of State; but upon
some particular circumstances of the state of the Affairs, as then they stood:
and therefore is this power limited only to such Heirs or Assignees of Henry
the Eighth, to whom the Crown shall come by his appointment. Nor did it ever
thrive to that desired end whereto it was intended: for upon the entry of
Edward the Sixth, the Councils changed, 1 E. 6. c. 12.
and the Parliament took this Statute away, as scandalous to the Fundamental
Government of the Nation, and instead of the power of Adnulling, allowed of the
power of Repealing; yet so, as until such time of Repeal, the said Statutes,
and all Acts thereupon done, shall for ever be deemed warrantable and good.
This was too much, but that the Times were yet in Equilibrio, and men were
loath to part with their Interests, which they did hang upon that Power of
Reserve, unto the King's Letters Patent. Yet in that the Power is limited, not
only in regard of the manner and time, but of the persons, and also of the
Statutes that are to be repealed: it is sufficient to vindicate the nature of
this Prerogative (if such it were) to be no ways inherent, but acquired by
Concession. But as touching the Legislative Power, they would not trust it in
the least manner to any other King.

The Parliament had crowned Proclamations at the instance of Henry the Eighth,
^ H. 8. c. 8.
with that Royal Title of Laws, in manner as formerly has been noted. Now all
Interests, both of the Popish, and of the reformed parties of this Nation, are
against it; the former, because they saw the King's present way to be against
them; and both it and the latter, because the thing it self was abominable unto
the Liberties of the people, and therefore it is soon taken away by Repeal, and
the Legislative Power is wholly reassumed to themselves, 1 E. 6. c. 12.
as formerly. For though in matters Ecclesiastical, the Power of the Crown
might seem to be more pre-eminent in regard of the Supremacy, 1 E. 6. c. 22.
and some particular powers in making Bishops by Election without Conge
d'eslire; yet did the Parliament neither yield or acknowledge any Legislative
power to be in the Crown thereby, but proceeded on in that way of the thirty
and two Commissioners formerly agreed upon by them, in the time of the King's
Father. Thus the King, though an Infant, was a gainer, ^ and 4 E. 6. c. 11.
and the Crown nevertheless still the same.

Secondly, That Crown that may be worn by an Infant, may much rather be worn by
a Woman, whose natural endowments do far exceed the other, and are not
inferior unto the most of men. Of this we have two Examples in these times,
Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, of several professions in matters of Religion,
and liable to exceptions in regard of their Sex, by men of the
counter-profession on both sides; yet both upheld the Honor of the Crown,
though therein the one more especially, being neither engaged in the Roman
Cause, nor in the Estate of Marriage, as the other was. This was Queen
Elizabeth, in person a Woman, but in mind endowed with all the perfections of a
man: she could not endure to abate one hairs breadth of her State; and yet upon
the sole regard of her Sex, she submitted her Title of Supremacy, to a more
moderate name of Supreme Governor, whereas her Father would be called Supreme
Head; as if it were not only hazardous, but hideous for a Woman to be Supreme
Head of the Church. 26 H. 8. c. 1.
And for this cause would she not receive that Statute made by her Father, and
continued by her Brother Edward the Sixth, and repealed by her Sister Queen
Mary. Nevertheless such as she was, 1 Eliz. c. 1.
she had all such Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities, and
Pre-eminencies, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as by any Ecclesiastical Power or
Authority formerly had been, or might be lawfully exercised for visitation of
the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation, Order, and
Correction of the same, and all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses,
Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities. She had therefore neither absolute Empire,
nor absolute Jurisdiction over the Churches; neither power to make, declare,
alter, or repeal any Law; neither did she ever exercise any such power but
only by Act of Parliament. 1 Eliz. c. 3.
She had a Power over Ceremonies in the Worship of God, which was given her by
the Parliament to execute by advice, and therefore was limited; as also was all
the remainder of her Power in Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. For she could do
nothing in her own person, but by Commission; and these Commissioners must be
Natives and Denizons, not Foreigners; and the same to be but in certain Cases,
and with certain Process. 13 Eliz. c. 12.
Some Cases of Ecclesiastical Cognizance were referred to Trial at the Common
Law, 23 Eliz. c. 1.
viz. Such as concerned the public Worship of God in cases of Forfeiture and
Imprisonment.

Lastly, Neither had the Queen, nor her Commissioners, nor Bishops, absolute
power over the Church Censures; no Censure was regarded but Excommunication,
and that no further than in order to the Writ De Excommunicato capiendo; and in
all Cases the same was to be regulated according to the Statute in that case
provided, 5 Eliz. c. 23.
or by the Common Law in case of Action. In all which we find no Jurisdiction
in Cases Ecclesiastical, that is absolutely settled in the Crown. In matters
Temporal the thing is yet more clear; she never altered, continued, repealed,
nor explained any Law, otherwise than by Act of Parliament, whereof there are
multitudes of Examples in the Statutes of her Reign; and what she did by her
Judges, was ever under Correction. A Woman she was, and therefore could be no
Judge, much less in the Cases of difference concerning her self and her Crown.
18 Eliz. c. 8.
A Queen she was, and might make Judges, but she must go according to the Law:
new Judicatories she could make none; nor judicially make, declare, alter, or
determine the power of any Court or Judge in case of difficulty, but by her
Parliament. As in the cases concerning the power of the Lord Keeper, the powers
of the Commissioners of Sewers and charitable uses, the Courts at Westminster,
5 Eliz. c. 18.
and the County-Courts, in the several Statutes concerning the same, 13 Eliz.
c. 9.
may more fully appear. 39 Eliz. c. 6.
And which is yet of a meaner size, her Power extended not to redress any
inconvenience in process of Error or Delay in Courts of Law, 18 Eliz. c. 12.
nor to remedy Errors in Judgment, 43 Eliz. c. 4.
Fines, Recoveries, Attainders, or other matters of Record or Trial, whereof
the Statutes of her time are full, and also the opinions and judgments of the
Judges of the Common Law concurring therewith. I mention not the power of Life
and Member, which without all contradiction has ever been under the protection
of the known Law. So as upon the whole account it will be evident, that this
Queen had no absolute Pre-eminence in all cases, but either in contradiction to
Foreign power, or the power of any particular person, and not in opposition to
the joint interest of the Representative of England.

Queen Mary comes next, although a Woman as well as she, yea, her elder Sister
and Predecessor, yet came short of her in the point of Supremacy, by a double
submission, both unto the Law of a Husband, and of a Foreign power in Cases
Ecclesiastical; although the same was with such qualifications, as it was much
more in Title and pretense than in reality; and so in the conclusion, neither
approved her self to be good Wife, good Catholic, nor good Queen. She could be
no good Wife, because she was too great for her Husband within the Realm, and
resolved not to be without. A Catholic she was, but the worst that ever held
her place: her Father appeared what he was, spoke plain English, and was easily
discerned. But she told the Pope a fair Tale of disclaiming Supremacy, and
reconciling her Kingdom; yet none of her Predecessors did go beyond her in
irregularity of her proceedings. Before ever she called Parliament, she settled
the great work of Reformation, or rather Deformation in the Worship of God, by
single Proclamation; and not only took away the Partition Wall of Doctrine by
the like power, but gave way and power to Persecution thereupon to arise,
before any (...) Order from the Holy See, then so called, enabled her thereun^
(...) And ^^ter that she declared her self convinced, that she ought not (...)
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and by her Instructions forbad the (...) in their
Process that Clause of Regia Autoritate fulcitus yet even these Instructions
had no other Authority than her own. And nevertheless, she still enforced the
Execution of all matters concerning the public Worship of God, and Government
of the Church, when as yet the Pope had no admittance unto his ancient claim.
It is very true, that the Pope long ere now had made a fair offer, and the
Queen had lent her ear; but her Train was too great to move as fast as was
pretended; so as no meeting could be had till the Queens Marriage with Spain
was past; and such as were disaffected, found it was bootless to stop the
Current of two such mighty Streams of Power now joined into one: and so that
unclean spirit returned seven times worse than when he went out, and took
Seisin, merely upon Repeal of the Laws made by Henry the Eighth, in the
Negative, without farther Grant or Livery. For though an express Embassage was
sent to Rome, to perform the solemnity of the submission; yet the Pope died
before the arrival of the Embassy, and the solemnity failing, left the Title
of the Crown much blemished, yet was it not wholly defaced. For if the Statutes
in Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth's time, did but confirm the
possession, it is evident that the repealing of those Statutes took away no
Right from the Crown, nor gave legal possession to the Pope, that had formerly
neither Possession nor Right; but left him to his Remitter, as in his ancient
right, or rather in his ancient wrong. Yet right or wrong, de facto, he both
did win and wear the Keys so long as the Queen lived, and so far as she
pleased: for her devotion would not allow of absolute obedience in that kind,
nor all for Gospel that the Pope said or did; but by her self and Council,
executed the powers of Supremacy of Jurisdiction in Church Matters, not only
in pursuance of the Papal Authority, but in crossing the same where the Popes
way crossed her opinion; as in the cases of the War between her Husband and
France, and the Power Legatine of Cardinal Pool; her condemning of Doctrines
and Books to be Heretical by Proclamation, establishing both Prayers and
Dirges, and other Orders of public Worship; whereof more fully in the public
Histories of those times, and the Queens Injunctions upon occasion of the death
of Pope Julio, is to be seen.

Lastly, she was no good Queen, not only because she gave up the peoples
Liberties in Ecclesiastical matters to the Foreign Jurisdiction of Rome, but
undertook too much therein by far upon her own account; and in Civil affairs,
though de jure she was not inferior to any of her Progenitors, yet she would
have it declared by the Parliament; as if the consideration of her Sex or
Birth, 2 Marl. Parliament 2. c. 1.
had made some hesitation in her mind; and when she had made all clear, she
commending her self thereby to the Prince of Spain, with her self, endangered
likewise that trust of the Nation which she had received, and cast such a
shadow upon her own Supremacy, as in many things it is hard to be discerned.

Lastly, in her whole course uneven; sometimes appearing like the eldest
Daughter of Henry the Eighth, at other times like a Fee-covert, led by the will
of her Lord and Husband, that wanting Supremacy himself, rendered her thereby
beneath her self.

For first, she married by Act of Parliament, as if she were not at her own
disposing; professing as much in her speech to the Londoners, upon the Kentish
Rebellion. So a difference was made between the two Sisters; the Marriage of
the one being by advice of Parliament, and the abstinence of the other against
the same. Nor is the same altogether irrational: for by the one, the Government
of the Nation is endangered; and by the other, otherwise.

Secondly, by her Marriage she became doubly married; one way relating to her
Person unto her King, the other relating to her Trust unto her Council: For
where a Foreign mighty King is so nigh the Helm, it is dangerous to trust the
same to his Wife, without the joint concurrence of the Lords. The matter in
fact declared no less: for many times she had steered quite wide, had not the
Lords been more stiff to their Principles than she.

The first year of her Marriage was Honey-moon with her; she thought nothing
too dear for the King, and that her self was but meanly married, unless her
Husband were as complete a King in her Nation, as any of her Predecessors;
although contrarily, the higher he was advanced, the meaner she became.

Thirdly, by her Marriage she adventured her Title of Supremacy of
Jurisdiction. For Philip, as King, had the Honor, Style, and Kingly name, and
so had the precedence. He had to do also with the Jurisdiction: for by the
Articles of the Marriage, he was to aid the Queen in her Administration of the
Kingdom, and maintenance of the Laws; Writs and Commissions passed under his
name. He also sat in Parliament, voted therein, and joined in the Royal Assent.

Lastly, joined in the publication and execution of all Laws. To him also was
Allegiance due; and therefore the Crime of Treason was equally against his, as
the Queens Crown and Dignity, saving that it was reserved to be as against him
only during the time of Coverture. And yet had the Queen left Issue by him, 1
and 2 Phil. and Mary, cap. 10.
it would have been a hard adventure for the Lawyers to have given their
Opinion in that case, seeing the King had been Guardian to his Children during
their Minority.

Lastly, the whole power and jurisdiction resting in them both jointly, could
not enable them to make or dissolve Courts at will, 1 Mar. Sess. 2. cap. 11.
etc. 5. and 7. etc. 12.
nor conclude Orders and Directions in cases of Plea and Conveyance, nor
Process concerning the same. I shall sum up all in this one conclusion: If
neither of these three had an absolute Legislative Power, either in matters
concerning the Church or Commonwealth; if no absolute Jurisdiction, in case
either of Life, Member, or Estate: If they neither can create, unite, or alter
any Court, either concerning the Trial and determining the Estates of the
People, or their own Revenue: If not alter or make any new Process in the
Courts of Law: If not order common Assurances of Lands or Estates;

And lastly, if they have no power in determining the last Appeal and
definitive Sentence in matters of Controversy, but all must rest upon the
Sentence by Parliament, there must certainly be found out a further sense of
that grand Title of Supremacy of Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, and Authority, than by the common Vogue has been made. The Title
of Supremacy was first formed in the behalf of Henry the Eighth's Claim in
matters Ecclesiastical; which by the Statute is explained under these words of
power: 29 H. 8. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 2.
To visit, correct, repress, redress Offenses and Enormities. This Power, and
no other, did Queen Elizabeth claim: witness the words of the Statute in her
own time. But in the framing of the Oath of Supremacy in her time, not only in
Causes Ecclesiastical, but Temporal, (which never came within the Statutes and
public Acts in Henry the Seventh's time) are inserted; and if any thing more
was intended, it must come under the word Things, which also was inserted in
the said Oath; and yet if the words of the Statute of Queen Elizabeth formerly
mentioned be credited, the word Things ought to comprehend no more than the
word Causes, and then the power of Queen Elizabeth in the Commonwealth will be
comprehended in these words of Supremacy; to visit, correct, repress, redress
Offenses and Enormities: for the Supremacy in the Church and Commonwealth, is
the same in Measure; and what more than this, I cannot understand out of any
public Act of this Nation. Now in regard Offenses and Enormities are properly
against Laws, the power to visit and correct, must also be regulated according
to Laws, either of War, or Peace: Nor do these five words, Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence, and Authority, contain any more Supremacy, or other
sense; for two of them speak only the Rank or Degree of the Queen in
Government, viz. Superiority and Pre-eminence belongs only to her, and not
to any other Foreign Power. And two other words do note her Right and Title
thereto, by Power and Authority committed to her. And the other word denotes
the thing wherein she has Superiority and Power, viz. in Jurisdiction: the
nature of which word, Vlpian (speaking of the nature of a mixed Government)
explaineth thus: Quando servata dictione juris judiciorum fit animadversio. So
as this Supreme Authority in Jurisdiction, is no other than Supreme Power to
visit, correct, redress Offenses, or determine matters in doubt, by deputing
fit persons to that end and purpose according to the Law; and this is all the
Supremacy that appears to me, belonging to the Crown in these times.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Power of the Parliament during these times.
WHen the Throne is full of a King, and he is as full of opinion of his own
sufficiency and power, a Parliament is looked upon as an old fashion out of
fashion, and serves for little other than for present shift, when Kings have
run themselves over Head and Ears. A Condition that those of that high degree
are extremely subject unto; but where the Crown is too heavy for the wearer, by
reason of infirmity, the Parliament is looked upon as the chief Supporters in
the maintaining both the Honor and Power of that Authority, that otherwise
would fall under contempt. A Work that must be done with a curious touch, and a
clear hand; or they must look for the like Censure to that of a King to a great
Lord that crowned him: My Lord, I like your work very well, but you have left
the print of your fingers upon my Crown. Such was the condition of these times,
wherein a Child and two Women are the chief; but ever under the correction and
direction of the Common Council, in matters of common concernment. Two things
declare the point; the course of the Title of the Crown, and the Order of the
powers thereof.

The Title ever had a Law, which was at the Helm, although diversely expounded.
Kings ever loved the Rule of Inheritance, and therefore usually strained their
Pedigree hard to make both ends meet, though in truth they were guilty
oftentimes to themselves, that they were not within the degrees. Bodin. rep. l.
6.
The People ever loved the Title of Election; and though ever they joined it to
the Royal blood, and many times to the right Heir, to make the same pass more
current without interruption of the first love between them and their Princes;
yet more often had they Kings that could not boast much of their Birthright in
their first entry into their Throne. Of three and twenty Kings from the Saxons
time, four of the former had no Title by Inheritance; the two Williams, Henry
the First, and King Steven. Two others, viz. Henry the Second and Richard the
first, had right of Birth, yet came in by Compact. The Seventh, which was King
John, had no Title but Election. The Eighth, viz. Henry the Third, came in a
Child* and contrary to Compact between the Nobility and the French Lewis. The
Ninth and Tenth succeeded as by unquestionable Title of Descent, yet the Nobles
were pre-engaged. The Eleventh, which was Edward the Third, in his entry eldest
Son, but not Heir, for his Father was alive: but his Successor was his Heir:
It is true, there were other Children of Edward* the Third alive, that were
more worthy of the Crown; but they were too many to agree in any but a Child,
that might be ruled by themselves. Three next of the ensuing Kings, were of a
collateral line. Their two Successors, viz. Edward the Fourth, and Edward the
Fifth, were of the Line; yet Edward the Fourth came in by disseisin, and Edward
the Fifth by permission. Richard the Third, and Henry the Sev^nth, were
collateral to one another, and to the right Blood. Henry the Eighth, though
when he was King might claim from his Mother, yet came in as Heir to his
Father. And if Edward the Sixth was right Heir to the House of York by his
Grandmother, yet cannot the Crown be said to descend upon the two Sisters,
neither as Heirs to him, nor Henry the Eighth, nor to one another, 28 H. 8. c.
7. 1 Mar. Sess. 2. cap. 1.
so long as the Statute of their Illegitimation remained; which, as touching
Queen Mary, was till three months after her entry upon the Throne; and as
touching Queen Elizabeth, for ever: for that Virago provided for her self, not
by way of Repeal (as her Sister had done) but more tenderly regarding the
Honor of her Father and the Parliament, than to mention their blemishes in
Government, by doing and undoing. She over-looked that Act of Henry the Eighth,
and the Notion of Inheritance, and contented her self with her Title by the
Statute made by her Father in his Thirty fifth year; 35 H. 8. cap.
which to her was a mere purchase; and was not ashamed to declare to all the
world, that she did have and hold thereby, and that it was High Treason for any
Subject to deny that the course of the Crown of England is to be ordered by Act
of Parliament. 13 Eliz. c. 1.
And this power did the Parliament exercise, not only in ordering the course
of the Crown to Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, but during the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, so far as to disinherit and disable any person who should pretend
Right to the Crown, in opposition to the Right of Queen Elizabeth. And upon
this point only, did the whole proceedings against Mary Queen of Scots depend;
who claimed to be, Thuan. vol. 1. lib. 20.
and doubtless was Heir unto Henry the Eighth, after the determination of his
Right Line; and yet she was put to death for pretending Right by the Common
Law, in opposition to the Act of Parliament. True it is, that this Doctrine
does not down well with those that do pretend to Prerogative, aided (as they
say) by the Act of Recognition made to King James, 1 Jac. cap. 1.
and the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; which do make much parley concerning
Inheritance and Heirs. Nevertheless it is as true, that the Act of Recognition
made no Law for the future; nor does the same cross the Statute of 13 Eliz. Nor
does it take away the power of the Parliament from overruling the course of the
Common Law for after-Ages. Nor do the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance hold
forth any such Obligation unto Heirs, otherwise than as supposing them to be
Successors, and in that relation only. And therefore was no such Allegiance
due to Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, or Queen Elizabeth, until they were
actually possessed of the Crown; as may appear by the Oath formed by the
Statute of Henry the Eighth touching their Succession. 35 11. 8. cap. 1.
Nor did the Law suppose any Treason could be acted against the Heirs of Edward
the Sixth, Queen Mary, or Queen Elizabeth, until those Heirs were actually
possessed of the Crown, and so were Kings and Queens; 1 Eliz. 6. c. 12. 5 and 6
E. 6. cap. 11. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. cap. 10. 1 Eliz. cap. 6. 1 Eliz. cap 3.
as by express words in the several Statutes do appear. Nor did the Recognition
by the Parliament made to Queen Elizabeth, declare any engagement of the People
to assist and defend her, and the Heirs of her Body, otherwise than with this
Limitation, Being Kings and Queens of this Realm; as by the Statute in that
behalf made, does appear.

And lastly, (had those Oaths been otherwise understood) the Crown had by the
virtue of them been pre-engaged, so as it could never have descended to Queen
Mary, Queen Elizabeth, or King James, but must have remained to the Heirs of
Edward the Sixth for ever.

Secondly, the same power that the Parliament exercised in ordering the course
of Succession in the Crown, they exercised likewise in determining and
distributing the Powers and Privileges belonging to the same: for these times
were full of Novelties. The Crown had formerly sitted a Child's head more than
once, but it never tried to fit a Woman's head since the Saxons times, till now
that it must make trial of two. France might afford us a trick of the Salique
Law, if it might find acceptance. And the unsettled state of the People,
especially in matter of Religion, might require the wisest man living to sit at
the Helm, and yet himself not sufficient to steer a right course to the
Harbor. Nevertheless, the Parliament having the Statute of Henry the Eighth to
lead the way, chose rather to pursue a Rule than to make one, and soon
determined the point, viz. That the Crown of England, with all the Privileges
thereof, equally belong to a Woman in possession, as to a Man or Child. A bold
Adventure I say it was, 1 Mar. Parl. cap. 1.
but that Henry the Eighth was a bold Leader; and yet the bolder it was, if the
consequence be considered. For Queen Mary, as a Woman, brought in one new
Precedent, but in her Marriage a worse: for she aimed not only at a Foreign
Blood, but at a Prince in Power and Majesty exceeding her own; and thereby
seeking advancement both to her self and her Realm, endangered both. The matter
was long in debate between the Spanish and English, and now had busied their
Wits about ten years; at length a Supremacy is formed suitable to the Lord and
Husband of Queen Mary, Sleidan.
that could not be content to be one inch lower than her self. Philip had the
name of a King, and Precedence; and in many cases, not without the Allegiance
of the English. Their offenses against his person, 1 Ph. and Mar. Parl. 2. c.
10.
equally Treason with those against the Queens own person; and Indictments run,
Contra pacem, and Coronam D. Regis and Reginae. That in some cases he
participated in the Regal Power, may appear, 2 Ph. and Mar. Parl. 2. c. 1.
in that by the Articles he was to aid the Queen in the Administration of the
Kingdom; he joined with the Queen in the Royal Assent, and in Commission,
Letters patents, and in Writs of Summons of Parliament, as well as others; yet
in the words the Crown is reserved only to the Queen, and she must Reign as
sole Queen. Now if the King had broken this Agreement, either the Parliament
must overruled the whole, or all that is done must be undone, and England must
bear the burden. A Queen Regent is doubtless a dangerous condition for
England, above that of an Infant-King, unless she be married only to her
people.

This was observed by Queen Elizabeth, who therefore kept her self unmarried;
nor did the people otherwise desire her Marriage, than in relation to
Posterity. Few of them liking any one of their own Nation so well, as to prefer
him so highly above themselves; and fewer any Foreigner. This was soon espied
by Foreign Princes; and the Queen her self perceiving that she was like to
receive prejudice hereby in her interest amongst them, signified by her
Ambassadors, Bodin de Rep. lib. 6.
that she never meaned to stoop so low as to match with any of her Subjects;
but intended to make her choice of some Foreign Prince, who neither by Power or
Riches should be able to prejudice the interest of any of her Neighboring
Princes. A pretty Complement this was, to gain expectation from those abroad,
and better correspondency thereunto. Upon this ground diverse Princes conceived
hopes of more interest than by trial they could find. And the Archduke of
Austria began a Treaty, which seemingly was entertained by her; but her
Proposals were such, as silenced all those of the Austrian Interest for ever
after, viz.

1. That the Romish Religion should never be admitted into England. 2. That no
man that she married should ever wear the Title of King. 3. That no Foreigner
should ever intermeddle in the Rule and Government of the Church or
Commonwealth, nor in the Ministry of the Church. 4. That if he survived the
Queen, he should never challenge any Title or Interest in the Government, or
any Possession in England. 5. She would never marry any one that she might not
first see.
So as either she aimed at some inferior Prince, that durst not look so high;
or else she did but make semblance till she was nigh Forty years old: and in
all declared, that she liked not her Sister Mary's choice.

To these two Powers of Determining and Distributing, I shall add a third of
Deputing, which the Parliament exercised as formerly it had done. Henry the
Eighth had in Ecclesiastical matters exercised a power beyond the Law, and yet
by Parliament had provided positive Laws, by which the same ought to have been
ordered: these were also confirmed in Edward the Sixth's time, with some
Additionals. 3 and 4 E. 6. c. 11.
By these, particular Commissioners were appointed for the making of
Ecclesiastical Constitutions; 1 Eliz. c 1. and 1.
and the King himself had a power of Episcopofactory, without Conge d'eslire. 1
Edw. 6. c. 1.
They likewise limited the power of Ecclesiastical Courts, 1 Edw. 6. c. 2. 5
and 6 E. 6. c. 1.
altered their Process, reformed their Censures, even that grand Censure of
Excommunication it self. 5 Eliz. c. 20.
The like, or much more may be said of their deputing power in Civil Affairs; 1
Edw. 6. c. 11.
as well by enlarging the King's power, as in abridging the same. For whereas
some of the Successors of Henry the Eighth, had power by virtue of his Letters^
patents, after Twenty four years of age, to annul any Act of Parliament by them
made before that age; in the time of Edward the Sixth, notwithstanding the
Proviso of that Law, and although Edward the Sixth, was not then Twelve years
old, yet the Parliament repealed all, and restored to Edward the Sixth only
that power for the time to come; but not to any of his Successors. And whereas
Henry the Eighth had gained to himself and his Successors a Legislative Power
by Proclamation; the Parliament in Edward the Sixth's time took the same quite
away, 1 Edw. 6. c. 11.
and reduced Proclamations into their former sober posture. The like may be
observed of the power of the Parliament, 7 Edw. 6. c. 2.
in ordering the Lives, Members, and Estates of the People in matters criminal;
1 Mar. Sess. 2. c 10. and 12.
and in making and altering Courts of Justice, and bounding their Power, 1 Edw.
6. c. 7.
altering their Process, abridging their Terms for Judicature, 1 Edw. 6. c. 10.
3 c. 28. 5 and 6. c. 26.
reforming Errors in pleading, amending common Conveyances and Assurance, as
in passing Fines with Proclamations; their course in County Palatine;
Limitations of Prescription; fraudulent Deeds; Recoveries by Collusion, etc. in
all which the Crown had no power, but in and by the Parliament. Many
particulars more might be added, if the matter so required; for the Statutes
are more full in these later Times than formerly, and may soon lead us beyond a
just period in so clear a matter.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in these last Times.
IN the general, and in relation to the Foreign Jurisdiction of Rome, it was
like a Child in an Ague, under Fits of heat and cold; but in it self, under the
Prelacie, still growing in Stature though not in strength Edward the Sixth came
in like a Storm that tor^ (...) by the roots, yet a Top-root remained entire
with the (...), bearing show of a kind of Divinity, that though bared of the
(...) Soil of the Papacy, yet transplanted into the new Mould of Royalty, soon
conveyed a new life, which made the Stock still flourish, and grow into a
better condition than formerly it had. Their Legislative Power in matters
concerning their own interest, though in outward view seeming their own, yet
was doubly disturbed from the Pope and the King; who, though many times they
opposed one another, yet evermore were both of them in opposition to the
Church, and with the greater bitterness by their own mutual Emulations. But now
the Church is come under the control of only, one that joined with it for
their mutual interest, as being both of them embarked in one and the same ship.

Two things concurred to the furtherance hereof.

First, the Times were tender, and scarce able to digest the change of Worship,
now patronized by Edward the Sixth, much less able to digest the change of
Government, if the same had been undertaken in a different way from what it was
formerly.

Secondly, The Times were also dark, and few saw the bottom of Prelacie, but
lodged all the prejudice in the persons that managed that calling. And
certainly they had the less occasion to doubt of their own judgment therein,
because Edward the Sixth had the good providence of God to lead him to make use
of such men in that place, that were meek, and holy, and themselves attempted
in the fire of Persecution, and therefore more tenderly affected to others in
that condition. And these carrying themselves like tender nursing Fathers in
their places, wrought in the people a good opinion of their places, and that
Form of Government for their sakes Yet even in those first Times of
Reformation, somewhat appeared in that very quintessence of Episcopacie, in
matters of Ceremony and Conformity, that might have taught wise men to beware.
Upon such grounds as these it went well with Episcopacy in these first Times of
Reformation, but ill with the Church in the issue. That Prelacie was a gainer
by the change in Henry the Eighth's time, has already appeared; and that it
still gained, may further appear in these ensuing Considerations.

First, Whereas formerly Bishops were regardant both to the Crown and
Presbytery (for so may the Dean and Chapter be accounted) in the point of
Election by Conge d'eslire, 2 E. 6. c. 2.
now they are made the birth of the Kings own breath; which thing was never
deduced from the ancient Right of the Crown; (saving due honor to the air of
the Preface of the Statute) for in the best Times it never had more than a
power of Investiture: But from the necessity of the Times so corrupted, that
Deans and Chapters generally were of the Roman Spirit, and gave little hope of
good Elections by themselves. Besides, the state of Learning and Holiness was
now at the low water mark; so as little supply being looked for to begin the
work of Reformation from beneath, they began above; and so it proved but a weak
building for the longer time. And thus a lesson is left to future Parliaments,
That in Cases of Reformation they are not to be strictly holden to Rules of Law
or Precedent.

Secondly, The Prelates hereby had their Authority confirmed by Act of
Parliament, and so were now built upon a Foundation, that formerly did hang
only upon a pin of power from Rome. For Jurisdiction without Authority, is but
a Dropsy that brings inevitable consumption in the conclusion. And thus the
Prelacie are enabled to hold Courts without contradiction, and directed in
their Process, who formerly had a good Title to neither, in that course that
they held the same.

Thirdly, Though their Jurisdiction was defined by the Statutes, yet in larger
bounds than ever the Statute-Laws formerly noted; and in what they claimed
power, they did it not altogether upon Civil Right, but still kept an awful
regard to their Persons and Power, as under the sway of a Divine Donation; and
therefore, as in those matters to them by the Statute allowed, they did proceed
in the name and under the Seal of the King; so in other things of Collation,
Institution, Induction, Orders, Excommunication, and such like, they proceeded
in and under their own Name and Seal; and, which was a Crown to all the rest,
power is still given to the Archbishop of Canterbury, in cases of Faculty and
Dispensation, to proceed under his own Seal, and not the Kings, as if it were a
power independent upon the Crown, and belonging unto the man; neither by
Statute nor Commission, but coming by some secret Influence from the very place
it self. Although in the clear sense it is no more than a power of Non obstante
in the point of obedience to the Canon Law, which by a Statute in Henry the
Eighth's time is declared no Law. But let this pass as a Mole in this fair face
of Church Government.

The Prelates are now become of the Vicinage, Probi and legales homines; they
have their Jurisdiction by Law established; what they lose in breadth, they
gain in height and goodness of their Foundation. Yet their Attire looks
ill-favourably in Queen Mary's eye; she will have it of the old cut again: and
though Cardinal Pool was well seen in the Roman fashion, yet when he had done
all, he did no more than shape a Garment to serve the present Interlude,
neither fit to the body, nor easy to be worn; and therefore after four or five
turns upon the Stage, it is thrown away. Nevertheless, during the time that
England was thus dancing the Italian measure, Prelacy in England held its own
Domestic garb so well, that neither Poole (being of English blood, not much
distant from the Crown, and then also holding the Chair Legatine, as little
inferior to the Throne) would not impose too much, nor Queen Mary, a woman of
a stout Spirit, yield farther than she liked. By means whereof, the Prelacie,
looking no more to Rome than the power in Appeals, and therein little more than
the bare Title, played Rex all the while with the people, under color of
Heresy and the Canon Law, which now was again made their Rule: And thus as
touching their Election and Jurisdiction, they were as before. For Queen Mary
did nothing but by single Repeal. But Queen Elizabeth being true English, both
by Father and Mother, liking not this retreat, faced about, routed the Roman
fashion out of fashion; put Prelacie to its close guard, and received it upon
capitulation, not only to mercy, but favor; and so it became her Vicar to
exercise her Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction per saltum: For it is hard to find by
what steps they gained this pitch. Henry the Eighth was Supreme Head by
submission of the Clergy, by Resumption, and by Act of Parliament; and as
such, the power of Bishops formerly derived from Rome ceased; and Henry the
Eighth after restored it anew, and settled the same by several Acts of
Parliament; which Edward the Sixth confirmed, with diverse additional Acts of
further benefit to them, as has been already noted. But Queen Mary altered all
by repeal of the former Laws, and so left all in Remitter, as before the
alteration by Henry the Eighth; and did neither give or grant any Jurisdiction
to the Pope. Last of all comes Queen Elizabeth, and by Repeal and Resumption
possessed her self of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical; and granted Election of
Bishops by Conge d'eslire, but never granted to the Bishops Ordinary
Jurisdiction by any express Act, other than permission of them to continue in
their former course; notwithstanding that the foundation of their Jurisdiction
had been altered twice; and so it will be difficult for it to hold by
Prescription or Custom, or any other way than by a kind of Divine Right, which
began to be pretended, yet to this day could never be made evident to the
World. Whatever the ground was, the thing is plain, that Prelacie in Queen
Elizabeth's time had this honor allowed thereunto, that it was upholden by
Election from Ecclesiastical men, and held its Jurisdiction as from it self,
and in the name of Bishop as Ordinary; and the power of Excommunication by a
saving in the Statute Law, and not by express Donation; notwithstanding the
late Precedent in the time of Edward the Sixth to the contrary.

Secondly, The Rule of this Jurisdiction was no less at large; for the
Canon Law was determined by Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, and was not
revived by any Act of Parliament, by Queen Mary or Queen Elizabeth, who neither
pursued the Medium of the Thirty two Commissioners, nor settled other rule, but
a few Canons, which (after some time) by Queen Elizabeth and her Clergy were
agreed upon, but never confirmed by Act of Parliament. And so could never bind
the Subject; and which in general set forth a kind of Form of Church^ policy,
yet no fashion of Jurisdiction, or rule of proceedings in the Ecclesiastical
Courts; but in such cases left them to the Canon Law, which was hidden in their
own breasts, and could be make strait or wide as they pleased.

Thirdly, the^ Censures now grew more sharp; for whereas at the utmost formerly
they ^^uld do no more but imprison, or deliver over to the Secular Power, and
that only in case of Heresy, 1 Eliz. ^. ^.
and yet had scarce ground of Law for what they did; now they have an
additional power, to fine and imprison in Cases of inferior nature, and so can
reach all that a man has even to his skin. Nevertheless this was not annexed
unto the ordinary Jurisdiction, but given by extraordinary Commission, called
the High Commission; wherein, though many others were named, yet the Clergy
and Canonists did the work; the rest being but in nature of a reserve to them,
in case they were put to the rout. The power of these Commissioners was to
execute the Queens Jurisdiction in Causes Ecclesiastical: so as the Bishops are
doubly interested in this work; one way, by supposed Commission from God, as
Ordinaries within their own Diocese only, and so may proceed to
Excommunication or Deprivation; the other way, by Commission from the Queen, as
Members of the High Commission, (for so many of them were such, as the Crown
would please) and so they might fine and imprison. They might and did, I say,
by their Commission, but not by the Statute that gives authority thereto, and
therefore cannot be said to be done legally.

Fourthly, besides the contracted power of making Canons in the Convocation, by
the power of the Royal Assent; the Queen had a power of making Laws by their
consent, in matters of the criminal part of the Worship of God.

This might be tolerable for the Life of the one Queen, who might be presumed
would (if she lived a few years) settle all things: but to subject the
Consciences of all the people to the opinion of one Metropolitan, that might
opinionate strange things; and that the Successors of the Queen should usurp
this as a Flower of the Crown, to determine what is for Gods glory in such
cases, and to be always altering and patching up a Form, as he and his
Metropolitan, or one of them alone, 1 Eliz. c. 2.
shall think meet, is neither commendable upon any grounds of Divinity or
humane Policy.

Now amidst the flourishing Estate of Prelacy, it is no wonder if the Churches
be no gainers, but like Plants spending their Natures in luxuriant Branches,
either are over-turned by the next blast of wind, or do wither upon the least
change of Sky. That the whole ordering of the Church Affairs rested originally
in the Parliament, no man can question, considering whatever the Queen did, or
had therein, was from the power of Acts of Parliament. And that the power of
Excommunication it self, notwithstanding that the Church held it by way of
reservation or saving, and not by donation from the Parliament, by any express
Act; yet was that saving with such limitations, as that it received but a lame
power, in comparison of what it claimed and exercised in former times. For
whereas formerly the Churchmen had the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo at their
own beck; now it will not come, but upon Articles and certain Conditions.

1. In cases of Heresy. 2. Of deserting of the Sacrament. 3. Deserting of
public Worship. 4. Maintenance of Error. 5. Incontinency. 6. Usury. 7. Simony.
8. Perjury. 9. Idolatry.
In other matters the Spiritual Sword must find or make their own way, or else
be quiet.

Secondly, The Church was now no less under the Chair and Throne, than under
power of the Parliament; nor is it a wonder, if it could not thrive when it was
so over^ dropped: for Prelacie by the King's arms is lifted up so high above
the other Clergy, that the rest of the Clergy are as much underlings to the
Prelacie, as the Prelates are to the King. They dare not offend the Crown, lest
they should lose their Honors; nor the inferior Clergy them, lest they
should lose their Livings and Liberties: and so the Prelates speak the sense of
the Clergy, and make the Crown their Oracle. Thus in the Church Matters the
Crown is all in all.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Militia in these latter Times.
IT cannot be denied, but as in the sober Government of this (...) there is a
Supremacy of Command; so also in the rudest times of War, and wheresoever the
same is settled, there must the Militia also be.

The word Militia is a general notion, sufficient enough for a name or title,
but not to define the thing. I take it for nothing else but the Government of
the Commonwealth when it is in danger, or War, or in order thereunto. It
consists in the raising, arming, ordering, and paying of the Soldiery. The
title of the Supreme Power in all this work has been of late put to the
question, and brought us to this sad condition of trial by Battle; and by
Fighting, to find out who had the chief power to fight. A Lesson that might
have been learned from former Generations foregoing, at a far cheaper rate,
when England is well in its wits. Where the Law of Peace is settled, there also
is the Law of War; and in what condition the Crown stands, in relation to the
Legislative power, in time of Peace, may be seen in the foregoing Discourse. In
War the King is the peoples General by his place; yet if any impediment do
befall, either by natural disabilities, or civil, to render the person incapable
of managing of the Service, there is no question but the people may order the
matter as they please. With examples hereof these times are full, wherein we
have a Child, a Virgin, and a Married Woman to sway the Work; all of them in a
very unmeet condition for such a Trust; and yet by the help they had, they
managed it well enough. The power of him as King or General in the Army, is all
one; but before it is imbodied, as a King only, he may do some things in order
thereto, according to the Law and Custom of the Nation; yet this falls under a
double consideration of the time and occasion. In the recess of the Parliament,
he is the first mover, and ought to move by the advice of his Council, if
occasion do provoke to Arms; but if the same befall, the Parliament then
sitting, no History or Record do mention that ever he moved but by their
concurrent advice and direction. The occasion either provokes offensive or
defensive War with other Nations, or with the people of his own Nation, in the
case of Insurrection. Examples of War with other Nations, that may be called
offensive Wars, we have but two; one in Edward the Sixth's time with Scotland,
and which was but in pursuance of a War begun by his Father, and wherein the
Kingdom stood engaged, in a case that concerned the public good and safety,
viz. The Marriage of their King refused after promise made. The other was in
the time of Queen Mary with the French, which somewhat reflected also upon the
public safety, but more upon the dishonor of the same. I^ none of these did
either of the Supreme Powers array, or raise men by Prerogative, but only such
as were Voluntier in that work. And because the people were ill principled in
Edward the Sixth's time, in regard of the change of Religion, he was induced to
hire Foreign aid out of Germany. The Wars in the time of Queen Elizabeth were
in order to the defense of this Nation, being ever under a malignant Aspect
from abroad, especially from Spain, in Ireland, France, and the Low Countries.
Yet were these Wars served only by Volunteers; nor did any Commission give
power of impresting men to serve against their wills in any Expedition made to
any of those places, as the Commissions upon Record do testify. If any Levies
of men were otherwise made, or compulsory means used for such ends, they are to
be reckoned up amongst the errata, whereof the Parliament took no notice, in
regard it saw the ends and issues of such Reflections in Government to be
successful and honorable; and that all was done by Council, and a Woman
popularly affected; and therefore they less feared Invasion upon their
Liberties. Or otherwise they are to be imputed to the condition of those
places, being Members of the Commonwealth; as the cautionary Towns in the Low
Countries, and the Irish Plantations were; and so befell under another
consideration of a defensive War, in case of Invasion and common danger
thereby, or by Intestine broils; during which condition, as it is the King's
duty to levy and array men, so is it the duty of the people to be ready to
assist one another in all such exigencies, and to defend the public Liberty.
Nevertheless, these Arrays are not left wholly at the Will of the King, but to
discretion of the Council, how far the same shall extend. For never were
general Arrays made, where but one Coast was in danger, and where no Conquest
is in pretense, but only Piracy or Plunder. But if the disease were general,
as in the year 88, the Array was general; and yet it was of none, but those
that were of the Trained-bands, besides such as were Voluntier.

Secondly, The arming of these men was also diversely; there was no general Rule
or Law for the arming of men since the time of Edward the First to the time of
Queen Mary, but the Statute at Winton; the course of Tenures, I mean of such
men as were of the Militia of this Kingdom: So as when they were raised, they
were raised in their own Arms. But for such men as passed the Seas for Foreign
Service, as they were Volunteers, or sent over by the Parliament, these were
armed according to special contract. But Queen Mary, having gotten a safe
reserve from Spain upon all adventures, and a strong interest amongst the
people, by upholding the Catholic party, made no bones to innovate in the
point of arming of the Militia, although it cost the people much more than was
imposed upon their Ancestors. The pattern hereof was taken from the Spanish
Cabinet; the Queen, being loath to be inferior to her own Husband, in bringing
as much strength to him as he to her, and both of them willing enough to appear
potent in the eyes of France, that then stood in competition with them both. A
yoke it was, yet neither the King nor Queens Will, but the Parliament put it
on; and ere an Age expired it was cast off again. For the better understanding,
see it in this Scheme.

Per Annum. Lances. Light Horse. Corslets Bows. Hacquebuts. Bills. 1000 l. 6 10
40 30 20 20 1000 marks. 4 6 30 20 10 10 400 l. 2 4 20 15 6 200 l. 1 2 10 8 3
100 l. 2 3 3 2 100 marks. 1 2 2 1 40 l. 2 1 2 20 l. 1 1 1 10 l. A Coat of
Plate. 1 1 5 l. A Coat of Plate. 1 Goods. 1000 marks. 1 1 2 4 3 400 l. 1 1 2 1
200 l. 1 2 1 100 l. 1 2 40 l. 2 Coats of Plate. 1 1 20 l. 1 Coat of Plate. 2 1
10 l. 1 1

The Lances were to be completely harnessed, or the one half of them. The
Corcelets furnished with Coats of Mail and Pikes; the Bows with and Iron Cap,
and a Sheaf of Arrows; the Hacquebuts with Sallets. All which was to be over
and besides such Arms as men were bound unto by Tenure, or Covenant with the
Landlord, or by virtue of the Statute 33. H. 8. c. 5. besides Townships which
were charged with joynt-arms; Annuities and Copy-holds were charged as Goods.
If the Arms were lost in the Service, the owner must make them good again. The
defaults were punishable with Fine by the Justices of the Peace, who had the
view, and might present them at the Sessions, to be proceeded upon as in other
cases. Here is provision enough, yet not as the Arms of the Militia of the
Kingdom, but as a Magazine in the hands of every particular man, and as his
proper Goods, to be employed for the public Service, either upon sudden
Invasion in a defensive War, or when the Parliament shall send them abroad. And
yet it is also a rule unto the Crown against arbitrary Assessments upon
discretion, from which it cannot recede if it mean to do right.

It might now very well stand with the Justice of Queen Elizabeth, to grant
Commissions of Array, Secundum formam Statutorum, and do hurt to no man. It is
true, her Commissions of Lord- Lieutenancy wanted that limitation in words, yet
they carried the sense: For if the Crown were bound by the Law, the Lord-
Lieutenants were much rather; but the danger arose after the death of Queen
Elizabeth. For when King James came to the Crown, under color of pleasing the
people, and easing them of a burden, he pleased himself more, and made the
yoke upon the people much more heavy in the conclusion; for where no declared
Law is, there the discretion of them that have the care lying upon them must be
the Rule. And thus came the Scottish blood to have pretensions to a greater
Prerogative than all their Predecessors had; upon this supposal, that the
Statute of Queen Mary took away all former Laws of that kind, and then the
taking away of the Statute of Queen Mary, takes away all declared Law as to
that point. But more truly it may be inferred, that if all Statute-Laws be
taken away, then the rule of Tenures at the Common Law must remain in force,
and no other. Nevertheless, this Statute of Queen Mary, though in force for the
present, was not a general rule for Arms in all places of this Nation; for the
Marches of Scotland were a peculiar Jurisdiction as to this point. They stood
in more constant need of Arms than any other part of this Nation, in regard of
their uncertain condition, in relation to their neighboring Jurisdiction; and
therefore were the Farms of these parts generally contracted for, upon a
special reservation of Arms for each particular; which being now decayed, are
again reduced by Queen Elizabeth 23 Eliz. c. 9.
to their ancient condition in the time of Henry the Eighth.

A second thing which may come under this general consideration of arming, is,
the arming of places, by making of Forts and Castles; which was not in the
immediate determinate will of the Crown to order as it pleased. For though they
may seem to be means of Peace and present Safety, yet they are Symptoms of War,
and in the best times are looked upon with a jealous eye, especially such as
are not bordering upon the Coasts: Because that Prince that builds Castles
within the Land, is supposed to fear the Neighborhood. This was more
especially regarded in the days of Philip and Mary: for when that Marriage was
to be solemnized, it was one of the Articles, to provide for the safety of such
Forts and Castles, as then were maintained; to the end they might be preserved
free from Usurpation, for the Use, Profit, Strength, and Defense of the Realm,
only by the natural born of the same. 1 Mar. Parl. 2. cap. 2.
And afterward when occasion was offered for the building of more of that
nature, a new power is given to King Philip and Queen Mary, 2 and 3 Phil. and
Mar. cap. 1.
to re-edifie or make Forts and Castles, which must be executed by Commission
to the Lieges for ten years; and only within the Counties bordering upon
Scotland, and these particularly named in the Statute. So as the Crown had not
power to build in all cases, nor to any end they pleased. Nor to place therein,
or betrust the same to whom it would. Nor yet had Edward the Sixth that
absolute power, although not engaged in Foreign Interests; as his Sister Mary
was: and therefore whereas Castellanes had been made for life by Patent, 2 E.
6. c. 16.
and so the absolute power of the Crown was barred in the free disposal of the
same during such time; the Parliament gave the King power to remove such as
were not liked, or thought not faithful to the Public Interest, although they
gave no cause of seizure by any disloyal act. The like also may be observed of
the Ships and Ordnance; for they also do belong to the State, as the Jewels of
the Crown; and therefore upon the Marriage of Queen Mary, they also are by
Articles preserved and saved, for the use, profit, strength and defense of the
Realm by the natural born of the same.

Thirdly, As touching the ordering of the Soldiery, the matter is not much to
be insisted upon; for little doubt is to be made, but that power that raises
them, also orders them to the same ends that they are raised. And therefore,
as the sole power of the Crown does not the one, so neither does it the other,
but in cases formerly mentioned. And yet in no case, though the War be never so
absolutely defensive, and the Soldiers raised by the Kings own and only
power, had the King absolute Authority, and Arbitrary power, in the ordering of
them when they are raised; but he must so behave himself to them, as to
Freemen, according to the Laws made by themselves in their Representative in
Parliament. And therefore are particular Laws made to that end, 4 and 5 Phil.
and Mar. c. 3.
against undue levying and discharging of Soldiers, and defaults in paying of
them: as also against the Soldiers departing from their Service without
License, or wasting their Arms, and such as wilfully absent themselves from
Musters; 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 2. 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. c. 3.
as also for the preserving the Castles, 5 E. 6. c. 11. 14 Eliz. c. 1.
Forts, Ships and Munition for War, from being witholden from their due use, or
from burning or destroying.

Lastly, As touching the charge of the War, and pay of the Soldiers. It is
evident, that in all offensive Wars the Soldiers were paid by the Crown,
although they might be said in some manner to be in order to the defense and
safety of the Nation; nevertheless, where the same was so apparent to the
people, it was the common course in these times to have often Parliaments, and
often Subsidies, which were no less in a good measure satisfactory to the Crown
for the Charges of the War, than Testimonies of the Peoples good acceptance of
the government of Affairs, and so accepted at their hands. The particular
Records will warrant all this. For of all the Wars in these times, (that of 88
excepted) not any of them were ever managed at the peoples charge by
Contribution, but by Retribution. So were these times, wherein the people,
looking upon the Crown as under a kind of infirmity of Childhood or Womanhood,
did therefore bear a kind of compassionate regard thereunto, without jealousy
at Prerogative; and could condescend and allow the Crown its full Grains, and
somewhat more; yea, more than was meet for some other Prince to desire, or the
People to give up. And yet more happy were they, wherein the Crown knew no
interest but in dependence upon the peoples good; and so understanding, were
rightly understood.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Peace.
IT is but little that can be said of Peace in these times, wherein so little
freedom was found from Foreign pretensions, and Intestine irregularities, or
both; and yet the people were never more resolved against the former, nor
secure against the latter, and had God to Friend in all. But most apparently
was this observable in the times of Queen Elizabeth, whose Government took up
four parts of five of these times whereof we now treat. She was a complete
Conqueror of War and Treason, and therein the true Inheritor of the Fate of
her Grandfather Henry the Seventh, with advantage; for she out-faced all
dangers by her only presence, having thereof had more experience than any
Princes that ever possessed her Throne: yet she was wise enough to beware
against the future; considering her condition to be the last of her Line; that
the next behind her was rather likely to trip up her heels than support her
Train; that the Pope narrowly watched every opportunity; the distance between
him and the Throne being no greater than the breadth of her only person. It
may well therefore admit of excuse, if the Statute of the 25 of Edward the
Third concerning Treasons did not give satisfaction; although therein if she
were sollicitous, her Subjects were more. Some kinds of offenses were made
Treason by Statute-laws, which formerly appeared not such, because they
appeared not at all; and yet in the opinion of her people, the Queen was too
slack in the making, and more slack in the execution of them. The people had
engaged themselves deeply against the Queen of Scots, and it was not safe for
them to go back; they go yet deeper, and without any positive Authority,
leading the way, they enter into an Association amongst themselves for the
Queens safety; and it was well liked by the Queen, because she knew it was well
meant, although by some it was mistaken. Nevertheless, to take away all
exception, a Law is made in pursuance thereof, 27 Eliz. c. 1.
and so the work is reduced under an ordinary rate, though the public danger
was such, as might well have digested an extraordinary undertaking.

I intend not to enter into the particulars of these Treasons of the new stamp,
because they are but temporary, and in their ultimate reach tend only to the
safeguard of the Queens person, in order to the intentionary sense of the
Statute of 25 Edw. 3. although not within the explicit words of that Law.
Only this is observable, that though the times were full of malice, yet was
not all malice looked upon as fatal, nor every expression thereof Treason, or
privity thereto, although the Crown it self was not a little concerned therein;
but reduced to an inferior degree, called Misprision; as if they were willing
rather to construe undertakings for mistakings, and thereby overlook much of
the Malignity of these Times, than to make strict inquisition into every
Punctilio of offense.

As touching Felony, the rules were various; 5 Eliz. c. 20.
some were of a new Original, as that of Gypsies; others formerly such,
afterward laid aside, are now revived with advantage, as Conjuration, and
Buggery: Cap. 16, 17.
But imbezzelling by Servants of their Masters Goods, made Felony for a time by
Edward the Sixth, is by Queen Elizabeth made perpetual. Some Felonies are made
such within a certain precinct, 2 Eliz. c. 29.
as Man-stealers, and other Crimes upon the Scottish Borders. 5 Eliz. c. 10.
Others formerly made Felony, are now unmade; as that concerning Prophecies:
and diverse formerly protected under the refuge of Clergy, Cap. 16.
are now barred of that reserve; such as are those that command, counsel, or
hire others to commit petty Treason, Murder, or Robbery, 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar.
cap. 4. Stealers of Horses, Geldings, or Mares, 2 E. 6. cap. 33. Robbers of
Houses, Booth or Tent, by Day or Night, 5 E. cap. 9. Pick pockets, or Cut
purses, 8 Eliz. cap. 4. And Woman stealers, 39 Eliz. cap 9. And some Crimes
made Felony impeachable only within a certain time, and not upon a cool suit.
So as upon the whole heap of Account, the zeal of the times will appear to be
more hot, by how much iniquity appeared more heinous; and that wicked men waxed
worse, as the times waxed better. More particulars of this nature, and of other
Offenses of inferior note, might be superadded; as also of Laws, of alteration
and amendment of Process and Trial, and of Common Assurance and Conveyance of
Estates, of particular Revenue. All which might be insisted upon, if need were,
to clear out yet further the conclusion of the whole matter; which I hasten to
accomplish, led on by a natural motion, that grows in speed, the nigher it
comes to its end.

CHAP. XL. A Summary Conclusion upon the whole matter.
IN the stating of this whole account, I shall first glance upon the natural
Constitution of the people of England, and then gather up the scattered Notions
into one form; because the one does not a little illustrate the other, and show
the same to be radical, and not by any forced inoculation.

The people are of a middle temper, according to their Climate: the Northern
Melancholy, and the Southern Choler, meeting in their general Constitution,
does render them ingenious and active: which nourished also under the wings of
Liberty, inspires a Courage generous, and not soon out of breath. Active they
are, and so nigh to pure act, that nothing hurts them more than much quiet; of
which they had little experience from their first transmigration till the time
of King James; but ever were at work either in building (as before the Norman
times) or after in repairing their ruins occasioned by tempestuous pretensions
from Rome and Foreign Princes, or by Earthquakes of Civil Contention about the
Title between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, or intrenchments of the
Crown upon the Liberty of the people. But King James conquering all enmity,
spoke Peace abroad, and sang Lullaby at home. Yet like a dead calm in a hot
Spring, treasured up in store sad distempers against a back-Winter. Their
ingenuity will not allow them to be excellent at the Cheat; but are rather
subject in that kind to take than give: and supposing others as openhearted as
themselves, are many times in Treaties over-matched by them whom they
over-match in Arms. Upon the same account they are neither imperious over those
beneath, nor stubborn against them above; but can well discern both person and
time. Man, Woman, or Child, all is one with them, they will honor Majesty
where ever they see it. And of the twain, tender it more when they see it set
upon infirmity: as if they knew how to command themselves only in order to the
public good.

Nevertheless, they love much to be free. When they were under awe of the Popes
Curse, they bore off designs by the head and shoulders; but afterward, by
watchfulness and foresight: and having attained a light in Religion, that will
own their Liberties, of them both they make up one Garland not to be touched by
any rude hand; but as if it were the bird of the eye, the whole body startles
forthwith; the Alarm is soon given and taken; and whether high or low, none are
spared that stand in their way. This they do owe to the Eastern people, from
whom they fetch their Pedigree. So as the only way to conquer them, is to let
them have their Liberties; for like some Horses, they are good for carriage, so
long as their Burdens are easy, and sit loose upon them; but if too close
girt, they will break all, or cast their load, or die. And therefore Queen
Elizabeth gained much to the Crown by fair carriage, good words, and cleanly
conveyance; which was not soon discovered, nor easily parted with: But Henry
the Eighth by height of spirit and great noise; and therefore was no sooner off
the Stage, but what was gotten by the snatch was lost by the catch, and things
soon returned into their ancient posture again.

The first Government of the people before their departure out of Germany, was
in the two States of Lords and Commons. The Clergy came not into pomp and
power till Austin's time, and soon came to the height of a third State
appendent to the former, and so continued till Henry the Eighth's time: Then
they began to decay in power, and in Queen Elizabeth's time utterly lost the
same; and so they can no longer be called a State, although they still keep
state.

The two States of Lords and Commons in their Transmigration, being then in the
nature of an Army of Soldiers, had a General by their Election; under whom,
after they had obtained a peaceable settling, they named him anew by the name of
Konning, or the Wise man; for then was Wisdom more necessary than Valor. But
after the Clergy had won the day, and this Konning had submitted himself and
his people to their Ghostly Father, they baptized him by a new name of Rex; and
so he is styled in all written Monuments which we owe only to Ecclesiastics;
although the vulgar held their appellation still, which by contraction, or
rather corruption, did at length arrive into the word King; a notion which as
often changes the sense as the Air; some making the person all in all, others
some in all, and some nothing at all but a complement of State. The Clergy
gave him his Title in the first sense, and are willing he should have a power
over the Estates in order to their design, which then was to rule the King, and
by him all his People; he doing what he lists with them, and the Clergy the
like with him. The Saxons take the word in the second sense; for though they
had put upon the Commonwealth one Head, and on that one Head one Crown, yet
unto that Head did belong many Eyes, and many Brains; and nothing being done
but by the common sense, a power is left to him much like to that of the
outward Members, Executory.

In time of War, how unruly soever the humors be, yet must the Law be his
rule: He cannot engage the people either to make, continue, or determine any
offensive War without their consent; nor compel them to arm themselves, nor
command them out of their Counties for War, or impose Military charge upon them
against their free consent, or contrary to the known Law.

In calmer times much rather, he can neither make new Laws, nor alter the old;
form new Judicatories, Writs, Process, Judgments, or new Executions, nor
enable or disable any Conveyances of Estates. He may seem possessed of more
power in Church Government, yet, De jure, can neither make nor alter Doctrine,
or Worship, or Government in the Church: nor grant Dispensations, or Licenses
Ecclesiastical; nor Commissions of Jurisdiction, other than according to the
Law. And as a close to all, by one Oath taken at the Coronation, he not only
gives to the people security of the Peace and good Behavior, but bears
witness that he owes Allegiance both to the Law and the People; different from
that of the peoples in this, That the King's Allegiance is due to the Law that
is originally from the peoples Election; but the Peoples to the King, under a
Law of their own framing.

This leads on the consideration of a higher degree of power than that of
Kings. For though Law, as touching morality in the general, be of heavenly
Birth; yet the positive Laws arising from common Prudence concerning the
Honor, Peace, and Profit of every Nation, are formed by humane constitution,
and are therefore called Honesta, or justa, because by common vote they are so
esteemed, and not because any one man supposes them to be such. The words of
the Summons to the Parliament does hold for this, Quae de communi consilio
ordinari contigerint; and the words in the Coronation Oath, Quas vulgus
elegerit, do speak no less; whether they be taken in the ^^eter perfect-tense,
or the Future-tense, the conclusion will be the same. True it is, that in all,
Kings are supposed as present; yet is not that valuable in the point of
Council, which is the foundation of the positive Law. For as the best things
under heaven are subject to infirmity; so Kings either short or beyond in Age
or Wit, or possibly given over to their lusts, or sick, or absent, (in all
which the name of a King adds little more to the Law than a sound) yet all the
while the Government is maintained with as much honor and power, as under the
most wise and well-disposed King that ever blessed Throne.

This is done in the Convention of States, which in the first times consisted
of Individuals, rather than Specificals. The great men doubtless did many
things even before they saw the English shore; that Tacitus notes: yet in the
public Convention of all, did nothing alone, till of one House they became
two. The particular time of the separation is uncertain, and the occasion more:
It may be the great Lords thought the mysteries of State too sacred to be
debated before the vulgar, lest they should grow into curiosity: Possibly also
might the Commons in their debates wish the great men absent, that themselves
might more freely vote without angering their great Lords. Nevertheless the
Royal assent is ever given in the joint Convention of all. But how a double
Negative should rest in the house of Lords, one originally in themselves, the
other in the sole person of the King, (whenas in no case is any Negative found
upon Record, but a modest waring the answer of such things as the King likes
not) is to me a mystery, if it be not cleared by Usurpation. For it is beyond
reach, why that which is once by the Representative of the People determined to
be Honestum, should be dis-determined by one or a few, whose Counsels are for
the most part but Notionary, and grounded upon private inconveniences, and not
upon experimentals of most public concernment; or that the veult, or Soit
fait, which formerly held the room only of a Manifesto of the Regal Will to
execute the Law then made (as his Coronation Oath to execute all Laws formerly
established) should be taken to be a determination of the justness or honesty
of the thing: When as this Royal Assent is many times given by a King that
knows no difference between good and evil, and is never competent judge in
matters that in his opinion do fall into contradiction between his own private
interest, and the benefit of the people.

However unequal it may seem, yet both that and other advantages were gained by
the House of Lords, after the separation was once made, as many of the ancient
Statutes (by them only made) do sufficiently hold forth: which although in the
general they do concern matters of Judicature, wherein the Lords originally had
the greatest share; yet other things also escaped the Common Vote, which in
after-ages they recovered into their consideration again. And the condition of
the people in those times did principally conduce hereunto: For until the
Norman times were somewhat settled, the former Ages had ever been uncertain in
the changes between War and Peace, which maintained the distance between the
Lords and their Tenants, and the authority of the one over the other, savouring
of the more absolute command in Law. And after that the Sword was turned into
the Plough-share, the distance is established by compact of Tenure by Service,
under peril of default, although in a different degree; for the Service of a
Knight, as more eminent in War, so in Peace it raised the mind to regard of
public Peace: but the service of the Plough supporting all, is underneath all,
yet still under the common condition of Freemen equally as the Knight. Peace
now had scarcely exceeded its minority, before it brought forth the unhappy
birth of Ambition: Kings would be more absolute, and Lords more Lordly; the
Commons left far behind, seldom come into mention amongst the public Acts of
State, and as useless set aside. This was the lowest ebb that ever the
Commonage of England endured, which continued till Ambition brought on
Contention amongst the great men, and thence the Barons Wars, wherein the
Commons parting asunder; some holding for the King, who promised them Liberty
from their Lords; others siding with the Lords, who promised them Liberty from
the King; they became so minded of their Liberties, that in the conclusion they
come off upon better advantage for their Liberties than either King or Lords,
who all were losers before their reckoning was fully made.

These Wars had by experience made the King sensible of the smart of the Lords
great interest with the people, and pointed him to the pin upon which the same
did hang; to take which away, a design is contrived to advance the value of the
Commoners, and to level the Peerage, that they both may draw in one equal yoke
the Chariot of Prerogative. The power of the Commons in public Councils was of
some efficacy, but not much honor, for their meetings were tumultuary; time
brought forth a cure hereof, the flowers of the people are by election sent to
be the Representative, and so the Lords are matched, if not over-match'd; the
people less admiring the Lords, and more regarding themselves. This was but a
dazzle, an Eclipse ensues; for Kings having duly eyed the nature of Tenure
between the Lords and Commons, look upon it as an Out-work or Blockhouse in
their way of approach: Their next endeavor is therefore to gain the Knighthood
of England within the compass of their own Fee, and so by priority to have
their Service, as often as need should require, by a trick in Law, as well for
their own safety in time of War, as for their benefit in time of Peace. This
was a work of a continuing nature, and commended to Successors to accomplish by
degrees, that the whole Knighthood of England is become no more the Lords till
the Kings be first served. And thus the power of the People is wholly devolved
into the King's Command; and the Lords must now stand alone, having no other
foundation than the affections of the People gained by beneficence of
Neighborhood and ordinary Society, which commonly ingratiates the inferior
rank of men to those of higher degree, especially such of them as affect to be
popular. Henry the Seventh found out this Sore, and taught his Successors the
way to avoid that occasion of Jealousy, by calling up such considerable men to
attend the Court, without other Wages but fruitless hopes; or under color of
honor to be had by Kings from the presence of such great men in their great
Trains; or of other service of special note to be done only by men of so high
accomplishment. And by this means Lordship, once bringing therewith both
Authority and Power unto Kings, before Kings grew jealous of their greatness,
in these latter days is become a mere Jelly; and neither able to serve the
interest of Kings (if the people should bestir themselves) nor their own any
longer. Henceforth the Commons of England are no mean persons, and their
Representative of such concernment, as if Kings will have them to observe him,
he must serve them with their Liberties and Laws: and every one the public
good of the people. No man's work is beneath, no man's above it; the best
honor of the Kings work is to be Nobilis servitus, Aelian. lib. 2. Var. hist.
c. 20.
(as Antigonus said to his Son) or in plain English, Supreme Service above all,
and to the whole. I now conclude, Tacit.
wishing we may attain the happiness of our Forefathers the ancient Saxons,
Quilibet contentus sort propria.

A VINDICATION Of the ancient way of PARLIAMENTS In ENGLAND.
THe more Words, the more Faults, is a divine Maxim, that has put a stop to
the publishing of this Second Part for some time: but observing the ordinary
humor still drawing off, and passing a harsher Censure upon my intentions in
my First Part than I expected; I do proceed to fulfill my course, that if
Censure will be, it may be upon better grounds, when the whole matter is
before. Herein I shall once more mind, that I meddle not with the Theological
Right of Kings, or other Powers, but with the Civil Right in Fact now in hand.
And because some men's Pens of late have ranged into a denial of the Commons
ancient Right in the Legislative power; and others, even to adnul the Right
both of Lords and Commons therein, resolving all such power into that one
principle of a King, Quicquid libet, licet, so making the breach much wider
than at the beginning; I shall intend my course against both. As touching the
Commons Right, jointly with the Lords, it will be the main end of the whole;
but as touching the Commons Right, in competition with the Lords, I will first
endeavor to remove out of the way what I find pulished in a late Tractate
concerning that matter, and so proceed upon the whole.

The subject of that Discourse consists of three parts; one to prove that the
ancient Parliaments, before the thirteenth Century, consisted only of those
whom we now call the House of Lords; the other, that both the Legislative and
Judicial Power of the Parliament rested wholly in them. Lastly, that Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament, or the House of Commons, were not known
nor heard of till punier times than these. This last will be granted, viz. That
their several Titles of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, were not known in
Parliament till of latter times: Nevertheless, it will be insisted upon, that
the Commons were then there. The second will be granted but in part, viz. That
the Lords had much power in Parliament in point of Jurisdiction, but neither
the sole, nor whole.

The first is absolutely denied, neither is the same proved by any one instance
or pregnant ground in all that Book, and therefore not clearly demonstrated by
Histories and Records beyond contradiction, as the Title Page of that Book does
hold forth to the World. First, because not one instance in all that Book is
exclusive to the Commons; and so the whole Argument of the Discourse will
conclude, Ab Authoritate Negativa, which is no Argument in humane testimony at
all.

Secondly, The greatest number of instances in that Book, are by him supposed
to concern Parliaments, or General Councils of this Nation, holden by the
Representative thereof; whereas indeed they were either but Synodical
Conventions for Church Matters, whereunto the poor Commons (he well knows)
might not come, unless in danger of the Canons dint; or if they did, yet had
they no other work there, than to hear, learn, and receive Laws from the
Ecclesiastics. And the Lords themselves, though present, yet under no other
Notion were they, than as Counsel to the King, whom they could not cast out of
their Council, till afterages, though they often endeavored it.

Thirdly, The Author of that Tractate also well knows, that Kings usually
made Grants and Infeodations by advice of the Lords, without the aid of the
Parliament: And it is no less true, that Kings with the Lords, did in their
several Ages exercise ordinarily Jurisdiction, in cases of distributive
Justice; especially after the Norman entrance: For the step was easy, from
being Commanders in War, to be Lords in Peace; but hard to lay down that power
at the Foot of Justice, which they had usurped in the rude times of the Sword,
when men labor for Life rather than Liberty; and no less difficult to make a
difference between their deportment in commanding of Soldiers, and governing
of Countrymen; till Peace by continuance had reduced them to a little more
sobriety. Nor does it seem irrational, that private differences between Party
and Party, should be determined in a more private way, than to trouble the
whole Representative of the Kingdom with matters of so mean concernment. If
then those Councils mentioned by the Author, which concern the King's Grants,
and Infeodations, and matters of Judicature, be taken from the rest of the
Precedents, brought by him, to maintain the thing aimed at; I suppose scarce
one Stone will be left for a Foundation to such a glorying Structure, as is
pretended in the Title Page of that Book: And yet I deny not, but where such
occasions have befaln, the Parliament sitting, it has closed with them, as
things taken up by the way.

Fourthly, It may be that the Author has also observed, that all the Records
of Antiquity passed through (if not from) the hands of the Clergy only; and
they might think it sufficient for them to honor their Writings with the great
Titles of men of Dignity in the Church and Commonwealth, omitting the Commons,
as not worthy of mention; and yet they might be there then present, as it will
appear they were, in some of the particular instances ensuing, to which we come
now in a more punctual consideration.

The first of these, by his own words, appear to be a Church-mote, or Synod; it
was in the year 673, called by the Archbishop, who had no more power to summon
a Parliament, than the Author himself has: And the several Conclusions made
therein, do all show that the People had no work there, as may appear in the
several Relations thereof made by Matthew Westminster, and Sir Henry Spelman,
an Author that he makes much use of, and therefore I shall be bold to make the
best use of him that I can likewise, in vindicating the truth of the point in
hand: For, whatever this Council was, it is the less material, seeing the same
Author recites a Precedent of Aethelbert, within six years after Austin's entry
into this Island, which was long before this Council, which brings on the Van
of all the rest of the Opponents Instances; which King called a Council,
styled, Commune Concilium tam Cleri quam Populi: Page 126.
and in the conclusion of the same, a Law is made upon the like occasion, Si
Rex Populum Convocaverit, etc. In both which it is evident, that in those times
there were Councils holden by the People, as well as by the Magnates or
Optimates.

His next instance is in the year 694, which is of a Council holden by the
Great men, but no mention of the Commons; and this he will have to be a
Parliament, albeit, that he might have found both Abbatesses, or Women, and
Presbyters, to be Members of that Assembly, and (for default of better)
attested the Conclusions of the same, notwithstanding the Canon, Nemo militans
Deo, etc. But I must also mind him, that the same Author recites a Council
holden by King Ina, Suasu omnium Aldermannorum, and Seniorum, and Sapientum
Regni: and it is very probable, that all the Wise men of the Kingdom were not
included within the Lordly Dignity.

The third instance can have no better success, unless he will have the Pope to
be allowed power to call a Parliament, or allow the Archbishop power to do that
service by the Pope's command; for by that Authority this (whatever it be) was
called, if we give credit to the Relations of Sir Henry Spelman; Council. Brit.
Page 212.
who also recites another Council within three leaves foregoing this, called
by Withered at Barkhamstead, unto which the Clergy were summoned, Qui cum
viris utique militaribus communi omnium assensu has leges decrevere: Ibid. p.
194
So as it seems in those times Soldiers or Knights were in the Common
Councils, as well as other Great Men.

In the next place, he brings in a Council holden in the year 747, which (if
the Archbishop were then therein President, Ibid. p. 242. 245.
as it is said, in the presence of the King) was no Parliament, but a
Church-mote; and all the Conclusions in the same do testify no less, they
being every one concerning Ecclesiastical matters.

And furthermore, before this time, Page 219.
the Author out of whom he cites this Council, mentions another Council
holden by Ina the Saxon-King, in the presence of the Bishops, Princes, Lords,
Earls, and all the wise old men and People of the Kingdom, all of them
concluding of the intermarriage between the Brittons, Picts, and Saxons, which
formerly, as it seems, was not allowed. And the same King by his Charter,
mentioned by the same Penman, notes that his endowment of the Monastery of
Glastenbury was made, not only in the presence of the Great Men, but,
Cumpraesentia populationis; and he says, that Omnes confirmaverunt: which I do
not mention as a work necessary to be done by the Parliament, yet such an one
as was holden expedient as the case then stood.

Forty years after, he meets with another Council, which he supposes to be a
Parliament also, but was none, unless he will allow the Pope's Legate power to
summon a Parliament. It was holden in the year 787; and had he duly considered
the return made by the Pope's Legate of the Acts of that Council, Page 392.
which is also published by the same Author, he might have found, that the
Legate says, That they were propounded in public Council, before the King,
Archbishop, and all the Bishops and Abbots of the Kingdom, Senators, Dukes, or
Captains, and People of the Land, and they all consented to keep the same.

Then he brings in a Council holden in the year 792. which he would never have
set down in the List of Parliaments, if he had considered how improper it is to
construe Provinciale tenuit Concilium, for a Parliament; and therefore I shall
need no further to trouble the Reader therewith.

The two next are supposed to be but one and the same; and it is said to be
holden Anno 974, before nine Kings fifteen Bishops, twenty Dukes, etc. which
for ought appears, may comprehend all England and Scotland; and is no
Parliament of one Nation, but a Party of some Nations, for some great matter,
no doubt, yet nothing in particular mentioned, but the solemn laying the
Foundation of the Monastery of Saint Albans.

What manner of Council the next was, appears not, and therefore nothing can
be concluded therefrom, but that it was holden in the year 797.

That Council which is next produced, and in the year 800, and is called in
great Letters, Concilium Provinciale, which he cannot Grammatically construe to
be a Parliament; yet in the Preface it is said, that there were Viri
cujuscunque dignitatis: Page 321.
and the King in his Letters to the Pope, says concerning it, Visum est
cunctis gentis Nostrae sapientibus; so as it seems by this, and other
Examples of this nature, that though the Church-motes invented the particular
conclusions, yet it was left to the Wittagenmote to judge and conclude them.

There can be no question, but the next three Precedents brought by the
Opponent were all of them Church-mates: For the first of them, which is said to
be holden in the year 816, Council. Brit. Page 318.
is called a Synod, and both Priests and Deacons were there present, which are
no Members of Parliament, consisting only of the House of Lords; and they all
of them did Pariter tractare de necessariis and utilitatibus Ecclesiarum. The
second of them is called a Synodal Council, holden Anno 822, and yet there were
then present Omnium dignitatum Optimates; which cannot be understood only of
those of the House of Lords, because they ought all to be personally present,
and therefore there is no Optimacy amongst them. The last of these three is
called Synodale Conciliabulum, a petty Synod, Council. Brit. Page 334.
in great Letters: and besides, there were with the Bishops and Abbots many
wise men; and in all these respects it cannot be a Parliament only of the
great Lords.

The next Council, said to be holden in the year 823, cannot also be called
properly a Parliament, but only a Consultation between two Kings and their
Council, to prevent the invasion of the Danes; and the attests of the Kings
Chaplain and his Scribe, do show also that they were not all Members of the
House of Lords.

The Council cited by the Opponent in the next place, was holden Anno 838,
being only in nature of a Council for Law, or Judicature, to determine the
validity of the King's Grant made to the Church of Canterbury; which is no
proper work for a Parliament, unless it befall during the sitting of the same.

The next is but a bare title of a Council, supposed to be holden Anno 850, and
not worth its room; for it neither shows whether any thing was concluded, nor
what the Conclusions were.

The work of the next Council, alleged to be holden Anno 851, was to confirm
the Charter of the Monastery of Croyland, and to determine concerning affairs
belonging to the Mercians; and if it had been a Parliament for that people, it
might be worthy of enquiry how regularly the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishop of London, and the Ambassadors from the West Saxons, could sit amongst
them, and attest the Conclusions therein made, as well as the proper Members of
that Nation.

He comes in the next place to a Council holden in the year 855, which is more
likely to be a Parliament than most of them formerly mentioned, if the Tithes
of all England were therein given to the Church; but hereof I have set down my
opinion in the former part of the Discourse. And though it be true, that no
Knights and Burgesses are therein mentioned, as the Opponent observes out of
the Title; yet if the body of the Laws be duly considered, toward the
Conclusion thereof it will appear, that there was present Fidelium infinita
multitudo, qui omnes regium Chirographum laudaverunt, Dignitates vero sua
nomina subscripserunt. Council. Brit. Page 350.
And yet the Wittagenmotes in these times began to be rare, being continually
interrupted by the invasions of the Danes.

The three next Councils, alleged to be in the years 930, 944, 948. were
doubtless of inferior value, as the matters therein concluded were of
inferior regard, being such as concern the passing of the Kings Grants,
Infeodations and Confirmations.

The Council mentioned to be in the year 965, Council Brit. Page 480.
is supposed to be one and the same with the next foregoing, by Sir Henry
Spelman; which calls it self a General Council, not by reason of the general
confluence of the Lords and Laity, but because all the Bishops of England did
then meet. The Primi and Primates were there; who these were, is not mentioned,
but it is evident that the King of Scots was there, and that both he and diverse
that are called Ministri Regis, attested the Conclusions. It will be difficult
to make out how these should be Members of the House of Lords, and more
difficult to show a reason why in the attesting of the Acts of these Councils,
which the Opponent calls Parliaments, we find so few of the Laity, that scarce
Twelve are mentioned in any one of them, and those to descend so low as the
Ministri Regis, to make up the number.

Five more of these instances remain, before the coming of the Normans.

The first of which was in the year 975, and in a time when no Parliament,
according to the Opponents principles, Council. Brit. Page 490.
could sit; for it was an Inter-Regnum.

The two next were only Synods to determine the difference between the
Regulars and the Seculars, in the King's absence, by reason that he was under
age; and they are said to be in the year 977, and 1009. But it is not within
the compass of my matter to debate their dates.

The last two were Meetings or Courts for Judicature, to determine the Crime of
Treason; which every one knows is determinable by inferior Courts before the
high Steward of Judges, and therefore not so peculiar to a Parliament, as to be
made an Argument of its existence. And thus are we at an end of all the
instances brought by the Opponent to prove that Parliaments before the Norman
times consisted of those whom we now call the House of Lords. All which I shall
shut up with two other Notes taken out of the Book of Councils, published by
Sir Henry Spelman.

The first of which concerns a Grant made by Canutus, of an exemption to the
Abbey of Bury Saint Edmunds, Page 534.
in a Council wherein were present Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Dukes, Earls.
Cum quamplurimis gregariis militibus, cum populi multitudine copiosa votis
regi^s unanimiter consentientes. The other taken out of the Confessor's Laws,
which tell us, that Tithes were granted to the Church, Page 621.
A Rege, Baronibus, and Populo. And thus I shall leave these Testimonies to
debate with one another, whilst the Reader may judge as seems most equal to
himself.

Being thus come to the Norman times, and those ensuing; I shall more summarily
proceed with the particulars concerning them, because they were times of Force,
and can give little or no evidence against the Customs rightly settled in the
Saxon times, which I have more particularly insisted upon, that the Original
Constitution of this Government may the better appear. Now for the more speedy
manifesting of the truth in the particulars following, I shall pre-advise the
Reader in three particulars.

First, that the Church-motes grew more in Power and Honor by the aid of the
Normans Law, refusing the concurrence and personal presence of Kings, whom at
length they excluded from their Councils with all his Nobles; and therefore it
is the less wonder, if we hear but little of the Commons joining with them.

Secondly, That the Norman way of Government grew more Aristocratical than the
Saxon, making the Lords the chief Instruments of keeping Kings above, and
People underneath; and thus we meet with much noise of meetings between the
King and Lords, and little concerning the grand meetings of the Kings, and the
Representative of the People; although some footsteps we find even of them
also. For the Kings were mistaken in the Lords, who meaned nothing less than to
serve them with the Peoples Liberties, together with their own, which they saw
wrapped up in the gross.

Thirdly, By this means the Councils of the King and Lords grew potent, not
only for advice in particular occasions, but in matters of Judicature, and
declaring of Law, ordering of Process in Courts of Pleas; which in the first
framing were the works of the Wise and Learned men, but being once settled,
become part of the Liberties of every Freeman. And it is not to be doubted but
these Councils of Lords did outreach into things too great for them to manage,
and kept the Commons out of possession of their right, during the present heat
of their ruffling condition; yet all this while could not take absolute
possession of their Legislative power.

I now come to the remainder of the particular instances produced by the
Opponent, which I shall reduce into several Categories, for the more clear
satisfaction to the Reader, with less tediousness.

First, It cannot be denied but the Council of Lords gave advice to Kings in
cases of particular emergency; nor is it incongruous to the course of
Government, even to this day; nor is it meet that the Parliament should be
troubled with every such occasion: and therefore the giving of advice to
William the Conqueror, what course he should take to settle the Laws of
England according to the instances in Councils holden An. 1060, and 1007. and
to gain favor of the great men, according to that in Anno 1106. and in the
manner of endowment of the Abbey of Battle, as in page 25 of the Opponents
Discourse: and what to do upon the reading of the Pope's Letter, according to
that in Anno 1114. And whether the Pope's Legate should be admitted, as in page
18. And how King Stephen and Henry shall come to an Agreement, as Anno 1153.
And how to execute Laws by Judges and Justices Itinerant, as Anno 1176. And
touching the manner of engaging for a Voyage by Croisado to Jerusalem, Anno
1189. And to give answer to Ambassadors of a Foreign Prince, page 25. And how
King John shall conclude Peace with the Pope, Anno 1213. Page 23.
Where nevertheless, Matthew. Paris says, was Turba multa nimis. I say, all
these might well be done by a Council of Lords, and not in any posture of a
Parliament; albeit that in none of all these does any thing appear, but that
the Commons might be present in every one, or many of them all.

Secondly, As touching Judicature, the Lords had much power therein, even in
the Saxon times, having better opportunities for Knowledge and Learning,
especially joined with the Clergy, than the Commons in those times of deep
darkness, wherein even the Clergy wanted not their share, as in the first part
of the Discourse I have already observed. Whatsoever then might be done by
Judges in ordinary Courts of Judicature, is inferior to the regard of the
Parliament; and therefore the Plea between the Archbishop and Ethelstan
concerning Land, instanced Anno 1070. And between Lanfrank and Odo, Anno 1071.
And between the King and Anselme, page 15, 16. And the determining of the
Treason of John (afterward King) against his Lord King Richard, page 23. And
the difference concerning the title of a Barony between Mowbray and Scotvile,
page 25. And giving of security of good behavior by William Brawse to King
John, page 26. All these might well be determined only before the Lords, and
yet the Parliament might be then sitting or not sitting; as the contrary to
either does not appear, and therefore can these form no demonstrative ground to
prove that the Parliament consisted in those times, only of such as we now
call the House of Lords.

A Third work whereby the Opponent would prove the Parliament to consist only
of the House of Lords, is, because he finds many things by them concluded
touching the solemnization, and the settling of the Succession of Kings; both
which, he says, were done by the Lords in Parliament, or those of that House;
and I shall crave leave to conclude the contrary: For neither is the Election,
or Solemnization of such Election, a proper work of the Parliament, according
to the Opponents principles; nor can they prove such Conventions wherein they
were to be, Parliaments. Not the Election of Kings, for then may a Parliament
be without a King; and therefore that instance concerning William Rufus, page
16 will fail, or the Opponents Principles, who will have no Parliament without
a King.

The like may also be said of the instance concerning King Steven, page 18.
Much less can the Solemnization of the Election by Coronation be a proper work
for the Parliament: Nevertheless, the Opponent does well know that both the
Election of a King, and the Solemnization of such Election by Coronation, are
Spiritless motions without the presence of the people; and therefore though his
instance, page 17, concerning the Election of Henry the First by the Bishops
and Princes, may seem to be restrictive as to them, yet it is not such in fact;
if Matthew Paris may be believed, who tells us, that in the Conventus omnium
was Clerus and Populus universus, Mr. Selden's Titles of Honor.
and might have been noted by the Opponent out of that Learned Antiquary so
often by him cited, if he had pleased to take notice of such matters.

A Fourth sort of Instances concerns matters Ecclesiastical, and making of
Canons; and hereof enough has been already said, that such Work was absolutely
challenged by the Church-motes as their proper Work; and therefore the
Instance, page 16, 17. of the Council in Henry the First's time, and the Canons
made by the Bishops there; and that other called by Theobald Archbishop of
Canterbury, and instanced by the Opponent, page 19. I say, both these do fail
in the Conclusion propounded.

Fifthly, as touching the most proper Work of Parliament, which is the making
of Laws concerning the Liberties and Benefit of the people; the Opponent
produces not one instance concerning the same, which does not conclude
contrary to the Proposal; for as touching those two instances in his Thirteenth
page, Anno 1060, they concern not the making of Laws, but the reviving of such
as had been disused formerly; which might well enough be done by a private
Council. But as to that in his Fifteenth page, of the Law made by the
Conqueror concerning Remigius Bishop of Lincoln, although it be true, that we
find not the particular Titles of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, ^yet
besides the Council of Archbishops, Bishops, and Princes, we find the Common
Council; for so the words are, Communi Concilio, and Concilio Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum, Abatum, and omnium Principum; although the Opponent would seem to
wave these words, Et Concilio, by putting them in a small Character, and the
rest in Great Letters, Tit. Honor, page 709.
that the Readers eyes might be silled with them, and overlook the other.

Secondly, As to the instance of the Council at Clarindon, in his Nineteenth
page, which he cites out of Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, and Hoveden,
although he pleases to mention the several ranks of Great Men, and those in
black Letters of a greater size; and says, That not one Commoner appears; yet
Mr. Selden's Hoveden, in that very place so often by the Opponent cited, tells
him, that both Clerus and Populus were there.

Thirdly, The Opponent cites an instance of Laws made by Richard the First, in
his Twenty fourth page; and he sets down the several Ranks of Great Men, and
amongst the rest, ingeniously mentions Milites; but it is with a Gloss of his
own, that they were Barons that were made Knights, whenas formerly Barons were
mentioned in the general; and therefore how proper this Gloss is, let others
judge; especially seeing that not only Milites, and Milites Gregarii, but even
Ministri, were present in such Conventions, even in the Saxon times: And Mr.
Seldom in the former known place mentions an Observation, that Vniversi
personae qui de Rege tenent in Capite, Tit. Honor, page 703.
sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse judiciis curiae Domini Regis cum
Baronibus.

Fourthly, He cites in his Twenty fifth page another instance in King John's
time, in which, after the assent of Earls and Barons, the words Et omnium
fidelium nostrorum are also annexed, but with this conceit of the Oponents,
that these Fideles were those that adhered to the King against his Enemies: be
it so, for then the Commons were present, and did assent; or they may be, says
he, some specially summoned as Assistants; take that also, and then all the
true-hearted in the Kingdom were specially summoned, and were there; so as the
conclusion will be the same.

In the fifth place, he cited a strange Precedent (as he calls it) of a Writ of
Summons in King John's time, in his Twenty seventh page, wherein Omnes Milites
were summoned, Cum armis suis; and he concludes therefore the same was a
Council of War.

First, Because they were to come armed. It is very true; and so they did unto
the Councils in the ancient Saxon times, and so the Knights of the Counties
ought to do in these days, if they obey the Writ, Duos Milites gladiis cinctos,
etc.

Secondly, he says, that the Knights were not to come to Council. That is his
opinion; yet the Writ speaks, that the Discreti Milites were to come, Ad
loquendum cum Rege de negotiis regni: It is true, says he, but not Ad
tractandum, and faciendum, and consentiendum. It is true, it is not so said,
nor is it excluded; and were it so, yet the Opponents conclusion will not
thence arise, That none but the King, and those who are of the House of Lords,
were there present.

The Sixth and last instance mentioned by the Opponent, is in his Thirtieth
page, and concerns Escuage granted to King John, who by his Charter granted,
That in such cases he would summon Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and the
greater Barons, unto such Conventions by special Writs; and that the Sheriff
shall summon promiscuously all others which hold in Capite: and thence he
concludes, That none but the Great Lords, and the Tenants in Capite (whom he
calls the lesser Barons) were present; but no Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses:
all which being granted, yet in full Parliament the Citizens and Burgesses
might be there. For Councils were called of such persons as suited to the
matter to be debated upon.

If for matters purely Ecclesiastical, the King and his Council of Lords, and
the Churchmen, made up the Council.

If for advice in emergencies, the King and such Lords as were next at hand
determined the conclusions.

If for Escuage, the King and such as were to pay Escuage, made up a Council to
ascertain the sum, which was otherwise uncertain.

If for matters that concerned the common Liberty, Littler. lib. 2. cap. 3.
all sorts were present, as may appear out of the very Charter of King John,
noted in my former discourse, Brit. p. 122.
page 258. and also from an Observation of Cambden concerning Henry the Third,
Ad summum honorem pertinet, (said he) Ex quo Rex Henricus Tertius, ex tanta
multitudine quae seditiosa ac turbulentia fuit, optimos quosque ad Comitia
Parliamentaria evocaverit.

Secondly, The Opponent takes that for granted that never will be, viz. That
all the Kings Tenants In Capite were of the House of Lords; whenas himself
acknowledges a difference, page 28. viz. That the Barons are summoned by
Writs, sigillatim, as all the Members of the House of Lords are; but these are
by general Summons, their number great; and hard it will be to understand, how,
or when, they came to be excluded from that Society.

I shall insist no further upon the particulars of this Tractate, but demur
upon the whole matter, and leave it to Judgment upon the Premises, which might
have been much better reduced to the main Conclusion, if the Opponent, in the
first place, had defined the word PARLIAMENT: For it was a Convention without
the People, and sometimes without the KING, as in the Cases formerly mentioned,
of the Elections of William Rufus, and of King Stephen. And if sometimes a
Parliament of Lords only may be against the King, and so without King or
People, as in the Case between Stephen and Maud the Empress; and the Case
likewise concerning King John, both which also were formerly mentioned; All
this is no more to the Government, than it would be, should at any time the
Commons hold a Parliament without a King or House of Lords: and then all the
Opponents labor is to little purpose.

A TABLE TO THE Second Part.
A
A Betting of Felony made Felony page 174 Administration granted to the next of
the Kindred 30 Admirals power from the Parliament 24. formerly under many,
brought into one 25. once gained jurisdiction to the high-water-mark 26. and
his Power regulated by Law ibid. over Seamen, Ports, and Ships ibid.
Allegiance according to Law 11. vide Supremacy, the nature thereof in general
42. it is not natural ibid. 52. not absolute or indefinite 49. not to the King
in his natural capacity 51. it obliges not the people to serve in foreign War
60. it is due to the person of the King for the time being 144, 163. what it is
in time of War, and relation thereunto 144. Henry the Seventh, and Henry the
Eighth endeavored to advance it in relation to the Crown, but effected it not
61. Appeals in cases Ecclesiastical restrained from Rome, and given in the
Kings case to the Convocation, and in the cases of the people, the Archbishop
afterward to the Delegates, and were never settled in the Crown 133, 136. vide
Archbishop. Archbishop has the lawful power of the Pope in Appeals and
Dispensations, Licenses, and Faculties 136. the Archbishop of York loses his
jurisdiction over the Scottish Bishops 113 Arrays, Commission of Array 104 vide
War. Assent of the King to Acts of Parliament, serves only to the execution
of the Law, and not to the making thereof 13 Association of the people for the
common safety, before the Statute enabling the same 173.
B.
BAstardy, not to be determined by the Ordinary, before Summons to the
pretenders of Title to be heard 92 Bench, the Kings Bench at Westminster abated
in power by the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-delivery 54, 97
Benevolence, first used by Edward the Fourth 108. taken away by Richard the
Third ibid. taken up again by Henry the Seventh 114 Bishops, not impeachable
before the Civil Magistrate 29. their Temporalties to be neither seized nor
wasted in the vacancy. Vide Ordinary Buggery made Felony 173.
C.
CAnons, their power anciently in debate 37. such as are not according to the
Law are taken away 138 Castles and Goals restored to the Country 67. vide Forts
and Fortifications. Chancery, once an Office, afterward a Court 21. the power
grows by Act of Parliament 22, 95. the manner of the proceedings 23. Keeper of
the Great Seal increases in power 95 Chancellor elected by the Parliament 23
Cheshire made a Principality 7 Children carried into Cloisters remedied 96
Clergy, priviledgea from Arrests 31. discharged of purveyance and free quarter
ibid. their Temporalties in question 38. the Commons love not their persons 86.
their first declining from Rome in the matter of Provisors 88. they gain free
process in matters Ecclesiastical 112. their defection from Rome, and
submission to the Crown 120 Clergy upon Trial but once allowed 151. in some
cases disallowed 147, 173. Commissioners Ecclesiastical 167. High Commission
ibid. Conjuration, vide Witchcraft Conservators of the Truce 95 Constables
Court, vide Marshals Court Convocation established by Parliament 89. it then
undertook great matters, but much more after the Clergies forsaking the Pope
134 Councils, the Privy Council ordered by Parliament 13, 20, 83. of use for
sudden motions 16. their Oaths 17. and Jurisdictions 19. and power 83 Magnum
Concilium, or the grand Council of Lords 16 Crown entitled not by Descent 75,
162. but intailed 75. vide 109. Womanhood 138. Coverture 139 Custos Regni, a
formality of State under the Parliaments Order 79. many times conferred upon
Children 80. and upon a Woman 148.
D.
DElegates, though named by the King, yet by Authority of the Parliament 133
Defender of the Faith 122 Dispensations, Licenses, and Faculties, never in the
Crown, but by the Parliament givent to the Archbishop under limitations 137,
139 Duels, ordered by the Marshal as subservient to the Common Law 63.
E.
EDward the Third his Reign 2. his Title upon Entry by Election ibid. Edward
the Fourth his Reign, though had Title of Inheritance, yet entered by Election
106 Edward the Fifth approached the Crown by Inheritance, but never put it on
108 Edward the Sixth his Reign, his Title and Possession did meet, though he
was a Child, and his Sister Mary grown in age 152 Ecclesiastical power, vide
Prelacy and Prelates Elizabeth Queen her Reign 155. her Title by Election 163
Englishire taken away 56 Episcopacy, vide Prelates and Prelacy Errors, vide
Heresy Exchange ordered by the Statute 38 Excommunication 159. the Writ de
excommunicato capiendo ordered 169. vide Parliament exportation 38.
F.
FAlse News punished 66 Felony by riding in armed Troops 56, 66, 101, 150, 174
First Fruits regulated 90. taken away from Rome 130 Forcible entries 101 Forts,
Fortifications and Castles ordered by Parliament 147, 171.
G.
Jail-delivery by the Judges of the Benches 54, 97. vide Judges Goals regulated
67, 149 Guard for the Kings Person, brought in by Henry the Seventh 113 Gypsies
made Felons 174
H.
HEnry the Fourth his Reign, doubtful in his Title, but rested upon Election,
chosen by Parliament sitting when there was no King 68, etc. Henry the Fifth
his Reign, his Title by an Intail by the Parliament 70, etc. Henry the Sixth
his Reign, his Title by the Intail last mentioned; though a Child, he is
admitted to the Crown 72, etc. Henry the Seventh first settled a constant Guard;
his sixfold Right to the Crown, and his gaining Prerogative in the persons and
Estates of the people ibid. 113, etc. Henry the Eighth his natural endowments
116, etc. his power in the matters Ecclesiastical 120, etc. in Temporals 125,
etc. Heresy and Error in Doctrine under the cognizance of the Civil
Magistrate 36, 92. not punishable by death by Law till Henry the eighths time
126, 138. the Writ De Heretico comburendo has no legal ground in any of those
former Times 67, 93, 95, 126, 138 Honors, vide Parliament Hospitals, visited
by the Pelacy 90.
I.
IMportation 42 Judges of Assizes 97, 142 Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical not
originally in the Prelacy, nor absolutely 137 Justices of the Peace, their
residency and quality, their number various, their work also 62, 99. one
Justice 63. and the settling of their Session ibid. their power to take Bail
149.
K.
KIngs, vide Parliament, Allegiance, Supremacy, Militia.
L.
Laborers, their Work and Wages 42. ordered by the Justices of the Peace 63
Lancaster, the Princes of that House friends to the Clergy in policy 86 Laws
made by the Successors of Henry the* Eighth, during their minority annulled 69.
Ecclesiastical Laws, vide Parliament Lieges by Birth, though not born within
the Allegiance of England 57 Liveries and Tokens inhibited to the Lords 64,
103. and limited in the Kings person ibid. means of jealousy between the King
and his people 143 Libels in the Spiritual Court to be delivered in Copies upon
demand 90 Licenses, vide Dispensations Lords, their power and jurisdiction in
the Parliament 14. in Council 17, 142 Lunacy, no impediment in Trial of Treason
151.
M.
MAry Queen, her Reign 153. her Title by Election 164. she prejudiced her
Supremacy by Marriage 163 Marque and Reprisal 122 Martials Court 62 Matrimonial
Causes after the Reformation by Henry the Eight, in the Cognizance of the
Clerge by leave 139 Militia 58, 102, 143, 122. vide War. Mint 44, 84. vide
Parliament Monasteries dissolved 117. maintained by Henry the Fourth 86 Money
out of England to Rome stopped 32.
N.
NAvy Royal, as Forts for the public safety, maintained at the public charge
148 Nisi prius 98 Non-residency 139 Noble Ladies Trial 101.
O.
OYer and Terminer 54, 98 Ordinary not to be questioned in the Civil Courts for
things under Ecclesiastical jurisdiction 28, 29. has cognizance of Usury 28.
of Avoidances, Bigamy and Bastardy 29. grant Administration 30. visit
Hospitals, and call Executors to account 90. has power to fine and imprison
91, 141. to keep Courts, but the Authority doubtful 137. have Cognizance of the
Heresy 91, 138. Matrimony, Non-residence ibid. In Queen Elizabeth's time their
jurisdiction left in doubt 168, etc. Oath ex Officio first brought in by the
Churchmen in matters Ecclesiastical 92. afterward by the Parliament into the
Star Chamber, in cases criminal 142.
P.
PArdon of Crimes not absolutely in the King 11 Parliament without the King
consisting of three States 69. without the Clergy 34 Parliaments power in
ordering of the Crown 75, 133, 162. In ordering the King's person by Protectors
9. vide Protector In ordering their Children In ordering their Family 10, 75.
In ordering their Revenues 10, 75, 68. In ordering their Council 83 In the
Militia: vide Militia and War. In conferring places of Honor and Trust 11, 23
In ordering the Mint: vide Mint. In making Ecclesiastical Laws. Concerning
Church Government 131, etc. 121, 165. Concerning Doctrine 123, 131, 138, etc.
Concerning Worship 131 Concerning Church Censures 140 In granting Licenses and
Dispensations 137 In final Appeals 133 In ordering it self 14, 76 In Judicature
15, 111 Parliament not inconstant, though mutable 110 Peace, Justices and their
Sessions 62, etc. 99, etc. 148, etc. 173, etc. penal Laws executed to get money
108, 114 Pleadings in English 57 Pope's power in England abated 33, etc. vide
Ordinary, Supremacy, Archbishop Prelacy not favored by the Canon 140. their
power since the time of Queen Mary 166. their dignity and power distinguished
28, 34 Priests Wages 41, 91 Praemunire and Provisors 32, 34, etc. 89
Proclamations made equal to Laws 125. altered 158 Protectors, variety of them
makes a doubtful Government 3, 5, 72 Purveyance regulated 31, 39
R.
RAvishment consented to, forfeits Jointure 56 Request Court established by
Cardinal Wolsey 140 Richard the Second his Reign 6. endeavors to overruled the
Parliament, but failed in the conclusion 7 Richard the Third's Reign 108. his
Title by Usurpation and Murder ibid. Riots 101.
S.
SAnctuaries changed into fewer privileged places 151 Servants imbezelling,
Felony ibid. 174 Sheriffs Courts regulated 149. Election of Sheriffs 55. Farm
of the County 98. continuance in service ibid. Extortion ibid. Soldiers, vide
War. Staple 42, etc. 111 Star Chamber 19, etc. 141 Stealers of Men and Women
Felony 174 Supremacy, Supreme Head 120. certainly not Absolute or Arbitrary
power, nor a Legislative power 166, etc. Supreme Governor 159. in causes
Ecclesiastical ibid. etc. in Temporal ibid.
T.
TEnths, and First Fruits 130 Torniament 63 Tunnage and Poundage 110 Trade 38,
111 Treason 45, etc. by Thoughts, by Marriage, and counterfeiture 149, 150.
tried where the King will 151. Petty Treason 55.
W.
WAles subdued by Henry the Fourth 69. United to the English Crown by Henry the
Eighth 141 War by advice of Parliament 58, 102. Levying of men 59, 103, 145,
167. Jurati and obligati ad arma, taken away 57. Arming of men ibid. 167.
Conduct to their Rendezvous 59. Running from their Colors ibid. 63, 172.
plunder satisfied 58. Their pay 103, 148, 169. Offensive and Defensive 167
Watches enquired into by Justices of the Peace 101 Wickliff 37 Wills probate 90
Witchcraft made Felony 150, 174.
FINIS.

