Some Flashes of LIGHTNINGS OF THE SON of MAN.

Being the substance of eleaven Sermons upon several Texts, Preached in London;

By WILLIAM SEDGWICK of ELY.

PSALM 97.4. His Lightnings enlightened the World: the Earth saw, and trembled.
LONDON Printed by H. For Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the sign of the
black-spread- Eagle at the west end of Paul's. 1648.

A PREPARATORY word, touching the Saints union with God; a main point spoken of
in this Book.
FIrst, Primun in unoquoque generi e^ causa reliquorum.
The first in every kind being the Cause of all the rest, there is no perfect
Causa ^eflendi e^ causa cognoscendi
knowledge of inferior or subordinate distinction and union, without the
knowledge of the supreme. The supreme distinction and union is to be seen in
God, in the blessed Trinity; where in the word, the Father brings forth himself
in all distinction; and in the Holy ghost, the Father and the word mutually
conspire into the closest union. The glory of unity is variety, and the glory
of distinction is union. (ie) The glory of the Father is the word, and the
perfection of the word, is his union with the Father in the Spirit. Unity is
barren without variety or distinction, and distinction is a withered branch
without union.

Secondly, Whatsoever things the Father does, the same things does also the
Son; bringing forth his fulness in all variety and distinction; and yet
retaining the same in perfect Union with himself as does the Father. Only with
this difference, that the Object of distinction there (viz. The word, which is
the fullness of the Father) is entirely the object of union in the Holy ghost;
though not under the same respect as he is distinct. But here the Son sends
forth one World, or the first World as a Lord to his left hand, being in union
with it only as a Creator; and a new World to his right hand; slaying the union
of the f^irst covenant or creation, or rather perfecting it in this later and
better union of the second covenant, or new creation: And so that different
respect that the Father has to his own fullness, as He considers it first in
the word, and then in the Holy Ghost is manifest to us (after a manner) more
real and substantial to us, in the Kingdom of the Son, being exemplified on
different subjects, Sheep and Goats. For this is the honor the Father has
given to the Son that be has made Him both Lord and Christ, as be is Lord,
he is the Flower of the whole Creation, having all that beauty and strength in
himself and being the root and original of it to every other creature. As he
is Christ, Himself is returned to his Head and Original, and possesses all in
the in-created glory, and draws up the new world thither.

Thirdly, And as the first is the Cause of all the rest, which being known, the
rest are known, and not perfectly till then, So the first is the last, as will
nessessarily follow from thence; If the last be not known without the first,
then at least, the first is in the last: But the first is the last; For what
else should the first seek to bring forth Vltimately but himself? And
therefore, though God do Embroyder his appearances and coming forth with all
Variety and fulness of distinction, Yet his design is by ALL to declare
Himself, and not to be veiled always: His design is to beget and draw forth
his own Form in and upon all this variety; to bring forth himself in it, and it
in himself; and yet this Variety and Unity to remain in the highest Consistency
each with other in the Union; and all these subordinations both to serve
Supreamacy and to be Supreme; the first to be the last, and the last first,
which is the mutual glory of them both. And so the Scriptures speak, 2 Ephe.
last verse, Ye are the habitation of God through the Spirit. And sometimes
they speak in the language of the subordinate, 3. Ephesians. 17. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by faith. Christ is in God, and God is in Christ, John
13.8. know thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. And they
that do not so know God and Christ, they know Christ after the flesh, as a
branch of the first creation, and not as the root of both creations. And they
that do not know themselves thus, as dwelling in God and God in them, are still
under the Law; stick in the first Covenant, and know not the Regeration but
weakly. If ye see not the blessed face of Unity drawn throughout all
distinction in God, in Christ, in Saints, ye see the Devil and an Antichrist,
and are in the smoke of the bottomless pit; though yet ye may be the children
of God. And therefore none may so securely descend into the valley of
distinction, as they that have been in the mount of Union: For they only will,
and can carry the Union along with them through all distinction, and that glory
of the first Unity, that has seated himself and dwells in their Eye, will bring
forth himself in and upon all things, and in what various forms soever they
present themselves.

Union is the interest, the delight, the Food of Saints: Distinction, is the
sauce, or savor of Union. The Saints could not enjoy God, if He were not one
with them: and where were the delight, and wherein should they be the richer by
enjoying him, if he were not another from them? There could not be such a
ravishing Concord and meeting between God and the Creature, without the parting
and discord, first, of a created and un-created nature, and this discord and
distance proceeding and let down through many subordinations (as between a Base
and Treble in Music there are middle Notes) If we were not so low, and God so
high, neither should we be so transported with this Match; nor would the
condescension of God be so manifested, and then where would be one of the
greatest glories of Gods love, and one of the quickest grounds of our joy?
Therefore we cannot confound things, for so we should offend against our own
interest: and who do this so much, as they that call themselves Christians,
and yet make Christ in Heaven, and themselves upon the Earth, confounding the
things that God has not only distinguist, but separated; even the mystery of
Godliness, which is God manifest in the flesh, And the mystery of iniquity,
which calls Christians, and denies the Anointing?

And as we cannot confound things that God has distinguist, so we cannot
separate the things that himself has joined: who has joined himself and
Christ, and Christ and US; the highest, with the lowest; the first, with the
last; the top, with the bottom; and therefore we the lowest, cannot glory in
less or lower, then the highest of all. We joy in God (says the Apostle Romans
5.) through our Lord Jesus Christ. And God who is Lord, descends, and gathers
up the very lowest things, even our flesh: makes the place of his feet
glorious: will lose nothing: is present with the lowest things as well as with
the highest; though not after the same manner, or in the same manifestation,
while they abide in their Iownes: but he will raise the lowest to the highest;
and the lowest shall be in the highest, and the higest in the lowest: the whole
creation in Man, and Man in Christ, and Christ in God. The Rule therefore for
things is this. To retain the distinction in the union, and the union in all
distictions. And the Rule that God leads Saints by is this, to lissen to God as
he brings forth himself within them: to rejoice in each degree of his light;
waiting still till be Fashion every formlesse lump into its right shape; and
bring forth every imperfect Embryon to its full growth, and settle the Chaos
into its distinction: not to outrun the appearances of God, and lust or
languish impatiently after Meats, when God is establishing our hearts with
grace. I charge ye, O ye daughters of Jerusalem that ye stir not up, nor awake
my love (in his present desingnment) until he please.

But not to forget the end of this preface: It is in a word, to give a brief
account of the drift of the ensuing Discourses, and of the cause of publishing
of them.

As for the discourses you will find them pregnant with the glory of Union,
union with God and Christ, and Saints: This is the Mount into which this
Discourser has been taken, and yet ye will find the subordination and
distinction so clearly acknowledged by him, as might have satisfied the
observing and unprejudiced Reader though I had animadverted nothing upon it.

To what I have said concerning it, I shall add only this. That Distinction
is the Wife, and Union the Husband. Distinction the weakness, Union the
strength. Distinction the Law, Union the Gospel. Distinction the first
Creation, Union the second Creation: and therefore Distinction as the Woman, is
barren and un-crown'd, unless Union rest upon it: But if the supreme Unity
will multiply and bring forth Himself in and upon each distinction, in and by
Union, then indeed is distinction glorious. Distinction is as an Instrument of
ten strings, that in the hand of Union will make most delightful Melody;
otherwise it is but a jarring sound. I am sure, and have found out by
experience these two things. That while a man's head is fraught with the riches
of Distinction, leannes may enter into his soul. And that if we know a glory
higher then that we are in union with, we cannot be happy.

This for the discourses. Now for publishing them. Ye are to put this Office
wholly upon the account of the forward affections of some of the Hearers, who
out of the best notes, compared together, have drawn forth this Copy, with a
desire to impart them for a more public benefit, which invited me to prefix
this word.

If the Author, or rather he by whom these discourses be ministered to us, do
pardon the adventurers, so the Reader may receive good thereby, then there is
all the reason, that ye for whose sakes it is undertaken should pardon the
faults escaped.

For a farewell, Remember it is the finger of God only that writes God in the
heart. The writings of men are but a witness of God in flesh. Thus I leave it
with you who am,

Yours all of ye that are the Lords. Joshua Sprigge.

THE TITLES and Texts of the several Sermons.
Sermon I. and II. THe Reign of God, on Psalm 97.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. verses.
Sermon III. The coming of the King of Zion. on Zechariah, 9.9. Sermon IIII, and
V. The coming of the Kingdom of Cod. Luke 17.20, 21, 22. Sermon VI, and VII.
The excellency of the love of Cod. on Psalm 36.7, 8. Sermon VIII. God the head
of Christ, as Christ of his Church. on 1 Cor. 9, 10, 11. Sermon IX, X, XI. The
Witnesses death and Resurrection. In a short exposition of the eleventh Chap.
of the Revelation.
To the Reader.
Friend,
THese Sermons did abruptly press into the world in the Pulpit, and gave us no
warning at all: they are Abortives, borne before their time; and therefore you
can expect little shape or comeliness in them. They are sudden and lively
actings of the Spirit that disdaines the help of Art: and dare profess their
incomposednesse to study; and choose a Rude nakedness of their own before a
clothing of humane industry.

They have stolen into the Press also without my knowledge and in my absence:
Coming to Town I find them where I looked not for them, Printed and ready to
come out; and thought wholly to have disowned them, but finding some sweetness
in them, I could not wholly turn my back upon them.

Being thus, thou will say, I spoke what I understood not. I may confess that;
and that the Writer and Printer put forth what they understood not: let it be
so, and then you will not wonder if you read what you understand not: there
were faults in Speaker, Writer, Printer, and will be in the Reader.

It Is a Thief steals out in the night and carries night upon him; and if thou
find him plundering thee of thy reason and understanding, use him as thou
please.

It Is like all the World, a ruinous heap; light and darkness fighting together.
Yet they that have love and light to see God in every thing, will meet him here
in clouds and rejoice in him.

It Is a cry at midnight, Behold the Bridgroome comes: Haste and disorder may
best suit such an occasion: and if thou understand but that in it, it will be
both profitable and pleasant to thee. I am sure to him that loves The appearing
of the Lord, the tidings of it will be welcome from any man, and in any
fashion; But if thy spirit be not yet awakened to expect the Lord, I am
persuaded here is so much light in these as to trouble thee, and alittle to
disturb thy worldly rest: and if I do but disquiet thee at this time, it will
be a kindness to thee.

In a most rich enjoyment of his gracious presence, and certain assurance of
his perfect fulness, do I rejoice; and in this joy I desire thou may
enjoy thy self; and then, this and every thing will be sweet unto thee; In
this farewell.

WILL. SEDGWICK.

READOR.
If thou resolvest to travel through these discourses thou shall do well to
facilitate thy way, by removing these rubs with thy (...) before hand; As for
other litteral fa^^^, the Printer presumes upon thy pardon of course.

Page 15. line 10. for no, read not. p. 39. l. 23. de. which. p. 101. l. 7. de.
and. p. 105. l. 12. r. Christ's. p. 112. l. 24. r. crowned. p. 118. l. 18. r.
that what. p. 132. l5. ad, is far better. p. 141. l. 9. r. wears away, p. 146.
l. 14. r. imbody. l. 28. ad how. p. 147. ad as men. p. 148. l. 4. de. As. p.
194. l. 1. r. forty two months. p. 206. l. 2. r. this creation. p. 234. l.
18. r. their own. p. 240. l. 24. r. while. p. 267. l. 29. for Spirit r. sixth.
p. 282. l. 18. for bouble r. double.

THE REIGN OF GOD.
PSALM 97.1, 2. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice: let the multitude of
Isles be glad thereof.

Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of his Throne.


Here Is good news; glad tidings: [ The Lord reigns.] It cannot be published
without praise, without rejoicing, without singing without blessing. We should
dishonor this truth, if we should not publish it; if we should with silence
suppress it; if we should not speak well of it. It is so sweet and
comfortable, that it fills the whole world with joy; and calls in every ear, and
every tongue, and every heart, to be glad, to rejoice, and to praise God.

[ Let the Earth rejoice, and the multitude of the Isles be glad]

As though he should say, Let nothing fear but hell: let nothing be disquieted
but devils. Let the lowest, the poorest of the People of God, though but Earth,
yet let them rejoice in this; [ The Lord Reigneth]

First, Here is the thing affirmed. The Lord reigneth]

Secondly, Here is the use of it, or the inference that is made from it. [ Let
the Earth rejoice, and the multitude of Isles be glad]

Thirdly, Here is the means by which he ascends into the Throne. [Clouds and
darkness are round about him]

First, Here is a plain and certain Proposition affirmed, [ The Lord Reigneh]
The Lord says it, and the Lord is it. What ever the Lord says, it is a
Kingdom: what ever he is, he is a Kingdom.

Men have Reigned; and when men Reign, God Reigns to by men: and it was always
true, That all the Kingdoms of the Earth were the Lords and his Christ's: and
so all the Kings of the Earth, have been the Reign of God in figure: God has
Reigned in them, as in types; but that which we must now affirm, and which the
Lord affirms, is the immediate Reign of God: such as that is which is
expressed, Rev. 11. Thou who wast, art, and art to come: have taken to thee thy
great power, and have Reigned. God did Reign invisibly, while men Reigned.
visibly; or God Reigned, because he gave Reign to others: but as there is his
Reign in giving, so there is his Reign in taking. Thou have taken to thee thy
great power.

The Lord takes Reign, and Kingdom, and Power, into himself: he takes off the
Crown from the heads of Princes, and sets it on his own head. It was adminstred
before by instruments; now God administers power immediately by himself. The
other Reign was a less, this the great Reign.

Have taken to thee thy great power. The greatest Power that ever the Lord gave
to men, is nothing, to that power which Christ will put forth, when he Reigns
himself. And observe the companion of this power: When thou reignest, the
Nations are angry. When God Reigns, the devil rages: when God comes to set up
his power; there is wrath and violence in the minds of the men of the world:
and when you see this violence and rage in the minds of the men of the world,
it is a sure sign, that God has taken the Kingdom, Power and strength from
them.

Here Is two things of very sweet consideration,

1. The Reign of the Lord: and

2. The Reign of the Lord in the Saints.

First, This Kingdom that God is now setting up, is his everlasting Kingdom.
It will not be administered by the weakness of man, but by the power of God;
not by the folly of man, but by the judgment of God. God will in this
Kingdom, nakedly manifest his own righteousness, his own compassion and
pity; his own love, his own peace: He will do all things immediately by his
own self. And therefore all the pride and ambition, all the oppression and
tyranny, and miscarriages that has been in the government of men, shall be
wholly taken away. Pure righteousness, and judgment, and equity shall be
infallibly dispensed; and infinite power, strength, holiness, goodness, and
authority, shall shine forth nakedly in the face of God: and that shall be, the
Judge of all men.

We shall no longer be abused and oppressed, by the will of men, by the lusts
of men. The poor people shall no longer groan, under the burden of men's lusts,
nor sweat for the pleasure and contents of men; nor their faces any longer be
ground, by the hardness of the spirit of men: but they shall be under the
protection of God.

The great cry now of the people, is, Let Us have a King! Ye shall have one, one
that will reign in righteousness; the LORD himself.

Secondly, And this Reign of the Lord shall be in his Saints; according to that
in Dan. 7.27. And the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most high, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions
shall serve and obey him. As this kingdom shall be administered in the glory of
God: so also in the sweetness and gentleness of man, by brethren, by friends,
by the Saints of the most High. God lifting up himself in the Saints, will
administer this Reign; and as he will do it by the Saints, so he will do it by
the softness and tenderness of the Saints, The kingdom and dominion under
the whole earth, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High.
It^ now doing; that ye shall obey none but the Lord; ye shall know no other
laws, but the Law of God; ye shall know no other Master but Jehovah. He has
made us Priests and Kings, and we shall reign with him on earth. This nature of
ours, this body of ours, shall reign with Christ, with God, and that upon earth.

The Lord reigns The Lord has served, has been hitherto much (yea mostly) in
the form of a servant. It has been, as it were, the business of the Lord,
whilst this world stood, to give supplies to men; to serve men; to give men
strength, and wisdom, and riches, and authority, and power, that men might be
great and happy, with the goodness of God: and (in this) God has been King
too, but in an under way; As says the Lord, I have served with your sins,
and lusts: now he will no longer serve but Reign.

God will take all the Power and Authority into his own hands. He will not be
any longer under men: but above all men.

Its time He should be so: Its reason He should be so: Its just He should be
so.

Every thing now must bow, stoop and submit, to the Law, and rule, and will of
God. No man shall any longer say, it shall be so, because it is my will to have
it so: there shall not be found an heart, or tongue, that shall move against
the Dominion of the Lord.

Satan has been a Prince; he has made Laws of your captivity and misery:
He has kept you to his task, to do him service. He has said, Be angry; and
then you have been full of rage. He has said, Be covetous; and then you have
been full of covetousness. He has said, Be Dark; and then you have been
full of blindness. He has said, Be proud; and then ye have been full of
haughtiness. And so he has (but by Divine will) tormented the world.

The sting of Satan's whips are in your consciences I know. His errors and
mistakes, have been in the kingdom of darkness in you, that you do not know
God; the holy will of God. You would come into the enjoyment of God; Satan will
not let you: you would know God; he will not suffer you: You would be wise
unto Salvation; he will not permit you: He has fettered you with his chains
of darkness; he has captivated your judgments; he has made you to grind
at his mill, and to drudge in his service; and has made you to cry-out, O when
will the Lord come! But now his wicked Reign is at an end; what ye had, ye
shall want; and what ye want, ye shall have: what has been, shall not be;
that which shall be, must be; and cannot choose but be: ye shall have Love,
because the Law of God is Love; and ye shall have peace, because the Kingdom
of God is peace; and ye shall have light, because this Inheritance is
Marvelous light: ye shall have righteousness, because this state is true
holiness: ye shall have liberty, setlednesse, stability, and every good thing
in this Kingdom of God.

Its always ill with us, while Satan reigns; Its always well with us, while
God Reigns: when our Husband is King, we shall have Preferment, and honor,
and riches, and greatness, and power, and authority; because our God Reigns.

The Lord Reigns, for us; the Lord takes his Kingdom, and it is for us: the
Lord has Reigned in himself all this while; now he Reigns by us: the Lord
counts himself not to have a Kingdom, till We have it with him: The Lord
thinks himself mean, and despised, till We are exalted. He is poor without
US. He is weak, while absent from US. He is not himself, unless he enjoyes
US. Thou art my Excellency, my Firstborne: The power of God is in weakness,
till We become almighty. The Kingdom of God is in darkness, till We shine it
forth. The treasures of God were of no worth to Him, if We were not his richest
jewels.

The Lord does Reign This is not to be passed by; its in the present tense.
This is the Song that we hear, and see Angels sing. The Elders and Saints in
Heaven sing it perpetually; we daily hear it. Hallelujah, Hallelujah, The Lord
Reigns. There is administered into our hearts and ears, An Hallelujah; The
Lord Reigns: indeed every creature speaks it; all in Heaven and Earth.

All these powers and darknesses on the face of the Earth, speak out this
aloud; The Lord Reigns. Your King has taken power to himself; and from every
thing else.

The Lord does Reign] and says, I AM UPON MY THRONE. I AM GREAT. NONE IS GREAT
BUT MY SELF. I AM KING: I HAVE THE SCEPTER IN MY HAND. I AM POWERFUL. NONE IS
POWERFUL BUT I.

All the power of men is broken. All the Thrones of men are shattered into
dust. All the wisdom of men is turned into folly. All the strength of men is
melted into weakness and water.

The meltings and moulderings away of the powers and dignities of the world,
speaks it aloud, The LORD Reigns]

-- Let the Earth rejoice, and the multitude of the Isles be glad This Reign
torments none but wickedness, and wicked men. The devil and his children may be
dismayed: but let Heaven and Earth rejoice. The Heavens they do rejoice. All
Saints, all Angels, Christ and all his members, they sing in this Kingdom. But
that is not enough, that Heaven shall rejoice; but Earth too. Poor Adam! That Is
his name, Earth! Poor man! poor earthy man! low Earth! The lowest of the
creation; the basest and meanest of the whole world: Poor dark Earth: Let this
creation which is Earth, let it rejoice. Let men and women and children,
relations, and comforts, estates; all the things of this World; Religion,
worship, gifts, trading, dealing, eating, drinking, let all these things
rejoice.

Object. Why, must not all these things be done away that God may Reign?

The evil of them shall be done away; the sinfulness, the baseness, and
filthiness of them, shall be done away: the corruption, the vanity, the
infirmity of them shall be done away: but this Earth must not be lost. The
Kingdom of God must be established in this Earth: but the ways of men, and
men, so far as they are acted by the devil, so far they shall be done away, and
destroyed by the breath of the Lord; be burnt up by the fire and Spirit of the
Lord. As they are in emnity with God; as they shut out God; as they are below
God; as they do not own and acknowledge God, so they shall be done away: And
they shall all be taken up into fellowship with God; purified, and sanctified,
and restored. Every thing shall be brought up into the holiness of God, the
nature of God, the being of God, the Spirit of God. Therefore let the Earth
rejoice.

Its good news for the poorest creature that dwells in darkness; that lives
below; that are strangers from Heaven; that dwell at a great distance from God.

You that live below in the world, in the meanest or lowest condition, rejoice.
God is come to dwell amongst you: God is come to restore you; to make you all
new. A new Heaven and a new Earth: and nothing shall be troubled but the Sea:
The confusion of the devil, that shall roar, be vexed and tormented: but the
low, poor, simple Earth: The mean Earth: whatsoever is pure Earth; those whose
hearts are not set against God and Christ: so far as there is submission to the
Lord, and subjection to God. If ye are not fierce, violent, and mad against the
appearing of a holy God, rejoice, though ye be never so low. But if ye
quarrel with God, or are angry with him, ye cannot rejoice, That the Lord
should Reign.

-- Let the multitude of the Isles rejoyce] There is a continent of Earth, and
there are Isles that are naturally divided from the firm land, by water. They
are in a lower, a weaker condition, then firm Land. And so here is a fuller
discovery of the poor people of God, that be as the multitude of Isles
separated by the Sea, from the firm land.

As Isles are divided from fellowship with the firm land, by Sea, and cannot
pass to it without danger: so there are people that are at a distance from
God, that are cut off from that firmnes and stability that others have in the
Lord; the Land of the living. There are divisions between them and God; and
they are broken one from another, by the Sea of darkness, that is in their
world: Broken in their understandings; broken in their apprehensions; broken in
their peace; broken in their strength; broken in their joys; broken in their
ways; and they float in the Sea, and waters of fears, cares; disquietnesses
are round about them, and beat upon them, that know not how to have fellowship
with God in a settled state. Yet, Let the multitude of the Isles be glad.

Indeed all the states of the Earth are broken in pieces, by floods and
inundations: And therefore let the multitude of the Isles be glad.

It is the Kingdom of the Lord that makes you to be Isles. It is the flood of
the Spirit of God that divides you, from that stability and firmness that ye
had.

The Isles shall hear the Word of the LORD: The divided and broken state and
condition of men, shall hear the word of the LORD. Those persons that are at
the greatest distance from God; from constant trading and dealing with God; let
them be glad and rejoice. It is the LORD has broken US off from the Earth:
from that stability and firmnes that we had in our selves, that we might have
it in himself; that so he might make US a new Kingdom: He has divided US from
the Land, that He might plant himself a Kingdom in US; that He might make many
Kingdoms for his own glory and righteousness to dwell in.

Neither is this without respect to a litterall sense: This Reign of God,
first, begins in Isles, it rises up in little Isles, before it appears in the
great Empires of the world. God will appear first in these lowest parts of the
Earth.

-- Let the multitude of the Isles rejoyce] Let the whole bundle of Isles,
England, Scotland and Ireland, rejoice: Let the multitude of Isles be glad.

It is visibly and sensibly, a time of the greatest sadness that ever was; but
really and truly, and in a spiritual sense, it is a time of the greatest joy
and gladness that ever was: To see things in the Lord is the time of the
greatest rejoicing, and truest gladness.

This is the time of the LORDS Reign, and the time of Englands rejoicing: If
England knew her own time, but we know no^ our seasons; and this is it that
makes us uncomfortable and unsuitable to our conditions, The Lord Reigns, and
this is the greatest cause of mirth and joy that ever the earth had.

[Let the earth rejoyce] Poor earth has been in bondage and captivity, but now
let the earth rejoice. We have been under the protection of men, yea, under the
government of Satan (for so long as we are governed by any thing at a distance
from God; there is a mixture of Satan in it) now we are under the protection of
God, The Lord has broken the rod of the oppressor. And now we shall have the
end of our hopes and expectations; the end of our prayers, now we shall have
peace, now we shall have settlement and stability, now we shall have
Reformation indeed, now we shall have every thing that we have desired, and our
hearts have longed for; freedom from oppression, love, quietness,
righteousness, justice, propriety, full trade, all in an heavenly, holy,
glorious, righteous, spiritual, eternal, sure, everlasting way; for this
kingdom of God has in it, all greatness, fullness, freeness, riches, pomp,
state, goodness; and to this end it is said, -- He shall come that is the
desire of all Nations.

Therefore sit down, and say what you will have: If you will have it in God, in
an heavenly way, ye shall; but if in a way of flesh, and darkness, and fear
(out of the pure light of God) ye shall not.

[Clouds and darkness are round about him] God that is the greatest light,
dwells in thick darkness; God is surrounded with darkness. And this is your
joy now, that in that darkness that ye see upon the face of the Earth, ye see
God dwelling in it; and your selves with him. While you are without it; its
sad. Do but come in through this darkness, and there is light within it; The
light of God; And these Clouds of darkness, are clouds of Witnesses, that
manifest and testify the presence of the Lord.

-- Christ comes in the clouds] O how visible these clouds are now to the eye
of reason! What a thick cloud hangs over the City! What a gross thick cloud
hangs over the Parliament! What a black, dark cloud hangs over the Army!
There Is none of them can see where they are; what they do; or one another: The
clouds are so thick that one neighbor or friend knows not another: can not
trust one another. What a cloud is there in the Country! How these clouds do
gather every where! If you will not see, you may be ignorant; but if ye will
see, the Lord is in these clouds. What darknesses and clouds of opinions are
there in the spirits of men! What strange darkness there is in the minds of men!
Most men grope and feel after God: and truly there are none can set a right
step toward him. What dark affections are there in man! Dark fear, dark
anger, dark disquietnesse and confusion?

Clouds and darkness are round about him] Every where, where God is not, you
will find clouds and darkness; but in the face of God, there you shall see
glory and brightness. There is nothing to be seen but clouds in all things,
save in the face of God; and there it is bright and clear day. God gathering in
all fair weather, light and brightness into himself: So that indeed, if you
will live any where but in God, you must live in clouds and darkness: Every
where else there is not a beam of light, but every thing grows thicker and
darker, till it come to a very hell, an eternal night: only there is light in
the face of God.

Yet now rejoyce] These clouds are round about God; and though you do not see
him, because ye are in the dark, yet he is near you, and he dwells secretly and
sweetly in the midst of these clouds, that shade and darken all the earth: and
you shall find that God will suddenly step up into his throne, and reign in
light and brightness. Will you not receive God in a cloud? Are ye not
contented with a cloud of darkness, that so ye may meet with God there? God
comes clothed in this darkness. God comes in a cloudy day, with fire, wasting
and consuming all the world; yet O who would not leap into those flames to meet
God? Be not startled at these dark clouds, because God is in them, but rejoice.
Let these clouds come into your estates, houses, means and enjoyments: Let them
come in, for God is there: Welcome them, rejoice in them, and be comforted, for
God rides upon them: He rides in triumph upon them. These clouds are his
Gharriot, and all the powers of the Kings of the Earth, he beats into dust,
and it flies about him; therefore go and meet the Lord in these clouds and
dusts.

Righteousness and judgment are the Habitation of his Throne. Through clouds
and darkness you approach the throne; Righteousness and judgment are there:
That is it you look for.

-- Righteousnesse] Shall put an end to sin. Dan. 9.24. Righteousness and
holiness shall dwell so stabilly with us, as it shall blot out all iniquity,
and make an end of sin: That wretched thing that has been the reason of all
plagues, the root of all mischief, the ground of vexation in all families; he
shall make an end of all this, of all sin; God will be revenged of it, by
putting an end to it: Ye shall not find a sin out of hell, nor a sinner out
of hell: Sin shall be in its own place; ye shall see wickedness no where, but
in the devil and wicked men; and them ye shall see in hell, for their sin shall
carry hell apparently with it. But the Saints shall be free, The LORD reigns]
Not so long as sin is amongst US, and abides with US: so long as sin is,
there is a Traitor to his Kingdom, and he has no quiet reign: But the LORD
will have a constant habitation of holiness, that sin shall appear no where
but in the devil and hell. And where ever you shall see sin, you shall be able
to say, There is hell; sin and its torment together. Sin shall carry hell in
its bowels. The very face of hell and devil in every sin. The light of God
shall break forth so clearly, that it will judge and manifest all the works of
darkness.

Are the Habitation of his Throne] All these ways of God that he is now
dispensing come from the throne of God. All these Clouds and judgments,
against King, Parliament, Cavaleers, Army, they al flow from the throne, and
are all dispensed in most exact righteousness and judgment, there is no fear
of ruin, of those that are the Lords. All is in judgment and righteousness,
to destroy the wicked, but to save his own people, and to bring them out of the
powers of darkness unto the throne of God.

There is no reason to be offended at that which comes from the throne of God:
these dispensations are confusions to men, to the reason and wisdom of men:
but they are the wisdom and judgment of God; and God does dispense them with
an exact hand, with a watchful eye, with a tender care toward his own people;
not a hair of their head shall fall to the ground: Nothing shall suffer in any
of you, but unrighteousness and sin: so far as you are unrighteous,
worldly and wicked, so far yea shall suffer, and no more.

God is in every spark of this Fire, in every corner of this Flame, in every
inch of these clouds, in every jot of this darkness; therefore rejoice and be
glad all ye Saints, the weakest, the poorest, the lowest, the meanest of
Saints, Rejoice, for the Lord Reigns.

The end of the first Sermon.
Psalm 97. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. verses. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice:
let the multitude of Isles be glad thereof.

Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of his throne.

A fire goes before him: and burns up his enemies round about.

His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled.

The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the
Lord of the whole earth.

The heavens declare his righteousness: and all the people see his glory.


THe great point we have in hand, is, The Reign of God.

Which is first asserted, The Lord does Reign. And then made good.

In the Second verse, Clouds and darkness are round about him] testifying that
he is come, and he does Reign. We have a Cloud of witnesses testifying this
truth; The Lord does Reign. And darkness it self speaks him. That which is
farthest from him, that declares him: and if we come within him, and come
nearer to him, we shall find a consent of righteousness and judgment, as the
habitation of his Throne.

Righteousnes] The righteousness of God the Father in whom all things are
righteous, and to whom all things in righteousness does belong; all things in
righteousness are in him; all things in righteousness are due to him: here is
judgment too: that is the excellency of Christ, Psalm 94.15. Judgment shall
return to righteousness; the Son returns to the Father.

All things are in the Father in righteousness: all things are in the Son in
wisdom, in judgment: all things are in the Father, as in their proper center:
all things are brought forth in Christ, in their right order, in Judgment.

Righteousness and judgment, are the habitation of his Throne.] These two are
the Foundation of his Throne.

The Spirit of God, or God exalted and lifted up in these two, Righteousness
and Judgment; is a Throne: or the Righteousness of the Father; and the
Judgment of the Son exalted, and triumphing in the Spirit: is the Throne.

The Righteousness of the Father, and the Wisdom of the Son, Reigns in the
Spirit; is in-thron'd in the Spirit; is exalted and lifted up, and established
eternally in truth, in the Spirit. And we are made, says the Apostle, Ephesians.
2.22. ver. through the Spirit, the habitation of God; the words are, In whom
ye also are builded an habitation of God, through the Spirit.

The Spirit building up man in its own holy form, and enlarging of him into
himself, is this habitation of God: Righteousness and Judgment In-thron'd in
US: In man: this is the inward and spiritual view and sight of God: if you
stand without in the world, there is darkness; if ye come higher into the
clouds, there is no clear view, sight, and enjoyment of him. If ye are in any
thing that is about him, there is nothing but darkness round about him; but
come within him; into his Throne; into his presence; and there you will see
righteousness and judgment set up, exalted, In-throu'd.

Righteousness in the Reign of God, is In-thron'd. Iniquity and transgression
is done away, in the holiness of God: and he makes us, by his own Reign in us,
holy, as he is holy.

He does wholly blot out Iniquity; and makes US the seat and habitation of
Righteousness: and gives us righteous judgments; righteous understandings; a
clear and sound judgment in all things. These two, righteousness and
judgment, raised and exalted, are the greatest glory, and purity of the
Kingdom of God, in the holy Spirit.

But here are yet further testimonies, that (it may be) will be more
effectual to most Christians: most men being without; those proofs of the
Reign of God, that are without, are foonest, and easiest accepted: fleshly
signs, much take fleshly Christians.

A Fire goes before him, and burns up his enemies round about him] The
forerunner of God Now is fire: not John the Baptist, that went before the
flesh, of Christ, and ushered him in; but an Elias, in a Fiery Chariot. The
messengers that go before God now, are all fiery: he makes his Angels
spirits, and his ministers flames of fire. And therefore its said, he comes in
flames of fire rendering vengeance to all that know him not.

And this fire of God is not a material, but an Angelical fire. Those gross
conceits of a material fire, are chafe, and must themselves be burnt up.

The fire that Ushers in the holy God, and goes before God, is like himself;
Spiritual, Heavenly. The (...) that men dream of, is like unto themselves,
earthly, gross, fleshly: but the fire of God is like himself; spiritual,
heavenly.

Now, this testimony does the Lord send before him; abundance of fire: this
fire of God, and indignation of God, is kindled, and burns hot amongst us; we
see there is no earthly thing is able to stand against it; and although we see
yet, but the feet of God (we know he has not yet let down his face into
your view) yet ye may see (as Habakkuk says) Coals of fire kindled at his
feet.

The LORD is walking amongst you; trampling with fiery indignation, upon all
the excellency, beauty, and strength of this Creation; filling all things under
his feet with wrath; burning up the Order, the peace, the comfort, and joy of
the whole creation into ashes.

And the fire of hell, which is Confusion, Wrath, Death, torment, horror,
breaks forth exceeding thick, and fast upon the World: and it burns up
Nations, Kingdoms, Cities, Governments, Religions, Ordinances, Knowledge,
Peace, Love, and every thing here below.

Its more then b^ndled, it flames-out: and you will see very suddenly this whole
Creation nothing else but one flame; burning up that which goes before it.

These burnings, these everlasting burnings, speak the presence of the LORD,
the face of God; and tells the World, If they will hear and understand the LORD
is come; they do eminently publish and proclaim the LORD of glory, to those
that are awake; they that are asleep in security and darkness, they hear it
not.

These are the fires that God allarmes the World with all, and burns up his
enemies round about: wheresoever there appears emnity against God, there
appears fire; that indeed being the greatest part of Hell. Wrath against God,
and Gods wrath against men: emnity and hatred against God, and God hating
wicked men and devils: So that indeed there is no emnity but did we understand
it, we should see plainly that its hell; it is fire; and the discovery and
breaking forth of it, will consume and burn up the World. There Is not a mouth
belching out Oaths or blasphemies against God, but it is kindled by this fire
of hell. There Is no man expressing rage, envy and cruelty against another, but
it is from this fire of hell in them: His tongue is set one fire of hell:
passion, infirmity, weakness, do for a while hide, cloth and mask hell, and
wrath: but hell is too hot and too big to be kept any longer in such bounds: God
loosens the bounds of hell, and says to them. Now go forth, show your selves.
God bring forth his own wrath in his own enemies, as well as his love in his
friends.

There is not an enemy of God, but the fire of God has already kindled upon
him. There Is not a devil in hell, nor a wickedness in the mind of man (which is
hellish) but begins to gnaw their tongues, and to fret and vex and feel their
torments! And though people are not fully sensible of it; yet those who are
quicker sighted then others, may see and easily smell the brimstone, and taste
the saltness of hell, breaking forth in the rage and violence of man. And this
fire burns up the wicked into the fire of Gods wrath, even as fire burns up
all that is in it, until it has made it to be fire.

And this fire of God, that is already kindled upon US, will never leave
burning, till it has burnt US all up into it self; into Heaven; into the pure
divine Love of God; so that there shall remain no dross at all, but all pure
gold; no rag of infirmity, weakness, or earthinesse, shall be left in us.

And the same God in wrath, will so burn up all his enemies, that they shall be
nothing at all but pure wrath: nothing at all but perfect misery; nothing at
all but utter destruction. There shall not remain upon the Saints of God any
thing on Earth to molest them: All their enemies shall be burnt up; sin, Satan,
and flesh, shall be cast into the Lake of fire; and there shall be nothing to
molest or hinder their joy. And so much of the wrath of God shall fall upon
wicked men, that there shall not be, The least drop of water to cool their
tongues; the least refreshment, the least mitigation; but all they shall have
or enjoy shall be in the fire of Gods wrath burnt up.

-- Burns up his enemies round about him. This wall of fire, is called in
Scripture, Our defense; it compasses US about on every side. The holy, pure
being of God; the Holy Ghost and fire compasses US round about, and burns up
all things into it self; that whatsoever has been our enemies or adversaries,
sin, Satan, flesh, man; we see this fire of the Spirit of God feeds upon them,
is in them, and keeps them at a distance from US, and they cannot approach and
come near US, We living in the LORD our God; but this fire of God lays hold on
them, and destroies them: Nay, they cannot approach in any malice against US,
but its clear, it is in Gods wrath: We do not hear a word of Anger, nor a word
of distaste that is uttered against the appearance of God in US, but it is this
fire of Gods wrath: this We are sure of; and We delight and rejoice in it; We
delight to declare it abroad, That there shall not be left a heart thinking, a
hand moving, a tongue speaking, but it is in the fire of God, in the wrath and
displeasure of the LORD.

This fire does grow and increase, and burns up round about; and all that are
not in God; that do not dwell with this everlasting burnings; that live not in
and with God; shall be consumed and burnt up: for this fire of God burns round
about him: and whosoever is not within Him, shall be consumed and burnt up by
Him. Therefore there is no rest, no peace, no safety, any where else, but in
this everlasting burnings, in this fire of God: in the LORD: in the presence of
the LORD: This is a bright and hot testimony of the Reign of God.

-- His lightenings enlightened the world, the earth saw it and trembled. Here Is
another testimony manifest to the world, the lightenings of the LORD our God:
there is in the face of God, in the day of the LORD; a most constant bright
shining light.

But besides this, there is a distance from him, and in the world lightenings,
certain quick flashings, sudden motions of the Spirit of God upon the world,
in the world; and upon the minds of worldly men: and as it is said of Christ,
speaking concerning his coming, That it is like the lightening that shines
from the East to the West, so should the coming of the Son of man be.

The first, and the remotest, and the furthest appearances of God, are like
lightenings: this the Lord has testified abundantly amongst Us: What strange
flashings of God have been upon men, and upon the spirits of men? There are few
that have slept so soundly these times, but this lightening has broken in upon
them into their beds betwixt their curtains: There Is none have shut up
themselves so close in the world; locked up themselves so close in the earth,
and in the love of earthly things: but I know these lightenings of God have
flasht in their consciences, and have in small, quick blasts and discoveries of
God, told their hearts, it is the day of the Lord. I say, if men could see, or
would see, the most worldly men have had some flashings of these lightnings
upon them. Many sudden, quick throws, pangs, hot meltings, breakings,
soul-terrifyings; telling them clearly, It is the LORD: And though they recover
again out of them; and the world heales it self again: and makes haste to
forget them (because these lightenings are sudden and quick: suddenly opening
themselves, and suddenly again enclosing themselves: for God has suddenly
flasht Himself forth, and suddenly extinguished Himself again) yet God has to
all men more or less, given enlightnings into their spirits; telling them
plainly, they must give an account that He is come to judge them; that He is
come to exalt and lift up Himself: that the end of their world, their profits
and pleasure is come: That all their earthly comforts and contents are a dying:
That there is no rest or peace to be had here below. These and such like
motions, have been in the minds of many men. But especially these have bin in
the hearts and spirits of Gods own people; though they are in the world, and
though in a worldly state, and at a great distance from God: yet they have had
some glances of the light of God. I know your own spirits are able to lead you
to those flashings and lightenings: And if ye are not quite drunk with the
world, and have not lost your reason and memory, you must acknowledge, that the
lightenings of God have shined upon you, and enlightened the world.

-- And the earth saw it and trembled]

So visible, so manifest, are the lightnings of the Lord, that poor earthly man
exceedingly trembles and quakes: poor man, Adam, earth, the poor earthy frame
of man has seen and trembled; The earth saw and trembled. you have seen the
Lord, though I know there is that in you that says ye have not, you do not. I
know you have seen the Lord; the earth has seen; God has set His feet upon
the earth; all the earth have had a view of God; there is never a door at which
God has not knocked: every eye shall see Him; although when they see him, they
turn away from him, and would forget him; for so soon as ever the door is
opened, and they see the Lord, they run away from him, and cannot endure the
sight of him.

Amongst all the things of the world, its most dreadful and and terrible, to
see the lightnings of God.

I know ye had rather run into the hottest fire, then into the fire of God:
and though ye have seen; ye say ye have not; because ye have no mind to see
him: but the whole earth has seen the Lord; though they have been sudden
startings, and quick motions, and flashings: yet the earth saw it: And that it
has seen; here is the effect, it trembles.

-- And trembled]

Its a constant, universal effect of the sight of God; this quaking, this
trembling; there is no man has the least view of God, but it strikes death to
him. Oh man! earthly man must die. This sight kills man. Oh now I must seace to
be! Now all is going! Now all is lost? Now every thing is drawing into the sad
pit of destruction! Now every thing is swallowed up into the horrible pit of
nothingnesse! I have (says the earthly man) seen, and known, and been: but
now I shall know, and see, and be no more.

We know how dreadful and fearful, the view, and sight of God is! and though
nothing more joyful to the spiritual man; yet nothing more joyful to the
earthly man! What shall we do, we have seen the Lord, said they that saw an
Angel The Lord clothing himself with an Angel, was very terrible; for they
said, we shall dye. The appearance of the Lord is terrible to the flesh of man.

The mountains leap and fly away, the waters roll back, the foundations of
the deep are discovered. The whole Earth shakes! A general Earthquake seizes
upon the Nations! What ail you, ye mountains to be removed? What ail you, ye
waters, to divide asunder? What all you, ye Son, and Moon, that your lights
are put out? What ail you, ye Stars, great and small, that ye drop down from
Heaven, like untimely Figgs? What ail you, all ye People and Languages, that
your Faces gather palenesse, and blackness? What ail you, that ye are afraid,
and do tremble? What Is the reason you so shiver, and quake? The reason is, ye
are before the God of the whole Earth.

The presence of the LORD, is present Death to all but Himself: when the LORD
comes, every thing retires: and as he comes near; so all things Fly packing
before Him! The Rod of God, is shaking over the hearts of men; which makes them
exceedingly to tremble and quake! and if ye will not yet be sensible; here is
that which is more visible, more sensible: he that has an ear, must Hear,
and does Hear, what this Rod speaks.

-- The Hills melted]

Suppose there should be that stoutnesse in the spirits of men, that they are
become like mountains and hills: suppose that there should be that hardness,
and brauninesse of hell and death upon the spirits of men, that they will not
see: yet the hills do melt! The hills melted like waxe]

If any Creature be upheld and strengthened, it is by Satan; like Pharaoh's
heart, that was hardened by the wrath of God, that he might be destroyed.

I know no man ignorant of this, but it is through his suffering the Devil to
seduce him: but though a man be seduced by Satan; hardened by hell; and do not
see: yet the mountains do see, and feels, and melt before the LORD.

Hills, Mountains, What are these? Not material mountains, or material hills:
the mountains of the Earth, are Great-ones, Strong-ones, Kingdoms, Nations,
Governments; these are Great mountains, which the men of the Earth (ye may
call them the beasts of the Earth) have continually lived upon; fed upon, and
been nourished by.

And those Churches that have called themselves the hills and mountains of the
LORD; mount Sinay, and mount Sion; these everlasting hills, that have stood so
long time, shall melt.

That Justice, Wisdom, Power, Strength, Order, Religion, Ordinances,
Obedience, and Love, which has been set up by God, and by the Ministers and
Angels of God; which have been the safety, peace, and comfort of the World;
these hills will melt like wax: Those glorious Angelical Excellencies; those
Excellent good things, that Angels have produced in the world, and which are
nearer to God, then Poor, base man.

WISDOM, KNOWLEDGE, UNDERSTANDING, JUSTICE, ORDER, GOVERNMENT, these Hills melt
like wax! There is not an Angel in Heaven able to maintain any of his works.

Those excellent hills, before spoken of, melt down before the brightness of
the LORD: And though man will not see; yet the mountains and hills, upon which
they live, sink under them; Secretly, and unsensibly do the mountains of all
humane confidence melt under them!

There is a fearful desolation of all the Powers and strength of the world:
And those High exaltations of them, how they melt away! How low does the high
spirits of men fall! How does our strength and confidence, and that staff which
we leaned upon, waste and consume away! And in what a deep consumption are all
the good things of the world!

-- Melted like wax]

The glory of man, or man refined (as we may say) is like wax. The LORD makes
poor earth, fine Images of Himself in wax! He does set up, and draws poor
Earth in some likeness to Himself! Gives him His own Image, Wisdom, Justice,
Holiness: But when he comes Himself, He then melts this picture, melts these
Images. And therefore where humane strength is in its greatest power exalting
it self, in it greatest height: It now appears, what it is to be Earth; to be
wax; and when God in his glory and brightness appears, it gives place to the
heat of God, to the fire of God: That which as yet ye have seen of God, is but
waxen Images of God; and God has hitherto upheld them by his absence; but now,
because he comes, they go, they give place.

-- Like wax at the presence of the LORD]

Man would be, if God were not present: You would enjoy whatsoever you enjoy,
if the presence of the LORD did not melt it away; if the light of God did not
come, if a greater light did not outshine this Creation, The Sun would not be
turned into darkness, nor the Moon into blood. If the presence of the LORD the
Son of righteousness, did not rise, it would be still the day of man: nothing
would destroy the glory of the world: Satan has bin at the work a great
while; he has been hacking at it to bring the world to confusion; and the men
of the world have been digging at the root of the world, and would fain
over-turn it; though they would fain keep it for themselves: but it has stood
till now, and now it melts; now the presence of the LORD shall cause it to melt
away; Rev. 20.11. At whose face the Earth and Heavens fled away, and there was
no place found for them. Kingdoms, Powers, Governments, Dignities,
Righteousness, Justice, and all at this appearance of the LORD, say, Come lets
go into confusion and darkness; for here is a light come, that confumes us;
our work is done; we were to give a representation of God, till He came; and
now He is come, there is no more place for us: There is no place for Images
and Pictures, where God is: Where the brightness and majesty of God comes, no
place for man! no place for creatures! no place for worldly and earthly things!
The majesty, brightness, and glory of the LORD cannot endure them, nor they it;
but GOD sits them flying, and they themselves hasten away.

-- At the presence of the LORD of the whole Earth]

It is the presence of the LORD: nothing but the presence of the LORD; it is
the LORD Himself; the LORD Himself in His own presence: It is My own Face
(says the LORD of the whole Earth) the Earth I made My footstool; it has had
some print of My feet; and as it has served Me, in its being till I came: so
now, it serves Me in its departing. The earth is Mine, I made it; its Mine, I
disolve it: I am LORD of all these things; by My presence, I gave them a being!
by a greater presence, I dissolve them! They obeyed Me in their being: they
obey Me in their not being. I by My Word brought them out of confusion, out of
nothing, and now they obey My Word, in returning to that emptines and confusion
again! They served Me, when I brought them forth; they serve Me, at their
return: Satan has had the Earth, he shall have it no longer: Men have had the
Earth, they shall possess it no longer (says the Lord) I will possess it My
self: I will enjoy it My self: I will redeem it from that bondage it has bin
in by wicked and ungodly men and Satan. I am LORD of the whole earth.

Here are quick, short, dark, low, remote hints of God, of the presence of God:
but if ye are not yet sensible of it, come up higher and further, and you
shall have a clear Discovery.

-- The Heavens declare the righteousness of God, and all people see his glory]

Come to the open heavens, creep out of the earth of worldly affairs and
businesses, and come into the open state of Heaven, and you shall see the
righteousness of God declared; the heavenly discovery of God, the Spirit of
the LORD, and the true presence of the LORD are so visible, that all the people
that are therein do see the glory of God.

For truly, if you be men, you are there in this heaven; otherwise you are not
worthy the name of men, but beasts: In heaven the righteousness of God is so
fully declared, that there is no question to be made of it; its so openly, so
fully discovered, so largely declared, that there is nothing else done, nothing
else spoken of, but the Kingdom, righteousness, and glory of God: and all the
people, and all the spiritual people that have got out of their fetters, their
banishments, that are got home to their own places: See this glory of God.

The most earthly craatures, have some heart-meltings, breakings, shakings,
terrors, troubles upon their spirits, by the appearing of God; by the
lightnings and enlightnings of God; this fire of God: but those who are
heavened into the spirit of God, who are awaked into the true life of God,
where the righteousness and glory of God are openly discovered; where there is
a full declaration of things, as they are in themselves; they clearly and
manifestly see the glory of God, Beholding with open face the glory of God, and
are changed into the same image from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the LORD.

The end of the second Sermon.
THE COMING OF THE KING of ZION.
Zechariah 9.9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of
Jerusalem: Behold thy King comes unto thee: he is just, and having salvation,
lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a colt, the fool of an Ass.


ZION, has long suffered; but must be delivered: Zion has long mourned: but
we have here a Voice, that turns our mournings into joy: A Voice so powerful,
so effectual, that does indeed cause sighings, and sorrows to flee away:
eternal and everlasting joy, says, Rejoice: A Fountain of joy, filling US
with joy, says, rejoice! Joy it self, speaks it self in US, and says,
Rejoice! I would not have you be troubled any longer! I shall not be satisfied,
til I have wiped all tears from your eyes! So long as you sigh, you wound and
pierce my heart! I cannot be merry my self, till my Spouse do rejoice with me!
So long as you are afflicted, I mourn; and your mirth, is my rejoicing!
Therefore come, let us rejoice together! Let Us sing together! Let Me be the
matter of Thy joy! Knowing Me, Thou can not but rejoice! I know nothing
troubles you but the absence of GOD. And there is no grief but this, That GOD
is absent. Nothing displeases you, but that GOD does not Reign. Nothing can
disquiet a Saint but this, That GOD is not exalted: And therefore you shall be
eased of your sadest thoughts, and greatest perplexities: and Ye shall see
that which will abundantly comfort you; Ye shall see your King; Ye shall see
the LORD Reign: This Reign shall be in you. Thy King comes unto thee]

Our God knows our troubles, and knows how to apply a remedy: He knows what
mounds US; to see sin and Satan, lifting up their heads so high: to see the
honor of our God in the dust: to see this, that Christ is crucified: to see
that we are any thing but GOD: this is our sorrow; this is our mourning: and
our God comes to US, and removes this sadness.

Indeed we will not rejoice, till we see our KING; we refuse to be comforted,
because We are not: Rachel mourning for her children, refusing to be comforted,
because they were not. We will renounce all comforts without the presence of a
God: We will not rejoice: but in this Joy: and yet in obedience to this voice,
to this Lord, we cannot but rejoice: We have all joy in speaking; We rejoice at
the heart, with joy unspeakable and full of glory: We are full of the glory of
God; and therefore We rejoice greatly.

-- Rejoice Greatly]

Every thing in US must rejoice in God: every thing must be satisfied and filled
with joy: there is no true mirth, except it be universal mirth; universal
satisfaction: if every part be not filled; the whole cannot be pleased, if we
have not all Joy; but if our God gives US all Joy, it is so great, as to fill
US every one; and fill every one full. This joy and rejoicing, is the Infinite
End, and Answer of fulness: and when God does fill us full; the Rebound of
this fulness, is joy. The Lord filling us so with Himself, that we return
back again into himself; filling us so full, that we flow out: this is our
joy, when we have so much as we can hold no more: when we are weary of
r^ceiving; pouring back to Him, that gave us all. This is our JOY, and
Rejoyceing.

So long as there is a defect and want, we cannot rejoice: til all are
completely satisfied. Indeed all Heavenly joy is great; has a greatness and
glory and Majesty in it: we are never so awful and terrible to our enemies, as
when we are singing and rejoicing: we are mighty, strong, and powerful in joy:
the joy of God makes US to be Great persons: Eminent persons! and our joy is
heightened, and does daily rise higher and higher; it grows continually fuller
and fuller: and the Spirit of the LORD does screw us, and wind us up to the
highest note of joy: great, HIGH and Excellent joy.

It pleases thee, Oh Lord our GOD, to hear our voices lifted up! Oh how it
pleases the Lord to have a Triumphing joy in US; as that we should wholly
forget all sorrow: that we should be even wild, and drunk with joy; that
we should even forget our selves, in great rejoicing!

Rejoice greatly; leap, dance and sing greatly! Lets have the largest of your
hearts; the largest of your affections; and we will fill them with joy: do
not live like low, mean, and base persons: but Great persons, in the greatest
height! Not the joy of Common Men, or Common Creatures: but the highest joy,
the fullest joy: Rejoice greatly!

-- O Daughter of Zion]

The Affections, and love of God, makes us rejoice. And finding God a heart
full of love, makes US to have hearts full of joy: to hear God break forth in
expressions of love, makes us break forth in expressions of joy: when he cries,
Oh my love! then we do sing with joy: and when he is in pain to deliver
Himself into us; to deliver us into Himself, then do we rejoice: when We
find our God ravished with love, taken and enamoured with us, Oh Daughter! We
cannot but rejoice, when we see great love; large expressions of the favor of
our God: then we are well pleased.

-- O Daughter of Zion]

What a sweet Name is this! It shows our relation, though at a distance from
him: it shows our tenderness and weakness; yet the delight and pleasure that
the Lord our Husband, takes to us, and in us.

Zion is the mountain of GOD: Mount Zion, the mountain of the LORD; and we are
the Daughter of this mountain; the Daughter of the LORD. Take it as in a
generation removed; and the further we are removed from God, the more need have
we of consolation, and the greater love.

The heavenly state of the Church of Jesus Christ in the Apostles, ye know is
called, mount Zion; Ye are come to mount Zion, to Jerusalem, the City of the
living God. GOD dwelling with His people in a manifestation of his own Spirit
and presence, is, mount Zion: Jesus Christ exalted in the resurrection, and His
people walking with Him, and in Him, is mount Zion; and the poor Saints of God
at this time, are but the daughter of this: in the purest and best estate, it
is but the daughter of Zion, dwelling with the daughter of Babylon; the
daughter of Zion in captivity.

The uttermost that you have, and enjoy, and know of God, it is but that
Gospel-state removed, or something that the Spirit of the LORD begets in you,
in some proportion and sutablenes unto the state that Christ and his Apostles
had.

That uttermost Spirit of the LORD, forming in you, and begetting in you
something of Himself, and of His own grace, that has (though in weakness and
infirmity) some likeness to that state the Church lived in in the primitive
times; and that is, I acknowledge and confess the daughter of that, the
daughter of that faith, the daughter of that love, the daughter of that Gospel,
and the daughter of that presence of God; though in infirmity and weakness a
child, and that a female, and in captivity in Babylon: None has this state
and condition pure and perfect, but mingled with darkness and weakness, with
much Antichristianisme.

This we own, there is some similitude and likeness of the state, which was
in deed and in truth in the primitive times, a child of it, a daughter of it,
amongst the Saints of God now.

Ye have not Zion, but a daughter of it; and ye are not Zion, but a daughter, a
generation descended from Zion, or Zion descended; a daughter of a Church in
weakness and in infirmity, in captivity: and this message unto you is, Rejoice
greatly.

To the poor, low, weak, infirm Saints of God in bondage and captivity; they
are the daughter of Zion, the beloved of God, owned to be the seed of Zion, the
children of Zion: and when ye shall be nourished and fed with the bread of
life, and the milk of the Word, ye will grow up to be Zion: but as yet ye are
tender, weak, feeble; weak vessels, subject to be spoild, tempted, carried
away by the deceits of Satan, by the vanities of the world; yet tenderly
beloved, and much affected by God, owned and acknowledged by Him to be His own
seed, His own children, bearing the Image of the heavenly Zion, and having the
nature of the mountain of God in You; and are indeed (though in extreme
weakness and infirmity) the seat, and habitation, and the rest of God:
Therefore, Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion! and ye are not only called to
rejoicing, but also to shouting.

-- Shout]

Your language you know is poor, weak, broken, feeble; the most that is heard
amongst you, is vain disputes, Genealogies, boastings and gloryings in the
spirit of Antichrist; humane and fleshly wisdom, exalting and glorying in it
self: but a savoury, sound and spiritual voice, is much in fears, doubts,
demands in asking questions (by people in the wilderness) Which is the way to
Zion? How shall we do to know God? Just like one that is blind, asks which is
my friend, which is God? How shall I know God from Satan, Christ from
Antichrist? How shall we do to understand the voice of the LORD? Here Is a
low, poor, mean voice; How is it? What shall we do? How shall we live? And
what shall we do to get this and that? And what is the matter? These and such
kind of questions, demands, complaints, are the voice that is here amongst
you: but ye are called to shouting, shout, shout, let us hear the voice of God
amongst you; the voice of a King. Israel shouted, Balaam prophesied, That the
shout of a King was in the midst of them. The King is in you, the King is with
you, and in you in victory; triumphing in the meanest and lowest state and
condition. Ye may see by the Spirit of the LORD and faith, the mighty power of
God; there is with us, and in us, the fullness of God: all wisdom, all
righteousness, all certainty, all good, conquering all evil, all joy, removing
all sadness, all sin taken away, therefore shout: Turn your complaints into
triumphs: turn your demands and questions into liftings up the heart and
spirit, and rejoice in such acclamations as these: I have found; I am; I enjoy
Kingdom, glory, life; Christ, and every thing that is good. Shout; speak out,
speak aloud, in the name of the LORD, and say, Ye are the children of the
living God; say, God lives in you. Let Us hear it aloud, speak boldly,
confidently; open your hearts largely, and say, Christ is in you: I have Him; I
am with Him; He is in me; I am in Him; here He is; He dwells in me; I am His
Temple; I see Him now; I see the LORD my Savior, I have heard of Him with the
hearing of the ear, but now mine eyes see Him: I have Him: I enjoy Him.

-- Shout O daughter of Jerusalem]

Though the daughter of Zion, and in weakness and lownes, yet the mountain of
God; begotten by God, and though as yet in infirmity, descended from heaven,
yet the daughter of Jerusalem, and the City of God, though very poor, and very
weak; yet this is the state and condition of the daughter of Jerusalem; that
is, the Jerusalem that is descended from above, Come down from heaven. The
glorious state of the Church, in which are twelve foundations of the twelve
Apostles; twelve gates, and twelve Angels, all of precious stones, all of
pearls, all of pure gold transparent as glass, all righteousness, beauty,
glory: all this is in us, and We are the daughter of it: all the glory, and all
the excellency of Jesus Christ, and all his Apostles and Prophets are borne and
brought forth in us: all the beauty, glory and excellency of Jesus Christ; of
all the Saints, Prophets, Apostles and Angels are brought forth in us: thou art
the daughter of it, the daughter of Jerusalem: a little Epitome of the heavenly
Jerusalem, a low and little child, and a babe of the heavenly Jerusalem; and
when thou growest up to know thy self, and what thou art, thou shall be the
mother of us all; and the mother of all the riches of God: thou art as (I may
say) Christened: and in this day of the LORD, called by this name, the
habitation and riches of all the fulness of the LORD; the place where the
infinite Deity, the divine excellency, delights to fix, to settle, to live;
this is thy state; thou art that building that is not made with hands, that is
eternal in the heavens, the daughter of it: and when thou shall grow up in the
name and strength of the LORD, then will thou appear to be the Zion and
Jerusalem of God. O what need thou have now of great joy! How should thy heart
be enlarged, when thou art the seat and habitation of all the glory and
excellency of God, that ever shined forth in all the Saints, Prophets, and
Apostles, and Angels! All this joy, glory, and excellencies, must come forth
from thee, must be Produced from thee, must be enlarged in thee. O then what
cause have thou to rejoice, and to shout greatly!

-- Behold thy King comes unto thee]

This Scripture has been fulfilled once, in the first appearing of the Lord
Christ, (when there was great joy in Jerusalem at his triumphant riding through
Jerusalem upon an Ass; the multitude of people spread their garments in the
way; and others cut down branches of trees, and strewed in the way, crying,
and saying, Hosannah to the Son of David; Blessed is he that comes in the
Name of the LORD, Hosannah in the Highest) And its now fullfiling the Second
time, by the Second appearing of the Lord; by the Second and GREAT appearing of
our Jesus: by the coming of the Son of God: not in infirmity and weakness; but
in the Majesty and Power of the Father; in the Kingdom and Power of God: and
therefore, Behold it! Look out for it: Look out of your bondage and captivity:
Look forth of your fears, and dark and troubled thoughts: See who is here:
Open your Everlasting doors: stand open ye Everlasting gates: Open your
everlasting eyes: Open your spiritual eyes: Look up: Look up, O ye lights of
God, Behold the KING of eternal glory! Arise, Awake and stand up out of your
carnal, humane and fleshly state, into your heavenly and spiritual light; and
see here: (What Is here?) -- Behold thy King comes unto thee!

-- Behold thy King]

Thou poor afflicted Zion; Thy Lord is a KING! Thy light is a KING! Thou shall
see this: Behold and see the KING in his glory! Jesus Christ glorified: thou
shall see Jesus Christ upon his Throne! Come see the Majesty of your Savior:
see him made KING! He that a long time has bin subject to the emnity of Satan,
and the world in you: Now He is setting His feet upon Satan: see Him, whom men
hated and despised, exalted upon the Throne! Come and be acquainted with a
glorious Christ: Come and see the Reign of your Savior: see Him in His Highest
Kinglinesse, Lordlinesse! see Him taking His great Reign! He will now take His
great Reign; He has Reigned in infirmity and weakness: He will Reign (now) in
power: He Reign's Greatly, Mightily! I know this will make your hearts rejoice;
and nothing but this.

I know you will never see good days, until ye see the KING upon His Throne:
till you see Christ upon THE Throne: and you will never see shouting, and
rejoyceing, til you see your KING, your Own KING: KING Jesus, KING Christ,
upon the Throne: til ye see Him whom ye love: til ye come to see Jesus Christ
Your LORD, Your Savior; that died for You; that has bin dead in you, living
in you; quickening you, and doing whatsoeve He will, in Heaven and Earth.

He has been called a King; but now He will be a KING indeed: you have said,
He has bin a King at a distance; but He will be a KING come; Reigning here:
Come see, A KING comes to Thee; Reigning in Thee; manifesting Power, and
Glory, and Majesty in us, with us.

What joy can it be to us, if our KING reign elsewhere, and be Enslaved in us,
Captived in us? No, but He comes to Reign in Thee, poor man; He comes unto
Thee, poor Daughter of Zion! He comes, He comes, says the Psalmist, (
Psalm. 96. last ver.) to judge the earth: He shall judge the world with
righteousness, and the People with His truth: He comes; He comes; He makes
haste; He is already mounted into His Chariot; He has got up already; He is
not here, he is Risen; He is free from the grave; He is ascended: He Rides
upon the wings of the wind: He is in the Clouds, hasting Mightily to US: and
you shall see Him, and enjoy Him; and He comes to be with thee; He shall reign,
and thou shall reign with Him, and sit upon His Throne: You shall enjoy His
great power; and Reign with Him.

He comes to man, poor man; and make^ man a King: He comes to Thee, to glorify
Thee; to fill thee with Royalty; to make Thee a KING. He does not speak
righteousness and comfort to thee, if he do not speak this; He comes to thee;
Thou shall live the life of a KING: and thou shall have the power of God and
Christ; All power in Heaven and Earth.

-- He is just, having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Asse]

The first thing is, that we shall see him in his Justice. He will slay all his
enemies: He is just, holy and righteous; a holy God: He has the very extremity
of Justice: He will not spare one: there shall not a wicked one stand before
him: He will severely punish his enemies: fear it not: the sword of justice is
in his hand, and its extreme sharp: He will take away all filthiness, and
filthy things; all iniquity and wickedness. Justice is the habitation of his
Throne. Nothing but pure justice shall dwell with our LORD: He will give to
every man according to his works; so shall they receive at the hands of our
KING: the hypocrite shall have a hipocrites portion: and the unbeliever, an
unbelievers portion: the proud shall be brought down: the poor shall be lifted
up: the low, exalted: the high, laid in the dust: men, evil men, wicked men,
shall be slain; shall be plagued with the vengeance of the Lord.

The holy men, heavenly men, shall be raised and restored: Who are righteous,
shall be known: Who are wicked, shall be discovered: there shall be a just
and righteous administration of all things: all the Goats shall be cul'd out
from the Sheep; and the Sheep from the Goats: and though the Saints are with
wicked men, and dwell together; yet they shall be set at a wide difference:
Come ye blessed: Go ye cursed: and the Righteous and Holy-ones, shall be
Highly Exalted, to the Highest Heavens: and the evil and good that so cleaves
to you, shall be perfectly drawn forth, the Gold from the Dross; and be
refined with the exact Justice of Jesus Christ; so that nothing that is holy and
good, shall be lost; and nothing that is evil and wicked, shall be saved: Every
thing that is holy, shall be saved: just, just to a hair.

None of the elect shall be lost; and none of the wicked saved. No evil shall
remain to trouble our good any longer: the righteous shall be rewarded, the
wicked punished by exact Justice: we shall be Just in Christ; He shall make US
Just; and He shall do Justice to all the flesh, and all the power of the flesh,
and the strength of the flesh, and the wisdom of the flesh; He shall likewise
do Justice to God: God shall have all the honor that is due to Him: Just
honor, Just praise, Just wisdom; and His Enemies shall be Justly plagued.

-- And having Salvation]

Ye shall be saved by Justice: ye shall be saved with Vengeance: If the Lord
Jesus be not Just, He cannot be a Savior: but He is perfectly Just; therefore
a perfect Savior: If He were not Violent against iniquity, He could not save:
If he were not an implacaple enemy to flesh, sin, Satan: if flesh, sin and
wickedness, could possibly deceive the eyes of Justice, we could not be saved
by Him: If any iniquity could hide it self from his eyes, we should never be
saved: If he were not Just for to pull down all wickedness, all
antichristianisme, there could be no Salvation: but this is your KING; this is
your Savior; one who is free from Iniquity and Sin: one who is just, and
having Salvation.

-- And having salvation]

People now a-daies talk much of a King, and much is spoken every day of a
King: but yet ye are not saved; here is no salvation appears: but here is a King
that has salvation; ye shall be saved: Salvation is heaven, glory, redemption,
deliverance; to be in a state and condition where we are safe from sin; safe
from trouble, safe from enemies, within and without; ye shall have justice done
too:yea Justice done against your enemies; and ye shall be advanced up into
salvation, made safe, all saved in Justice. His name is a Savior: He saves
Israel from their sins: from all our enemies, from all that hate us: having
Christ, we have salvation: and our Lord has salvation the height of salvation;
glory, the height of glory; so also He is very lowly. And that particularly
take notice of the meekness and lowliness of our King, our Lord, our Savior:
This high and lofty One, this King is very lowly, very meek, very mean, very
poor; though a King, though Lord of all.

And these two cannot consist in the thoughts of man, that he should be a King,
and yet very lowly. The narrow heart of man cannot match these two together;
the highest of glory, in the lowest of man: but though man cannot reach this,
God can: He dwells with poor, low, broken man: The greatest glory in the
highest Majesty, lives in the brokenest spirits; and you will find and see the
LORD breaking forth, shining forth in those that are the lowest of people;
those whose wisdom is dashed in pieces; those who have lost their strength and
confidence, their Religion, their form of knowledge and worship; that are
fallen (as some maliciously say) from grace: they had thought they had had some
knowledge and acquaintance of God, but now they see they know nothing: they
thought they were in a safe state and condition, but now they see they are in a
wilderness, in a desolate, barren estate: they had something, but now they are
nothing.

Thy King comes to thee in this low estate, in this darkness, in this
nothingnes; Thy King comes, and has humbled Himself in that state and
condition, and delights to take up His residence in thee: He comes to thee, as
a thief, having stolen away the riches and treasures in the house, goes and
lives in a poor cottage: So the LORD has stolen away the glory and greatness
of the creature, and then chooses it for his Habitation, and then lives in
lowness, in meannesse; a lowly Lord hears the King. I see the LORD (says the
Soul) in emptiness, in nothingnesse, in weakness, and infirmity: Behold,
What Is here? A Mighty GOD, a Mighty KING, clothed in rags! One that has all
things, and yet ye hear nothing but complaints: Possessing all things, and yet
poor and begging His bread: The LORD of Glory, and yet in pitiful infirmity,
in a mean, low estate, and none regards Him: This is the pleasure of the LORD;
This is Thy good will, Oh LORD!

-- Riding upon an Asse]

It was once fulfilled in a grosser way; in a more literal way; now we find
the Lord in His Second Coming, fulfilling of it in a more Spiritual way.

An Ass is the dullest of all the creatures; the slowest, dullest, basest
creature: and that by which we express fools; a creature of scorn and
contempt; and it was that creature, which in and under the Law, was refused; it
might not be Sacrificed: the Law would not be satisfied with it: the Law was
so choice, so wise (as I may say) as it would not accept of an Ass: yet this
the LORD Chooses of all other Creatures: This is the lowliness of My LORD, to
come in such a Mean state and condition, upon a dull, heavy, poor, scorned
and contemptible Beast: Riding upon, exalting Himself upon a Poor despicable
creature; the worst of Creatures; dull, heavy, slow, beastly, poor, mean, and
low Creatures: These the KING OF GLORY makes use of; and not of the High,
Stout, Lofty Horses: You shall have some that are very quick, nimble and light
of foot; highly carried up in the excellencies of the letter, knowledge,
professions and forms; and now they are as lofty as Horses; and can be leaping
from text to text, from truth to truth, and out-runne, and run round, a poor,
dull and heavy Christian: and knowledge has so puffed them up, that a poor,
mean, low Christian is refused, despised, and scorned at.

But these are not they which the LORD Chooses: but it is such as are in a low,
mean, and dull way: The wisdom of the LORD is condemned, rejected, and
refused, by the wisdom of the World; and its counted foolishness: But the
Lord will Ride; will be Exalted in the poor, mean, low despicable things of the
world.

-- Riding upon an Asse]

Me thinks Christ should choose a better beast, says the Law, we will not
accept of him; and says the letter, we will not accept of an Ass: Does not the
Scripture say plainly, we will not have an Ass? But the Lord Christ chooses to
come to such as are despised; and in such a way, as the Law rejects, and as the
letter disownes; and as men contemnes.

-- And upon a Colt, the foale of an Asse]

An Ass, an ignoble Beast: and upon a Colt too, The foal of an Ass; the
weakest of that poor creature: the foal; the Colt, sets forth the weakness,
insufficiency, indiscretion and foolishness. The foal of an Ass, is simpler
then the Ass it self: The poor creature that has no discretion; no judgment;
no understanding of things: so simple, that he knows nothing; understands
nothing; is not acquainted with any thing: to these Christ comes.

We looked for Christ to come in another way then so mean, so low; we now a
days look for great things: Signs, Miracles, Wonders, Professions,
Ordinances, Ravishments, Astonishments; such as may take up our affections,
wisdoms, and judgments: This was the manner of the Jews; they refused
Christ's in lowness, and would not accept of him in such a mean estate: even
so, the Jewish estate in our days, is not forwarn'd by their fall, to lie down
and be humbled: but this Jew does in a more mystery of iniquity oppose,
refuse, and reject Christ.

Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Zion; shout O Daughter of Jerusalem; for,
Behold thy King, thy Lord, thy Savior comes to Thee; is with Thee; in Thee,
Riding upon an Asse] -- He has the Highest of Severity and Justice, Glory and
Power, in the lowest state, in the meanest condition: He comes, Riding upon an
Asse] -- His way, though disallowed, disapproved of by legal perfection, and
looked upon by humane wisdom, to be simple and foolish; yet, Behold thy King
comes; having justice, and salvation: Come rejoice greatly!

He that will not take Christ upon an Ass, shall never receive him. Thou that
wilt not let him in, coming in a low, mean estate, shall never enjoy him: This
is the way My Lord chooses to come. I choose this state: I Ride in a simple,
foolish way; disregarded, disesteemed, despised by the wisdom of the world and
by the strength of man: yet I am thy King, thy Lord, thy God, thy Savior: and
having Justice, and Salvation.

The end of the third Sermon.
THE COMING OF THE KINGDOM of GOD.
LUKE 17.20, 21, 22. And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the
kingdom of God should come, he answered them, and said, The kingdom of God
comes not with observation.

Neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there: for behold, the kingdom of God
is within you, etc.


THis Scripture is proposed to be opened; wherein we find the Pharisees and
Disciples, all enquiring concerning The kingdom of God. A parallel Scripture
with this, is that in Mat. 24.3. A little of the appearing of God in Jesus
Christ, makes both Disciples and Pharisees enquire after the Kingdom of God:
and you may observe how the Pharisees as well as the Disciples are enquiring
after heavenly things.

We are troubled with the perverseness of the Pharisees, as well as the
weakness of the Disciples; the Pharisee is most in question; they that are
highest in their own conceits, and most confident of their own wisdom, do
most abound in proposing questions, do most desire to grow in notions;
Therefore it is not every one that asks shall have, nor every one that seeks shall
find, but he that asks aright, We shall find no question, but we may see a
Pharisee in it, though withal a Disciple.

The enquiry is after the kingdom of God. While it was present with them, they
were in dispute and question concerning it; Christ tells them, The kingdom
of God is within you; it was in him, it was in them; It Is in me, it is in you, and
yet ye enquire after it: therefore there is no question but there is unbelief,
there is darkness: Take away unbelief, and darkness, and emnity against the
kingdom of God, and ye shall see nothing, but the kingdom of God: For there is
nothing but the kingdom of God, that shines from East to West; and while every
man questions it, and proposes doubts, he shows in that what the kingdom of
God makes him, and discovers the evil and punishment of his own flesh.

But here is proud flesh, wise Pharisees, asking after the highest glory, The
kingdom of God.

While flesh is up in questioning, the kingdom of God is trampled upon: and yet
so cunning is the flesh, that when with cruel emnity they hate and persecute,
yet with seeming zeal they enquire after the Kingdom of God: and while the LORD
says -- You are of your father the devil (you are murderers) they say, We
would fain see and enjoy the Kingdom of God.

Wretched man, while he is climbing high in his notions, in his understanding,
to search and pry into the greatest mystery of God (of God in his Kingdom) he
stands then at the greatest distance from God.

The kingdom of God is the subject of every man's discourse, the object of every
man's hatred: al men talk of it, and no man loves it; every man says, How, and
when, and where is it? how shall I know it? how may I see it, and no man can
endure it?

The Kingdom of God is the destruction of the world (so the Disciples knew)
When shall thy coming, and the end of the world be? So long as the world is,
The Kingdom is not. God reigns not, or there is a Kingdom of God in the
world, which is not THE KINGDOM, or, The Kingdom Come. This Kingdom as it
manifests it self, the world is not.

And as every man dreads (every man corrupted by Satan dreads) and hates the
end of the world, and the destruction of all things: so every man hates the
Kingdom of God. There is nothing so much flattered, nothing so much abused, as
the Kingdom of God. Men would see it and know it (because they cannot be saved
without it) but are enemies to it, because it comes with the destruction of the
flesh.

There are many now further off from the Kingdom of God then these Pharisees.
If any thing of the Kingdom of God break forth, they fly from it, they will
not endure it. This is the Kingdom of God so far as it manifests it self --
God reigning, God triumphing all in all: Where nothing is but God, nothing
lives but God, none speaks but God: Where God is upon the throne (of his own
glory) where God lives alone, speaks alone, says, I am, and there is none
besides me; When I have conquered and overcome every thing to my self, by the
brightness of my own glory, made every thing light like my self, when all
things speak me, and acknowledge me, and every thing declares me: This is my
Kingdom.

And this man hates, this man dreads, this is death, death to all the world.
This man cries out against as Blasphemy: Man can be well contented that God
should be his Pillar to bear him up, but not that God should come uppermost,
and say, I am the LORD: He can be content that God should support him in his
weakness, and give him the hopes of a Kingdom, but cannot be content that
he should be a King.

-- When the Kingdom of GOD should come]

It comes, it must come. They were not so wicked (nor is there any Pharisee so
wicked) as to say, it shall never be, but they would not have it as yet: They
love to talk of it, more then to hear it, or see it: and are great pretenders
to believing, but great opposers to view and sight. Pharisees are most
certainly concluded in faith, to believe it shall be, they care not for the
sight. The Kingdom of God is good at a distance, but hard and intolerable in
presence, because it discovers and judges good and evil, it shows men where
they are, what they are. The wretchedest Jew in the world will offer sacrifice
in token of God to come, Christ to come; though when he comes they do oppose
him, The same do men now.

-- He answered, and said unto them, The Kingdom of GOD comes not with
observation.

By that reason, that judgment whereby you would comprehend and understand
heavenly things; ye shall not. The kingdom of God is no way subject to your
observation; its not the Kingdom of God, if you could see it, if you could
observe it; you are darkness, and cannot know the light.

None can observe this Kingdom, but the Kingdom it self; when ye come to it
and enjoy it, ye shall see it: None can say this is the Kingdom, or that is
the Kingdom, or this is not the Kingdom, or that is not the Kingdom, for it
comes not with observation. It Is not to be observed by the most studious, the
most inquisitive, the most thirsting men after the knowledge of it; not by the
best reason, the clearest judgment, the largest comprehension, the most
curious speculation of man: compare times with times, seasons with seasons,
Scriptures with Scriptures; all this is but observation, and according to this
way, the Kingdom of God does not come: to say, this is not the Kingdom of
God, because it does not agree with this and with that, is to go by
observation; but The Kingdom of GOD, comes not with observation.

Wretched man, silly ignorant man, blind man, that dares subject this Kingdom
of God to his observation! But it comes not so. Men talk and babble, and argue
amongst themselves; we know this the Scripture says, and this the Word says,
and therefore the Kingdom of GOD must be so, and so (this is observation and)
by this the Pharisees rejected Christ; and by this a spiritual Pharisee, a more
subtle Pharisee, the heir of the Pharisee does daily, and continually reject
Christ.

Away then with observation: The Kingdom of God is not so mean, and so base as
to be subject to humane capacity, to men's Reasons -- Christ was this, did
this, wrought this; and therefore we expect in the second coming he should do
this, and work this, as he did then; this is the common vote of men, of reason;
-- If thou be Christ, do this, for God says this, and Christ does this:
all this is observation. Christ a Servant (indeed) comes with observation; but
Christ a LORD, comes not with observation: Christ in meannesse and lowness, is
subject to your reason; Christ in height and glory, is far above it.

Christ does the same in the Second appearance, as he did in the first; but not
with observation: not visible and manifest in the flesh; as thus, he raised the
dead, opened the Eyes of the blind, cured the lame; all this is done in his
Second appearance; but in a higher, in a heavenly way, above and beyond
observation.

Christ will not (you would have him, but he will not) come again in that Low
Mean way, subject to Observation; and so, subject to the baseness of the
Creature.

If any thing take notice of Christ, besides himself, its not Christ. He says,
That which men approve of, I will not own; that which man commends, I abhor.

The Lord will not continue in such a state and condition, wherein the Jews
shall cry Hosannah to him; But will presently pass into such a state, wherein
they shall Crucify him: He will be what the world hates.

You will find false Christ's, coming with signs and wonders, Mat. 24.24.
There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the
very elect. You shall have Christ's according to your desire (I speak to
Parisaical man, carnal fleshly man) you shall have Christ's to do what you
desire; false Christ's: and this shall be your judgment: false Christ's to show
you such signs and wonders, as you gape after: God (in judgment) has false
christ's: for false seekers, for false inquierers: This is the plague of the
flesh, it shall have what it does desire: such things as you would now be glad
to see and do inquire after, ye shall have; one that will open Scriptures, do
mighty miracles show great gifts; and yet all this but a false christ; and the
very elect, so far as is possible, shall be deceived therewith.

So long as ye live in observation, and not in the pure being of God, ye shall
be abused and deceived. Its easy for Satan to bring forth such a form, such
delusions as shall beguile and deceive, the subtilest of your observations.

-- Neither shall they say, Lo here, or Lo there]

Neither shall they say, and yet they will swear (at the 23. ver. -- They shall
say unto you, see here, see there: These two verses contradict one another;
they shall, and they shall not. They shall say, but they shall not say it
rightly: they shall speak it, but they shall be discovered to speak it falsely;
not groundedly and truly: though they shall speak it, yet they shall not be
able so to speak it, as to perform it: They shall speak it an hundred times
over; Here is Christ, now I have him, here he is, this is he; and yet they
shall quickly after, be forced to unsay it again: Oh it is not he, I thought
this was Christ, but now I see it is not; or ye shall say, but not be able to
make it good: ye shall say it with much carnal confidence; but not say it
certainly, with any stabillity or assurance.

The brightness of the shining of the LORD GOD, will out shine all false
christ's: will utterly confute, and judge all the Imaginations of men; that say,
now I have Christ; here he is, it is he, I enjoy him in this faith, I have him
in this comfort, I enjoy him in this ordinance: all this ye shall say, and ye
have said (and I know your consciences witness it in you) and by and by,
quickly after, ye (have and) shall unsay it again; and say, O I am mistaken,
I am deceived, this was not Christ; it looked like an Angel of light, but it is
not Christ, it is a delusion; I thought it was the Messiah, but it is a Judas;
I thought it was a shining-light, but it is but a Meteor; it is not what I took
it for; I was beguiled.

Most men's finding, and enjoying of Christ, it is but observation; for a while
(or time) men think, and say, they have Christ ( by observation and experience,
and the like) but they shall learn another language, they shall not say so
long: ye do (and shall) often say it, and unsay it again; I have Christ; here
is Christ: and yet this is not he.

Before the Kingdom of GOD appears, every one must have acquaintance with
false Christ's; it must be so: offenses must come, be not offended at it; ye
must be deceived; ye shall be deceived (GOD has a great design of glory in
this) ye will be, ye cannot but be deceived, til all your observation be
worn out; til ye are gone beyond observation, ye will be cozened: with much
joy ye shall say Christ is here; and then by and by unsay it again.

-- Neither shall they say, Lo here, or Lo there]

False Christ's are here described; and this is their Language -- Lo here, Lo
there, Mat. 24.23. If any man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or Lo
there; believe it not: The sum is this, Christ will be spoken by no man; no
man shall be able to Speak Christ; to say here is Christ: and if you hear any
say (any man say) here is Christ; or if you (man) say, this is Christ, or there
is Christ; that is a deluder, that is a deceiver.

Christ will be understood and known by no man, while we are man, we cannot
understand and know Christ; till we are dead and raised up into Christ, we
understand not Christ: None but Christ, can speak Christ; none but Christ can
declare Christ. Its not the Kingdom of GOD, if man be able to utter it and
declare it. Christ comes and slays, and throws off al man; and speaks himslf,
-- I AM.

-- If any man shall say to you, if man in you shall say, this is Christ, or
that is Christ, it is a liar; or if you think you hear man speak Christ, ye
are deceived. Ye shall never be free from deceit, til the Lord Jesus comes
forth and declares Himself in every one of You: I AM The LORD.

-- NO man shall say]

Let not man say, Lo here or Lo there: This is the wretchedness of man, to
be something in himself; to take part himself, and to give part to Christ; or
to say, here I AM, when HE is not, or This is Christ, when it is not Christ.
And thus every man must speak, and cannot speak otherwise.

Its the speech of some; I am in Christ, and Christ is in me: he is in
spiritual things, he is in preaching and praying; but he is not in outward
things: lo here he is, when I am wrapped up in heavenly enjoyments; but when I
am in my businesses, in my calling, I cannot say he is there: I have Christ in
me, there is something of Christ in me, he is in my spirit, there he is
spiritually, but I have flesh, and a body, there he is not. This voice is the
same with that in the Text, Lo here is Christ, and there is Christ, and here
he is not, and there he is not. To shut Christ out of any place, out of any
thing; this is to say, Lo here, or lo there; these are false Christ's.

This is the wickedness of man to include and exclude Christ, to imprison him
into one thing; to make him to be one where, and not another where; but Christ
is, and there is none besides him; he is weakness as well as strength, darkness
as well as light, evil as well as good; Christ in me, Christ in all; the LORD
in triumph, the LORD crucified, the LORD exalting, the LORD humbling, the LORD
in life, the LORD in death, the LORD saving, the LORD destroying, the the LORD
here blessing, the LORD there cursing: this is Christ: if ye cannot see him in
one thing as well as another (in wicked men as well as good men, in this death
as well as his resurrection, in lengths and depths, and breadths, and all) ye
do not see him at all.

Here Is the narrowness of the heart of every man (a sensible creature, full of
observation, and his own reason) saying, Lo here is Christ, there is Christ,
here he is not, there he is not; narrowing of him into their own
observation; he is in me, when I am so qualified, and he is not in me, when I
am not so qualified; not knowing or understanding, that he is in some,
trampled on under the feet of his enemies, and yet there in glory; in some he
is at the top, in some he is at the bottom; in some withering them; in some,
bringing forth fruit; in some, sweetning and moderating their nature; in some,
letting forth wrath and emnity.

-- For behold the Kingdom of GOD is within you]

God will be all or nothing; ye shall not think him like your selves, The
kingdom of God is within you, in every one of you. The kingdom of God is
amongst you; ye are possessours of it, it is not without ye, ye have it: while
ye are led out by your carnal reason to observe it without, it is neglected
within.

Behold, Behold (says he) the kingdom of God is within you] Heavenly
blessedness is within ye, and ye do not see it till ye see it there; If ye
had eyes to see (says he) ye would see your selves in the kingdom, and the
kingdom in you.

This is a sweet Behold, and a word of special grace and favor: Those
thoughts that lead you out of your selves for God, for Christ, believe them
not, hate them, abhor them: O lay down all those wicked imaginations, those
carnal observations, those cursed reasonings of the kingdom of God within ye.

Some men think to see the Kingdom of God coming in such and such a person;
to see the Kingdom of God coming in such and such sights and voices, these
are delusions, Behold the kingdom of Christ, the kingdom of God, the kingdom
of heaven is within you; use it as you will, deal with it as you please, but in
you it is; it is in you suppressed; it is covered over with a deal of desperate
wickedness, with a thick vail; and none knows that it is there, but it self;
there it is seen only, and enjoyed only by it self. Or give me leave to say, I
am within you, all that I speak, am, and do, is within you: all the light and
glory that I have, is within you, and ye do not understand me, if ye do not
see me within you. There is another comes between me and you, if you hear me
without you.

If ye hear not this LORD speaking within you, ye understand nothing, and so
the words that I speak they are cast into another form, before they reach
your ear; the evil one takes them from the Spirit (which is in you) and carries
them about to you, through the ear. While I speak and am understood in that
sense, I am abused and wronged. That speech that I will be understood (in and
must be understood in) is to speak in the heart within you. That life that I
live is in you, and speaks that that I speak; and I do nothing but interpret
and open, what your heart speaks.

Let me not be another from you, for then ye oppose me, and resist me, and
ye will not hear not receive the truth that I declare, which is my own heart,
my life, my bosom, my self. These are the things than are lodged and wrapped up
in my heart to eternity; these are my very soul; only I have been asleep, and
now (being awakened) I see they are all in me: If ye hear with the inward
ear, and see with the inward eye, you will say, This is not a man, but the Son
of God; This is my bosom friend, my LORD, and husband, that begins to awake
and rowse me: This is a fountain and no stream.

I do you injury if I speak of a Kingdom of God without you (that is, I my
self without you (that is I my self without you) for the true spiritual new
man is the kingdom of God; what I am indistinction from you, is an evil to you:
if your unbelieving spirits say, I am a man, and another, woe be to that
distinction; but if ye say, this is my LORD and my Father, happy is that union.

-- The kingdom of GOD is within you]

It is not without you, in Ordinances, in Scriptures: The kingdom of God. The
whole kingdom, all is in you; all Truth, all Scriptures, all Wisdom, all
Power, all Strength, all that I AM, all that God is, all that Christ is, all
that Heaven is, all that God in Reign and Kingdom is, is within you.

I hear, I see, the kingdom of God coming forth, breaking forth in every man;
and every man always is (but now begins to appear to be) what God is in him,
The Kingdom of God, either justifying or condemning, either punishing or
rewarding; punishing man and flesh with darkness, or rewarding Man with light,
glory and blessedness.

He that lives indeed, I know hears me, and smiles at this, and rejoices in
his soul: The true life, the true man, the true ear rejoices at this, and
speaks it self, That all the Power, all the Excellency of God is in me, its
with me, its not out of me, it declares it self in me; all the Majesty of
God, the Kingdom of God, All, Every thing, its here, its in this man, in this
creature, in you, within you, and reigns there, its King there, though a King
crucified, though on the Cross, yet he is King of the Jews: Though denied for
a while and opposed, yet a King, and a Kingdom.

This is the bravery and noblenes of this Kingdom, it is not lessened by
hatred, by death, its as glorious in the grave, as it is in exaltation; as
glorious in rejection and persecution, as it is in height and glory.

The Son of God, this Kingdom, it passes through lowness and meannesse, to
excellency and honor; and therefore all the reason and parts of man (in this
generation) are set against it, that this may be fulfilled -- He must suffer
many things, and be rejected of this generation.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
THE COMING OF THE KINGDOM of GOD.
LUKE 17.22. And he said unto the Desciples, The days will come when ye shall
desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it.


QUestionings Occation this Scripture.

They that are least knowing, are fullest of disputes.

They that have something to satisfy them, are least in questioning.

To the Pharisees there is a rebuke, ver. 20. The Kingdom of God comes not with
obsevation. And then a comfort, ver. 21. Behold, the Kingdom of God is within
you.

But now to the Disciples, there is a sharp sentence; The days will come, when
ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see
it.

This is spoken to them that desire to see Christ: The Disciples: You that
acknowledge Christ present with you, your Master: you that are called to an
owning and confessing Christ to be come; To you that have believed and do
believe, and have published this -- This is the Messiah: This is he whom we
looked for; To you it is spoken: for you are the Disciples.

What is a Disciple?

One that has devoted himself, and given himself to a constant, and continual
attendance upon Jesus; or, one that is separated from the world, and lives in
the family of Christ; who always is with the Lord. Then, there is a sharp
fentence to beloved Disciples.

In love to you, I could be content to conceal it, were it not love to you, to
declare it; That the days will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the
days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it.

Such tribulation, such darkness, such confusion, within and without, every
where such trials and combustions, that ye shall desire to see something of
God, something of the arm of God, of the appearance of God, and ye shall not
see it. Such floods of darkness, will be let loose upon you, and so drown all
your understandings, your senses, your experiences, your hopes, your
enjoyments, your comforts, your confidences, within and without, That ye shall
desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not be able
to see it: ye shall desire to see, and shall not see, the least spark of the
light of one of the days that ye have had.

-- The days will come] It cannot be avoided: Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, but not one tittle of my word shall fail. Nights will follow days; and
the best day that ye have ever yet seen, is not Eternal; and therefore it will
be pursued, and followed with a dark night. -- The days will come] Nothing
can withstand them. What is to come, must come, before the word of GOD can be
fulfilled.

All that ever you have known and understood, is no more able to resist them,
then a poor straw is able to resist the greatest river; or dry stubble, to
withstand fire. These days are so firmly Decreed, resolvedly Purposed, in the
Holy Conncell of God, that all that ye have and know, shall not be able to
resist it.

These things I tell you before hand, that when they come to pass, ye may
remember that I told them you -- Its appointed for man, once to die; etc. Its
appointed for your lives, the life of all that ye have and are, the life of
man to die, and come to judgment. and in these days, ye shall desire to see
one of the days of the Son of man etc.

Ye think ye see GOD, ye see Christ; the time will be, when ye shall desire to
see, and shall not; when ye shall confess ye are in the dark; when ye shall
confess ye know nothing: when ye shall not say, ye see, but ye desire to see.
People that now are very confident that they do see, and know something; it will
be manifest that they do see and know nothing.

-- YE shall desire to see] Though Disciples, yet YE shall desire to see. An
earnest hunger and thirst, shall be after the view and sight of Christ: when
you will long not to hear but to see Christ: You are now satisfied with the
report of him; that is nothing, you shall desire to see him. After all your
enjoyments, there will come a heavy thirst; a grievious parching heat and
thirst; and nothing will satisfy but this, I must see GOD, and Christ. Ye shall
be in such tribulation and desolation, that nothing but the sight of Christ
can cure you; at such a loss, that if all the gifts and comforts of men and
Angels should be presented to you, ye would throw them at your feet: and
nothing will content but This, I must see the LORD; all that has comforted you,
now will be nothing; ye will not be at peace, unless ye see the Lord Jesus;
ye will be in such a straight, that ye shall desire to see [one of the daies]
of the Son of man. Mary would see Christ, though a Crucified Christ; and would
see the Son of God, though in the grave. You will desire to see him, though in
the meanest and lowest condition. O, that I might have but one glimse of the
light of God: If he would but look through the lattis, through the keyhole;
but without sight and view of him, I can never be at rest: If I may enjoy
himself, his Own-self (though in never so small a degree) it is well.

Now ye are full, ye shall be empty; ye are rich, ye shall be poor; ye say ye
see, ye shall be made blind; ye think ye have all, and are rich and have need
of nothing, but ye shall find that ye are nothing, and have nothing.

Ye are contented new with the days of man, with the works of man; these
things make a good man; ye think ye do well, if ye do like wise men, honest
men, and holy men; this will not always satisfy you, this will not always be
desirable; that which ye now rest in, will be unsatisfactory: and ye will desire
to see, one of the days of the Son of man etc.

-- One of the days of the Son of Man] The Son of GOD, is the Son of man;
Christ borne of a woman: Jesus Christ, the Anointed of GOD, descending from
Man, springing forth from Man: This fruit of the Spirit, This Holy Child
Jesus, growing out of man.

There is first The day of man, wherein man lives, and lives upon faith, and
expectation of Christ; and lives in looking, and waiting for the Son of man,
the Son of GOD. In this state the Disciples and John were: and they that be
in this state, are (by the knowledge that they have of Jesus Christ) washed
from the polutions of the world, have fellowship and communion with Christ; are
given up ^o obedience to Christ: But this is but the day of man. What Is this if
I go Childlesse; if I may not see the Son of Man, that springs forth of man;
if I may not see the Heir brought forth; if I may not see Jesus Christ borne;
This Man Child born in to the world, I cannot be Satisfied?

-- The Son of Man] This Holy Child, is contented to acknowledge man to be
his Father, or his Mother rather; to succeed man. But when He comes forth, He
lives, and man gives place to Christ; and though in another respect he is
called the Son of man, yet He is the Son of GOD. (He is also called the Son
of man, as he is born of man, borne of the flesh, taking our nature.) This is
that the Desciples must thirst after; to see the generation of Jesus Christ; to
see the birth, and bringing forth into open view, the Son of God: shall I give
to conceive, and shall I not bring forth.

Though ye are as that Woman in the Revelation (in an excellent condition)
Gloathed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, yet she traveled to
bring forth the Son. Though ye are never so glorious, and clothed with
brightness and light, and are above the World, and above the Letter, and above
Ordinances; yet ye must Travel to bring forth the Man-child.

-- Ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and shall not.
When ye have conceived him, and have felt the Babe stirring in you, Ye shall
not be satisfied till ye have seen him brought forth. Ye shall have many
desires, and shall not attain your desires, many longings and lose your
longings; and ye shall cry and thirst, and thirst and cry so long, that ye can
cry no longer; ye shall cry till the tongue cleaves to the roof of your mouth;
ye shall be parched with thirst; ye shall be as Dives in hell, cry for a drop of
water, one drop; so here in the Text, one day. Ye shall desire to see one day
of etc.

Many rejoice in their desires, and I know God in desires is sweet: but there
are desires that shall not be satisfied; there are desires, and of seeing the
Son of man. What will God deal so hardly with the Disciples? so harshly? Can
the LORD hide himself from his own flesh? LORD, Can thou be so harsh as to
deny those that do so much desire to see thee? Yes, I can and will be so hard,
and so cruel, as when they shall earnestly desire, I will deny their desires;
though they be mine own desires, begotten in them, yet to purify their
desires, I will burn them, I will deny them.

Is there nothing in Christ but kindness and mercy? No! there is extreme
severitie: If there be but a grain of flesh come forth in your greatest
desires, he will nip all for that one, that there may be pure desires to a
pure Christ; If there be a thousand-fold heavenly Angels in your desires; and
but one carnal, fleshly evil in them, he will deny all, till he has killed
that evil. He knows in the greatest severitie, how to fifth every grain of dust
from the wheat, and to burn up all the dross from the gold. He is most cruel
to flesh, but most merciful to spirit; and when he does most reject desires,
he does most answer desires: But you must not, nor shall not enjoy Christ so
easily as you thought for. Such days come as ye shall not see Christ; ye shall
have enflamed desires, and they shall be unsatisfied, and there shall be
nothing but darkness within you, and without you, earnest parching, thirsting
desires, and yet not satisfied; but all your desires shall be thrown into the
fire; and you with them.

There is a boldness and sauciness in the flesh, grown up in a literal and
fleshly acquaintance with Christ. Men come to have a little acquaintance with
Christ in the letter and flesh, and then they think all evil is pall, all
sorrow is done away, and they think they have Christ at command, and they
shall no sooner ask then have; but that will not always last: there will come
that which will check this vanity in the flesh: Ye shall pray, and seek, and
hunger, and thirst, for one little glimpse, one view of the Son of God, and
ye shall not have it: If the Son of God were not as wise to deny, as free to
give, I could tell what men would do, if God did not as well kill as make
alive, men would be Judge, and not God: If he knew not how to afflict and
scourge, as well as reward, every one would abuse him, and be Lord over him: If
Christ had not a knife to cut off evil branches, all the juice and sap of God
would run waste: If he knew not how to lock up and conceal himself, as well
as to open himself, he would be scattered, shed abroad and lost.

Object. But, says the flesh, this is not God, he is not so sharp and
fierce, he is mild and gentle.

Sol. But if the LORD were not fire to you, to burn up evil dispositions in
you, he would not be water to refresh you. And here is not all your evil
neither; The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood.

In these evil days, the light and comfort of all your enjoyments, within and
without shall be darkened; and then they shall say to you, Lo here, and lo
there; that is the time when your false Christ's shall be seen. (Now) the Father
is so merciful to you, as not to let you (Yet) know what a false Christ is,
what an Antichrist is, but does forbid Antichrist to appear: They shall not
say, Lo here, lo there, ye are not yet acquainted with such a temptation as a
false Christ is. But when the day of tribulation shall come, and when the
desires of seeing and enjoying the Son of God, then shall be the discovery of
false Christ's, and then shall ye be tempted with false Christ's, Mat. 24.23.
Then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the
world, to this time, no, nor ever shall be, -- and except those days be
shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the Elects sake those days
shall be shortened,

Hitherto your desires were never much drawn out after an immediate view and
sight of God: People look for that when they die: in the mean time, they will
talk of God, they will hear Sermons, and go to Church; yet there are some
Disciples, that secretly long after Christ, to see Christ; but false Christ's
never appear till we are gone beyond man, and above all the ways and days of
man: There are temptations suitable to all conditions, and when ye are coming
into the highest condition, ye shall have the highest temptation; when ye come
far from and above all men, and long to see Christ, then ye shall have
Antichrist stir and appear. While ye would be sober men, ye are tempted to
intemperance, While ye would be knowing men, ye are tempted to err. While ye
would be honest men, ye are tempted to deceit: but when ye would live the life
of Christ, then ye are tempted with Antichrist, and have false Christ's
presenting themselves to you. When ye come to thirst after the day of the LORD,
then will be the trial of these false Christ's: Then ye shall have false
Christ's, presenting themselves unto you, ye shall have Christ come upon you more
then you would have. If ye go into the desert, there is Christ; if into the
City, there is Christ. Some shall say, Lo here; others, Lo there; Ye shall have
false Christ's every where, a false spirit, a false resurrection, a false glory,
a false God, continually offering themselves unto you, Lo here, lo there.

Such excellent, glorious, high, ravishing, delightful, comfortable, wonderful,
admirable discoveries of spiritual things, that they shall say plainly to you, I
am Christ. Such things so far excelling all that ever you have known, so
heavenly, so glorious, as thereby ye shall be able to judge al men, to judge al
Angels, and to say with open face, Here Is Christ. Ye shall have a light above
men and Angels, and al; and yet all this shall be but a delusion. I know you are
not acquainted with this, as yet; but you shall have such glorious discoveries,
in such illustrious brightness, Majesty and authority, that shall absolutely
say in you, I am the Christ, I am the LORD, I am the Son of the living God.
It is that which I have been acquainted withal. In Ezekiel. 28.2. there is a type
of the wicked appearance of the God of this world; -- Thine heart is lifted up,
and thou have said, I am God, and I sit in the seat of God, yet thou art a man,
and not God, though thou set thine heart as the heart of God; Behold thou art
wiser then Daniel, there is no secret that they can hide from thee, etc. Ye
shall be so transported and carried up out of the world, that al men shall be as
dwarfs to you, as beasts to you: such heavenly mighty, inlargements shall be in
you; such a spirit as shall say, I am the LORD; such a majesty as now ye dare
not aproach to, that shall say, I sit in the seat of GOD; but though thou set
thy heart as GOD, yet thou art a man, and not GOD etc. Ye shall be so enlarged
in understanding, that ye shall be wiser then Daniel, that ye shall see through
all the mystery of Daniel, through all the dark Prophesies of Daniel, as a
clear thing: yet there will be a false christ, an Antichrist under all this.

It is that man of sin, we have not yet been acquainted with all; we have not
yet known that man of sin; we have a long time known the woman of sin; sin in
that sex, s^in in its weakness; but we have not known the man of sin.

-- Go not after them, follow them not. Such appearances will present
themselves unto you, and invite you to the discovery and clear understanding of
the dark places of Scriptures: but (says GOD) follow them not. They are such,
that if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect: so glorious and
so beautiful, as for a while (so far as ye are men) ye shall be deceived.

That wisdom and knowledge in which you live, that experience you have of the
way of God in your hearts, the utmost light and understanding that ye have
attained unto by reading, and searching, and knowing the Scriptures, is no more
able to keep you from falling down before (and worshipping) these false
christ's, then a little Child is able to withstand a mighty giant.

Al you that seem to be knowing men, shall be deceived; only there is an elect
(a secret seed of the blessed GOD) that will keep you from being utterly
deceived: nothing but the seed of God, nothing but the chosen elect one can
preserve you, and secure you from being beguilded by them.

The Son himself says -- Go not after them, for as the lightning shines from
one part of heaven, unto the other etc. Here is a greiveous condition; Evil
days, such as never were before, nor ever shall be: earnest desires after
Christ, and yet no sight of him; seeking and hunting after the true Christ, and
beautiful and glorious false Christ's coming and saying, I AM HE: This is he
whom ye seek. Hungry to death, and excellent meat (in appearance) offered, and
no daring to meddle with it; thirsty and panting for refreshment, and a river
of pleasures presented, and yet not daring to venture on it. A sad state, much
darkness, great troubles, an earnest seeking after deliverance, a voice from
one that stands by, speaking thus, here is one will save thee, and show thee
light; shall I follow him (says the soul?) No says Christ. Shall I lie in this
darkness and trouble and torment? Yea. Why? For as the lightning lightneth
from one part under heaven to the other, so shall the coming of the Son of man
be.

Here Is the reason why we must wait in these unheard of tribulations, because
Christ will come on a sudden, as lightning; and then Hea will Show US the truth
of ALL.

Christ will immediately come, as quick as lightning; though he does withdraw
himself and deny our desires, yet he will come suddenly; and no flesh (in its
fleshly condition) shall be saved; and except those days should be shortened,
no flesh should be saved: it shall be intolenable for flesh.

This coming of Christ (or this day of Christ) it is beyond all the patience,
and hope, and comfort, and strength, of all flesh: He will come as quick as
lightning; and though he does delay to come, at many disires, yet now he will
come at the first desire; even then when ye are in the depth, under heaven;
below heaven; under the earth, in the depths of the earth; even then the light
of the brightness of the Lord (Jesus Christ) shines from one end under heaven to
another: and ye shall see and know then, that ye are in Christ.

When ye most desire to see, and your desires are unsatisfied and perplexed
for want of it; even then, The light of Jesus Christ shines into the bottom of
that ye are; in the darkest night of that Sun set, (that West:) even in the
most unsatisfied condition that ye can pobssile come unto, shall Jesus Christ
break forth, and shine in that dark pit.

Go not gaping after another, ye are in it already; The kingdom of heaven is
within you. All this is but himself; His light shines from East to West. He is
as glorious in the Setting, as in the Rising. Ye cannot be any where out of
him. He says, When you think I am farthest off, then I will be nearest; when
ye are hungry, I will give you bread; when ye are thirsty, I will give you
water; when ye are in darkness, I will be you light: and this only shall be
your rest and satisfaction: the Lord is salvation, where ever he is.

Says Antichrist, I Will give you a clear discovery of all things; I Will give
you peace: No says the Elect, I am already with Christ, I am nothing but what
He is, He is nothing but what I am; I am with Him, and in Him; He is with me
and in me: why should I go out after another? For as the lightning etc.

Jesus Christ is the lowest state and condition in which you can be; and he
comes quick as lightning, and then as lightning, will give you, and is giving
you, the full discovery of all things. When he is in you at the depth, the
lowest point, the center of hell, the bottom of the grave, it is that he might
give you a full Restoration of all things.

The lightning from east to west, makes east and west meet together: so this
appearing of the Son of God, darkens, flesh, confounds man, and makes the
highest glory of God to be in the lowest pit; and takes the lowest state of
darkness, into the highest pich of light.

By these flashes, flesh shall be blasted, and destroyed, and consumed. These
blasts of the Spirit of the Lord does open US, and enlarge US to a large
comprehension of all things; of all in the East, of all in the West, of all
above, and all below: Til we be low, we cannot be high; til we be the worst, we
cannot be the best; and we are best, when we are worst; in the greatest
darkness, He is present; in the bottom and heart of such tribulations, that
all before it is nothing to it, and nothing is like it, that comes after it.

In this tribulation, not to see and know Jesus Christ; in this tribulation to
have longing desires, and then to have peace and deliverance seemingly tendered
to us by a tempter; we cannot but obhor it: to have joy and gladness sounded
in our ears, and not be able to touch it; What an extremity is here? The
absence of the highest good, the presence of the greatest evil; our desires
not answered by God, and answered by Satan.

Out of this darkness, will Christ arise; out of the extremity of deaths and
confusions, does the Son nf God arise: it is as nesesary ye should be brought
into this state, as it is that the Night should go before the Day.

-- But first must he suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation.
The Desciples of God, shall not enjoy Christ, til they have rejected him. Ye
must forsake him and leave him, and (be Pharisees) and persecute him, before
ye can be Coroned with Him. That which is, in a high degree, malignity in the
Pharisees, is in a less degree (and qualified) in the Disciples: the Pharisees
killing, the Disciples departing; its all flesh, man, weakness and ignorance.

Before any man see The Kingdom of GOD, he must first reject it. Do ye long
to see the Kingdom of GOD? Do ye say, When will it come? How shall I see it?
Where is it? Ye shall not see it, til He suffers by you. Ye shall do him many
injuries before ye know him. Ye shall be offended at him; ye shall stumble and
fall, and reject him, before ye find him. Ye shall never be acquainted with
Christ, til ye know that ye have Murdered Him; til ye have killed Him, and
beheaded Him; and hanged Him; He must suffer many things of YOU: He must be
rejected of the best of you, and the best in you; and the best of the best, of
you. Ye shall reject, hate and persecute Him, before the kingdom of GOD can
come in you.

Object. I know you will say, Must we be guilty of this wickedness? Is there
such wretchedness in the heart of man, to do thus? Why have you such hard
thoughts of us? Thus speaks the flesh. But thus says the LORD -- The Son of
man must suffer many things from this generation.

Christ must suffer from some, and be rejected by others: some are so wicked,
as to kill him; others so unbelieving, as to forsake him; some so cruel, as to
slay him; some so faint, as to leave him and not to own him; some revile him;
others shake their heads, and cannot tell what to think of him: some cry out
violently against him; others are not able to speak a word for him: Ye shall
never see the LORD, til ye can say, this is he whom we have peirced; this is he
that I reviled, that I hated.

Thus speaks Christ, If ye stand upon terms and say, What, we crucify Christ?
O, God forbid that we should crucify our Savior, the LORD of glory? What, we
that are Gods own People, Jews and Disciples, we that are his own dear
Children, and shall be saved by him?

To whom Christ will say, If I suffer not by you, I will not be deliverance to
you: If ye are so nice and curious, that ye will not make me a sacrifice, ye
shall never feed upon me. If ever you see me, you will see you have pierced and
murdered me. I will save none, but those that kill me: If ye will not own that
ye have slain me, ye shall not enjoy me; ye shall never eat my flesh, and
drink my blood, unless ye slay my flesh, and spill my blood.

Jesus Christ suffers by all men; which is clear in this, That in all ye have,
in all that ye do, in all that ye are, and in all that ye speak, nothing is free
from the blood of Jesus; nothing that ye do, speak, live or act, in the
highest, devoutest, and most glorious way, ye will find is nothing but Murder;
Murder and Blood; killing the LORD of life. Yea, It is necessary, he must
suffer by you: he will not find a throne in you, til he has found a grave in
you: he^ will not be raised in you, til he has been dead and buried in you: ye
shall never see him in the resurrection, til ye see him killed; and then he will
rise again in your hearts: this Son of righteousness will arise with healing
in his wings, to your everlasting joy, peace and comfort.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
THE EXCELLENCY OF THE LOVE of GOD.
PSALM 36.7, 8. How Excellent is thy loving kindness O, God! therefore the
children of men, put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou
shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasure.


THis Psalm does fitly set forth unto us the estate and condition of these
times, wherein wickedness increases: and so in the former part of the Psalm, is
a discovery of wickedness, ver. 3. the words of his mouth are iniquity and
deseit, he has left of to be wise and to do good: Men now speak nothing but
wickedness and deceit, and have left off to be wise: they have left off to do
good, and set themselves in a way which is not good; abhor not evil. And what
should we do when there is such wickedness in the earth? In the fifth verse,
Thy mercy (O Lord) is in the heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches to the
clouds. God is gathering up al goodness, mercy and peace from man, to himself:
and though there is cruelty, mischief and wickedness in the world; in the
earth; yet there is mercy, truth and faithfulness in the clouds: and its good
that wisdom, goodness, truth and righteousness leave the world, and cleaves
to God; that so we may follow it: and what goodness, mercy truth and
faithfulness we formerly enjoyed in man, we may enjoy it in God.

And when wickedness increases, righteousness increases likewise; Thy
righteousness is like a great mountain. When the world tears and breaks it
self in peeses, then is the righteousness of God a great mountain. Thy
judgments are a great deep; when the whole world is become one Sea of
confusion, then are the judgments of the Lord a great deep: where not only
man, but beasts may rest safly, Thou preservest man and beast: And though this
time, is a time of growing and spreading of wickedness in man, yet it is a
time of sweetest admiration and love in God: and when men that sin, do cry out
O, woeful man! they that enjoy God, cry out O, happy man! And though men that
live in the earth, cry out O, miserable! What times are here? Men that live in
heaven cry out, How excellent is thy loving kindness O, God! The LORD makes al
things naked and bare, that we only may have him to be our safety.

In the first part of this verse, our God sets up a standard, and proclaims the
excellency of his own name, in these troubleous times; O how excellent is thy
loving kindness* and he does it to this purpose only, that the children of God
should put their trust under the shadow of his wings: and when they are
abundantly troubled, They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of
thy house.

-- How excellent is thy loving kindness O, God] We have thought men and
creatures, have bin excellent; and we have bin much taken up with them; but now
we see al creatures fallen, and nothing but GOD exalted: Thou O, GOD! do
exalt all things: thou do exalt all treatures. The Lord our GOD sets forth
the vanity, emptiness and weakness of the creature, that so he may set forth
his own excellency.

The Lord our God is not only good, but exceeding good; not only gracious, but
exceeding gracious; O, the loving kindness of God! and the grace of God is
most sweet, it is most satisfying, most precious: How excellent, How great, How
good it is! Come tell us, you that have large hearts, how excellent and good he
is; come tell us the glory and riches of our God; you that have the liveliest,
quickest inversion, set your hearts on work in setting forth the loving
kindness of God: it is so full, so glorious, so complete, that instead of
murmurring, it sets us on rejoicing.

-- Loving kindnesse] That thou should impart all thy self to us, make us
so hppy as thy self; O, here is a kind heart indeed! does all for us, suffers
all for us; we do not suffer, thou suffer; we are not reproacht, the world
reproacheth thee in us; we are not hated, no, thou art hated, thou take all
upon thy self; only we are greived to see thy sufferings: so kind art thou that
thou do empty thy self into us; and do un-heaven thy self, unglory thy
self, that thou may make us heavenly and glorious: Its thy kindness to dwell
with us, and to dwell with us these evil times; and to dwell in afflictions
themselves to make them speak kindly to us; to come down into a shadow of
death, that we might receive no hurt there: to come and dwell in a tempest of
storms and earthquakes, that they might be kind and gentle to us.

-- Thy loving kindnesse] Thou do not only show us kindness, but loving
kindness: not only kindness to such who are in distress, but the loving
kindness of a Father to a child, a Husband to a wife: not only kindness to
us as strangers, but loving kindness as a Father and Husband: Thou do not
only show us kindness, but love, that binds thee to be kidnesse to us: The
fountain of love, the cause of thy kindness.

Ye are my Children, I love you; my love begat you; ye are descended from me;
I must needs use you kindly: ye came out of my loins: ye were once in me,
yea, ye were always in my loins: ye are my spouse, my wife; ye were taken
out of me: ye are my companions, my friends: My Fellowship is with you; I am
solitary when I enjoy you not: ye are my House and habitation; I must preserve
you: ye are my self, and when I hurt you, I hurt my self, when ye are wronged,
I am wronged.

-- O, GOD] This is excellency of love, because its O, GOD! It would not excel
if it were not GOD, if it were not Divine, it were not excellent. Thou give
us thy self O, GOD! to give us thy love in thy self, to be as kind to us as to
thy self; to bind us upon thee, and to write thy self upon us O, GOD!

We speak the same thing with joy, comfort, confidence and triumph, that once
we spoke with fear, sorrow and doubtfullnesse; O, God! When shall we come unto
thee; O, God! when shall we see thy face, and enjoy thy loving kindness? When
shall we be filled with thy beauty O, GOD?

Now, How excellent is thy face O, GOD! How excellent is thy loving kindness
O, GOD! We beg that thou would love us O, God!

Now thou show us that thy loving kindness is excellent O GOD, now we can
do nothing but admire the goodness and loving kindness of our God: we
delight in nothing else: We fix here; we live here; we will sit down here; we
will rest here. This song we will sing, O, GOD! the Excellency of our GOD: This
shall be our safety, our Castle, our protection, The loving kindness and
goodness of our God.

-- Therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings. God is so excellent that he preserves man and beast; and yet men are but
the children of men and the devil. Thy loving kindness is so excellent, so
sweet, that all the children of men, will put their trust under the shadow of
thy wings.

There will not be found a man that shall be groping and looking after any Idol,
any creature to be saved by it: It is and would be found inhumane to trust in
any thing but in the LORD; for the LORD will write so visibly and manifestly,
Folly, Vanity and Fashood upon all creatures; that it shall not only be
man-like, but devil-like to look for any good from man.

The LORD does so visibly appear in judging and condemning the creature, that
children; the lowest and weakest, shall trust in nothing but in God: the
veriest babes in knowledge, shall trust in the LORD: a man shall scorn to look
after any creature; a man shall scorn to own any creature in the world: every
babe, every child shall scorn the glory of the creature: he that has the least
acquaintance with God: though a babe and child, yet he shall be able to puff at
them to despise all the glory and strength and power of the creature.

-- The children of men] The new man, is the LORD from Heaven: children and
men, and the children of men, all believe the great God of Heaven and Earth:
children with Christ, the holy child Jesus.

-- The children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings] Grown
men shall come into the light of thy countenance: but Children shall trust under
the shadow of thy wings.

The LORDS wings take the near unto himself: but the shadow of his winds takes
in the most poorest, and weakest: the shadow of his wings reaches very far.

The excellency of the loving kindness of God makes every one glad to gather
near unto him, and glad to get under shelter of the name of the LORD: glad that
they can in the least manner be shadowed and kept by the goodness of God; it
is that which the LORD says. How often would I have gathered you together as a
hen gathers her chicken under her wings etc. It is an expression often used
in Scripture, covering with wings; the wings of God: I will carry you upon
Eagles wings: As birds flying so will the LORD defend Jerusalem: It shows the
excellency of the goodness of God; his spirit, his power, is to his in the worst
times soft and tender as feathered wings: when God is the hardest and ruffest
to the world, then is he gentlest, as feathered wings to his people: or that
great darkness that is upon the world and upon the enemies of God, is but
shadows of Gods wings, to his own people: and we seeing these troubles that
are abroad in the world, we know they are but the shadows of Gods wings with
which he does cover his people: and when God opens and spreads forth his wings,
and causes that darkness and confusion to be upon the people; its cause of joy
and comfort to his people, for they see them to be the wings of God, in which
they have peace and rest; and therefore that which is the worlds trouble, is
our safety; that which is the worlds grief, is our joy; and that which is the
worlds and the men of the earths disquietnesse, is our comfort and consolation.

When we see these motions and commotions, wars and tumults in and upon the
earth, then God is risen from his seat and he is flying, he is upon his wings;
and therefore as the world, the flesh, the earth, dreads these things and runs
from them: the children of God shall run to them, and put their trust in them:
what though we do not see the face of God in brightness and clearness, yet I
see this is the shadow of his wings: though I do not triumpt with him upon the
Throne, yet I see this is the shadow of himself.

-- Therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings] The weakest, and poorest Saints of God shall be able, ney are able to
put confidence and trust in God in trouble: and that which darkens the joy and
comfort of others, is a comfort and shelter to the Saints; and that which they
so much complain of, That the Sun is turned into darkness, all our ligts,
created comforts and peace appears to be nothing but darkness; yet this is a
shadow, a shelter unto them, and they shall see that this is the wing of God,
by which he will carry us up into himself: And though God does not walk with
us in the settled way of creatures as he has done, yet we see him flying about
us with the wings of his own Spirit, with the wings of his own favor and love;
so there is a shelter and safety for us: but that is not enough; though this be
good for children, for the children of men; but they shall also be abundantly
satisfied with the fatnes of thy house.

-- They shall be abundantly satisfiid with the fatness of thy house. I shall
rejoice a little to speak of these words: Protection is very sweet: to lie
down in the shadow of God: the hollow of GODS hand is very comfortable: but not
only so, But they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy
house: here is not only protection and safety, but food and plenty:
satisfaction, abundance of satisfaction, and that of the richest and chiefest
of all [Fatnesse] and that in the [house of God] we shall be always full: we
shall always feast: we shall always have our table richly furnished: we shall
continually have bread enough; and our waters shall not fail: we shall want
nothing: we shall not say of any thing, I would we had this, or if we had this
or that it would be well with us: we shall see compleatnesse, not a desire
unsatisfied: not a longing expression, unles longing it self may have its
satisfaction in it self: not a desire but shall be satisfied; and then the
desire shall be satisfaction it self: and this is the greatest happiness that is
satisfaction: and dissatisfaction is the root of unquietness: to look for and
long for that which you dave not, is restlesnesse: but in this enjoyment of God
we have always what we would have: the LORD will so manifest himself that we
shall not say of any thing, we would have this: we shall never be baging and
craving, but always enjoying: never be hungering, unless hunger sets an
appetite to heavenly things, and so makes them more delightful to us: we have
nothing present that shall be absent; there shall be no corner of our heart
unfill'd: but every thing shall be completed: every thing shall have enough; so
we shall be satisfied.

-- And abundantly satisfied] Not a little: but very large satisfaction:
abundant of satisfaction: we have enough and shall have enough and to spare: we
shall have overflowings of light, peace, joy, power, strength and of every good
thing.

The LORD our GOD feeds us not in a nigerdly way; but gives us abundance,
enough to spare: we have more then we are able to receive; more then we are
able to carry, or makes us know such abundance, that if it were not a abundance
it would be a burden to us: so thronged with joy, comfort, peace, wisdom,
power and strength, that if it were not GOD, we might complain we had too much:
it does superabound all nessessaries, all wants; it is even more then we desire,
only we have a desire created in it: if there be any difficulty, it is because
it is too much; too great; too large: if we have any reason to complain, it is
because it is excessive: and if any desires come from us, it is that God would
withhold: and if any pain, it is because we cannot stand under the weight of
glory. But this is goodness to be overcome with this fullness, drowned with
mercy. We are even laden with blessings, and because they are blessings, they
are no loads, else it would be a huge load indeed; if that they were not
bessings, we should be undone with them; and to be undone with this, has
it is satisfaction.

-- With the fatnesse] These blessings and mercies are not the meanest: but the
fattest of thy house: it is not common or ordinary food; but the fattest,
richest, preciousest.

We have made shift to live with God in creatures, but that is poor food. We
have made shift to live with morsels and crumbs, that have come from the table.
We have made shift with things that have been scattered out to us: but now the
chiefest, the best, the fattest: The fat Calfe; the fat Lamb Jesus Christ: the
Lamb, the Calfe fatted with the fullness of God; Jesus Christ raised up, highly
exalted in the fulness of God: Jesus Christ long prepared fed and fatted with
the excellency of the majesty of the LORD our God.

-- With the fatness of thy house. This plenty is not in the field; though it
were good there in a Tent, in a Tabernacle: but we have it in the house; and in
a house not made with hands: and not only a house; but the house of God. To
have a little comfort and refreshing when we are wandering in a desert, in a
wilderness is good: but to come to a settled house and habitation where God
dwells;

The riches of God become, a house, a house to us, A house whose builder and
maker is God, a house whose foundation, building, roof, top and covering and
all is GOD: The Saints habitation is God. Now what provision is laid up for us
in the lowest estate, in a shadow, in a shed or shelter, it is very safe,
comfortable and pleasant; it is great safety to be under the tender feathers of
the Fathers love; compassing us about with his loving kindness; and this when
ye were children, and children of men; then we found great joy and comfort and
safety in God, which caused us to put our trust under the shadow of thy wings:
but that is not all, but here is also such a rest, peace, comfort, such abundance
of satisfaction, and that with the chiefest, and richest exelency of God our
Father; and those sure and settled, for it is in the house, and in the
everlasting house and habitation of our God: Lo this is the good will and loving
kindness of of our God.

The end of the sixth Sermon.
THE EXCELLENCY. OF THE LOVE of GOD
PSALM 36.7, 8. How Excellent is thy loving bindnesse O, God! therefore the
children of men, put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou
shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.

For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light.

O continue thy loving kindness unto them that know thee, and thy righteousness
to the upright in heart.


GOD will excel; GOD does excel. Every thing goes down, that God may go up.
God abaseth the creature, that his own name may be seen.

The loving kindness of the LORD our GOD, is now breaking forth; and it will be
so, and must be so, that every one shall have cause to trust in Him.

Therefore the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings] Children of men. The weakest babes do trust in God. There is the little
child Jesus in the heart, that does trust in God; and that will trust in God.
Jesus Christ and his People, will find shelter in a shadow; in a shadow of the
wing of God. The Lord our God is so rich in mercy, that the shadow of his
wings, afford comfort and support.

They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house] We go on
in the strength of GOD, in the power of GOD; we delight our selves in the LORD
our GOD.

-- Thou shall make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures. There, There Is
abundance of satisfaction and excellencies of God, that are in to house of God;
But how shall we do to partake of them? The well is deep, How shall we draw out
the water? Or, being broken eisterns, we cannot keep, or retain this water when
we have it? -- Thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. The
Lord will make us to drink of his own rivers of pleasures, whether we will or no.
The Lord will not only discover heavenly things to us, but make us receive them.
When Hagars eyes were opened, she saw a fountain; and if our eyes were open we
should see a fountain round us. And as the Lord takes away the veil, that
keeps us from seeing, so he will remove every thing that keeps us from drinking;
He will make US to drink.

The LORD will, by the parching beas of his own wrath, dry up all other
streams; ye shall have nothing to drink of, but God. And as he will dry up all
other streams, so he will dry up every desire; those filthy lusts shall be
consumed in that wrath, that there will be no water to drink; or any appetite,
to drink any other but God. And the LORD will not only give us drink, but desire
and love to it, and a great delight in it. The Lord opens the mouth and fills
it. The Lord opens the ear and speaks in it: and the word of the LORD, and the
presence of the LORD, is both mouth, and water to drink.

-- Thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. God is a river, a
constant stream; a river into which many streams continually empty themselves,
a large river; there we have water enough: an exceeding sweet river; every drop
of this is life; its the river of life. Not a river only to satisfy our thirst,
but to swime in; the waters that came from under the threshold of the Sanctuary
arose so high, that men might swime in them; waters in which we may wash our
selves, and bathe our selves continually: pure waters, that cleanses us from
all sin, from al iniquity; water that makes us white: water that washes, and
refreshes us to: and this we have in abundance.

We need not force, nor can we force the love of God; it comes so naturally,
we need not pumpe for it; it flows of it self: we need dig no wel^, we have a
river near us; we need not strive to keep the water in, its best when it runs,
and passes away.

This water is troublesome when it is stopped, but quiet and still when it runs
without disturbance: When earthly and carnal things hinder the running, it
swells and is angry, Never cease til it has broke down every thing that
stands before it: It is such a River as will not be kept in a standing state:
such a River as comes freely from the Osian, and is never at quiet until it
carries us into the Osian: and when the Earth opens it self to it, it does most
willingly, and readily, power forth it self into it: And this is a River of an
High nature -- of (Thy) pleasures.

We have been acquainted but with little pleasure in the world; much labor,
and little pleasure. If some times, we have found some sparks and drops of
pleasure, how sweet have they been unto us! But Man is borne unto sorrow, as
the sparks fly upward. But here, in the LORD our GOD, There are Rivers of
pleasures.

The whole age of a Spiritual life, is a holy day, a feastical day; a Sabbath
day; a jubily, a marriage day; a time of continual delight and pleasure.

-- The River of pleasures. Wherein (as I may say) we may tumble in pleasures,
we may Swime in pleasures; wherein we have constant and continual pleasures;
pleasures without cessation; Rich and exceeding great pleasures; a sweet and
full pleasure; a River of pleasure: A sweet and full expression; a River of thy
pleasure. And -- Pleasures; Not only pleasure, But pleasures.

Many things must concur to make one pleasure: Man is not pleased except many
contents meet together: Except he has good Company, good Cheer, good
Conditions, a good House, a good Conscience; Many delights; a heap together,
does but make one ple^sure. But here are many, multitudes of Pleasures meeting
together: where there are Varieties of pleasures; GOD pleasing Man, Man
pleasing GOD: God in his greatest Variety, opening himself, un-folding
himself, to the Variety and state of Man, to Man, many pleasures; And many
pleasures united together.

There is nothing in God but is pleasant; and there is nothing that we drink
but the pleasure: every thing has music in it: every thing has spirit in it:
every thing laughs and smiles: every thing has a hermony and agreement in it:
every thing does tickle and please us, and administers joy and content to us.
There Is no smart, no torment, no vexation, no disquiet; but exery thing speaks
God; it is pleasant.

-- And it is the Rivers of thy pleasures] If God were not pleased, we could not
be wholly pleased: and if it were not the pleasure of our God, we could not be
satisfied: and if God and we did not take pleasure together, there were no
pleasure in it; o^ if it were not divine pleasure, it were but a ^inckling
Simball; it would savor all of madness, if it were not all divine; if it were
not thy pleasure: What everlasting and eternal way and pleasure our GOD has
in himself, that he continually streams out by us, to us: ravisheth us with
pleasures: the whole mystery of the LORD our God, discovers it self in one
River of pleasure to us: God says in every thing that he is to us, and in
every thing that we are, He is well pleased: and that is our delight and
pleasure, that still our LORD and God smiles upon us; and still our LORD and
Husband has pleasure in us: and all that our God does to us it is still in
pleasure; and all his ways that he walks in unto us, it is in the light: We
do not from one end of the week to the other hear him chide; we do not see
one discontent or other in his browe at any time; but in pleasure shows
himself unto US. We are in the LORD our God a River of pleasures: The LORD our
God delightfully powers out himself into us. It pleases God: God takes
pleasure in it, to power out himself into us; or the pleasures and delights of
God, continually stream in us. This is that -- Thou shall make them drinkt of.
Take into thee these divine pleasures, these pleasures of God: God freely
communicates, and makes us free to receive.

Some time this River flows out of us. Out of their belly shall flow Rivers of
living water: and when it flows out of us, it delights to return again into
us; and we again return what flows from us. As this River of life turns and
winds it self into various postures, or gives us delight and content: it
flows out from us, and goes again into us; and pleases it self to return
whence it came; and so takes pleasure in giving out, and pleasure in receiving
in.

-- For with thee is the fountain of life] We drink it, and shall drink it, as
the Earth drinks Rivers. The whole stream of divine love, shall continually run
in us, as the water when it finds a passage, through the Earth, it still winds
it passage, and weaves away it is passage, til at last it finds a way easily to
pass along: so this River of life makes its own way through the passage of our
hearts, and continually wears the banks of the heart larger and larger, til
quietly and peaceably it passes through us: and this is the joy of our heart,
that the glory of God will still wash and were open our banks, til it makes us
receive all its fullness; til it has widened and made a passage through us: and
for this reason; For with thee is the fountain of Life] Ye shall drink of the
fountain of the great deep. God is open. the Spirit of God is abundantly powered
forth; ye shall drink or drown: ye must receive this water into you or perish;
For with thee is the fountain]

The fountain does now burst open, and makes it way, and never cease running
til it has made it self a way to pass.

-- For with thee is the fountain] The Spirit of the LORD is not a winter
stream; It Is a Fountain. It comes not by fits it flows constantly. We find it
always working; always flowing forth; alwies powreing forth it self.

You may lie down and sleep in carelesnes; this Fountain runs whether we sleep
or wake; We cannot possibly bind in this Fountain from running: O, it gusheth
forth, and will not be stopped! Always sends forth it is streams: We are no
more fearful or thoughtful of the want of water, because of a Fountdin: Nay, We
are rather thoughtfull, what We shall do with this abundance of water; and our
greatest care is to widen a passage for it, lest it overflow and drown us; but
grace and mercy in Jesus Christ, is the most excellent Fountain. Ye have lived
upon the stream, and ye have tasted the water of life at much distance: If ye
will follow this stream, ye will at last come to the Fountaine^ Where Is that? --
WITH THEE]

-- With thee is the fountain] There is danger and fear so long as We live upon
a stream; there is only rest and satisfaction in God.

-- With thee is the fountain] and being brought to the LORD our God, we are
brought to the fountain: Now we enjoy that original that has always
refreshed us: Now we see that Rock, being clean by Jesus Christ: Jesus Christ
coming forth, we see that passage out of which the waters flow: and this is
our exceeding satisfaction, that we are with the fountain, in the fountain, and
the fountain of life.

Our sweetest life, it is in the pleasure of pleasures; Life, it is the great
pillar upon which all comfort hangs; Life, it is that which gives subsistence
and being to every thing in us, and the life of man is but a shadow of the life
of God; and when we come to God, we come to Life: Now we can say we live:
Now indeed we live: We are Life: Before we were living; but now we are life it
self: We were quickened, or life was derived to us: but now we have that which
did derive life to us, and is life it self: We were acted; but now We have
that life that acts us: or we had the stream; but now We have the Fountain.
And this life is called immortality and life.

The best life of this life is mortality; that which is made to live by
another, and cut off from the original, dies, or that which receives life (if
the conveighance be stopped) loses it is life: but that which is Life it self,
cannot dye; or that which receives the life it self, must needs be mortal: now
every thing that is acted, is immortality, and every thing that is seen and
enjoyed is immortality; life it self. Now if there be so much in a living
soul; how much is there in a quickened Spirit? The least life is better then the
most excellent death: A living Dog is better then a dead Lion: How sweet is
life? It Is that which indeed is proper to us in God; and to GOD in us. And is
is proper to me to live in GOD.

None truly lives, or lives indeed, but GOD; who is indeed the author and
fountain of life; yea, that is life it self. -- With thee is the fountain of
life.

-- In thy Light we shall see light] Life and Light: next to Life, nothing so
pleasant as Light; or Life is pleasant when Light is in it: darkness and death
go together: and Life and Light go together. Where ever there is darkness,
there is death, and where ever there is death, there is darkness. -- In thy light
we shall see light] This Fountain of life and light is ours; or this life and
light takes us into it: We are in this light, we walk in this light; or this
light is in us; it is not another from us, it is one with us: We are not another
from it; We are in it: O, this light is comprehesive and large like the light
of the Sun, the true light indeed! The light of the Stars and of the Moon is
but a borrowed light.

Is the light of a Candle true light?

But this light of GOD, is most comprehensive, most large! This is called
dwelling in the light, living in the light: being in be light, We are
altogether light: We are in this light as Cristal, or Gold transparent, Revel.
21.21. The streets of the City were as pure gold; as transparent glass: This
is the nature of Glass especially if be that is pure it does not at all
obstruct the light; but willingly takes the light into it: Nay, in a cristall
the light shines clearer then in the Air; the brightness, and clearness of a
crystal, makes the light it self more manifest; or gives a lightening to the
light; or if it be rightly composed by its thickness, it does gather up the
light into it self.

The Stars are the thicker part of the Orb, therefore the light gathers into
them fixes there: so the Lord prepares us (though Earth) by himself; that we
are apt to receive in the light, and the light gathers into us, and becomes in
us more light: so We naturally opposing the light of GOD, and maintaining our
selves, as Earth in darkness, til We be purified in the fire, and made gold
transparent; crystalized: til by the Spirit of Christ We are made true
Crystal; so rarefied by the Spirit of God; so rarefied, that the light of the
Godhead does as it were gather it self in an heap together; imbodi'd it self,
and so shines clearly in us; that as we are from the light, so we are in the
light; and God does in this vessel as it were lose it self; infuse it self in
such a vessel as Christ is; there it fixes and settles, and gathers it self
together, and shows it self delightfully.

-- In thy light we shall see light] We are in the light of God, and our light
is the light of God: The day is broken; The Sun of righteousness is risen,
with bealing in his wings: What We see, We now in thy light, which is certain,
clear, most sure; it cannot fail us: It Is Thy light.

The judgment that we have, is the very judgment of God; and the light in
which we walk, is the light of God; though it be but early day, yet it is day:
and the light of thy righteousness, shall shine unto the Perfect day, unto
high noon: In this light, we see light. It Is light by which we see, it is light
we see, the light of God; or, That which we see, is that by which we do see:
We see nothing but God. In all things we see light, we see God. When we see any
thing, any thing separated from GOD, its darkness; and though darkness in us, as
separate from God, yet, as it is in God, its light.

The light of God shining upon us, does so lighten us, that we see nothing but
light: and walking in his light, we walk with confidence: There is no fear,
where there is no darkness.

If we saw men, we would not be afraid of men; and herein we are like starting
Horses, seeing things unperfectly, we fly from them; And if we had a perfect
view of things, we should start at nothing: It Is weakness and dimnesse that
fears. When God vails himself, when he dims and shuts up himself, there is
fear: When he opens himself, it flees away; so that, In the day of the LORD,
There is neither fear, nor stumbling. As by the light, every thing is
discovered: as things are discovered to be good, and so desirable; so things
are discovered to be evil, and to be avoided.

There is not a Bait or Snare, but is discovered; and being discoveeed, it is
out of danger.

-- In thy light, shall we see light] We see nothing but what God is: we see
what God does, and nothing but what he does: being in the light of God, we see
and enjoy the light of God: that light that our God is, that we have, that we
enjoy: it does not exclude us from it, but willingly receives us into it.

What thou have, we have; what we are, we are in thy light; we see nothing but
thee; and when we see our selves in thy light, we see thee: we see nothing but
that which is good, for we see nothing but God; and nothing, but in the light
of God.

Our eye made light, is in the light; and it being in the light, it cannot be
dark. The light that we receive, is not from another, out of us; but we are
gathered up into the body of the Son, the light; and So the Light goes from us:
Not the Light to be judged by others, but the light to judge and discover
others.

It Is the great presumption of those that live in darkness, to say in the face
of the light, they are not what the light makes them to be.

That which stood up for truth, is mannifest by the shining light of God, to be
falfhood: and that which called it self by the name of God, is Idolatry: and
that which stood up for Christ, is Antichrist.

Its boldness for darkness to stand up in the light, and say, Its not so. None
knows the light, but they that are in the light: nor none can make a judgment
of any thing, but he that is in the ligdt. If the LORD has not gathered up our
judgments, and understanding into himself, we cannot judge between good and
evil: being gathered up, and seeing as God sees, now we see what men do, and
are: Men cannot (now) possibly keep themselves from this light, that now breaks
forth; but every man's heart shall be as open, before this light, as his face
before the Sun.

-- O continue thy loving kindness unto them that know thee] A supplication
upon good ground. We have enjoyed mercy, and would have it continually; it shall
be to them that know Thee. The LORD GOD will not do us less good, but more good:
God is enlarging, and increasing in his love to us; not lessening, and
decreasing.

The loving kindness of our GOD, grows upon us; it does not fail. We have
tasted a little, we shall drink Rivers: we have seen a little of the Streams,
we shall have the Fountain. GOD has been merciful to us in a low estate, he
will abundantly satisfy us, in a high estate: and this he will do, to you that
know God. You that know God, know him a Fountain, that cannot be Exhosted: and
you that know GOD, know that in all his dispensations, he is good; you that
know Ood; know that there is life in every thing that God does: and they that
know the fountain, know the Fountain to be Sweet; and was Sweet, when shut up
in the Earth, in Prison, in the deepest love and mercy.

Therefore the loving kindness of GOD, does, and shall for ever continue; it
shall here, for ever abide with us: for there is nothing here, but abiding: Here
every thing is stable and firm. In the world every thing is unstable, and
infirm: And therefore, your fear of the discontinuing of love, is in the going
away of the world; and that which made you enjoy God by times and fits, in the
world; These are going away, that ye may always enjoy him. GOD is cracking
every vessel: that which had before water, shall have none: And he is thowing
them away, that he may be a continual stream.

God is doing great and wonderful works unto us; he is taking away those
vanishing shadows that we did enjoy, that he might give us an everlasting
enjoyment of the substance.

The world, flesh, men, they do fly away, they shall fly away; but thy loving
kindness shall continue, and all things else do go away, that nothing but,
love may be for ever: And it is the perpetuity and constancy of love, that
throws away the inconstancy of those things that we did enjoy.

-- To them that know thee] If ye have known God, ye know him unchangable, ye
have known him a Fountain: if ye have not known him, ye have known nothing
but broken Cisterns. Therefore they that know God do not fear changes; and they
that do know him, know that loving kindness shall continue.

-- And thy righteousnesse] We can spare the love of men, the love of the
world. The righteousness of men, we can spare it, let it go: but then, let
thi^^ continue: We are contented to see men unrighteous, but GOD is Righteous
for ever; that shall abide: And God is Righteous in all that he has done, and
now does: and therefore we say, In the way that thou art going on, go on, do
not stay.

We may doubt the Righteousness of men, when we see men great; but we doubt
not the righteousness of God, when we see it not in men.

-- And thy righteousness to the upright in heart] To them that know thee, and
to the upright in heart. As none know Thee but Christ, so there is none upright
but Christ: every man is a lie; Every Man: There Is not one righteous, no, not
one: They are all gone out of the way. They have left off to be good.

Wicked men, deceitful men, do no good at al; they are fools, they are
ignorant; astonished fools, they have no wit to do good; wise to destroy, to
confound; but to do good they have no wit: Therefore, there is none upright
but Christ: he is The upright one, The holy one, that looks only to God, that
eyes only the Lord.

The heart of Christ came from GOD, and returns to GOD; knows whence he is, and
whether he goes; and is an upright heart, an honest heart: and as this seed
acts in any, it discovers God.

I came out from him, I go to him: I am in my Pilgrimage whilst I am out of
him: I came from him, I live not till I be in him; and though I lose all, yet
thither I am bound.

-- And thy righteousness to the upright in heart] It Is righteous, that the
holy Christ should enjoy the whole GOD. Is it not righteous that God should
enjoy his own Son, and his own Saints? Is it a righteous thing that the Saints
should be always Captives in the world?

The end of the seventh sermon.
GOD the HEAD OF CHRIST, AS CHRIST OF HIS CHVRCH.
1 Cor. 11.10, 11, 12. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her
head, because of the Angels.

Nevertheless, neither is the man without the etc.


SO it pleased divine providence, to stamp and imprint it self upon his lowest
creatures. And the glory of the LORD our God being cumpleate and full it self:
desires to make out it self; to break forth and show it self in various and
several shadows; And therefore is the highest and most glorious Fellowship of
the Father and the Son, of GOD and of Christ, sweetly and fairly written out
in that relation of the Man and Woman. What Man is to the Woman, that is Christ
to the Church. That is GOD to Christ. Christ is a woman to GOD; the Lamb, the
Wife, the Spouse: GOD the Head, the Husband of Christ: Christ the Head, the
Husband, the Lord of Man: Man the Spouse, the wife of Christ. So in direct
terms says the Apostle in the third verse, The head of every man is Christ,
the head of the woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God. And this is
the happiness of the creature to be restored and brought back to that fountain
whence it comes; and so this Earth is married to live in love with that which
made it. And as it is it self a shadow of that substance; to lose it is being
and subsistence in the shadow, and be found in the substance. And there is true
Man, true woman; true Husband; true wife, in God and Christ.

Sin and iniquity perverts and overthrowes that fellowship and comfort which is
between these two; the Man and the Woman. It disorders and breaks in pieces the
harmony and consent that God makes:

There Is an excellency in both: both in some respect excel each other; and both
are superior (as we shall see) yet both equal; and the superiority and
inferiority of each, does mutually perfect each other.

Now the discovery of the original of these two, is the only way to rectify
the disorder and discontent between these two.

The man is the head of the woman] he may exercise too much of that headship.

The Woman is inferior to the Man: She may be denied that honor that is due
unto Her.

The Woman has an honor: she may assume too much to her self. The Man has a
head-ship, that may denied him. This is all reduceable to that original tipe
that makes these two; God and Christ, or Christ and the Elect.

First, Here Is the subjected part of the Woman set down; which shows Jesus
Christ in subordination to the Father: and therein must the woman expect that
her duty and place should be as Christ's; Covered; and only let the Head, the
LORD God be uncovered.

Christ vailes himself, covers himself in infirmity, that the glory and majesty
might be by right uncovered; and so shows that Christ, and that man and woman,
are in subordination to a superior end.

But Christ is not, appears not; but for the Father: as Man appears not, is
not, lives not; but for Christ. As the Woman is not; but is made for the man.

-- Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man] The
end being more noble and excellent then that which aims at the end. GOD being
the Head, the end of Christ; and therefore more noble and excellent: Christ the
Head and end of his people, and therefore more excellent. Man the Head, the end
of Woman, and therefore more excellent.

Yet there is another ground of the superiority -- The woman is of the man]

God sends forth Christ; Christ is of God; Man is of Christ. The woman is of
the man.

The first is above the second; and is that which causes and gives being to the
effect, therefore greater then the effect. Christ descends from God; is of him.
Man is of Christ: Woman is of the Man.

But this is most common and evident, and People are best acquainted with it.
God descending down to Christ; Christ ascending up to GOD. Christ decending
down to man: Man ascending up to Christ Man descending to the Woman: Woman
ascending to the Man.

But there is another mystery: How, or in what respect the woman has honor? Or
in what respect she may be superior to her Husband?

For this cause has a woman power on her head -- GOD has given a power to
Christ, over himself. And Christ has given a power to Man over himself. As man
does give a power to the woman over himself. Though GOD be the original of his
own power, yet he is pleased to give it to his Son.

It pleases God so to exalt Christ that he sets him on his right hand. It
pleases Christ to exalt Man and do as much for him; set him at his right
hand. And so it pleases Man to honor Woman, and set her at his right hand.

The Love of the Father is so great to his Son, that as he is for his nature
equal with him; so for his love he sets him above him. He delights to see him
Honored whom He loves; to set Him above himself.

Christ is so delighted in Man, that he gives him that honor, as to set him
at His Right band.

God has not the less Honor because he gives it to Christ, or to Man. The
Husband has the greater glory, when he gives it to the woman.

The love of God has this design upon Christ, and through Christ upon us; and
Christ has this design upon us, which the Man has over the Woman; to give us
Power over Himself.

Though all Power be in the Lord our God, yet he is pleased to give us Power
over Himself. And this is the reason, Because of the Angels.

The Question is Stated, and Confirmed in the two former Verses, For this Cause
ought the woman to have power on her head.

There Is not a full harmony between God and Christ, and Christ and us, til by the
grace that he gives us, we have power over him; or the Father has not done
all that he has to do, til he has set his Son at his Right hand. The Son has
not done all that he ought to do, til he has set us at his Right hand.

The Father owes to Christ the Kingdom, the Throne; and he does not right
til he gives it him: and says, Son take the Throne, It Is thine: I have
exercised dominion and power hitherto; Now do thou take it, do thou reign. And
Christ has not done all that he has to do, til he has set us down in his
Throne, as he is set down in his Fathers Throne.

And (says Christ) though the Father be greater then I, yet through the love
of the Father, I have power to say to the Father, Father, I will; and I will
have it so and so. and though we are creatures below Christ, yet we have the
same privilege to say, I will; and I will have it so.

And if GOD exercises his Dominion without this free, and volentary
submission, he does not all the work of a Lord, of a Husband.

Except Christ does descend from his greatness in some measure; I say from His
greatness, and come down a little from strict terms of his Highness, he does
not what he should do.

-- For this cause ought the woman to have power over her Husband] It Is the
duty that the Superior owes to the Inferior, to love, to give honor and
respect.

GOD has written out this exceeding plain and clear; as he says to Moses, Let
me alone. The loving opertunity of Moses was exceeding pleasing to God, and
held him by a kind of violence; a power and strength under which GOD suffered,
Let me alone. Jacob was admitted to the same privilege, Let me go, says
God; no, says he, I will not let thee go: he had that power to chain God to
his pleasure, No, thou shall bless me; I will not let thee go. Yet this will
in us, is the will of our husband and head; and it pleases him to put this will
into us, that it might overcome himself.

That which a Husband loves, and is agreeable to his nature, that he loves
should come from his wife.

Though a thing seem never so good and pleasant to God, yet it delights him to
have it come from our requests: Nay, our requests do not please Him, so much as
our violence: It pleases him to be held by violence by that love which he
gives; He was held in the galleries. He is contented to have his own will to
be subjected to the will of those that he delights in.

And in plain terms, He has given out this privilege -- Concerning the works
of my hands, Command ye Me.

A loving Husband gives all the power that he has over his Family, unto his
wife; and says, They are at thy command, all in thy power; though they are
mine, yet I freely bestow them upon thee. -- And concerning the works of my
hands, Command ye me.

The greatness of God never manifests it self more, then in coming down and
being a Servant; or, his power appears most in Subjection.

If power can only Reign, and not Serve, it is not Excellent power: but when
power exercises it self, Now in a Command, and then again sends forth it self
into obedience and Subjection, there is the Excellency of it.

To give Laws, and only to give Laws, were to be a Tyrant; and to make Laws
to keep us under, were Slavery: But to enable us to give Laws to Him; and rule
us so, as we may rule Him, to communicate to us so, as that He himself can
take the place of a Servant, This is Excellent Power and Lord-ship.

When the LORD has exercised the part of a KING over us, toward us, he
delights then to descend from his Throne, and to see us (as KINGS) act our
part, our power over Him.

-- For This Cause ought the woman to have Power over her head] For this cause,
That there may be a Harmony and an Agreement between them. For this cause, That
the Woman's yoke may be easy, delightful and pleasant. For this cause, That
there may be no discontent: for this cause, That there may be perfect love.

There could not be such a Harmony, if the LORD should always shut up himself
in Power, and we always Serve him in Strictnes of Authority, and* he always
hold forth himself unto us, in Commanding us, do this, and do that, and the
other; What delight could He have in us, or we in Him? If it were nothing but
thus, we should always stand at a distance, or run away way from him in fear.
Would he? No he could not take content in us, because we should be to weak
and low for him; if he did not give us Power, we were not suitable for him: And
if the LORD did not open himself to us, and show us our power over His heart,
as well as His Power over us, we could not so approach to him as we do; we
could not so take pleasure in him.

And we know this, That it pleases the LORD our GOD, that our fellowship with
him, should be delightful and satisfactory to us. If we were below Him, below
the greatness of God, if he did not greaten us, and heighten us, we were not fit
for his Society.

If he did not give such privileges to us as these, we might say to him, as
the Woman did to David, shall I wash the feet of the servants of my LORD. If
God did not cloth us with his own garments, his own Power and glory, put
upon us his own Majesty, his own self; if it were not his own greatness with
which we come unto him; if he did not make us fit, with that which he makes
for himself, we should not be fit society for him. He owes this to Christ upon
this ground, that Christ is equal with himself. And Christ owes this to Man
upon this ground that man is equal with himself.

There is a certain equallity between the Father and the Son -- He thought it
no robbery to be equal with God.

And we are exceeding bold (in the presence of God) to say, it is no robbery, in
some sense, that we are equal too: Therefore Christ is entered into a low
estate with us, that he might be one with us in a low estate. And we are raised
to a high estate, to be one with him in power and great glory; that it may be
counted no robbery to be epuall with him; To sit down with him in heavenly
places; to be as he is; to be where he is; to sit at his table; to eat as he
eats; drink as he drinks; drink and be merry. But this is readily confessed, the
equallity between the Father and the Son.

If the Father gives not power to him over himself there were no equallity.

If I did not give that power that I have to command thee, unto thee, that thou
should by this power command me by way of love; and as I have ruled thee as
a Father, thou should rule me as a Son: And as I have ruled thee as a Head:
If I were not contented now to lay down my bead-ship, that thou may as a
wife overruled me with thy Love; there were no equallity.

But there is a lesser reason, yet a great one; Because of the Angels.

This power of the Wife over the Husband is but what he gives, and what he
lowes.

Yet there is a reason for it, and that is the Angels. The Angels are friends
to this truth: or this is the Angels privilege.

When the great God brought forth his Son: (Mark) as he did in this lower
creation so he did in the Heavenly creation; he brought forth male and female,
in that Heavenly* creation he brought forth the first borne, he brought forth
male and female; or he bouught forth head and members: Christ and Angels.

And that which I shall say is this: In this state does all the Sons of God
sing together; here was that the Son took pleasure in; in the habitable parts
of his Earth Christ was brought forth: and Angels are as it were his body, or
his Spouse. Now in this state and condition the Angels and Christ they sung
together, or the Sons of God sung together; as Job says.

There is no note that Christ the head of Angels sung, but they sung too: there
is no praise that Christ gave to God, but the Angels that have fellowship with
him, gave to God the the same. There Is no favor that Christ received from his
Father: but they received the same in their proportion; and by virtue of that,
they had that which we speak of; power over Christ.

Oh, there was such an intimate, dear and sweet fellowship between Christ and
them, that they had power over him, as he had power over them.

Now when the LORD makes an Image of this heavenly creation, in this lower
World; and brings forth that world into this World; he makes here as he did
there; Man and woman; therefore does the Apostle require that the woman should
have that power over her head, that her antitype Angel had. Or Angels will
secure and make this good: the excellent Angels will make this good: That the
Womon should have power over her head, because it is their privilege, to have
power over Christ their head.

Though the devil would debar the creature from it, yet the Angels, good
Angels, do defend it; they secure it, it is their place, their priveledge. So
that Christ who is the great Angel, the Angel of presence; it is his privilege
to have power over his head.

He is an Angel, a Messenger, sent out from God: yet can say, I am such an
Angel, such a Messenger sent out from God, that I have such privilege, such
favor to have power over him. Angels come forth from him; may say, Thou have
sent us forth from thee, thy Messengers; yet we have this privilege, to have
power over thee. And man may say freely to, Lord thou have sent me forth, thy
servant: I am thy Messenger, thy Angel, and though sent out from thee, yet
still I have power over thee.

The Father sends out the Angel, Christ to do his will; yet is still contented
to take wisdom and council of Christ, and to be instructed by him: -- Thy
right hand shall teach thee terrible things.

Christ comes out as a Messenger from God concerning men. God takes council of
Christ of the things of man.

Christ sends out Man, and Man is his Messenger; yet is willing to take
instructions from him, in managing the affairs of the World.

To confirm this truth. That there is a kind of honor, true honor, that the
woman has given her by the man over the man. So Christ over God: And we over
Christ.

Yea, the same thing affirmed, and the reason of it, in the last chapter of the
Proverbs at the tenth verse and so on.

Who can find a virtuous woman, for her price is far above rubies.

The heart of her Husband does safely trust in her, so that he shall have no
need of spoil; she will do him good and not evil all the gaies of her life:
She seeks wool and flax, and works dilligently with her hands. She is like
the Merchants ships, she brings her food from afar. She considers a field
and buieth it with the fuit of her hands. She planeth a vinyard etc.

We know the figure; how woman is to Man she is made a meet healp to him. How
soletary and alone is Man without the woman: how desolate, wanting that
society; how unable he is to multiply himself; to perpetuate a generation to
himself without her. How loose, ayrie, and wandering a thing is he, till he
fixes and fasteneth by marriage. Such benefit has God by Christ: such benefit
has Christ by us. Such reason has the Father to exalt the Son. Such reason
has our Lord to exalt us.

-- Her price is far above Rubies.

Woman is the glory of the Man: The Church is the riches of Christ. We are the
glory of Christ. Christ the glory of God.

A man shines not gloriously, but in his wife. Christ shines not gloriously but
in his Church. God shines not gloriously, but in his Son.

God is poor without Christ; mean, has no riches if he have not his Son.

Christ is a poor head, if he has not his Church.

God is alone, solitary, wanting society, till he entertaines his Son into
fellowship with himself.

Christ is alone and solitary, till he entertains the Church into fellowship
with himself.

GOD certainly gives all his power to do his Son good.

I know that my glory thou art. I have it not except you have it. I can freely
and sufely commit it to you, for you are my self.

So says Christ. I have no glory except you have it. Yea, I have it in the
sweetest way when I have it in you. (I mean a chaste Church; a chaste Spouse,
married to Christ) Christ can as certainly commit his power to her, as to
himself.

The heart of her husband does safely trust in her.

As we are safe no where but in GOD, so GOD is safe no where but in US; as GOD
is our keeper, so we are his. And this treasure would be lost (the treasure of
God) if not found in Christ. The treasure of Christ would be lost, if not found
in the Church: The Heavenly liquor, or wine of Heaven, GOD, would be lost, if
there were not this vessel, Christ, to put it in.

And this Heavenly liquor, or wine, Christ, were lost, if there were not you to
but it in.

God needs such a vessel as Christ, to put himself in; Christ needs such a
vessel as you, to put himself in.

GOD would run every way, settle no where, be bounded in nothing, if he did
not settle in his Son. The Son would rest no where, have no content, if it were
not in thee. Men would run every way, rest no where, if not bounded by a wife.

God is not well, or safe, til he is committed to you, in you -- The Gospel is
committed to you.

The Glory of the Godhead is committed to Christ, and there it is safe: Christ
is committed to you, and there is safe.

The God of all excellency and treasure, is most safe, when he is committed to
us.

So that he shall have no deed of spoil.

Being made virtuous by the Spirit of our God (for therein we are made
virtuous) being one Spirit, He shall have no need of spoil: God has no need
to use the Septer and Sword, to arm himself against us, but in love and
kindness; there need's no forcing of us: When we are subdued into himself --
There Is no need of spoil. This assurance that he has of us, by giving Himself
unto us, is the quiet that He has in us. And when He has charmed us with
Himself in us, then He is become our Rest and quiet.

She will do him no hurt, but good all the days of her life.

Thou may well give thy Power to us, thou know that Power will never hurt
thee: Thou may well give that to her, thou know that will Command thee.

When the LORD our GOD opens Himself most to us, then we are most his Servants:
When he stands upon terms of Authority and Lord-ship still, then we reserve
something; but when he opens himself to us, then we reserve nothing -- we do
him no evil but good.

When he does us all good, then we do him all good; for we are all good in
Him: We are so filled with that goodness (Himself) that we can do him no
evil, but good all the days of our life.

She seeks wool and flax, and works willingly with her hands.

A Woman whilst she is a Servant, a Maid, is not so profitable to her Master,
as a wife: when our Lord is Married to us, then have we power to give our
selves to Him. With what Care does the Woman answer her Husbands love; with
what diligence does she labor for him, when filled with love.

When the LORD our GOD over-comes us with love, then we seek wool and flax:
Now we can be willing to labor; before we did it, but now we willingly do
it; now we seek it -- she seeks wool and flax.

All her household are clothed with scarlet.

The fruit of the Woman's labor, is the Husbands clothing.

The LORD our GOD is Clothed, God and all the People of God, are clothed by
Christ: And Christ and all his Family, are clothed by the Church. Let the
Church have this Fellowship, None shall go uncloathed, every thing amongst us
shall be full of the Spirit of our God; all the Family of God now, is Clothed
in Righteousness.

She is like the Merchants ships, she brings her food from far: she
considers a field, and byeth it; with the fruit of her hands, she planteth a
vinyard.

When Christ has this fullness of the Father, He puts forth and plants a
Church, and eats the fruit. When we have this fulness, we plant and eat
too. Christ comes down to us, as into a far country, to carry us to God. Christ
comes down to us; we come down into the world, to trade, traffic and deal for
God.

So in all this, the favor that God gives to us, is to give US a Propriety
with Himself, over Himself.

Nevertheless, Neither is the Man without the Woman, nor the Woman without the
Man in the LORD.

For as the Woman is of the Man, even so is the Man also by the Woman.

These two are unseperable, Man and Woman: In the LORD, they are unpartable.
It Is Sin and Satan, the accuser (of the breathren) that makes a breach between
these two.

-- The Man is not without the Woman, nor the Woman without the Man] Ye never
see God, but with Christ in his bosom; you never hear of a God, but you hear
of a Christ too. GOD will never speak, or act any thing but with Christ.

And ye never see Christ without his Church. Ye never see the Son of God, but
ye see the Spouse in his bosom.

If ever Christ be torn ffo from God, it is by violence of Death, of Satan,
and of Sin.

If ever we be rent from the bosom of Christ, its by the Devil, Death and
Sin. Yet then when we are rent from him, are we with him.

When Christ was in the lowest estate, in hell, he was in Heaven also; Noe one
is descended from Heaven, but he which is in Heaven.

Ye never find God without Christ, nor Christ without the Church, nor Man
without Woman.

Ye never find the Church without Christ, nor Christ without God, nor Woman
without the Man.

If ye find a Church without Christ, it is a Harlot; if you find a Christ
without a God, it is an Antichrist. The true Church is always as the Woman,
never without the Man; you never find her but in banishment, in sin without
the Man: you never find Cirist without God, nor the Woman without the Man, in
the LORD.

-- In the LORD. If these two are partable, it is not in the LORD, it is without
the LORD; but if they are reconciled in the LORD, they are never parted --
Neither is the Man without the Woman, Neither is the Woman without the Man.

Therefore give us leave to disclaim a God without a Christ; or a Christ
without a People. Ye do not see God, except ye see Christ; ye see not Christ,
but ye see GOD also; ye see not Christ, but you see your self.

It is not true Christ, only Christ, THE Christ, except thou see him in thy
own person; except thou see thy self with him. If thou see him one, and
thy self another, its a Sad sight, an Ill sight, its no true fight: you cannot
see the Son, but you must see your self with him: see him in the highest glory
that you can, you see him not right, except you see your self there -- Man is
not without the Woman.

If you would give God an exaltation above your self, he will not. God says,
I will not be exalted except my Son be there: God will not exalt his Son where
you are not.

And the Son says, I will not be where you are not; I cannot be where you are
not, I cannot be without you -- The Man is not without the Woman.

-- Neither the Woman without the Man] You cannot be without Christ; you cannot
possibly be The wife and spouse without Christ: And if thou art sick, he is
sick with thee; if thou art tempted, he is tempted with thee; if thou art
afflicted, he is afflicted also.

Christ cannot be any where but the Father is with him, I am not alone, the
Father is with me: when he was in the lowest condition that could be, when God
seemed to leave him, yet he was really with him; and when he was in death then
he was in death too: when Christ suffered and dyed, God suffered and dyed; it
was the blood of GOD: If I go down to hell, thou art there.

And when thou know thy self to be the wife and spouse of Christ, then
thou can say, I am in hell indeed, but my Lord is with me; I am in hell, in
death and sorrow, but Christ is with me -- The Woman is not without the Man.

All the violence of Satan cannot take the Son from the Father; If he does take
him any whither, the Father will go with him: yea, though the Son does go away,
the Father goes along with him into that humiliation. Neither can any thing
rend us from the bosom of the Father; but if we be, or hereafter may be by
temptation rended from him, yet we shall see our Lord in temptation: Where the
one is, the other is: where one is, both are.

-- The Man is not without the Woman] He says, I have no glory, but what thou
have; we say, we have no weakness, but what thou have. Thus does the LORD
our GOD enterchange with us; He makes US High and great with Him: and makes
Himself Low and Nean with US.

And this is another reason that secures that power which is given to us.

And though she rule over me; yet I rule, because she is my self.

And though I give her my power, I give her my will too: Fo it is what I please.
And (says Christ) though I give it you, yet it is mine; and there is nothing in
you but my will; yea, for my good.

And as I give you my will, so I give you my power; and you cannot abuse me, be
cause you are my self. (No one hates his own flesh but loves and cherishes
it) And when you exercise this power over me, it is my self.

-- The Woman is not without the Man] In communion, you are now the Man, and I
the Woman; as I was the man, and you the woman: as I was mighty in you; and you
weak in me: as I was weak in you, and you mighty in me.

If the Husband should reserve any thing from the Wife; then the Husband would
be without the Wife.

If God should reserve any thing from Christ, and did not communicate his
uncommunicablenes; And with all things his power: then God would be some where
where Christ is not; or Christ some where where God is not.

Or if Christ had power without, the Father; then he would be some thing that
the Father is not: If the Father were not in subjection with the Son, the Son
would be some thing that the Father is not. If I did not give you that power
that I have by my spirit, I should still be something without you. And if you
should be the subjector, and I not servant; then would you be some thing
without me; which I cannot endure.

I be nothing but what you are: and you shall be nothing but what I am. There
would still be some jarres between us, if there wrre any thing un-made-over,
ungiven.

If thou did est not take every thing that we have into Thee, and set it on
high; we could not be exalted. And if thou did not take our meannes and
subjection upon Thee, and walk in the flesh; we could not enjoy Thee.

Here Is another reason. As the woman is of the man, so the man is by the woman:
but all things of God.

-- The Woman is of the Man] Christ says, I am of the Father. The Church
says, I am of Christ. I have nothing says Christ; but what I have of the
Father. I have nothing says the Soul, but what I have in Christ. I do nothing
of my self, but what I see the Father do, says Christ. I do nothing of my
self, nothing of my own, but as I see Christ do; what I have or am, I am of
him, says Man: I am all of him and in him. This is more easily confessed. But
then,

-- Even so is man by the woman] As I am of Christ (says the Soul) even so is
Christ by me As the woman says, I am of man I confess; so is man by me, and
he has his being from me.

Question. How comes this to be so?

Answ. First, Thus: Man is by the Woman in the stubstance, in Jesus Christ: As
Wisdom borne of a woman. He is therefore called the Son of Man, descended
from Man.

As Christ descends from God in a way of descending (the Father begets the
Son; the Son begets us) so the Son arises out of us. The Father out of him.

As Christ receives substance from the Father, and we from him: so Christ
arises out of us: The Father out of him. And as we borrow our selves of him;
so he is borrowed out of us.

As by his travel we are brought forth, he labors six days and brings forth
us; so by our labor he is brought forth by us. And he does as freely confess
us to be his Mother, as he is willing to be our Father. He has his original
from us, and does confess that it is his glory, that he has his birth, rice
and growth out of such a poor mean stock and root as Man. Jesus Christ is by
us; he is of man, he is called the Son of man.

First, Nan is in the World, then Christ, then God: as God is first in Heaven,
then Christ, then Man. And so if ye will take the point of the lowest from the
Earth: Then first, Man is begotten; Man is; Man lives; and after man is, then
comes Christ borne of Man: an age after Man, the second unto unto Man: when
Christ has lived here a time; then is God.

As we are of him, so he is of us: -- Even so is the man by the woman]

God does so empty Himself of all that he has into the Son, that he does as it
were receive a new being from the Son.

God does so love Jesus Christ, that he does deny himself for his sake. I do
even spoil my self of my glory, my Son, to empty it into thee. I do divest my
self of my glory, to put it upon and in thee.

Christ comes and empties himself by his humiliation into us. I will power out
my Kingdom into you. I will suffer my Kingdom to be wholly emptied into
flesh, into man. And the next Kingdom that I have, shall be in Man, in you.
And if I am not emptied enough into you by my incarnation, then I Will come forth
on the cross and be slain, that I might be more in you. And the glory that I
had distinct from you, I have lost it. And ever I be raised again, it shall be
by you, and in you, or in you and with you. -- Even so is Man also by the Woman]

That seeing it has pleased me to humble my self so low; or it has pleased
thee for my sake, in obedience to me, to be abased, therefore in reward to this
righteousness and subjection of thine, I Will have my glory out of thee, by thee.

And then, when our Lord Jesus has brought us into subjection, and slain us.
Now (Mark) That out of an empty and dying state, I will arise into glory, and I
will come to my greatness and majesty by this means that you are in.

Though Man be the head of the Woman, yet Man is by the woman; and though this
be the greatness of Man, yet he must have his being by the Woman.

-- A woman shall compass a man. And he is swollowed up and lost even in this
weakness, that he might receive another glory, out of us, by us and in us.

-- But all things of God] Now if ye meet with this mystery in any piece of it,
if you meet with this truth in in any percel of it, or if you meet with this in
a side-look, it will have no comeliness at all in it, or nothing to be desired:
but if you see this in open face, as in God; if you see God below. and God
above; God in you, and GOD without you; God in Christ; GOD in his People: If
you see God fill all in all; how he is the highest in the lowest, the lowest in
the highest; how he is gift in taking, and taking in giving; that what he
gives, he has, and what he has, he gives: O, this is order and harmony!
there is no striffe or jarre in this tune, every string speaks to one another,
and embrace each other; all points are good in their place, and every period if
you take them in God: as all things are in God, O, now it is excellent, here
it is precious!

Heavenly mysteries are pleasant, reconciled; sweet, no where but in God, of
GOD; but out of him they are full of weakness, obsurdity and mere vanity.

And any of these enjoyments, outward beings, inward speculations, outward
actions etc. if they are not all as of God, in GOD, they are all nothing. In
being broken off from the whole they are killed and slain: but in the head ye
see them jointly embrace one another: as many, and yet one; being two, and yet
one: being two, and yet the same: being one and yet divided: divided, yet
whole. This is sweet.

The end of the eight sermon.
THE WITNESSES DEATH AND RESURRECTION.
REVEL. 11.11, 12. And after three days and a half, the Spirit of life from
God entered into them, and they stood upon-their feet: and great fear fell upon
them which saw them.

And they heard a great voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither.
And they ascended up to Heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld them.


THere is much talk and discourse of the two witnesses, and of the slaying of
the witnesses, which has occasions the opening of this Scripture at this time.

I shall briefly pass through the former part of the Chapter, which shows the
mystery of these two witnesses in a lower and sadder state, Prophes^ing in
sackcloth, together with their death, and the lying of their dead bodies in
the streets of the great City: And shall hasten to that which (to me) is the
most pleasant and delightful, Their Resurrection and Ascension; which are
expressed in the verses now read.

Its said in the first verse of the chap. There was given to me a Reed like
unto a Rod, and the Angel stood, saying, Rise and measure the Temple of God,
and the Alter, and they that worship therein.

We know concerning the Revelation in general ( John says) It was The
Revelation of Jesus Christ, which was given to him of the knowledge of things
that should shortly come to pass. The state and condition of the Church of
God, from the Apostles time to the end: or, the discovery of that wickedness
and apostasy which was to come in upon the Church, and we see is come into the
Church since the pouring forth of the Spirit of God after the Ascension of
Jesus Christ. with the nature, kinds, and effects, of this Apostasy.

And (says he) there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel said,
Arise and measure the Temple of God, and the Alter, and they that worship
therein.

Its that which every one would be at, the measuring of Heavenly things, the
Temple of God; but before ye are able to give the measure of Divine things, ye
must have a Rule given into your hand.

Every one presumes to have this faculty to judge all things, to try all
things, and yet have not that Standard or Rule given them, where by they should
Judge and Try.

This Reed or Rod is the standard of the Spirit of GOD, It is the Rod of Gods
mouth. And until ye have this standard, this Rule, to try and measure things
by, all ye do is vain, and ye shall in measuring, measure only the outward
court, and neglect and leave out the inward Temple of God, and Alter, and they
that are the True Worshippers.

And as we must have a Reed or Rule given us, wherewith to measure Divine
things, so it must be an Angel, I say, an Angel at least, or the Spirit of an
Angel that must measure; for that is the lowest estate that can be admitted
to measure Divine things.

-- And he call's [Arise] Arise out of flesh, Arise out of the world, Arise out
of your own reason; Arise far above the traditions of men; Arise from that you
have known, from that you have heard of men; come up far Higher and far above
that dark, deceitful, lying world in which ye have lived.

And what must be measured?

There are three things to be measured: The Temple, the Alter, and they that
Worship therein. The Lord has afforded his presence in the midst of that
general Antichristian Apostacy that has befallen the Church.

The Temple is the presence of God, the indwelling of God with his People; or
such a measure of the Spirit of the Lord in his People, as makes them a fit
Temple for the Lord to dwell in.

An Alter is such a presence of God, as makes us kill and, slay, and shed the
blood of those beasts that are in the Church.

And they that worship therein: That is, All that inwardly, and spiritually do
worshid in the Temple, and Sacrifice upon the Alter, that have an assurance of
the presence of God dwelling with them; GOD dwelling in flesh, and crucifying
flesh; God dwelling in flesh, is the Temple; GOD killing, slaying and offering
up flesh, is the Alter: and God in these is known and worshipped.

They in whom GOD dwells, in whom God kills and crucifies flesh, They are the
Temple; They are the Alter; They are the true Worshippers of GOD. This is that
which must be measured; the Temple, the Alter, and they that worship therein.

-- But the Court that is without the Temple leave out, and measure it not] All
your outward, visible prophessions, wisdom, arts, knowledge, gifts, Churches,
ordinances, all that is without the Temple of GOD, all that is without the
Spirit of GOD (says He) leave it out, measure it not; Its that which the
Gentiles are exercised in, Its given to the Gentiles. Worldly christians,
Gentile christians (for they will be called christians) Gentile Saints (for
they will be called Saints, and we will give it them:) Its their business to
measure the outward court; for it is given to idem; Ordinances, Scriptures,
gifts, Churches, Governments; all these things are the outward court^: they are
given to the world, therefore leave them out, measure them not. They are the
outward Court, therefore take no pains about it; cast it off, own it not,
acknowledge it not measure it not, for it is not worth the measuring.

There is indeed an inward secret Temple of God, and Alter of GOD; God in the
flesh, God offering up flesh; These are to be measured: but as for all visible,
outward, earthly things, have nothing to do with them, they are the Gentiles
portion, the Heathens, the Nations portion. Those only that are Spiritual, that
know the in-dwellings of God with them; the dwelling of God in flesh, and the
offering up of the flesh unto God: These are the Temple and Alter that are to
be measured; But The outward Court leave out, measure it not.

Object. But these are holy things (you will say) holy Ordinances, holy
Scriptures, holy Prayers holy Faith; These are the holy City of God?

Ans. True, and yet all these are given to the Gentiles, to be trampled upon
and trodden under foot. And all that which worldly Saints, Gentile Saints,
worldly professors do with these things, is only to tread upon and trample them
under their feet; this is the use they make of them, and of all the holy things
of God that are outward; holy ordinances, Scriptures, Churches, etc. they shall
tread them under foot, and use them like beasts and swine. And how long?

-- Forty and two months. It Is the time of the Reign of Antichrist, the time
of slaying the witnesses: It Is expressed in the 11. verse, by three days and an
half: and here, by Forty and two months; which is a season or time that is
measured by the Moon; and shows, that in all these things there is only a Moon
light, a cool, weak light, a light borrowed from the Sun, not the immediate
light of the LORD: and ye know the Moon is always changable, increasing or
decreasing, in the wane, full, or at the change; it is always up and down,
never at one stay; so is the state of the World, of the Worldly Church;
uncertain, unconstant, and variable. And you shall have them in twenty four
months, in several moons, in several states; and called by them, several
dispensations; one while in Episcopacy, another while in Presbytery, then in
Independency, then in Annabaptisme; every one have their several months
measured out; in which are various operations of that moon light: but all these
Ordinances, Scriptures, Churches, Prayers, etc. are the Gentiles portion. And
let them take them, and use them all their months.

-- And I will give unto my two witnesses] I will give] GOD gives that which
the witnesses have. It Is said of the holy City It Is given: God gives to the
witnesses to Prophecy by days, not by months; but it is given to the
Gentiles, to Antichrist, to trample under foot the holy City, the outward Court
by months, not by days; by a cool weak moonlight; not by the light of the
Sun, not by day light. Though the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, be a sad
and dark time, yet it is not without a glorious light, a bright shining light;
It Is by days.

But more particularly, -- I will give] God Himself will give this inward
spiritual glorious light of Himself; He will give to his two witnesses a more
Immediate discovery of Himself, a more Divine and Heavenly light then to all
the World besides: More Spiritual light, more life, more grace, more glory
shall appear when there shall be an explicateing and unfolding of the secret
(but sweet) Name of the LORD. The LORD says it, This I will do; and the LORD
does whatsoever He says -- I will give unto my two witnesses.]

-- MY two witnesses] The two witnesses are described to be two Olive trees
and two Candlesticks, standing before the GOD of the whole Farth. I the LORD
will give unto MY witnesses.

-- To my TWO witnesses] The LORD has TWO Witnesses that testify concerning
Himself; which are Christ and the Spirit, Two witnesses; first the Son, then
the Spirit; first Christ in flesh, and then Christ in Spirit. These are the two
Olive trees, Through which the golden Oil of the Godhead and Dietie runs
into the Church; into the two golden Candlesticks: That Holy anointing which
runs through the flesh and Spirit of Christ, into the Saints; whereby they
come to be the Holy Anointed ones of GOD: and these two testify that there is
a God in the Earth.

The first Witness is Christ in the flesh, testifying in weakness, in
lowness, in meannesse; and this is the Olive tree on the left hand.

The other Witness is, Christ in spirit, in more power and glory, testifying,
or bearing Witness to GOD, in more brightness, strength and power; and this
is The Olive tree on the right hand, Christ in Majesty, Christ exalted.

-- And I will give to my two witnesses] I, I the LORD will give, I the Father
will give: It Is the proper nature of the Father to give, to send forth from
Himself: And they to whom the Lord gives, are first, Christ in flesh, and
secondly, Christ in Spirit. And these testify and show forth what God is.

-- And they shall prohesie a thousond two hundred and sixty days clothed in
sackcloth. Such is the wisdom of GOD, that when he will have the holy City,
the outward court left to the Gentiles; to worldly Professors, to be trodden
under foot, it is for so many months: Its for a space of time, measured by the
Moon. -- But he will give to his two witnesses to prophecy by days. They
shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and sixty days. The course of the Moon
is by months. The course of the Sun is by days. A day is measured by the Sun,
as a month is by the Moon. And it is to be observed, that though the
prophesying of the Witnesses be reckoned by shorter and quicker spaces, days
being shorter then months; yet is for a special reason; to signify that this
time of the prophesying of the witnesses, is a daytime: it is a day; the day of
the Lord.

And though the Gentiles time is more in bulk, by months, yet it is no more
then the time of the prophecy of the witnesses is by days. It Is a glorious
time; it is the time of the appearing of the Son of righteousness: though it
be reckoned by days yet it is the same time, and of as long continuance as the
other that is reckoned by months.

When the outward Court is trampled under foot by the Gentiles forty two
months, then the two witnesses are prophesying a thousand two hundred and
sixty days. I will give you a particular reason why the time of the witnesses
prophesying is reckoned by days. It is to note the infinite variety of
dispensations in the prophesying of the witnesses: In which time are many
sweet, bright shining days; many excellent discoveries; many glorious
mysteries, are voutsafed unto the People of God, in the time of their
prophesying; and yet the nature of their prophecy is, They are clothed in
sackcloth: It is a dark, mournful expression, holding forth thus much; That
they are in a dark, low, course, sad, mean, and poor estate, and but
prophesying neither.

The LORD comes and sets up his two witnesses, Christ in flesh, and Christ in
spirit. He gives two witnesses of himself: the flesh of Christ, and the spirit
of Christ; the one to be crucified, the other to revive; the one prophesying
and foretelling what shall be, in sackcloth; in a very dark, low, mean estate:
the other prophesying and foretelling heavenly things to come. More high, more
glorious, more divine discoveries are made known by the Spirit of Christ, then
by the flesh of Christ: And these are the two Olive trees and two golden
chandlesticks, standing at the right hand and left hand of the God of the whole
earth.

-- To my two witnesses] There are many and various interpretations that People
do make of these two Witnesses, which though very remote from the inward and
spiritual pith and marrow; yet they may bear some Analogy or proportion with
the mind of the Spirit, as they are a dark figure of truth; and in their
greatest distance may be gathered up into these two; Christ in flesh, and
Christ in Spirit. Some interpret them to be the Magistracy and Ministry: this
is a very dark interpretation, and very remote from the Adequate sense and
meaning of the place; and yet it may hold forth something of truth in it; it
being a dark figure of the Magistracy and Ministry of Christ. Christ a
Minister, a Servant, a Prophet, a Priest: So he is in the flesh. Christ a Lord,
a King, Reigning, Governing, and so he is the Spirit.

Some again interpret them to be the two Testaments, the old and the new; which
they call, Law and Gospel. A remote and dark figure, still of Ghrist in flesh
and Spirit. Christ in flesh, having much in it of the nature of the old
Testament; Christ in Spirit, the new man, the LORD from heaven; having much in
it of the nature of the new Covenant or new Testament.

But it is generally understood to be the Saints of God, and (to speak in
proper language) these are the Saints of God, or the holy ones of God, Christ
in the Spirit: Christ in the flesh, and Christ in Spirit, where these two are
bearing witness in any, they are the Saints of God, they are the holy ones of
God; These are the two Olive trees spoken of, and the two anointed ones that
stand by the Lord of the whole earth. Zech. 4. last verse. These are the two
holy anointed ones of God

If the question be, What be these two Olive trees which through the golden
pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves? It Is answered, They are the two
anointed ones of God.

It Is too much for men, mere men, to be the Olive trees, or the Olive branches
arising out of the root of God, emptying the golden Oil out of themselves: for
men take oil into themselves: but Christ in flesh and spirit, gives forth the
golden Oil into the two golden candlesticks. The Spirit in the anointed ones,
or the anointing of the Spirit in the flesh of the Saints, are the two Olive
trees, and the two golden candlesticks, standing by the Lord of the whole
Earth. Emanuel, God with us. God with man: God in flesh.

-- And they have mighty power -- If any man hurt them, fire proceeds out of
their mouths to devour their enemies] If any thing within or without rises up
against Christ and the Spirit, against these two Olive trees, against these two
witnesses prophesying, fire proceeds out of their mouths and devoureth it. If
any man hurt them he must in this manner be killed.

They have great power, though but prophesying, and in sackcloth. -- Fire
proceeds out of their mouths etc. Not material fire: but spiritual fire. The
fire of God in the Iowest ^state of the two witnesses, though but prophesying
in sackcloth, is very firce and terrible. If any man rise up against the Test
money of Christ in Spirit against these two Olive trees; they have power to
destroy it: fire proceeds from the Spirit, torments, consumes and destroys it:
whatsoever rises up against these two witnesses in this our age, this fire it
has, it does constantly destroy and devour it up.

And I am sure of it, the cause of all the devouring plagues that are upon the
world in this age, at this time: the distractions and confusions that are upon
all powers ecclesiastical and civell, is for the hurting and opposing the low,
poor, and mean beginnings and appearances of the Lord in his witnesses. And
this be ye assured of, if any man will hurt or oppose them, be he never so
great, be he never so wise, be he never so strong and powerful, be he never so
rich and wealthy, be he never so devout and religious, if he or they shall
oppose the Spirit of the LORD, Christ in his People: in their prophesying
either as they leave out the outward Court and holy City; or as they are
measuring the inward Temple and Alier, as they are worshipping God in the
Temple sacrificing and offering up their flesh and fleshlinesse: I say,
whosoever shall make opposition against the Spirit and spiritual actings of
the Lord Christ and his People, must in this manner be killed. Fire puoceedeth
out of their mouths etc. Fire shall destroy the whole world, and all that which
is of the world.

I have found, that whatsoever in me has risen up in opposition against these
two witnesses, the fire of the LORD has fallen upon it and destroyed it: and I
have found that the two witnesses have power to shut heaven, that it rain not.

-- These have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days of their
Prophesie] When these two witnesses testify against any thing, any man, any
creature, any way, any ordinances, any judgment, saying, This is hethenisme,
this is gentileisme, this is carnal, this is fleshly, this is the creature,
this is man, and not God, or of God; presently it is destroyed, consumed,
blasted and brought to nothing.

And in this they shall shut Heaven: through men have formerly been sweetly
affected by the power of grace, yet when any thing in them has risen up
against these witnesses, they have power to shut. Heaven against them.

As they have power to open Heaven upon some, so they hove power to shut Heaven
upon others: that is, effectually to exclude all carnal, fleshly, earthly man,
from the showers and dewes of the grace of God. Though they have made never so
great a show of holiness, religiousnes and godliness, though they have been able
to say much, and execute what they say; yet when the two witnesses have
declared, that it is not God; it is not Christ, it is not the holy one of God;
but it is man, it is the flesh; it is the outward Court that is excluded: not the
inward Temple; Therefore measure it not, leave it out, meddle not with it;
exclude it from having the dewes and showers of Heaven fall upon it; let not
the sweet distilling strerms of God fall upon it; for it is not God, nor off
God. Presently Heaven has been shut, and they have had no rain: This we have
experience of in their ministration. This me have found with a bundance of
justness. When any man, or any thing, has risen up against these witnesses,
these Prophets (and so it has been frequently seen) though they have been
never so glorious in the Word, and under never so glorious professions of
Gospel, Christ, free grace; the light of the knowledge of God, Church
felowships, and such like notions as these; yet, When ever they have risen up
against the Spirit of Christ, so soon as the same Spirit has declared, and
witnessed, what they are, presently they have deen blasted, withered, scattered
and broken: They have had no more Rain from Heaven; and have withered as a
plant, that God has not planted, as a branch that has had no showers.

-- And have power to turn water into Bloud] This we have seen to (for we
speak nothing else but what we have seen) that whereas professors have
formerly had many pleasant streams, many sweet waters, many refreshing
comforts and joys: Immediately upon the Witnesses Prophesying all their sweet
waters have been turned into blood; ordinances, duties, gifts, when they are
not spiritual, and spiritually exercised, the Witnesses Prophesying, have
turned them into-bloud; into contention, strife, debate, distraction and
confusion.

-- And to smite the earth with all Plagues] The Earth is Thy creation, the
subject on which these Plagues are inflicted.

Whenfoever the Spirit of the Lord appears, either on the right hand or on the
left, that is, as Christ in flesh, and Christ in Spirit: whenever these Two
witnesses, these two Anointed ones, that stand by the LORD of the whole Earth,
shall testify and bear witness of flesh to be crucified, killed and slain;
presently their testimony smite the Earth, and all earthly things with Plagues.

These Prophets have the Power of God, and all the Power of GOD; and can smite
the Earth with what Plagues they will. I have found them Smiting the Earth with
sicknesses, spiritual sicknesses, weaknesses, consumptions, leprosies,
plague-sores, running-sores, famine, death, wars, fears, frightings,
amazments, wild-beasts; with all these Plagues. The Earth is now full of
Plagues, sent forth from the mouths of these two witnesses.

And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall oversome
them, and kill them.

There is a time to Witness, and a time to Finish their work; and you have it
here Prophesied, that they must first Finish their Testimony, and that they
shall be overcome and killed; but not before they have finished their
Testimony.

But How must they be killed?

The beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit shall made war against
them, and kill them.

This Beast which ascends out of the bottomless pit, is Antichrist. Many
speak of the slaying of the Witnesses, and it is in many peoples mouths now,
which does certainly foretell (though in them very darkly) something that is to
come. But first let me tell you, that that which shall kill them must Ascend out
of the Bottomless pit. It shall be no outward, or visible force that shall
slay these two Witnesses: It shall be by no visible Power of Kings or Princes,
Papists or Malignants, that these Witnesses shall be killed: no, we may see to
the Bottom of al these. That which shall slay these two Witnesses, shall Ascend
from a pit that has no Bottom; that is, There shall such hellish fins, such
Hideous Monstrous darkness, such filthy Beastliness, arise in the minds and
spirits of men, that shall fight against the very Light of Christ, and the
Spirit of Christ in His People: But these Witnesses are above the rage, and
reach of all visible Powers. They may indeed kill and slay the bodies of men,
and after that can do no more; for (alas) that is not that which is here
slain; But the two Olive Trees, Christ in Fesh and Spirit: And that which kills
them is a Beast, a Beastliness below the Beastliness of man; It Is not man,
it is by no power of man; It Is Beastly darkness, Beastly lusts, Hellish
wickedness; such as arises from a Pit that has no bottom; such as you cannot
tell whence it is, nor what it is; such as has not been visibly manifest
amongst the Sons of men. Ye shall see yet more abominable, hellish, hiddious
beastly, black wickedness, then ever yet appeared.

Ye cannot yet tell the Father of these wickednesses: Ye are able to say, such
and such wickednesses comes from the Pope; such and such from Jesuits and
Papists; such and such from your own hearts: But ye shall find such black
hellish wickedness, such disorder and confusion, such torment, such
disquietment, such ignorance, such base ignorance, come out of a Pit deeper,
and darker, and filthyer then has yet been found out amongst the sons of men;
such as is without length, or breadth; such as is not to be fathomed, or
measured; such a pit shall be opened, and such darkness come in to the world,
as never before appeared: such as shall be blacker, and baser, and fouler, then
hitherto has been brought forth.

And these shall make war against the Witnesses, and overcome them: First,
fight, then overcome and kill them. First, oppose the light of the LORD, the
Spirit of the LORD Christ. I say, oppose these two witnesses and testimonies of
the presence of the LORD; of GOD dwelling in flesh, killing flesh, offering up
flesh upon the Alter: These shall be opposed.

Secondly, overcome them, and kill them: There is a continual opposition of
the Death, and of the Resurrection of Christ; and of Christ Risen in us; of GOD
dwelling with us, and in us. And there shall such a darkness, such a black
darkness, arise out of this bottomless pit, that shall fight with this light,
overcome it and kill it; So that ye shall not be able to say, ye have God in
you. These Olive trees shall not give forth their Oil; they shall not be able
to speak their own Language in you; ye shall not enjoy those sweet inward
refreshings, that some times ye have had.

The Witnesses shall be overcome, killed and slain: such hidious, monsterous
darkness shall arise in you, that ye shall not know that ye have the Spirit
of God, that Christ dwells in you: ye shall not be able to see, or say, that ye
have the presence of God with you; that ye have the presence of these two Olive
trees, Emptying their Golden Oil into you: Al their opperations shall be quite
killed, slain and dead.

-- And their dead bodies shall lie in the streets of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. The
place of the dead bodies, is the streets of the great City, Babylon. The world
governed by Satan, the god of the world, is Babylon. In the Streets of the
great City, Babylon, ye shall have the dead bodies of the Witnesses lie
un-buried. There ye shall have some forms, and figures of what they have
said, and done, but dead; without life, without power, without spirit.

Ye shall have strange workings of the Devil, and Satan, in the streets of the
great City, when the Witnesses are killed, to preserve their carcasses, forms
and figures, spiritless and life-less: And this is the wickedness of the flesh
Heightened.

There are these two Streets in the great City, Sodom, and Egypt, that will be
found in you, though they do not yet appear: The filthiness of Sodom, pride,
gluttony, fullness of bread, and abundance of Idleness. The wickedness of
Egypt, Idolatry, enmity, rage and malice, against the Israel of GOD.

-- Where also our Lord was Crucified] Our Lord was Crucified at Jerusalem
literally, or according to the Letter; But spiritually it was in Sodom and
Egypt: It was the filthy wickedness of Sodom, and the cursed enmity of Egypt,
that Crucified Christ. And you will find that that spiritual Sodom and Egypt,
that filthy wickedness of Sodom, and that cursed Idolatry of Egypt, is that
same wickedness which shall, will, and must, kill and slay these two witnesses:
or thus, That wickedness in the Scribes and Pharisees, that crucified Christ
formerly; I say, that wickedness Heightened, and Spirituallized in the
worldly, fleshly part of the Saints; that wickedness grown more vil'd, and
more abominable, then ever was known before. The wickedness of the Scribes and
Pharisees that accused Christ, of the High Priest that condemned Christ, of
Judas that betrayed Christ, that grown as Sodom and Egypt, as the filthy
whordome of Sodom, as the cursed emnity of Egypt, shall make war against these
two witnesses, and kill them: Here the Dead bodies of these two Witnesses Lies.

-- And they of the people, and kinreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see
their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in graves.] Peoples, Kinreds, Nations, Tongues, Gifts,
Strengths, Powers, etc. Shall see the dead bodies of the two Witnesses, the
outward form, and figure, without spirit and life; The outward carcass that
these Heavenly lights, that these two witnesses, did minister in: They shall see
them and shall not suffer them to be buried, to be put in graves. The earthly,
carnal, worldly part of man, cannot endure that these bodies should be buried:
And why? They live upon them, they cannot subsist without them; their very life
and being is upheld and maintained by the carcass, by the body, the dead body;
by the fleshly part that is in man, in the Saints. The Remembrance and sight of
these, is their very life; therefore they will not suffer them to be put in
graves: to be buried out of their sight. They keep up al outward, and fleshly
forms above ground as long as they can. It is their life, their peace, their
comfort, their joy; they are glad that the Spirit and life is gone, that was
wont to vex and torment them.

And they that dwell on the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and
shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them,
etc.

-- They that dwell on the Earth shall rejoyce] All fleshly powers, and parts,
rejoice and are glad in these forms. There is an ease, a freedom, a joy, a
rejoicing, that arises in, and amongst earthly men, when these two Prophets
are slain.

-- And shall send gifts one to another] Those that were before counted earthly
men, are now in their own Esteem, Heavenly. We are (say they) good
Christians, Religious men (yea, in their own esteem; and so they judge of them
selves in the midest of their merriment) And though we be in the Earth, and
on the Earth; yet we have Peace, and Quietness, and gladness; we rejoice
and are merry together; Now, there is nothing to vex us, because they that
tormented us are dead. This is the manner of their boasting, and glorying over
the dead bodies, the Carcasses of the witnesses, when they are slain.

-- But after three days and an half, the Spirit of life from God entered into
them] After the death of the witnesses, follows their resurrection: there must
be a death, before there can be a resurrection. People would fain ascend into
Heaven, and possess Heaven, and attain to the resurrection of the dead: but
this they cannot do, until they be first slain. You must die, before you can
rise (I speak to those that are spiritual, into whom these Olive trees have
emptied themselves) I say there must be a death, before there can be a
resurrection. The most excellent, the most glorious christians that I know,
must be slain.

-- After three days and an halfe] It Is a sad time, this, The slaying of the
witnesses. The prophecy is mournful, yet very effectual. When the Beast
ascendes out of the bottomless pit, killing the witnesses, it is a sad time:
but when they rise again, it is a time of great rejoicing. Though their death
be grievious, yet their resurrection is glorious.

-- After three days and a half] This is expressed elsewhere, by a time,
times, and half a time.

First, A Time, that is one day. Then times, that is two days. Then half a time,
or the division of time, that is half a day. The meaning is this. It will be but
a while that the witnesses must lie in this sad and dead condition.

It will be but a day and two days and half a day: or a time, times, and half
a time, and then they shall rise again.

In this sad condition there will be an expectation of a quick and sudden
deliverance. Well (says the Soul) after one day is past, I shall be delivered
and recover again. This is comfortable that it is but a day. O, the slaying of
the witnesses (though a sad time) will not be without a day to your spirits: A
day wherein ye shall see God. A day wherein ye shall know it is day. A day
wherein shall be an expectation of a seasonable and sweet deliverance.

But then (alas) there are yet two dries and half a day, wherein it will grow
more dark; there will be multiplied evils; there will be division of times. Now
(says the Soul) let it be when God will; I am contented to wait: I am not
careful when it shall be. When the heart shall lose its expectation of a quick
deliverance; and shall scarce have a thought of deliverance at all, much less
know when it shall be: and shall ly down in a sweet submission, now let it be
when God pleases.

When this state (days or times) is past, then comes half a day, or half a
time: And this is a short time, now deliverance hasteneth. He will cut his work
short in righteousness: For except these days should be shortened no flesh
should be saved: but for the Elects sake they are shortend. They are but half
so much at last as they were at first. God will cut his work short in
righteousness.

-- And the Spirit of life from God entered into them] There is not true life,
but by the Spirit of life which is in God. When the Spirit of the holy God
comes into us, then we live, that is a life in deed. Before, it was the Spirit
of God working in a poor, low, sad state; it was a life in sackcloth; a
mournful, a dying life: a life next the grave. But when the Spirit of life
from God, the Spirit of life (that is life it self) lives in man; then he is
well; then he lives; then he has life indeed.

-- And I heard a great voice from Heaven saying, come up hither] Until we
hear this great voice, Come up hither, there is no life, there is no motion:
but when we hear this Voice, then we live.

I see People are gaping after Heaven, but they cannot come up thither, see the
glory of God, or know any true solid joy, or peace, till they be dead and
raised again: Then shall they hear a great Voice, saying, COME UP HITHER. And
yet this is but the sixth Trumpet. So much briefly for this time.

The end of the ninth sermon.
THE WITNESSES DEATH AND RESURRECTION.
REVEL. 11.11, 12. And after three days and a half, the Spirit of life from
God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet: and great fear fell upon
them which saw them.

And they heard a great voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither.
And they ascended up to Heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld them.


WE have already opened part of this mystery, of the two witnesses; and have
showed you who they are.

These two Olive trees, or the two golden Candlesticks, that stand on the right
hand, and on the left, before the God of the whole earth; are Christ and the
Spirit, who do testify and witness concerning the Father. And though other
ordinary Interpretations of the two Witnesses may be taken in; as that it is
the Magestracy and the Ministry, the old and new Testament, and the Saints; yet
al of them in a very far and remote way: and as they have some analogy and
similitude with Christ and the Spirit: Christ in the flesh, being the Minister,
Priest, or Prophet of the Church: and Christ in the Spirit being the
Magestrate, King or Governor of his Church.

Some take them to be the old and new Testtament, which is indeed a dark Figure
of Christ in flesh, and Christ in Spirit: The Old Testament, which stood in
types, shadows and figures of Christ to come in the flesh, may be taken to be
a dark figure of Christ in flesh: and the New testament, or New Covenant, being
the testimony and witness of God more clearly, with open face, may be taken in,
as a figure of Christ in Spirit.

Some say they are the Saints, and these are indeed the Saints of God, the Holy
ones of GOD, the truly Anointed ones of God: These have power, that if any man
will hurt them fire proceeds out of their mouths (fire proceeds out of the
mouth of Christ, in the Sdirit) and this devours their enemies, and if any man
will hurt them it is death, they must in this manner be killed

-- These have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days of their
Prophecy, etc. To deny the blessing, grace, and favor of God to any man, any
creature, or to any thing.

-- And they have power over waters, to turn them into blood etc. To kill and
slay, and to mingle strifes, contentions, debates, envy, malice, and wrath in
the minds of men; because they are disobeyed.

-- And to smite the earth with ALL plagues, etc. Plagues both inward and
outward: The Plague of Sword, Pestilence, Famine, Blindness, Barrenness,
Nakedness etc. as often as they will.

-- And when they have finished their testimony etc. We have seen their death,
when their testimony was finished, but not before.

When the Son of Man had finished his testimony, when his hour was come,
then must he suffer, and not before: So when the Witnesses have finished their
Testimony, they must be killed, and not before. Then, there ascends a beast out
of the bottomless pit, out of the lowest hell, the nethermost hell. A new, and
undiscovered wickedness and uncleanness of Spirit, rises out of this
Bottomless pit, against the two Witnesses.

-- And makes war against them, overcomes them, and kills them. And then
their dead bodies lie in the streets of the great City, which spiritually is
called Sodom and Egypt. This whole World is this great City, as it is governed
and ruled by the God of this World: and in this great City of the World, is the
filthiness of Sodom, and the Idolatry of Egypt.

-- Where also our Lord was Crucified. It was a spiritual wickedness that
Crucified the Lord Jesus, and it shall be a more spiritual wickedness, that
shall kill and slay these two Witnesses.

-- And they of the People, and Kinreds, and Tongues, and Nations, etc. Humane,
Carnal, Fleshly, Gentile Christians, the Nations of this world, shall see these
witnesses lie dead, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves:
When the Spirit is withdrawn, killed and slain by the Beast, or cloud of
darkness, that rises out of the bottomless pit: these Gentiles, People,
worldly Christans, shall not suffer their dead bodies, (outward forms) to be
buried; the natural man upholds the body or form without the spirit; a bare,
humane, carnal remembrance; to keep up the form and flesh of Christ, left
spiritless and life-lesse: this is the nature of the men of the world, or
earthly and fleshly men; to live upon the dead carcass of Christ: but they
cannot endure the spirit and life of Christ; they can live no longer then they
have the body dead and slain; if that revive, they dye.

-- And they that dwell on the Earth shall rejoice over them and make merry.
And shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them
that dwelt on the Earth. An expression of joy and rejoicing: and this is the
wickedness of earthly People, that dwell in the Earth, that dwell in the
World; they have no peace, no joy, longer then they get the mastery of the
Spirit of God; and when they can by the strngth of that wickedness that arises
out of the bottomless pit, trample upon the Spirit of God and of Christ, then
they are well, then they can go rejoicing from one to another, blessing
themselves, and comforting one another, telling vain and foolish stories, of
their victory that they have killed and slain the Lord, and denied him to
reign over them.

In these three verses following is the reviving of the two witnesses.

-- After three days and an half] When these two witnesses shall appear in
any, shall finish their Testimony, be killed and slain; they shall ly dead
three days and an half (or, as it is expressed in the next chapter of the
Woman's being in the wilderness) for a time, times and half a time.

The time of the killing of the witnesses, shall be a time of great joy and
rejoicing to them that dwell one the Earth; eartly Christians, carnal
Christians: Yet there shall be in it a day. Jesus Christ makes the grave a day:
There is a quiet rest, and a sweet day in the death of Christ, in the killing
of the witnesses: and though in it self it be very grievious and terrible; yet
you shall see brightness and glory, shinings and twinklings forth of light, so
that ye shall be able to call it a day.

But there is a day and two days, and half a day, or a time, times and half a
time.

First a day and season in which there shall be a comfortable expectation of a
seasonable and speedy deliverance, where-we are able to say, These witnesses
are now slain; but they shall speedily revive and rise again.

After that comes times, or two days, wherein there will be less expectation,
and more trouble; multiplied evils, time divided; and then there shall not be
such an expectation of a speedy deliverance as was before. The Soul shall be
able to say, I shall be delivered, but I know not when: for ought that appears
I may lie long in this state; but I will wait with patience; I will submit to
the will of the Lord.

Then after this there is half a day, or a season wherein there shall be a
sudden reviving, an unexpected deliverance. A short work will the Lord make on
the Earth.

-- The Spirit of life from God entered into them] They had before but the
Spirit of prophecy (The Spirit of Prophecy is the testimony of Jesus)
wherein, though they live'd, yet their life was but a saying they should live:
but a foretelling of a higher, and further state of life to come: but now they
have a Spirit of life -- The Spirit of life from God entered into them. Not the
Spirit of prophecy only, but the Spirit of life: not only to be able to
fore-tel what they should be, but what they are; That they are righteous, holy,
happy; that they live. Yea, not only to be able to say they live, but to be
life it self. Not only to Prophecy in sackcloth; to be under a veil; but by
the re-entry of the Spirit of life into them; to see GOD opening, and
un-vailing his face.

These Witnesses must, and will Prophecy before they live: First, wear
sackcloth, Prophecy darkly, that they shall live, then live. First, be in
expectation and Prophecy of live, then live: first, believe, hope and expect,
then live.

We never lose any thing, but we gain by it. If we lose the Spirit of
prophecy, we gain the Spirit of life for it: we gain by sufferings; we gain
by losing.

If a spirit of darkneses ascend out of the bottomless pit, clouding our
comfort, we receive a better Spirit for it -- The Spirit of life from God: and
so are gainers. This we may be assured of, for the LORD says it. He will not
leave my soul in hell, nor suffer his holy one to see corruption.

We may be brought to the death, we may be killed and slain, we may be dead
carcasses; But where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles be gathered
together. Thither this Eagle (the Divine Spirit of GOD) does resort: to this
Carcass (I say) to Revive it.

This heavenly Eagle, or Spirit of GOD, comes and eats up all the deadliness,
all the corruption, all the Carcass; that he in us, might live in the Spirit.

There is no true life, but the Spirit of life. Then may we say we live, when
we live in the Spirit of GOD: this is called the quickening Spirit. The first
Man was made a living soul, the Second was made a quickening Spirit. Man is a
living soul, a living creature; and it is the Spirit of GOD that makes him to
live a Spiritual life: but when that life is killed and slain, then he has a
second life for it; a better life, The Spirit of life, life it self; true life
indeed. And we know no life, no true life, but in the LORD, our life. -- When
HE who is OUR life, shall appear etc.

While the Witnesses prophecy, they cannot say that they live; but when they
have received the Spirit of life, then they can truly say they live: Now they
can claim that title, I was dead, but am alive. I am the resurrection and the
life.

There is no true life til there be a Resurrection; til then it is but a state
of mortallity: It is not yet life: But when we revive, and rise again,
mortallity is swallowed up of life: now we live indeed.

That Is true life that is not subject to death; that is true life, that cannot
be killed.

That life that is under the Power of death, that is under the Command of
death, that can be extinguished by death, is no true life. Its life to be set
free from death; to be dis-engaged and dis-obliged from the command of this
King of fears: when we can say, O death! Where is thy sting? O grave! Where is
thy victory? When we can trample upon death; that is life, true Life indeed.

-- The Spirit of life from God] True life consists in a continual flowing
forth from God, a daily pouring out of the Divine life, the Divine nature into
us; enlivening and quickening all our actions and services.

Those are not living actions, living services, living performances, that flow
not from the life of GOD in us. We live when every thing we act or speak flows
from the life of God in us: Then we live, when al we do comes from GOD, when
God sends it forth, God speaks it, God does it; then they are living words,
living actions -- In thy presence is life.

The absence of the soul from the body, is the shadow (and but the shadow) of
death; but the absence of GOD from a thing, or person, that is death, Spiritual
death.

You cannot say a man lives, except you see his soul act, move, speak etc. If
ye were Christians indeed, ye would not say you live, until ye hear the voice
of GOD saying to you, This is the way of God, these are the words and works of
God. There is life true life indeed. The reviving and life of these two
witnesses is the resurrection and the life, the life of the Son of God.

God comes forth in these two, in the Son and in the Spirit; the fulness of God
showing it self in the flesh of Christ and the Spirit of Christ, this is life.
These three are all in union together, the Father, the Son and Spirit, in one
conjunction and unity.

The Father putting forth himself in the Son by the Spirit: The Father acting,
quickening and inlivening the Son, by the Spirit; these mutually embracing each
other, is our life.

Concerning this resurrection of the witnesses observe, that it is graduall,
The Spirit of life from God first entered into them; after that they live: there
was a kind of absence before; but now a presence of the Spirit of God.

The holy God suffers a kind of parting to be between himself and his Son;
ney, betwixt himself and his own Spirit which is himself; and after this again
there is a reuniting. First, There must be an entrance, The Spirit of God first
enters into them, then they live.

The Resurrection though it be quick, though it be in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, yet it is graduall.

First, There is an entrance of the Spirit; The Spirit of life from God entered
into them.

Secondly, There is a double effect of this entering of the Spirit.

1. They stood upon their feet. 2. They heard a great voiyce saying, Come up
hither.
First, The Spirit of the Lord entered into them; while they are dead, while
their dead bodies were lying in the streets of the great City, the breath of
life from God entered into them. And this is very certain, we shall not lose
any thing that we have had. Though the Lord withdraw himself from us a little
while, yet he will return to us again, and then he will gather up all that is
scattered, and enter into all that is dead.

-- And they stood upon their feet] This is the second gradation, or the second
degree of their Resurrection, which is twofold.

1. They could own the Lord, they could say, The Lord is with us; our God is
with us, and in us. Life is come to us. We are the holy ones of God. We are the
golden candlesticks, upon whom the light of God does shine. This is the Spirit
of life from our God.

And then secondly, they are raised from the earth; and so raised as that they
can stand upon their feet; an expression of the dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. into whom
when the breath of the Lord came, they lived, they stood upon their feet, an
exceeding great Army. So the Prophet Ezekel when he was overcome by the glory
of God in the great vision he saw chapter 2. it is said, The Spirit of the Lord
entered into him, and he stood upon his feet. And so Daniel was raised, chapter
10.10, 11. O, Daniel, a man greatly beloved! understand the words that I speak
unto thee, and stand upright: Which is the same with this: The Spirit of the
Lord intring into us, standing up in us, manifesting and showing what we are,
making us visibly to appear the anointed ones of God; inabling us to stand up
and own a heavenly and spiritual life and light, to appear, to arise, to show
our selves, that we are the holy ones of God.

And though whilst we were slain and dead we could not own the Lord, or
acknowledge him; we could not confess the Lord, who he was, and what he was,
because we were in death and darkness: yet now having the Spirit of the Lord
entered into us; we now being raised from the dead, we stand up and are able to
say, We are the Lords; we are the holy anointed ones of God.

There is life and strength and confidence appearing in the witnesses standing
upon their feet, so that they can say, We (by this life or in this life of God)
are able to live amonst men, to walk about in the Name of the Lord; to own and
confess God amongst men; and with confidence to look men in the face; Hell in
the face; Devils in the face: To out-look, out-speak, out-act, all our
adversaries. To say, We live, and God lives in us. We dare own our selves what
we are; We dare go up and down, and act and speak in the Name of our God.

-- And they stood upon their feet] Time was, that the glory of God was carried
about upon the shoulders of men. The Prophets did testify and witness in the
strength and by the strength of the creature and in and by the means and use
of some creature, gifts, parts, Scriptures, experiences, and such like things,
wherein God stood upon the shoulders of man; upon the feet of man; was upheld
and borne up by the strength, power and authority of the creature; by reason,
by judgment, by opinion, by strength of argument etc. but this they are now
dead unto, and now there appears in them a high, a more excellent way: the
witnesses (Christ in flesh and Spirit) stand now upon their own feet; upon
their own strength, simply and immediately upon their own strength and power,
not leaning upon cratckes of man, the wisdom of man, the strength of man, the
parts of man; not borrowing ought from any creature, but standing barely upon
their strength, their own power, their own authority: And because they are the
Saints of God, therefore they stand and require not help from creatures. Now
they can say, This authority God gives us; this power does God administer to
us, and this we dare challenge and claim, being the holy ones of God; being the
anointed ones of God. We need no strength from others; we care for no
crartches; we lean upon none; we stand barely and simply upon the strength
and power of our God. We need no arguments to confirm us; no reasons to
parswade us; no authority of men to strengthen us; we stand upon our own feet;
we dare say, Here we are in the Name of our God. Because we are, we are:
because we llve, we live; And because we are the anointed of God, therefore we
act, therefore we speak, therefore we live, and upon no other account at all.

-- And they stood upon their feet] They yet are upon the Earth, and have not
wholly put off their earthlines; though they are able to live, to act, to speak
in the Name of the Lord, yet they go upon the ground. Though they need not
cratches, yet they stand upon the Earth.

Afterward they ascended up into Heaven, into a higher and more spiritual
life then this; when they hear that great voice from Heaven, Come up hither.

The Feet, the lower and inferior part of the body, are always subject to
defilement by dirt and filth of the Earth, for they have continually fellowship
with the Earth. But these two witnesses though living in the earth, though
standing upon the Earth, yet have some fellowship with the Lord of Heaven.

-- And great fear fell upon them that saw them.

Earthly men, and they that dwell only on the Earth, when the witnesses are
slain, they look and expect that that state of death and darkness wherein they
lie should utterly swallow them up; O, (say they) what a dark, what a sad
condition are they in?

While the witnesses prophesied and testified against the flesh, against the
strength and wisdom of man, earthly men were troubled and cast down; but when
the witnesses are slain and lie dead in the streets without the actings of the
life of God in them: presently they conclude they are wholly destroyed. O, (say
they) see what a sad state they are in, they are quite undone, they have lost
their life, their strength, their joy, their peace, their comfort, they are
dead, they are gone, there is an end of them. Thus they speak, thinking they
shall never revive again. These are the thoughts, and this is the language of
earthly men: but when they see them stand up upon their feet, revive and live
again, O, this strikes them to the very heart: to see the Lord standing upon
the Earth, owning himself in his People, is terrible and dreadful to earthly
men: the glorious appearance of God, strikes man to the very heart: O, I shall
dye, I have seen the Lord. So Daniel when he saw the Lord, he fell upon his
face. So Job, when his eyes had seen the Lord, he repented in sack-coth and
ashes. And know this, that the reviving grace, the reviving Spirit of the Lord,
bringing up his holy ones from the depths of temptations and troubles, to a
state of life and joy, is terror to the world, a terror to them that see it:
When any thing of the appearance of God, of the clear brightness of the Lord
breaks forth, and speaks thus; I am the Lord, the holy one of God; man cannot
stand, he fears, he trembles, he falls down as dead: when men live only in the
light and strength of God, then great fear falls on them that see them.

-- Great fear fell upon them]

It falls irresistably, they cannot avoid it; every creature that is earthly,
within or without, Fear falls upon them, Fear surprizeth them, at the reviving
of the witnesses.

I know palenesse and sadness, fears and astonishments, and great troubles,
fall upon the flesh of man: It has upon me, and it does upon the flesh of man,
and upon all that hear any thing of the tidings of the appearing of Jesus
Christ: I say, The reviving of the witnesses, the entrance of the life of God
into them; the quickening, the appearing of Jesus Christ in the Spirit: God
being in man, and man being in God; this life of God strikes horror, terror,
and amazment into the hearts of earthly and carnal men: It falls upon them like
a Millstone it breaks them to pieces, it grinds them to powder.

Men are weak things, poor things, base things, fearful things, guilty
things, and therefore fearful things; full of bondage and slavish fear.

The least appearance of the high power and glory of God, does affright,
startle and confound the strongest, the nost stout-harted amongst men. No man,
no earthly man, no fleshly man, Dares, Dares look upon God when he appears.

While man is able to say, it is not God; while he is able (as he thinks) to
shut his eyes against him and not see him, he may please himself (at least a
while) in having a little peace, and persuade himself that he shall do well:
but this appearance of God is so sharp, so bright, that he cannot, must not,
shall not be able to shut his eyes: possibly he may do as a man that shuts his
eyes against the Sun: the man that lies in the Sun, though he does shut his
eyes as fast, as close as he is able, yet the bright beams of the Sun, do so
pierce and work into his eyes that he does see, do what he can. So when men
say, This is not Christ; this is not the Spirit: yet the bright beams of the
Sun of righteousness do so pierce into their eyes, into their hearts, that (I
know) they see, and connot but see, and say, This is the Lord; and they tremble.

-- And I heard a great voice saying, Come up hither]

When we are alive we hear the voice of GOD. And though the voice of GOD be a
mighty voice, a great voice, a strong voice; yet when we hear God speak we
rejoice: O, pleasant voice! (pleasant because from Heaven) O, Heavenly voice!
When Heaven speaks, it speaks love, and life, and joy, and glory, and
kingdom, and power, and goodness, and excellency, and majesty: We hear it, we
hear it continually; an eternal word: It is always sounding in our hearts and
ears; O, this great voice, this mighty voice! Every thing that is in us hears
it; every faculty, every part, every gift, Every thing hears this voice: It
speaks largely, it speaks mightily and powerfully, it speaks to the whole man:
It is so big and great, that it makes us to become all ear; or the ear to be
every where, and every thing; the head, the feet, the body, the soul, the
spirit, the inward man, the outward man, all hear this great voice: It speaks
with Authority and Power: It removes, and sets aside every thought that hinders
obedience to it: hile we hear it we obey it, we receive it: It is so great that
there is nothing else left but it.

This great Voice says, Come up hither; it is so great a voice that it turns
us into Heaven; it turns us into the voice it self; we are the voice; it fills
Heaven and Earth; so mighty, so powerful, so full of majesty; O, it is the
great answer of our prayers, the great end of our hopes, the great glory we
look for, the great reward of our sufferings, the great joy of our GOD, the
great love of our God! O; It Is the voice of our beloved, of our Father, of our
King, of our GOD! Its thy voice O GOD!

-- A great voice from Heaven saying unto them, Come up hither.

To them, to none else, none but the Holy ones, the Anointed ones of God, none
but they that live in the Spirit of God: though it be a great voice, yet it is
spoken to none but them. You my Son, you my Spirit, you my Self, Come up hither.

Rev. 4.1. says John. A voice said unto me, Come up hither, and immediately I
was in the Spirit. So here, When the Witnesses hear the voice, immediately
they ascend. The voice takes them up into Heaven, up into it self.

The voice saiith unto them, Come up hither; Come to Me, live in Me, live in My
Power, live in My Strength, live in My Glory, live in My Kingdom; Be as I Am,
Be where I Am, Be what I Am; Do what I Do, Do as I Do: Come into My Glory: live
not below the glory of God; live no longer like creatures, live no longer in
the world; but Come up hither and live in the glory of the Creator, the glory
of GOD: Live not amongst men; live not amongst Angels; but live the life of
GOD: Come up hither, Come to Me.

This is not a going from place to place, in a carnal way by a bodily motion;
but the true ascending and coming to God, is in the Spirit of God, in the life
of God; to live in the presence of God, in the Face of God, in the Kingdom of
God, in the Glory of God.

-- Come up hither]

O, Excellent voice! O, powerful voicel O, precious voice! O, pleasant voycel
Transcendent love! Infinite goodness! The bosom of the LORD opened! Heaven it
self opened! The LORD Himself opening Himself, and reaching forth his hand
saying, Come hither, Come hither. Ye cannot live any longer without me; I can
live no longer without you: Let Us live together: Ye are a part of my self, I
can no longer be parted from my self, my self must come to my self; we can live
strangers no longer; ye must come and live with me, in my house: Here Is a
Throne, sit down; here is a Crown, put it on thy head; here is Glory, wear it;
here is a Kingdom, its yours. We Come, we Ascend.

-- And they ascended up to Heaven in a cloud]

The third degree of their rising is upon their hearing. We do arise, we do
ascend; it is our nature to ascend: and seeing we are now living the life of
the LORD, in the Spirit of the LORD; we are able to ascend.

While we were only men, our faces tended to the earth, down-wards; but now
our natural course is turned, through the divine life of God in us, we do
ascend to Heaven, to God; or thus, our ascending up daily more and more to God,
is become our natural course.

Now we can quit the earth, quit the creature, quit the flesh; al things below
the glory of God we let them all go: Now we bid farewell men, farewell griefs and
troubles and shame; the companions of men. Farewell earth, farewell weaknesses,
cares and fears, companions of the earth farewell; now we ascend to Heaven in
a cloud.

-- In a cloud]

Whilst we ascend in a Cloud something yet of darkness and weakness
accompanies us, Though we are hastening to glory, hastening to God, yet it is
in a cloud. God descends, Christ descends, the Spirit descends, and we ascend;
yet we meet in a cloud. GOD comes down to us, we go up to meet God, yet both in
a cloud. We meet together, we converse together, yet in a cloud. Here Is the
glory of God in the Saints, not yet breaking forth into naked and open
brightness; but covered with Clouds, with some weakness, with some infirmity.

-- And their enemies beheld them]

Satan, the Nations, Kinreds, Tongues, religious Voices, religious Opinions,
Flesh, and World: all their enemies beheld them: look upon them, but its little
comfort to them, little joy to them, to see them ascend.

This is an increase and addition to our glory, that we must ascend in the
sight and view of al those that hated us, and persecuted us, and were enemies
to us; and as they rejoiced when we were down, so they must be troubled when we
arise.

Hell, death devil, look on us and behold us, and yet cannot hinder our asent;
we ascend and go up in the sight and presence of all our adversaries, yet they
are not able to hold us down.

The witnesses that were slain, arise, and ascend into heaven, yet their
enemies cannot in the least measure hinder them.

As we ascend in the sight and view of God, so in the sight and view of al our
enemies.

As heaven is filled with joy at our arrival, so the world is filled with
affrightment and amazment at parting with us: we cannot leave the earth, but we
carry the life of the earth with us; we take al good from hence, and carry all
good and glory into heaven with us. Hell, death, devil, shall al look upon us and
shall be troubled, and not be able to keep one ragge of us from enjoying this
Glory, Majesty, Brightness and Excellency of GOD.

The end of the tenth Sermon.
THE WITNESSES DEATH AND RESURRECTION.
REVEL. 11.13. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth
part of the City fell, and in this earthquake were slain of men seven
thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven.


WE are unfolding the mystery of the two witnesses, which are the witnesses of
God: in which, and by which every word of God is confirmed: they are two in
their prophecy in sackcloth: but their is a third conjoined with them in their
resurrection, as they are in Heaven, Ascended and Risen.

There are thee that bear witness in heaven, and by these three, is every word
established: The Father, the Son and the Spirit; each of them having a
sufficiency to confirm each other; and together to put an end to all
controversies.

You heard in the morning that there were several degrees of the reviving of
the witnesses, the first degree is the entering of the Spirit of life from God
into them, which caused them to stand upon their feet.

Secondly, They heard a great Voice from Heaven, calling them up, Come up
hither.

And thirdly, There is their Ascension into Heaven: They were taken up in a
cloud, and their enemies beheld them.

And in the 13, verse, there is the effect of all this. In the same hour there
was a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell:

These works of God are not yet pure, though they are very excellent. Though
there be a Resurrestion and Ascension into heaven; yet it is in a cloud,
covered with some infirmity and darkness; and yet in this there is the
greatest glory.

And the same hour was an Earthquake]

Or (to speak the language of God elsewhere) A rejoicing with trembling.

In the greatest appearance and manifestation of God, so long as there is any
Earth it Trembles: and indeed, the more glorious the discoveries of God are,
the greater the Earthquake. No Earth can be without moving and trouble, that
bears the weight of the glory of God upon it

In this hour of ascension, there is a mixture of some secret rejoicing; and
some trouble occasioned by the Earthquake; or else take the Earth here as
distinct from the witnesses, and then their ascending up from the Earth, makes
the Earth to shake. Christ and the Spirit of God, those two witnesses are the
streneth and stability of the Earth; yea, the strength of the Pillars of the
Earth: I uphold the Pillars of the Earth says the Lord: He it is that
strengthens the very foundations of the Earth. And therefore when these
witnesses, the strength and Pillars of the Earth, ascend and remove from it,
the Earth must needs quake and tremble.

The witnesses are the corner stone of the World; It was by the word of the
Lord, that Eternal word, that the Worlds were made, that the Worlds are
supported: therefore when this Word of the Lord Ascends out of the World, the
World must needs shake.

The whole World has lived and leaned upon Christ and the Spirit of Christ,
and now his arising and removal out of the World, must needs prove the ruin
and downfall of the World. All your strength, peace and comfort, has been
borrowed of Christ; and now his leaving the World, and carrying the Pillars of
the World with him (as Sampson the Gates of the City) makes all the World fall
to confusion.

-- A great Earthquake]

The natural cause of an Earthquake, is the wind pent up in the bowels of the
Earth, which seeking vent, breaks forth and so shakes the Earth. So the
Spirit, or breath, or wind of the Lord, pent up in the bowels of the Earth,
shut up amongst earthly men (as the Son a Man was three days and three nights
in the heart or bowels of of the Earth) when it breaks forth it shakes and
rends the World: And this is the cause of the Earthquake and commotions that
are now abroad in the World: The breaking forth, or ascending of the Spirit of
God out of the World.

An Earthquake is one of the greatest perplexities and evils that can befall
the world; the Earth being the Center and stay of man. The very bottom and
foundation upon which all the camfort and good of the life of man stands. When
this center, this rest or stay, this foundation shakes, nothing more
affrightens, and astonishes man.

These Witnesses ascending out of the world, the Bottom and Foundation of
peoples strength and comfort trembles and quakes: the root of al humane life is
cut insunder at once: the bottom of al humane joy is taken away: The foundation
of Ecclesiastical and Civil power is shaken; the groundwork of all earthly
stability and comfort, of Church and Comon-wealth quakes and trembles; I say,
the world is losing the foundation and groundwork upon which Religion and
Civil-government stands; and this makes the Earth to shake.

-- And the tenth part of the City fell]

This City is Babylon, called the holy City. This holy City is trampled under
foot, as you may read in the second verse of this Chapter. This holy City, or
the outward Court, is left to be possessed by the men of the world, by the
Gentiles, by men uncircumcised in heart and spirit; by fleshly and carnal men:
This is the fate of this City.

-- The tenth part]

The tenth part (you know) was the Levits part, which was holy to the LORD, or
dedicated to the LORD; it was offered up to the Priests under the Law, it was
the chief maintenance of the legal priesthood.

And here the tenth part of the City, the chiefest part, the devoted part (as
you say) Gods inheritance, the lot and portion of the Priesthood, this part of
the City fell; in sum, the holiest, the chiefest, the excellentest part of
the City fell.

The ways of worldly Prophessors and Christians, are something that is holy,
something that is offered up to God, but in the hands of the world, trampled
under foot by the world. There is an excellency in this, this is that that is
called the tenth part, that part wherein men have thought themselves most
sacred and holy, that which they have offered up to God, that which they have
separated from the world and their own proper use, and given to God; some of
their wisdom, some of their estates, some of their time, some of their
strength, etc. the tenth part. This tenth part of the City fell; this chiefest
and most excellent part: This tenth part, when they have reserved nine parts to
themselves and dedicated the tenth to God: That which has bin men's Religion,
and that wherein they have placed their confidence and comfort and by which
they have thought to be saved, this excellent part, this tenth part of the City
fell in this earthquake.

I tell you again, When these two Witnesses ascend and leave the earth, then
the highest forms of religion, the most excellent separated things of men,
those holy things wherein they have most devoted themselves to GOD, and the
Temple of God, their hours of Prayer, their Sabbaths their Fastings, their
Engagements and Covenants to serve the Lord; this tenth part in the Earth quake
falls al to the ground: the tenth part etc.

-- And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand]

As the tenth part of the City fell, the chiefest part, the best part, the
excellentest part of the holy City; so the best part of men, or an excellent
number of men, and both understood by this number seven thousand: one thousand
is a great number and an excellent number as well as a great number: ten has an
excellency in it, therefore the tenth part was given to GOD; one hundred is ten
times ten, one thousand is ten times an hundred, which in the Law is multiplied
to hundreds and thousands.

Seven thousand is the perfection of the creature as it is able to be numbered;
or it is the multiplying of all the perfections of man; or man numbered into the
highest perfection, or largest number that may be multiplied that is not
Infinite, which is God.

-- Seven thousand]

Seven is a Holy number; and therefore the seventh day was sanctified and made
holy. A blessed number, therefore GOD blessed the seventh day. Its also a
number of rest, GOD rested the seventh day and appointed the seventh day to be
observed as an holy rest.

Here is humane perfection in the greatest number, in the blessedest number, in
the quietest estate, wherein men have thought themselves to be holy men,
blessed men, men at rest; wherein they have thought themselves truly blessed,
truly holy, truly happy.

When men have numbered up themselves to such a state, to seven thousand, a
holy number, a blessed number, a number of perfection; to such a state wherein
they have thought themselves holier then others; more blessed and happy then
others: when they have thought themselves at rest; and indeed (in humane
account) have had abundance of blessedness, thousands of blessednesses,
thousands of blessed hopes, blessed believings, blessed joys and comforts,
such a state wherein they have rested and been satisfied; yet now in this
Earthquake, in the same hour that the Lord leaves the Earth, that the
Witnesses ascend up to Heaven, when the LORD will no longer converse with Earth,
but with Heaven, when he will no longer converse with his People in an earthly,
but in an heavenly way and manner, he and they walking together and enjoying
each other in Heaven; Then those thousands, those seven thousands, all those
holy, happy, blessed, resting men, shall be slain.

-- And the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the GOD of heaven]

The chiefest and choicest part of men are gone, and that which remains now is
but a Remnant, a small part; so mean and poor a part as is not worth the
numbering, or to be gathered up into order and beauty, or into the account of
holiness and blessedness, as other men are; they are only a poor remnant.

This Remnant was affrighted and gave glory to the GOD of heaven.

Nothing is more frequent in the Prophets, where mension is made of the
judgments of God (through which he brings his people to salvation) then this,
That a remnant shall be saved, a remnant shall be brought through the fire.
Here one and there another, as the gleanings of the vintage; like small bunches
of grapes upon the uppermost boughs; a small company, and them not regarded, a
remnant.

They are but little, and exceeding little, a Remnant shall come to happiness.
The bulk and body, the head, the crown and glory of man falls and are slain;
and a Remnant only escapes: The LORD will take off the head of man, according to
that saying, And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus Rev. 20. I say, the LORD will take off the head, the glory, the top, the
crown, the wisdom, the excellency of man; the maine, the chief, the principle
part will th e LORD slay; al these in man shall be taken away, and only a remnant
shall remain.

The LORD will waste and consume flesh to a very low state; He will bring down
man to a fragment, to a very small Remnant, til there is almost nothing left; to
a state and condition that shall not be considerable, that shall scarce be fit
for any use.

The thousands, the seven thousand; the excellentest, the greatest, the
richest, the most numerous, the most religious and devoted part shall be slain;
a remnant only shall be left and those affrighted too.

-- And great fear fell upon them that saw them]

When they saw the LORD ascending out of Earth, leaving the Earth desolate;
leaving Religion, Society, Commonwealthes, to wasting and destruction; when
they, saw stability, goodness, wisdom, righteousness and holiness forsaking the
earth, and ascending up into the holiness of God, this affrights men; and it
affrights them (almost out of their wits) to see that there is no living
amongst such men; that there is nothing to be seen amongst them but death,
horror and confusion in the whole creation: And to see that if we do not
submit to the Lord, live in the Spirit of the Lord, and follow the guidance and
conduct of the Spirit of the Lord, we are for ever ruined. If we are not able
to ascend with these Witnesses, go up with them to Heaven and live with Christ
and the Spirit of God an heavenly life, we are utterly undone for ever; we shall
see hell opening her mouth to devour us; miseries, fears and wrath ready to
cease upon us and swallow us up: therefore if we cannot ascend to Heaven with
these witnesses, Woe be unto us; for we shall see there is no possible way of
subsistence out of heaven. We shall see much hellish wrath and darkness and
confusion fall upon men; that they cannot live in that state and condition
wherein they have lived.

-- And they gave glory to the GOD of Heaven]

Strange language, that a Remnant, a poor affrighted remnant, should be able to
give glory to God. Yet thither we must be brought before we can give glory to
the God of Heaven.

Whilst we have any glory left, we give glory to our selves, and not to God;
but when we are become a Remnant, Affrighted and dashed in pieces, then shall we
glorify God.

We think that men of excellent wisdom and strength should glorify GOD, O no,
they take from the glory of God, and give it to themselves. We think that
Assemblies, and Parliaments, and Synods, and Councels of great Men, should give
glory to God; no, none at all; they give glory to themselves: None but an
affrighted remnant gives glory to God.

God neither has, nor will have any glory til man be brought to an affrighted
Remnant -- they that were affrighted gave glory to God: Mark it, if you are
able to mark it, that such a poor and affrighted remnant should give glory to
the God of Heaven; that the God of Heaven should receive glory from so poor an
affrighted remnant, a poor fag-end of the world, wasted and consumed by sword,
plagues, and judgments; that they that have nothing, should yet give to God:
When men are wasted and consumed to nothing, yet that that nothing should be
able to add and give to God, this is worth your observation.

So long as we are any thing, we are still attributing and giving to our
selves; and when we are wholly revelled out into nothing and lost, then we are
contented to give all to God.

It is much that we that are nothing, should give to him that is al things; and
it is very much that we should give him glory; that which is most dear to him,
and that he should accept of it from a poor affrighted Remnant: Though (I say)
the glory of God be that which is exceeding dear to him, and that of which he
is most Jelous, yet it is not dear to him until we give it him; and then it is
double glory; even then when it comes from a poor affrighted Remnant: When God
can come and speak out of the mouth of a poor creature, wasted and consumed to
nothing that is his glory. It is not his glory that he has it from Mighty
Angels; No, he lays aside that nature, and is pleased to accept of it from
poor flesh, poor man, poor wasted, consumed man. I say, Our God has his glory
from wasted, consumed man.

God has glory in wasting and consuming flesh in man: He takes away the glory
from the creature into himself.

Gods greatest glory is to repair wasted man. When man is carried out of
himself, into the lowest estate that can be; when the glory of man is laid flat
upon the Earth, then GOD is gathering it up into his garner.

And this is certain, til this poor remnant gives glory to God, God has
visibly and manifestively no glory at all. It must be this poor man, this
wasted man, this poor flesh, this poor creature, walking through the fire, and
passing through many tribulations that must set this Crown of glory upon the
head of God; that must make God glorious; a glorious blessed God.

The root and foundation of the glory of God, is lost and undone man.

-- And gave glory to the God of heaven] Before (as I said) they gave glory to
themselves; or if they gave glory to any God, it was to that God that is the
God of this world.

All that men contend for in the strength or power of man, is to give glory to
the Gods of this world, the Gods of the earth. There Is is indeed a seed of
sincerity in the Saints, that gives glory to the God of Heaven, but it is in a
poor low, dark, way; Prophesying in sackcloth.

These stand before the God of the Earth as the Olive tree on the left hand of
God, offering Sacrifice to the God of Heaven, though it is as yet but in an
Earthly manner: unto God it is, though in weakness; or, unto the God of Heaven
in an Earthly way.

That which most men in this world do, is to give glory to themselves, or to
the God of this world, the devil, as Rev. 9.20 And the rest of the men which
were not killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands,
that they should not worship devils and Idols, of gold, silver and brass, and
stone, and wood, which can neither see, nor hear nor walk.

The greatest care and industry of most men, is only to maintain an outward,
earthly power; an outward government, an outward worldly Kingdom a State
Religion: which is nothing else but secretly to provide for their own carnal
peace, carnal ease, fleshly and diabolical State and so they worship the devil,
and give glory to the god of this World: Now when a man is wasted and consumed,
and affrighted, and brought to a Remnant, he is contented to give glory to God,
to the true God, and to him in Heaven, in a heavenly way: and the matching of
these two together, is an exceeding wonderful and glorious thing; that the
lower end of man cut down by the Ax of the Spirit to a stump, and left a poor
remnant; That this retched creature, this poor Remnant, should be able to give
glory to the God of Heaven: That is, should so speak, act and live, as to be
always giving glory to the God of Heaven, or rather, that it should speak, act
and live the glory of the God of Heaven, and enjoy continual communion and
fellowship with the God of Heaven; that it should be able to set forth, adorn
and beautify the God of Heaven, in a heavenly way; to hold forth God in his
brightness, excellency and majesty.

This is the work we are called unto, through death, through slaying, through
Earthquakes, through commotions, through temptations, to ascribe and give
glory to the God of Heaven; to give up our selves to the glory of the God of
Heaven; to give up that little, that nothing that remains of us, that Remnant
to be to the glory, or to be the glory of the God of Heaven, or to suffer the
God of Heaven, to render himself glorious upon us; I say, This is wonderful.

Why have we heads, bearts, hands and tongues to be killed and slain, wasted
and consumed to nothing; but to be raised again? What is it for, but that the
God of Heaven should enjoy them? So long as we kept and enjoyed them to our
selves, we used them to the glory of the god of the Earth; but now having been
wasted and consumed to nothing, and raised again, they are to be employed in
the service, for the use, and to the glory of the God of Heaven: And now in
this condition, we are in Heaven; now we are in the Kingdom of God, in the
presence of GOD, in the Majesty and glory of the GOD of Heaven.

-- The second Woe is past, behold the third Woe comes quickly] We are not yet
at the higth of our glory, nor past through all our woe.

It pleased God to devide these woes into three parts, a first, a second, and a
third. The first, is not the greatest, the second is (as I may call it) the
wofulest it is the middle woe; it is as it were the heart of the woe; it is such
a one as is like that tribulation, Mat. 24.21. such as never was before, nor
ever shall be like come after; It Is that which is the very Center of the woes,
and this at the Resurrection of the witnesses is past, then the heart of the
woe is broken, and we are fully delivered from the middle woe; then we are
broken out of the bowels of the Earth, out of the bitterrest woe.

As Christ lay three days in the grave, and rose again the third day: so the
witnesses having lain dead in the streets of the great City three days and an
half; at the end they are raised up again.

-- And behold the third woe comes quickly] The great woe of all is the lying
of the dead bodies of the witnesses, three days and an half in the streets of
the great City: but it is some mittigation of the evil, that it is quick,
short, full of dispatch; but three days and an half: Therefore says Christ
(who had the infirmity and flesh of man) to Judas; That thou do, do quickly.

Lasting woes, are the worst woes. Then comes the third woe, which shall last
but half a day: And as it is short, so it is that which shall let us into the
third state of the glory of God.

As there is the day of man, the day of Christ, and the day of God; so their is
the glory of Man, the glory of Christ, and the glory of God. This Heaven, into
which the witnesses ascended, is not the highest Heaven, the highest glory.
There must come a third woe, that will carry them thither.

-- And it comes quickly] It is an happy state the witnesses are in when they
are raised from the dead: yet it is not lasting, though their condition be
glorious yet it has a woe stealing upon it; yea, though it be a very blessed
state; a Resurrection from a sinful Earth: yet it is such a blessed state as
is subject to war; for immediately succeeds the third woe. This clear bright
Sun of righteousness is subject to an eclips: The tenth part falls, and 7000.
are slain, yet all earth is not cleared away: There were sweet enjoyments of
the glory of GOD, yet it was mingled with some weakness: and this is our
happiness, that our God will never cease refining us, til all Earth, till all
flesh be quite removed from us; til he has perfected us into himself.

The Third woe is a tolerable woe: though it has its sting, yet it comes
quickly and goes quickly: It Is such a one as we are well able to endure. And
then comes the seventh Angel Sounding, and he says aloud,

-- The Kingdoms of this world are become The Kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ] The two Witnesses, their prophesying, their slaying, resurrection,
and ascension, is in the Mystery of the Spirit, Angels sounding: It comes
near to perfection, but yet is not absolute perfection; the highest Reign and
Kingdom of the Lord, and of his Christ, breaks forth at the sounding of the
seventh Angel.

The seven Trumpets are all but one Trumpet, The last Trump shall sound. The
Spirit of the LORD being able either to contract all into one, or to enlarge
one into seven, when, and as he pleases: He can give all to one, call it one,
make it one; discover it and open it into one, or enlarge it into seven. Seven
days make but one with him; Seven Angels, and seven Trumpets, make but one
Angel, and one Trumpet with him.

Seven is a number of rest and blessedness: and here is the seventh Angel, or
the ange licall nature in et's perfection; Christ the Head of Angels, or the
Perfection of Angels.

Angels are ministering spirits sent forth from God; Ministers and Trumpets
sounding forth the Kingdom of glory.

The exellency or perfection of Angels is to trumpet out the last and greatest
glory of God: Yet Christ the Archangel, the head and chiefest Angel, takes
pleasure to sound forth the glory of God, before the breaking forth of the
Highest and Last glory.

Trumpeting is a proclaiming or declaring of the glory of GOD. Jesus Christ,
the Archangel, the head or chiefest Angel sounds and sends forth a
proclaimation or declaration of the Kingdom of GOD. And when we hear the sound
of this great Trump, we enter into glory; or the sounding of the last Trump by
Jesus Christ, the great Archangel, goes before the approach of the highest
glory of God. And its said,

-- There were great voices in heaven] After the sounding of the Trumpet comes
forth the voices; which is a more distinct and excellent note in music then
the sound of the Trumpet. No Organ or Instrument sends forth so sweet a note as
the tongue of man.

Its said, There were great voices in heaven: and (as its expressed afterward)
these voices are uttered by the four and twenty Elders that sat before the
Throne, worshipping God.

Twelve (you know) was the number of the Apostles, who had only the first
fruits of the Spirit: We (says the Apostle) have the first fruits of the
Spirit. They had (as it were) a single harmony of music, publishing and
declaring the glory of God; But here is not only twelve, but twenty and four
Elders; The Spirit of God appearing in a double measure, twice as much as in
the Apostles, having the full harvest of the Spirit; a greater company of
Saints, and the Apostolical Spirit; or the gifts and graces of the Spirit in
the Apostles doubled upon the heads of the Saints; or Jesus Christ appering in
the Saints in a double measure of the Spirit of God. And they are all Elders
too; al taken up into the Ancient of days, living in the eternal and
everlasting Spirit.

He is an Elder indeed, who was before the World was made; he is but an Novice,
and of yesterday that can speak but from the beginning of the World.

These are the great voices in heaven, by the four and twenty Elders: In this
dispensation you have that measure of the Spirit of God that was given to the
twelve Apostles and Church in the primative time, doubled: raised up to the
Ancient of days.

-- And there were GREAT voices in heaven] Some times our God speaks in a low
still voice, and indeed His very whisperings are pleasant. Here is not only one
voice, or a low whispering voice, but many and Great voices: Audible and Mighty
declarations; Great and various discoveries of our God When the witnesses
Prophesied in sackcloth, Thousands were sufficient; but now here are Thousands
of Thousands. Now here is Christ in the flesh, and Christ in the Spirit joined
together: Now they are multiplied to Thousands of Thousands in heaven: Many
voices tuned, multitudes of hearts enlarged in heaven: they are four and twenty.

In the former dispensations they were shut up in Earth, they were clothed in
sackcloth, they were but twelve; Here they are increased to twenty four: All
the voices crying out Now in one Great voice; and that so clear, so shril, that
it shall spread thorrow the whole Earth. -- The Kingdoms of this world etc.

It may be those people that are of the earth, that are of the world, question
and doubt what these voices say, and they cannot say after them, or with them,
The LORD lives, the LORD reigns; they think it, they dare not speak it; or if
they do speak it, it is but poorly and weakly, from a bare letter, not from the
Spirit of God: But hear when Heaven is opened, the glory of God manifested, and
the Spirit of God doubled. There are great Voices, thousands of voices,
concenting and concentering together; al speaking aloud, al singing that
heavenly Halelujah, saying, The Kingdom of the LORD; The Kingdom of of the
LORD, The Kingdom of the LORD: Now here is full Language; full speech, bold and
loud speech in Heaven saying, The Kingdom of the LORD, The Kingdom of the
LORD. There are many and great Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this
World are become the Kingdoms of OUR Lord.

When the seventh Angel sounds; when there is freedom and liberty in the
hearts of the Saints, they all now say, The Kingdoms of the LORD.

-- There were great voices in Heaven] They talk aloud of God in Heaven. Below
in the Earth people whisper and speak (as it were) in a corner of God; they
speak low and in private, therefore (says Christ) What you speak in a corns
shall be published on the house top.

All the appearances of God, have been but as in a corner. Though the sending
out of the Apostles into the World, did typify that universal, free, abundant
declaration of GOD, this Name of God in the World: Yet all that which has been
made known of God hitherto, has been but a speaking in a corner, in comparison
of that which is now breaking forth.

God has been spoken of in a corner, here a little and there a little: But now
there comes a great Voice, that throws down State, Kings, Kingdoms and all the powers of the Earth; to make way for the glory of God.

God will whisper it no longer, nor speak with a faint Voice, with a cold
language; but will speak so, and come so, That every Eye shall see him; every
Ear shall hear him; every Tongue shall speak him, and every heart shall
acknowledge and confess him; This is the LORD. Now does GOD REIGN. Now is
Christ exalted.

This Voice may be heard in Hell, and spoken in wrath: but when ever it is
spoken freely and aloud with joy, then it is in Heaven to the Saints: And this
is the close of the great Voice The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ]

-- The Kingdoms of this world are become etc. God heretofore has had the
meanest of this World: A sort of poor, low, mean People only have testified a
little for God and Christ: here a little, and there an handful: but do you
think it, or can it be thought, That God will always be contented with this? Or
do you think the GREAT things of the World were made eternally for the Devil
and wicked men? Or can it be imagined that God should fill a World with men, and
furnish them with parts and abilities; Greatness, Wisdom, Riches, Majesty,
Authority, etc. that wicked men should always abuse them, and devils always
have the command of them, and God forever be excluded and shut out.

No, no such matter: No, the Kingdoms of this World, all the Riches, all the
Strength, all the Authority, all the Power, all the Righteousness, Justice,
Judgment and Excellency of this World, both in respect of Civel and
Ecclesiastical Government: All the Kingdoms of this World, shall become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ: We dare in the power of the Lord speak
it: The Voice will be, No man has to do with any Power, Authority, Wisdom,
Riches or any thing in the World: No creature has any power or privilege to
dispose of any thing on the Earth: Al Power, Strength, Riches etc. are taken
from men; or if any thing be left, that which remains is consuming and
blasting, and shall wast away, til al greatness and excellency whatsoever
resolves it self into the Kingdom of OUR Lord and of his Christ; The Kingdom
of Our Lord they are become. OUR Lord now must Reign: Al things now are become
his. They were Our Lords from the beginning, and of right al did belong to him:
If he did entrust them to other Kings, Nobles, Great ones, etc. it was but
only as they were his Servants; they were but entrusted and committed to them
as Talents; they are but his Stewards; and woe be his Stewards, when he turns
them out of their Sewardship; they must be Stewards no longer; but must give an
account of their Stewardship, of their Talents: And these Kingdoms of the
World, must immediately become the Kingdoms of Our Lord, and of his Christ.

We have a Lord that is a Lord indeed, The great Lord of Heaven and Earth, The
Lord af Lords, and King of Kings: others are but Images and Pictures of this
OUR LORD, they are but his Substitutes; and now OUR Lord comes and throws out
al other Lords; He casts these Stewards out of their places; and the Kingdoms
of the World return again to Him, whose they are.

They were of old thine, only they were let out to use for a while: The
original right is in OUR Lord; he has it, and will maintain it; and he himself
will Reign. The Spirit of God has prophesied of this in all Ages, and now he is
performing it; The next Age, nay, at this time, this dominion is Our Lords.

Now for Our LORD, now for the great GOD. Now for Our King: Now all the
Kingdoms of the World, are become the Kingdoms of OUR Lord. OUR Lord will take
al, and leave nothing un-possessed. He must have al, and we must have all in
him: He must Reign, and we must Reign with him. He that upholds us and comforts
us; He that is in us and with us; He that speaks this language in us, and puts
forth this expression by us, is OUR. Lord, God with us, or Emanuel.

This LORD shall have all the Kingdoms of the Earth; and he will put us in
possesson of all that is good, excellent, rich, beautiful, all that is Kingly
and Noble; all that excels; all the Kingdoms of the World.

And out of the Lord, and from the Lord shall be nothing but desolation and
confusion: yea, desolation and confusion it self is our Lords prison, into
which our Lord will cast his enemies. They are al become Our Lords and his
Christ's, OUR Lords and his Anointeds.

It is Christ in the glory of the Father that is Our happiness and Our life.
The Son in the glory and power of the Father: God exalting the Son into
himself.

The Kingdoms of the World are the LORDS yet so the LORDS as that Christ is
King epual with the Father.

Christ lays down his Kingdom, that he might ascend into the Kingdom of the
Father. And we lay down our Kingdoms of the World and creatures, that we might
live in the Kingdom of Christ; that so the Father, Christ and We might Reign
together.

-- The Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ] or his Anointed. There are
many Anointed, that pretend to be THE Anointed of God: And many there be that
have some Anointing: But none shall Reign, but His Anointed: The holy one of
God; the Anointed of God; He that is filled with the Spirit of God; He that
is Anointed with the Oil (the Oil of GGD) He shall Reign for ever; no other:
None but the ANOINTED of GOD.

OUR God Anoints US, and We are the Anointed of GOD; the Christ of GOD; the
holy one of God; all gathered up into one Anointing, one Anointed, one God: and
in this unity, all in one, we shall Reign with him for ever and ever: And so its
said, Revelations 5. He has made us Kings and Priests to our God: and we shall
reign on the earth: The World shall become ours. Al worldly things, are taken
into Heavenly: they have bin divided and distinguished (you know) some things
are carnal, some things are spiritual; some things are of God: some things are
of the World-But now al things shall be taken up into the glory of God; into the
glory of Christ: Which is the redemption of the body, the deliverance of the
creatures out of bondage wherein they have been held.

The whole Earth, the whole Creation shall be taken up and filled with the
righteousness and glory of the Lord.

-- And he shall Reign for ever and ever] Satan and wicked men have Reigned
long, but they shall Reign no longer. So long as Satan can Reign over us, we
are subject to many evils; but now he is cast down, and now none can Reign
over us but the Lord; we shall now receive no good from man, so also we shall
receive no evil from man; no good from good Angels, no evil from evil Angels:
No man, no creature has any power over us; none but the LORD. We are the
Lords, the Holy ones of God; and none but the HOLY ONE of God Reigns over us.

-- We give thee thanks O LORD GOD ALMIGHTY, which ART, and WAST, and art to
GOME; because thou have taken to thee thy GREAT Power and have Reigned. The
LORD, the LORD Reigns, he has taken to him his Kingdom; that is it for which
we give Thanks; His Kingdom, and Our Thanksgiving. And we thank not man,
but God: Thanks are due to none but GOD.

Because the Lord Reigns, and we shall Reign, Therefore we give thanks.

The Reign of Christ is an Eternal Reign; For ever. But the Reign of GOD is
for ever and ever; two Eternals.

The Reign of Christ is an Everlasting Reign, yet he gives it up into the hands
of the Father; and God becomes all in all, and Reigns for ever and ever.

There are two Eternities in this Reign, the Lords and his Christ's. The LORD
delights to double his excellencies; to multiply Eternities: and there is no
minute wherein it can be said our LORD does not Reign, no season or time
wherein it can be said our LORD does not Reign.

Whilst the LORD does give forth favor and grace by man, and man gives thanks
to man, its not the Eternal Reign of God and Christ.

The Reign of God is without intermission; it is for ever: It is in all things,
and at all times: It is in height and depth, in day and night, in summer and
winter: It Is Eternal, for ever and ever.

-- Which art, and wast, and art to come] Here are three Eternals.

First, The Eternal that was before the world. This Kingdom was before all
times, and shall be after all times, when times shall be no more.

-- Which ART] It is present, it is no longer absent: yet it is to come, but not
so to come as that we want it; but it is so to come, that we shall enjoy it
everlastingly: It takes in all times, past, present, and to come. It is that
Circle of Eternity that comprehends al, beginning and ending.

-- And HE shall Reign for ever, and ever] Now there is a bouble use made of
this by the Spirit of God.

Thanks be to God, by them that dwell in Heaven: Down with all your glory, lay
down al your excellency; that is, the excellency of all that are heavenly, to
give thanks to God.

In the 16. verse its said, They fell upon their faces and worshipped God: They
lie down in the dust, are base and worth-less in their own eyes, that they may
give glory to GOD.

Now they say, nothing is excellent, righteous or good but God. Worship God,
fear none, acknowledge none but God: speak nothing, love nothing, be nothing,
do nothing but God.

-- We give THEE thanks] Here is thanks, here is praises, here is rejoicing;
LORD GOD ALMIGHTY, We bless THEE, we rejoice in THEE, we are exceeding glad
of THEE; we never expected good from men, if we did, they failed us: There is
nothing but oppression in man: But in THEE is deliverance.

Certainly God will Reign in righteousness, in justice and truth. Men are in
tumults, wars, plots, mischiefs: But GOD Reigns in truth and righteousness.
And the GREAT Kingdom of the LORD is our joy; Therefore -- We give THEE
thanks O LORD GOD ALMIGHTY.

-- The Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come] The World, and the powers of
the World are angry; they fret, they vex, they cry-out this is Blasphemy. And
we expect nothing but wrath from the world, and it is proper for them that they
should be wrath; our joy is their wrath: See how angry man is, freting, and
vexing at Gods pulling down the Kingdoms of the Earth. This is the reason of
that bitterness and malice, that fury and madness, that is amongst men: What
makes them so unquiet, killing and destroying one another: but because God is
over-turning the glory of the world? What makes men so full of wrath, but
because Thy wrath O LORD is come?

-- And the time of the dead that they should be judged] All the dead shall de
judged, Dead Ordinances, dead Authorities etc. all that live not in the life of
God, shall be judged.

Nothing is life and light but the LORD; nothing lives but the LORD, and those
that live in the Spirit of the Lord: as for others, they are dead, and shall be
judged as the dead: But those who live in the Spirit of life which is in God,
they triumph over death, and that destruction that comes upon the Kingdoms of
the world: They with joy can speak on this manner,

Their Wrath, is our Love; their Grief, is our Comfort; their Anger is our
Peace; their Trouble is our Reward; their Ruin is our Life.

This is the application the Spirit of the Lord makes to the Nations, which
none can with stand.

God dvides the world into love and wrath, blessings and cursings: he wraps
the world up in wrath and cursings, and the Saints in thanks givings and
blessings.

To the Saints he says, Let them say, The Lord our Reward, our Comfort, our
Love, our Joy, our Strength, our Heaven, our Life, our Father, our Head, our
Prince, our King is Come.

But to the world he says, Let them say, our Doom, our Judgment, our
Darkness, our Confusion, our Dreadful day, and the Dreadful day of the Lord is
Come.

FINIS.

