JOHN SELDOM, OF THE JUDICATURE IN Parliaments, A Posthumous TREATISE: WHEREIN,
The Controversies and Precedents belonging to that Title, are Methodically
handled.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Lawson Bookseller in the Bail of Lincoln; And Sold
by the Booksellers in London.

A Scheme of the Method and Contents.
CHAP. I.
PEers to render Judgment of Peers, page 1 Qu. Whether the Spiritual Lords de
jure are triable by their Peers, p. 4 Touching the Nature of the Offenses
triable in this High Court. 6
CHAP. II.
In what Cases Judicature belongs to the Parliament, 8 Of Judgment on
Delinquents, 10.I. 1. Their Accusation by the Commons, 11 Four manner of
Accusations in Parl. ib. Precedents of their Complaints. 1. By Petition, 12 2.
By Demand, 16 3. By Impeachment, 17. II. 2. Accusation ex part Domini Regis,
p. 33 Some Delinquents accused in Parliament upon Common Fame, without proof of
Witnesses, 37 The Judgment Repealed. 38 No Peer can be Indicted in Parliament,
39 He may be Indicted out of Parliament, and proceeded against in the next
Parliament upon the said Indictment. 40. III. Qu. Whether S. R. Ferrars (4 R.
2.) was Legally brought to his Answer in Parliam by Commandment of the D. of L.
44. Whether he being no Peer nor Baron, could be Legally Arraigned in
Parliament by Information ex part Regis, Ib. Question Resolved, 45 How the
Earl of Bristol's Cause could be heard in the House of Lords, notwithstanding
(35 H. 8.) 46 The Usage in such Cases and Precedents, 48 Whether in a Trial
before Lords and Commons, the Commons are to Sit with their Speaker? 54. IV.
Accusation ex Mandato Domini Regis. ib. The Earl of Northumberland's Case, 5 H.
4. ib. The Lords Impeach not any to themselves, because they are Judges, 63 The
Manner of proceeding against a Delinquent that absents, ib.. V. Of Accusation
by Complaint of private persons, 66 The Fishmongers Complaint against the Lord
Chancellor, 7 R. 2. 72 The Lord Chancellor his Defense, 74 Of the Complaint
against Bishop Williams Lord Keeper, 80 The History of the Appeal, 11 R. 2. 81
The Lords proceed not against a Commoner, but upon the Complaint of the House
of Commons, 84 Appeals abolished, 1 H 4. c. 14. 87.
CHAP. III.
The Parties Answer. 89 The Party accused to be brought to his Answer, 95 An
Answer required from the D. of Gloucester, to certain Accusations, though he
were dead, and Judgment given upon him. 91 Another Delinquent found guilty long
after he was dead, 95 In what Cases the Party is to answer as a Freeman, in
what as a Prisoner, 97 Things to be considered in the Answer. 97 Variation from
the Ancient Course, 100 Touching Council allowed him, 102. 2. When Council
shall be allowed him, and when not, ib. In Misdemeanors the Party may have
Council to Answer. 103 But the Earl of Middlesex was denied it, 21 Jac. 103 The
Parliament has compelled a present Answer in Misdemeanors, and without
Council, 107 The Mayor, etc. accused by the Scholars of Cambridge, ib.. 3. The
Replication, 109 Where the Articles against the Delinquent are ex part Regis,
there the Commons do not reply, nor demand Judgment, ib. Impeachment of the
Lord Latimer, 111 William Ellis Impeached, 114 Lord Nevile Impeached by the
Commons, ib.
CHAP. IV.
The Proof. By Examination of Witnesses, 120 Witnesses produced by the Commons,
ib. A Committee for Trial of Alice Pierce, 123 A Jurie in Parliament for
Misdemeanors, 125 G. D. of Clarence Arraigned, 127
CHAP. V.
The Judgment, 132. 1. It belongs to the Lords only, 133 The Commons have no
Right to it, ib.. 2. In what Cases the King's Assent is necessarily required,
136 Necessary in Capital Judgment, 143 In Judgment on Misdemeanors the King's
Assent is not required, 144. 3. The King's Presence in Parliament, 39. 4. The
Presence of the Lords Spir. ib. In Cases of Misdemeanor, aff ib. Capital, neg.
ib.
The Protestation of the Bishops for ever, 150 Whether they can be present and
not Vote, 152 A Bishop being Lord Chancellor, was present at the giving
Sentence in Case of Treason. 156. 5. Of the Presence of the Commons in Cases
Capital, 158 The Precedents, 149 Their Presence not necessary unless when they
impeach, 160 Whether they Sit if they are present, 161 Of the Presence of the
Judges, 162. 6. The manner how the Lords resolve on their Judgment, 167 Whether
it be ultra Legem, 168 Judgments for satisfaction, 173 References to the Common
Law, 175 By whom to be demanded, 176 By whom to be rendered, ib.
CHAP. VI.
The Precedents for Life and Death, 178
CHAP. VII.
The Execution of the Judgment, 182 In Capital Offenses, In Misdemeanors.
CHAP. VIII.
The Recovery of Damages, or Restitution to the Party aggrieved. 187.
JUDICATURE IN Parliament,
CHAP. I.
Peers to render Judgment on Peers.
THE Execution of all our Laws has been long since distributed by Parliament
out of inferior Courts, in such sort as the Subjects were directed where to
complain, and the Justice how to redress wrongs and punish offenses: And this
may be the reason of the Judges opinion in Thorps Case, 31. Hen. 6. Number. 37.

That Actions at Common Law are not determined in this High Court of
Parliament, yet complaints have ever been received in Parliaments as well of
private wrongs as public offenses. And according to the quality of the Person,
and nature of the offense, they have been retained or referred to the
Common Law.

Touching the quality of the Person the Lords of the Parliament did not
anciently try any Offenders how great soever the offense was, unless he were
their Peer. As by that of 4 E. 3. N. 2. where when the King commanded the Lords
to give Judgment on Simon de Bereford, and diverse others also, who were not
their Peers, for the murder of E. 2. and the destruction of the Earl of Kent,
Son of E. the first. A proviso and agreement was made and recorded in these
words, Et est assensu and accord, etc. And it is assented and accorded by our
Lord the King, and all the Grandees in full Parliament. That albeit the Peers
as Judges of the Parliament have took upon them, and rendered the said Judgment,
Peers to render Judgment on Peers.
etc. That yet the said Peers who now are, or shall be in time to come be not
bound or charged to render Judgments upon others than Peers. Nor that the Peers
of the Land have power to do this, but thereof ever to be discharged and
acquitted; And that the aforesaid Judgment rendered be not drawn to example or
consequence in time to come, whereby the said Peers shall do contrary to the
Laws of the Land if the like Case happen, which God forbid. 4 E 3. N. 6. This
Proviso and agreement was made by the Lords and Commons, and it had these
respects. First to satisfy the Commons, that the Lords by these Judgments
intended not to alter the course of the Common Law, and therefore they
disclaimed that they had power to do this, Quite contrary to the Law of the
Land.
and confess it was contrary to the Law of the Land.

Secondly to preserve their own Right, to Judge none but the Peers, in Case of
Life and Death. For then the Kings Steward is to sit in the Chancellors place
and the Lords are to be Tryers and Judges: And so by judging others then their
Peers descended below their degrees, For none but Peers are so to be Tried and
Judged. It is otherwise in Cases of misdemenors, then the Chancellor keeps his
Place, and the Lords are only Judges and not Tryers, they may command a Jury to
be Impannelled.

For Trial of the Facts, if the truth appear not by the Parties answer, the
Testimonies are Exhibited as 1 R. 2. in the Case of Alice Pierce. Here arises
a Question.

Whether the Spiritual Lords de Jure, How Bishops are tryable.
are tryable by their Peers or no?
Out of Parliament they are not to be Tried by the Peers; But the doubt is,
whether in time of Parliament they are to be so Tried or no? To me it seems
they may, if the matter be moved against them in time of Parliament. For as it
is in the Parliament at York, 15 E. 2. in the Act for the Repeal of the
Spencers banishment, they are Peers in Parliament. Note, that the Petition for
the Repeal says that the Bishops are Peers in Parliament. The Bishops name
themselves Peers of the Land: And the Chancellor to the King. And the Act style
them Peers of the Land in Parliment.

There be diverse Presidents also of the Trial of Bishops by their Peers in
Parliament, as well for Capital offenses as misdemenors, whereof they have been
accused in Parliament. As the Archbishop of Canterbury, 15 E. 3. N. 6, 7, 8. Et
ibid. postea, 44 and 39. Et ibid. 17 E. 3. 22. And the Bishop of Norwich. 7. R.
2. for misdemeanors: So were the Bishops of York and Chichester, Tried for
Treason by their Peers in Parliament, upon the Appeal of the Lords Appellants,
11 R. 2.

Anno 21 R. 2. The Commons accused the Archbishop of Canterbury of Treason, and
the temporal Lords judged him a Traitor, and banished him: But if the Bishop be
accused out of Parliament, he is to be tried by an Ordinary Jury of
Freeholders; for his honor is not inheritable, as is the temporal Peers out
of Parliament, save that only of their Trial. As no day of Grace to be granted
against them in any Suit. A Knight to be returned upon the Panel where a
Bishop is party, and no Process in a civil action to be awarded against his
body, and the like. And by this it appears what Persons are de Jure, tryable
by the Lords in Parliament, viz. their Peers only.

Touching the nature of the Offense. The nature of the offense.

Herein the complaint and accusation as well of the Party delinquent as offense
is to be considered. For upon the Information of the King at his Commandment,
or upon complaint of private Persons, the Lords may not by the Law try any but
their Peers for Capital offenses. And the Lords have ever referred offenses of
other nature complained of by private Persons to the Common Law, if there be
remedy, unless some special cause appear fit for their own Judgment.

But upon complaints and accusations of the Commons, the Lords may proceed in
Judgment against the Delinquent of what degree soever, and what nature soever
the offense be. For where the Commons complain, the Lords do not assume to
themselves trial at Common Law. Neither do the Lords at the trial of a Common
Impeachment by the Commons, decedere de jure suo: For the Commons are then in
stead of a Jury, and the Parties answer, and examination of witnesses, are to
be in their Presence, or they to have Copies thereof: And the Judgment is not
to be given but upon their demand, which is in stead of a verdict, so the Lords
do only judge not try the Delinquent. In the Lords proceedings in Judicature is
observed also a certain form, which varieth according to the nature of the
complaint, and the matter complained of; so that no general Rules can be given
therein, though many Judgments have been reversed for errors, whereof there be
many Precedents. And the Execution upon life and death, has been stayed at the
Request of the Commons, the proceedings being illegal, whereof I have seen only
one Precedent, touching the Duke of Clarence, tempore E. 4. Wherefore for our
better understanding of the Form of Judicature, let us first consider the
several causes wherein Judicature belongs to the Parliament, and then the
ancient way of proceedings in each Cause.

CHAP. II.
In what Cases Judicature belongs to the Parliament. In whnt Cases, etc.

JUdicature belongs to the Parliament in these six Cases.

1. In Judgments against Delinquents as well for Capital crimes as
misdemeanors, wherein is to be considered, 1. The Accusation. 2. The Parties
Answer. 3. The Replication. 4. The proof by Examination of witnesses, or
otherwise. 5. The Judgment. 6. The Execution.


2. In the Reversing erroneous Judgments in Parliament are to be considered, 1.
The Petition. 2. The bringing in the Record. 3. The Assignment of Errors. 4.
The Reversal thereof.


3. In the Reversing of erroneous Judgments given in the Kings Bench are to be
considered 1. The Petition. 2. The Writ of Error. 3. The bringing in the
Record. 4. The Assignment of Errors. 5. The Writ of Scire facias. 6. The
Defendants answer. 7. The Reversal of the Judgment.


4. In deciding of Suits long depending either for difficulty or delay, wherein
is to be considered 1. The Petition. 2. The advice with the Judges. 3. The
determination of the Lords.


5. In hearing complaints of particular Persons on Petitions, wherein is to be
considered, 1. The Petition. 2. The Defendants answer. 3. The Proof. 4. The
Orders of the Lords.


6. In setting at Liberty any of their own Members or Servants imprisoned, and
in staying the proceedings at the Common Law during the Privilege of
Parliament, wherein consider, 1. The Quality of the Person Imprisoned. 2. The
Parties Answer at whose Suit he is imprisoned. 3. The manner of his Charge.


In certifying the Elections and Returns of Knights and Citizens for the
Parliament. But now the Commons alone determine of this: Wherefore I will only
show that the Commons did heretofore Petition to the Lords for redress herein,
and what course was then taken. I leave it to the Clerk of that House to show
how the Commons proceed herein at this day. Of the rest in Order; And first,

Of Judgments on Delinquents.
1. In Judgment against Delinquents, Of Judgments on Delinquents.
is first to be considered, the Accusation. For as in the Kings Bench the
Justices proceed not to the Arraignment of any Offender without an Indictment,
So the Lords have not proceeded to Judgment, unless the Crimes have first been
presented to them by way of Accusation: If otherwise their Judgments have been
reputed erroneous, as that against the Spencers was in 15 E. 2. Rot. 2. claus.
lit. penden. For the same Persons cannot be both Accusers and Judges.

I have observed four manner of Accusations in Parliament. Four manner of
Accusations in Parliament.


1. First by the Commons, either by their Complaints, or their Impeachments. 2.
Secondly by Information. Ex. part. Dom. Regis. 3. Thirdly by Complaint of
private Persons. 4. Fourthly by Appeal of some of the Lords in Parliament,
which was abolished, p. Stat. 1. H. 4. c. 14.
The Accusation of the Commons.
The manner of Accusation ought to be by the Commons alone, and not by the
Lords and them together, for so, Earls, Prelates, Barons, and other Peers of
the Land, and Commons of the Realm, did accuse Hugh de le Spencer, 15 E. 2. and
one of the Errors assigned for the Reversal was, that the Lords had no Record
before them of the Causes contained in their Award, vis. Rot. claus. 15 E. 3.
in the Parliament at York. The Reasons may be, because the Lords joining in the
Accusation with the Commons, have declared their opinion of the Fact, and there
needs no further Trial thereof. Wherefore the Lords who are only Judges may
neither accuse any to themselves, nor join in the Accusations with others.

The complaint of the Commons is either by Petition or demand in general, or by
Impeachment in particular which is their Declaration against the party accused.

Precedents of their Complaints by Petition are. Complaints by Petitions.

Anno 21 E. 3. n. 38. The Commons complain of Extortion used by certain
Merchants, who were Farmers of the Kings Customs of Wools, not naming the
Parties, for which they pray remedy and that the said Merchants may be put to
their answer in this Parliament for such outrage and distress done to the
people. Which Petition is thus answered.

Let the Merchants be called into the Parliament, Et oient lour Respons, In
codem Parl. n. 49. The Commons in another Petition complain: Petition.
That whereas diverse aids have been granted to the King for his Wars, certain
Merchants by confederacy between them, and in manner of usury have bargained
for the same, to the Kings great loss, and the grievance of the Commons, etc.
His people pray these Particulars may be examined, in presence of some by the
said Commons deputed by good wise and Loyal men during the Parliament.

The King shall assign some of the Sages of his Council to hear, Respons.
and determine the things contained in this Article. And if any of the Commons
can inform the King, for his profit of any of the Points herein contained, let
him put it in certain, and he shall be heard, to the end that Right and reason
may be done.

And the Justices which shall be assigned to enquire of false Money, shall have
power to enquire of the excess of such Ministers. Though these complaints were
general, yet they pointed so directly to the Parties accused, that John de
Worsenham, and Walter de Chairton, did exhibit their Petitions also in their
own defense, desiring to come to their Answers. What further proceedings were
herein is not recorded; The Commons were directed to impeach the Parties whom
they accused. If any of the Commons can inform, etc. Let him inform in certain,
and he shall be heard, etc. So that although the Commons accusation by
complaint be general, yet if the complaint be received, and the Parties brought
to answer, the Commons may then impeach the said Parties, viz. declare against
them in special; and then the Suit is theirs, prout. Anno 50 E. 3. against
Lions, Ellis, the Lord Latimer, the Lord Nevile, Peecher and others.

But if the Commons do only accuse by any way of complaint whatsoever, and do
not declare in special against the Party accused, then the Suit is the Kings,
and the Party is to be arraigned, or otherwise proceeded against by
commandment, Ex part Dom. Regis, prout Gomeniz Weston, and Alice Pierce. 1 R.
2.

Anno 1 H. 4. The Commons pray the Lords Apellants in the 21 R. 2. may be put
to their answer, and so they were 10 Placit. Coron. of that Parl. n. 1. 2. 3.
etc.

Anno 29 H. 6. The Commons pray that the Duke of Somerset, the Duchess of
Suffolk, the Bishop of London, and many others may be abandoned from the Kings
Presence during their lives, and not come within twelve Miles of the Court, for
that the people spoke evil of them.

The King of his own mere motion is contented that all shall depart, Answer.
unless they be Lords, and a few of them whom he may not spare from his
presence, and so to continue one year, to see if any man can misprove them. n.
6. inter Petitiones Communium. For this was no Accusation, for the Commons did
not require they might be banished the Court.

Anno 38 H. 6. The Commons among their Petitions accuse the Lord Stanley of
sundry Particulars, as to be of confederacy with the Duke of York, and pray he
may be committed to Prison.

The King will be advised. Answer.

Primo. Jac. 26 Maii. The Commons by message accuse the Bishop of London, for
words spoken of them in the upper House. Of the other kind of complaint by way
of demand, I have seen these two Precedents only.

Anno 1 R. 2. The Subsidy to be treated upon between the Lords and Commons, as
the manner then was; The Commons delivered to the Lords a Schedule of their
demands to be dispatched before Treaty should proceed. Amongst which one was,
That all such who without Cause have lost or given up any Castle, Town, or
Fortress, to the dishonor of the King, and damage of the People, may be put to
their Answer before the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament.

The Complaint herein is general, They accuse such as had delivered up Castles,
etc. if it be an Accusation: But they name not the Parties, yet two Delinquents
hereupon who were Imprisoned in the Tower, for delivery of Castles, etc. were
put to their Answer, viz. Gomeniz and Weston, Anno 7 R. 2. The Commons grant a
Subsidy, according to the Tenor of a Schedule indented delivered in Parliament,
requiring it may be enrolled in the Parliament Roll verbatim; in which Schedule
is this Protestation, That it is not their meaning to grant the said Subsidy,
without the Conditions ensuing.

Inprimis, That the Clergy make the like Grant.

Item, That the Bishop of Norwich, and others, be compelled to answer such
Sums, as they have received for Service by them undertaken, and not performed,
etc. Numb. 13.

Here the Commons name one of the Parties, against whom they complain, but they
impeach him not; and yet he, and diverse others, were censured on that general
demand.

Of the Impeachments of the Commons, Impeachments of the Commons.
there be these Precedents: Anno 50. E. 3. The Commons having granted the
Subsidy, they protested their good will, and firm purpose, to aid the King; and
said, That it seemed to them for truth, that if the King had always about him
Loyal Subjects, good Counselors, and faithful Officers, he had been rich in
Treasure, and needed not have charged his Commons with Subsidies, etc. Then
they desired that three things might be enquired of.

1. First, the withdrawing the Staple from Callis, by the Council and
Procurement of some Privy Counselors about the King.

2. Secondly, of Loans to the King by way of Usury, receiving again greater
Sums than they disbursed, wherein some Privy Counselors have been Partners.

3. Thirdly, of buying the King's Debts by way of Bargain, some for the 10th
Penny, some for the 20th, or 100th Penny, and procuring the King to pay the
entire Debt; to the King's loss, and profit of some Privy Counselors, and
others of their Covyn: Of which three Articles, and their Dependencies, the
Commons said, They would make farther Declaration in special, whenever it
shall please the King to hear them, Numb. 15, 16. Then follows their particular
Impeachments and Accusations.

First, Richard Lions, Merchant of London, is impeached and accused by the
Commons of many Deceits, Extortions, and many other ill deeds by him done to
our Lord the King, and his People, as well during the time he was retaining to
the King's House, and to the King's Council, as otherwise, whilst he was Farmer
of the Subsidy and Customs of the King. And in special of this, that the said
Richard, by Covyn made between him, and some of the Privy Council of our Lord
the King, for their private Profit and Advantage, has procured many Patents,
and Writs of License, to transport great quantities of Wools, and Wool-fells,
and other Merchandise beyond the Seas, to other places than the Staple at
Callis, contrary to the Ordinances, etc. And so they declare of many other
Villainies in great deceit of the King, and of his Court. Whereunto the said
Richard being then present in Parliament, said, etc.

Then follows his Answer in particular to what was particularly alleged
against him, and in general to what was generally charged upon him.

The Lords reassured him for that which was particularly objected against him,
and granted Commissions to enquire of the Extortions wherewith he was charged
in general.

Then the Commissioners in like manner accused and impeached William Lord
Latimer of diverse Extortions, Grievances, Deceits, and ill Deeds, viz. of
diverse Oppressions, when he served the King in Britain, for being Partner with
Richard Lions, etc. and for loss of Towns and Forts beyond the Seas. Numb. 21.

Item, William Ellis of Great Tarmouth was impeached in this present Parliament
in diverse manners.

First, by Surmise of the Commons, etc. Numb. 11.

And afterward John Botheil, and William Cooper, exhibited their two Bills in
form which follows:

To their thrice redoubted Lord the King, and to the said Council shown, etc.
complaining of the Oppressions of the said William Ellis, unto them, and
others, etc. and their Oath was taken against him. Numb. 32.

Item, John Peecher of London, Merchant, was accused and impeached by the said
Commons, That he, by the assent and aid of Richard Lions, and of other Privy
Counselors, for their private profit and advantage, have purchased a Patent
under the Great Seal of our Lord the King, containing that none shall sell
sweet Wines within the Francheses of the City of London, but only the said
John. Numb. 38.

Item, John Nevill was likewise impeached, etc. for buying the King's Debts,
etc. and for loss of Towns beyond the Seas.

Here I observe, that though the Commons complained, Observe.
50 E. 3. but of three Grievances, viz. of the withdrawing the Staple from
Callis; of Loans to the King upon excessive Usury; and of buying the King's
Debts; yet when they who were accused appeared, they declared against them for
other matters also: As against Lions, for new Impositions upon Wools, without
assent in Parliament; and against the Lord Latimer, for his misgovernment
beyond the Seas, and loss of Forts there; and against Peecher, for a Monopoly
of sweet Wines, etc.

I observe also, Observe.
that their Declaration is not made according to the strict forms of Law, as
you may perceive by that against Lions, wherein so many Extortions are so
generally set down against him, that he made no answer to them, neither could,
etc. Which Impeachment the Lords notwithstanding did not reject, but supplied
the defects thereof, by granting Commissions to enquire thereof. Ibid. Numb.
20. in fine.

Item, In this Parliament of 50 E. 3. an Ordinance was made against Women's
pursuing businesses in the King's Court, and especially against Alice Pierce,
Numb. 45. I find no Accusation against Alice Pierce; I only conjecture that the
Commons complained of her, though it be not entered, for she is in the number of
them whom in the next Parliament of 50 E. 3. Numb. 87. the Speaker of the
Commons names to be unjustly convicted in this Parliament: And none were there
convicted, but those whom the Commons complained of.

Item, Adam de Bury, Citizen of London, was impeached by the Clamor of the
Commons in this Parliament of many Deceits, and other ill things done to the
King, and to his People, whilst he was Mayor of Callis, and Captain of
Bullingam, and other ways, as more at large appears in one great Bill,
delivered in Parliament the last day of this Parliament at Eltham. And
thereupon the said Adam was sent for to come to answer in Parliament, and he
came not, neither could be found. Wherefore it was awarded, that all his Goods
and Chattels should be put in Arrest; and so it was done by Writs sent to the
Sheriffs of London and Kent: And the said Bill is on File with the special
Petitions of Parliament, 50 E. 3. Numb. 11.

Out of this last Precedent, concerning Adam de Bury, I observe two things:

1. First, whom they complained of: The Lords sent for him only to appear
before them; they sent not to apprehend him as a Delinquent, until he contemned
their Demand, whereof more hereafter in the Title of the Parties Answer.

2. Secondly, that the Commons delivered not their Impeachment (that is, their
Declaration) against the Party accused, until he appeared before the Lords, and
then they kept it until the last day of the Parliament, in hope that he would
be brought before the Lords; and when they saw he could not be found, they then
delivered their Impeachment against him, to the end (as I concieve) the
particulars of their Accusation might remain upon Record against them hereafter.

Here I also observe an Error of the Clerk, that he has omitted the
Proceedings against Alice Pierce, John de Leycester, and Walter Spooner, who
were all convicted in this Parliament, as appears by the Speaker's motion to
the King for their Pardons in the next Parliament. 50 E. 3. Numb. 87.

Thus much touching the Commons Accusations and Impeachments.

The next Precedent is in 11 R. 2. in which Parliament the whole Commons with
one assent assembled, came before the King, Prelates, and Lords, in the
Parliament Chamber, complaining grievously of Michael de la Poole, Earl of
Suffolk, Chancellor of England, there present, accusing him openly by word of
Mouth:

1. First, that whereas he being Chancellor, was bound by Oath to further the
King's Profit and Commodity in all things: He notwithstanding contrary to the
said Oath, and not regarding the King's great necessity, had purchased of the
King Lands and Tenements to a great value, procuring the same, by reason of his
Office, to be Surveyed at an under value.

2. Item, Whereas at the last Parliament, nine Lords were appointed to see and
examine the State of the King and Realm; which being done, and their Advice
delivered to the King, as well by word as writing, by what means the same might
best be remedied: The Chancellor promised in open Parliament, that the same
should be put in Execution, which was not done, through his default, he being a
Principal Officer.

3. Item, Whereas the Subsidy, granted the last Parliament, was appointed by
the assent of the King and Lords, in what sort it should be expended, and not
other ways employed; in this was his default, he being Principal Officer.

4. Item, Whereas John Tidman had a certain Annuity from E. 3. which he had
since forfeited, and the payment thereof was discontinued for the space of 20
or 30 years: The said Chancellor knowing this, purchased his Interest, and
procured the King to confirm the same unto him, etc.

5. Item, That whereas the great Master of St. Antony being a Schismatic, had
thereby forfeited to the King all his Revenue within this Realm, the same
Chancellor had taken the same to Farm of the King for 20 Marks. And whereas the
Master should have livery thereof again, he could in no wise get the same,
until he had bound himself to pay 100 l. yearly to the Chancellor and his Son.

6. Item, That during the time of his Chancellorship, there had passed diverse
Charters of Pardon, as well for Murders, Treasons, and Felonies, as also for
rasing of Rolls, and imbezelling of Laws and Records; and especially since the
beginning of this Parliament, a Charter of Franchises was granted to the Castle
of Dover, to the disinheritance of the Crown, and to the Subversion of all the
Places and Courts of the King, and his Laws.

7. Item, That at the last Parliament diverse Sums were allotted for the defense
of the Town of Gant, notwithstanding the same Money was lost, etc. by his
default, etc.

Of all which Articles, the Commons demand Judgment of the Parliament, etc.

I have been long upon this, considering all the Precedents follow at large.
These are the most formally set down of all the Accusations hitherto of the
Commons, yet most of these are very general and uncertain: Howbeit the
Chancellor took no exceptions to the insufficiency thereof, but answered to
every particular.

The next Accusation of the Commons is 11 R. 2. in the 21. of the King, they
accused diverse of those whom the Lords had first appealed; whereof, when we
speak of all Appeals. Anno 21 R. 2. the Commons accused and impeached of
Treason the Archbishop of Canterbury, Numb. 15. and demanded Judgment against
him, and had it. Numb. 16.

Eodem Parl. Mortymer and Cobham.
The Commons accused and impeached of Treason Tho. Mortymer, and John de
Cobham, a Baron of Parliament, and had Judgment against them both.

Anno 28 H. 6. William de la Pool, William de la Pool Duke of Suffolk,
impeached.
Earl Marshal, and Duke of Suffolk, was accused and impeached by the Commons in
manner following, viz. The Duke being the great Favorite of the King and Queen,
the common People laid all the fault of the evil Government on him, and made
Ballads thereof, (which I have seen) taxing his Loyalty to the King.

The Parliament of 28 H. 6. begun the 6th of November, and held to the 6th of
December, and was then Prorogued to the 22th of January.

The Duke of Suffolk, whether provoked by the Ballads then made on him, or by
some Speech in the House of Commons, whereof nothing is recorded, did require
of the King that he might be specially accused, and be heard to answer, for
that many reported him to be an untrue man; and he made a solemn Protestation
of his Loyalty, wherein he shows, that his Father, and three of his Brethren,
died in the Service of the King, and of his Father and Grandfather. That he
himself had served 34 years in the Wars, being then but a Knight. That he had
been taken Prisoner, and paid 20000 Marks for his Ransom. That he had been 30
years of the Order of the Garter; Chancellor to the King 15 years; and had been
17 years in the King's Wars, without returning home. And he prayed God so to
pardon him, as he had been true to the King; and required his Purgation. Numb.
14, 15.

Whether this was sent to the Commons, or what notice they had of it, appears
not; but on the 2th of January, the Commons required the Duke might be
committed to Ward for his own Confession, for that, as I concieve, he himself
confessed, General Fame.
That the general Fame went of him: And the Lords, on Consultation of the
Justices, thought the same to be no good Cause of Commitment, unless some
special Matters were objected against him. Numb. 16.

On the 28th of January, the Speaker declared to the Lords, how the Duke of
Suffolk, as it was said, had sold this Realm to the French, who prepared to
come hither. And that the said Duke, for his own defense, had furnished
Wallingford Castle with all Warlike Munition. And then on request, the Duke was
committed to the Tower.

On the 7th of February, the Chancellor, and some other Lords, were sent by the
King to the Commons, (a thing not usual) but wherefore they were sent is not
expressed, happily to be informed what they could say against the Duke, or to
reconcile the business. But the Commons delivered to this Chancellor, and those
other Lords, a Bill of Articles against the Duke, wherein they accused him of
diverse Treasons, viz. For intending to marry his Son to the Heir of the Duke of
Somerset, and thereby for want of Issue of the King, to claim the Crown. For
practicing with the French, etc. Numb. 18, 19. and they require Prosecution
against him. Numb. 17.

March 19. The Commons delivered another Bill of less Offenses against him,
Numb. 28, 29, 30, etc. requiring those Articles also to be enrolled, and the
Duke put to his answer.

These before recited are all the ancient Precedents I find recorded; the
following are of later times.

Anno 1 Jac. The Commons accused and impeached by word of Mouth Sir Giles
Mompesson, and Sir Fr. Michell, Knights; for many Oppressions done to the
People: They impeached them to the Lords at a Conference, and afterward
delivered their Declaration against them.

First, Concerning a Patent for Inns and Osteries.
Secondly, A Monopoly for Gold and Silver Thread.
Thirdly, Concerning a Patent of Concealments.
Eodem Parl. Lord Visc. St. Alban, Chancellor, accused, who was Sir Francis
Bacon.
They accused Francis Lord Viscount St. Alban (at a Conference) of Bribery, and
Corruption, in his Office of Chancellor. They delivered no Writing, but a
Committee of the Lords having considered the Proofs, and drawn up the
Particulars in form of a Charge, they were sent to the Lord Chancellor, and his
answer required to each particular.

In the same manner in the same Parliament, they accused John Bennet, Judge of
the Prerogative Court, of Bribery and Corruption in his Office.

In the same manner they accused and impeached Lyonel Earl of Middlesex, and
Lord Treasurer of England, of Bribery and Extortion, and Impositions on French
Wines and Grocery, which being reported to the House, a Committee was appointed
to consider of the Commons complaint, and also of a Committee, who had reported
to the House a great want of Powder in the Stores, through the Lord Treasurer's
negligence.

A Committee appointed to consider thereof, did, after many Examinations taken,
draw up out of the whole Complaint of the Commons, a Charge against him; as
also out of the Report of the Committee for Munition touching the want of
Powder; and of a Complaint made to the House by Sir Thomas Dallison, and of
some Misdemeanors whereof they are informed in the great Wardrobe, and Court of
Wards: Which Charge the House sent unto the Treasurer, and required his Answer.
21 Jac.

In eodem Parl. 21 Jac. The Commons at a Conference, accused and impeached by
word of Mouth the Bishop of Norwich of some Misdemeanors, which being reported
to the House, the said Bishop made a present Answer thereunto, as it was.

In the Parliament 1 Car. 1. Febr. 6. The Commons at a Conference accused and
impeached George Duke of Buckingham, of many Misdemeanors, and delivered their
Declaration in Writing, that the said Duke might be put to his Answer.

2. The second manner of Accusation is Ex part Domini Regis, Accusation Ex
part Domini Regis.
which is threefold.
The two first are immediately from the King, and the third from the
Commandment of the Lords, by a formal Information exhibited in Parliament by
the King's Attorney, or Council learned, as was that of E. 3. against Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, and diverse others; and 4 R. 2. against Sir Ralph
Ferrers, Knight; and 1 Car. 1. against the Earl of Bristol.

By the King's Commandment, either upon the Petition of the Delinquent, and
upon the return and view of any the Proceedings taken elsewhere, as against the
Earl of Northumberland, and Lord Bardolph, upon former Proceedings against them
in the Court of Chancery. And 2 H. 6. upon request of the Commons against Sir
John Mortimer, Knight, indicted in London. In these Cases no Articles are
exhibited Ex part Domini Regis, as in the former.

By Articles exhibited Ex part Domini Regis, Ex part Dominorum against such
as the Complaint is made upon in general by the Commons, prout 1 R. 2. against
Gomeniz, Weston, and Alice Pierce; 7 R. 2. against the Bishop of Norwich, and
diverse others. Which Articles, though drawn and exhibited Per mandatum
Dominorum, yet were the Parties charged therewith Ex part Domini Regis.

Of Accusation by Information Ex part Domini Regis.
In Rot. claus. 4 E. 3. There is a Proclamation of the death of Edmond Earl of
Kent, Of Accusation by Information Ex part Domini Regis.
where it is said, certain Letters of his containing Treason, were showed to
the King; wherefore he was Arrested, and freely acknowledged the same before
the Earls, Barons, and other Grandees and Nobles of the Realm, in the
Parliament at Winchester, 4 E. 3.

Here appears plainly, that Articles of Treason are exhibited in Parliament
against the Earl of Kent.

In the next Parliament in the same year, Edmond, Son and Heir of the said
Edmond, exhibited his Petition, praying the King, that the Record and Process
whereupon the said Earl was put to death, might be brought before him in
Parliament, and if Errors be found, that Right be done. Numb. 11. The which
being read before the King, Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Grandees in the
said Parliament, the King by his Royal Power and Dignity by assent in
Parlialiament, repealed the said Judgment. Numb. 12.

Note, That in this Repeal no Error was alleged, nor any Exceptions taken for
this, that the Lords proceeded upon the Articles only, which were objected
against him the said Earl.

This is out of the Close Roll.
The first Precedents recorded in our Parliament Rolls of Accusations in this
kind, are these of 4 E. 3. in the Parliament at Westminster, which are added at
large amongst diverse others, at the end of this Discourse, the effect whereof
does follow, viz. These are the Treasons, Felonies, and ill Deeds done to our
Lord the King, and to his People, by Roger de Mortimer, and others of his
Covin, reciting them all, and concludes thus: Whereas our Lord the King does
charge you the Earls, Barons, and other Peers of this Realm, that for as much
as these things touch him principally, and you, and all the People of this
Realm, That you do unto the said Roger right and lawful Judgment, as is fit for
such an one to have who is very guilty of all the crimes above written, for
that he believed the said things are notorious, and known for truth unto you,
and to all the People of the Realm, Numb. 1.

The follows the Judgment against him.
Item, In the said manner our Lord the King charged the said Earls, Barons, and
Peers, to give right and lawful Judgment on Simon de Bereford Knight, who was
ayding and counselling unto the said Roger de Mortimer in all treasons and ill
deeds, for which the said Roger was so awarded, and done to death, as the thing
that is known, and notorious to the said Peers, as the King believes.

Then follows the Judgment against him also.
Then follows the Judgment against John Matrevers, Thomas de Gurney, and
William de Ogle, Numb. 5. But no particular accusations are recorded against
any of them, unless they were comprised in those general words of that against
Mortimer, viz. And other of his Coin. For some of the same Crimes are mentioned
in the Judgments, yet no doubt but the Kings Attourny did exhibit Articles
against every of them, upon which the Lords proceeded to Judgment. Here I do
ingenuously confess my own Error, when I said that this Judgment against Roger
de Mortimer was afterward reversed; for that he was put to death without any
Accusation, which I conceived to be so upon first view of the Repeal thereof.

Anno 21. E. 3. Numb. 10. Where the Petitioners Roger de Mortimer, the
Grandchild assigns for that the said Earl was put to death, and he
disinhereted: Sans Accusament, Et sans estre masone in Judgment ou en Respons.

By which words (sans accusament) I gave you to understand that the Articles
were no accusation, whereas now upon better Consideration I do find that these
words do intend no accusation by witnesses or otherwise to prove the said
Articles objected against him. For these Articles are a legal accusation in
Parliment, and frequently used, as appears by many Precedents of the like
nature. But there was no other proof offered by the Lords to prove the same,
then that the King believes them, and that they are notorious and known for
truth unto the Lords, and all the People of the Realm.

And the Lords also having examined these Articles, said all these things
contained therein are notorious and known. They speak not a word of any one
witness examined, or any other proof then the common fame: For this Cause and
for that the said Earl was not brought to Judgment nor to answer, but condemned
unseen and unheard upon common Fame only without any legal Proof, The whole
Parliament did very justly Repeal the said Judgment and Record, The Judgment,
defective in all points.
declaring it to be erroneous and defective in all points. And the Lords were
willing to damn the whole Record in all points, least happily it might be
alleged against themselves another time for Precedent.

Anno 15. E. 2. The Lords and Commons joined in the Accusations against the
Spencers, and for that the Lords had no Record in their own pursuit upon the
Cause contained in their award, and they ought not to be their own Judges, etc.
having been Accusors no exceptions were taken to the Articles but other Errors
assigned, quod vide where it is said to be sans Accusament, so that they
repealed it not for that there was no Accusation but for that he was not
brought to his Answer.

Again, That those words Sans accusament should simply signify no Accusation,
is only the Averment of the Petition. The Judgment does not say, that there was
no accusation, but that it was erroneous in all points. And so it was, no proof
being produced but common Fame to prove the Answer. And this first error bred a
second. I do not well understand the meaning of these words (Sans accusament.)
That a Peer ought to be Indicted for Capital offenses in Parliament. But having
perused all the Judgments I do not find any one Peer indicted in Parliament. In
11. R. 2. Numb. 7. All the Lords Spiritual and Temporal claimed as their
liberty and franchise, that the great matters moved in this Parliament, and to
be moved in other Parliaments in time to come touching the Peers of the Land,
ought to be admeasured adjudged and discussed by the course of the Parliament,
and not by the Civil-Law, nor by the Law of the Land, used in the more base
Courts of the Realm, which the King granted in full Parliament, eodem Anno Rot.
Appeal 290.

This is said to be their ancient custom, viz. To be adjudged according to the
use of the Parliament only.

Then no Peer can be indicted in Parliament, for that it is contrary to the use
of Parliament. Let this suffice for the confession and rectifying mine own
former Error herein.

But a Lord of Parliament may be indicted out of Parliament, and by the Kings
command proceeded against in the next Parliament, upon the same indictment as
in these Subsequent.

In the same Parliament, The Lord Berkley arraigned waved his Peerage.
the Lord Berkley was arraigned, for the death of Ed. 2. and whether out of his
humility or otherwise, he waved his Peerage, and put himself on the Trial of
his Country. the Articles against him though not expressed, but by the
Inference out of his Arraignment are for the murder of King Ed. 2. at Berkley
Castle in the County of Gloucester, unto which he answered, that he was then
sick at Bradley in Worcestershire, and pleaded not guilty of the death of the
said King, Et de hoc de bono and malo ponit se super Patriam: The Precedent
shall hereafter be added at large.

It begins thus.
Placita Coronae tenta coram Dom. Rege, Ed. 3. post conquestum Angliae in pleno
Parliamento suo predicto. Et allocutus de hoc quod cum Dominus, Edwardus nuper
Rex Angliae Pater Dom. Regis nunc, in custodiam Thomae and cujusdam Johannis
Matrevers extitit deliberatus, ad salvo custodiendum Castro ipsius Thomae de
Berkley in Com. Gloucester, and in eodem Castro in custodia ipsorum murderatus
extitit, and interfectus, qualiter se velit de morte ipsius Regis acquietare:
dicit, etc. Numb. 16.

Then follows his Answer.
Here the cause why the Lord Berkley was tried is mentioned, but the Articles
objected against him, and by whom he was accused, who questioned him, whether
the Chancellor or Steward of England, or who else; All these circumstances are
omitted. It appears not I say in what manner this crime of the Lord Berkley was
presented to the Lords, whether by the former general Information against
Mortimer, and autres de la Covyn, or by some such Particular Information
against him alone, which I rather believe.

Some such Information there must be of necessity, else how could he be
questioned for his crime in Parliament? But here it appears that the Lords
brought him to his Answer, which they omitted to Mortimer, and in that Point
their Proceedings against Mortimer were erroneous. And had his manner of
Accusation been erroneous also, No doubt but the Lords would have avoided that
error now against Berkley.

The manner how Berkley was arraigned here, in pleno Parliamento, is explained
in the Precedent of, 1 R. 2. Gomeniz and Weston, who were brought Prisoners by
the Constable of the Tower, before the Lords in full Parliament sitting in the
white Chamber, where they were arraigned at the commandment of the said Lords
in full Parliament, by Sir Richard le Scroop Knight, Steward of the Kings
House. The words full Parliament signify the Lords and Commons. For that Record
says, the Commons prayed that all such that have surrendered any Forts, etc.
might be put to their Answer before the Lords and Commons, etc. Whereupon they
were brought to their Answers in full Parliament for that Offense. So here I
conceive the Lord Berkley being accused by the King, for the murder of King E.
2. was brought before the Lords and Commons: For the Commons are to be present
at such arraignment as shall be shown hereafter, and the Clerk of the Crown
having read the Accusation against him, Allocutus fuit: That is the Lord
Steward of England recited the Fact, whereof he was accused and demanded of him
how he could acquit himself.

This I conceive to be the manner thereof, Vide the Appeals 21 R. 2. for the
form thereof.

I marvel the Lords permitted the Lord Berkley to wave his Peerage, and put
himself super Patriam.

Anno 4 R. 2. Sir Ra. Ferrers Knight, was brought into Parliament under the
guard of the Marshal of England, and there arraigned on the Kings behalf, for
suspicion of Treason, etc. Numb. 21. In the Process against him is recorded
that for suspicion of Treason surmised against him, he was arrested in the
Marches of Scotland, by Monsieur de Lancaster, and other Lords Temporal there
being in the said Marches, and that he was brought under the said Arrest by
commandment of the Lords to Answer in this Parliament, to that which shall be
surmised against him, in special concerning certain Letters, which were found
and sent to the King and his Council. The Letters were also recorded, and read
in Parliament, Numb. 17. 18, 19, 20. but the Information exhibited against him,
whereupon he was arraigned is not recorded. It is only said, He was arraigned,
Ex part Domini Regis.

. 3. Here might be two Questions. Quest.

Ra. Ferrers legally brought to his Answer in Parliament by the commandment of
the Duke of Lancaster, and those other Lords who were then with him in the
Marches of Scotland.

arraigned in Parliament for life and death, upon an Information, Ex part Dom.
Regis, which is contrary to the Law, as was resolved in Parliament, 4 E. 3.
Numb. 2. and 6.

For resolutions of these doubts, Resolv.
I am of opinion that the Duke of Lancaster might send Sir Ra. Ferrers to the
Parliament, because it was then sitting, and might examine the Treason whereof
he was suspected, though they could not proceed to Judgment against him,
without the Commons, he being a Commoner, and not their Peer: And it fell out
in the Examination of this business, they found the Letters to be
counterfeited, and so he was acquitted thereof: And so far their proceeding was
not illegal. For the Parliament may entertain and examine any Cause, and then
direct the Judgment thereof to its own proper Court if it belong not unto them
as, they did in, 5 R. 2. Numb. 43. and 44.

Here Sir William Cogan Knight, being accused by Sir Richard Clurdon of matter
sounding to Treason. Observe.
After the Lords had heard the Cause, they remitted both the parties to the
Common Law. And in this Case of Sir Ra. Ferrers (if they had found he had been
guilty) they might have proceeded to Judgment against him according to the
Precedent of Sir Tho. Mortimer in 2 H. 4. who was indicted in London, and the
Indictment returned into the Chancery, and thence brought into the Parliament,
where the Commons affirmed the same, and prayed Judgment against him.

Anno 2 H. 4. The Lords Temporal gave Judgment on one Tho. Holland Earl of
Kent, John Holland late Earl of Huntington, John Mountague late Earl of
Salisbury, the late Lord de Spencer, and Ralph Lumley who were beheaded in a
War they had Traitorously raised against the King. This Judgment is entered but
not the Information, Ex part Dom. Regis, which is necessary to be understood,
for had it been omitted, his Son Thomas would without doubt have assigned that
for one of the errors in his Petition to reverse the said Judgment, 2 H. 5.
apud Leicester, which he did not, though he assigned for an Error, That his
Father was put to death without an accusation.

In the Parliament begun at Westminster Feb. 6. 1 Car. 1. The Earl of Bristol
charged with Treason.
and continued until June 25. Anno 2. ejusdem Regis, John Earl of Bristol was
charged with High Treason in this manner, viz. Primo die Maii. The said Earl of
Bristol being brought to the Bar, and kneeling till the Lord Keeper wished him
to stand up; The Lord Keeper told him, he was sent for to hear his Charge of
High Treason, And Mr. Attorney General being at the Clerks Table, began to open
his Charge, but being interrupted by the said Earl, who with much importunity
exhibited Articles against the Duke of Buckingham then present, Articles
against the Duke of Buckingham.
which as he said he conceived to be Treason, and required of the Lords that
his Testimony against the Duke, and the Lord Conway, against whom he then also
delivered Articles, might not be made invalid no more then the Charge against
himself, which he affirms was procured by the said Duke: yet notwithstanding
the head of the Kings Charge were opened against him by Mr. Attorney, and then
the said Articles against the said Duke, and against the Lord Conway were read.
And it was ordered by the Lords of the Parliament that the Kings Charge against
the said Earl, should be first heard, and afterward the Earls Charge against
the Duke, etc. But yet so, as the Earls Testimony against the said Duke be not
prevented, prejudiced, hindered or impeached.

Secundo die Maii. The House was moved that the Earl of Buckingham, might be
indicted according to the, Stat. of 35 H. 8. the Treasons committed being
beyond the Seas as was objected, and that being certified to both Houses, they
to proceed against him by Trial of Peers. But their Lordships did not resolve
on the manner of proceeding. Then the Houses were moved that Mr. Attorney might
provide an Indictment, against the said Earl to be returned to the House on
Saturday next, Maii 6. And if he doubt of the Form, to confer thereof with the
Judges. And if any great difficulty, appear to resort to their Lordships and
acquaint them with it. And it was ordered that Mr. Attorney proceed with the
preparation, but the Houses not to be concluded at their next meeting on
Thursday. And the Sub-Committee for Privileges, etc. to search for Precedents
in the mean time. Die Jovis Maii 4. The Sub-Committee for Privileges reported
one only President, viz. the Trial of the Earl of Northumberland, 5 H. 4.
which the Clark read unto them out of the Parliament Roll of that year.
Whereupon after long debate, It was ordered first that Mr. Attorney prepare the
heads of the Charge, against the Earl of Bristol, and to bring them in on
Saturday next.

Secondly, The Earl then to receive his Charge at the Bar.

Thirdly, That when the Earl has heard his Charge, the Lords will determine
when he shall Answer, But he is not to be inhibited if he will Answer presently.

Fourthly, The Cause of the Earl of Bristol is to be retained wholly in this
House.

After the Earls Charge is brought in and his Answer, then their Lordships to
proceed to hear Mr. Attorneys proofs amongst themselves, and then to put the
Cause into a way of Proceeding in this House.

Die Sabati Maii 6. The Lord Keeper showed how Mr. Attorney desired that in
regard the House, has already heard the nature of the crimes objected against
the said Earl of Bristol.

That the Clark of the Crown in the Kings Bench, may attend the reading of the
Charge here according to a Precedent of former times, which was denied in
regard the Clark of the Crown in the Kings bench, is no Minister of this Court,
And also for that it was ordered May 4. that this Cause was wholly to be
retained within this House. The said Order being read, the Earl was brought to
the Bar, and the Lord Keeper commanded Mr. Attorney to read the Charge against
him, who read the same out of a Parchment engrossed in Court-hand, and signed
by himself, To. Heath.

It contains diverse Articles of High Treason, and other great Enormities,
Crimes, Offenses, and contempts committed by the said Earl, etc. prout postea.
Thus much touching the Charge against the said Earl by Information in the Kings
behalf.

A Question was demanded of me and others in private, Quest.
the last Parliament: Thar seeing by Order of the Lords House May 4. the Earl
of Bristols cause should be wholly retained in this House, how that might now
be done in respect of the Stat. of 35 H. 8. By which it was enacted, That all
Treasons committed beyond the Seas, as this Earls were, shall be tried in the
Kings Bench, or before Commissioners Assigned by the King; And an Order of the
upper House cannot avoid the Statute. Some were of opinion, that the Earl was
first to be indicted before Commissioners, appointed by the King, and that
Indictment being returned into the Parliament to be tried thereon by his Peers,
and vouched that Precedent of 2 H. 6. Of Sir John Mortimers Indictment returned
into the Parliament.

But then the Cause cannot be wholly retained in the Parliament, neither can it
be inferred out of the Precedent of Sir John Mortimer, that the Parliament can
try any of Treason unless he be Indicted elsewhere. For then the Parliament
should not have so much power, as has the Kings Bench and other inferior
Courts, wherein Capital Offenses may be both enquired of and determined.
Neither can Sir John Mortimers. Indictment thus returned be a leading Case, for
Trial of Peers in Parliament for he was but a Commoner, and therefore not to
have been judged by the Lords, unless they had first accused him, and the
Commons did so by Informing the Indictment to be true, before the Lords gave
Judgment upon him. But their can be no Precedent shown, that a Peer of
Parliament has been tried in Parliament on an Indictment taken elsewhere.

To resolve this Question two things are Considerable.

First, Resolve. 1.
The Statute of 35 H. 8. Whether the meaning thereof were to limit the Trial of
a Peer in the time of the Parliament (for Foreign Treasons assigned) taken in
the Kings Bench, or before Commissioners Assigned by the King, and not
elsewhere. But I conceive the Statute has no such meaning. The Preamble says,
it was doubted whether such Treasons might by the Common Law of the Land be
enquired into, heard, and determined within this Realm of England. For a plain
remedy Order, and Declaration herein to be had and made, Be it enacted, etc. So
that if such Treasons have not been heretofore enquirable by the Common Law,
then this Statute provides a Remedy and Order for the same hereafter. But this
Statute does not abridg the Parliament of the power it had to enquire of, and
determine such Treasons in time of Parliament. Whereof there are diverse
Precedents, viz. 1 R. 2. Weston and Gomeniz, 50 E. 3. for William Latimer, and
John Nevil, 7 R. 2. for the Bishop of Norwich, and ibid. Numb. 17. for
Cressingham and Shipworth, and ibid. Numb. 24. for Sir William Elsingham, Sir
Thomas Trevet, and Sir Henry de Ferrers, all Tried in Parliament for matters
done beyond the Seas.

The second thing to be considered is, The Order it self which I conceive to be
of force notwithstanding the Statute, of 35 H. 8. for that it is neither
directly contrary to the Statute, nor repugnant to the Common Law, otherwise
the Act of one House alone cannot alter a former Statute made by consent of
both Houses. And this is to be remembered, Observe.
that the Proceeding against a Peer in Parliament is not necessary.

But thus it was used to be, viz.
The Peer accused to be brought before the Lords and Commons, and then the Lord
Steward to sit in the Chancellors place, on the Woolsack and the Articles to be
read against him by the Clark of the Crown, and upon his Answer the Lords do
determine of their Judgment, which is afterward pronounced by the same Lord
Steward. A Question might be whether the Commons have used to sit with their
Speaker at these Trials. If they have then the Court of Requests, or some such
place may be provided for the purpose. And thus that whole Cause might be
retained in Parliament notwithstanding the Stat. of 35 H. 8. Thus much touching
the Accusation, ex part Dom. Regis, exhibited in a formal Accusation by the
Kings Attorney.

The Duke of Clarence was arraigned in Parliament, 18 E. 4. upon the like
Information, but the Precedent is not in the Parliament Rolls: Therefore I omit
it.

. 4. The second kind of Accusation on the Kings behalf is, ex mandato Dom.
Regis, upon the Roll and view of any proceedings elsewhere against the
Delinquent, or upon his Petition; The Precedents thereof are these.
Anno 5 H. 4. The Earl of Northumberland was Tried in Parliament, ex mandato
Dom. Regis, upon his own Petition. The Accusation and manner was thus. The said
Earl had raised Forces to have joined with his Son Hotspur, in Rebellion
against the King: Hotspur was slain in the Battle of Shrewsbury, 21 July 4. H.
4. before the said Earl could join with him. Whereupon he dismissed his Forces,
and retired to Worksworth Castle. The King after the Battle came to York, and
sent for the said Earl, and being come pardoned him for his life but abridged
him of his Liberty. The next Parliament was summoned the 20 of October to begin
at Coventry the 3. of December. And the Earl had his writ of Summons. This
Parliament was prorogued till the 23. of November by new Writs (as the manner
then was) returnable Crastino Hillarii then following. But the Earl had no new
Summons thither.

But thither he comes a Petitioner.
Speed says he was abridg'd of his liberty, but the Record says, he came
before the King and Lords. And not that he was a Prisoner as Gomeniz, and
Weston, 1 R. 2. Nor that he was caused to be brought as a Delinquent, sent for
as Alice Pierce, 1 R. 2. But that he came before the King, Lords, and Commons
of Parliament. And then the Chancellor told him that upon Wednesday last past,
he had been before the King and Lords, and Commons in the same Parliament; and
besought the King as he had done before, at his coming before him at York. That
the King would do him grace for his misprisions against him, in not keeping his
Laws and Statutes, as by one Petition delivered by him in Parliament written in
English, The tenor whereof follows.

To my most dreadful and Sovereign Liege Lord.
I your humble Subject beseech your Highness, A Petition.
to have in remembrance my coming into your Gracious Presence at York, of your
free will by your goodly Letters.

The which Petition per Commandment du Roy, was examined by the Justices to
have their Counsel and Advice therein.

But the Lords by Protestation made claimed the Judgment, to belong unto them
only in such Cases, etc.

And so the Lords Tried him, and acquitted him of Treason and Felony, but found
him guilty of a Trespass only which the King pardoned. Here no Information was
exhibited against the said Earl, yet the Kings Counsel opened his Offenses to
the Lords, else how could they appear.

Anno 7 H. 4. The King commanded the Lords Temporal in Parliament, to advise
what manner of Process should be made against Henry late Earl of
Northumberland, and Tho. Bardolph late Lord Baron, for certain ill deeds which
they had lately committed contrary to their Allegiance. At their meeting the
Constable of England, showed them the Process made in the Court of Chivalry,
against Henry de Peircy upon the Articles of Treason committed by him and
others of his Covyn.

In which Articles are named the Archbishop of York: Tho. Newberry Earl
Marshal, the said Earl of Northumberland, the said Lord Bardolph and many
others, and their several Treasons are therein contained. The Lords having
advised therein, and considered the proofs delivered their opinion to the King
touching the said Earl of Northumberland, and the said Lord Bardolph only, and
proceeded to Judgment against them. Then the King caused to be demanded of the
Lords Temporal, Peers of the Realm what they would say touching the Act of the
said late Archbishop of York, and of the said Earl Marshal, who lately with a
great multitude of people were armed, and trained in the field within the Realm
of England with Banners displayed, etc.

Unto which demand the said Lords Temporal said, That according to the
Information to them given by the said Constable. It seems unto them to be
Treason: yet notwithstanding the Lords desired that with good deliberation,
when they next returned to the Parliament they might speak thereof, unto our
Lord the King as no error might be found in their doings in time to come. This
was done on that day the Parliament was adjorned. Here the Lords had no other
Accusation against those two Peers but the Kings commandment, upon view of
former Process against them in the Court of Chivalry.

And the Lords declared their opinion touching the Archbishop of York, and the
Earl Marshal (though their Treasons were contained in the same Process also)
least Error might be found in their doings hereafter. But whether they thought
their Error to be, that the King had not commanded them first to advise
thereon, touching the said Archbishop, and the Earl Marshal as he had done
touching the others. Let the Reader Judge; For my part I think that would have
been error: Could the Lords proceed upon Process elsewhere unless the King
commands them?

2 H. 6. The Judgment against John Mortimer, is drawn up very briefly by John
Hales one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, wherein he first shows that the
said Sir John Mortimer was Indicted in London sitting the Parliament before the
Lord Mayor of London, and other Commissioners appointed by the King. For that
the said Sir John being committed to the Tower, for suspicion of Treason,
corrupted his keeper and broke Prison: That the said Indictment was returned
into Chancery, Ex mandato Dom. Regis, and by the Chancery brought into the
Parliament before the Duke of Gloucester the Kings Protector, and the Lords
Temporal, the King being then an Infant.

And the Protector being Authorized by Commission to hold the Parliament, de
Precepto Dom. Regis. That the said Sir John Mortymer by Virtue of the Writs was
brought before the said Duke, and Lords, and Commons. That the said Commons
affirmed the said Indictment to be true, and desired Judgment against him, as
convict of Treason and Felony.

And lastly, That he was thereupon adjudged. In this is set down all the
essential parts of the Lords proceedings against Mortymer. The Ceremonious or
formal parts thereof are omitted, as, who complained of or accused Mortymer to
the Parliament.

The King or the Commons did not, for then there needed no Indictment: And
therefore it must move for the King either before the Indictment, or rather
upon the Return thereof unto the House. For had the Accusation been before the
Indictment, it had been a shorter way to Arraign him also before the
Commissioners in London, (he being no Member nor Peer of Parliament) then to
return the Indictment into the Chancery, and then be brought into the
Parliament.

Here is also omitted the Conference before hand, between the Lords and Commons
touching this matter: For it is very unlikely that the Lords did suddenly send
for the Commons, and then abruptly read the Information before them, and they
as suddenly affirm the same, all these are necessarily understood. That the
Commons affirmed the Indictment, ande.

It appears that the Lords cannot of themselves Judge a Common Person, for an
Offense for he is no Peer according to that of, 4 E. 3. Numb. 26.

The manner of Accusation by Information, Ex part Dom. Regis, is when the
Commons as any other private Person accuse any man unto the Lords in general,
but do not declare the Offenses in particular, other then by the Commandment of
the King. Articles are drawn up against the Delinquent, Ex part Dom. Regis.

The Precedents are these.
2 R. 2. The Constable of the Tower, was commanded to bring Gomeniz and Weston,
(whose Offenses were complained of in general by the Commons that they named)
before the Lords in Parliament, to Answer to the Articles objected against them
on the behalf of the King, and they were severally arrained* at the Commandment
of the Lords, etc.

Eodem anno, Alice Pierce being complained of by the Commons was accused, and
commanded to come before the Lords in Parliament, to Answer to certain things
objected against her on the Kings behalf.

And here upon Sir Richard le Scroope, Chief Steward of the Kings House by
Comandment of the Lords, rehearsed in Parliment in the presence of the said
Alice, a certain Ordinance, etc. Made in the Parliament of 50 E. 3. against her.

And this Rehearsal being made, the said Steward surmised unto the said Alice.
That it seemed to the Lords of the Parliament that she had incurred the pain
comprised in the said Ordinance in certain points, and especially in two, That
is to say, etc.

By these two Precedents it appears plain enough that the Lords commanded the
Articles to be drawn, and exhibited though ex part Dom. Regis, for all these
are said to be done by their Commandment, And the practice at this day is, that
out of the Complaints of the Commons, as of Mompesson, The Lord Chancellor, and
the Lord Tresurer, and a Committee of the Lords did draw up the Charges. But
they wanted the words Ex part Dom. Regis.

The reason why in this Cause the Articles are, Ex part Dom. Regis, seemed to
be this:
The Commons complain but impeach not, Notwithstanding the Impeachment the
Lords cannot proceed neither can they Impeach any to themselves: The Lords
cannot impeach any to themselves.
So it rests that the party is to be Impeached at the Kings Suit.

It may be lawful for me to examine the proceedings of the Lords in the
Complaint against Mompesson, and to compare them with ancient Proceedings in
like Cases, And they will appear to differ much.

And touching Mompesson the Commons did not only complain but accuse him: He
fled, in his absence they ought to have proceeded to Judgment against him,
before Proclamation first made for him to appear before the King, and then at a
day, the ancient use in such Cases was this.

The Lords considered of the Complaint, and examined the Proofs produced by the
Commons: Then agreed on their Judgment and caused Proclamation to be made
throughout England for the party to appear at a day, else Judgment shall be
pronounced against him, with which the Commons are to be acqnainted before the
Proclamations are sent for. Then the Return of the Proclamations to be reviewed
and examined, and if any Errors be therein, new Proclamations are to be made in
the next Shire only for the party to appear at a short day: If they find no
Errors in the Return, then Judgment is to be pronounced and not before. Thus it
was in 21 R. 2. in Thomas Mortymors Case, etc. In 7 H. 4. in the Earl of
Northumberlands Case. But there needed no Articles to be drawn up, Ex part
Dom. Regis, out of the Impeachment of the Commons for the Suit is theirs and
not the Kings.

Touching the Lord Treasurer, First the Commons did swerve from the Ancient
Course in this, they delivered not their Accusation in writing (he being
absent;) Had it been in the open House, an Impeachment by word of mouth had
been sufficient, and the Suit had been theirs: but it being at a Committee, how
could the Lord Treasurer take notice of their Impeachment? wherefore the Lords
of necessity did draw up a Charge against him out of their Accusation, and then
it became the Kings Suit, and they were abridged of their power to reply, or
demand Judgment, Prout in Weston and Gomeniz, Case 1. R. 2.

And Alice Pierce, ibid. Neither was it now necessary for the Commons to be
acquainted with the Delinquent's Answer, or any of the Proceedings, for that
they neither demanded he might be put to his Answer before the Lords and them,
nor impeached by word in open House, nor in Writing, One of which is required
in an Impeachment.

And the Lords they varied in this, that they did mingle other Complaints with
these of the Commons, when each should have been apart of it self, prout 43 E.
3. Sir Joh. at Lees Case. Neither did the Lords anciently use to omit any part
of the Commons Complaint and Accusation, as they did the Imposition on the
French-Wines: And the Articles of the Charge they sent to the Lord Treasurer
ought to have been examined ex part Domini Regis prout in the former
Precedents of 1 R. 2. The next Precedent is 7 R. 2. upon the Demand of the
Commons against the Bishop of Norwich and others.

. 5. Of Accusation by Complaint of private Persons.
I do not remember any Precedent of this manner of Accusation for public
Offenses unless the Parties Complainant be particularly interessed therein; yet
I doubt not but such Complaints have been, and may be received, and the Parties
proceeded against in Parliament, or else that High Court should not have so
much Authority to receive Information pro Domino Rege from private persons, as
the Inferior Courts have: But what has been done shall appear; I will omit
all Complaints of particular wrongs, evcept it be of Bribery, Extortion or
Oppression, in Men of Authority.

Anno 43. E. 3. William Latimer exhibited his Petition in Parliament unto our
Lord the King, and to his Council, showing that he had the Wardship and
Marriage of the Heir of Robert Latymer, by mean Grant from the King, and held
the same until Monsieur John at Lee, then Steward of the King's House, sent a
Sergeant at Arms to bring them to London, and commanded him, being come, not to
depart without his leave, A great Oppression.
upon payment of 1000 l. and afterward would not give him leave to depart
until he had surrendered the Body of the said Heir, and the King's Patent unto
him the said Monsieur John at Lee; and thereupon the said John was put to
reason before the Lords, etc. no. 20, 21. and also the said John was put to
reason before them for this; When he was Steward of the King's House, he caused
diverse to be attached by their Bodies, some by Sergeants at Arms, and some
otherwise, as W. Latymer and others to be brought before the King's Council,
etc. n. 22. and also for executing the Authority of Steward out of the Verge,
n. 23. and also for discharging out of Newgate, by his own Authority, and
against the Judges Commandment, Hugh Levenham, an Prom^oter.
Approver, who had appealed several men of Felonies, etc. n. 24. and also, that
he being sworn by the King's Council, did bargain with Nicholas Levayn for the
Manor of Cainham in Kent, which the faid Nicholas claimed to hold during the
Minority of John Staynton, whereas the said John at Lee knew the same was never
holden of the King in Chief of the Castle of Dover, n. 25.

These be the Particulars wherewith the said John at Lee was Charged. It
appears W. Latymer accused him at the first, but not the rest; and I imagine
that the Commons accused him of the Second and other Particulars, for that they
are said somewhat generally, and are offenses against the Liberties of the
Commons; and also for that diverse of the Commons were present at the hearing;
And for the Fourth and Fifth Particulars, I conceive the King's Council accused
him thereof, for that one is an Offense against the legal Proceedings of
Justice, which then was that of the Approver, viz. He which accuses any one of
Felony, etc. should remain in Prison as well as the accused until Trial. Of
later times the Accuser puts in Sureties to prosecute; and the other Offense is
a partiticular wrong done unto the King in his Revenues: And had any private
person accused him of this, their Petitions would have been recorded as well as
Latymer's: But the Lords proceeded against him upon Latimer's Accusation, and
then upon the rest severally, and they did not mingle one with another.

Anno 50 E. 3. The Commons accused and impeached W. Ellis, n. 31. and
afterward John Botheil and W. Cooper exhibited their Bills against him, to
this effect;

To their Thrice Redoubted King, and to his Sage Council, shows John Botheil
of London, That the Monday next after the Ascension, in the Fortieth Year of
our Lord the King, that now is, a Ship of Scotland in Pruse, was chased by
Tempest into Likebread (whereof the Master's Name is Henry Luce) Charged with
diverse Merchandises, etc. and that the same day one William Savage, Clerk, and
Servant to William Ellis, by Command of the said William, took of the said Ship
for the Merchandises not discharged there, 17 Nobles and a Last of, etc. and
because that W. Ellis knew that W. Cooper was to come to the Parliament, and
show these and other Grievances in aid of the Merchants, and also to show how
the great Prices of Herrings might be amended in aid of the whole Realm, the
said W. Ellis, by false suggestion, caused the said W. Cooper to be Arrested
and put in Prison in the Tower for three Weeks.

May it please you, etc. Here I observe that the Accusation of a private person
ought to be legal and certain, as that was.

This Accusation consists of two parts; The unjust taking of 17 Nobles, etc.
from the Merchant of Pruse, and the Imprisonment of the Petitioner by false
suggestion to the King.

Upon hearing of the Matter, the Lords Ordered, That as for the Complaint
touching the 17 Nobles, it should be sent to the King's Bench to be tried there;
but the Lords themselves determined the Imprisonment upon the false suggestion
to the King, and awarded Ellis to prison, to pay Fine and Ransom to the King,
and Damages to the Accusers.

The Lords received the latter part of this Complaint for two Causes; The one,
for the false Suggestion to the King, limited by the Statute of 31 E. 3. to be
punished by the Chancellor, L. Treasurer, and the Council if he be untrue; all
which were present in the Parliament.

The other, For a Scruple which might arise out of the Words of the Statute,
which provides for false Suggestions only to the King himself. Whereas Ellis
his false Suggestion was by a Letter written to one of the Kings Servants,
which being showed to the King, his Majesty caused the Petitioner to be
imprisoned. And this the Lords expounded to be in Ellis a Suggestion unto the
King himself. And had this Point been truly triable at the Common Law, the
Lords had referred it thither: This is but my own Conceit.

Anno 5 R. 2. Numb. 4. Richard Clevedon Esquire, by his Bill exhibited to the
King in Parliament, accuses Sir William Cogan Knight.

Anno 5 R. 2. Numb. 45. The Mayor, Bailiffs and Commonalty of Cambridge were
accused, etc.

The next of this kind is a very slanderous Accusation of the Chancellor, which
I will briefly declare, and the whole proceedings therein, for that it differs
in some points from the rest.

The Parliament of 7 R. 2. at Salisbury began the Friday after the Feast of St.
Mark the Evangelist, April 29. On the 24th-of May next, The Fishmonger contra
L. Chancellor.
John Cavendish Fishmonger, complained in this Parliament:

First, Before the Commons of England in that Assembly, in presence of some
Prelates and Temporal Lords, and afterward before all the Prelates and
Temporal Lords in full Parliament.

In the beginning of this Complaint, he desired the Lords (for God's sake) to
grant sure and speedy protection for the safety of his Life, and that he might
have sufficient Surety of the Peace against those of whom he would complain;
and especially he demanded Surety of Monsieur Michael de la Poole, Chancellor
of England; and accordingly the Chancellor did (at the Commandment of the King)
find Sureties, viz. Two Earls, etc. Then the Fishmonger rehearsed, how that all
the last Parliament which was held at Westminster, at Allhallontide in the same
year, he did sue by his Bill to have restitution of certain Merchandises of
great value, (from Geo. Mansfield and three others) which was lost upon the
Seas by them at such time as they had undertaken the Safeguard of the Seas, and
of the Merchandises passing and coming in the mean time, against all Enemies
except Royal Power. The which was endorsed, says he, and committed to the
Chancery, to discuss and determine the Matters therein comprised, according to
Law and Reason. Whereupon he dealt with one John Otrey, a Clerk, and
Houshold-Servant to the said Chancellor, for his Master's Favor and
Furtherance in the Business. The Clerk, after he had viewed a Copy of the Bill,
and considered of the Business, promised, that for Forty Pounds to his Lord's
use, and Four Pounds to his own use, he should have speed: That he gave his
Bond for 44 l. to be paid at a Day to come, and afterward delivcred unto the
said Otrey certain Herrings and Sturgeon, to the value of 9 or 10 Marks, to the
use of the said Chancellor in part, and three yards of Scarlet, which cost him
32 s. unto Otrey, for his own use, in part of the said 4 l. Notwithstanding all
which, he found no Favor from the Chancellor in his Suit, but was delaied, and
still is, and cannot have Justice therefore.

That the said Otrey told him, that he could have had more Money of his
Adversaries to have been against him; which made him suspect the worst. But,
said he, whether the Chancellor shall be reputed privy to this, God knows;
judge you My Lords; for the Chancellor has paid him for his Herrings and other
Fish, and sent him his Bond cancelled; but whether he did it out of Conscience,
or to avoid Slander and Reproach, he knew not; Judge you, My Lords: but he was
not paid for his three yards of Scarlet.

Unto this the Chancellor made his Answer, The Chancellors Answer.
not presently, but at another time; for the Record says, He Answered first
before the Prelates and Lords, and afterward before the Lords and Commons;
whereas the Commons were present when the Complaint was made, it being in pleno
Parliamento.

And in the Judges Award, to whom this Matter was afterward referred, it is
said to be coram Magnatibus and Communitat' in Parliamento. So that the Answer
was made some other way.

First, He protested his Innocence touching the Delay of Justice, and showed
how the Delay was through the Difficulty of the Cause, and vouched the Justices
and the Sergeants, who had often heard the Pleadings.

Touching the Bribery, he swore by the Sacrament he had no knowledge thereof,
until upon Account with his Officers, he found those Fishes not paid for; and
then he presently caused them to be paid for, and the Bond cancelled, and sent
him. He denied that his Clerk moved him in that Business; all which he offered
to prove in such manner as the King and the Lords should ordain, and demanded
Justice against the Fishmonger for the Slander. Unto which the Fishmonger
presently answered, and said, He did not accuse the Chancellor himself, but his
Clerk only. The Lords examined the Fishmonger and the Clerk about the Bond, and
his Adversaries on their Allegiance, whether they had given any thing, or
promised to give? And finding tde Chancellor free from Bribery, The Chancellor
acquitted.
the Lords acquitted him of his Accusation aforesaid; then at the Chancellor's
Request, the Fishmonger was committed until he found Sureties to appear de die
in diem before the Lords, and before any Judges who should be assigned. The
Lords committed the Clerk also; and afterward the Parliament growing to an
end, the Complaint was referred wholly to the Judges to hear and determine the
same, as well for the King, as for the Parties. Auxi avaunt come les Peers de
Parliamento, might have done, if the Plaint had been fully treated in their
presence, and in the Parliament.

The Proceedings before the Judges were in a Schedule, annexed to the
Parliament-Roll, and were thus;
A Commission was granted in Parliament unto Tressilian, Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, and Bellknap, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, to hear and
determine.

They met at Westminster June 19. and were assisted by the Lord Treasurer, Lord
Keeper, Lord Privy Seal, the Master of the Rolls, and the King's two Sergeants,
etc. and they called the Fishmonger before them, and cause to be recited the
said Accusation, and the Chancellor's Answer; and then demanded of him what he
could say why he should not undergo the Penalty of the Statute against such
Scandals, especially whenas the Chancellor has acquitted himself in
Parliament, and is yet ready to acquit himself by any way possible?

The Fishmonger denied that he slandered the Chacellor, but the Clerk only, etc.

The Commissioners considering the Accusation and Answer in Parliament, and
especially that the Fishmonger said he could not have Justice in his Cause
before the Chancellor, the contrary whereof was expressed and proved out of the
Records of the Chancery, The Fishmonger guilty of the Defamation.
They adjudged him guilty of Defamation, and to pay one hundred Marks to the
Chancellor, and to be imprisoned until he could pay the same, and a competent
Fine due to the King.

It should seem the Lords could find no time to examine the Injustice he
complained of, and therefore referred it to the Judges. Anno 6. R. 2. Octab.
Mich. Numb. 59. Diverse Bills were exhibited this Parliament by the Mayor,
Aldermen and Citizens of London, concerning the Fishmongers, and the said
Mayor, and Aldermen, and Fishmongers were present at the reading thereof; where
Nicholas Exton, who spoke for the Fishmongers prayed the King to receive him
and his Company into his Majesty's protection, Numb. 59. which was granted,
Numb. 60. Then one Walter Sybil, a Fishmonger, craved Audience, and said, These
Bills were not exhibited for any good zeal to the Commonweal, but for mere
Malice to the Fishmongers, for that the chief Exhibiters of these Bills being
commanded to prison for sundry Misdemeanors in the time of E. 3. were then
imprisoned by certain of the Fishmongers, who then were chief Officers in
London, for which cause Malice was born at that time, Numb. 60.

To that, one John Moore a Mercer answered, The Citizens of London went to keep
the Peace toward them, unless they went about to let into the said City the
Rebels of Kent and Essex, as the said Walter, and others did. Numb. 60.

The said Walter Sybill took advantage of those words, and desired the Lords to
bear witness.

John Moore thereupon expounded his words, saying (as the Report then went) and
prayed the Lords that the Truth thereof might be further enquired of in the
City.

There is one only Precedent of a Complaint made by a private person in the
House of Commons, and of the Commons proceeding therein, against a Lord of the
Parliament; which was thus:

Anno 15. H. 6. Tho. Philips exhibited unto the Commons his Bill of Complaint
against John Bishop of London, for his long Imprisonment upon suspicion of
Heresy.

The Commons sent up the Bill, being written in Paper, amongst other, to the
Lords, without any Message, for ought appears upon Record. On Monday
following the Bill was read, and the Lords Excogitabant, That it did not belong
to their House de talibus frivolis rebus consultare, and returned it to the
Commons.

Hereupon the Commons sent -- to the Bishop for his Answer in writing unto this
Complaint; which yet the Bishop did forbear to do, until he knew the Opinion of
the Lords herein, and acquainted their Lordships therewith. The next day the
Lords answered all with one voice, Quod non consentaneum fuit aliquem Procerum
alicui in eo loco responsurum, Lunae 2. Martii. In the Parliament begun at
Westminster, An. 16. Jac. Sir John Bowser Knight, complained of the Bishop of
Lincoln, Bish. Williams Lord Keeper.
the then Lord Keeper; but he was not compellable to answer before the Commons.

10 R. 2. The Commons accused de la Poole openly in Parliament before the King
and Lords; unto which the Counselors made a good Answer (in the Opinion of
this Age) yet upon the many Replications of the Commons, and the enforcement of
his Oath strictly against him, he was Fined and Imprisoned, etc. In this
Parliament also the Lords and Commons procured Commission unto certain of the
Lords to enquire of the Enormities of the Realm, and to redress them.

The King was so highly displeased with these Proceedings, that on the last day
of this Parliament, being the 25th. of November, he himself protested that
nothing done therein should turn to the Prejudice of him or his Crown.
Afterward he sought all means to overthrow those Lords who procured that
Commission, viz. the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Danby, Arundel, Warwick,
and Earl Marshal. And at a Consultation thereupon, he sent for the Chief
Justice Tressilian, and some other Judges, and his Sergeants at Law unto
Nottingham, where, on August 25. Anno 11. he propounded certain Questions
containing all the points of Advantage against the Proceedings of the last
Parliament, which the Judges affirmed to be Treason under their Hands and
Seals. Then the King thought to proceed judicially against those Lords, but
they kept together with the Duke of Gloucester, at Heringby with a strong
Guard: And the King sent for them, and all doubts of danger to their Persons,
being first removed, The History of the Appeal of 11 R. 2.
they came November. 3. Anno 11. and kneeling before the King's Majesty, he
demanded why they were Assembled at Heringby-Park in warlike manner? They
answered, for the good of the King and Kingdom, and to remove certain Traitors
from about him, meaning the Lord of Ireland, the Archbishop of York, Michael de
la Poole, Sir Robert Tresilian, and Sir Nich. Brembre. And with that they threw
down their Gloves and Gages of the Challenging to prove the same. Unto which
the King replied, This shall not be done so; but at the next Parliament, which
shall be the Morrow after Candlemas Day, and then all parties shall receive
according as they deserve.

In the mean time he conveys away the parties accused, and acquits them by
Proclamation; then summoned a Parliament at Westminster, Crast. Purificat. 11
R. 2.

Where these few Lords Appellants came well Armed, which made the King
unwilling to come amongst them; yet at last he came. Haec ex Ep. fol. 603.

On the first Day of this Parliament, the Duke of Gloucester (one of the said
Appellants) kneeling before the King, showed, That whereas he understood his
Majesty was informed, that he intended the Deposing of him, and Advancing
himself to the Crown, he was ready to declare his Innocence herein, in such
sort as the Lords would ordain. Whereupon the King answered, He held him
thereof acquitted.

On the second Day of this Parliament, the said Appellants exhibited their
Petition to the King concerning several Articles against diverse Lords and
Commons, whom they appealed of Treason. The said Articles being read in
presence of the King and Lords in Parliament, the said Appellants offering to
make Proofs thereof, required that the said Appellees might be called to
Answer; and for default of their Appearance, demanded Judgment against them.
Hereupon the King and Lords deliberated. The Judges of the Common Law, and the
Sages of the Civil Law were charged by the King to give their best Counsel to
the Lords of the Parliament how to proceed in their Appeal rightly. Who, after
long Consultation, answered the Lords, That the Appeal is in no point made and
declared according to the Order of the Common or Civil Law.

The Lords after long Debate, declared by the Assent of the King, that the
Offenses being committed by the Peers, the Cause should be determined in
Parliament only, and that by the Law and Order of Parliament only, and adjudged
the said Appeal with the Process thereon depending, to be good, according to
the Laws and Course of Parliaments.

And the Default of Appearance was Recorded, and Judgment given, etc. against
those who made their default.

After which Sir Nicholas Brembre, a Commoner, was brought Prisoner before the
King and the Lords at the request of the said Appellants: And the said Articles
being read, he pleaded Not Guilty; which he was ready to defend with his Body.
Whereupon, the Commons of the Parliament said, that they had seen and
considered all the said Articles, which they found to be true, and that they
likewise as much as in them lay, did also accuse the said Appellees, which they
would have done, and it appertained to them to have done, had not the aforesaid
Appellants pursued the said Appeals. Whereupon was answered by the Lords of
Parliament, That the Battle does not lie in this Case; but that they upon
examination of the Articles, would proceed to Judgment.

Here I note, The Lords cannot proceed against a Commoner but upon complaint of
the Commons.
That the Lords cannot proceed against a Commoner, but upon a Complaint of the
Commons: But here is not expressed how the Commons came daily to have a sight
of these Articles. I deny not, but after they were read in their presence, (for
their presence is always understood in Judicature upon Life and Death prout
postea) they demanded a sight of the Articles, and considered of them apart,
and then supplied the Defects thereof. And this also is to be observed, that
the Commons accuse Commoners, as the Lords do their own Peers. I suppse that
Brambre was denied the Battle, because the Commons accused him also; otherwise
he ought to have it granted upon an Appeal.

Afterward the Commons themselves accused and impeached diverse Commoners,
prout 2 Mar. Sir Rob. Belknap, L. Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir John
Carey, late Chief Baron, and other Justices, etc. The Records were brought into
the Parliament, at the Demand of the Commons, and the Commons accused the
Justices for their untrue Answer made unto sundry Questions before the King at
Nottingham, to the emboldning of the aforesaid Offenders in their traitorous
Designs and Attempts, etc. Unto which they answered, etc. were adjudged, etc.

And then follows another Impeachment of the Commons; thus:
The Accusements and Impeachments made by the Commons of the Realm, against
Simon de Burle, Sir John Beauchamp, Sir John Salisbury, and Sir James Berners,
Knights, do ensue underwritten, whereof the Commons pray Judgment in this
present Parliament.

Thus much touching the Appeal of 11 R. 2. But this begot another Appeal in the
21th. of the said K. R. 2. in the Parliament begun Sept. 14. being the Feast of
St. Oswald.

Edmond Earl of Rutland, Tho. Earl of Kent, John Earl of Hunt. Tho. Earl of
Nottingh. Joh. Earl of Somerset, Jo. Earl of Salisbury, the Lord Despencer, and
William Scroop Chancellor unto our Lord the King, in their proper persons
delivered unto our Lord the King, then sitting in the great Hall within the
Castle at Nottingh. in his Royal Estate, with a Crown on his Head, a Bill of
Appeal against Tho. Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl of Arundel, and Tho. Earl
of Warwick. The which Bill of Appeal is recited in that Parliament, and as it
seems per Copiam verborum inde, was penned by the Advice of some Civil Lawyer.
It seems also they were very careful herein to avoid all Errors of the former
Appeals.

For in that of 11 R. 2. they appealed diverse Commoners, but here the Lords
appealed none but Peers; then it was done by word of mouth, they being called
to the King upon some other occasion, but now it was done solemnly in writing,
and was delivered to the King sitting in his Throne of State. There they
offered to prove their Accusation by Battle (a thing not meet for the
Parliament) or in what course his Majesty would ordain it; but here the Bill
was read in Parliament, and they said, they have been, and are ready to prove,
etc. as you our thrice Redoubted King, and this Honorable Court of Parliament
should ordain. Nor were they less careful in their proceeding to Judgment, to
avoid the Errors in the former, prout in the Answer. But these Appeals are now
abolished by 1 H. 4. c. 14. and not without cause; for as this Accusation was
extraordinary, so were the Proceedings carried with a strong hand; the former
by the Lords, this by the King prout ex Chroniculis in quinto comparet cum
Codice 1 Maij, A Brief whereof, so much as concerns this Appeal, follows
hereafter at large, with the Precedents of 21 R. 2. Ad quod Parliamentum
convenire jussit Rex omnes Dominos sibi adhaerentes, cum Sagittariis and viris
armatis, tanquam ad bellum, and contra hosts omnino progressuri fuissent. Ipse
vero Rex ut efficacius proficere possit, nequam conceptus malefactores de
Comit' Cestr' congregari fecit ad velandum locum stramine, etc. Erexerat autem
Rex quandam domum amplissimam in Palatio Westmonaster' quae pene totum Palatii
spatium occupavit; in qua sibi Thronus parabatur altissimus, and pro cunctis
Regni Statibus locus largus; and pro Appellantibus, in uno latere locus
specialiter deputatus, and in alio latere locus largus pro Responsu assignatus;
seorsim vero pro Nobilitatibus Parliamenti, and qui non fuerunt electi per
Communitatem. Et Forale nuncupatur Parliamentum. Thus much of Accusation by
Appeal, (which when any of the Lords accused others out of Parliament) was
summoned; Appeals abolished per Stat. 1 H. 4. c. 14.
but God be thanked, they are abolished, 1 H. 4. c. 14.

CHAP. III.
The Parties Answer.
THe Party accused is to be brought to his Answer, otherwise the whole Judgment
will be erroneous, as was Mortym. 23 E. 3. Numb. 10. and Spencer's, 15 E. 2.
and John Matrevers, 21 E. 3. Numb. 65. dors. Although the Party be absent, yet
the Parliament has used all means possible to have his Answer, prout 21 R. 2.
where the Lords Appellants, and the Commons also accused Tho. Mortymer of
Treason; and the Commons said, That it was notoriously known unto them, that
the King had sent his Mandate by W. D. a Sergeant at Arms, unto the said
Mortymer in Ireland, commanding him upon his Allegiance to come before the King
in all haste, to answer, etc. And that the said Mortymer having notice thereof,
withdrew himself among the wild Irish, where the same Sergeant, nor any other
Officer of the King's durst come, for fear of Death: Wherefore, and for that
his Offenses are notoriously known both to the Lords and them, they prayed
Judgment, etc.

The King, the Lords, and the Procurators of the Clergy considered of the
Request of the Commons with good deliberation; and then the Lords, with the
said Procurators, by the assent of the King and Commons, did award that
Proclamation should be made through England and Ireland, commanding the said
Tho. Mortymer to render himself in proper Person to the King in what place
soever it shall be in England, within three Months after the 23th. Day of
December next coming, to be at his Answer; and they farther awarded, That if he
came not, etc. that then he shall be judged Traitor, and Convict of of all
Treasons whereof he is accused, and shall forfeit, etc.

Then the King adjourned the Parliament, and the Appellants to the 15th. of
Hilary next at Shrewsbury; on which Day the said Appellants declared to the
King, That it was awarded that Proclamation should be made, etc. ut supra, The
Commons did the like. And for that the said Tho. Mortymer came not, they had
judgment.

In 7 H. 4. The Lords agreed this Judgment against the E. of North. and the
Lord Bardolph, who were fled to the Rebels in Wales, and Proclamation ut supra,
throughout England. At the day prefixed they examined the Returns of the
Proclamations in the presence of the Commons, and so the Judgment was agreed on
in their presence also; and so it ought to be in all Cases of Life and Death.
And finding a small Error, they awarded new Proclamations in London only; and
the Return thereof was again viewed and considered in the presence of the
Commons, and then on the next day Judgment was given.

Eodem Anno 21 R. 2. An Answer required, though the Duke was known to be dead.
The Lords Appellants accused also the Duke of Gloucester of Treason; and
although they knew he was dead, they prayed the King that he might be brought
to his Answer. Whereupon the King sent his Writ to the Council of Calice (unto
whose Custody he committed the said Duke) to bring him into the Parliament to
his Answer. The Captain returned his Writ, That the Duke is dead; the which
Writ and Return being read, the said Appellants prayed Judgment; and the
Commons showed, That the Dukes Levying War against the King's Person, is
notoriously known to all the States of Parliament, and therefore they desired
Judgment also, and had it.

And what may not the whole Parliament do when they join in one? Yet
notwithstanding the King fearing some Error (as it seems) the Lords Appellants
besought the King, that if there were any thing on Record, be it by Confession
or otherwise which concerned their Appeal, that it might be openly known, and
shown in full Parliament. Whereupon, by the King's Commandment, was read a
Commission granted unto William Richal Justice of the Common Pleas, and a
Confession of the Duke of Gloucester, made before him, by virtue of the said
Commission; yea and Richal himself, being commanded, did justify that the Duke
did write the Confession with his own hand, in his absence, and afterward read
it unto him: so careful they were to have something to supply an Answer, I
marvel that Richal was acquitted of his Proceedings herein at the next
Parliament of 1 H. 4. where he affirmed that much of this Dukes Confession was
altered after he had returned his Commission. He well deserved to die, in that
he spoke not of it.

Yet there is one Precedent directly contrary to all this, viz. 11 R. 2. in
that Appeal which happened on this occasion.

The aforenamed Duke of Gloucester, and four other Lords went to the King, and
accused the Duke of Ireland, the Archbishop of York, Michael de la Poole, and
others of Treason; the King adjourned them to the next Parliament, promising
them Justice there, and in the mean time conveyed away the Parties accused, and
then by Proclamation, Part 8. fol. 603. in the next Parliament, 11 R. 2. the
Articles of the Appeal being read, the Duke and other Appellants offered to
make proof thereof, and required that the Parties appealed might be brought to
their Answers; and for default of Appearance, demanded Judgment. Whereupon the
King did deliberate with the Lords, and commanded the Justices, and other Sages
of the Law to give their best Counsel to the Lords how to proceed rightly in
this Matter of Appeal; who after Consultation therein had, answered the Lords,
That they had seen and considered the Tenor of this Appeal, which they said was
in no point made and declared according to the Order of the Common or Civil
Law. But they gave no Answer touching the Demand of Judgment for default of
Appearance; whereupon the Lords deliberated, and after by the Lords assent
declared that this Cause committed by the Peers against the Person of the King
and State of the Realm, shall be determined in the Parliament only, and by no
other Law than by the Law and Course of the Parliament: And that it belongs to
the Lords only to judge in such Cases. And with the assent of the King they did
judge the same Appeal, and the Process thereupon depending, to be good,
according to the Law and Course of Parliament.

Then the Lords Appellants proceeded, and desired to have the fault of
Appearance recorded, and Judgment given, and so it was. So likewise 21 R. 2.
After the King had given the full power of Parliament to determine all Matters
begun into the Hands of twelve Lords or six, and six Commoners, or any three.
He adjourned the Parliament from Westminster to Shrewsbury in 15 Hill. and there
on March 22. It was showed to the King how that Robert Possington was impeached
at the Parliament at Westminster, for being with the Duke of Gloucester in levy
at Herring, An. 11 R. 2. For which the said Duke was adjudged as Traitor, and
therefore they brought the King to ordain the like Judgment against Robert
Possington, though he was dead: Whereupon our Lord the King, Found guilty long
time after he was dead, so forfeited his Estate.
by the assent of the Lords and Knights of Counties, having power, etc. awarded
the said Robert guilty, etc. And that he shall forfeit, etc.

But these extraordinary Precedents cannot lead us into the ordinary course of
Proceedings; and I allege them only so, as their Errors may be avoided.

. To conclude, The Party accused to be brought to his Answer.
it is the just and constant Course of Parliament, to bring the Party accused
to his Answer; yea, though he fly Justice, yet to send out Proclamations into
the Countries, that he appear at a Day, or else such and such Judgments shall
be given against him. I confess this Course was omitted in the Judgment against
Mompesson, 18 Jac. and happily it was not then thought upon; the Judicature of
Parliament being so long out of use; and therefore that cannot be alleged as a
leading Precedent.

And in that Judgment 21 H. 6. against Sir Jo. Mortymer, upon an Indictment of
Escape out of Prison, being committed upon suspicion of Treason, the said
Mortymer's Answer is not recorded; yet it is said he was brought before the
Lords, and the said Indictment read in his presence, that he made an Answer
unto it, though not mentioned. And this proves that the Party is to be brought
to his Answer; else Mortymer's presence had not been necessary.

Anno 7 R. 2. Numb. 2. The Duke of Lancaster and Gloucester complained to the
King, That Sir Tho. Talbot, with others, conspired the Death of the said two
Dukes, and prayed the Parliament to judge thereof. The Fact is judged High
Treason, and Writs sent to diverse Sheriffs to apprehend him, which Writs were
retornable into the King's Bench: And upon Proclamation made in
Westminster Hall, That upon the Sheriffs Return, and the not-Appearance of the
said Thomas, he should be convicted of Treason, and forfeit, etc.

This was extraordinary in terrorem: But what may not the whole Parliament do?
They may alter Law much easier than Form.

In the Answer is to be considered,
First, In what Causes the Party is to answer as a Prisoner; and in what as a
Freeman.

Secondly, When Council shall be allowed him, and when not.

Touching the First.
The Parliament has guided their Proccedings therein secundum Legem terrae,
and Judicium Parium. According to the 2th. Chapter of Magna Charta, Nullus
liber homo capietur vel imprisonetur, etc. nisi per legale judicium Parium
suorum, vel per legem Terrae. And therefore in Causes Capital, whether the
Party accused be a Lord of the Parliament, or a Commoner, he is brought a
Prisoner to his Answer secundum legem terrae, prout, 4 E. 3. Numb. 1. etc.

The Lord Berkley accused by the King for Murder of E. 2. Anno 1 R. 1. Jo. Lo.
Gomeniz and W. Weston. Upon the Demand of the Commons for surrendering Forts
beyond the Seas, An. 4. R. 2. Sir Ra. Ferrers Knight, was apprehended for
suspicion of Treason.

Anno 28 H. 6. Although the Lords refused to commit the Duke of Suffolk upon
the Commons complaint of him of a common Fame of Treason; yet when they accused
him of particular Treason, he was Committed, and brought Prisoner to his
Answer. But in Cases of Misdemeanors it is otherwise; then the Party accused,
whether Lord or Commoner, answers as a Freeman.

The Lord within his Place, the Commoner at the Bar; and they are not committed
till Judgment, unless upon the Answer of a Commoner, the Lords find cause to
commit him, till he find Sureties to attend, etc. lest he should fly; prout Jo.
Cavendish upon the Lord Chancellor's Demand of Justice against him for his
false Accusation, was Committed after his Answer, until he put in Bail, Anno 7
R. 2. And before Judgment.

And so Michael de la Poole, the said Chancellor, 10 R. 2. after his Answer,
and many Replies of the Commons, was Committed, and presently Bayled.

Anno 50 E. 3. William Lord Latymer, and John Lord Nevill, being impeached by
the Commons, answered in their Place: so did the Bishop of Norwich and the Lord
Chancellor, 7 R. 2. And the said Lord Chancellor too, 10 R. 2. answered in his
Place, though afterward he was committed before Judgment, upon Request of the
Commons.

The Bishop of Bristol, 1 Jac. and the Duke of Buck. 1 Car. 1. All these
answered as Freemen in their Places, their Offenses not being Capital. And the
like Precedents there are of Commoners.

Anno 50 E. 3. Richard Lions, William Ellis and John Beecher did answer as
Freemen, being impeached by the Commons. And whereas the Commons did that year
also accuse Adam de Bury, who was absent; the Lords sent for him to come; but
he contemned their Authority, and came not. Then the Lords, as it seems by
the Record, sent to apprehend him, and he could not be found; wherefore they
awarded that all his Goods should be put in Arrest. Ibid. N. 17. It is briefly
entered, Adam was sent unto to come and answer in Parliament; he came not, nor
could be found: Wherefore it was awarded, etc. Which is sufficient to prove, A
Commoner is not to be brought a Prisoner to his Answer for a Misdemeanor, if he
will appear.

5 R. 2. The Mayor and Bailiffs by name, and the Townsmen of Cambridge were
complained of in Parliament, for many Outrages against the Scholars there; and
the Lords sent one Writ to the Mayor and Bailiffs that then were, and to the
Commonalty, to appear and answer; and another Writ to the Mayor and Bailiffs
that did the Outrage; and they appeared in person, and the Commonalty by their
Attorney.

This was the Ancient Course.
Yet even in these Days, viz. 15 R. 2. the Peer of Holland complained of a
great Riot committed by Henry Tibb, and diverse others, in the Parsonage-House
of one Williams. Whereupon a Sergeant at Arms, by virtue of a Commission to him
made, brought up the said Tibb, and one more only (the principal doers therein)
before the Lords in Parliament; who, upon the Return of the Examination,
confessed nhe whole Matter, and were committed. But I suppose the Sergeant at
Arms was sent, for happily they would have obeyed no Writ: and yet he was sent
for two of the principal Offenders only. At this Day, if the Commons accuse a
Commoner of Misdemeanors in such a state of Liberty or restraint as he is in,
when the Commons complain of him, in such he is to answer, prout 18 Jac.

Sir Francis Michell, and Sir John Bennet were both committed by the Commons
before their complaint to the Lords, and so they answered as Prisoners: But
that in a sort may be called Judicium Parium suorum.

18 Jac. The Earl of Middlesex being then Lord Treasurer, and accused of
Misdemeanors only, absented himself from the House: His Charge was sent to him
in writing, and he answered in writing. At the Day prefixed for his Trial, he
was summoned by the great Usher to appear. He came without his Staff, and
kneeled, until the Lord Keeper willed him to stand up. There he protested, That
he ought not to answer in that Place, and desired others might not be
prejudiced thereby: And I hope they will not.

The Earl did himself the first wrong, by absenting himself from the House; for
he might have stayed there until Judgment, unless when his own Cause came in
agitation.

. 2. Touching Council.
In all Causes of Felony, Touching Council.
Treason, etc. Council anciently was denied to the Party accused, prout Anno 4.
R. 2. Numb. 21. Sir Ralph Ferrers was brought to the Parliament under the Guard
of the Marshal of England, and arraigned at the King's behalf for suspicion of
Treason, who prayed to the King and to the Lords to have Council in that Case.
Unto whom it was said, That in all Matters wherein Council ought to be granted
by the Law of the Land, the King or Lords would allow it. And it was further
said unto the said Sir Ralph, That forasmuch as the Matter stands so much upon
Treason, That by the Law he ought not to have Council in his Case, of no
earthly Creature, but obliged himself to answer at his peril.

This last Answer was given upon deliberation. And 5 R. 2. Numb. 44. Sir
Richard Cogan Knight, being accused by Richard Clevedon Esquire, for extorting
200 l. from the Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem in a riotous manner, required
Council, which was denied him, for that the Cause touched Treason.

28 H. 6. The Duke of Suffolk being accused of Treason, by the Commons, desired
Copies of the Articles, but no Council, and he answered without Council.

Primo Car. 1. In the Parliament begun Febr. 6. The King's Attorney exhibited
Articles of Treason and misdemeanor against John Earl of Bristol, and he had no
Council allowed him; which was on this occasion:

Anno 21 Jac. The Earl of Middlesex was denied to answer by Council touching
Misdemeanors only, that Precedent of 10 R. 2. of Michael de la Poole being
mistaken, as I conceive. And afterward the Lords considering the
Inconveniences that might happen thereby, did order that Council should be
allowed to all Delinquents in all Cases generally. At the Voting of which
Order, the King and Prince were present, and I did expect some Reply thereunto
on the King's behalf, and especially observed whether the Prince would any ways
dislike of it, either in Words or Countenance; and he showed none: which made
me verily believe that he had been acquainted therewith beforehand; but he was
not, as I shall make it appear.

In this present Parliament, upon reading the Articles of Treason and
Misdemeanors against the said Earl 6 Maij, and upon the Earl's Answer to them
on the sudden, The Journal is, The Lords did answer that he should have Council
allowed him to plead his Cause. But on Monday the 8th. of May, the King sent a
Messenger to them, That he not suing for a Default in Cases of Treason and
Felony: It is an ancient fundamental Law of this Kingdom, and desired the Lords
to proceed with that Caution, that ancient fundamental Laws may receive no
blemish nor prejudice.

On the 15th. of May, the Lords answered this Message, That by an Order Dated
May 24. 21 Jac. Anno 1624. Counsel was then present, and they had allowed the
Earl of Bristol Council before the Message came May 14.

His Majesty is content the Earl of Bristol to have Council, although his
Majesty knew that by the Law he ought to have none; but takes Exceptions to
that Order of the 24th. of May 1624. That it was occasioned by the Earl of
Middlesex, whose Cause was only Criminal, which never till now extended to
Cases Capital.

And that the Judges were neither advised with therein, nor the King's Council
heard for his Majesty; and therefore his Majesty is not satisfied about the
general Order, but will advise, etc. The Lords thereupon allowed him Council to
plead, etc. This Parliament of 6 Feb. 1 Car. 1. was dissolved before the Cause
of the Earl of Bristol was heard and determined, and that the said Earl was
sued in the Star Chamber for the very same Matter contained in the Articles
against him in Parliament: All which were but Misdemeanors. And if it be lawful
for me to speak freely, I believe the Lords thought they were but Misdemeanors,
when they allowed him Council in Parliament: But in Cases of Misdemeanors only
the Party accused was never denied Council.

Anno 10 R. 2. In Misdemeanor the Party may have Council to answer.
The Commons accused Michael de la Poole of many Misdemeanors in open
Parliament before the King. Afterward in the King's Absence, the Chancellor
said first to the Lords, That he was Chancellor of England, and for the time
represented the King's Person in his absence; and demanded whether he ought to
answer in the Presence of the King, since he was impeached of Acts done whilst
he was Chancellor.

This received no Answer.
Secondly, He said, That he had appointed by the Advice of his Council Monsieur
Richard le Scroope, his Brother-in-Law should have the words of his Answer to
the first Impeachment. Whereunto the Lords said, That it was Honest for him to
speak by his own mouth. And thereupon he made Protestation that he might add to
and take from that which should be honorable and profitable for him. The which
things unto him were granted. And the said Chancellor declared as well by
himself, as by the mouth of the said L. Scroop, That etc.

I note here that Council was not denied him, but that it was only told him, It
was honest for him to answer by his own mouth.

Anno 7 R. 2. The Bishop of Norwich, for Misdemeanors in general, Numb. 15. was
particularly charged by the Chancellor, Numb. 18. The Bishop said, That albeit
in this Case he ought to have Counsel, yet making Protestation, That at all
times he might amend his Answer, he would answer in person, and so he did,
Numb. 19.

Anno 1 Car. 1. The Duke of Buckingh. being accused by the Commons of
Misdemeanors, and Copies of the Impeachments, and Answered by Council in this
manner, viz. Die, etc.

The Duke being in his Place, and standing, his Council came to the Bar, and
then read the Dukes Answer, as it was penned in writing. Yet sometimes in Cases
of Misdemeanors, when the Party accused has demanded the Copies of the
Articles, and Council, and Time to answer, the Parliament has compelled them
to make a present Answer without Council; but this is rare, and I have seen but
one Precedent of it.

Anno 5. R. 2. The Mayor and Commonalty of Cambr. accused.
Die Animarum, Numb. 45. The Mayor, Bailiffs and Commonalty of Cambridge were
accused by etc. For that they in the late Tumults and Wars confederated with
other Misdoers, did break up the Treasury of the University, and compelled the
Chancellor and Scholars to release to the Mayor all their Liberties, The Parl.
has compelled a present Answer iu Misdemenors, and without Council.
and all Actions, etc. In Number. 46 and 47. Several Writs were sent to command
them to appear. They appearing at the Day, and answering to such Articles as
were objected by the King's Council, and delivering in the two Releases which
were cancelled Numb. 48. Then the Chancellor and Scholars exhibited diverse
Articles against them by way of Petition. Upon the reading whereof, it was
demanded of the said Mayor and Burgesses what they would say, why their
Liberties should not be seized into the Kings hands as forfeited? And they
required Copies of the Articles, and Council, and Respite to answer, Numb. 54,
55.

To the Copy of the Articles, it was answered, That inasmuch as they had heard
them read, it should suffice; for by the Law they ought to have no Copy. And
touching Council, it was said, That wherein Council was to be had, they should
have it; and therefore they were then to answer to no Crime nor Offense, but
only touching their Liberties, Numb 56.

After many dilatory Shifts, the said Burgesses submitted themselves to the
King's Mercy, touching their Liberties, only saving their Answers to all other
matters, Numb. 57.

And the King by assent of the whole Parliament, granted the assize of Bread,
and all weights, Measures, etc. to the Scholars, and to the rest of the
Burgesses, yielding and increase of Rent, 59. 6. And there is no farther
proceeding against them for other Crimes; yet this also proves Counsel ought to
be allowed in Cases of Misdemeanor.

. Next to the Answer follows the Replication; The Replication next which
belongs to him or them that sue.
and that in my opinion belongs to the Party whose Suit it is. If the Commons
impeach any man, it belongs to them, if they will reply. And to this end,
either they are all, or some of them to be present when the Party makes his
Answer, and to consider thereof apart by themselves, and to reply if they see
cause. Or else a Copy of an Answer is to be sent them; and their Replication
expected before any other Proceedings be. If they do not reply, the Lords may:
But if the Articles against the Party be so drawn ex part Domini Regis, then
it belongs to the King and the Lords alone: And the Commons can neither reply,
nor de Jure demand the Party to be put to his Answer. All this will appear in
the ancient Precedents which follow.
Anno 50 E. 3. They impeached Rich. Lions for procuring Patents and Licenses,
etc. to carry, etc. to other places than to Calice. For diverse other new
Impositions upon Wools, etc. For levying the same to his own use, without view
of a Comptroller, for 20000 Marks in London, for the King, and causing the King
to repay 30000 Marks: For buying of Debts of the King at the 20th. penny and
less, and causing the King to pay the whole Debt. In general words, For many
Extortions, etc.

His Answer is,
First, to the third part, and pleads Not Guilty; which he is ready to prove:
To which nothing is replied.

To the several Impositions, He confessed he levied 12 d. on every Sack of Wool
licensed, to his own use, but by express Commandment of the King, and Assent of
the Merchants. And for other several Impositions, That he had paid them wholly
to the King's Chamber, and fully accounted for the whole year.

Unto this part of his Answer also there is no Replication recorded, it is
drawn up so briefly; yet these which follow show somewhat of what was replied,
viz. And it was said unto the said Richard, that he should bring forth his
Warrant by what Authority he did these things. But he showed no Warrant in
Parliament under the King's Seal, nor otherwise; but only he said he had
Command from the King himself and his Council to do it. Now whether the Lords
willed Lions to show forth his Warrant upon the Reply of the Commons, or
otherwise, it appears not by conjecture out of other Precedents.

Eodem Anno, Impeachment against the L. Latymer.
The Commons impeach the Lord Latymer, That contrary to the Proclamation upon
the last Truce with the French, he and his Lieutenants and Officers have taken
diverse Victuals by force, without paying for the same, and that he extorted
great Fines and Ransoms of diverse Persons and Parishes of Betherel in Brittayn,
whilst he was Captain there, for which he has answered nothing to the King.
And for the Loan of 20000 Marks made to the King by him, and Richard Lions, to
transport Wool, etc. And also through his ill Government, the Fort of St.
Saviors in Normandy, and the said Fort in Normandy, called Betherel, and many
more are lost. And also that he, of his own Authority, discharged Spies and
Fellows imprisoned by the King, wherein he encroached to himself Power Royal.

This is the Effect of the Impeachment; His Answer.
the Answer follows.
First, He said, That saving to himself so much as ought to be saved unto him,
as one of the Peers of the Realm, as well in giving Judgment, as otherwise in
time to come. And if it please the King and Lords here Assembled, he will
willingly give his Answer unto him who will in special object any other thing
against him.

It should seem that the Commons advised hereon; for it follows, Et puis
presents. Forasmuch as no person would in special openly accuse the said Lord,
vouching the said things in Parliament, but that the Commons would maintain the
said Judgment in common, he answered to each Particular.

1. His Answer to each Particular.
Touching the Ransoms that he has been before impeached for, and the Sums of
Money he received, it appears that he owed the King 2000 l. which he
confessed, and submitted himself to the King's Grace for the same. And soon
after this, the Commons having heard this Answer of Submission, prayed the
Lords that Execution might be had of the said 2000 l. presently against the
said L. Latymer, as a thing past by the said Submission being made by him as
aforesaid; for it shows not any agreement made with the King, nor any Pardon,
or other Discharge.

And the Lords answered, That his Answer should be reported to the King, and
thereupon Right shall be done for the King.

2. Touching the Acts done by his Lieutenants, he said, That he is altogether
innocent, etc. For he was then in England, by the King's Command, and he had no
part thereof, etc. And the Commons thereunto replying, said, That although he
be innocent, yet his Lieutenants received it in his Name; and therefore prayed
he might answer to the King for his Lieutenants, if they be not able, etc.

3. Touching the Loans of 20000 Marks, he absolutely denied he had any share or
advice therein, he made in a manner a Negative Answer to all the rest; offering
Proofs: whereupon witnesses were examined, but no other Replications of the
Commons mentioned.

Eodem Anno 50 E. 3. W. Ellis was impeached by the Commons, W. Ellis impeached.
for that he being Farmer to the King of the Petty Customs in Yarmouth, and
Deputy-Farmer to Rich. Lions, of Tonnage and Poundage, etc. he extorted several
Sums of Money from the Merchants, and particularly 33 l. from a Scottish
Merchant at Kirkbread, who was driven in thither by a Tempest, but unladed no
Merchandise there.

The said Ellis answered in general, His Answ.
He had never taken any thing of the said Merchants by way of extortion; which
he was ready to prove.

The Commons brought in four Witnesses, The Reply.
who justified the Extortion upon Oath, and then demanded Judgment. And W.
Ellis rejoined to this Replication, confessed the Receipt of the 33 l. and
avoided the Extortion.

Eodem Anno, The Lord Nevile impeached.
John Nevile was impeached by the Commons, for that he, as Officer to the King,
and one of his Privy Council, had brought diverse Tallies of Assignments made by
our Lord the King, unto diverse persons unto whom he was Debtor, and had thereof
due allowances in the Exchequer; but the Parties had of him little or nothing;
and especially of the Lady Rovensholme, who is deceased, and of Reignald Love.

And after he was impeached, for that in this late Voyage into Britayn, in the
King's Wages in great number of Men at Arms and Archers, for which he accorded
with the King, and those he carried with him were not sufficient, come Garcone
and autres lieux: And yet he received full payment in deceit of the King, and
that by his default many Forts were lost in Britayn.

And also at his passing at Southampton, his Men did much Mischief to the
Country, as if they had been Enemies.

To the First, Touching the Buying of a Debt due by the King to the Lady
Ravensholme, he made a very good Answer, and denied that he bought any Debt of
Reignald Love for gain. And the Commons being present, desired that Love might
be examined therein: and he was examined, and cleared the Lord Nevil thereof.
And thereupon Michael de la Poole, and W. de Winged being present, did expressly
affirm, That the said Love had acknowledged before him and many others, the Day
before, That the said Lord Nevile had bought the said Debt for gain, etc.

And the said Reignald Love replying to their Affirmation, said, That he never
spoke any such Words to them or any other. Et tant est autres apres, etc. And
soon after the said Knights and Commons affirming that the said Reignald did
not only speak those Words, but also prayed that it might be showed in open
Parliament, the said Reignald confessed, That, etc. and was therefore
Committed, etc.

Touching the Second Point; The L. Nevile showed, That he made full Muster of
his Men, etc.

Touching the Third, The Pillaging of Soldiers, he said, That he did none; and
if any were done, let the Malefactors answer. And unto this it was said by the
said Lords of the Parliament, That it was reason, since the King paid the
Soldiers their Wages, that the Soldiers should answer for their ill Deeds, and
the Captains should answer for themselves.

And thereupon the Commons prayed Judgment against the Lord Nevile, and that he
might be put out of his Office about the King.

Touching the Articles of the Lady Ravesholm, It was awarded in Parliament,
That the Lord Nevile should make Restitution unto her Executors. Quaere hoc.

That he be banished according to the quality of his Offense, as others have
been, etc.

I have translated this of the Lord Nevil almost ad verbum; it needs no
Exposition.

The Commons were present at the L. Nevil's Answer, and desired that one
Witness whom he had brought with him, and who gave them Information of the
Complaint touching the buying of the King's Debts, might be examined. And
examined he was in the presence of two Knights of the Parliament, and they did
contrary his false Answer; and afterward all the Commons came and testified
against the Witness.

This is sufficient to prove, That the Commons may Reply, and are to be present
at the Answer, or have a Copy thereof sent them: But the Commons did not Reply
unto the Lord Nevil's Answer.

Touching the Pillaging of his Soldiers, for ought appears, the Lords Replied
to that part.

Primo Car. 1. 6 Febr. The Commons impeached the Duke of Bucks, and Declared
against him in writing. The Commons demanded a Copy of his Answer, that they
might Reply unto it, and it was debated at a Commit, whether the Commons
might Reply or no? which was resolved in the Affirmative, upon view of
Precedents, and reported to the House; and then a Copy was sent to the Commons.

Thus much touching Replication by the Commons.
Where the Articles against the Delinquents are ex part Dom. Regis, there the
Commons cannot Reply, nor Demand Judgment; for the Suit is the King's, and not
theirs.

Anno 10. R. 2. Upon Complaint of the Commons, Jo. Lord Comeniz and W. Weston
were put to their Answers; but the Articles were exhibited de part le Roy. The
Complaint of the Commons was general; and though the Commons be there present
at their Answer and Judgment, yet they did neither Reply nor Demand Judgment.

The King's Steward before whom they were Arraigned, Replied, as shall appear
by the Precedent at large.

In like manner the Commons demanded that the Bishop of Norwich and others
might be put to their Answer, and the Articles were drawn de part le Roy. And
the Chancellor replied to their Answer, the Commons not once interposing
therein.

5 R. 2. The Chancellor and Scholars of Cambridge accuse the Mayor, Bailiffs,
and Commonalty of Cambridge, of many Outrages and Misdemeanors. They appeared
and answered. The King's Council replied, Numb. 49.

CHAP. IV.
The next Considerable Part in Judicature after the Answer and Replication, is
the Proof by Examination, First, Of Witnesses.
THe Practice at this Day is to swear the Witnesses in open House, Witnesses.
and then to examine them there, or at a Committee, either upon Interrogatories
agreed upon in the House, or such as the Committee in their discretion shall
demand.

Thus it was in Ancient Times, as shall appear by the Precedents, so many as
they are; They being very sparing to Record those Ceremonies, which I shall
briefly recite, and then add those of later times.

Witnesses produced by the Commons. Witnesses by the Commons.

Anno 15 R. 2. The Lord Latymer having answered to one of the Commons
Complaints touching a Loan of 20000 Marks for 30000 Marks to be repaid, whereof
he said he was innocent. It follows thus immediately, etc. And thereupon it
was certified in Parliament by Monsieur Rich. le Scroop, the late Lord
Treasurer to our Lord the King, and by W. Wallworth of London, That when the
said Loan was made, the said Walworth offered in the Name of the Staplers, to
lend the same, and be repaid without Usury, out of the Customs of Wool to
Calice. Whereto the Lord Latymer answered, He never heard of that Proffer; and
others swore the said William Walworth did make the said Proffer to them.

Anno 15 R. 2. The Commons produced four Witnesses to prove their Complaints
against Ellis, Les queux Examinees in Parliament, said, etc. And there I observe
that two of those Witnesses had exhibited a particular Complaint against Ellis,
concerning a particular wrong done unto Merchants, whereof the Commons
complained, and Ellis took no exception against them.

And afterward being put to his Answer upon their particular Complaints for
wrong Imprisonment, etc. Ellis said, That they betrayed him as he was coming to
London, and so he caused them to be committed, and the said Complainants
affirmed the contrary upon Oath, and it was testified expressly by diverse
sufficient men, That, etc. agreeing with their Oath.

Eodem Anno John Peecher being accused for Extortion, affirmed, he retained it
by the assent of the Mayor, Recorder, and of the greater part of the Aldermen,
and being examined in Parliament, affirmed there, That, etc. to the contrary,
and then Judgment was given.

Eodem Anno, The Commons accuse Jo. Lord Nevil for buying the King's Debts of
Reignald Love; which the said Lord denied: and the Commons desired that the
said Reignald might be examined. And the said Reignald being charged upon his
Allegiance to tell openly before them the full Truth, says, clearing the Lord
Nevil; but afterward he confessed against him. He was examined in presence of
two of the House of Commons.

Many Complaints were made against Richard Love and William Ellis in the
Parliament, and a Commission sent to enquire of the behaving themselves in
their Offices.

1 R. 2. Alice Pierce Not Guilty, and that she would prove by Testimony of the
late King's Household, whom she named. The Offense being for procuring E. 3.
privately to revoke an Ordination of his Council.

The Lords gave her Day, and in the mean time named a Committee to examine
Witnesses.

The Committee were the Duke of Lancaster, A Committee for Trial of Alice
Pierce.
Earls of Arundel, Cambridge, Northampton and of March. And diverse Witnesses
who are named, were sworn upon the Holy Evangelists, and diligently examined
upon the Articles objected against her.

The Lord Beauchamp was sworn and examined; and the Duke of Lancaster being one
of the Commit, was diligently examined before the rest of the said Committee,
but not sworn ad testificandum. Earls and Dukes are not sworn.

A Jury of the Household was impannelled for her Trial before the said Committee.

The Order made by the Lords for the Examination and Trial. Per l'assent Prelat
and des Seigneurs du dit Parliament ordeint fuit que testes Articles
serounttrious per testimonies, and per enquest d'eux que seront de Hostel, de
dit Appeal and que le verite purroit mieux estre conus.

By virtue of this Order, the said Committee did take the Examination of the
Witnesses, and after their Examinations, it follows thus:

Et nient minus seroit venire devant le Duc and les dits Commissionaries
Monsieur K. B. etc. And so names eight Knights, and nine Esquires, queux
fuerint jures adire le verite si le dit Alice fuit culpable de les Articles
avaunt dits, ou nemy.

Note, This is the only Jury I find Recorded for Misdemeanors in Parliament. I
make no doubt but if the Delinquent does put himself upon the Trial of his
Country, That a Jury ought to be impannelled therefore.

But if the Commons impeach any man, they are in loco proprio, and there no
Jury ought to be; only Witnesses are to be examined in their Presence, or they
to have Copies thereof: And the Judgment not to be given until the Commons
demand it.

For Proof that the Witnesses ought to be examined in their Presence, vide 50
E. 3. The Impeachment of the Lord Nevile, where Richard Love was examined in
presence of two Knights of the House of Commons, who contraried his Testimony,
Numb. 44.

The Proof that a Delinquent may put himself super Patriam, vide 4 E. 3. Where
the Lord Berkley, who waved his Peerage, was tried by a Jury of Gloucestershire
and Warwickshire, for that he was Arraigned for the Murder of E. 2. at
Berkley-Castle in Com. Glouc. And he answered, That he was sick at that time at
Bewdley in Com. Wigorn.

But he was Arraigned upon an Information ex part Dom. Regis, and not upon the
Impeachment of the Commons; for then they had been Patria sua. And as the Party
may put himself super Patriam, so he may demand Battle: But not when he is
accused ex part Domini Regis, prout Clarence, Anno 18 E. 4. Nor when he is
accused by the Commons, prout Brembre, 11 R. 2.

When the Earl of Arundel was brought to answer the Appeals, the Lords
Appellants threw down their Gloves by way of a Challenge. The Earl answered, Si
essem liber, non resurgeram.

Note, That the Commons had accused them -- also. Vide a Herald Parl. lib.
Mayleress. And thereupon it was testified openly in Parliament, That our Lord
the King had expressly said that day, before the same Lord then present in
Parliament, That he knew not how nor in what manner the said Richard was come
into such an Office about him; and which is more, he did not know him to be his
Officer.

Anno 21 R. 2. The Lord Cobham being brought to his Answer, for procuring a
Commission to himself and others, in derogation of the King's Prerogative, 11
R. 2. and for executing the said Commission.

He denied the procuring thereof, and that he would not have used the said
Commission without the King's Commandment, and that he told the King so much,
and that the King commanded him not to intermeddle therein. Whereunto our Lord
the King answered and said, That he was in such Governance at that time, that
he could not otherwise say, because of them that were then about him. And that
the Lord Cobham knew well that the said Commission was made at his Will. The
which thing Jo. de Cobham did not gainsay at his Trial; and so Judgment passed
on him for the same, and he adjudged a Traitor. Et qui non vult.

Anno 18 E. 4. George Duke of Clarence was Arraigned in Full Parliament. George
Duke of Clarence arraigned.
There is no mention thereof in the Roll, but in a Manuscript of that time,
written by a Friar of Croyland. Tam testis est vera, and disceptatio ea habita
inter duos tantae humanitatis Germanos. No man questions the Duke but the K.
none answers the King but the Duke.
Nam nemo arguit contra Ducem nisi Rex; nemo respondet Regi nisi Dux.
Introducti autem erant nonnulli de quibus a multis valde dubitatur, an
Accusatorum an Testium officiis sunt functi utraque enim officia in eadem causa
eisdem personis non congruunt. Delevit enim object a Dux ille per
Justificationem, asseruit, si exaudiri possit, manuali defensione teneri causam
suam. Quid multis numeror Parliament les reputantes audit as Informationes
sufficere formarunt in eam sententiam damnationis quae ab Henrico Duce Buck.
pro tempore noviter creato Anglorum Seneschallo prolata est, postea dilata est
executio, quo ad usque Prolocutor Communitatis in superiorem Cameram cum sociis
suis adveniens, novam ejus conficiendae rei requisitionem fecerat, and
consequenter infra paucos dies factum est id qualecunque genus Supplicii
secreti infra Turrim London. utinam sine malo, Anno Dom. 1418. Regni vero Regis
E. 4. 18. per Anonimum libris Cotton.

Here let us examine for what illegal proceedings the Commons desired to have
the Cause tried again. The Author says, Nemo arguit contra Ducem nisi Rex.
Against Law that the King should enforce Testimony against a Delinquent.
This the Commons held to be against Law, That the King himself should enforce
either Article or Testimony against a Delinquent in a Capital Cause: For it is
inconvenient, That he who has the Forfeiture of Life, Lands and Goods, shall
be Accuser, Witness or Judge. The Commons were present at this Trial, and
considering the Inconveniences thereof, they returned, and made the Request ut
supra.

Primo Car. 1. In the Parliament of 6 Febr. John Earl of Bristol was accused by
the King's Attorney of Treason beyond the Seas, 8 May 1626. The said Earl
petitioned the Lords, That seeing several points of that Charge are grounded
upon private Conferences, wherein his Majesty by Testimony becomes a Witness,
and in case the Earl should be convicted, his Commission comes to the Crown,
etc. he desired their Lordships to put his Majesty in mind thereof, for the
declining his Accusation and Testimony*

9 Maij, These Questions were proposed to the Judges.
1. Whether in Treason or Felony the King's Testimony is to be admitted, or not?

2. Whether Words spoken to the Prince, who afterward is King, make any
alteration in the Case?

And the Judges were to deliver their Opinion therein on the 13th. Day of the
said Month of May.

And on Saturday Morning, being the said 13th. Day, the Judges were desired to
deliver their Opinions.

The Lord Chief Justice said, They appointed to meet and to consider thereof;
and Mr. Attorney desired to know the time of their Meeting; and before that
time he brought them a Message from the King, A Royal wise Answer.
viz. That his Majesty was so sensible of his Honor, that he would not suffer
the Right of his Crown (which may justly be preserved) to be dampnified in his
time. That they might deliver their opinion in any particular Questions
concerning the Earl of Bristol, but not in the general Questions whereof his
Majesty could not discern the consequence which might happen to the prejudice
of the Crown. Every particular Case varying according to the circumstances.

4 E. 3. The Articles were read against Roger Mortimer; and it follows thus;
Wherefore our Lord the King does charge our Earls and Barons, Peers of this
Realm, That forasmuch as these touch him principally, and all the People of
this Realm, That you do unto the said Roger Mortimer right and lawful Judgment,
such as appertains to such an one to have, who of all the faults abovesaid,
is very guilty, as he believes. And for that the said things are notorious and
known to be true unto you, and to all the People of the Realm.

This was all the Proof produced against Roger Mortimer. The Lords hereupon
judged him. But afterward, Anno 28 E. 3. Numb. 10. they reversed it as
erroneous: so that although the King's Testimony, confirmed by the common Fame,
was 4 E. 3. received against Roger Mortimer, yet it was afterward adjudged Null
Accusament in the 28th. of the said King E. 3.

In that Parliament of 18 Jac. diverse Witnesses were examined in open House in
the Causes of Mompesson and the Lord Chancellor, upon Interrogatories agreed on
beforehand, and diverse at a Committee. And it was resolved, That none might be
examined upon any thing that might accuse. Whereupon the Earl of Southampton,
one of the said Committee, signified, That a Scruple did arise, Whether Sir
Ralph Horsey should be examined what Bribe he gave to the Lord Chancellor; and
upon the Vote, it was agreed, he should, dissentiente Comite Dorset.

Eodem Anno, The Lords did find that the Testimony of diverse of the House of
Commons was necessary, touching the Complaint against Mompesson, and therefore
sent a Message to this effect.

The House of Commons, before their Complaint exhibited against the Lord Cobham
and Doctor Field, for a Bribe concerning Egerton's Case, 18 Jac. examined one
Davenport, but not upon Oath. The Lords, when they had examined Davenport,
found that the Case was not so foul as he related it unto the Commons, and
therefore sent his Examination again unto them, and then punished him for his
false Relation.

CHAP. V.
The Judgment.
FIrst, Unto whom the Judgment belongs, and the King's Assent and of the
Presence of the Spiritual Lords, the Commons and the Judges.

Secondly, The Judgment it self, and by whom it was demanded, and by whom
rendered.

In making of our Ancient Laws, the Commons did Petere the Lords Assentire, and
the King Concludere.

So in Judgments on Delinquents in Parliament, The Commons accusare and petere.
the Commons might accusare and petere Judicium, the King assentire, and the
Lords only did judicare.

. 1. That the Judgment belongs only to the Lords, appears by all the old
Records that I have seen; prout 4 E. 3. against Mortymer, The Earls, Barons,
and Peers did Award and Judge by assent of the King, etc.
7 H. 4. In the Case of the Earl of Northumberland, Protestation was made by
the Lords, That the Judgment belonged unto them only.

For the clearing of this Point, That the Judgment belongs to the Lords only,
vide the Protestation of the Commons 1 H. 7. which excludes the Commons from
any Right thereunto, viz.

On Monday, November. 3. The Commons made their Protestation in manner as they
did in the beginning of this Parliament and then further declared to the King,
That no Record in Parliament be made against the Commons, That they are or
shall be Parties to any Judgment given, or hereafter to be given in Parliament.
Unto which it was then answered by the Archbishop of Canterbury, by Command of
the King, That the Commons are Petitioners, and not Demanders; and that the
King and the Lords have ever had, and of Right shall have the Judgment in
Parliament in manner as the Commons themselves have declared, saving in
Statutes to be made, and in Grants of Subsidies, and the like, though to be
done for the common profit of the Realm, the King will have especially their
Advice and Assent: And that this Order be held and kept at all times to come.

This excludes the Commons from all Right to Judgment: But whereas it faith,
the Judgments in Parliament belong only to the King and Lords, That is to be
understood touching the King's Assent only, as apppeareth by the Replication of
the Parliament in this Point in 2. H. 5. which was thus:

In the Parliament at Leicester, 2 H. 5. Numb. 11. Tho. Earl of Salisbury
Petitioneth to reverse a Judgment in Parliament against John Earl of Salisbury,
his Father, in 2 H. 4. and one of the Errors assigned was, for that the
Judgment was not given by the King, but by the Lords Temporal only: whereupon
the Earls of the Parliament, at the King's Commandment, gave Copies of the said
Judgment of 2 H. 4. and of the said Errors assigned unto the Kings Sergeants at
Law then present. Ad sequentem solutionem Juris Regni in hac part avisarentur:
Super quod Servientes ad Legem crastino die, Domino Regi, ac Dominis
Spiritualibus and Temporalibus praedictis hoc in Parliamento petierunt
scrutinium pro Domino Rege in hac part. Quibus dictum erat ex part Domini
Regis, Quod ipsi procederent ulterius absque aliquo scrutinio habendo quoad
declarationem and judicium super supradicta, etc. And afterward Day was given
at the next Parliament which was held at Westminster, eodem Anno 2 H. 5. In
which Parliament the said Judgment of 2 H. 4. being examined and discussed at
full, videbatur tam dicto Domino nostro Regi, quam etiam Dominis suis
antedictis, etc. quod idem Judicium and Declaratio praedicta versus eundem
Johannem, etc. sunt and fuerunt bona and legalia. Declaratio and Judicium. Per
quod cousider atum fuit in praesenti Parliamento per praedictos Dominos tunc
ibidem existentes, de assensu dicti Domini Regis, quod praefatus nunc Comes
nihil capiat per Petitionem aut Prosecutionem suam praedictam; Et ulterius tam
Domini Spirituales, quam Temporales praedicti, Judicium and Declarationem
praedictam versus dictum Johannem quondam Comitem Sarum, ut praemittitur habita
sive reddita de assensu ipsius Domini Regis, asserunt fore and esse bona and
justa and legalia: Et ea pro hujusmodi ex abundanti decreverunt and
adjudicaverunt.

Out of the last recited Precedent of 2 H. 5. may be observed, That the
Temporal Lords by Assent of the King, may give Judgment on Offenders for
capital Crimes; and therefore, Whereas it is said, 2 H. 4. That the Judgment
belongs only to the King and Lords, that is herein explained.

The King's Assent ought to be to Capital Judgments, Observe.
and the Lords Temporal to be only Judges therein, and not the Lords Spiritual:
But in Misdemeanors, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal are equal Judges, and the
King's Assent is not necessary, as shall appear.

. 2. In what Cases the King's Assent is necessarily required.
Touching the King's Assent, it is expressed in diverse Judgments on Capital
Offenses, In what Cases the King's Assent is necessarily required.
4 E. 3. against Mortimer.

Anno eodem against Simon de Bereford. And there be diverse other Judgments that
year of this Nature, wherein the King's Assent is not expressed; Peers de la
terre.
but against John Matrevers Les Judices Peers de la terre, and Judges de
Parliament adjudgent and agardant que le dit John be drawn, hanged, etc. not
mentioning the King's Assent. And there are two other Precedents of the same
Nature briefly Recorded; Estre ou tiel Judgment est accord que soit sait de
Burges de Bayons and John Dever. And Item outiel Judgment est accord de Tho.
de Gurney and W. de Ogle, not mentioning by whom the said Judgments of -- Death
were given.

2 H. 4. The Judgment against the Earl of Salisbury and others, for Treason, is
by the King's Assent; and so is the Judgment of H. 4. against the Earl of
Northumberland, and 11 and 21 R. 2. upon those several Appeals. In all which
the King's Assent is recorded. And so the Articles objected against Simon de
Burley, without the King's Assent, and against his will, which I shall here
recite.

Item, The aforesaid Dukes, Earls of Arundel and Warwick.

Anno 50 E. 3. Richard Lions pleading a Warrant from the King, which he could
not show, follows thus, etc.

And Tho. Mortimer continues his traitorous purpose, and by force of men took
and imprisoned diverse men your Liege, etc. Amongst others, Simon de Burley
Knight, and him they carried in the Parliament at Westminster, held the Morrow
after the Purification of our Lady, in the 11th. year of your Reign, and there
were surmised against him diverse points of Crime and Treason, and thereupon was
demanded of every Lord there present in Parliament, his Advice of the said
Simon, touching the said Crime. And afterward the said Dukes and Earls of
Arundel and Warwick would know your Advice Thrice Redoubted Lord. You answer
plainly, That the said Simon de Burley was not guilty of any the said Points,
and then they took upon them traitorously to have constrained you to have given
your Assent to the Judgment which they have purchased against the said Simon
upon the Points aforesaid. And you Thrice Redoughted Lord would not consent to
any Judgment to be given against the said Simon. And yet notwithstanding the
aforesaid Dukes and Earls took upon them Royal Power in prejudice of you, and
derogation of your Crown; and without your Assent, and against your Will, and
in your Absence, and in the Absence of many other Peers of Parliament, and
without their Assent, and against their Will, awarded that that said Simon
should be drawn, etc. and thereupon caused him to be beheaded, but traitorously
against your Crown, Peace and Dignity.

This I have recited at large: Unto which the Duke of Gloucester made no
Answer, being dead before* the said Earl of Arundel pleaded the King's Pardon,
which was not allowed him.

The said Earl of Warwick confessed all the Articles in the said Appeal, and
put himself upon the King's Grace, and the said Tho. Mortimer could not be
found.

This Parliament begun at Westminster Die Lunae post Festum Exaltationis
Sanctae Crucis, and was adjourned to Shrewsbury. And on Tuesday 28 January, the
Parliament there showed unto the King how that they in the said Parliament at
Westminster had accused and impeached John de Cobham in the 11th. year of the
King's Reign, with others convicted in this Parliament, accroaching to himself
Royal Power in Judgment. Awarded that the Lieges of the King, Simon de Burley
and James de Barners Knights, should be Drawn, Hanged and Beheaded without
Assent of the King, and against his will, and in his absence, and in the
absence of many other Peers of Parliament, who with held themselves, and would
not sit in such Judgment, and against their will, traitorously against the
Peace of the King, his Crown and Dignity.

And prayed our Lord the King to cause the said John de Cobham to join in this
present Parliament to answer to the things aforesaid, and to ordain such
Judgment against the said John de Cobham as the Cause demands. The said Jo. de
Cobham was brought, etc. And touching the said Judgment awarded against the
said Simon and James, the said Joh. de Cobham said, That it was told him by
them who were present then, That it was the King's Will to make such Judgment
against the said Simon and James convicted of the said Judgment and Award which
he had so given against the said Simon and James, notwithstanding his Answer;
Whereupon, etc. Judgment was given against him, and he adjudged a Traitor.

Here is objected, That the Judgment against Simon de Burley, was given by the
Lords without the King's consent. Secondly, Against his Will. Thirdly, In the
King's Absence. Fourthly, In the Absence of many of the Peers, and against
their wills.

Touching the First, viz. The King's not Assenting.

It may be Objected, That the Lords gave Judgment against Weston, 1 R. 2.
without the King's Assent, but yet not against the King's Will; for they
respited the Execution until the King might be informed thereof. And the Reason
then given for the said Respite, was, For that the King is not yet informed of
the manner of this Judgment. But whether the Lords proceeded to that Judgment
against Weston, before they informed the King, because the King's Assent is not
necessary, or for that it being the last Day of the Parliament, they had no
leisure to inform his Majesty thereof, let the Reader judge: yet it seems to
me that the King's Assent is necessarily required in Capital Causes and
Judgments, for these two Reasons:

First, For that all Precedents mention the King's Assent in Capital Judgments,
except that one against Matrevers, 4 E. 3. which might be the omission of the
Clerks, who drew up the Roll; for it is said directly afterward in the said
Bill, Numb. 6. That the Peers gave those Judgments in the presence of our Lord
the K. and by his Assent: And except that of 1 R. 2. against Weston, in the
last Day of the Parliament, and it was 3. in the Afternoon that Day before the
Lords had determined what to do in that Business; so that it may be the Lords
were prevented of time herein, to have which, they respited Execution, for that
the King was not informed of the manner thereof.

Secondly, For that the Lords Appellants 11 R. 2. who had then great Forces
about them, were so earnest with the King for his Assent to the Judgment
against Burley, That the Duke of Gloucest. told him, A bold Saying. This Duke
of Glouc. was many years after imprisoned for this at Calice, and there died in
his Bed.
as appears by his own Confession, 21 R. 2. That if he would be King, he
should not entreat for Simon de Burley, to save him from Death. And in the end,
when his Majesty would not assent to their Judgment, yet they wrought so, that
Messengers were sent unto him, and brought word (not before they gave Judgment
against Simon) and the King's Assent is mentioned in the said Judgment. All
which the said Lords would not have done, had not the King's Assent been
necessary.

And afterward in the Parliament of 21 R. 2, The Lord Cobham being accused for
giving Judgment without the King's Assent, answered, That the Messenger brought
word, That his Majesty had assented: And yet because he did not gainsay that
the King did deny his Assent, the Commons immediately demanded Judgment. All
which seem to imply, That the King's Assent is necessary in Judgments upon
Capital Offenses.

Touching the Second, viz. Judgment against the King's Will.
It is all one with Judgment without the King's Assent.

Touching the Third. viz. In the Absence of the King.
The Judgments of this kind are good notwithstanding, so as the King does
assent; as that of Simon de Burley, 11 R. 2.

Touching the Absence of many of the Peers.
That is to say, of many of them, and against their will; This cannot invalid
their Judgment, so as the greater number of the Lords be then present
(accompting the Proxies of the absent Lords) for it is not material whether
some Lords do absent themselves, or disassent. The chiefest Matter is the
Assent of the Lords who are present either in Person or by Proxy. The others
are to Answer for their Absence without a just Cause shown, or a proper Assent.

2. In Judgment on Misdemeanors, In Judgment on Misdemeameanors the King's
Assent is not required.
the King's Assent is not required.
50 E. 3. The Lords judged diverse Commoners for Misdemeanors, and the King's
Assent not mentioned; as Richard Lions, William Lord Latymer, a Privy
Councellor, John Lord Nevil, a Privy Councellor, Jo. Peecher, and others. The
King was then sick at his Manor of Eltham, and on the last day of the
Parliament, the Lords, Prelates and Commons came before him there, and he heard
the Petitioners, and their Answers for most part read, and also Judgment given
on the Privy Counselors and others, don't ils se leyron franchement le respons
de mesme nostre Seignior le Roy, Numb. 15. Which shows that the King had not
assented to them.

7 R. 2. The Bishop of Norwich was accused of Misdemeanors, and judged in 10 R.
2.

The Lord Chancellor Mich. de la Poole was judged by the Lords for
Misdemeanors, and Speed fol. says, That the King was much displeased thereat;
for it appears he gave not his consent. And it was one of the Questions
demanded of Tresilian and others, 11 R. 2. Whether the Judgment were erroneous,
or not? and resolved to be erroneous; yet it was not objected against any the
Lords Appellors that the Judges proceeded without the King's Assent.

. 3. The King's Presence in Parliament.
In 4 E. 3. The King commanded the Lords to do right and lawful Judgment on
Mortimer. The which Earls, Barons and Peers having examined the Articles, came
again before the King, and said, etc. Ibidem. The King commanded them to give
Judgment on Simon de Bereford. The which Earls, Barons and Peers came again
before the King, and said, etc. And so the King was present at their Judgment,
but not at their Consultations.

10 R. 2. The King was present when the Commons accused the Lord Chaneellor
William de la Poole of Misdemeanors, but he was not present at his Trial; for
he demanded if he ought to answer sans presence de dit Roy, being Chancellor?
and in the end he answered notwithstanding.

21 R. 2. In the cruel Parliament of the Lords Appellants, the King was present
at the Parlies: Non constat whether he was present at the Consultation of the
Lords.

5 H. 4. The King was present when the Earl of Northumberland was to be tried
upon his own Petition, and so were the Commons. And the King delivered the
Petition to the Judges for their Opinion; but the Lords claimed their Right:
But this was on the Wednesday, and the Friday following the King and Commons
met there again, and the Chancellor rehearses, First, What was done the first
Day, and the Lords having had competent deliberation on the said Petition, and
having heard and considered the Statute, They adjudged, etc.

It is plain the King was not present at this Consultation of the Lords, though
at their Judgment.

7 H. 4. He commanded the Lords to advise what manner of Process shall be made,
and what Judgment shall be rendered against Henry de Peircy Earl of
Northumberland; and a Week after the Lords declared their Opinion to the King.
And it appears in that Roll very clearly, that all Evidences and Examinations
were shown and taken by the Lords in the absence of the King, and their Advice
also agreed on in his Absence, but the Judgment reversed in his Presence.

To conclude, The King may be present if he please, at the Parties Answer, in
Capital Causes, and at the Judgments given, prout, etc. But he was never
present at other times of Proceeding against the Delinquent, nor at any Answer
for Misdemeanors, for ought I have yet seen.

. 4. The Presence of the Lords Spiritual. The Lords Spiritual.

In Cases of Misdemeanors, In Cases of Misdemenor they may be present.
the Lords Spiritual have ever been present, but never in Offenses Capital.
This is so generally-received of all men, that it is not worth the Labor to
prove it; yet I will vouch the Precedents: For it may be, out of one or other
of them somewhat may occur worthy the Observation.

In Misdemeanors.
In 1 R. 2. Alice Pierce was brought before the Prelates and Lords in
Parliament, to Answer, and the Prelates and Lords did ordain.

42 E. 3. Numb. 20, etc. John at Lee was put to Reason before the Prelates,
Lords, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and some of the Commons.

7 R. 2. Jo. Cavendish accused the Lord Chancellor of Bribery, before the
Prelates and Lords in Parliament. The Chancellor Answered before the Prelates
and Lords.

In Offenses Capital. In Cases Capital may not be present,

In 4 E. 3. The Earl of Kent was brought before the Counts, Barons and autres
Grandees and Nobles en mesme Parliament, etc. for Treason dors. Numb. 38.

Eodem Anno, The Articles of Treason being read against Mortimer, the King
charged les Counts and Barons, les Peers de son Realm, to give Judgment. And
Judgment was given per les dits Counts, Barons and Peers come Judges del
Parliament.

Item, The King commanded les dits Counts and Barons Assembled in Parliament,
to give Judgment on, etc. and so were four others tried in the same Parliament,
all for Treason, and not one word of the Prelates, either when the Articles
were read, or at the Judgment.

6 E. 3. Numb. 11, 12. Post Festum Sancti Gregorii, The Parliament being
commanded to consult of the keeping of the Peace, and Punishment for the
breaking thereof, the Prelates departed, pur ceo que aviz fuit dits Prelates,
que ne attinet pas a eux consuler de guard de la Pees ne de chastisament de
tiel; yet afterward, when they heard what was ordained touching those
Malefactors, for the apprehension of them by Hue and Cry, etc. to bring them
before certain Commissioners to be tried according to Law, the Prelates gave
their Consents also to the Act, and added also Excommunication by the Assent of
King, Lords and Commons.

Anno 10 R. 2. The Commons prayed That such as gave up Forts, puissent estre a
respons cest Parliament. Et selon leur desert puis per guard les Seigniors and
Baronage. And thereupon John Gomeniz and William Weston were brought before the
Lords aforesaid in full Parliament, etc. It is to be understood before the
Temporal Lords; for the Bishops are never comprised in the Word Baronage.

Anno 11 R. 2. Diverse Lords and others being appealed of Treason, and other
misdemeanors, the Prelates absented themselves, during the Trial having first
made Protestation saving their Right to be present in Parliament. Regni more
solito considerare, The Protestation of the Bishops forever.
tractare, ordinare, statuere, definire and caetera excercere, cum caeteris
Paribus etc. Verum quia in praesenti Parliamento de nonnullis materiis agitur,
in quibus non licet nobis juxta Canonum Sacrorum instituta quomodo libet
interesse, Eo propter pro nobis and nostrum quolibet Protestatur quod non
intendimus nec volumus sicuti de jure non possumus nec debemus, nec intenditur
nec vult aliquis nostrum in Parliamento dum de hujusmodi rebus agitatur vel
agitur, quomodo libet interesse, sed nos and nostrum quemlibet in ea part
penitus absentare: Jure Paritatis nostrae, and cujuslibet nostrum interessend.
in dicto Parliamento, quoad omnia and singula ibidem excercenda juris, and
eorum quilibet statu and Ordine in omnibus semper salvo. Ad haec insuper
protestamur and nostrum quilibet protestatur, quod propter hujusmodi absentiam
non intendimus nec volumus, nec nostrum aliquis intendit, nec vult, quod
processus habiti, and habendi in praesenti Parliamento super materiis
antedictis, in quibus nec possumus nec debemus ut praemittitur interesse,
quantum ad nos, and nostrum quem libet attinet, futuris temporibus quomodo
libet impugnentur, infirmentur, seu etiam revertentur.

This was read in full Parliament and enrolled at the Request of the Commons, I
mean the Prelates by the Kings Command and assent of the Lords Temporal and
Commons. Here the Protestation says (de jure, interesse non debemus) but I
think it intends that they could not be present by reason of the Common Law,
and by reason of an Ordinance made at the Council at Westminster, in 21. H. 2.
By which all Clergymen were forbidden, agitare Judicium sanguinis, upon pain
to be deprived both of Dignities and Orders. For surely as I think, they might
otherwise have been present both by the Common Law and by the Law of God. But
by such their long constant absence, even from our first Parliaments upon
Record. The Lords Temporal have only heard and determined all matters
concerning Capital offenses, which has continued in them so long that it is
become their Right, etc.

So that now it will be a wrong unto them the Lords Temporal, if the Bishops do
any way meddle with such Judicatures, either touching the Answers, the Replies,
the Proofs, or the Judgment. For where they may not adjudg, they may not do
any thing as a Judge that does conduce to judgment. And therefore as heretofore
they would be absent, Now they cannot be present whilst the Matter is in hand,
but are to be absent altogether dum de hujusmodi materiis agitatur: For some or
other matter may happen to be Voted in their presence concerning the Answer,
Replication, etc. or concerning the Form of Judicature herein: And by the
Voices of the Spiritual Lords that Vote may pass against the major part of the
Temporal Lords, who should sustain wrong therein.

Can they be present, and not Vote?
I know that at all Assizes and Sessions diverse of the Clergy are present till
Judgment be given in such Cases; but their Presence cannot prejudice the Judge
at the Assizes by Vote, as in Parliament. And at Sessions the Lay and Clergy
are equally in Authority to hear and determine.

Eodem Anno 11 R. 2. A Special Act passed at the Request of the Commons, to
make good those Appeals and Judgments, notwithstanding that the Spiritual Lords
pur benefit and salvatioun de lour Estate, Cap. 3. and in Parl. Roll, N. 28.

This Act, I conceive, was occasioned by the Clause in the said Protes(...) of
the Prelates; Ad haec insuper Protest(...) etc. quod processus habiti and
habendi in praesenti Parliamento super Materiis praedictis, in quibus nec
possumus, nec debemus interesse, ut praemittitur, quantum ad nos attinet
futuris temporibus non impugnentur, etc. For there is no such Act to make good
any former Judgment notwithstanding their Absence.

And 2 H. 5. Upon the Petition of the E. of Salisbury, the King and Lords
Temporal adjudged the Judgment against his Father in Parliament, 2 H. 4. to be
good, notwithstanding that it was rendered without the consent of the Lords
Spiritual, which yet the said Earl alleged as Error in his Petition; so that
by the Judgment of the whole House, neither the Presence nor Absence of the
Spiritual Lords in necessary in such Judgments.

In 21. R. 2. The first Petition that the Commons offered was, That before this
time many Judgments and Ordinances made in the time of the Kings Ancestors in
Parliament, have been repealed because the Clergy was not present in Parliament
at the making of the Judgments; and therefore they desired that the Clergy
might make a Proctor with a suffici(...) to consent in their wants, (...)
Things and Ordinances to be done in this Parliament, Numb. 9.

Whereupon the Prelates and Clergy being severally examined, deputed for them
all Tho. de Piercy.

But in ancient times ( in libro Mailicess) Numb. 9. which has written
somewhat largely of this Parliament; It is said, The Pardons granted to the
Earls of Arundel, were first repealed by the Assent of the Prelates; for which
he blames them much, saying, Dederunt ergo locum Praelati Judicio Sanguinis in
hoc facto, ita quod dubitatur a pluribus, si incurrunt irregularitatem pro
negotio memorato, unde contigit quod propter istud minus peccatum consequentur,
nam exactum est ab iis, vellent, nollent, ut Laicam Personam constituerent, ad
Judicium Sanguinis dandum in dicto Parliamento, si necesse foret, and occasio
emersisset.

I have perused all Judgments and Ordinances in Parliament, Observe. No
exceptions taken for the Absence of the Prelates.
and do not yet find one, whereto any Exceptions were taken for the Absence of
the Prelates and Clergy.

I find an Exception to the Judgment of the Exile, in 15 E. 2. for that it was
made without the Assent of the Prelates, who were present, and protested in
writing against it. And one of the Errors whereupon it was repealed, is, for
that it was made without the Assent of them, who were Peers of the Realm in
Parliament.

But this Repeal was per duress and force, etc. prout 1 E. 3. c. 2. So as this
cannot be alleged for a Legal Precedent.

5 H. 4. The Earl of Northumberland came before the King, the Lords and Commons
in Parliament. The Lords made Protestation that the Judgment belonged to them
only, etc.

The Petition being read before the King and the said Lords, as Peers of the
Parliament (unto whom such Judgments do of Right belong) considering, etc.
adjudged that it was neither Treason nor Felony, etc.

Note, That all this Parliament, Note especial.
the Bishop of -- was Chancellor, and he as Chancellor, delivered the Opinion
of the Lords when they had acquitted the said Earl of Treason. Whereby it seems
that He and the other Bishops were present at the Trial of Life and Death;
wherefore though the Record does here say the Lords indefinitely, we must
understand the Lords Temporal only; especially since they claimed the said
Judgment to belong to them.

In 4 E. 3. Judgment was given by the Earls, Barons and Peers, as Judges in
Parliament, in point of Treason, where the Prelates are not named; and
therefore understood of the Temporal Lords only. This will be explained by the
next of 7 H. 4. Rot. Process coram Domino Rege, etc.

The King commanded the Lords Temporal, Peers of this Realm, to advise what
Process to make, and what Judgment to render against the Earl of Northumberland
and the Lord Bardolph. The Lords advised thereupon, and reported their Opinions
to the King. The said Lords, Peers of the Realm, by Assent of the King, Ordain,
That Proclamation should be made for the said Earl and Lord Bardolph to appear,
or else to be Convicted by Award of the Peers in Parliament.

The King did farther demand the Opinion of the said Lords Temporal touching
the Archbishop of York; unto whom the said Lords Temporal said, etc.

The Commons prayed the King that they might have Cognizance, etc. Whereupon,
by Advice of the Lords Temporal, the Returns of the former Proclamations were
made at the Parliament-door for the said Earl and Lord to appear.

By Advice of the said Lords Temporal, the Returns of the former Proclamations
were examined, the said Lords Temporal considered of the Errors therein.

By the said Lords Temporal, with the Assent of the King, by their Authority,
New Proclamation is granted, the Return whereof is read in full Parliament
before the King and the said Lords Temporal.

Whereupon, the said Lords Temporal then being in the said Parliament, by
Advice and Assent of our Lord the King, by their Authority in Parliament,
Awarded the said, etc. Convict of Treason.

Here all was done by the Lords Temporal from the first beginning of the Trial
until the Judgment, and yet the Judgment is said to be in Full Parliament,
notwithstanding the Spiritual Lords are not once mentioned, nor intended to be
present at any time whilst the Matter of Treason was handled.

. 5. Touching the Presence of the Commons in Cases Capital. The Presence of the
Commons in Cases Capital.

I observe the Presence of the Commons to be necessary at the Parties Answer
and Judgment in Cases Capital.

Now one Reason for the King's Assent, and the Commons presence in such
Judgments, may be this; Both King and People are to be satisfied for the death
of the Subject; therefore all Trials for Life and Death, are public in the
full Assembly of the Court: And how can it be said in Full Parliament, when the
Commons, one of the States, are absent?

For this purpose the Court of Requests (called Camera Alba) was prepared for
such Trials, where both Lords and Commons might meet more conveniently; yet
though the Commons were present at such times, they had no Voice there. But at
their Return to their own Assembly, they considered among themselves, if the
Proceedings were Legal; and might come again and show it, and require a
Rehearsing of that Cause: as they did at the Judgment of the Duke of Clarence,
18 E. 3.

Nor are the Commons to be present when the Lords do consider of the
Delinquent's Answer, and the Proofs, and do determine of their Judgment.

The Precedents are these.
10 R. 2. Gomeniz and Weston were brought before the Lords and Commons seaux a
la blanch Chamber, and Answered on Friday, 27 November. and there they were
delivered to the Constable of the Tower, who was commanded to bring them again
the next Morning. In the mean time, the Earls, Barons and Baronets assembled,
and advised from the time that the said Answers were given in Parliament on
Friday until part of Saturday to the hour of Three, of the things touching the
Answer aforesaid, and then the Prisoners were brought in to the Parliament.

10 R. 2. Rot. de Pardonatione Haxei, 7 Febr. Anno praedicto, Praedictus Tho.
Haxei coram Nobis and omnibus Dominis Parliamenti Nostri existentibus in Alba
Camera adductus fuit, and Billa praedicta coram praefato Thoma ibidem, per
Praeceptum Nostrum lecta fuit, and Quaesitum fuit per Charissimum Avunculum
Nostrum Ducem Aquitain and Lanc. Seneschallum Angliae, a praefato Thoma, si
ipse dictum praefatum Communibus tradidit.

5 H. 4. The Earl of Northumberland was brought to his Trial on Wednesday; Then
the Commons were present; but I do not find that they were present with the
Lords between Wednesday and Friday, when the Lords advised on the Earl's
Petition. This Record mentions not where the Assembly was, Numb. 7. H. 4.
Quint. of his Reign.

After the Lords had Awarded Proclamation against the Earl of Northumberland,
and the Lord Bardolph to appear at a Day, or Judgment to be given. The Commons
not being acquainted therewith, they came and prayed the King, they might have
cognizance what was done touching the said Rebellions of Salop, and
elsewhere-within the Realm: whereupon, New Proclamations were made, and the
subsequent proceedings were done in full Parliament, in presence of the
Commons; and the Record says, upon the Request of the Commons. A Question has
been often asked, Whether the Commons did heretofore sit at Conference with the
Lords? Which I cannot very well resolve; but verily believe, That at all these
Arraignments the Commons did sit with the Lords.

10 R. 2. Gomeniz and Weston were brought before the Lords and Commons sitting
in the White Chamber. The Words are, Devant les Seignieurs avaunt dits en plein
Parliament, etc. But the Commons are here intended by the Words en plein
Parliament. And so was the Commons Demand, that they may be tried before the
Lords.

No other Records speak whether they did sit or stand.

In Judgments on Misdemeanors, The Presence of the Commons not necessary.

The Presence of the Commons is not necessary, unless they impeach a
Delinquent, prout 50 E. 3. And then they were present at all the Answers of
those whom they Impeached, and demanded Judgment.

And when the Lords had rendered their Judgment against the Lord Latimer, to be
prisoner with the Marshal, and to make Fine and Ransom to the King, the Commons
prayed the King, he might also be put out of all his Offices, and especially
from being Privy Councellor: Which the King granted.

And when the Lords had determined one part of the Complaint of the Commons
against William Ellis, touching a wrong done to certain Scottish Merchants, the
Commons prayed a general Enquiry might be made of the Residue whereof they
complained; which the Lords granted.

And when the Lord Nevil Answered, They required that one Richard Love might be
examined, to prove that which the said Lord denied, and they departed; but two
of the Commons remained, and heard the Examination, and told the Lords, That
the said Richard had related it to the Commons otherwise the day before; which
the said Richard denied. Then all the Commons came and justified it again, and
thereupon the said Richard Love confessed it, and on their Demands was
committed.

This shows what Interest they have in their own Impeachments.

So in 10 R. 2. When the Commons had Impeached the Lord Chancellor, They were
present at his Answer, and so often Replied, and enforced his Oath against him,
and required him to be Committed, and so he was before Judgment, but Bayled
presently.

But if the Commons do only complain, and do neither impeach the Party in
Writing, nor by word of Mouth in open House, nor demand Trial to be in their
Presence; In these Cases it is in the Election of the Lords whether the Commons
shall be present or not.

And therefore when they complained of Alice Pierce, 10 R. 2. The Lords
deferred her Trial until the Departure of the Parliament, that is, till the
Commons had leave to depart. And if the Commons presence be not necessary in
such Cases where they complain, much less is it wherein they complain not; yet
they have been present when they did not complain; but that was upon an
extraordinary Cause, prout 7 R. 2.

A Fishmonger exhibited his Complaint, first to the Commons against the Lord
Chancellor, and afterward to the Lords in Full Parliament, in presence of the
Commons. But they were present no doubt at the Lord Chancellor's Request, That
he might clear himself in Public of the Slander, and so he did.

The Presence of the Judges.
In Cases Capital, The Presence of the Judges.
the Judges are to be present also, otherwise it is not a Full Court; but they
have no Voice. And though there be diverse Precedents that complain of the
Prelates, prout 21 R. 2. and 2 H. 5. and this last of the Commons, yet there is
not one Precedent that finds fault with their Absence in these Cases; for they
are not tractare cum caeteris Magnatibus, but cum caeteris de Concilio.

Here may be Objected that which Tresilian and other Judges answered to one of
the King's Questions, 11 R. 2. touching the Judgment of Michael de la Poole,
That the same Justices and Sergeants would not give the same Judgment, because
it seems to them, that the same is irrevocable, as erroneous to every part.
Vid. Print. Stat. 21 R. 2. Tresilian was much mistaken, as much as in the other
Answers, whereby he determined that to be Treason; and so here he gave his
Advice, not his Consent: And yet he says, he gave his Consent. Read but a
little further, and you shall find in the very same place, as follows; Which
Questions and Answers, as well before the King, as before the Lords and
Commons, were read and perceived; and it was demanded of all the States of
Parliament, how they thought of the Answer? And they said, They thought the
Justices made and gave the Answers duly and lawfully, as good and liege People
of the King ought to do.

And in the same manner Sir Tho. of Shelton, Learned in the Law, and Will.
Hawkford, and Will. Beechley, the King's Sergeants, being demanded by the King,
of their Advice, etc. and my Lord Will. Thurning of the Common Pleas, etc. That
the Declaration of Treason not declared, belongs to the Parliament: And if he
had been demanded, he would have said in the same manner.

And in like manner my Lord William Rickill, Justice of the Common Bench, and
after the coming of my Lord William Clopton, Chief Justice, he said thus;
Wherefore the said Answers be judged good, and affirmed sufficient in the said
Parliament.

Whereupon the King, by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Procurators of the Clergy, and the said Commons, and by the Advice of the said
Justices and Sergeants there being, It was Awarded and Adjudged, etc.

Here you see the Manner of the Judges Assent, viz. their Advice only. Nor
shall you find their Assents to any Statute; yet the Judges have ever used to
be present at the Trials in Parliament upon Life and Death, 5 H. 4.

The King delivered the Earl of Northumberland's Petition to them. And at the
Trial of any Peer out of Parliament, the Judges are ever present on that Day;
and their presence is necessary for their Counsel to the Lords; but their
Assent is not necessary to the Judgment.

. The Manner how the Lords resolve on their Judgment. How the Lords resolve on
their Judgments.

How this was Anciently, appears in the Appeals, 21 R. 2. Touching the Death of
Simon Burley, viz. It was demanded of every Lord who was present at the said
Parliament, his Advice of the said Simon touching his Crime.

Eodem Anno, in the Print. Stat. 21 R. 2. The Judges Opinions were demanded in
the same manner; beginning with the Sergeants, etc. and so ascending to the
Chief Justice.

And at this Day the Question is put by the Chancellor or Lord Keeper, and the
puisne Baron answers first, Content, or not Content; and so the Lords in Order:
But their Lordships do first debate the Judgment amongst themselves, and the
Question is out of that which seems to be most generally agreed on.

In the Judgment it self is to be considered,
First, Whether it be ultra Legem.
Secondly, By whom to be Demanded.
Thirdly, By whom to be Rendered.
Touching the First.
Judgments in Parliament for Death, have been strictly guided per Legem Terrae;
otherwise they would not have judged the Earl of Kent, the King's own Uncle, to
be Hanged, Drawn and Beheaded, might it be left to their Discretion. Vide
Literas E. 3. to the Pope, speaking of this Earls Judgment by the Parliament,
for Treason; Cui Sententiae subductis tamen quibusdam opprobriosis, and in
detestatione tanti Sceleris, de Rigore Legis nostri Regni infligenda erat,
Dolentes acquievimus, 4 E. 6. But the Roll is lost.

The Lords judged Mortimer to be Drawn and Hanged as a Traitor, 4 E. 3.

Simile pro Simone de Bereford, N. 2.

Ibidem, Numb. 3. They judged John Matrevers to be Drawn, Hanged and Beheaded.

10 R. 2. Weston adjudged a Traitor for delivering up of Castles, Forts, etc.

And so Jo. Lord Gomeniz. a German, was adjudged to die; but because he was an
Alien, and a Baronet, and was not the King's Liege-man, he should be Beheaded;
That being the Death used in Germany to Gentlemen.

10 R. 2. Simon de Burley, the Earl of Arundel, and others were Adjudged to be
Hanged, Drawn and Beheaded for Treason. They differ something, yet herein they
agree, That the opprobrious Death of a Traitor, is, to be Drawn and Hanged;
which the Parliament could not alter, no not in their Judgments against the
King's own Uncle. It was per Legem Regni infligenda. The King might pardon all,
and usually did, except Beheading of the Nobility of his own Blood, and of
later Times, to all Noblemen.

As the Parliament could not dispense with, nor omit any part of the Judgment
on Traitors, so they could not add more than the Law required. And this may
appear by their Judgments of Forfeitures of the Parties Estate.

The Parliament, 4 E. 3. spoke nothing what Mortimer should forfeit to the
King: He well knew the Law could give the King all his Lands, in Possession,
Reversion, or Service. Vide The Restitution of 28 E. 3. Numb. 10.

The Ordinances in 50 E. 3. Numb. 45. against Women which shall make suit, etc.
to the King; against Alice Pierce by Name, is, Upon pain of as much as she can
forfeit, and to be banished. But had it not been for the former Ordinance, the
Lords would not have given any such Judgment against her; Her Offense being
only for procuring Favor to her Friends from the late King, contrary to a
former Order of Council.

11 and 21 R. 2. The Lords Adjudged the Forfeitures to the King, of some
Convicted on the Appeals, greater than the Law will give; but they passed
Special Acts in each Parliament to Confirm both the Judgments and Forfeitures.

1 H. 4. The Lords Adjudged and Declared the Earls of Kent, Salisbury, and
others to be Traitors, and to Forfeit, Numb. 30. as the Law of the Land wills.

7 H. 4. They Adjudged the Earl of Northumberland, and Lord Bardolph to Forfeit
for Treason, all their Lands in their own Demesne, or where others were seized
to their Use.

And so in Fines and Amerciaments, the Judgments anciently were indefinite,
prout 42 E. 3. Numb. 26. John at Lee is Committed to the Tower, there to remain
till he has paid Fine and Ransom to the King, and at the King's will and
pleasure.

50 E. 3. He is Awarded to Prison at the King's Will, and to be put to his Fine
and Ransom according to the quality of his Trespass; who being brought before
the Lords, they told him, his ill Deeds were so great, that he had not
wherewith to make satisfaction; and he submitted to the King's Grace: and the
Lords Awarded all his Goods to be seized, and his Body to be in Prison at the
King's Will.

Eodem Anno, The Lord Latimer to make Fine and Ransom at the King's Will, Numb.
28.

Item, William Ellis the like, Number. 28.

John Peecher the like, Number. 33.

Cavendish Awarded 7 R. 2. to pay Damages to the Chancellor, and to remain in
Prison until, etc. and the King de Fine suo competenti sibi inde debito; but
not set down how much to the King.

These Fines were not put in certain, for that the Law limits them to the
King's Will: But not doubt but after the Judgment, the Lords did rate them; as
may be gathered out of Richard Lions; where, after Judgment, they called him
before them, to consider, it seems, at what Rate to Tax the same. And they
found it not sufficient.

And in Ancient Court-Barons, the Amerciaments were ever offered after the
Presentiments.

In the Star Chamber, all Fines were usually mitigated after the Censure, and
that Court had Antiqua Vestigia Magni Consilii.

I hold that anciently the Fines were often Rated or Taxed: And if the Lords
may mitigate a Fine a Majore, they may Tax it after the Judgment, the Certainty
not being then specified.

Judgments for Satisfaction. Judgm. for Satisfaction.

In Complaints of Extortion and Oppression, the Lords Awarded Satisfaction to
the Parties wronged, which sometimes was certain, sometimes general, but always
secundum, non ultra Legem.

42 E. 3. Numb. 18. Full Restitution was made unto William Latimer of the
Wardship and Marriage of the Heir of Sir R. Latimer, whereof he was outed by
Duress by John at Lee. But this was done by a great Council per Commandment du
Roy, after the Judgment.

William Ellis, 50 E. 3. Awarded to pay to Botheil and Cooper 20 l. apiece, for
their Damages, Number. 25.

John Peecher, Number. 23. Awarded que il face yeulx a les parties Compl. de lui
pour les extortions issint prizes.

Jo. Nevile, Number. 34. is Awarded to make Restitution to the Lady Ravensholme in
Certainty for an Oppression done to her, whereof the Commons complained.

7 R. 2. The Parliament referred the base Accusation of Cavendish against the
Lord Chancellor, to be heard and determined by the Justices, in such sort as if
the Parliament had determined the same. And the Justices adjudged him convict
of Slander; and that the Lord Chancellor should recover his Damages, which they
Taxed at 1000 Marks, and that he be imprisoned until he had satisfied the
Chancellor, and the King pro Fine competenti sibi inde debito.

The Judgment against Alice Pierce, Anno 10 R. 2. was, That if she had
purchased any Lands by Force or Duress, soit il pur Fine, or Deed en pais, or
Deed enrolled, or otherwise, that her Purchase be held for none, and the
parties who hold themselves aggrieved, have their Process against her in
Chancery. By Advice of the Grand Council, Let Right be done to the Parties, and
Restitution made according as the Case requires, so as the Purchase made bona
fide, be not undone or annulled any way.

References to the Common Law.
Nor could the Lords judge any Complaint of private persons, where the party
might have his Remedy at the Common Law; prout Botheil and Cooper Anno 50 E. 3.
accused William Ellis for extorting 17 Nobles from certain Merchants at Pruse;
and also for their wrong Imprisonment, by the false Suggestion of William Ellis
to the King. And the Lords referred the taking of the 17 Nobles to the Common
Law. But upon the Examination of the Imprisonment, it was proved, That Ellis
did write his Letters to one of the King's Bedchamber, falsely suggesting
against Botheil and Cooper, which Letters were shown to the King, his Majesty
then commanded them to be Committed.

This the Lords expounded to be false Suggestion in Ellis. The King himself
judged him for the same.

Had that Point been cleared in the Statute of False Suggestions, happily the
Lords would have referred it to its proper place.

So also, Anno 5. E. 2. The Lords referred the Accusation of Clingdon, to be
Tried at the Common Law.

Secondly, Touching the Demand.
Touching the Demand.
That verily belongs to the Party at whose Suit it is; To the King's Council
for the King, if the Articles were de part le Roy; and to the Commons, against
an Impeached Delinquent.

By whom Judgment ought to be Rendered. By whom Judgment ought to be rendered.

It appears plainly by many Precedents, That all Judgments for Life and
Death, are to be rendered by the Steward of England, or by the Steward of the
King's House; and this is the Reason why at every Parliament, the King makes a
Lord Steward of his House, though he has none out of Parliament. And at such
Arraignment, the Steward is to sit in the Chancellor's place: And all Judgments
for Misdemeanors by the Chancellor, or by him who supplies the Chancellor's
place.

CHAP. VI.
The Precedents for Life and Death.
ANno 10 R. 2. The Precedents of Life and Death.
John Lord Gome(...), and William Weston were brought by the Constable of the
Tower before the Lords in Full Parliament, sitting in the White Chamber; where
they were severally Arraigned at the Commandment of the Lords, by Richard le
Scroop, Chief Steward of the House of our Lord the King, in manner following:

Here the Lords commanded the Arraignment of certain Earls, Peers of the Realm:
They did not appoint the Steward to do it: It belonged to his Office.

Anno 20 R. 2. Thomas Haxey was Arraigned of High Treason before the King, the
Lords and Commons in full Parliament, in Alba Camera, by the Duke of Lancaster
Seneschallum Angliae, and the Judgment rendered by him.

Anno 21 R. 2. All those Judgments on the Appeal were rendered per Seneschallum
Angliae. The Records of E. 3. and H. 4. are silent herein, by whom the Judgment
was rendered.

It may be Objected, Obj.
That Anno 5. H. 4. The Lord Chancellor kept his place at the Trial of the Earl
of Northumberland, because he did deliver the Opinion of the Lords.

That could not properly be called a Trial; for it was upon the Earl's own
Petition. And if it were resolved whether it were Felony or Treason, it should
have been done by the Steward, sitting in the Chancellor's place. Neither does
it appear by the Record, that the Chancellor kept his place, though he
afterward delivered the Opinion of the Lords.

So likewise, Anno 1 Car. 1. Febr. 6. The Lord Keeper kept his place when the
Articles of Treason were read against the Earl of Bristol; but he did not
Arraign him. Then they were read, and his Answer heard by the appointment of
the House, and some Witnesses examined also, to the end they might understand
the true Nature of his Offense, and then to declare how, and in what manner to
proceed against him for the same.

The Spiritualty did not deliver their Opinion therein.

To conclude, All Records that are (which mention by whom the Delinquents in
Cases Capital were Arraigned) do say that it was by the Steward of England, or
of the King's House, And in remembrance of this, a Lord Steward is appointed at
every Trial of a Peer of Parliament.

Touching Judgment rendered by the Chancellor in Cases of Misdemeanors, it is
needless to recite any Precedents: only this I will say, The Chancellor never
gave Judgment on Life and Death, and the Steward never on Misdemeanors.

And though there be Precedents of Judgments given by the Steward of England in
Parliament, prout 20 and 21 R. 2. yet I have seen none of the Judgments on the
Peers rendered by the Steward of the King's House: And the reason may be, for
that there was anciently a Seneschallus Angliae. Quaere tamen whether the
Steward of the King's House, being a Peer, may give Judgment on a Peer or not.
I think he may, if there be no Steward of the House constantly made every
Parliament, though but during the Sessions.

The last Considerable Thing in Judicature is,

CHAP. VII.
The Execution of the Judgment.
ANd first in Capital Offenses, I have seen but two Precedents thereof in the
Parliament-Rolls.

The First is, 4 E. 3. Which begun on Monday after the Feast of S. Katherine.
There were long Articles exhibited against Mortimer for Treason, and he was
adjudged to die for Treason; and thereupon, says the Record, Commandment was
given to the Earl Marshal to Execute the Judgment; and also to the Mayor,
Aldermen and Sheriffs of the City of London, and to the Constable of the Tower,
and likewise to them who had the Guard of the said Mortimer, to be aiding to
the said Earl Marshal, to do the said Execution. The which Execution was done
and performed upon Thursday, next after the first Day of the Parliament, which
was the 29th. Day of November.

Ibidem Number. 2. Judgment was given on Simon de Bereford, to be Drawn and
Hanged: And thereupon it was Commanded that the Marshal should do Execution
near the Tower of London. And the said Earl of Arundel was Beheaded ou the same
Day. The Earl of Nottingham, one of the Lords Appellants, was Lord Marshall at
that time, and therefore his Deputy did Execution.

Item, The Earl of Warwick being adjudged to die, the King did pardon the
Execution, and granted him his Life, viz. That he should remain in perpetual
prison out of England, in the Isle of Man, etc. And that he be at Sea on his
passage, before the end of one Month. And thereupon he was delivered to
Monsieur William le Scroope, and to Monsieur Stephen his Brother, to bring him
safely to the said Isle of Man, etc.

The Earl Marshal was Commanded to Execution on a Peer, and the Marshal on a
Commoner.

The Command no doubt issued from the Lords, with the King's Assent herein.

Thus much touching Execution quoad Mortem.

In Misdemeanors, the greatest Corporal punishment has been Imprisonment. I
find no other in Ancient Parliament: But who was the Officer to carry the
Delinquent to prison, is not Recorded, save he to whose Custody he was
Committed, prout 42. E. 3. John at Lee was Committed to the Tower. Et dit fuit
al Monsieur Alley de Buxhill, Constable de la Tower, que il priest with the
King.

Anno 50 E. 3. Numb. 28, and 29. The Lord Latimer is Awarded to prison, destre
en guard du Marshal; and afterward upon Mainprise of diverse Earls, suffered
to go at large. So it seems that first he was Committed, and delivered to the
Earl Marshal immediately.

Primo R. 2. William Fitzhugh was Committed to the Tower, but it appears not
who carried him thither. At this Day the Lords have used to impose some
Corporal punishment on Misdemeanors, prout Flood.

And at this Day if a Peer be Committed to prison, the Gentleman Usher has the
Charge of him thither, and the Sergeant attending on the Great Seal, prout Anno
18 Jac. 16 Febr. The Earl of Berks was sent to the Fleet by the
Gentleman Usher, for forcibly thrusting the Lord Scroop in open House.

Anno 21 Jac. 13 Maii. The Earl of Middlesex was Committed to the Tower, and a
Warrant given to the Gentleman Usher to carry him thither.

Anno 1 Car. 1. In the Parliament begun 6 Febr. The Gentleman Usher was
commanded to bring the Earl of Bri-Bristol.

But if a Commoner be Committed, the Sergeant at Arms attending on the Great
Seal does usually carry him to prison, and he also has the Charge of him, and
to see any Corporal punishment inflicted on him.

Anno 18 Jac, Wright and two Sergeants at Mace, who had Arrested a Servant to
the -- were Censured to ride with Papers on their Heads, for their wilful
Contempt and Scorn of the Privileges of Parliament, And for that the Sergeant
at Arms did not see the whole punishment Executed on them, he himself was
Committed.

CHAP. VIII.
For Recovery of Damages, or Restitution of the Party aggrieved.
ANno 50 E. 3. Botheil and Cooper had each of them twenty pounds Awarded for
their Damages; and it is not there declared how they should recover the same.

In the same year John Lord Nevile, upon Complaint of the Commons, is awarded
to make Restitution to the Executors of the Lady Ravensholme; neither when the
same is to be restored, nor the manner how the same shall be recovered, is
declared.

In those two Cases, I conceive the Parties are to have their Remedy (the
Parliament being ended) in the Chancery, and not in any other Inferior Court at
the Common Law: But the Lords in Parliament may direct how it shall be Levied.

Anno 1 R. 2. The Lords adjudged Alice Pierce to forfeit all her Lands and
Goods to the King; and notwithstanding this Forfeiture, If she has purchased
any Lands by Force or Duress, it shall be void, and the Party grieved to have
his Remedy by Process in the Chancery, and by Advice of the Lords of the
Council, Let Right be done, and Restitution made.

Anno 7 R. 2. John Cavendish was awarded to pay 1000 Marks to the Lord
Chancellor for his Damages, and to remain in Prison until he had paid it.

FINIS.

