A BRIEF DECLARATION OF THE BARBAROVS And inhumane dealings of the Northern
Irish Rebels, and many others in several Counties up-rising against the
English, that dwelt both lovingly and securely among them.

WRITTEN TO EXCITE The English Nation to relieve our poor Wives and Children,
that have escaped the Rebels savage cruelty, and that shall arive safe among
them in England; And in exchange to send aid of men, and means forthwith to
quell their boundless insolences, with certain encouragements to the work.

By G. S. Minister of Gods word in Ireland.

Volanti calamo, dolenti animo.
In mundo pressuram.
JOHN 16. 2. The time comes that whosoever kills you, thinks that he does
God good service.

Published by direction from the State or Ireland.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Abel Roper, at the black spread Eagle against
St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1641.

They that are Recusants in the Wane, still prove Rebellants in the full of the
Moon.

AS Popery and Treachery go hand in hand, while Popery is kept under; so
Popery and Tyranny are inseparable Companions, when Popery gets the upper hand.

A brief declaration of the Barbarous and inhumane dealings of the Northern
Irish Rebels, and many others in several Counties uprising against the
English, that dwelt both lovingly and securely among them.
THere was a blessed Union betwixt God and man, till man's sin broke the Peace,
since which time we are all up in Arms against his Majesty, and having
mustered up all our forces, our rebellious and corrupt affections, we still
march on in a course of sinning, as if we would stand out with an Arm of
flesh, and bid battle against the highest. And this general Rebellion of ours
against our gracious God, has much occasioned this particular Rebellion of the
envious Papists in Ireland against us, which now I shall plainly lay open to
the view of the world, that all good Christians in the world may see, hate, and
detest their worse then Scythian dealings.

On Friday the 22. of October. 1641. A notable Treason was discovered, how that
the Castle of Dublin, by a plot of the Lord Mac-Guiers, Captain Mac-Mahon, and
other Papists their adherents should be taken, and the City of Dublin surprised
(of which you may expect a larger Treatise hereafter) out of expectation
thereof the Papists in the North his Confederates, who confidently persuaded
that the City and Castle would be then taken, resolved upon a general Massacre
of all the Protestants throughout diverse Counties in the Country, had the
Sunday before every where directions given them at Mass by the Priests, as
they tendered the Catholic cause, and expected the Popes benediction, and
desired to avoid his curse, that they would observe three things, whereupon
they gave all their people the Sacrament enjoining them great secrecy.

First, that on Saturday following they should disarme all the English,
whereupon many borrowed weapons of their English neighbors upon several
pretenses; some that had been servitours against Rebels in former times, under
pretense of doing more service against Rebels, of whose places of Rendevous
(they alleged) they had certain notice given them.

On Sunday they were to drive away the English goods and Cattle.

And on Monday upon the watchword (Skeane) a dangerous weapon which they use,
they were to cut all the English throats; Now the two former of these things
were accordingly executed, the third only they failed in, because they were
disappointed by Gods infinite mercy (who watches for us when we sleep) in
that Dublin was safe, the Castle not taken, and the Traitors were caught in the
pit that they had privily hid for others; wherein they justly deserve to suffer
as Haman, who was hanged upon his own Gallows; or as Perillus who was
tormented in his own engine. Nec enim Lex justior ulla est
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.


But leaving them in the hands of Authority, whiles we pass on in the truth
of our Tragical story, those rebellious Tyrants, and tyrannical Rebels
persisted, and still go on in their most bloody outrages (animated thereto by
their Popes pardoning Bull) a few particulars of their cruelties amongst
innumerable others, we here present unto your most Christian considerations.

On Saturday the 23. of October, that day the Calender notes with Romanus
Episcopus, that day wherein Titus slew 80^0. of the Jews, that day the
Mac-Guiers began to murder, first at the House of Christopher Coats, an out
seat in the County of Farmannagh, killed the Gentleman, slew his wife, his
son and daughter, and so went on; and in this their fury they spared neither
widows nor children, nor any Protestant they met with, and coming soon to
Shannogge Castle, that day they brought two Rogues whose hands were bound with
witthes (that they might be the less suspected) before Master Arthur Champion,
a Justice of the Peace, but after some few words passing on both sides, one
Redmund Mac Guier, Tenant to the said Master Champion, told him he was his
prisoner, and so stabbed him to the heart, and afterward slew his brother
Thomas Champion, Mr. Midleborrough sub-Sheriffe of Farmannagh, and Mr. Thomas
Ironmonger Clerk of the peace for the County of Cavan, in all nine men who
were there, and lodged that night; An Irish youth was feign to give five
shillings for to have leave for to bury Mr. Champion and Mr. Ironmonger his
Master in old sheets of Mr. Champions, or such things as he could get; but the
other seven they threw into a ditch to be meat for the fowls of the air,
and the beasts of the field, killing their Dogs, and throwing them on their
dead corpse in despite, not suffering any to bury them; And round about in the
County of Farmannagh, within a little compass, were about three hundred
English persons that day cruelly murdered, the particular manners after which
they were slain we cannot yet fully learn; but to some they would not give
leave to say their prayers before their end, others had their noses and ears
cut off, being cruelly tortured before they dispatched them; Some women had
their hands and arms cut off, yea joynted alive to make them confess where
their money was. But above all others (Ministers excepted) they were most
fierce against the Kings Officers; Such as were Clerks of the Peace, Sheriffs,
Coroners and Pursevants.

That monster and merciless wight Captain Rorie Mac Guier, took Mr. Eleazer
Middleton Clerk of the Peace for the County of Farmannagh, and servant to the
Lieutenant of the Tower of London, carried him three miles in great derision
with a Piper playing before him, and nigh Donagh Church they hanged him wishing
his master Sir William Belphore there in his room, threatening death to him
that should take him down or bury him; etc.

Diverse outrages most bloody and past expression, they used toward Henry
Cross, James Whitewood, John Maynes, Thomas Smith, William Ogden, Maximilian
^ibbs, Richard Butler, and Steven Wrixon, their wives and Children, sparing
none, male nor female, young nor old.

But in the County of Cavan at the first they were more sparing, till at length
they being hardened, came to learn of their neighbors, and being fleshed in
blood, came little or nothing short of them: the blood of Abraham James, Roger
Loftas, and goodman Dear with his two sons, and many others cry out against
them.

What shall we say of the ravishing of women before their own Husbands faces,
yea some green women lying in childbed, burning Churches (lately built at the
great expenses of the English) down to the ground, making other Churches
slaughterhouses, and others Mass Houses, pulling down the Kings Arms and
defacing them? time would fail me to reckon up all their outrages in this kind.

Mr. Edward Aldridge, a man of great hospitality, high Sheriff of the County
of Monohan, (with his sub-Sheriffe Mr. John Scarlet) having notice that his
house and Wife were taken, and five hundred pounds of the Kings Subsidy money
seized upon, and that inquiry was made for himself (and indeed it was
discovered after, that they had a special aim and direction to take away his
life) by Gods providence fled to the County of Cavan, where he gave notice of
the Rebels sudden rising to all wheresoever he came, whereby some were
preserved, and the Enemy perceiving it, was put to a stand for a while, so that
on Saturday little was done in the County of Cavan, only the high Sheriff of
that County Molmory O Rely, rose with fourscore Rebels more, and gave out
that he had the Kings warrant to disarme all the English, and so came to
Farnam Castle, thence took arms for himself, and all his followers, and so
posted to Clogh-water Castle, a Castle situated in an Island, which is of great
strength. There he imprisoned Arthur Culham Esquire, his wife and children, and
what usage they have had since, God only knows.

After the said master Aldridge had done this service, in forewarening the
County, whereby the Lord Burlasse his troop gathered most of them together,
and got their horses and arms, which otherwise would have been all surprised
in their beds, and their horses and arms converted to their enemies use: He
took along with him Doctor Teate of Balliheyes, and some other friends, who
resolved that night, to pass as far as they could toward Dublin, to save
themselves, and to give notice to the state, as soon as they could* and these
came twelve or thirteen miles from the Cavan, before they met any that
withstood them. But a little on this side Virginia, (a Town so called in the
foresaid County) three or fourscore armed men suddenly compassed them in, and
knocked them off their Horses, stripped the said Master Aldridge and his
sub-Sheriffe stark naked, they knocked the said Doctor thrice to the ground,
wounded him dangerously in the head, and so left them to travel barefoot all
that cold night through those rough ways. The said Doctor having nothing on
his slashed head, but a cap of blood, and with much ado they escaped with their
lives, upon the Doctors naming some of them by their names, who afterward
forbore, and so dismissed them, sore repenting after, they had so done (as one
relates that since heard them, and passed through their merciless hands.) But
since then, all that have come from among them, have been monstrously abused.
More then two thousand men women and children came from Bellturbet, and
thereabouts, in one flock, but those Wolves (false in their word) having
promised they should part in peace, with their clothes on their backs, and to
this end two hundred of them went along with this armelesse harmless people,
eight or nine miles, pretending to preserve them from other Assasinates, but
meeting there with a multitude of their associates, men, women, and boys,
joining altogether, they stripped them all stark naked, except some few lovely
women, whom they took back (as is supposed) to Bellturbet. An hundred of
those poor naked souls, in frost and snow perished for want of food, before
they came to Dublin. Some sixteen women fell in Labor by the way, and so
miscarried. Some with sudden terror fell distracted (the Lord be their
comfort) yea they have thrown some sucking Infants on the snowie ground, and
stripped them stark naked to search for money, which they thought was hidden
in their swaddling clothes, and that for twenty miles and more together; And if
any clothes were given to these naked ones by the way, they were sure to be
rifled afresh, within one five miles, either by the men which were bad, or by
the women which were worse, or by their children, which would follow them with
greatest insultation and scorn, none daring to resist their insolences. Yet
to some of his servants the Lord has extended mavelous great grovidence and
mercy, and as Acts 27. 44. some came to land on plankes, some on broken pieces
of the Ship, so some have passed these pikes, some with torn clothes and rags,
some with roules of Hay about their middles, some with sheepskins and
goat skins, and some of the riflers themselves exchanged their tattered rags
for the Travelers better clothes. But above all, Gods extraordinary
providence toward Doctor Teate is not to be forgotten, who being spent with
travel, and effusion of blood, prayed the Lord to put an end to his miseries,
either by life or death, it pleased God that presently after day break he
being strayed from the rest, in the dark, came to an house where accidentally
an Irish Surgeon was, who formerly never had resorted thither, and he
washed his head, and applied a sovereign Balsome to his wound, and bound it up
with a little Linen clout, wherein he found great comfort, and so got a horse
to Kells, where he met his company, and was refreshed. The like or greater
providence did the same bounteous hand extend to his sucking babe, who after he
had fasted twenty four hours, by reason that his mother, who came up toward
Dublin a week after her Husband, had no Milk left through fasting, and
extraordinary fear and grief, it pleased God, as she laid her down under the
cleft of a Rock, to be sheltered all night from the sharp wind, she found a
little Irish Mader full of Butter-milke, or Bonny-clabber, whereby the babe was
preserved alive.

And a common mark of providence is to be observed in that the enemy did not
meddle with Master George Creighton, of Virginia, Minister, who relieved all
comers, boiling barley and beef, and other necessaries, night and day for
that end.

In other Counties they have killed diverse Ministers, Scots and English, after
they have tortured them, and dragged them about. Yea, they have hewn some of
them asunder, as Master Madder near Donganan, a Scottish Minister, and Master
Drayton of Turneredge, an English Minister, and a good housekeeper. Some are
their prisoners, as Master Hudson and others. If zealous and painful Master
Robinson, or honest Master Mors, late Minister nigh Bellturbet, (with many
others) be now alive, they may justly cry out and conclude; Nunquam bellabonis,
nunquam certamina desunt.


But to hasten. In the County of Monnohan, Master Richard Cope, his Wife and
Sons, Walter Cope Esquire, his wife and children, Anthony Cope, Richard
Blany, Master Branthwait, master Ralph Secum, his wife and children, with
diverse others, Esquires, Ministers, and Gentlemen of all sorts, have they
carried away into Monnohan goal, and there keep them close prisoners, in the
nasty and stinking Dungeon, threatening every day to hang them, or otherwise to
deprive them of their lives. And their Mass Priests, those sowers of Tares,
working upon the extremities of forlorn men, do by all means possible, seek
to turn weak Christians, to their superstitions, both by threats and
promises, and prevail with too many.

But oh ye false seducers, Quae vos dementia coepit? Will ye not cease to
pervert the right ways of the Lord? Help Lord, deliver the oppressed, to
celebrate thy praise and power. Rescue such as are appointed to dye, and in
life endure worse things then the most bitter death. Lay no more on them then
what they are able to bear, and in death let Christ be their advantage.

And you our friends in England, our own flesh and blood, especially you of
the honorable and high Court of Parliament, and the house of Commons, the
representative body of the Kingdom, be pleased to yield your joint assistance,
in relieving the poor exiled, that commit themselves to your wings for
protection; And be as ready to Acts ^^.
relieve us in Ireland, as the Saints were to succor the Brethren in Judea.
Our need is no less then theirs was; It will be an heavy indictment one day,
when Christ shall say to some, who have neglected his poor members, I was
hungry, and ye fed me not; naked, and you clothed me not, etc. Go ye cursed,
etc.

And for this your own Backdoore of Ireland, for your own sakes, have a care
now in most needful time. They are guilty of much innocent blood, and have
broken the oath of their God, I meanethe oath of Alleagiance toward our
Sovereign King. God in his wrath toward us, has Judges 13
remembered mercy. If he would have destroyed us, to Desolation, he would not
have discovered the Plot, nor showed himself so mavelous, on the behalf of
some of us as he has done.

God has promised his Church, that they who Revel. 17.
begin to make war with the Lamb, shall be overcome by the Lamb. Then
reward them, Revel. 18.
even as they have rewarded us, give them double according to their works, and
in the Cup that they have filled to us, fill them double. Reward them (we
pray) as Iehu did Baals priests; Or ^ Kings 10. 25.
deal with them as Samuel dealt with Agag. Hew these traiterous Agags in
pieces before the Lord. Severity is but Justice, when Lenity puts all in hazard.

Sometimes to omit the punishment, is to commit the offense. There is a cruelty
in some kind of mercy, though there be no mercy in cruelty. Our goods by them
forcibly taken and detained, together with their goods and estates, in justice
will become a prey to you. And fear not them for they shall even be bread for
you. Their defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us; Their sins
are full ripe, it is time for God to put in his sickle. Religion is the
greatest motive to a Christian mind: Let them not ever insult, and say we have
prevailed: Bring not that curse upon your souls denounced, Judges the 5. and
Verse 23. Curse ye, curse ye them bitterly, that came not to the help of the
Lord against the wicked: who have in a trice laid wast those hopeful
Plantations in the County of Cavan, Farmannagh, Tyrone, Ardmagh, Longford,
Letrim, Monehans, with diverse others which have been thirty years in
Planting, and now for the greatest part utterly supplanted. They are also out
in Rebellion in the Counties of Derry, Donogull, Down, Louthe, and Antrim, and
the greatest part of the English in all these Counties utterly impoverished by
them.

Also in the Counties of Sligo, Resecoman, Westmeath, East-meath, the King and
Queens Counties, the English are much spoiled by them: So that the Goods and
treasure which those Assassinates have taken from the English in the three
Provinces, of Vlster, Lynster, and Conaught, amounts to a very great invaluable
sum.

True it is, that in several Counties, many of the best sort are in restraint
with them, as Sir Edward Travers, Captain Smith, the Lord Bishop of Killmors,
Blanys Lady, and his Sisters, the Lord Cafield, Edward Philpot Esquire,
Mistress Moynes the elder, Roger Moynes Esquire, his wife and children, and
very many others. And hereupon many think, if any forces proceed against them,
that then they will wreake their utmost malice on these.

But others conceive, that in regard they knowing that they cannot possibly now
(since their plot is discovered) long hold out, The consideration of this, that
Lex talionis may be rendered to them, And that as they deal with these and
others our friends and children, the like may befall their own wives and
children, will restrain them from laying violent hands on such as are in
durance: And we know that a hair cannot fall from the head of any one of us,
without the providence of our Father in Heaven, to whom we leave them, that
can show mercy by life, or in death; in whose hands are our times, and not in
theirs, that may have the custody of our bodies; who has bidden us not to
fear them, that can kill the body, but to fear him that can cast both body
and soul into hell. To whom be honor and glory, now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

