The Privileges OF THE BARONAGE OF ENGLAND, When they sit in Parliament.

Collected (and of late revised) by John Seldom of the Inner Temple Esquire out
of the Parliament Rolls, and Journalls, Patent, and close Rolls; the Crown
Rolls, the proceedings of the English Courts at Westminster, the Register of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Delegates yeare-Bookes, of the Common
Law, Statutes and other good Authorities, and in such sort that frequently the
words of the chiefest Testimonies are transcribed, least the freedom of the
Readers Judgment might be other ways prevented by short Collections. The
recitalls of the French Records in the 4th, Chap. also newly translated into
English for the benefit of others, as well as the Students of the Laws of
England.

Quo communius eo magis bonum quod est justum.

LONDON, Printed by T. Badger for Matthew Wallbanck, and are to be sold at his
shop at Grase-Inne Gate. 1642.

The Introduction by way of Table or Index to the Chapters following contained
in this Treatise.
Privileges are special Rights belonging to the Baronage of England. In which
name are com^rehended all those, who as Magnati and proceres regni by common
right are summoned to every Parliament wherein also they have place and voice
as incident to their Dignities, and what things do concern them e^ther as
they are one Estate together in the upper House, or as every one of them is
privately a single Baron. As for the prelacy who had heretofore the first place
in the summons, viz. Praelati, magnates etc. they have now lost all their
Privileges o^ sitting in Parliament, and of bearing of any secular Offices in
the Kingdom, they are disabled by act of this present Parliament, 17. Car.
1641.

For Privileges of the first kind.
CHAP. TEstimonies are hereby collected touching. CHAP. 1. Their proxies and
making of proxies 1 CHAP. 2. Their proceedings in Suits as well for followers
as for themselves during the Parliament. 7. CHAP. 3. That none of them be
subject to be questioned before the lower House only. 9. CHAP. 4. Their
Jurisdi^^ion in matters of offenses as well capital, as not capital. Errors
out of the Kings Bench. 10

CHAP. 5. Their passing of Bills and giving of Judgments heretofore without
any assent of spiritual Lords. 120 CHAP. 6. Their appointing of Judges out of
themselves for examination of delays of Judgments in other Courts. 127 CHAP.
7. Their Tennants of ancient Tennancies, bring discharged of paying the charges
of Knights of the shiere. 129
For Privileges of the second kind, of which also some are communicated to
Baronesses. The heads of the Collections are,
CHAP. 1. FIrst touching Oaths and Protestationt upon Honor. 131 CHAP. 2
Trial by Peers. 142 CHAP. 3 Scandala magnatum. 155 CHAP. 4. Process against
them in English Courts Proceedings by Bill and Answer. id. CHAP. 5. Their
number of Chaplains is qualified. 158 CHAP. 6. Their retayning of strangers.
159 CHAP. 7. Clergy without reading. id. CHAP. 8. Their liberty of hunting in
the Kings Forests. 161 CHAP. 9. Amerciaments of them. id. CHAP. 10. No
Process in a civil account to be awarded against the body of a Baron. 163
CHAP. 11. A Knight to be returned upon every pannell where a Baron is party.
16 CHAP. 12. No day of grace against a Baron of Parliament. ib. CHAP. 13.
Making Deputies of places of Trust committed to them without words of the
special power. 167
BEsides these, they have some Rights which are so commonly known, that there
needs no particular mention of them; as their interest in making, or repealing
of Laws, or the like, and diverse others may perhaps be found, which have not
been oblivious in the late search made for them: but of these particulars
before mentioned, according to the order in which they are described, such
store as are here collected do follow.

First, of the special RIGHTS, WHICH Concern them, as they are one estate in
the upper House of Parliament.
CHAP. I. Of Proxies of the Lords of Parliament.
UPON the summons of the Parliament, license of absence being obtained, and the
same license as usually it being provided that a proxy be made, the Baron so
licensed may appear only by that proxy, to whom his voice is so committed,
although his Writ be Quod personaliter inter^it, and so also without license
upon sickness or such inevitable cause of absence.

The first mention of Proxies that occurres in the memories of our Parliaments,
is of Carlisle under Edward the first, where the words are, Quia omnes Praelati,
Milites, and alij de communitate Regni, tunc plenarie non venerunt receptis
quibusdam procurationibus Praelatorum, qui venire non poterant adjornantur
omn^s qui summoniti sunt ad Parliamentum, usque ad diem Mercurij proximum
sequentem ad horam primam. And in a Parliament held at Westminster under Edwa^d
the second; the Bi^hops of of Durham, and Carlisle remaining upon the defense of
the marches of Scotland, were severally commanded to stay there; And in the
Writ this clause was ordered to both of them. Sed procuratorem vestrum
sufficienter instructum ad dictos diem, and locum mittatis ad consentiendum
quod tunc ibidem per dictos praelatos and proceres contigerit ordinari. And the
like Testimonies are afterward under the same King for allowance, and making
of proxies by the name of procuratores sufficientes. And in succeeding times
the Testimonies of them down to this day are most frequent.

But two things are most especially observable touching them.
(1.) THat although the general proxies were admitted, yet when the nature of
the Parliamentory business required more speedy and full advice, a clause was
inserted into the summons to premonish the Baron summoned, that his proxy
should not be admitted unless he were compelled to absent himself by most
inevitable necessity. So was it in the Writs of summons under Edward the third
to the Parliament, held for advice touching the voyage of the King of France,
into the holy Land, every Baron having these words in his Writ. Scientes pro
certo quod nisi evidens, and manifestus id exposcat non intendimus procuratores
seu excusatores pro vobis admittere, ea vice propter arduitatem negotiorum
praedictorum. And likewise under Richard the second, the summons to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest had these words. Et (...) nullatonus
amittatis ^ne quid absit per vestram absentiam quam necessitate infirmitate
tunc ^etenti fueritis quod aliqualiter illuc laborare non poteritis nullo modo
excusatum habere volumus, ista vice expeditio ne potior nostr^rum praedictorum
retardetur, seu aliqual^ter deferatur. And diverse other Exam^l^s are for
personal appearance* and exc^uding Proxies.

(2.) That the course of the elder time was: not that Barons only were made
Proxies in the upper House as at this day but other men also of low condition,
and this has been very frequently in the case of Bishops, and Parliamentory
Abbots and ^riors, who gave their letters usually to Parsons, Prebendaries,
Canonists, and such like. In that Parliament of Carlisle under Edward the first,
the Bishop of Exeter sent to the Parliament, Henry de Pynkney parson of
Houghton as his Proxy. The Bishop of Bath and Wells sent William of Charleton,
a Canon of his Church, and in like fort other of the spiritualty of that time.

In the beginning of the 17th. year of Richard the second, the Bishop of
Norwich made Richard Corqueanx being then Deane of the Arches, Thomas Hederset
Archdeacon of Sudbury, and John Thorpe parson of Epingham, his Proxies by the
name of Procuratores sive nuntij. And in the same time the Bishop of Durhams
proxies were John of Burton Canon of Bewdley, and Master of the Rolls, and John
of Wendlingborough Canon of London, and other like are of the same time. By
which also that of the Preamble of the Statute of Praemunire is understood,
where it is said that the advice of the Lords spiritual being present and of
the procuratores of them that were absent, was demanded. The like under Henry
the fourth and Henry the fifth are found in the Rolls. And under Henry the fifth
the Archbishop of York gives the proxy to the Bishop of Durham; and to two
other Clerks of his Province. And it is observable that in the making of
proxies by the whole number of Bishops in case of Attainders upon Appeal,
their course was sometime to make a Gentleman beneath the degree of a Baron,
their Proxy as under Richard the second, first they made their proxy for
assenting in the Parliament, but afterward the Earl of Wiltshire had that
place in the same Parliament. But this of making others then Barons of
Parliament, proxies is carefully found in the cases of the Lords spiritual.

One special case of it is under Henry the fifth, in that of Thomas de la Ware,
who being a Clergy man had his Barony descended unto him, and is styled in the
summons always Magister Thomas de la Ware, and not Dominus, he gave his
Letters to, John Frank and Richard Hulme Clerks but the proxy Rolls for the
Temporal Lords are for the most part lost. The following Times especially ever
since the first memory extant of the Iournalls of the upper House; U. 8*
which began the first of Henry the eight, have kept a constant course of
making parliamentory Barons only proxies. And it appears in those Iournalls
that one two or three are joined conjunctim, and divisim; and most commonly
Temporal Lords have given their proxies to temporal and spiritual men: yet
not without a Temporal Lords giving his letters of proxy to a Spiritual, and
Temporal Lord together. And under Queen Mary, Francis Earl of Shrewsbury made
Anthony Viscount Mountague, and Thomas Bishop of Ely his proxies. And in the
beginning of Queen Mary Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester was joined in
letters of proxy sometimes with a Temporal Lord. But the Lords spiritual
have so much mistataken (of late) the Laws of this Kingdom, the Kings
prerogative given by the Law, and what and whence was the Original of the
Honors, they themselves had obtained: and have been ready to enlarge the
Dominions of Antichrist, and to induce an arbitrary government by their
writings, and other apparent practices, in so much as now they have lost both
Privilege and Vote in Parliament.

CHAP. II. Privileges in Suites as well for their follows as for themselves
during the Parliament.
IN a Bill exhibited under Henry the fourth, is showed that the Lords Knights
etc. and their men, and servants etc. should not be arrested or otherwise
imprisoned by the custom of the Realm, and it is prayed that if any be the
parties offending may make fine and ransom, and give damages etc. Hereunto
the Answer is, there is sufficient remedy in the case. In the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's reign, John Broxham being Plaintiff, in an Assise in the
County of Lincoln against the Lord Willoughby, it was ordained, that an
Injunction should go out of the Chancery Subpaena 500. l. That the Plaintiff
should not proceed to Trial.

To this head may be referred that case of the Lord Cromwell, Dyer. Parl. 14
Eliz. Dyer par. ^9. and 43. Eliz. and l. ^ac. etc.
cited in the Title of process against them in English Courts, and in the
Iournalls of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and our present Sovereign, the
Testimonies of these privileges for the servants of every Baron of Parliament
are most frequent.

Hereunto may be added that of the first citation out of an Ecclesiastical
Court against the Earl of Cornwall, Rot. Parl. 18. E. 1. Rot. 2. Dor^o:
which was served upon him in Westminster Hall, as he was going to the
Parliament at the Suite of Bago d^ Clare, and the Prior of Saint Trinity in
London, for the Earl sued them for the contempt, and recovered 1000. Marks
damages. And in the same Parliament the Master of the Temple petitioneth that
he might distraine for rent in a house in London, which it seems the Bishop of
Saint David's held of him. In qua non potest distringere in tempore Parliamenti.
But answer is, non videtur honestum quod Rex concedat, quod ille de consilio
suo distringatur per Ostia and fenestras and prout Moris est.

CHAP. III. No Peer of the upper House to be called to answer in the lower
House only.
THomas Philips complained of the Bishop of London upon diverse Articles in the
lower House, 2 Mareli in Dye^ parl ^ 15. Hen: 8:
and at first by Order of the House, whence it was referred by reason of the
slight nature of the offense, etc. whereupon the Bishop remembering the upper
House of their Privileges, Ejus verbis auditis pr^ceres omnes una voce
dicebant quod non consentantum fuit aliquem procerum praedictorum alicui in eo
loco responsurum. So where the Bishop of Bristoll had written the Book of
Union, which was conceived to be derogatory to the honor of both Houses, yet
he was complained of only in the upper House, and that so he might be, and
not before the lower House alone, it was acknowledged in the message delivered
from the lower House touching him. The like is the privilege of the Bishops
complained of in this present Parliament, 1641.

CHAP. IV. The Jurisdiction of the Lords of Parliament in matters of offenses,
as well capital as not capital, and in errors out of the Kings bench.
THe power of Judicature belonging to the Lords of Parliament, is chiefly seen
in their Jurisdiction upon Writs of error, and their Judgments of Offenses, as
well capital as not capital, which they give to any public mischief in
State.

Of these Judgments of such Offenses many examples are of former times in the
Records of Parliament, See 3. E. 3. fol. 9. Scroope.
and out of them are here selected, some such as most of all conduce to the
opening of the course of Accusation, the form of the Defendants, answering the
usual ways of Trial, and other Incidents in their various kinds of
Judgments, which are found arbitrary in cases not capital: so that they
extend not to the life or inheritance, and in capital offenses so Arbitrary,
that the form of the death inflicted sometimes varied from the ordinary course
used in the common Law for such offenses.

Under the first Head these cases of
1. John Matravers 2. Borges of Bayons 3. John Deverill 4. Thomas Gourney 5.
William of Ocle. 6. John of Gomeniz, and 7. William of Weston.
All condemned to death for Treason, and all to be drawn, and hanged saving
Gomeniz, who was judged to be beheaded, because he was a Banneret, and had
served the King in his Wars.

Under the second Head are these cases of
1. John at Lee Steward of the household. 2. Richard Lions. 3. William Lord
Latimer. 4. William Ellis. 5. Chichester and Botesham. 6. Alice Pierce. 7.
Cavendish against Sir Mich. de la Poole Chancellor of England. 8. The Earl of
Northumberland.
For Writs of error their power, and course in them may be seen, some
special examples which are expressed, whereunto is added that of Thorpe being
Speaker of the Lower House, under Henry the sixth which specially shows the
power of Judicature in the Lords, although otherwise it taste too much of what
is wholly against the privileges of every member of the Parliament at this day.

Ex rot. Parliamenti 4. E. 3. mem. 3. number. 3.
Witness the Peers, Earls and Barons assembled in this Parliament, at
Westminster, that it is openly assented and agreed, that John Matravers is
guilty of the death of Edmund Earl of Kent, the Uncle of our Lord the King
that now is, as he that principally, traitorously and falsely compassed the
death of the said Earl, so that the said John did know of the death of King
Edward our Father, when the said John by heinous manner, and by his false and
wicked deeds conspiring with the son of the said Earl against the life of
the King, which he did actually commit, for which the said Peers of the Land
and Judges of the Parliament, adjudge and award that the said John be drawn,
hanged and quartered as a Traitor, in what part of the Kingdom soever he be
found, and the said Peers do pray our Lord the King, that he will command
that a writ be made to make search and enquiry throughout the Realm, and that
he that can take the said John alive, and bring him to the King shall have a
hundred marks, and if in case he cannot be taken alive, he that brings his
head shall have fifty pounds of the Kings gift.

Moreover to have such judgment, Rot. parl. 4, E. 3. m. 7. Boges of Bovons,
John Deverell.
it is agreed, that it be put in execution of Boges de Boyons, and John
Deverell for the cause aforementioned, and that he that can take the said
Boges alive, and bring him to the King shall have a hundred pounds, and he
which brings the head of the said John shall have forty pounds of the Kings
gift.

Item it is assented and agreed, Thomas Gournev, William of Ocle.
that Thomas Gourney and William of Ocle, shall have such judgment for the
death of King Edward (Father of our Lord the King that now is) who falsely and
traitorously murdered him; and who can apprehend the said Thomas, and take him
alive shall have a hundred pound, and he that can bring the head of him a
hundred marks; likewise he that can take the said William alive shall have a
hundred marks, and he that brings the head of him (if in case he cannot be
taken alive) shall have forty pound of the Kings gift.

Rot. Parliamen. 4. R. 2. M. 5. in Schedula annexa.
THis Schedule the Commons made and caused to be brought in Parliament, praying
the Lords to ratefie the same, and to put in execution; in that schedule
amongst diverse others, this Article occurres.

Item that all those which have lost, or rendered when necessity required not,
Castle Town, or Fortress to the dishonor of our Lord the King, the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament, being every of them attainted of such
fault, shall be punished according to their desert without partiality, for to
avoyde the evil example which they have given to all others.

Then afterward follows an Accusation and a Judgment upon an offense of that
nature.
ITEM where the Supplication is by the Commons, that all those which have
rendered and lost Castle or Towns, lost by the very default of Captains may be
put to their answer at this Parliament, and according to their desert thoroughly
punished by the award of the Lords and Baronage, avoiding the evil example
which they have given to others, and that Allen Buxall (Constable of the Tower
of London) shall cause to come before the Lords of Parliament at Westminster,
on friday the 27. day of November in the year before mentioned, John Lord of
Gomeniz, and William of Weston imprisoned and detained in the said Tower at the
commandment of our Lord the King, John of Gomeniz.

William of Weston.


because they have rendered and lost faithful Castles and Towns of our Lord
the King, for to answer upon the Articles which there shall be preferred for
the said cause, on the behalf of our Lord the King. At which day being friday,
the said John and William were brought by the said Constable of the Tower
before the Lords aforesaid, sitting in full Parliament in the great chamber;
They were severally put to answer at the commandment of the said Lords, by sir
Richard Scroope Knight, (Steward of the Household of our Lord the King) in
manner as follows.

William of Weston, you have taken upon you to the thrice powerful Prince,
whom God have in his keeping, Lord Edward late King of England (Uncle of our
Lord, the King that now is) surely to keep to him, and his Heirs Kings of
England: the Castle of Barwick without surrendering the same to any but him; or
his said Heirs, have you William who were a liege man of our Lord the King that
now is (true Heir of the late King Edward) delivered and surrendered the said
Castle to the Enemies of our Lord the King, without his Commandment in
dishonor of him, and his Crown, and of the Estate of his Realm of England,
against your leigeance and undertakings: whereupon he put his answer in
writing, having a Schedule containing the Tenor of many things, and came and
read the said Schedule in full Parliament, upon which the Law was demanded by
the said Steward, if the said Schedule should be taken for his final answer
in that behalf or not. And thereupon the said William prays that the said
Schedule may be redelivered to him, and there he puts in his final answer,
and after the said William put in to the said Schedule an Addition in full
Parliament for final in that behalf: The Tenor of which Schedule is such as
follows.

To the most sage Council, of our Lord the King, and to the other Nobles and
Commons of Parliament.
WIlliam of Weston beseeches, The same Petition is in the roll of petitions,
of the first of R. 2. It and ultimo.
and shows that he is accused maliciously, to have rendered the Castle of
Barwick, which he had in keeping upon the Trust and assignement of our Lord the
King: may it please your just and learned discretion, to have the said William
excused for the causes which follow. First, may it please you to remember how
that the said William was lately warned by a Spy, that a very great power of
Enemies came against him, for to besiege the said Castle, and to batter the
same with great Ordinance, whereupon the said William forthwith by his
Attorney, and by his Letters requested the Council, that they would please to
fo^tifie the said Castle with more Gentlemen, f^r the defense and safeguard
the^of, having regard that the garrison of the said C^stle was not sufficient
for half the multitude of so great force, to make resistance in so large a
place: but in the end for that he could have no succor of the said Council,
and likewise (the said William being not in default was left without sufficient
soldiers of a long time, whereby to keep and defend the said Castle, whereof
he beseeches you that you will take just, and benign consideration.

Likewise may it please you to take notice by the privy Scout of War, that
there came the Enemies power of Arms, and seven hundred fighting men, with
6000. of the common soldiers of the Land, having nine great Cannons, a great
Engine, and a Trebutchet big above measure, which they carried in their
marches, that thereby presently a great part of their Gentlemen of Arms, and
soldiers aforesaid came before the Gates of the said Castle, to assault it,
and there was a Knight of theirs killed, which was cozen to the Lord of
Chiffin, insomuch that officers and many others also were there slain: and in
a short time after they began to plant their Cannons, and Engines, and so
continuing from day to day their assault (that is to say) Tuesday, Wednesday,
and Thursday, and the walls then of the houses and of the said Castle were
broken, and divided in many places, and they had by force filled the ditches of
the said Castle in three places, if possible to make way for them to issue, and
there came upon the said works a a great part of them, and they by force had
broake and spoiled many of our bars, and the morrow after which was Friday,
they came at the break of day with all their strong men to assail the said
Castle, but by the help of God they were not yet Conquerours by force of their
Assault. And of our side and of their side there appeared great death and
losses, and the same day the Marshall of Burgoyny treated with the said William
and others, to render the said Castle: Wherefore and in consideration, that the
said Castle could not hold out for the smallness of the number of Gentlemen
there, and for that the walls in many places were beaten down by their
marvelous Ordnance, there was a Treaty with the Lords, to the end that the
said William with his companions, might know what to do the next morning,
whether to stay or depart from thence. Likewise the same night the Enemies had
brought all their Ordinance, their Engines Trebutchet and Cannons, upon
carriages drawn by Horses to the foot of the ditch of the said Castle, and the
next morning which was Saturday, they put themselves all in Order to assault
the place, and then first of all they sent a Herald to the said William, to
know if the same Castle should be rendered or not, whereupon the said William
by advice of the graver sort of his companions, having consideration how the
said place was destroyed by their Ordinances, and also that there were few
Gentlemen left for the defense, and that twelve of their companions were at
that time dead, and that many being wounded and sick, he could not renew the
Gentlemen of the Garrison, and that for safety to defend themselves, there
being only but thirty eight, and by common assent the said Castle which he
could hold out no longer, was by force rendered for safety of the lives of the
men. That all these things aforesaid are true, the said William puts
himself upon Trial according to your discreet Ordinances.

Item, it is to be remembered that when the said Castle was rendered (as
aforesaid) certain Gentlemen of France did bargain with the said William for
his victuals, and bought the same together with certain persons, which the
said William held within the said Castle in Prison, for which things he
received of them 1000. and 500. Franks, whereof he paid to his companions for
part of their wages which then was behind, three quarters of a year, 678.
Franks.

Item, he paid at Callis for victuals of the said Castle before that time
due 1442. Franks.

Item for the passage of the said William, and for his expenses being at Callis
135. Franks. And therefore the said William beseeches that you have regard to
Justice and bounty, how that he by envious suggestion has been against all
reason accused thereof concerning his estate and name, for which offense he
has seized and stayed some of the Cattells of his Adversaries, and that you
have consideration how that he has paid his companions out of his proper
goods for their wages, and that you will be pleased for Gods sake and piety
also to ordain for him, that by your discreet nobleness, he may recover his
Estate and goods.

Item the said William Weston shows how the first day, when the Enemies came
before Ardee he fled thence to the Army at Callis, to the Captain there, to
pray of him more succor and aid of men to guard the Castle of Barwick, and to
defend if the Enemies had assaulted, and the Captain answered him briefly,
that he would not deliver nor lend succor, nor aid at that time, for that he
doubted himself the Enemies would come before the Town of Callis. And the
Lord Steward came and read the said schedule in Parliament. John Lord of
Gomeniz, you have undertaken to the thrice powerful Prince, whom God preserve,
Lord Edward late King of England Uncle of our Lord the King that now is,
safely to keep to him and his heirs Kings of England, the Town and Castle of
Ardee without surrendering the same to any, but to the said King and his Heirs,
or by the Commandment of him and his Heirs. Have you (Lord of Gomeniz) in
time of our Lord the King surrendered the same without his commandment, to the
detriment of him and ^is Crown, and of the Estate of his Realm of England
against your undertaking aforesai^? what say you to it? whereupon the said John
answer^th, that the said Town and C^stle of Ardee was so feeble, that he
could not well keep it against so great power of the Enemies, which were
ready to assail the said Town and Castle, and therefore he went forth to
entreat with the E^^mies, that he might save the liege men of our Lord the King
being within that Town and Castle of Ardee, without that that he at any time
took any thing for the surrender of the said Town and Castle of Ardee.
Whereupon one Geffery of Argentine Knight, said in full Parliament to the said
John, that he the said Geffery was at that time in the said Town and Company
with the said John, and that the Town and Castle of Ardee were not at any time
delivered by his assent, but that he was ready to stay and come upon the safe
guard thereof, and this the said Geffery affirmed. And moreover it was demanded
of the said John if he had any other thing to say? and he answered no:
whereupon the Constable was charged with the safe keeping of the said John and
William, until the morning of the next day; and then to bring them again
safely before the said Lords in the said Parliament at the place and day
afo^esaid. At which day (that is to say) the eight and twentieth day of
November, in the year aforesaid, were the said John and William brought again
in full Parliament, and there it was showed severally by the s^id Steward at
the same day, by Commandment of the Lords aforesaid, how upon the Answers
which the said John and William have given in the said Parliament, (as before
mentioned) to the Lords of the said Parliament, viz. the King of Castile and of
Leon, and the Duke of Lancaster; Edmond Earl of March, Richard Earl of
Arundell: Thomas Earl of Warwick, Hugh Earl of Stafford, William Earl of
Suffolk, William Earl of Salislbury, Henry Earl of Northumberland, John Lord
Nevill, Roger Lord Clifford; and many other Lords, Barons, and Baronets being
assembled in the said Parliament, to advise at the time when the said Answers
were given in Parliament, the Friday Even at the howe^ of three a clock, of the
matters touching the answers aforesaid, and viewing and examining diligently
the said Answers, and other Articles concerning that business. And upon good
and mature deliberation and Information, given of the most valiant and discreet
Knights, and others being in the said Parliament, it was said in manner as
follows, to the said William by the Steward reciting the things aforesaid,
touching the said William. It seemed to the Lords aforesaid, that you William
without ^uresse or default of victuals, have wickedly delivered, and
surrendered to the Enemies of our Lord the King for your own lucre, contrary
to all plea of right or reason, and against your liegeance and undertaking
according to an Information in such case: which me^tioneth whereas the late
Baron of Graystock, who was a Lord and one of the Peers of the Realm, had
taken upon him safely to keep to the aforesaid King, the Town of Barwick:
presently after the said King prepared himself to travel to the Kingdom of
France; the said Baron without the Kings Commandment, left the said Town of
Barwick, and a valiant Esquire Robert Ogle as Lieutenant of the said Baron, who
safely should keep the said Town of Barwicke to the King. And the said Baron
went a^ a horseman to the parts of France to the said King, and there stayed in
his company, surmizing that an assault of war was made at the said Town of
Barwick by the Scots. And the said Robert as Lieutenant of the said Baron,
defended forcibly there, and at last by their assaults the said Town was
taken, and the s^id Robert and two of the sons of the said Robert were
slain, he being in the company of the King in the parts of France: And it was
said that it was adjudged by the advice of the said King in the parts of
France; and the said Dukes, Nobles, and Earls t^g^ther with Henry Duke of
Lancaster, the Earls of Northumberland, and Stafford, and Sir Walter Maney,
that the s^id Town was lost in default of the said Baron. And for that cause
he had Judgment of life and member, and that he ought to forfeit all that he
had, and Judgment was rendered in these words by the commandment of the King,
which things also considered, for that you William have surrendered the Castle
of Barwick to the Enemies of our Lord the King aforesaid; without duresse or
default of victual against your allegiance, and undertaking aforesaid, the
Lords aforenamed sitting in full Parliament adjudge you to death, and that you
be drawn and hanged, but for that that our Lord the King is not yet informed
of the manner of this Judgment, the execution thereof shall be put in writing
until the King be informed: wherefore it is commanded to the said Constable
safely to keep the said William, until he has other commandment from our
Lord the King. And as touching the said John Lord of Gomeniz touching the
Answers aforesaid. It was showed there by the said Steward, how the said Lords
were assembled, and advised of the said Answers as before said. Moreover it was
showed how that at the time, that Sir Ralph Ferrars Knight had the keeping of
the Town and Castle of Ardee, the said Town was not so strong by the one
half, as it was at the time when the said John surrendered the same, and the
said Ralph did put himself in peril for the safeguard thereof, and forthwith
the said Ralph did hold, and forcibly defend the same against a very great and
forcible assault, and other evidences concerning the said John in this behalf
were delivered, (as follows) to the said John being in Parliament, by the
said Steward, reciting all the matters aforesaid touching the forementioned
Judgment of the said Baron and the cause thereof in manner as before, it
seems to the Lords before named sitting in full Parliament, considering your
answers in this behalf, and your examinations, and Informations therein, that
lately amongst the number of Gentlemen, by whom you have strongly undertaken
safely to keep the said Town and Castle with twenti^ men of Arms, and twenty
Archers you were sent to the said Town and Castle of Ardee in the Afforcement
thereof, according to your requ^st thereof made to certain Lords, being sent in
message to Callis under our late King Edward, and at such time also as you were
advised by the King of Castile, that if you could not wel^ keep it, you ought
in no sort to take upon you to keep the same, and there were that would have
undertaken the safe keeping thereof to the said King Edward and his heirs, and
you have undertaken safely to guard the same with no surrender to any, but in
manner as aforesaid, and now have you John, without duresse or default of
victuals or of Artillery, or of other things necessary for the defense of the
said Towns and Castles of Ardee. without Commandment of our Lord the King,
wickedly delivered and surrendered it to the Enemies of our Lord the King, by
your own default against all plea of right or reason; and against your
undertaking aforesaid, The Lords aforesaid in full Parliament adjudge you to
death; and for that you were a Gentlemen and Banneret, and have served the late
King Edward in his wars, and have not proved a liege man to our Lord the
King, you shall be beheaded without having other justice. And for that also our
Lord the King is not yet informed of the manner of this Judgment, the
execution thereof shall be respited until our Lord the King shall be informed
thereof, where it is commanded to the aforesaid Constable safely to keep the
said John, until he has other commandment from our Lord the King. And it is
to be remembered that Geffery Martyn Clerk of the Crown, was named in this
record, and delivered the same there in writing in this present roll, by his
own proper hand.

Ex. Rot. Parliamen. 42. E. 3. M. 2. N. 22, 23. etc.
WIlliam Latimer of the County of Dorset preferred a Petition in this
Parliament, in manner as follows. To our Lord the King and his Counsel
shows William Latimer of the County of Dorset, That whereas ou^ Lord the King
otherwhiles in the pestilence granted to the Bishop of Salisbury, the Wardship
of the Manor of Dentish, and Devilish, in the said County being in his hands,
by the minority of Robert son and heir of Robert Latimer Knight, John Lee
Steward of the household
together with the marriage of the said Robert the son, being then of the Age
of six years for a certain sum of money to him paid: which Estate the
said William Latimer has held, until Master John Lee then Steward, by
procurement of Thomas Delaber, sent one Richard Inworth Sergeant at Arms in
Dorset, to the said William Latimer, to bring him to London in safeguard as
prisoner with the Intent aforesaid; that is to say the Monday next before the
Feast of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, in the year of our Lord the
King that now is the nine and thirtieth, and the said sergeant also performed
the same, and the said Master John Lee did charge, and command the said William
in the Kings name, that he should not go out of Town upon pain of a hundred
marks, until he had surrendered the body of the said heir, contrary to the
patent of the King, to the said Mr. John Lee, and outed the said William of his
Charter, and moreover made a deed of release, whereupon the said Master John
Lee comma^^^^ to hold all the Lands, and Tenements aforesaid, until the Feast
of St. Michael then next ensuing, for a certain sum of money, and then the
said Master John Lee leased to the said William, the Wardship of the said
manor of Devilish rendering forty pounds per annum, whereof he was seized as
prochein amy of the Infant, viz. Pulchrain Helto, Whitechurch, Oxford, and
Staket, and let the same to the said William, and to diverse other persons at
his will, by such duresse, imprisonment and arresting the said William to the
great mischief, grievous damages and losses, to the great wrong of his simple
estate, whereof he prays remedy. To the points of which Petition the said
John Lee answers, and says, that because that the Manors, Lands, and
T^nements of Inheritance there comprised in the said Petition, were wickedly
extended by the Escheator, and leased out of the Kings hand at too small a
value, to the great damage and deceit of the King, he caused the same Manors,
Lands and Tenements, to be resumed into the Kings hands, the Wardship of which
Manors, and the marriage of which said heir the King had committed to him.

And likewise the said John Lee was put to answer before the Lords, of the
affairs in such time as he was Steward of the Kings household, for that he had
attaiched diverse Gentlemen by their Bodies, some by Sergeants of Arms, and
some by other ways; as William Latimer and others, and caused them to come
before himself, as before the Counsel of the King in places where pleased
him, out of any of the Kings accustomed places, to answer to diverse things,
whereof the recognizances ought to appertain to the Courts of the King.

Item It was debated concerning his authority of Stewardship, that he within
the verge had attaiched diverse Gentlemen of the verge, as John Goddard, and
others to answer in the Marshallsea of things done out of the verge, and caused
some men to be apprehended, and sent to the Tower of London of his own
Authority, without Commandment of the King or his Council.

It was likewise debated, that Hugh Lavenham had appealed certain Gentlemen of
Felony, and that before the Kings Justices at Newgate, and diverse Gentlemen
arraigned at his suit, whereof some put themselves upon the Country, and some
defended themselves by their bodies, and stayed in prison as the Law demanded,
and that an Appeallee of murder was let go at large, by Commandment of the
said John Lee against the Law, and command of the Justices, and that he took
the said Hugh by his own Authority and let him go at large, and some that
were not appeallees in roll of the Crown, at the suggestion of the said Hugh
were taken and imprisoned, as if they had been appeallees.

It was also affirmed that whereas the said John Lee was sworn to the King,
and his Council; he did bargain with Master Nicholas Lovaine, concerning the
Wardship of the Manor of Reinham in Kent, being then in the hand of the said
Nicholas by the under age of the son, and heir of John Stanton as appeared
by certain evidences, as well by letters Patents under the Kings Great Seal,
as others which the said John had in his keeping, that very plainly, the said
Manor was holden of our Lord the King in chief, as of his Castle of Dover and
Fort, that the Wardship thereof appertained to the King, to the great damage
and deceit of the King against his Oath. Of which points and articles, he
cannot duly and suffici^ntly excuse himself by the Law, and therefore was the
said John commanded to the Tower of London, and there to stay as a prisoner,
till he had made fine and ransom to the King according to his will, And it was
commanded to Master Allen Buxall Constable of the Tower; that he take safe
keeping of him, and so departed the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, and Barons, and
afterward by the commandment of the King, the said John was caused to come
guarded from the Tower to Westminster, before the Great Council, and at other
times examined upon the points of the Petition; the ^ad Willi^m Latimer
answered and said: Tha^ our Lord the King had committed the wardship of the
Manors, Lan^s and Tenements of the said heir, until the Age of the said
heir together with the marriage of the said heir; and as entirely he would
render it into the Kings hands And then before the said Council it was agreed
and assented by them: That the said Manors, Lands and Tenements, and the body
of the heir aforesaid ought to be released in the Kings hand, and delivered to
the said William Latimer, to hold as he held of the said Bishop until the
full Age of the said heir, doing to the King in manner as it was before the
said John surrendered the same; and that the Letters Patents of the King made
to the said Bishop, of the same ward and marriage, and the Letters of the said
Bishop of the same Ward, and marriage made to the said William; and surrendered
to the said John by the said William by durity and menaces, be fully restored
to the said William, and that the Enrolment of the release to the said John by
the said William of the same Ward, and marriage, also by durity and threatening
made as by the said William in the Exchequer, be cancelled void and holden for
naught for ever, saving all times to the King his right in time to come.

Ex. Rot. Parl. 50. E. 3. mem. 2. number. 17.
FIrst, the said Richard Lions Merchant of London, was impeached and accus^d by
the said Commons, of many deceits, (extortions, and other evil deeds committed
by him, against our Lord the King, and his people, as well in the time that he
had been belonging to the House and Council of the King as otherwise, during
the time that he was Farmor of the Subsedies, and Customs of the King. And
more especially for that the said Richard by Covin had between him, and some
of the privy Council of our Lord the King for their singular profit, and
advantage, had procured and gotten many Patents, and Writs of License to be
made to carry great faith and credit. whereby Skins, wools, and other
merchandises were transported other where then to the Stap^e of Callis, against
the Ordinances an^ defenses made in that behalf, concerning the same before
time in Parliament. And for that he had imposed and procured to be put upon
Wools, Skins, Leather, and other Merchandises, certain new Impositions without
assent of Parliament, and those Impositions and Taxes without permission of the
King, or of the High Treasurer of the Realm, having not medlage therewith, and
it was said how he uncertainly took ten shillings in one parcel: and twelve
pence in another parcel of every sack, etc. which mounted to a very great
sum throughout all the time that he had been receiver, or Treasurer: and
likewise of another new imposition of four pence by him made, and put upon
every pound of money upon the Lumbards, and other Merchants for a discharge by
his own proper Authority, and without warrant and assent in Parliament, or
otherwise, and the same imposition of four pence the pound, contrary to piety
collected and kept as to the use of our Lord the King, whereof he paid
nothing. And also of diverse loanes made to the use of the King without cause
necessary, and more especially of one loan which he newly had at London, of
twenty thousand marks, where our Lord the King was bound to pay 30000. marks,
and that by the Counsel of the said Richard, and others in the Kings Court,
who have covenanted with the receivers to have part of the gain, and to be
parties secretly to the said loan: the said Richard takes the said money, and
afterward gains by way of usury of the King his Lord, (of whose Council he
was before) a great quantity of money in great damage and deceit to the King,
and also many other extortions thro^ghout the Realm, and so demeaned himself
against his Council, Treasurer and receiver, concerning the new impositions as
otherwise, taking upon him in all the said matters the Royal Power which was
horrible to rehearse. And also for that our Lord the King had been debtor of
Record to diverse Gentlemen, of many great sums of money; so had the said
Richard by the assent of other privy accomplices in the Kings Court, of the said
Covin, caused many such accounts to be bargained, and compounded sometimes for
the tenth penny, and sometimes for the twentieth, or a hundredth penny, and has
procured the King to pay the debts entire, and so by such his subtilties, and
for his singular profits as well our Lord the King as the said debts, are
wickedly abused: and more especially the Prior of Saint John of Jerusalem in
England, to whom the King was debtor of a certain sum, and the said Richard
has had twenty four Marks thereof for Broakage, to cause the said Prior to
have payment of the remnant: and another time of the Lord Steward to whom the
King was also a debtor, and the said Richard has had of him by the same manner
another great, sum of money, and so of many others in great deceit, slander,
and villainy to the King and his Court. Whereunto the said Richard present in
Parliament, says, that as to all the said Loan made to the King of the twenty
marks aforesaid, he is altogether without other fault, and further says,
that he at no time had profit or gain, nor took any thing at all of the Loan
aforesaid nor of the said money, nor in other things, and that he was ready to
prove by all ways reasonable when they would demand of him: and as to the said
Impositions of ten shillings and twelve pence the sack of wool, etc. and 4.
pence the pound of money, he could not clearly excuse himself that he had not
so levied and collected and thereof taken money his part, that is to say, 12.
pence of every sack of Wool, etc. but that was (he said) at the commandment
of our Lord the King, and at the prayer and assent of the Merchants, who
demanded such License, and as to the remnants of these Impositions he had wholly
delivered them to the receiver of the Kings chamber, and accountable is the
receiver in the Parliament. And the said Richard first of all collected the
same, having a Warrant by which authority he has before showed in Parliament,
under the Seal of the King himself and his Council so to do, and thereupon
were witnesses produced in Parliament, that our Lord the King had expressed a
day for the same. And some Lords there present in Parliament were, that knew
not how or in what manner he was become in such office under the King, (and
what is more) that the King knew him not for his Officer, and that amongst
other Articles, the said Richard made no answer, wherefore the said Richard was
awarded to prison during the Kings pleasure, and distrained to fine and ransom
according to the quantity of his trespass, and that he loose his freedom of
the City of London, and be no more in Office under the King, nor approach to
the Kings Court or Council, and thereupon another time the said Richard was
sent before the Lords of Parliament, where it was said to him that it seemed to
the Lords that his offenses were so great and horrible, that he had not
sufficient wherewith to make satisfaction, and forthwith the said Richard
submitted himself into the favor of the King, his body, his Lands, Tenements,
goods and Chattells, and willed and granted that his body goods and Chattells
should be at the Kings will to give, and as to the Extortions done by the said
Richard, or his Deputies from the time that he was Farmer of the subsedies, or
Customs as beforesaid, it is ordained in Parliament that good Inquiry be made
by sufficient Gentlemen in all the Ports of England.

Ibidem N. 21.
The^. ^at.
ITem William Lord Latimer was impeached and accused by the vote of the said
Earls of deceits, extorsions, g^ievances and other mischiefs by him, and
others of his faction and Covin, during the time he stayed as well under our
Lord the King in Britain, when he was in Office with the King, as otherwise
in England the time that he was Chamberlain, and of the privy Council o^ the
same our Lord the King. First of all concerning that when the said L. Lat. had
bin long Captain of Becherell. and Officer of the late King Edward in
Britain, if before or during the peace or truce it was committed. And
thereupon it was proclaimed and published under the King through Britain that
no English man, nor other Forreigner shall take Wines, Victuals nor other
things of any persons, Towns, Castles nor of others, except they pay presently
for them nor shall they take or ransom any Person, Town, Fortress or other
place, upon pain of what they may forfeit, notwithstanding all which the said
Lord Latimer, and his Lievtenants and Officers caused to be taken by wrong and
violence, of diverse Gentlemen of the Country, much wines and victuals to a
great value, without paying any thing, and likewise ransomed many by oaths, and
in taking and receiving ransoms unto the sum of 4 millions, and 3 thousand
pounds: whereof our Lord the King enjoyed nothing, to the great damage and
villainy of the King and oppression of his people and the said parts, and
against the Proclamation and defense aforesaid, as in a letter made and sealed
with the seals of many Lords of Britain cal^ed Ragman and sent into England
to our Lord the King aforesaid more at large appeared, but the said Ragman
could not be found in any sort, nor any man knew how to say in truth, what
become of it, and yet he at another time was accused thereof, that he had taken
at Becherell and Plimoyson, from thence unduly 153 l. w. of gold, whereof the
King had never any part nor any restitution made thereof, and the parties from
whom those sums were taken, preferred a Bill in Parliament in form as
follows.

It is to is to be remembered that the proofs of parties that were ransomed
at Becherell and Plymoison during the time of Truce, have paid so much to
Master John, port-Constable of Bech^rell for the Lord Latimer, and to William
his son, and to Hugh Middleton Receiver of the said Town or to the Lord
Latimer departed out of Britain.

The yearly sum 40 Franks.
And likewise the said Constables William and Hugh, have received of the
ransomes of such as were wont to be ransomed during the War more moneys than
would have well paid all the Soldiers of the said Town.

The sum 50 Franks.
And likewise the said Country of Britain have paid to the said Constables
William and Hugh, for the death of diverse Gentlemen liege men of our Lord the
King that were killed upon the land of Britt^ine.

The sum 30 Franks.
And likewise the said Constable, and William his son gathered upon the
Country of Britain, to send Monsieur Gakes from Plymouth dates to England.

The sum 12 Franks.
And likewise the said William for that he lost 20 Marks in the Isle of
Garnesey, in a Ship, put a fane and ransom upon the said Becherell.

The sum 1000 Franks.
And likewise Robert Ravenstons boy, had stolen stolen a h^lf salt-seller of
silver, and therefore the Land of Britain was ransomed.

The sum 2 Franks.
And likewise the said Constables William and Hugh Receivers of the said Town,
had received diverse times for victuals sold as salt, wine, beef and other
commodities, to the sum of 1000 Franks, to the great loss of your poor
liege-men, and to the Town of Becherell. For by these extortions which they had
borne and sustained by the horrible necessity of the poor people, and likewise
of the Gentlemen, was the said Town lost. Wherefore they beseech our Lord the
King and his Council, to cause the said Constables William and Hugh to come
and answer the aforesaid receipts, so that our Lord the King may be served of
that which belongs to him, and that your poor liege-men that were in the
defense of the said Town may be paid, their wages for the time that they were
in the said Town, if so it be your pleasure.

And likewise the said Lord Latimer was impeached by the Commons of diverse
loanes, made to the use of the King without cause necessary, to the great loss
and and grievous damage of the King, and more especially of a loan that was
made of late to the use of the King, by the counsel of the Lord Latimer,
Richard Lions and others of his covin of 20 thousand marks, where our Lord the
King was obliged to his Creditors in the said Case to pay again 30 thousand
marks, and that was done by covin of the said Lord Latimer, and others that
were privy with the said Creditors, to have part of the said Gain, and to be
parties to the said deed, or without answering the said loanes; for it was
furnished in special, that the said money was the Kings own, taken out of his
Chamber or Treasury, and also the proper money of the said Lord Latimer and
Richard Lions, who appeared as if oppressed by the said loan, and also for
that by like Covin between him and the said Rich. Lions for their singular
profit and gain he had procured and counseled our L. the King to grant many
Licenses by Patents and Writs, to cause a great quantity of Wools skins, and
Leather and other things, to be carried to parts beyond the Sea, other then to
Callis, against the Ordinances and defenses made before time, in that behalf,
to the destruction of the staple of Callis and of the moneyage there, to the
great damage of the King, and of the Realm of England, and hurt of the Town
of Callis; and likewise that by such covin done between him and the said
Richard Lions for their singular profit, he had caus^d to be put upon the
wools, skins, leather and other marchandises of the Staple, diverse new
Impositions. That is to say of every sack of wool passing other where than to
Callis, by such License 11 s. more against the Statutes and Ordinances thereof
made, and also for that by his singular profit and ill government between our
Lord the King and his Realm, they have had and suffered many other grievances,
losses, damages, and villainies without number, as the loss of the Town of S.
Savior in Normandy, and of the said place of Becherell, and of other
Fortresses which might have been well saved and kept, if the King had been well
counseled.

And also concerning certain Spies and other felons taken and imprisoned by
the King, and after delivered by the Lord Latimer, of his own proper authority,
without the knowledge or pleasure of the King, taking upon him, and incroaching
notoriously in doing these things upon the Royal power.

Whereunto the said Lord Latimer then present in Parliament said: That saving
to him what ought to be saved to him; as to one of the Peers of the Realm, as
well in giving of Judgment as otherwise in time to come, if please our Lord
the King, and the Lords assembled, he might be put to answer to him, which in
especial would accuse him of any of the matters aforesaid, and afterward for
that no especial person would openly accuse the said Lord of the same things
in Parliament, whereof the Commons would maintain the said Accusations against
the said Lord Latimer, in accusation of his person and Declaration of his fame,
he said, that true it was, that he was Captain of Becherell and that such a
Peace was made in Britain under the King, and that an inquiry was made and
put in writing and ^ealed with many Seals of the Lords of Britain, and sent
to our Lord the King in England, which enquest is there called Ragman, but he
says that this Enquest was made by the Brittons and French, which would not
have our Lord the King, nor any Englishman for their Governor, and falsely to
have destroyed the said Lord, and he says now (as other times he has said) to
our Lord the King when he was in like manner impeached thereof before the King
himself, that all the profits, which he at any time received by himself or
otherwise in Britain, passed not in all things the sum of 10000 l.
accounted in the same sum of 10000 l. all the profits which he received for
the ransom of Viscount of Roane and of other prisoners which he took at the
Battle of Crey and this he is ready to prove by all reasonable ways that one
of his estate and degree ought to do, and he says, that it seems by the Law
of Nations, that the said Ragman is not to be allowed and that it was done by
the enemies of the King and Realm, (as aforesaid) and likewise made out of the
Realm, and that therefore all men ought not to hold him of the less credit or
Reputation. And soon after the Commons having this answer of Submission prayed
the Lords of Parliament in behalf of the King, that the 10000 l. execution be
had forthwith against the said Lord Latimer, as of a thing past by the said
Submission thereof as he had knowledged at another time, when he was impeached
thereof, and that the said Submission be made by him, as it ought to be, nor
that any remonstrance or agreement be made to the King, nor pardon, nor other
thing gotten, by which he may be discharged. And the Lords answered, that the
said Answer should be reported to our Lord the King, and thereupon right shall
be done for the King and as to the said Bill preferred before in Parliment
concerning such men as he made his Deputies or Lievtenants at Becherel and
Plimoyson, the said Lord Latimer faith, that he is altogether innocent and
without blame, even at the time that the said Ragman was so made and sent to
our Lord the King. And the Lords answered thereunto, that they would take
advice of the Kings Council, and thereupon right should be done on every part.
As to the loanes made to the use of our Lord the King without necessary cause,
he answers and says, that he knew of none without cause very necessary and
greatly behoovefull. And to that, that the intent is submitted to be false
covin or other disloyalty for profit, or to have part, he says, that he is
altogether innocent and not guilty, and that he never delivered nor took any
money or other thing of the King, nor of any other to make the said pretended
Loan and that he was ready to prove by all ways that a man ought to do. And
as to the Patents and Writs made and granted for the passing of woolls, skins,
leather, etc. otherwhere than to the Staple of Callis, he says, That those
licenses were commenced before his time, with the King as well at Genoa and
Venice, as other where, and further says, that if nothing thereof had been
done till his time, the same ha^ not been done, nor was persued by his counsel
only but by him with others, and that the^e accrewed thereby by virtue of the
Kings Grant, great profit to the King, Whereof he was answered in his chamber.
And as to the new Impositions, the same were never put upon the woolls, skins,
and leather by him of late, nor upon the Country in any part, but only the
subsidies thereof granted in Parliament, and that at the instance and prayer of
those who demanded such licenses, which paid voluntary and without any
compulsion 11 s. the sack, that is to say, 10 s. to the use of the King, and
the 12 d. to the use of the Clerks writing and persuing the s^id Licenses,
which moneys he has not yet put in certain; and further says, that he took
nothing thereof to his own profit by himself nor any other, and that he is
ready to prove by all reasonable ways and thereupon it was witnessed in
Parliament by M. Richard S^roope Chancellor. late Treasurer of our L. the King,
that Will. Walworth of London in time when the said loan was made to the King
of the said 20 thousand marks, the said Will. Walworth proffered in behalf of
himsel^e and his companions merchants of the said Staple of Callis, to the Lord
Latimer to make a loan to our Lord the King of 10000 l without repaying any
thing for increase by usury or otherwise by covenant so that they might be
repayed the said 10 thousand pounds in their proper hands of the Subsidies due
to the King, of their wool, etc. then next to be passed to Callis, and that
the King should covenant and grant that no such Licenses shall be henceforth
granted to carry woolls, etc. out of the Kingdom, further then the Staple of
Callis. To which the said Lord Latimer answers and says, that he had no such
proffer of them and the other affirming the contrary, wondered that the said
Will. Walworth should make such a profer. And as to the loss of the said Towns
and Forts, and the deliverance of some spies or felons so imprisoned the said
Lord also says that he is not guilty and that he will prove and avow by all
reasonable ways that he ought to do. And thereupon many other words and reasons
shown and pleas as well in fu^l Parliament as otherwise before the Prelates
and Lords only as well for the part of our Lord the King, as for the part of
the said Lord Latimer, and many examinations in print as well as otherwise,
aft^r full deliberation thereof had, Judgment was rendered in Parliament
against the said L. Latimer in these words that follow.

For that the said Lord Latimer is found in full Parliament in default by his
singular government and counse^l against the profit of the King and his Realm.
That is to say, of diverse loa^es procured unto the Kings loss without
necessary cause, and also of Patent^ made in destruction of the Staple of
Callis, and als^ of diverse Impositions put upon woolls against the Statute of
Parliament in that behalf lately made, he is awarded by the Prelates and Lords
in full Parliament to prison, to be kept in Ward of the Ma^shall, and to make
ra^som at the Kings will, whereupon the said Commons beseech the King for that
he is found in such defaults by his singular Counsels, he being in all Offices
of the King and especially one of the Kings Privy Counsel throughout all that
time it was requested that the King would be pleased to grant that the said
Lord might go under bail, whereupon the King willed and granted that the said
Lord Latimer should find in Parliament certain Prelates, Lords and others
during the Parliament to have his body before the King and the Lords to answer
further to the Articles whereof he was ^o arrested under a certain pain and
form comprised in a Schedule annexed. And under such surety, the Marshall of
England let him go at liberty.

Ibidem N. 31.
ITem Will^am Ellis of great Jermouth, is impeached and accused in this present
Parliament in diverse manners first, viz. by the surmise of the Commons made to
him, that the said William whilst he was Farmer to our Lord the King of his
pety Customs in the Port of great Jermouth, and Deputy of Richard Lions
Farmour of the Subsidies of 6 d. the pound, granted by our Lord the King of all
Marchandizes passing out of the Kingdom, and entering in the same for the
safeguard of the Sea, and of the Merchants passing by Sea, and of their
Merchandise, he did take by him and his servants, as well English as of
Strangers in the said Ports and members thereof, by way of extortion, by color
of his said Offices, many great sums of money, and otherwise that he ought
not to have done, in great prejudice, slander of the King, and damage of the
said Realm, and to the oppression and wrong of the Merchants aforesaid.

And the said William Ellis present in Parliament, says, that true it is, that
he is one of the Farmours of the said pety Customs of the Merchants passing
and coming, saving the purport of the Commissions thereof made, without that
that he took the same, or caused any thing to be taken by extortion, more than
was clearly due to the King, and that he was ready to prove to the King: by
whatsoever way way he ought to do, and the Commons replying said, that the
said William confessed to them in the Common assembly in the Chapter house
within the Abbey of Westminster the day before, that he had received the said
33 l. and prayed that against his own ackowledgement so openly and before so
many persons he might not at other times be received to say the contrary. And
thereupon the said Commons brought in Parliament John Botild and Willi. Cooper
of Leiwstoft and two others that affirmed they had paid to the said William
Ellis by the said Marchan^ of Scotland, the said 3^ l. for full Inform^tio^ of
the matter aforesaid, which John and William Cooper being thereof examined in
Pa^liament acknowledged that they were obliged to our Lord the King and to the
said William Ellis by their obligations or letters obligatory in the said 33
pounds together with the said Scot, which was their host, and paid at a
certain day for the said Subsidy of 6 d. the pound due of all the marchandizes
in the said ship and the truth was that the said Scot discharged nothing of all
the matters aforesaid, at the day of payment, but that they paid to the said
William Ellis the 33 l. and thereupon the said Commons prayed Judgment upon the
same said William Ellis who said, that although that he had received the said
33 pounds of John Botild, and of the other aforesaid be received it not but as
supposing the same a gift, and that without c^ndition, and that as often as
concerning the ^ame he should have a Writ or other Commandment of our Lord
the King he would make deliverance thereof, which otherwise he would not do
voluntarily. Item, afterward the said John Botild and William Cooper did put
in the Bills in form which follows. To our Thrice doughty Lord the King and to
his Sage Council, Shows John Botild of Lewistoft that the monday next after
the Ascension of our Lord, in the year of the reign of our Lord the King that
now is, the nine and fortieth that there was chased by tempest in Kirk la
Rode, one Cockboat of Gotham in Pruse, whereof the Masters name was Henry Luce
charged with diverse Marchandizes of the Merchants of Pruse, that is ^o say,
Freeze, and other marchandizes. And the same day William Savage Clerk and
servant to Will. Ellis, by commandment of the said William Ellis, took of the
said Cockboat for the marchandizes (neither discharged the same from paying
custom then) 17 nobles and a last of leather, the price of the last 10 pounds
16 s. at Lewistoft before the boat went out of Kirk la Rode, to the great
danger of the said Merchants. And because that the said William Ellis knew that
Will. Cooper would come to this Parliament and show this grievance and others in
aid of the Merchants, and also set forth how the great Charter Huc. Ang. might
be amended in aid of the whole Realm, the said Will. by his false suggestion,
caused the said Will. Cooper to be arrested and cast in prison, for the space of
3 weeks: May it please our thrice doubty L. the King and his sage Council, to
make remedy thereof in work of charity. Which Bills passed in absence of the
said Will. Ellis, he says, that as to the said 17 nobles and skins, called
leather, he could not swear for him, nor for any of the said Merchants of
Pruse, nor other whatsoever, and the said John Botild and Will. Cooper affirming
the contrary; at last it was said by the Lords in Parliament, that those Bills
touching the entry of the leather, were now in the Kings Bench for Trial. And
as to the said Imprisonment, the said William Ellis says, for that he was
warned in coming to London by many sufficient persons, that the said John, and
Will. Cooper, with 36 other persons of Lewist. did lie in wait for the person of
the said Will. Ellis at Wickham market in Suffolk and going there in the high
way of Gerneith from London, at such time as the said W. was going toward
London, carrying with him a great sum of the K. money of the Customs and
Subsidies aforesaid, and for that the said W. Ellis is awarded to prison to
make fine and ransom to our said L. the K. and it is awarded to either of the
said John and William Cooper twenty pounds for their damages, and dispences
during their said Imprisonment, had and suffered. Also it is awarded that the
said Commissions be made to sufficient Gentlemen, to enquire of William Ellis,
and of all others Deputies of the said Richard Lions throughout the Realm.

Parl. Anno 1. R. 2. n. 32. and 33.
ITem William Fitzhugh Goldsmith of London preferred his bill in Parliament,
in form as follows: To our thrice excellent and thrice noble Lord the K. and
to his thrice Honorable and thrice sage Council shown the poor Commons of
the mystery, and company of Goldsmiths in the City of London: that John
Chichester, John Botesham, and many other Gentlemen, and ric^ goldsmiths of
that mystery in the same City, by their compassing and subtle devising
deceitfully have caused many of the said company to enseale severally diverse
obligations, and those who refused so to do were taken and imprisoned and in
danger of death by many grievous threatenings of the said goldsmiths, who had
sealed severally diverse obligations as their poor companions had done before,
to cause that the said poor Goldsmiths should not buy, nor sell to any
Merchant Cutteller, Ieweller, Vphoulster, nor to any other forraigner nor
Denizen, any goods of their working except they sold the same at a treble
value, and that none of them should carry gilt, nor any other thing of gold or
silver to any Lady or other person to make profit thereof, and if they did
that the pain comprised in the said Obligations should incur upon them, as
before the major Sheriff and Aldermen of the s^id City, as by the confessions
of the said rich Goldsmiths it was proved, whereupon it was unreasonably
debated, so that it was put by good mediation and advice to the said Mayor, and
many of the Aldermen of the City: the said rich and poor Goldsmiths put
themselves in Arbitrament of three good men, for a final accord of all the
debates and quarrels between themselves, which Arbitrators assented upon
certain points rehearsed to the parties aforesaid, and ordained the same
points to be affirmed and enrolled in the Parliament for ever, and thereupon
the said parties were released. But notwithstanding this Agreement the said
rich Goldsmiths would not assent, nor suffer that the s^id points be enrolled
and holden as the said Arbitrators adjudged: And furthermore by their
procurement many mischiefs do from day to day arise to the wrong of the said
poor Commoners so far as they are like to be undone (which God defend) and
have purchased likewise a new Charter against the said agreement, to the great
decay and hurt of the said poor Commons: may it please you (thrice gracious
Lords) to ordain and command that the said Accord b^e affirmed, and holden
finally for good, and that the said Charter and other things, tending to the
prejudice and loss of the said poor Goldsmiths, be made void for Gods sake
and in the work of Charity. And thereupon the said John Chichester and John
Botesham, and many other Goldsmi^hs of London came i^ Parliament, and havi^g
heard the said Bill, it was forthwith demanded of the said William Fitzhugh,
if he would maintain the said Bill, and find pledge to do, and answer that
which the Law demands, who said that he would do so, but af^erwards he could
not bring in his surety, nor pleadge to answer the said Bill, so was the said
William Fitz Hugh commanded to the Tower by the award of the Lords in
Parliament.

Ibidem Anno 41.
ITem the said 24. day of December: during yet this present Parliament. Alice
Piere
Alice ^ierce was caused to come in the same Parliament before the Prelates and
Lords, for to answer certain matters, which by Letters should be surmised
against her in the Kings name, and thereupon by commandment of the Prelates
and Lords of the said Parliament, Master Richard Scroope Treasurer, Steward of
the house of our Lord the King rehearsed in Parliament, in the presence of the
said Alice, an Ordinance made in Parliament holden at Westminster; the monday
next after the feast of Saint George, the year of the reign of the King
Uncle of our Lord the King that now is, the 50. in these words, For that
complaint is made to the King that many women have persued in the Courts of the
King, diverse businesses and quarrels by way of maintenance, and to have a
share: which thing displeases the King to defend, and that h^nceforth no woman
shall do so; and more especially Alice Pierce upon pain of whatsoever the
said Alice may forfeit, and to be banished out of the Realm, and after this
rehearsal made the said Steward surmised to the said Alice; that it seemed to
the Lords of Parliament that she had incurred the pain comprised in the said
Ordinance, and had forfeited against the said Ordinances in certain points,
and more especially in two, viz. that she stayed Master Nicholas Dagworth
Chancellor, when he was ordained by the Council of the late King to go into
Ireland, for certain urgent businesses which should have been profitable to
our late King, and his Realm; the said Alice after the said Ordinance made as
aforesaid, persuaded the said King in his Court at Havering, that at her
singular persuit and procurement, the said Nicholas was countermanded and his
voyage stayed from all that Island, to the great damage of our said late King
and his Realm.

Item, That whereas Richard Lions for misprisions w^ereof he was convicted at
the said Parliament, holden the said 50. year of our late King Edward,
submitted himself in the Parliament into the favor of the said King (that is
to say) his Body, all his Lands and Tenements, and he gave some of them to the
Earl of Cambridge, and some of them to Master Thomas Woodstock now Earl of
Buckingham, for term of their lives: the which our late K. after having pity
of the said Richard, was willing by the assent of his Council to show him
favor, and to pardon him the Imprisonment of his body, and to restore him to
certain of his Lands, goods, and chattells aforesaid, which pardon seemed to
our late King and his Council t^ be a grace sufficient, notwithstanding the
said Alice so persuaded the said late King in his Court at Sheene, that by the
singular persuit, and procurement of the said Alice, our late King Edward
granted to the said Richard, all his Lands, goods, Tenements and chattels
aforesaid, together with the said Tenements which he had given to the said
Earls for term of their lives as before said, and amongst the same pardoned
the said Richard 300. l. of certain Arrerages due by the said Richard in the
Exchequer, and also granted him a thousand marks of his Treasure to be
^eceived of the said Lady, which persuit and procurement are contrary to the
Ordinance aforesaid. And the said Steward demanded of the said Alice how she
would excuse her self of those Articles? which Alice did answer and say, that
she was not guilty of those Articles, and that she is ready to show and prove
by the Testimony of the said Master John Ipr^ then Steward of the said King
Edward, and William Street then controller of his house Allen Buxall Knight,
and Nicholas Carrein Keeper of the privy Seal of the said King and others
that did then belong to the said King, and afterward from him to the time
supposed, that she committed forfeiture, and that they can discover the truth.
And thereupon day is given unto the said Alice until Wednesday next, by the
Pr^lates, and Lords of the Parliament, and it was ordained and assented that
those Articles shall be tried by witnesses and by enquest of those that were of
the household of the late King Edward, whereby the truth may better be known,
and thereupon were certain persons examined before the Earl of March, the
Earl of Arundell, the Duke of Lancaster, the Earl of Cambridge, and the Earl
of Warwick; that is to say first Master Roger Beauchampe late Chamberlain of
the said King Edward, sworn upon the holy Evangelists, and diligently examined
touching the Countermand of Master Nicholas Dagworth, and upon the other
Article concerning the said Kings pardon, and favor to Richard Lions, says
upon his Oath, that in presence of the Lady Alice Pierce a Bill was delivered
to him, which Bill he took, and after he had understood that the same
contained the calling back of Master Nicholas Dagworth from Ireland, for that
he was an en^my to Master William Winsor, to that which the Bill supposed he
answered, that he durst not prefer it to the King for that the Counsel had
ordained the contrary, and the said Alice requested him and said that he might
safely deliver it to the King, and presently the King demanded of what matter
they discoursed, and the said Master Roger answered of a Bill that does
contain such business, and forthwith when the King had understood the Bill,
he answered that the Petition was reasonable, and when Master Roger replied
the Council had ordained to the contrary, the King answered that he himself
was agreeing, and that yet it seemed the Bill was reasonable, and commanded him
that the said Master Nicholas be caused ^o be called back, which was likewise
done, but what day or month it was he remembers not, and as to the matter of
Richard Lions the said Mr. Roger says, that he was Chamberlain but an hour,
and so knows nothing more then he has said.

Item Master Lanc. diligently examined before the Committees says, that he
came one day to Havering, and found the Lady Alice Pierce there, and forthwith
Master Roger Beauchampe showed him Billa, and after the King understood the
matter, he said thus that it seemed not reason, that one en^mie should be
judge of another, and the said Duke answered that he was come between them,
but it was so that the said Ma^ter Nicholas was sent for the profit of the
Land, and of all the Realm; and therefore it was ordained before the King that
the said Master Nicholas and Master William do come before the Council, and
if the said Master William could prove any cause for the Enmity between them;
that then the said Master Nicholas shall not go if he well can prove such
enmity; otherwise the Ordinance of the Council made in that behalf shall stand
in force: to which thing the King did well assent for that time, but forthwith
the King was assailed in his chamber by the said Lady Alice, and there came in
the said Duke and prayed the King that he would not suffer in any sort, that
the said Mr. Nicholas be called back, who answered, that it should be no
otherwise then it was before ordained before the King, and when he came in that
behalf to crave a testimonial favor, he could not obtain it, and the next
morning when the said Duke did his obeisance to the King in his bed. The King
himself commanded upon his blessing that he suffer not in any manner that the
said Master Nicholas go into Ireland, The Ordinance thereof made the day
before to the contrary notwithstanding, and likewise the said Master Nicholas
was countermanded, and as to the Article of Richard Lions, he says in his
conscience that the said Alice was principal promotrix of the said business:
but he was not present when it was done.

Item Master Philip de Bath sworn, and diligently examined, says, as to the
Article of Master Nicholas Dagworth, that he heard not the said Dame Alice
speak to the King of the same matter, but he heard in the Kings house the said
Lady Alice make a great murmur and say, that it was no reason nor Law, that
the said Master Nicholas who was an enemy to the aforesaid Master William,
should go into Ireland to enquire, and do Justice against him, and more he
know^s not how to say in this matter. But as to the Article of the said Richard
he says, that he was one day at Sheene when the said Richard was brought
before the King, and that he was called into the Kings chamber to hear those
things that were to be done, and when he understood a little of the matter he
would not stay in the chamber; and further he says that there were then in the
Kings Chamber, the said Lady Alice, Nicholas Currein; Master Allen Buxall,
Walter Walsham and many others; and says that she was in the Court; and that
the said Lady Alice was an aider and friend in the business.

Item Nicholas Currein sworn as aforesaid: and diligently examined says, that
he was commanded by the King to come to Sheer, and there he found Rich: Lions:
which Richard and Nicholas were commanded to come before the King to his bed,
and there they found the Lady Alice Pierce sitting at the side of the bed: and
there it was shown that the King would pardon the said 300. l. to which he was
yet bound to the King, as of the arrerages of his account in the Exchequer, and
also the King would give to the said Richard 1000. marks of his Treasure, and
further would make full restitution of the Tenements which had bin given to his
sons of Cambridge, and Woodstock as before said. And thereupon the King
commanded the said Nicholas to say from him his pleasure to his said s^nnes,
but he says that he remembers not i^ that matter were shown at that time
before the King, by relation of any other person, or by the Bill of the said
Richard there read, or otherwise by the said Richard himself: the said
Nicholas remembers himself very well: that he requested to come before the
King, who caused to come from behind ^h^ curtains Master Allen Buxall, and
others Knights, and Bishops which then were there to testify that which the
King had said to the said Nicholas in the said commandments and so it was
done, and all the commandments of the King were r^hearsed in presence of all
those men.

And as to the matter of Master Nicholas Dagworth he says, that he knows
nothing but that Master Roger Beauchampe sent him to countermand the said
Master Nicholas.

Item Master Allen Buxall sworn in like manner, and diligently examined says,
that one day at Sheen after the last Parliament he was called to the King,
where he found the Lady Alice Pierce, Nicholas Currein, and many other
Knights, and Esquires which came with him, and there it was rehearsed by the
said Nicholas, how the King had showed favor to Richard Lions of his
Tenements, which were holden by the Earl of Cambridge, and Master Thomas of
Woo^stock, and had given him a 1000. marks of his Treasury: And as to that
which was don, the said Dame Alice Pierce prayed the same Mr. Allen, that he
would declare to the said Earls the Kings will, and his chargings upon the
blessing of their father, to cease to extend the Tenements of Ma^ter Allen, and
that they do it voluntarily if the King commanded them to do so. And
forthwith at the instance of the said Alice the King commanded, and it was also
done. And as to the Article of Master Nicholas Dagworth he says, that he
knows nothing but that he heard the said Lady Alice say many tim^s, that it
is not reason nor Law that the said Mr. Nicholas who was enemy to Master
William Windsor, should be sent into Ireland to make Inquisition of him or
against him.

Item, Will: Street late controller of the Kings house, sworn in like manner,
and diligently examined says, that he was one day at Havering, when William ^f
York spoke to the K. of William Windsor, in presence of the Lady Alice Pierce
for to disturb the passage of Master Ni^holas, and the said Lady Alice said,
that it ^as not reason that one Enemy should be Judge of another, And moreover
the said William Stre^t says in his consci^nce, that the said Lad^ Alice was
principal and motrix of the said cause, as he verily believes. And as to the
Article of Richard Lions he knows nothing before it was all finished.

Item, John Beverill sworn in like manner and diligently examined says, that
he heard not at any time the said Lady Alice speak to the King concerning
neither the one Article nor the other, and that she kept her self well from
him, that she spoke nothing in his presence, but he thinks in his conscience
that she was the promotrix in the said business, for he knows no other which
could have followed that matter, and notwithstanding they were caused to come
before the said Duke, and the said Earls, Mr. Robert Beauchampe, Master Allen
Buxall, Master John Burle, Mr. Philip de la Page, Mr. John Foxley, and Thomas
Bar Knight, Nich: Currein, John Beauchampe of Holt, John Beverly, George
Felborough, John Salisbury, William Street, Pierce Cornwall, Thomas Lurden,
Lolvin Legate Esquires of the house of the said late King Edward: which do say
upon their oaths that the said Alice was principal promotrix to the said
King, at his Court a^ Havering, about the Feast of All Saints in the 50. year
of his Reign concerning that Article, touching the revocation of the said
Nicholas Dagworth, and for that she was committed.

Item as to the Article touching Richard Lions, they know well that the said
Alice was well willing, councelling and aiding to the said business prevailing
with the said King at Shee^ in the month of May last past, and for that she is
found guilty in the same impeachment, and the Lords of Parliament, that were at
Parliament when the said Ordinance was made, remember, that their intention was
witnessed, and bearing the force of a Statute, and by the general words
(whatsoever the said Alice may forfeit) extend as well to the forfeiture of
Lands and Tenements as goods and Chattells and all other possessions
considering the damages and villainies by her done to the King and to the
Realm for that it was in effect to restrain, and punish the said Lady Alice
only (wherefore it is awarded in this present Parliament, that the said
Ordinance have the force and effect according to the intent aforesaid, that she
be banished out of the Realm, and her Lands and Chattels, Tenements and
possessions as well in demean, as in reversion be forfeited to the King, and
seized into his hand and it is the Intention of the King, and of the Lords, and
of the Ordinances assented to in the same Parliament, that all the Lands
whereof she has taken the profit, or bargained to her own profit be forfeited,
because of the fraud which may be presumed in which she is most abounding,
for which c^use the same shall (...) ^or^eited to the King, and seized as the
other Lands. And it is the Intention of the King and of the Lords, that this
O^dinance and award made by the King for such odious things in th^s especial
case, which may extend to a thousand other persons shall in no other case but
this be taken in Example. Likewise it is ordained and assented, that
notwithstanding the said forfeiture if she purchased any Lands or possessions
by fo^ce or dures; Be it by fine or by deed in pais or deed enrolled, or
otherwise, that the purchase be holden for nothing, and that the parties which
perceiv themselves aggrieved may have remedy by process in Chancery, and by
advice of the GRANDIES of the Council right shall be done to the parties; and
restitution made according to the case demanded, so that the purchases made
bona fide be not made void nor disanulled b^ any manner of way. Et istud
rotulum sic factum; and scriptum tradidit and libera^ it Edmundus Bradwell
Clericus de Corona etc hoc in Parliamento assig. Clerico. Parliamenti.

Ex. Rot Parliam. Anno 7. R. 2. N 11.
ITem It is to be understood that the 23. day of May, there was present,
Cavendish against pool C^ancellor.
one John Cavendish of London pri^oner in this Parliament before the Commons of
England, in their Assembly in presence of some Prelates, and Lords temporal
there being, and afterward before all the Prelates and Lords being in this
Parliament, and prayed the Lords, that for Go^s s^ke they would hasten for the
peace, and safety of his life that he may have iufficient surety of the peace
of those whe^eof he complained, and especially demanded surety of the Peace of
Master Nicholas de la Poole Chancellor of England, and this request to him was
granted, and thereupon by Commandments of the Lords aforesaid, the said Master
Nicholas there present found Sureties to be peaceable toward the said John,
that is to say the Earl of Stafford: and the Earl of Salisbury: and the said
John rehearsed how at the last Parliament he had made persuit by one Savill
against Gibbon, Mansfield, Robert de Parry: John Hawkins, and WILLIAM HORSMAN
to have Restitution of certain goods, and marchandizes of great value left
upon the Sea, in default of the said Gibbon, Robert John, and William at the
time when he had undertook the safeguard of the Sea; and of the marchandizes
passing and coming from Sea, for the time against all Enemies out of the power
Royal, which Bill was endorsed in the said Parliament he confessed, and
acknowledged in the Chancery for to discontinue and determine the matter, by
composition according to Law and reason.

And further the said John says, that he being a Fishmonger has preferred at
the same Pa^liament his Bill, for that a Clerk and familiar of the Chancellor
whose name was John Otler, undertook that the said Fishmonger should the
better have good help in his case of the said Chancellor before whom his
business depended, who was to do Justice to high and low: which Clerk demanded
copies of his Bills, and demeaned the whole business that he delivered to him,
which when he had viewed and understood, he promised that for 40. pounds to
the use of his said Lord, and 4. pounds to his own proper use, he should have
his business wel^ and graciously dispatched by his Lord without difficu^^y, and
upon this promise the said John Cave^dish was well agreed, and granted to pay
him the said 44. l. in manner as he should demand the same, but for that he
said he had not the sum ready in his hand to pay, he obliged himself
voluntarily to make payment well and lawfully at a certain day, and ^o it was
done, and afterward the said Fishmonger delivered to the Clerk certain
quantity of Herring, Sturgeon, and other fish to the value of 9. or 10. marks,
to the use and behoof of the said Chancellor, in part of payment of the 40. l.
aforesaid, and 3. else of Scarlet, which cost him 32. s. he delivered to the
said Clerk in part of payment of the said 40. l. which he promised. And
further the said Cavendish says, that although he had don so much and promised
to give more to one person and another always, yet he found not long
friendshi^, aid f^vour, nor succor in effect in the person of the said
Chancellor in the said suit for all his cost, and also he says, that a good
part of all sorts came with him to the house of the said Chancellor, to
discourse of his matter where he found there his Adversaries before him, where
he encountered them in presence of the said Chancellor: but if the said
Chancellor be to be punished for committing of this Affair, or no, he knows
not, God knows, but he says that true it is, that at a certain day past the
said Chancellor caused him to be paid for his Fishes, and that he cancelled
the Obligation, and that the same was cancelled in bounty, and conscience; or
otherwise to shun a slander and reproach in the case, he knows not now to
say, but says for certain, that for the three Else of Scarlet, he was not
yet paid, and thereupon the said Chancellor first of all before the LORDS and
COMMONS answers, and says, That in this affair, and of all this matter he
is innocent in every degree; And first of all as to that that is surmised of
him by the Accusation he now says, that the said Fishmonger had not been
delayed, nor is yet delayed by the said Chancellor, and that right and Justice
is done to him in the said Suit, and that the Accusation contains no Truth,
and the said Chanc^llor voucheth to witness all the Judges, and Sergeants of
the Realm who were present in the Chancery many times when the said matter was
pleaded between the parties, which suit is pleaded to issue, whereof part
lies in Judgment, and part remains untried, so that nothing now remains
to do, but to render Judgment there of what remains in Judgment and
Traverses thereof have been put in for difficulty, and for other cause, and
that it is not Truth of the said Chancellor, that the Fishmonger has now said,
that he could not have Justice and that he is unjustly delayed.

And as to the remnant of the Accusation now made, the said Chancellor swears
by the SACRAMENT of JESUS CHRIST that he is utterly innocent, and more thereof
did never come into his Cognizance, but in manner, as he has said which is
thus and says, that of late he had speech with the Officers of his house to
know the Estate thereof, and for ordinary payment of those to whom for the
dispences of his said House he was a debtor, and there first of all, and
before his Officers he demanded how such a quantity of Herring, and Sturgeon
was brought into his said house, and not by way of bargained-for provision, and
in what manner the same was spent in his house, whereat he marvelled because he
knew not the said Fishmonger, and there withal he reckoned with his said
Officers how such an obligation was also made by the said Fishmonger, who had a
general suit depending before him, and as soon as the heads of this matter
was understood by him, he was much grieved, and in passion did curse and
swear to his said Officers, that he would not eat nor drink within his said
house, until the said Fishmonger was paid for that which he had sent into his
house aforesaid, and the Obligation was utterly cancelled and defaced, and
thereupon presently was the said Fishmonger at his commandment caused to come
in presence of the said Chancellor in the Chapel within his house, where he
stayed for the present time when he was in London, in the same Chapel where
our Lord Jesus Christ's Sacrament was continually, he swore by the same
Sacrament in presence of his said Clerk, and of the said Fishmonger that he was
never bound to do that which his said Clerk had undertaken, and that he touched
nothing of the said Commodities before reckoned, nor had knowledge thereof in
private or in public, but by relation of those other Officers in manner
aforesaid, and that he was never a partner to the said Covenant made thereof
in any manner, nor caused the said Clerk to take the same Obligation, but
caused the said Fishmonger to be paid for his Fish aforesaid. And the said
Chancellor swore by the Sacrament of Jesus Christ, that his excuse now given,
in contained full truth, and that he is ready to prove in whatsoever manner it
pleases our Lord the King, and his Noble Lords of the Realm there present to
ordain, and the said Chancellor prays to the Lords aforesaid, that they have
due consideration to the Estate that he bears within the Realm by his
Office of Chancellor; that it may so please them to ordain him due remedy and
Justice of the said Fishmonger, concerning the defame and grievous slander
which he had brought upon his person in Parliament, which is the most high
Court of the Realm, and could not accuse the said Chancellor of any thing in
his complaint, but only the Clerk of the said Lord. And for that the said
Fishmonger disclaimeth in part, his said Accusation, and so denies by his own
mouth that he had not any bargain with the person of the said Chancellor but
with his said Clerk.

And also for that as well the said Clerk as the said Fishmonger thereupon
examined, acknowledged that the aforesaid Obligation was made to the said Clerk
only, and in his name without naming the Person of the said Chancellor in any
part, and that the same Clerk upon his Oath made in the case had fully excused
his Master the said Chancellor, that he was not knowing of the said
Obligation, nor of the Covenant aforesaid otherwise then before set forth.

And for that also his said Officers Gibbon, Robert, and William were
personally in this Parliament, and examined upon their Alleageances to say the
Truth of their part in this case answered expressly, that they never gave any
thing, nor promised to give reward to the said Chancellor in private, nor
openly by themselves, or any other person in the World: the Lords aforesaid
^old the person of the said Chancellor for excused of whatsoever was comprised
in the Accusation aforesaid.

And thereupon the said Chancellor prayed again to the LORDS there, for that
as well the said Fishmonger had disavowed his Accusation in part, and for that
he might every way be excused thereof for any thing that could appear to the
Judgment of every discreet person which hears the said Accusation, that for
those words, which the said Fishmonger had put in his Bill, he the said
Fishmonger might be arrested until he had found sufficient sureties to tender
him that which should be adjudged upon this matter, and especially upon the
false slander aforesaid, which he had drawn upon him. And thereupon it was
commanded by the Lords, That as well the said Fishmonger, as the said Clerk
should be committed, and so they were committed to prison, (...) ^fterwards
they were let go at large* That is to say, the said Fishmonger by the
maine-prise of Thomas Spicer and Steven Skinner, who were obliged body for bo^y
to have the said Fishmonger from day to day, before the Lords aforesaid, or
before whatsoev^r Judges should be assigned: And afterward, f^r that the
Parliament was drawing to an end, and the Lords were also greatly busied there
amongst other great businesses of the Realm. The said Suit by the Pa^liament
with all things thereof, was referred to the Judges of the Kings Bench, to be
heard and determined, as well for our Lord the King as for the parties.

In Schedula. Record. fact. apud Westminsterium per Justiciarios, etc.
ET postea die Martis proximo post octab. Trin. viz. 14 die Junii Anno regni
Domini Regis R. 2. post Conquestum 7 Robertus Tresilian capitalis Justiciarius
in Banco ipsius Regis, Robertus Belknap capitalis Justiciarius in Communi
Banco, and Roger. Fulthropp unus Justiciarius in Communi Banco vigore
Commissionis Parliamenti dicti Domini Regis, apud Novum Sarum ultimo tento
fact. and authoritate ejusdem Commissionis unde in rotulo Parliamenti predicti
mentio facta est specialis, contra quendam Iohannem Cavendish de London
Fishmonger qui Parliamento praedicto primo, viz. Coram communitate regni Ang.
Congregat. and postmodum alia vite coram magnatibus ejusdem regni in eodem
Parliamento, de Michali de Poole Milite, Cancellario dicti regni, and Iohanne
Ottre Clerico ipsius Cancellarii de diversis misprisionibus sibi per eosdem
factis, ut asseruit, graviter querelavit; and ipsum Cancellarium per hoc
multipliciter accusavit and aefamavit processi, in hunc modum.

Imprimis, viz. ipsum Iohann. Cavendish, Coram iisdem Iusticiariis apud
Westminst. dicto 14 die Iunii, assedentibus sibi tunc ibid. Hugone Seagrave
Milite, Thesaurario Angl. Magistro Walter de Shirlawe, Custode privati Sigilli,
Iohanne Wal^ham, Custode Rotulorum Cancellariis, nec non Waltero Clopton,
Willielmo Richell, and Iohanne de Lockon serviend. ipsius Regis venire
fecerunt, qui ibidem comparens and de accusatione sua praedict. and fact. and
in Rotulo Parliamenti praedicti, before irrotuletur, cujus mat^ria, una cum
responsionibus per Dominum Can^ellarium in eodem Parliamento, adhuc in
excusationem suam datis prout continetur in Rotulo praedic pro majore part
recitat. coram ipso Iohanne de Cavendish, tu^c ibidem allocatum fuit per
Iusticiarios praedic. and super hoc quaesitum fuit ab eodem, si quid haberet
pro se vel ulterius dicere sciret, quare ipse poenam in Statuto contra
hujusmodi defamatores edito subire non debeat maxim cum Idem Cancellarius se
in Parliamento illo excusavit and omni alio modo possibili se inde excusare est
paratus, qui quidem Ioh. ad hoc respondebat and dixit quod ipse nunquam
personam dicti Cancellarii in Parliam. illo defamavit, nec aliquid sinistrum
sive inhonestum de persona ipsius Cancellarii clam vel palam in Parliamento
ille dixit, vel alias affirmavit quovis modo sed dicit quod quicquid per eum in
hac part fuerit hoc solum de praefato Ioh. Ottre Clerico ipsius Cancellarii in
ista materia factum and sententia verborum suorum, ac modo and forma eorundem,
nec non responsionibus ipsius Cancellarii and aliorum ex part sua hinc inde
factis and dictis ibidem debite ponderatis and ulterius haben^a respondit ad
hoc quod ubi praefatus Ioh. Cavendish, dixit quod Justiciam coram dicto ^omino
Cancellario praedict. prout alius praedict. Cancellarius allegavit in eodem
Parlia. clare constare debeat cui cunque discreto, and intelligenti, quod idem
Ioh. Cavendish per accusationem suam praedictam ipsum Cancellar. in eodem
Parliam. false defamavit. Per quod consideratum est quod praefatus Ioh.
Cavendish super defamatione illa convincatur and idem Cancellar. recuperet
versus eum da^na sua et quod Ioh. Cavendish praedict. committitur prisonae
Domini Regis ibid. moratur. quo usque tam preafato Cancellario de damnis suis
praedictis, quam dicto Domino Regi pro fine competenti sibi inde debito
plenarie satisfecerit.

Rotulo Parliamenti, Anno 10. R. 2. M. 4. and 5.
IN this Parliament all the Commons with one accord and in one assembly came
before the King, Prelates and Lords in the Parliament Chamber, complaining
grievously of Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk, late Chancellor of England
being then present, and accused him by demonstrance of word of mouth in manner
following, that is to say, First, that the said Earl being Chancellor and
sworn to do the profit of the King, purchased of our Lord the King, Lands,
Tenements and Rents to a great va^ue, as appears by the Records, and Rols of
the Chancery, against his Oath in tha^ behalf, not considering the great
necessity of the King and the realm. And moreover, because the said Earl was
Chancellor in time of the said purchase made, the said lands and tenements were
extended at a lesser value than they were worth per annum by a great sum, to
the deceiving of our Lord the King.

ITem the said Lords were assigned at the last Parliament to view and examine
the Estate of the King and Realm, and to declare their advice how the same may
be well amended and put in better Governance and disposition; And the
examination and report thereupon made to the King, as well by mouth as in
writing, the said late Chancellor said in full Parliament, that the said
advertisement and Ordinance, ought to be put in due execution, and that it was
not done in default of him that was the principal Officer.

ITem, Whereas the charge was granted by the Commons in the last Parliament, to
be put into certain form, demanded by the Commons and assented by the King and
the Lords, and no otherwise nor in any other manner then was ordained, many
mischiefs are come to the Realm, and it seems true, that ^hey came in
default of the said late Chancellor.

ITem, It was debated, That whereas one Tidman of Lymberch, who had to him and
his heirs, of the gift of our late King Edward, 50 l. per annum, of the
Custom of Kingston upon Hull, which the said Tidman forfeited to the King; And
also the payment of 50 l. a year, was discontinued for 20, or 30 years, the
said late Chancellor knowing thereof, purchased to him and his heirs of the
said Tidman the said 50 l. a year, and the purchase was until the K. ought to
enjoy the profit.

ITem, It was debated, whereas the high Master of S. Anthony is a Schismatique,
and for that cause the King ought to have the profit which appertains to him
in the Realm of England, the said late Chancellor who ought to have advanced
and procured the profit of the King, took to farm the said profit of the K.
for 20 marks a year, and there took to his own use goods, and 1000 marks and
more. And that the said Master of S. Anthony in England, which now is, ought to
have possession of the said profit, and he could not have it before he had two
persons bound with him by recognizance in Chancery, and other Instruments to
pay 3000 l. yearly to the said late Chancellor, and to John his son 100 l. a
year, for term of their two lives.

ITem, That in time of the said late Chancellor there were granted and made
diverse Charters and Patents of Murders, Treasons, Felonies, Rasure of Rols,
Sale of Woods, and in especial after the beginning of this Parliament, there
was made and ensealed one Charter of certain Franchizes granted to the Castle
of Dover, in the disherison of the Crown and the subversion of the duties of
the places and Courts of the King and of his people.

ITem, By the Ordinance that was made in the last Parliament for the Town of
Gaunt, That ten thousand marks ought to be gathered, and for default of such
collection, there ought to be forfeited 3000 marks, that by default and
negligence therein of the said late Chancellor, the said Town was lost, and
forthwith the said 10000 marks paid and the said 3000 marks lost by def^ult as
aforesaid. Of all which Articles the said Commons demand Judgment of
Parliament, whereunto the said E. made his answer in manner which follows.

First, the said Earl says to the Lords of Parliament, how that he was
Chancellor of England, and the same time did represent the person of the King
in his absence, and demanded if he ought to answer without the presence of the
King, for that he was impeached of things done in time that he was Chancellor.

Secondly, the said E. had ordained by the advice of his Council, that Master
Richad Scroope his brother in Law, should put in the words of his Answer of the
said impeachments.

Whereunto the Lords replied, that it was honest for him to answer by his own
mouth, and thereupon he made protestation that he might add or diminish in his
Answer what might be honou^able and profitable to him, by advise of his
Council. Which thing was granted to him.

ANd as to the first Article of his impeachment, That is to say, after that he
was Chancellor that he purchased certain land of the King etc. the said ^.
does answer, etc. After that he was Chancellor, he at no time purchased any
lands nor tenements of the King nor the King gave to him any, until the time
that the King caused him to take the Estate of an Earl, but by way of true
Exchange, videlicet, That how the said Earl has had four hundred marks a
year upon the Custom of Kingston upon Hull by descent of Inheritance, for
which it pleased the King to assign to the said Earl the Lands or Tenements
in value; and that he assigned and gave part thereof to the profit of the King
as well yearly as because of a sum of 1000 marks paid to the King by the
said Earl for that cause. And further says that the King at his progress
into Scotland pleased to make Duks, Bannerets, and Knights, to the honor of
him and his Realm, he plea^ed without desire or seeking of the said Earl of
his own proper motion, to make him Earl, and commanded him to take the Estate
of the Earl of Suffolk in place of him that late died, and after that he
named the quantity of that which he had to maintain that estate, and further
says that he will assign the quantity of the lands, which were belonging to
the said Earl of Suffolk who last died.

ITem He says, That the said Tidman has had 50 l. a year upon the ancient
Custom of King. upon Hull, to him and his heirs inheritably for ever, whereof
King Edward uncle of the King that now is, was not paid of a long time, as
appears by the Accounts of Customers of Kingston upon Hull, in the Exchequer
of our Lord the King, which Tidman for 1000 ma^kes which he owed to the said
Earl, granted to him by his deed a long time since the 50 pounds aforesaid to
have and to hold to the said Earl and his heirs for ever. And because the
said Earl, made restitution of the patent of the said Tidman to the King,
discharged of arrerages, the K. pardoned the same purchase, without that, that
the said Earl then committed or had yet committed any forfeiture, or debt
against the King concerning the said Tidman.

ITem, As to the other Article, in which there is mention of a Charter granted,
etc. he says that a warrant came to him for so doing, and for that it was A
Castle and to the profit of the King without evil intent of the said Earl, he
passed it not intendi^g then that it was against the Laws; And if any man would
have declared or informed the said E. that it had been prejudicial to the King
or his Laws, he had not ensealed the same, but would have repealed it, and that
yet thereof no damage is come, etc. And as to the other Charters specified in
the same Article, he passed them by Warrant without ill intention or covin of
his part in any point. And further he prays, that no new way be put upon him
otherwise, then had been used aforetimes upon any Lord or such Officers
understanding that of the Chancellor make a patent against reason or law. That
such patent shall be repealed and such Judgment reversed, Without inflicting
other punishment upon such Officer o^ Judge. And the Commons replying to the
Answer of the said Earl, concerning the first Article, did show to the Lords
the copy of his Oath, made when he was created Chancellor, in manner as
follows.

YOu shall swear that well and loyally you will serve our Lord the King and
his people, in the Office of Chancellor, and shall do right to all sorts poor
and rich, according to the Laws and Usages of the Realm, and lawfully shall
Counsel the King, and his Counsel shall keep. And you shall not be privy, nor
suffer any damage, nor disherison to the K. nor that the rights of the Crown
be taken away, if you can any way hinder it, and if you cannot hinder it, you
shall make the same clearly and expressly known to the K. Together with your
loyal Advice and Counsel, and you shall cause and purchase the profit of the
King, by all that lies in you to do reasonably, so help you God and his holy
Gospel.

ANd praying that the same might be read well understood, and the circumstances
of the said Answer considered, viz. That he had not denied that he received of
the Kings gift after that he was made Earl, being in the Office of the said
Chancellor, diverse Lands and Tenements which are certai^ and sure of the value
of 400 marks a year, which he has had upon the Custom of Kingston upon Hull,
which are casual and may deceive the King to his damage in that behalf. And
how he said that he had received part of the ^^id Lands and Tenements, so taken
^n ^xchange before he was Cha^cellor. The Commons say, that he was then of the
privy Council, and afterward sworn in the creation of the Office of
Chancellor, by the aforesaid Oath, and he in that Office agreeing to the
exchanges, takes and receives the remnant of the said Lands and Tenements in
full performance of the exchanges, as by his Answer in Parliament aforesaid.

ANd in Answer to the second Article, the Commons replying, say, That insomuch
as he acknowledges in his proper protestations, That he represented the Estate
of the King, while he was Officer: and so extends his power upon all others,
wherefore although default was in others, he cannot therefore be excused, and
especially of that which the King had commanded him to speak in Parliament as
he had said, he was the more bound to put the said matter in execution, and to
confess, what he denied not, the damages are no less than they have
surmised: They pray the Judgment of Parliament.

ANd as to the Answer of the fourth Article, the Commons replying say, That it
shall be found of record in the Exchequer, the aforesaid Tydman to be debtor to
the King in great sums as they suppose, and for that cause the said rent
appertains to the King, notwithstandi^g he had otherwise forfeited, and so the
King was deceived and they pray that the records may be examined. And further
say, That one Neele Hackney was killed by his wife and his servant, and the
said Tydman for which felony, the said woman and servant were arraigned found
guilty, and suffered the Judgment and execution of the Sentence of the Law,
and the said Tydman as follows.

ANd to the Answer of the fifth Article, the Commons prayed again, proposing the
example of one William Thorpe late Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, surmising
that he took 20 l. of one party who had an Office in plea before him, and for
that he sold the Law, for which cause he was judged to death and forfeiture of
his Lands and Chattels, and say insomuch as the said Earl was so Chancellor,
and took 100 l. etc. of the said provision there commanded to be delivered out
of the Kings hands of his profits, which he ought to have done according to
the command of the K. freely without taking any thing, it seems to them that
he has sold the Law and prayen Judgment.

ANd to the Answer of the sixth Article, the Commons replying said, That it
appertained to him (as wise as he is) to be well advised and counseled, that
he assent not, nor do such a thing which may tend to the disherison of the
King, and oppression of his people, as he would avoid the Indurance of the
Judgment of Parliament.

ANd thereupon the said Earl replying to the Replication of the Commons,
touching his oath said, That to take the words of the said oath without other
special Intendment no Chancellor heraftet will inseale any thing of the Kings
grant to any persons of Lands and Tenements or other Goods without offense of
his Oath. But the said Earl says, That it is not comprised in the said Oath,
nor forbidden him to take to himself of the Kings gift, nor to any other
person.

And for that the Kings gifts to other persons in the said voyage, nor of
diverse other things before, be not impeached not holden against the Oath of the
Chancellor, it seems to him that no more he ought to be impeached for the
gifts given to his personal estate, seeing that in the said Oath it is not
forbidden nor restrained to him more than to others, and more especially for
that the said Estate and the Gifts given are confirmed by Parliament, and
further says, that he accepted of his Oath of Chancellor according to his
conscience and power, and for the causes before expressed, he says, as he
shall answer before God, that he thinks nothing done in the matters aforesaid
against his Oath, or understanding of his conscience, but that the Chancellor
may inseale the Kings gifts to the Lo^ds for to maintain their Estate; or for
other reasonable cause by the Kings warrant, and that he has done nothing
against his Oath, etc. And says that, that which is comprised in the Oath that
he suffer no damage, not disherison of the King etc. That is to be
understood of that which is intended, of matters whereof the King has not
cognizance, and that appears by the clause comprised in the Oath, that he
shall make known to the King clearly, and express^ly: And after that the King
is informed in such manner, the Chancellor may do the Kings Commandment
without offense of his Oath, and s^ith that concerning his Estate, and what the
King gave him, it was expressly done by the Commandment, knowledge, and will
of the King, and so not against his Oath, and that it may not be intended that
he should be impeached concerning this matter.

ITem as to that, that the Commons say that the said Earl has deceived the
King; because he has taken of the King, the manner of Faxfleet in value 50.
pounds which Manno^ was worth 200. l. per annum etc. The said Earl answers,
that Master William Morris has reported to him that he has taken of the King
the two parts of the said Manor, with the rent in North Dalton to serve for 7.
years for fifty pound a year, and that he has lost by the said Farm in the
said time a 100. marks, and further says that the said Manor with the ten
marks of rent in Dalton altogether are extended (as appears in the Chancery)
but at 41. l. 9. s. 3. d ob. And for that that, the said Earl understands by
the Earl of Kent, who has had the said two parts of the said Manor together
with the said ten marks, at the value of 50. marks, that the entire Manor
could not be above the value of 50. pounds. And further says, that the said
Manor with the ten marks are not worth more. And that under a certain^ pain
says, that whatsoever person will sustain the charges of the said Manor
sufficiently, and pay him for the two parts 50. marks for aid, and as to the
third part be it what it will, let him give security to pay for the said
Manor, with the ten marks of rent 50. l. per annum, that he will so lease it
with all his heart.

ITem as to that impeachment of the Commons of a 100. pound pension, out of the
provision of Saint Ant^o^y, and that the said Earl should sell the Laws, and
put in an Example of Master William Thorpe etc the said Earl answers, That
the cases are nothing alike, which the parties pleaded before the said Master
William Thorpe as before their Judge for the Laws of England. In which case no
Judges ought to take reward of any parties pleading before them. But the s^id
provision came to him with the help of Saint Pierce the Pope, and not as a
Chancellor or Judge in this case, but as Father and friend to John his son. At
which time a man knew not if the said John had obtained it of the Popes favor
or no. Also faults were found by the Counsel of the said Earl in the Bulls of
the said provision; And from the same caus^ the said Provisour by his friends
of his own accord proffered an annual Pension of a 100. and 60. pound for to
leave suit in the Court of Rome by his said Son, and for that he should not
impeach the Bulls: that the matters before said were not done as before a
Judge, but by way of composition as may be prooved by instrument and by
witnesses in this Town, and so this matter touched not the Laws of England,
and always the said Earl intended not but that he should be holden to
answer to the party in this case. And thereupon after the answers of the said
Earl given to the Accusations of the said Commons, and the replications to
them made of one part, and of another the said Earl at the request of the said
Commons for the greatnesses of the defaults so of him surmised, was arrested by
Commandment of the KING and Commons in ward of the Constable of England, and
afterward let at Liberty upon bail. And for that the said Earl alleged not
in his answer that he observed the effect of his Oath, in that he swore that
he would not know nor suffer damage, nor disherison clearly and expressly
to the KING, together with his own lawful advice and Council, and that he
should cause and purchase the profit of the KING by all that he could
reasonably do: and he held the premises although he were principal Officer
of the KING, knowing the Estate and necessity of the KING and of the Realm,
and did take of the KING such Lands, and Tenements as is supposed in the
Impeachment to him in the said first article surmised, and although he
alleged in his answer, that the deeds to him so made were confirmed by full
Parliament, there is no such accord in the rolls of Parliament wherefore it is
awarded that all the manors, Lands, Tenements, rents, services, fees,
advonsons, reversions and profits with their appurtenances by him so received
of the K. ^e reseised and reprised into the K. hand, to have and to hold to our
L. the K. the lands and chattells of the said E. from thenceforth is not the
Intention of the K. nor of the Lords, nor that this Judgment extend in the Law
to cause the said E. to lose his name and title of Earl, nor of the 20. pounds
a year, which the King granted him, to take of the Issues of the County of
Suffolk by the name and Title aforesaid.

And moreover for that the said E. lately denied that he was of the K. privy
counsel when he demanded of the K. the said excha^ge and had acknowledged that
before the excha^ges performed he was made Chancellor, in which Office he was
bound by his Oath made in the form aforesaid: and he so being sworn to the
said Office, took of the King the said 400. marks of Land, by reason of the
said Exchange agreeing to the said covenant of Exchange, which he also made
before that he was Chancellor, in which Office he was bound by his Oath: And
alleged not in his said answer, that the King gave him Manors, Lands, and
Tenements; which are certain and cannot very easily be destroyed, nor be
countervailed by the aforesaid 400. marks annuity, which are leviable and
demandable of the Customs and also as casual, and in diverse cases there may
loss ensue; It is awarded that all the Lands and Tenements so taken by the
said Earl, by the exchanges aforesaid be resumed into the hands of our Lord
the King to hold to him and his Heirs, in manner as he held the same before
the gift or deed in the said Exchange, in which the Issues and profits
aforesaid after the said exchange deducted: if the said Issues and profits so
taken after the Exchanges extend to a gr^ater value then 400. marks a year,
that then the King shall have the overplus of the Lands and chattells of the
said Earl from thenceforth hereafter. And it is therefore awarded that as well
the said Manor of Flaxflreet, and the ten marks of rents aforesaid with the
appurtenances be reprised in the Kings hand to hold to him, and his Heirs as
he held the same before the gift to the said Earl, so as the Charter, the
pardon, and Confirmation of the purchase of the said fifty pounds of rent be
certain in the hands of the King, and his heirs in firm as it was before the
purchase, and it was since to the said Earl, and that the issues and profits
received or owing to the use of the said Earl as well of the said Manor o^
Faxfleet, and the ten marks of rent as the Issues and profits of the said
fifty pound of rent, which he thereof had taken by reason of the purchase
aforesaid, be levied to the use of our Lord the King of the Lands, and
Chattells of the said Earl from henceforth.

And as to the Article containing the Provisions of Saint ANTHONY* for that the
Master of the House of Saint Anthony in which the profits were taken as proved
in England was a Schismaticke, and taxed for moving the King and power of
France and by such repute as then and yet is taken to be, wherefore all the
said profit ought to appertain to the KING as of a Schismatic and alien, which
thing of reason ought to have been made known by the said Ea^le, before he
demanded of the KING the said profit, and he k^ew expressly that he demanded
it for ^is son as an Hospital, and alleged not in his answer, that the
King when he granted the profit was informed of the matters aforesaid: and
also in that, that when he was such an Officer as beforesaid, he sent to the
Court of Rome to have the same profit for his Son of the Collation of the
Pope (as benefice of the holy Church) and to have also the profit out of the
KINGS hand by the Sea Apostolical (as the Record terms it) and he denies
not that he received of the said profits four hundred pounds per annum,
alleging that he rendered to the KING the some, and that after the said
Earl had made a bargain^ to have the provision which he claymed of the said
profit in England of the Pope, a hundred pound per annum of the said provision
to him and his Son John, for term of their two lives for to deliver the said
profit to the said provision for payment of which 100. l. to him, and his son
he took surety of the provision by recognizance and Obligations of diverse
sums, notwithstanding that the King had commanded by his Letters to deliver
all the profit aforesaid out of his hands to the said provision there, where it
seems for any thing that yet was shown, that all the said profit ought to have
rested in the Kings hand for the causes aforesaid, at least until it had be^ne
discussed whether the said profit were the benefit of holy Church grantable by
the Pope: or appurtenant to the K. by reason of Schismasie and endemnity of the
said Master, and he alleged not in his answer, that the King was clearly
informed of the matters aforesaid: wherefore it is awarded that the said four
hundred marks per annum in time, that the said profit was so granted to him by
the King until the time that he delivered the same profit to the said
provision, as also the said 100. l. a year received also of the s^id provision
until the same be levied to the use of our Lord the King of his Lands and
cha^tells, and that all the profit which should of late appertain to the said
Earl by reason of the said recognizance, or of other Obligations, and
Covenants also made in surety of payment. And as also to the 1000. marke^,
which he had alleged that he paid to the King for the said Exchanges. It is
awarded that the said 1000. marks remaining in the hands of the King, as part
of payment of the fine and ransom that the said Earl shall likewise make to
the King, before he be delivered from prison.

Ex rotulo Parliamenti Anno 5. H. 4. N. 11.
ITem Friday the last day of February, the Earl of Northumberland came before
the King, and the Lords and Commons of Parliament, and there the Chancellor of
England showed how on Tuesday last past he had been before the King, the
Lords and Commons in the same Parliament, and there beseeched the King as he
had done at other times at his coming before him in York, that it would
please our said Lord the King to grant him pardon of those things wherein he
has offended against him, not keeping his Laws and Statutes as Ligeance
demands as by a Petition by him preferred in Parliament, written in English,
whereof the Tenor ensues may appear more at large.

To my most Dreadful and Sovereign liege LORD.
I Your humble liege, beseech your Highness to have in remembrance my coming
to your Highness, to have in remembrance my coming to your Worshipful
presence unto York of my free will by your goodly Letters, where I put me in
your Grace, as I that naught have kept your Laws and Statutes, as liegeance
asks, and especially of gathering of power, and giving of Liveries, as that
time I put me in your Grace and yet do. And I sent it like to your Highness,
that all graceless should not go. Wherefore I beseech you that your High
Grace be seen on me at this time, and of other things which you have examined
me of, I have told you plainly, and of all I put me wholly in your Grace.

WHich Petition by Commandment of the King, examined by the Justices for to
have their Counsel, and advice in this behalf by Protestation made by the
said Lords, that the Judgment appertained to them only, and after rea^ing and
understanding of the same Petion before the Lords, as Peers of the Parliament,
to whom such Judgments appertain of right to hear and understand by the
Statutes made in the 25th. year of the King that now is, by deliberation of
King Edward cozen of our Lord the King that now is, they adjudge that those
things which the said Earl has don contained in the said Petition, are not
treason nor Felony but only Trespass, for which Trespass he ought to make
fine and ransom according to the Kings pleasure, wherefore the said Earl most
humbly reverenceth our Lord the King, and the said Lords, the Peers of
Parliament concerning the right Judgment, and further the said Earl prayed
our Lord the KING, that in affirmance of those matters he might be purged
from all suspicions, and prayed to be judged de Novo, in the presence of the
KING, and of the LORDS and Commons in Parliament; the said Earl took his Oath
upon the Cross of the Archbishop to be faithful and loyal liege man to our
Lord the King, and to his eldest son and to the Heirs issuing of his body,
and to his brothers and their Issue successesively and inheritably, at which
time if the King would command him, he should be ready to show and declare
that which he knows in that he half, and set forth the truth thereof. And
that our Lord the King might not be deceived, the said Earl was present and
(charged in his liberty) the said Earl upon his Oath which he had made upon
the said cross sets forth and declares openly in Parliament that, which
he knows in this matter upon which charge to him given the said E. says.

That at the day of Trial of his life he knew not of the Dukes and Bishops,
and other Lords any thing that ^ounded in derogation of the honorable estate
of the K. and of his royal Majesty, but that they were and are to him good and
lawful Lieges, and that for such our Lord the King may hold and repute them,
and may faithfully put his trust in them in peril of his life, and by the Oath
which he^ had made as before said. And moreover the said Earl of
Northamberland humbly beseeched the Lords, and Earls and Commoners, that they
will beseech our Lord the King of his grace toward him concerning the fine and
ransom, and if at any time he do any thing against our Lord the King other
then liegeancy: that they make no prayer, nor request for him in whatsoever
ensues thereon, but that they be altogether against him. And also the same
Friday it was adjudged by the King and the Lords in Parliament, that leave of
Battle be made by the said Mr. Henry and Mr. Thomas, which are holden to be
guilty of Treason, and that as well for themselves as for others which shall
be in their company at the time of the said license: And those to whom the
King had granted favor and pardon, the King will that they stand firmly in
their force and virtue.

Ex rotulo Parliamenti Anno 31. H. 6. N. 26.
ITem the Friday the 15. of February it was opened, and declared to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal being in the Parliament chamber, by the Counsel of
the Duke of York, that whereas Thomas Thorpe the monday the first day of
August, in the reign of Henry the sixth 30. cam^ to the place of the Bishop of
Durham, and then and t^ere took and bore away certain goods and ^attle of the
same Dukes against his will and license, and thereupon the said Duke came and
took an action by Bill in Mich: Term last past, against the said Thomas in
the Court of Exchequer according to the Privilege, for so much as the said
Thomas was one of the Court, to which Bill the said Thomas willingly appeared,
and had diverse days to imparle at his request and desire: and to the said Bill
and action pleaded not guilty, whereupon there was awarded in the said
Exchequer a venire facias to the Sheriff of Middlesex returnaeble in the said
Exchequer, and thereby the Jury that passed between the Duke and the said
Thomas, it was found that the said Thomas was guilty of the said trespass
contained in the said Bill, and the same Jury assessed the damages to the said
Duke, of the said trespass to a 1000. l. and for his costs 10. l. And
thereupon Judgment was given in the said Exchequer, and the said Thomas
ac^^rding to the ^ourse of the Law was committed to the Fleet for the fine
belonging to the King in that behalf. And thereupon it was prayed humbly on
the behalf of the said Duke: that it should like their good Lordships,
considering that the said Trespass was done and committed by the said Thomas,
since the beginning of the present Parliament: And also the said Bill and
action were taken and scanned, and by process of Law Judgment given thereupon
against the said Thomas in time of vacation of the said Parliament, and not in
Parliament-time, and also that if the said Thomas should be relieved by
privilege of Parliament, ere the time that the said Duke be satisfied of his
said damages and costs: the said Duke should be without remedy in that
behalf, That the said Thomas according to the Law, be kept in ward according
to the time, that he have fully satisfied and contented the said Duke of his
damages and costs; the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, not intending to
impeach or hurt the liberties and privileges of them, that were come for the
Commons of this Land in this pr^sent Parliament, but equally after the course
of the Law to minister Justice, and to have knowledge what the Law will weigh
in that behalf opened, and declared to the Judges the premises, and asked of
them whether the said Thomas ought to be delivered from prison by force and
virtue of the privileges of Parliament or no.

To the which Question the chief Justice in the name of all the Justices after
some Communication and mature deliberation had among them, answered and said,
that they ought not to answer to that question, for it has not been used
aforetime that the Judges should in any wise determine the Privileges of this
High Court of Parliament, for it is so high and mighty in his nature, that it
may make Law, and that which is Law, it may make no Law: and the determination
and knowledge of that privilege belongs to the Lords of Parliament, and not to
the Judges. But as for the Declaration of proceedings in the lower Courts in
such cases as Writs of Supersedias of privilege of Parliament, to be brought
and delivered to the said chief Justice, he said there be many and diverse
Supersedeas of privilege of Parliament brought into the Courts, but there is
no general Supersedias brought to surcease all process, but if there should
be, it should seem that this high Court of Parliament that ministers all
Justice should let the process of the common Law. and so it should put off the
party complaynant without remedy, for so much as actions of common law be not
determined in this high Court of Parliament, and if any person that is a member
of this high Court of Parliament be arrested in such cases as be not for
felony or Treason, or security of the peace, or for condemnation had before a
Parliament, it is used that all such persons should be released of all such
arrests, and make an Attorney, so that they may have their freedom, and
liberty freely to attend the Parliament.

After which answer and declaration it was thoroughly agreed, assented and
concluded by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; that the said Thomas according
to the Law, should remain still in prison for the causes above said the
privilege of Parliament, or that the said Thomas was Speaker of the said
Parliament notwithstanding, and that the Premises should be opened, and
declared to them that were common for the Commons of this Land, and they should
be charged and commanded in the Kings name, that they with good have and speed
proceed to the Election of another Speaker. The which Premises for as much as
they were matters in Law, by the commandment of the Lords were opened, and
declared to the Commons by the mouth of Walter Moyle one of the Sergeants at
Law in the presence of the Bishop of Elie, in the Kings name, that they should
proceed to the Election of another Speaker, with all godly have and speed, so
that the matter for which the K. called this Parliament, took good and
effectual conclusion and end.

ITem 16. die Febr. tunc prox. sequenti praefati Communes; and quidam de sociis
suis declaraveru^t dominis spiritualibus and te^poralibus in presenti
Parliamento, quod ipsi per mandatum ex part domini Regis pridie sibi injunct.
cum omni diligentia exequentes eligerunt loco praefat. Thom. Thorp, Thom.
Carleton militem prolocutorem suum humillime deprecando quatenus praefatus
dominus Rex hujusmodi electionem vellet acceptare.

Qu^bus per domi^um Cancellarium Angliae de mandato dicti Domini Regis, and
advisamento consilii extitit respons. quod quidem dominus Rex de electione
praesenti Thom. Carleton se been contentavit injungendo eis quatenus ad
expeditionem negotiorum Parliamenti praedicti cum omni diligentia proced^rent,

Judgments upon Writs of error in PARLIAMENT.
IF erroneous Judgments be given in the Kings Bench: ^ot. parl. 30. ^ 3. Art.
^8.
or in the Exchequer Chamber upon the Statute of 27. Eliz. cap. 18. the party
may have his Writ of ^r^o^ retureable in Parliament, ^2. E: 3. fo: Hadlowes
case parl. 1 R: 2. m. 3. Art: 28.2 R. ^.

Art. 19.20 ^: 2 Art. 26. the case ^ase of the ^ate of the ^arle of Sa^i^bury.

^arl. 15. R. ^. m 5.

Art: 23. and ^6. Art. 8 ^ 17. Art: ^3 and 18.

^he case of ^he Dane, and Chap^aine of ^^chfield and the pray of New^ort
^annell, ^ H. 7. fo: 10 Flower^^ens case.


but not upon judgment given in the Common Pleas until the same be ^ever^ed
or affirmed in the Kings Bench, as it was answered in Parliament under ^dward
the third, in the case of the Bishop of Norwich. Upon the Writ of Er^or the
Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench is to bring in the Record, and a
^ra^script of it into the Parliament, and the^e leaves the Transcript ^ut
car^^e^h the Record b^ck and there^p^n the Er^ou^s being assigned: or as some
Examples are before the Assignamus of the Errors. order is to be given that a
Scire facias be awarded against the Defendant, upon whose appea^anc and
examination of the Errors by the Lords, the Judgment is either affirmed or
reversed.

AFter the Record thus brought in, Clericus Parliamenti habet inde Custoaiam
and per duos tantum and non per Communitatem assignabitur Senescallus, qui cum
Dominis spiritualibus ac temporalibus per con^ilium Justiciariorum procedat ad
err^rem corrigendum.

In which words it is observed; that the Lords have power to make a Delegation
of their Jurisdiction to a person chosen out of themselves, as a Steward to
judge for them, as also they did in their proceedings against Gomemz, and
Weston under Richard the second, when they ap^ointed the Lord Scroope for
Steward of the Parliament to arraig^e the Offenders, but this rests at their
pleas^re whether they will judge themselves together, or so appoint a Steward.

MEmorandum quod Christopherus Wray miles capital. Iusticiarius de Banco Regis
se^u adduxi^ in ^ar. in camera parl inter duos bre. de errore and billa de
regina indors. ac rotulat In quibus continebantur placita and processus in
quibus suppon^bature^ror, and ib. reliquit transcript totius recordi ci^ Cler.
Parl. and super hoc venit Richardus Herbert. Ioh. Awbr^y, Willielmus filiam and
^imon Brow^e in propriis personis suis in Parliamento, and statim dixerunt quod
in recordo and processu praedict. in redditione Iudic^i praedict. manifest est
erratum in hoc quo^ postquam Iudicium praedict. in loquela praedict versus
praefat. Thom. Gomiel redit. fuit and antequam praedict. Johannes. Hunt
prosecutus fuit and impetravit praedict. primum breve descire facias versus
praefat. Thom. Ric. Herbert and caeteros praedicto: manucaptores praedict.
Thom. Gomiel nullum breve de capias ad satisfaciendum pro debito and damnis,
praedict. per praefat. Iohannem Hunt. in Parliamento praedict. prosequendo. Et
reternat. fuit versus praefat. Thom Gomiel ubi per consuetudinem Curiae dictae
Dominae Reginae coram ipsa Regina a tempore contrarii memoria hominum non
existit in eadem usitat. and approbat. brev. de Cap. ad satisfaciendum versus
eundem Thom. Gomiel, pro debito and damnis praedict. Parl. praedict. prosequi
and retornari debet antequam aliquid brev. de sci fac. versus manucaptores
pr^d^ct. in loquela illa impetr^nt. seu prosequi debe et licet consue^udo, and
forum captionum r^cognitionum in curia praedict. usi fuerunt in forma praedict.
viz. si contigerit eundem Thomam Gomiel in Parliamento praedict. convinci, tunc
iisdem manucaptores concesserunt and quilibet eorum per se concessit tam
praedict debitum quam omnia damna and castag. etc. praefat. Ioh. Hunt. in ea
part adjudicentur de Terris and catallis and eorum cuislibet fieri and ad opus
praedict. Iohannis Hunt, levari si contigerit praedict. Thom. Gomiel debitum
and damnae illa praefat. Iohannis Hunt minime solvere aut se prisonae
Marescall. Dominae Reginae coram ipsa Regina ea occasion non reddere etc. Et
petiere iidem Rich. Herbert and alii praedict. quod Iudicium praedict. and
processus super bre. de scire fac. prosecut. in curia Dominae Reginae coram
ipsa Regina revocetur adnulletur. and peni^us pro nullo habeatur. Et super hoc
Domini per consensum Iustitiariorum post longam and maturam deliberationem cum
consensu adjudicaverunt quod judicium praedict. and processus super bre. de
scire fac. prosecut. in Curia dict. domin. Reginae coram ipsa Domina Regina
revocetur, adnulletur and penitus pro nullo habeatur.

CHAP. V. Bills passed and Judgments given without assent of the Lords
Spiritual.
Under Edward the third a Petition of the Commons was thus.

^ot. parl. 20 ^: 3. n: ^3.^5.38. See ^lso to this ^liz. stat: C^rl: and 25. E:
3. stat: d^ ^rovision.
ITem we are not willing to suffer that payment be made to Cardinals for
their juornying into France, for to treat out of the Realm of England.

THe answer is, as to the dispences of Cardinals; it seems ^o all the
Baronage and other sages of the Kings Council, that the Commons demanded
reason: and for that they are agreed that it shall be so.

The like is there in the two Petitions of the Commons against the Clergy,
carrying money to Rome, and Cardinal having benifices here, diverse Ordinances
against the Church of Rome are agreed by the K. the Lay, Peers, and Commons,
but all the Prelates made Protestation of not assenting or doing what may be,
or turn in prejudice of their Estate or Dignity.

The power and direction for Justices of the peace is ordained at the complaint
of the Commons by the King, by the assent of the Lords Temporal: And so also
diverse times without mention of the Lords Spiritual, who indeed under Edward
the 3 protested that they had not to do with matters of keeping the peace.

THe Commons exhibit a Petition against Procurations from Rome, Rot. Par. 3.
R. 2. M. 3. N. 37. fine 12.
and benefices obtained by Letters thence, etc. It is ordained and established
by the K. by the advice and ass^nt of the Lords Temporal, that no Benefice is
to be had here, but by guilt from the Kings Subjects, etc. and if that any do
contrary to this Act, he should incur the danger of a praemunire given by the
Statute of 27 E. 3.

A Petition in these words. Item, Rot. 11. R. 2 M. 2. Act. 34. part.
that the Appeals pers^ites, accusations, Judgments had and rendered, etc.
should be good, notwithstanding the Lords Spiritual and the procurato^s of the
Lords Spiritual absente^ themselves out of Parliament, in time of the said
Judgments rendered for salvation of their e^tate: As it is contained in a
Protestation, by which the Lor^s Spiritual and Procurators were in this
present Parliament, etc.

The King grants it, And the Protestation of the Clergy is entered as,
follows.

For as much as certain matters were moved in this present Parliament,
touching openly the crime of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other
Prelates of his Province, who made Protestation in the form and words which
follows.

IN Dei Nomine, Amen, Cum de Jure and consuetudine regni Angl. ad Archiep.
Canterbur. qui pro tempore fuerit, nec non caeteros suos suffragandes,
Confratres and Coeptis. Abbates and Priores, aliosque Prelatos, quoscunque per
Baroniam de domino Rege tenentes pertinet in Parlimentum Regis quibuscunque ut
pares regni praedicti personaliter interesse ibidemque de regni negotiis and
aliis ibi tractare consuetis, cum caeteris dicti regni paribus and aliis
consulere, ordinare statuere and definire ac caetera facere quae Parliamenti.
Tempore ibid. incendet. faciend. in quibus omnibus and singulis nos Willielmus
Cant. Archiepiscopus totius Angl. Primas and Angl. Sedis Legatus, pro nobis
nostrisque Suffraganeis, Coep. and confratribus, nec non Abbatibus, Prioribus
and Prelatis, omnibus supradictis potestat. and eorum quilibet potestatur qui
per se, vel procuratorem si fuerit modo presens and public and express quod
intendimus and intendi volumus, ac vult eorum quilibet in hoc presenti
Parliamento and aliis ut pares regni praedicti more solito interesse
considerare tractare, ordinare, statuere, and definire, ac caetera exercere cum
caeteris jus interessendi habentibus eisdem statu and ordine Juris; and eorum
cuilibet in omnibus semper salvum verum, quia in praesenti Parliamento agitur
de nonnullis materiis, in quibus non licet nobis alicui eorum juxta sacrorum
Canonum instituta, It was ordained in a Council held at Westminster, that no
Clergy man should Agitare judicium, and he that did, was to be deprived of his
dignity and Orders, Roger de Hovenden in H. 2. page 30.10. and Gervas.
quomodo libet personaliter interesse; eo propter pro nobis and eorum quolibet
protestamus, and eorum quilibet hic presens etiam protestatur quod non
intendimus, nec volumus sicuti de Jure non possumus nec debemus intendi, nec
vult aliquis eorundem in praesenti Parliamento, dum de hujusmodi materiis
agitur vel agetur, quomodo libet interesse, sed nos and eorum quemlibet in ea
part penitus absentare in re paritatis nostrae, and cujuslibet eorum
interessend. in dicto Parliamento, quoad omnia and singula ibidem exercenda
juris, and eorum quilibet Statu and ordine in omnibus semper salvo. Ad hoc
insuper protestamur, and eorum quilibet protestatur quod propter hujusmodi
absentiam non intendimus, nec volumus, nec eorum aliquis intendit, nec vult
quod habet processus, and habend. in praesenti Parliamento, super materiis
antedictis. In quibus nec possumus, nec debemus, and permittitur interesse
quantum ad nos and queml^bet eorum attinet futuris temporibus, quomodo libet
impugnentur infirmentur seu etiam revocentur.

Which Protestation read in full Parliament by the commandment of the King,
and Assent of the Lords Temporal and Commons, In like manner make Protestation
the Bishop of Duresme and Carlisle, mutatis mutandis. This was upon the
occ^sion of the appeal of Treason in the same Parliament commenced by Thomas
Duke of Gl^ucester, and others, Rot: process. and Judicii prob. 11. R. 2
against Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland and
others.

But although they thus absented themselves, Rot. Parl. 2 H. 4. and Rot. Papl.
2. H. 5
they made no proxy at this time to assent in their room; as afterward they
agreed to do in cases of Judgment of death. But the first use of such proxies
is in the 21 o^ Rich. the 2. neither at all are such proxies, or assent of the
Bishops. For under H. 5. the Earl of Salisbury by Petition in the nature of a
Writ of Error, showed that the Attai^der of John the late Earl, father to the
P^titioner in the second of H. the 4 might now be reversed, and amongst the
errors assigned, one was, that he had been adjudged sans assent in Parliament,
Rot. Parl. 13 H. 2 Act. 24 Holest^ in Reg. Courtney, 332.
but it was in Parliament now adjudged that it was no error.

The Archbishops of Cant. and York, for themselves and their Clergy make
Protestation not to consent to any Statute made in this Parliament, Quatenus ea
in restrictione potestatis Apostolicae aut in eversione Ecclesiae dignitatis
tendere dignoscuntur, which at their request was enrolled in Parliament, yet an
Act passed at that Time and is public against the Popes giving of Benefices
by way of provision in England.

Dyer ^ Eliz Parlia. yet the Act of this year as of most others, is domin. tam
spiritualiu^ quam temporalem assensu.

7 H, 8. f. 104 b. vel 184 b


In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, when diverse Acts passed touching
matters of the Church, as Service and Sacraments* and Church-possessions, etc.
the Bills passed, Dissentientibus, All the Bishops as it is especially entered
in the Iournals, with particular enumeration of all their names.

Whereunto may be added that assertion of the Judges in that deliberation had
under Henry the eight, touching the power Royal in the Church, as the words
were reported, That our Lord the King may well enough hold the Parliament by
himself and all his temporal Lords, without the spiritual Lords, etc,

CHAP. VI. Their appointing Judges out of themselves for examination of
Judgments and delays of other Courts.
THis is given them by a Statute of Edward the third, in these words. Stat. 14.
E. 3. cap. 5.
Likewise for that many mischiefs are come, etc. That diverse places, as well
in the Chancery as the Kings Bench, Common pleas and the Exchequer, the
Justices assigned, and other Justices to hear and determine the Judgments,
wherein have been delays sometimes by difficulty, sometimes by diverse opinions
of the Judges, and sometimes by other occasions, it is assented, established
and agreed, that of the Commons before said, in every Parliament there be one
Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons that shall have Commission and power of the
King. Which privilege is now taken away from the Prelacy, by Act of
Parliament, Anno 17. Car.) to hear by Petition to them delivered, the plaints
of all those which complain of such delays, or grievances done to them, and
that they have power to cause to come before them at Westminster or in any
other places where the parliament shall be holden, and the Courts of records
and processes of such Judgments as are delayed; and shall cause to come before
them the same Justices, who shall be there present to hear the cause, and
their reason also heard by good advice of them; the Chancellor, three Justices
of one Bench, and of the other, and others of the Kings Council.

And in the same Parliament accordingly, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Earls of Arundell and Huntington, and the Lord Woake, and the Lord Basset were
assigned to the same purpose, and although the Justices, Chancellor, Treasurer,
Privy Seal, and others, had before taken Oath, etc. Yet it was ordained that
those of the Baronage assigned, shall give them a new Oath, and increase and
diminish the Ministers of Justice, as they shall see Cause.

CHAP. VII. Their Tenants of ancient tenancies, being discharged of paying, the
charges of Knights of the shire. Rot. Parl: 28. E. 3. petit. 7.

THe Commons exhibit a Petition, that whereas the Tennants of the Lords that
did hold by Barony, and summons to the Parliament might not be discharged of
paying toward the expenses of Knights, etc. That the King would declare the
certainty of it. But the answer of it is on^y, As at other times, etc.

A like petition and answer is afterward under the same King in a petition,
28. E. 3. petit. 7.
touching the same thing, under Richard the 2, it is supposed that all ought to
pay, but those which come in Parliament by summons, by writ, 28. E. 3. art. 20.
and do stay there at their own charges, etc.

In a Petition afterward, Parl. 15 R. 2. art. 37.
it is supposed that the Tennants of such lands as were immediately held of the
Lords of the Parliament, contributed not to those expenses but it is complained
against, and the answer is only, Let it be as at other times, and if that any
found himself agrieved he should have remedy in the Chancery, yet by a Statute
which is not in the Rols of three years before, Stat. 12. R. 2. c. 12. and H.
4. fol. 1.
the Tenants of the Lords themselves shall pay for such lands, as of late times
they have purchased before being contributary.

To this belongs that in Fitzherbert, The villains of Lords, Not. Brev. fol.
228.
which come to Parliament shall not be therefore contributary to the expenses
of the Earls, which come to Parliament. And to this purpose the Lords may by
Letters in their own names command the Sheriff that he distraine not their
villains.

THE SECOND kind of their Privileges. Privileges, or special Rights, that
concern the Barons that have place in Parliament, as they are every one single
in their private estates.
CHAP. I. Touching the Oath and Protestation upon Honor.
ALL Oaths being either promissory or assentatory, 17 Johan. reg p. 35 41 H. 1.
Idem page 1395. and 1315.3. H. To. Parl.
and the first being, that which binds to a future performance of Trust. The
second, that which is taken for discovery of a past or present truth.

The first kind, they as occasion required used in taking the oath of all the
Barons for the maintenance of the great Charter, Rot. Parl. 7 ^t 8. H. 4. M 4.
art. 66: and H. 4. rot. Parl. 39. ^tat. 21. R. ^. c. 3. and 4.
and the like was under King John and H. 3 as also swearing of the Lords in
Parliament in the time of H. the 6. that they should not take parts in the
great Controversy between the Earl Marshall, and the Earl of Warwick, and
the oaths of diverse Lords appointed for the keeping of the Parliament in 8 and
11 H. 4, where yet the Prince was not sworn, being one of those appointed for
the keeping of the ordinances. Because of the highness and excellency of his
honorable person; As the words are in the Roll, Rot. Parl 1 M. 7. Parl. 1 an.
14 art. ^ 5.
so under H. the 7. the Lords Spiritual and Temporal swoare in the Parliament
to the Article of taking care for the preserving of the peace, and under H the
8. to the Bill of Succession; but under Richard the second, the Archbishop of
Canterbury challenged, that neither he nor his predecessors were compellable to
any oath, Dyer, 15. H ^. Parl. Stat. Jac. 14. and 7. ^ap. 6.
but to the K. and this kind of Oath is frequently taken by such Barons as
undertake the great Offices of the Kingdom, and they are all liable to the
like by their tenures, by fealty and by Statutes of the Oath of Allegiance, but
of these kinds of Oaths for the Supremacy they are discharged by the first
Statute that gives it; Stat. 15. Eliz. c. 4. vel. 1
and in the case of Essoynes wherein by the ancient Law, the Essoiner was to
swear that the party Essoined should appear at a certain day, all Barons and
B^ronesses were excepted from the Oath, and instead of the Oath they put in
surety, Ratio vero diversitatis (says Bracton) talis esse poterit ut videtur
quod ita nobiles and dignae personae in warrantizatione Essonii non per se
jurabant sed per procuratores (scilicet) plegios suos. Lib 5. c. de Essoniis,
c. 2. and 3. etc 9 fo. 281.


Assentary Oaths are in Cases of trial by 12 or 24 witnesses defendants, 1
Henry 4. fol. 1. a 10. E 4 fo. 6. H. 8. fol. 12. a Stamford, lib. 3. Cap. 1.
Cook, Liber 3. fol. 30.6.
which proceed by Bill and Answer.

Plaintiff^s examined in actions of debt brought upon arrerages of account in
cases of trial by 12 they are discharged of the Oath that is in cases of
trial of their Peers, 48. E. 3. fo. 30.16. lib. Ass. 35. H. 6.46. a. 22. E 3
fo. 18. a 27. H. 8. fo. 22. Cook ^ib. 6 fo. 53.
in which they answer guilty or not guilty, only upon honor for in other
trials they have no part, but are exempted from being impanelled in Juries,
Nisi eorum Sacramentum adeo sit necessarium quod sine illis veritas inquiri non
possit, and thence was it that some Barons under Edward the first of the
Marches of Wales refused to swear^ before the Justices of Oyer and Terminer
upon an Enquiry to be made by them, Regist. orig f. 179. b. Fitz. Not. bre. f.
165. eodem Parl. in arce London 20. E. 1 Coram Rege, Ret re^ep. Scaccarii.
and others of certain outrages committed by Cilbert of Clare, Earl of
Gloucester, against Humphrey of Bohun Earl of Hereford and Sussex; those
Barons were Jo^n de Hastings, John Fitz Raynold, Roger de Mortimer, Theobald of
Weldon, John Troger, and ^efferey of Camvill, to whom dictum est (as the Ro^
says) ex part Regis quod pro statu and ^ure Regis, and pro conservatione
dignitatis Coron^ and pacis sua apponit manum ad librum, ad faciendum id quod
eis ex part injungetur qui omnes unanimiter responderent, quod ipsi vel eorum
antecessores hactenus in hujusmodi casu, ad praestandum Sacramentum aliquid
coacti fuerunt.

And afterward the Oath being offered them, they answered every one by
themselves, quod nihil inde facerent sine consideratione parium suorum.

Barons being witnesses in Cases of witnesses, Examples are, that they give in
their Testimonies only upon Honor.
IN the Courts of the Delegates in the 3 of E. 6, Art. in f^ro deleg. 1550
in the proceedings against Gardener Bishop of Winchester, upon a special
Commission from the King, the then L. Chancellor, and Marquess of Northum. and
the Earl of Wiltsh. and Bedfora, are examined only upon their honor or sometime
upon allegiance or fidelity to God and the K. and this was upon the special
privilege of such persons, for both by the Civil Laws and Common, no testimony
is taken regularly but upon Oath.

In Chancery in a Case between Jeffery and Jeffery, Mich. 12: Eliz in ar Cur.
apud Examinar.
and in another between Blighton and Dantrey, Thomas Lord Buckehurst, under
Queen Elizabeth; delivers his testimony only upon honor.

In the Court of Chivalery under Rich. the 2, To. pro. 10 R. 2. and 10. in ar.
Land
in the great Case between Sir Rich. Scroope appellant, and Sir Robert Gravenor
defendant, touching matter of Arms, the Attestations taken by Commission from
John of Gaunt, the Earl of Darby, the E. of Northumberland, the Duke of York,
and the Earl of Arundell, are for ought appears without oath; for whereas
others are sworn the Entry of their deposition is: (Pray and requests
according to the right of Arms by the procurator of Master Rich. Scroope, to
testify and say, etc.)

And amongst others the Earl of Devonshire was examined by Commission, by John
Kentwood, who in the return of his Commission and the depositions certifies
the Court, that he had swore all the witnesses there being none of the
Nobility but only the Earl in his return, who was not sworn, but spoke in
the loyalty of his Chivalery.

But in the multitude of witnesses of this cause, diverse Barons are sworn as
the Lord Poynings, the Lord Scales, the Lord Gray, the Lord Ruthen, the Lord
Basset. To every of which names in the attestations is added (Sworn and
Examined) And agreeable hereunto is the examination in the Case of Alice
Pierce, Ro^. Parl. ^ R. 2. art. 41:
in the beginning of Rich. the 2.

Barons answering to Bills as Defendants.

For Barons answering in Chancery as Defendants, are diverse presidents of such
their answers in the times of H. the 7, and Henry the eight: but there are none
of that time that cleeres it whether they were sworn or no; for the answers of
that time, as also of the time following, till about the middle of Elizabeth or
later, are frequently filed without any Jurat. to them.

But under Queen Mary, 2^. R 3. and M. and fasce in Sacello^.
in a suit by William Armer against Thomas Lord Wentworth, touching the
Inheritance of Copyholders in Stepney, the defendant presents in his answer
with Master Sackfords hand to it, who was his Council. (And on the upper part
of his answer where Jurat. is sometimes but rarely in that Age witten) These
words are found, this answer is made by council and the Defendant not sworn
by order of Court.

Then in Queen Elizabeth's time the Lord Dacres being Plaintiff against the
Lord Buckhurst, and Parker, and Manwood, these two defendants are sworn, but
not the Lord Buckhurst.

And afterward the Lord Buckhursts answer is inscribed per traditionem
Comitissae super honorem suum. 18. Iunii Mich. 31. and 32. Eliz.
So the Countess of Northumberland: In virtute honoris sui agnovit
responsionem suam esse veram: as the entry is upon her answer at that time.

32. Eliz.
And in the Countess of Rutlands case where she with Sir George Shaworth were
Defendants about the later end of Queen Elizabeth, The Dedimus potestatem was
to answer upon his Oath super Evangelia, as also a Dedimus toward the end of
Queen Elizabeth, 44. Eliz.
was directed to Roger Bromeley, and Richard upon the bill of complaint of one
Brook against George Earl of Huntington to take his Oath super honorem, 7
Sept. Mr. 42. and 4^. Eliz.
etc. About which time also the Lord Eure put in his answer super honorem only
to the bill of John Barnes and Robert Talbois.

In other Courts as the Starr-chamber, and Court of Wards, it was questioned in
Queen Elizabeth's time whether Barons being Defendants, should put in their
answers upon Oath, and in the Court of Wards an Order was made in the Lord
Mountagues case, that they should and that so the course should be henceforth
constant. 40 El^z apud Tothill.
The like course has been held of late in the Star Chamber, as also in the
Eccl^siasticall proceedings, and about the end of Queen Elizabeth's time in
Chancery, also the Lord Wharton by a compulsory order answered there upon Oath.
O^do 10. lib. 10. Ja^. in Chanc.
And within these few days the Earl of Shrewsbury was ordered to answer upon
Oath to one Revell being plaintiff there, and diverse Noble men have been
sworn to their answers in Chancery since the beginning of the King, and some
in Queen Elizabeth's time also, Mic. 4. Iac. Mic. Winton 5. Com.

Pemb. Pas. 6. Com.

sinc. Hill. 7. Com Dorset. and Dominus Russel Pas. 5. Jac. Hough^on 1. Eliz.

Butter verse Dom. mordant M. 13. and 13 Eliz.

Campz. v. Com. Bedfo^d-Mich. 21.22. Eliz. ibidem Butvers Dom. Rich. Hill. 4.
Viscount. Mountag: etc. H. 3. and 4.


neither is the time of Queen Mary and Edward the sixth wholly without example,
but the sum of all seems this that according to the claim of the Barons in
20. E. 1. they were not anciently till about the end of Queen Elizabeth, or
the time of King James, and of our present Sovereign compellable to swear to
their answers, for the first compulsory order falls in the 33. of Eliz. in the
Court of Wards, but that some of them taking no advantage of their privileges
in this case, voluntarily took the Oath, and others standing upon their
ancient right, put it in only upon honor, as also we see in that case of
Gravenor and Scroope, and Alice Pierce under Richard the first, for it were not
a special Privilege it will fall out, that in all the Examples where they
were not sworn, the Judges committed great Injustice in receiving their
answers, and depositions without oath, if they had not been subject by
compulsion to an o^th, no otherwise then if a Judge of the Common Law should
admit evidence given to a Jury, or take a verdict without Oath which were not
excusable. And a few examples of giving in their answer without Oath, upon this
reason are of great weight against many that showed that they were voluntary
sworn, and these orders which were compulsory, are of so late time, and of so
weak power, that they cannot at all take any right from the Baronage which was
before settled in them.

Examined as Plaintifs in actions of debt upon arrerages of accounts.
BY the Statute of 5. Henry 4. cap. 8. In actions of debt upon Arrerages of
accounts, 3. H. 6. fol. 43. and 44.
the Judges have power to examine the Attorney of the Plaintiff, or whom they
please, and this examination was meant, and has been practiced upon Oath, yet
in action brought by the Lady of Abergavenny, being a Baroness against another
in the time of Henry the sixth: when the Counsel of the Defendant desired that
the plaintiff might be examined, Cockanie the Justice said that they should not
do well to make her being a Baroness, come to be examined. And how ever the
Statute were general for high as well as low (as the words of the books are)
yet he says the Law will be otherwise, and different between another common
person.

Of the form that was used in swearing of spiritual and Temporal Barons.
IN the form of swearing the promissory Oath, Rot. parl. 1 H. 7. part. 1. M.
14. M. 15. parl. 15. E. 3. N. 43 Circa E. ^. de Templo in Anonimi Chron.
a difference has been amongst the Barons of Parliament, the Temporal Barons
under Henry the 7. swear with their hand upon the Book, the Spiritual with
their hand upon their breast, first the one tactis the other vis^s Evangeliis:
Anciently this Oath was taken by the Lords in the house upon the Archbishops
cross. To this day the Spiritual Lords have challenged it, Gal. observe. prac.
100. fol. 22.
and sometimes have used to swear visis only as a thing to be done by the
privilege of the Church. But there is the Testimony that shows, that all the
Bishops in a provincial Synod did swear here their Iuramentum corporale
which is tactis and howsoever if it be a privilege of Nobility in some other
States or of Gentry to depose by writing without a corporal oath, as in
Bohemia, Austria Bavier etc. yet there is no sufficient certainty, with us for
a^ established difference of form in swearing.

CHAP. II. Trial by Peers.
Not in Appeals 10. Eliz. 4. b. lib. in tract tit. appeal de mort. 7. Stamf.
etc.
IN all cases of Treason or felony, or misprision of either of these offenses, a
Temporal Lord of Parliament is to be tried only by his Peers, if arraigned
by indictment per Judicium parium suorum, or of 12. or more Temporal Barons of
Parliament. This holds as well in all cases made Treason or Felony by Statute,
1 H 4.1. an. 10.4.6.13 E. 4.12. an. Stamf. lib. 3 cap. 1. Cook lib. 9 fol. 30.
b.
as received anciently to be so by the Common Law, as Justice Stamford
expressly affirms, although usually in Statutes which make Treason or Felony
a special clause be inserted for Peers to be tried by their Peers, as also
to the now trial where perhaps more need was of such a clause, stat. 4. Iac.
cap. 1.
upon the Statute of remainder made for trial of offenses committed by the
English in Scotland; It is added that if the Offender be a Peer of the
Realm, then his trial shall be by his Peers; And this is clear for all
Temporal Barons and their Ladies; but it has been doubted whether the same
Law be in case of trial of spiritual Barons or no, and without doubt one
special Argument among others has been made from the name of Peers some
concluding thus: Spiritual Barons are no Peers: stat. 20. H. 6 cap. 9. Cook.
lib. 6. fo. 52. b.
therefore not to be tried by their Peers, others for the other part thus,
Spiritual Barons are Peers therefore to be tried by their Peers, but of these
two Arguments, the first is false in matter, the second in form.

For the first it is true and plain, that Spiritual Lords have been Peers,
and of the antecedent false: the Testimonies justifying them to have been, so
are very frequent in the Bish: of Winchesters case, who departed from the
Parliament at Salisbury, about the beginning of Edward the third: and was
questioned for it afterward in the Kings Bench, he pleaded to the
Declaration: Quod ipse est unus e paribus Regni and Praelatus etc. and in that
short disputation of the case which is lest in the the year books, Pas. 3. E.
3 c^ram rege Rot. 9. Rep.
he is supposed clearly both by the Court and Council to be a Peer. So
afterward under the same King, in a Writ of Wards brought against the Bishop
of London, he pleaded to issue and the Defendant could not have day of grace,
for he said as the words of the book are) that a Bishop is a Peer of the
Land. 3 E. 3 fo. 186 p^: 28.
Et haec erat causa etc. And in a like case upon an Action of trespass against
the Abbot of Abyndon who was one of the Lords Spiritual, 13. E. 3. tit.
Enquest. 43 tit. challenge.
day of Grace was denied against him, because he was Peer de la terre. So
expressly upon the Question of having a Knight returned into a Jury where a
Bishop was Defendant in a quare impedit, Plowden Com pl. 117 and ve. Hill. 8.
E. 3. Ro^. 23. coram Rege.
the rule of the Court was that it ought to be so, because the Bishop was a
Peer of the Realm. So the Judgment given against the Bishop of Norwich in
the time of Richard the second, he is in the roll expressly allowed to be a
Peer, for he had took eeceptions that some things had passed against him
without assent or knowledge of his Peers of the Realm. To which exception the
answer was, It behooves you not at all to touch your Prelate of only certain
misprisisions, which you as a Soldier of the King, etc. have done and
committed, etc. Here is to be avoided that challenge of Stafford, Archbishop
of Canterbury under Edward the third, when upon his being excluded the
Parliament, he thus challenged his place. Ego tanquam major par Regni post
Regem vocem habeus Jure Ecclesiae mea tantum vendico and ideo ingressum in
Parliamento peto, the same is justified by the Clergy touching their Ius
paritatis before recited at large and entered in the Parliament roll. And in
the Assignement of the Errors under Henry the fifth, for the reversall of the
Attayndor of the Earl of Salisbury, one error is assigned that Judgment was
given without assents of the Prelates which were Peers in Parliament, and that
although that were adjudged to be no error, yet it has been allowed clearly
in the roll, and the Petition that they were Peers. Stat. 4. H. 5 ca 6.33. H.
8. Trial 141.
So in an Act of Parliament under the same King, the Bishops and Archbishops,
and Archbishops of Ireland, are called Peers of that Kingdom, and diverse
other passages occur touching this name of Prelate, neither could any scruple
be further made of it, until the passing of an Act of this Parliament. 17.
Car. 1641.

But as this is clear that they were Peers, so also it is clear that they
were not by the lay to be tried, as Temporal Barons by their Peers, and the
conclusion of the contrary drawn (as before) out of that that they have been
Peers, is wholly without consequence, this having been a point of the common
Law, as it is distinguished from Acts of Parliament, which falls out generally
to be only the known and received custom within the Kingdom, if the
practice and custom within the Kingdom be therein observed, the point of Law
may be soon resolved. In the practices and customs diverse Bishops are found
to have been arraigned, and legally tried upon Capital offenses, yet all that
have been so, have had their Trial only by common Iuries, and whether by
Statute any alteration be of this common Law shall presently be examined,
there being many Bishops now to be tried.

THat practice and Custom appears in particular examples found from the time
of Edward the second to the age next before us thus collected; Hill 17. E. 2.
Rot. 87. Dorse coram Rege and Rot. Romans m. 6.
Adam Bishop of Hereford under Edward the second, was indicted of diverse
Felonies, and of joining with Roger Mortimer, he is arraigned in the Kings
Bench: and upon question how he will be tried, he says: Quod ipse est
Episcopus Heref. ad voluntatem Dei, and summi Pontificis, and quod materia
praedicta Articulorum sibi imposit. adeo ardua est quod ipse non debet in Curia
sic super praedictis sibi impositis respondere, nec inde responders potest
absque offensu divino and sanctae Ecclesiae: Hereupon day is given over, and
then the Indictment is brought into the Parliament, whereupon his arraignment,
he give^ the like answer, and Walter Archbishop of Canterbury petit eum, and
ei liberatur, and this is commanded that he have him ready at a certain day
in the Kings Bench. Et praeceptum est vicecomiti Hereford. quod venire faciat
coram Domino Rege tot and tales etc. ad inquirend. prout moris est etc. And a
common Jury is returned which finds the Bishop guilty, whereupon he is
committed to the Archbishop and convict, and his Lands and goods are seized
into the KINGS hands.

Here was the Bishop tried by a common Jury, although it appear^s both in the
Record, and in the History of that time, that the whole Clergy earnestly
indeavou^ed to have kept him from conviction, Thomas Walsingha^ fol. 199.
Transert.
but no pretense of any right of Trial by Peers is once mentioned in this
behalf, though other complaints are full enough expressed against the whol^
proceedings.

T^i. 30. E. 3. Rot. 11. Rep.
Under Edward the third John de Isle brother to Thomas Hen, Bishop of Ely, was
indi^ed in Huntingtonshire; that he with diverse others per assensum, and
procurationem Episcop. 28. E. 3. die Lunae post festam Sancti Iacobi, burnt the
house of the Lady Wake at Colne, by Sommersham, and quod praedictus Thomas
Episcopus sciens praedictam combustionem per praedict. servientes suos esse
factam dictos servientes apud Somersham postea receptavit, etc. And also it was
found before the Sheriff and Coroner that 29 Edward the third, ^he Bishop was
guilty de assensu of the murder of one William Holme, slain by Ralph
Careless and Walter Ripton called little Watt, upon malice conceived against
Holme, because he followed the suit of the Lady Wake, the principalls were
attainted by Outlary, the Bishop was arraigned, and upon question how he would
be tried dicebat quod ille est membrum Dom. Papae, and quod ipse ab ordinario
suo viz. venerabili patre Domino Simono Archiepiscopo Canterburi. Angli^
primat. respondere non potest. Et super hoc idem Archiepiscopus prasens hic in
Curia petit, quod dictus Episcopus Eliensis de feloniis pr^dict. sibi impositis
hic coram laico Iudice, non cogatur respondere, and ut sciatur inde rei veritas
per inquisitionem patriae etc. praecept est vicecomiti Huntingdon, quod venire
faciat coram Dom rege in Octab: sancti Mich. etc. ubicunque etc. 24, de Just.
de Somersham and idem dies datus est Episc, etc. Ad quem diem coram Domino rege
venit praedict. Episc in propria persona and similiter Jurat. veniunt qui
elect^, tricati, jurati and onerati, si idem Episc de assensu pr^dictorum Rand.
and Walter. and de recept. eorundem sit culpabilis, nec non dicunt super
sacramentum suum quod idem Episc est in nullo culpabilis, sed dicunt quod idem
Episc. post feloniam receptavit ip^os apud Somersham, sciens ipsos feloniam
fecisse. Ideo inquiratur de bonis, catallis, Terris and tenementis etc. Et
super hoc praedictus Archiepisc. presens in curia petit ipsum tanquam membrum
Ecclesiae sibi liberari, and ei liberatur oustodiend. prout decet, and Writs
were sent out to the Sherifes of all Shires where he had goods or Lands to
certify them for the Kings benefit, and in this Record it is observable that
the Jurors were tried, which proves, that the Bishop had his challenges to them
at his trial.

About the beginning of Henry the fourth, Thomas Merke Bishop of Carlisle was
indicted of Treason before Thomas Earl of Warwick, and other Justices of Oyer
and Terminer in Middlesex, the Bishop standing before committed to the Tower
for the same offense. Et hoc Justiciar. praedict. recognit. mandatum est
constabulario Turris praedict. vel ejus locum tenenti quod corpus ejusdem
Episcop. habeant, vel alter eorum habeat coram praefatis Iusticiariis apud
Turrim praedictam die Mercurii ex tunc proximo sequente ad respondendum Domino
Regi de proditionibus etc. And the precept est vicecomiti London, quod tunc
venire faciat coram praefat. Iusticiar. apud Turrim praedict. tam Aldermannos
and cives quam alios probos homines de vicineto Warder. praedict. 1. Baynards
Castle and Dougate qui praefat. Episc. nulla affinitate attingunt ad faciendam
tunc ibidem deliberationem de dicto Episcopo prout moris est secundum legem
Regni Angliae ad quem diem and locum, the Bishop is brought before them, and a
Writ comes from the King to the said Justices reciting that licet in statuto
apud Westminsterium nuper edito inter caetera continetur quod nullus
Archiepiscopus, nec Episcopus coram Iusticiar. nostris occasion alicujus
criminis impetatur absque speciali praecepto nostro quousque aliud remedium
inde foret ordinatum de advisamente tamen consilii nostri vobis mandamus quod
si aliqui Archiepiscopi, vel Episcop. coram vobis impetiti vel judicati
existunt, tunc ad deliberationem ipsorum procedatis prout de Jure and secundum
legem Regni nostri Angliae fore videritis faciendum, statuto praedicto non
obstante, I este me ipso apud Westminsterium 28. die Januar. Anno Regni nostri
primo.

THis Writ being read in the Court, the Bishop was demanded how he would be
^ried, He first stands upon the privilege of the Church, to whom the Justices
reply that the offense was so high, that he must answer them with protestation
of saving the Liberties of the Church, he pleads not guilty. Et inde de bono
and malo ponit se super patriam, inde fiat inde Jurat, hoc instante die etc.
The Jury finds him guilty, but the Justices being not advised of their
Judgment, return him to prison, the Record was afterward removed in the Kings
Bench, and the Bishop renders himself to the prison of the Marshallsea; and
then being asked if he had any thing to show, why Judgment should not be
given on him he pleades his pardon, and it is allowed him.

To these presidents a Learned Judge in Queen Mary's Time says diverse were
agreeable. ^tamf. lib. ^. fol. 133.
Among which are specially to be accounted those of the Bishop of Rochester in
the time of Henry the eight, and of Cramner Archbishop of Canterbury under
Queen Mary both tried by common Iuries: ^empore ^. 8. pro Trial 142.
neither is there any example extant from the first memory of a legal trial
of Bishops which is under Edward the second, that testifies any Trial by
Peers belonging to a Bishop, and accordingly hitherto it was taken clearly by
that learned Judge of Queen Marie's time, ^tamf. lib. ^. page 135.
that no ancient Statute speaking of trial by Peers, has been put in ure to
extend to a Bishop, or Abbot, although they enjoy the name of Lords of the
Parliament, for they have (as the words are) this name of Bishop or Abbot
ratione Officii being not chosen in Parliament in respect of their Nobility,
but in respect of their possessions the ancient Baronies annexed to their
Dignities according to which there are diverse Presidents, whereof one was in
the time of H. the 8. where also it is as judiciously and modestly affirmed by
a most learned man of this Kingdom that the spiritual Lords enjoy all legal
privileges, as the temporal Barons do saving only this trial by Peers.
^ambd. in ^^rdi Angl.


That which may be here objected out of the Statute of the grand Charter wherein
every man ought to be tried by his Peers, id est, Juditium Parium suorum, or
out of the Statute of 25. E. 3. by which all treasons are to be tried by men
of the same condition, of which the offender is, may easily be answered; for
both these anceint Statutes are now to be interpreted, as it is clearly taken
in continual practice, and in the books according to the known use of the
legal proceedings, and not by literal interpretation of the words, as it is
plainly seen in both of them: For all Gentlemen, Esquires, Knights,
Batchellors and Bannerets, and at this day Bannerets are accounted Peers, 1
Mar. Dyer fo. 986. Hollenshead Cron. fo. 1749. Surpleis. case. Coo. fo 40.5
not only amongst themselves, but also to all other men of the lowest condition
which yet cannot be out of the force of the word, only the like appears in
that non amercientur Comites, vel Barons, nisi per pares suos. And it is
showed in the title of Amerciaments, wherein that which the Statute referres to
Peers is done so by Judges. And this of Bishops refers to those Statutes is
only to be adjudged according to use and practice, which is the best
interpreter of the Statutes and not by the mere Interpretation of the word
Peers.

Parl. 28. H. 6.
And it is most likely that if any such right had anciently belonged to them,
not only they themselves, but the temporal Baronage under H. 6. protests by
the mouth of Viscount Beaumont for their trial by Peers, when William de la
Poole put himself upon the King and not on his Peers, in such sort as those
Bishops put themselves on the Pope, and not upon any legal Trial.

But one particular case is here to be added touching this right singled by it
self, Stat. 1. Eliz. c. 1.
that is, Trial by Peers upon the third offense against the Statute of
Service and Sacraments, under Queen Elizabeth, for the known trial by Peers,
is in cases of treasons or misprisions, or one of them. And trial by Peers
saved to the Baronage in the Statute of new treason of felony has reference
only to the known use of such trial, so that in those new treasons, or
felonies, such as for other offenses, which were before treason or felony, were
to be tried by their Peers, are likewise (and none else) to be tried by their
Peers for new treasons or felonies, and therein the Spiritual Lords are
equally excluded. But this of the third offense, against that Statute, is
neither treason, felony nor misprision, but a Trespass, punished only by
forfeiture of goods, and perpetual imprisonment. In which Case this act says
without reference to the use of trial by Peers, as it is usually expressed in
other Statutes, that all and singular Lords of the Parliament for the third
offense shall be tried by their Peers.

CHAP. III. Scandala Magnatum.
IF any person shall divulg false Tales of any of the Lords of Parliament, by
which dissension may be betwixt the Commons and them, the offender is to be
imprisoned until he bring forth the Author, but this also is communicated to
the grea^er Officers of the Kingdom.

CHAP. IV. Process against them in English Courts, by Bill and Answer.
THe course of the Chancery is, and of the late Starcham. was that the
Chancellor writes to the Lords of Parliament, and sends out Subpoena's and
usually his letters are prayed in the Bills that are exhibited against them.

But whether upon a Barons not appearing on a Subpoena, an attachement may be
awarded has been a question, neither do I find it clearly resolved otherwise
than that in later times, the practice is, that it may: but in the time of
Queen Elizabeth, in a suit between Tavernor and the Lord Cromwell the defendant
disobeying an Injunction in the Chancery, it was questioned what course should
be taken against him, Laurence Iennius li. 2 a Cromp. Iuris^. f. 33.
and upon good and deliberate advice taken by the Court, having the opinion of
some of the Judges herein, an attachment was awarded to the Sheriff of
Norfolk and returned so and the Sheriff had his costs for bringing him. This
attachment was awarded in Michaelmas Term and in Hillary Term he was returned
so, but afterward there being a Parliament began in May, and ended in June;
the Lord Chancellor complained of it, and it was pretended that it was gotten
in Court, in the absence of the Lord Chancellor, and advice was had with
Council, and Judges, and it appears not (as the words of the Iournall book
are) that by the Common Law or by any presidents of the said Court of Chancery,
Dyer, Part. Iun 14. Eli. and Dyer fo. 314. and 315
it was warranted that the person of any Lord having place and voice in
parliament (in the like case) in the said Court of Chancery before this time
had been attached, and therefore they took it to be against the privileges of
the Lords of this Kingdom, and he was discharged.

But for that of attachment upon Subpoenas, Rot. Parl. 3. H. ^. parl. 1. M. 2.
N. 46. Rot. Parl. 15. H. 6. N. 25. and Parl. 2 H. 2 art: 69.
and in the course of proceeding against noble men by such Writs or Bills as are
used in the Exchequer, Chancery or elsewhere, it is not likely that any
certain, Course of ancient Common Law, or proceeding in equity can be found to
justify it at all either against them or any other persons beyond the time of
R. 2. under whom John Waltham, Bishop of Salisbury, and Chancellor of England
brought in the Writs of Subpoena, and caeteris de causis, in the Chancery and
the Exchequer, by example whereof other Courts have used them, against which
the Commons passed a Bill in Parliament under Henry the fifth, but the King
would not give assent to it. The like is found under Henry the sixth, and Henry
the fourth.

CHAP. V. Their number of Chaplains qualified.
BY the Statute of Pluralities, every Archbishop may have eight Chaplains
that may take dispensations for a plurality, but for the plenty of Scholars of
good ability in Arts and Learning, it is like the Law in these points will be
altered, that they all have and none want convenient benefice.

Every Marquess and Earl, may have 5 Chaplains. Every Viscount, may have 4
Chaplains. Every Bishop, may have 6 Chaplains. Every Temporal Baron, may
have 3 Chaplains.
Every Duchess, being Widows two. Every Marchioness, being Widows two.
Every Countess, being Widows two. Every Baroness, being Widows two.


CHAP. VI. Their retaining of Strangers.
A Baron of the Parliament may keep six strangers borne out of the Kings
obeisance at one time, whereas another man may retain not above four.

CHAP. VII. Clergy.
Under Edw. the sixth, a privilege was given to the Nobility, that in all cases
where a common person, as a Clerk convict shall and may have benefit of his
Clergy, and in all cases where privilege of Clergy is restrained, or taken
away by that Statute except in wilful murder, that is, Burglary, Robbery, by
or near the highway, stealing of Horses, and Sacrilege; a Lord of the
Parliament and Peer of the Realm should at the first offense, only of common
grace without prayer have benefit of the Clergy, and stand as a Clerk convict
to make purgation, although he cannot read.

Parl. Cor. lib. 2. fo. 130. a.
But as Stamford notes in all other cases, in which Clergy is taken away since
that Act. A Baron of the Parliament is in the same case as any other common
person is; And by Acts made since, it was taken away generally.

1 For stealing of Horses, 1. E. 6. cap. 33.

2 Robbing in dwelling houses, etc. in or near the high way, 5. E 6. c. 9.

3 Burning of Houses or Barnes, pety treason, 5 Phil and Mar. c. 4.

4 Stealing of 5 s. in any dwelling house or any place adjoining, 39. Eliz.
cap. 15.

5 Stealing of 12 d. or more without the knowledge of the person, etc. 8. Eliz.
cap. 4.

6 Burglary and Rape, 16. Eliz, cap. 7.

7 Killing one that has no weapon drawn, 1 Jac. cap. 9.

CHAP. VIII. Their liberty of hunting in the Kings Forests.
QVicunque Archiepiscopus Comes vel Baro veniens ad nos, per mandatum nostru^
transiret per forestam nostram liceat ei capere unam bestiam vel duas, per
visum Forestarii si presens fuerit, sin autem faciat cornare, ne videatur hoc
furtim facere, hoc liceat eis redeundo facere sicut praedict est: and this has
been interpreted to the coming of a Lord by summons to the Parl. by process out
of the Chancery, Kings bench or otherwise, where the return is Coram Rege.

CHAP. IX. Amerciaments.
IN case of Amerciaments of Barons of Parliament upon nonsuits, or other
Judgments, ending in misericordia, there is a special course, both for the
sum and the way of assertaining of it, which differs from the Amerciaments of
common persons.

38 E. 3 fol. 3^. a. 24. ^. ^. f. ^1 b. 1. H 6.7a 9. H 6 f. 2 b 19. E. ^ f 9 a.
21. E. 4. f. 77 b.
For the sum, the Amerciaments of an Earl, or Spiritual, or Temporal Baron
is equal, that is, 5 l. of a Duke, 10 l. and the sessing of this is by the
Kings Justices, before whom the action depends. The Justices in this place
supplying the room of Peers, by which according to the grand Charter they are
to be amercied, as expr^ssly it is affirmed in the Judgment under H. 6.
against the Earl of Northumberland, where the words of the Justices are,
Insomuch as an Earl is a Peer of the Re^lme, 1. H. 6. f 7. b. Cook l. 8 f. ^.

Gr^sseys case.


he shall be amercied by his Peers, according to the Statute* and therefore we
put not the Amerciament i^ ce^taine.

And thence and thus is the grand Charter to be understood that says, C. 4:
li. 3. De Cor c. 1. fol. 116. b.
C^mites and Barons non amer^ientur, nisi per Pares suos, but continual usage
has thus (as before is showed) interpreted that privilege and so has the
practice been, and thence was it under E. 2. a writ was directed to the
Justices of the Common pleas that they should not amerce the Abb^t of Crowland,
tanquam Baro, Claul. 15. E. 2. m. 12.
because he did not hold per Baroniam, aut partem Baroniae.

For this of Amerciament while there were no other Titles of greater Nobility
but Earl and Baron, which was in the time of E. 3. who created the first Duke
in England, as Rich. the 2. the first Marquess; and H. 6. the first Viscount.
And the Amerciaments of the Lords of the Parl. were all at 5 l. whence also is
generally so affirmed in the Statutes of Ireland under H. the sixth, that every
Lord that is called L. of Parl. in all places as well personal as real, in
which amerciaments do ly, shall be amercied at 100 s. But when other dignities
were made, and it seems according to the proportion of the releifes, paid by
those new dignities, for a Duke is to be amercied at double the sum of an
Earl that is 10 l. as his relief is double, which is 20.

CHAP. X. No process in civil actions to be awarded against the body of a
Baron.
NO baron of the Parliament or Baroness is to be arrested by Capias upon
action of debt, account, 11. H. 14. a. Cook lib. 6. fol. 52. b. 27 H. 8 f. 7.
a. 14. a. 22. b. 29. Ass. Pl. 33 14. Eliz. Dyer. fol. 315. Trin. 1^ Hen. 4.
Rot. 8. Coram Rege Cromw. libr. Introt and tit. Error. utiary 20.13. R. 2. tit.
retorn del. vic. 74.10. H. 4. tit. process. 44.198.1. H. 5. fol. 22. b. v. Ass.
21. ^. 3 fol. 59. b.
trespass or the like, but they are to be distrained only and pay issues,
returned for an appearance. The reason of this was anciently, because the Capias
in such Cases, goes out only upon nihil habet, returned by the Sheriff which
could not be for a Baron who was ever to be supposed to be seized of his
Barony, by which he might be distrained and lose issues. Although the reason
fails now in those that have not more than the names alone of their Baronies,
yet the same Law still remains, but this limited to actions between party and
party, and party for in cases of rescues, felonies, or the like, where the
offense is immediately to the King, A Capias lies against a Baron of the Parl.

And it is as other privileges which are legal in England, limited also to the
Barons of the Parl. of England, for it appears under R. 2. that in an action
of debt, a Capias was awarded against the Countess of Ormond, being one Irish
Baroness, and participating of her husbands dignities as our Ladies in Eng.
neither can a Baron of Ireland be tried here by the Peers of Eng. for they are
not his Peers, no more than the L. Zanchar might being a Baron of Scotland, who
was indicted and arraigned only by the name of Rob. Creighton Esquier and upon
this reason, that he was no Baron of Parl. tried by a common Jury. Thence it is
also that an Earl, Baron, or Duke of France coming into Engl. by the Kings
safe conduct shall not in any legal proceedings be styled so, as appears in
the time of Edw. the 1. in the case of the E. of Richmond, being then Duke of
Britain, and in the case of Sir John Douglasse under Edw. the 4. And the
reason why S. Gilbert Humfravill, 39. Eli. f. 35. b and Claus. 39. E. 3. m. 2
in the time of Edw. the 3. was legally to have his title in writs of Earl of
Anguish, was because that in that age the E. of Anguish by that name was L. of
the Parl. as it is expressly noted in our year-books.

And this difference it seems has been here between Temporal dignities, and
Spiritual, that in regard the temporal State of England was ever held as
severed and distant from other States, not at all communicating with them in
civil government. Therefore foreign dignities which are of the Civil part
of States, had no respect given them as appears in the examples already
brought.

But on the other side in dignities Spiritual, because there was anciently
through Christendom supposed an unity in the Church. So that England with
foreign Nations, and they with England (as membe^s of one body had a mutual
reference to each others Country) was legally valued, as Bishops in England,
19. E. 3. tit. Trial 57*
as may be seen in that case of the Bishop of V^recht (for this is the right
Name, though it be printed Vrston) under E. the 3. where being made Bishop of
Vtretcht makes a Prebend of England So the Title of Cardinal was usually given
in legal proceedings to such as had that dignity in England, whence also the
Archbishop of Raguse being parson of a Benefice in the Bishopric of Carliste,
Extra. tit. derenuntia. cap. 9. ad Supplicationem.
under King John was (it seems) to have been accounted here also an Archbishop
for dignity, though not for Jurisdiction.

13. E, 3. tit. challeng. 115 and tit. Enquest. 43. Ploud. Com. l. 117. and 1
and 2 Phil. and Mar. Dyer f. 107 63. and 4. ^ l. idem f. 208 ^. 27. H. 8.^^. b.
CHAP. XI. A Knight to be returned upon every panel where a Baron is party.
IN every Jury impannelled between any Baron of Parl. and other person
whatsoever, one Knight at the least is to be returned, which failing the array
may be quashed by challenge: A testimony hereof as well for spiritual as
temporal Barons is frequent.

CHAP. XII. No day of grace against a Baron.
12. E. 3. f. 9. ^. 27. E. 3. f. ^8. b. 27. H ^. f. 22. b.
IF a Baron of the Parl. be plaintiff or defendant in any action, and the
plaintiff or defendant pray a day of grace, he shall not have it against him,
and this is expressly affirmed in the books.

CHAP. XIII. Making deputies of places of trust committed to them.
O^ late years it was agreed in the case of Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury that
whereas the office of Steward-ship was granted to the Earl of Rutland, Te J^.
f. 4^ Cook^ (...)
without givi^g power to make a deputy (and this by Q. Eli^abeth) that ^et he
might exercise the same Office by Deputy, by reason of the n^c^ssity that is
supposed in the law to be of the Ea^l^s attendanc^ upon the King and the
Government of the Kingdom, the same reason is it seems for all Barons.

FINIS.

