BELLAMIRA, OR THE MISTRESS, A Comedy: As it is Acted by Their Majesty's
Servants.

Written by the Honorable Sir CHARLES SEDLEY Baronet.

Licensed, May 24. 1687.

Rog. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed by D. Mallet, for L. C. and Timothy Goodwin, at the
Maidenhead over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1687.

The PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Know very well the danger of Writing in such an age where the best Wits
Chose rather to be lookerson, then expose their stock of reputation to Public
censure. Nor did I design any to my self by this Play: It was originally
Maenanders in the Greek, Terence's in the Latin; whose great names gave me a
Curiosity to try how I could make it run in English: A Friend came to my
Chamber as I was upon the first Act, he seemed to approve my design: I told him
I found it extreme easy to go through with: And that if he could get it Acted
under his own or another Name, I would finish it for him: But for I know not
what reasons he could not do it; and I was obliged to own it my self, or my
friend had lost his third day The whole Play runs upon a Rape committed by a
Lover under the disguise of an Eunuch, and an indulgent Keeper, governed and
Jilted by his Imperious Mistress, which parts were so essential that they could
not be omitted, nor well fitted to our Stage without some expressions or
Metaphors, which by persons of a ticklish imagination, or over-quick sense that
way, seemed too lascivious for modest Ears; I confess after the Plays I have
seen lately Crowded by that fair Sex: the exception did not a little surprise
me; And this sudden change of theirs made me call to mind our English weather,
where in the same day a man shall Sweat in Crape, and wish for a Campagn Coat
three hours after. I am very unhappy that the Ice that has borne so many
Coaches and Carts, should break with my Wheel barrow: I confess to have taken
my Idea of Poetry more from the Latin than the French: and had rather be
accused of some Irregularities, than tire my Reader or Audience with a smooth
even stream of insipid words and accidents; such as one can neither like nor
find fault with. But Reader between what will not please, and what will not
pass at this time; there is so little left to be said on this or any other
Subject, that I will keep thee no longer at the Door. Go in and Judge for thy
self, see what the Modesty of this year takes offense at, and I am confident
thou will with me congratulate the happy change. And yet absolve both the Poet
and the Translator from any unpresidented indecency.

PROLOGUE.
IS it not strange to see in such an Age
The Pulpit get the better of the Stage?
Not through Rebellion as in former days,
But Zeal for Sermons and neglect for Plays.
Here Is as good Ogling vet, and fewer spies.
For Godly Parents watch with whites of Eyes.
Here Gallants do but pay us for your Room,
Bring if you please, your own brisk wit from home.
Proclaim your drunken fray's three benches round
What Claps you have met with, and what puuks are sound
Who are the Bully-rocks: and who gives ground.
We take all in good part, and never rage:
Tho the shrill Pit be louder than the Stage.
There you must sit demure, without a word:
Nor Perruque combed, nor Pocket tortoise stirred
Here you may give the Lie, or draw your Sword.
Be lowed and senseless, huff, dumbfound, and roar;
Till all the Lady's and some gallants scowre.
What free born subject, or true English heart,
Would with such Rights and Privileges part?
When our two houses did divide the Town,
Each Faction zealously maintained their own,
We lived on those that came to cry us down.
Our Emulation did improve your sport:
Now you come hither but to make your Court:
Or from adjacent Coffee Houses throng
At our sourth Act for a new Dance or Song.
To set all right we yet could make a shift;
Had we a few good Livings in our gift.
Your hearts are ours, and let whoever preach
The young and fair will practice what we teach.
Our Play old virtuous Rome the Eunuch named
But modest London the lewd title damned.
Our Author tried his own and could not hit:
He now presents you with some Foreign Wit.
Dramatis Personae.
Merryman. Keepwell. Lionel. Eustace. Cunningham. Dangerfield. Smoothly.
Pisquil.
Bellamira. Isabella. Thisbe. Silence. Betty.
Bullies. Bailiffs. Linkboyes.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Mixed Essays upon Tragedies, Comedies, Italian Comedies, English Comedies, and
Opera's to his Grace the Duke of Buckingham. Written Originally in French by
the Sieur de Saint EUREMONT.

Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead over against St. Dunstans
Church in Fleetstreet, 1687.

Bellamira, OR THE MISTRESS
ACT I. SCENE I.
Merriman and Keepwell. Merry. I Ever told you, this Woman would be the ruin
of you: all must go to make her fine, and every New Gown you give, gets you a
new Rival.


Keepw. Thou think all Money thrown away, that is not spent in a Tavern: thou
have no taste of Love, scarce any remains of Lust, or thou would never Rail
at so Divine a Creature as my Bellamira.


Merry. You are resolved to go to her again; notwithstanding the damned trick
she served you with the Sea Captain and your noble resolution to the contrary?
I Will see her hanged first! No, tho she beg it a thousand times, and with a
thousand tears, I Will n'e'r go near her!


Keepw. Did I say such bug-words?


Merry. Yes, and a great deal more.


Keepw. 'Twas when I was in my Altitudes, what? Rebel against my Lawful
Sovereign Bellamira! I Will go to her tho, and show her I am not such a Cully as
she takes me for.


Merry. Have a care what you do: If you once begin and don't go through with
her, you settle her Empire for ever; and when she finds her own strength, that
you are not able to leave her, she will use it like a Tyrant: And tho you be
the injured party, after six kind words and a false tear or two, you must make
your peace with a Present of China or a French Petticoat.


Keep. These are sad Truths; but when my Bell. frowns I had rather be in a
Sea Fight for the time, I Will say that for her, tho it is soon over. I gave her
but a dozen pair of Marshal Gloves, and she was in the purest Humor all day!
We took the Air in the afternoon, Sup't and went to Bed together.


Merry. That was a gaudy day indeed, but I fear you will give so long, till you
have nothing left.


Keepw. I had rather give a little Money, than Lie, Flatter and Forswear my self
as the Gallants of the Town do: I love to go to Sleep with a good Conscience.


Merry. And rise with never a Penny in your Pocket; if she loved you she would
not be so expensive.


Keepw. It Is all to please me. Before I knew her she wore a Gown six months;
and had but one poor Point of her own making.


Merry. Matters are well mended with her indeed since that time.


Keepw. I had the most to do to make her accept of an Imbroider'd Toylet.


Merry. How so?


Keepw. She said 'twas Money thrown away.


Merry. And would have it in Guineas, I warrant.


Keepw. Thou art a Witch, she cares not a Farthing for Fine Clothes; and but
for fear the Women of the Town should get me from her, would not dress her self
in a Month.


Merry. You are too indulgent a Keeper: the poor Sinners of the Town complain
of you; you raise the Market upon 'em.


Keepw. Why what would a man do?


Merry. Let one Nail drive out another: Take me a fresh Wench, a Bottle of Wine
or two, and go hear some Scandal at the Rose -- But here she comes, who with
one Look will confound all our Devices.


Enter Bellamira. Bella. Oh, my dear Keepwell! I am afraid thou art Jealous of
me, because I did not let thee in sooner; the news of it put me into such Fits,
all our Maids were too few to hold me.


Keep. The news of what?


Bella. Of a Duel I was told thou had fought: there was no body to run to the
Door; but thou saw there was no man with me.


Keep. I saw no man indeed, but am much mistaken if I did not hear one leap out
of your low Window into a Boat.


Bella. This Summer one or other is leaping into the River all night long.


Keep. Oh, that you loved like me; or I like you!


Bell. Why my dear Keepwell?


Keep. Why, then you would never use me thus, or if you did, it would not thus
afflict me: my heart is as full of Jealousy as an Egg full of meat.


Bell. I swear by all that's good there is no man on Earth so welcome to these
Arms, as thy dear self.


Keepw. Why did not you let me in sooner then?


Bell. I was just rising out of a Bath, and I will be seen haked by no man
Living.


Merry. Kind Soul! first she was in Fits for fear you were hurt; but now she
was coming out of a Bath, and could not in modesty let you in.


Keepw. She fell into Fits just as she came out of her Bath.


Bell. I have always your good word: But I had rather you should say any thing
of me, than kill my dear Keepwell with Drinking. But now I Will tell you the
business I came about: Can your Drunken Friend keep a Secret?


Merry. If it be a Truth; but it prove a Lie, a Flam, a Wheedle, 'twill out: I
shall tell it the next man I meet.


Bell. My Father was a Merchant, and Breaking here in Town, my Mother went to
Jamaica, and took me with her.


Merry. This may be kept secret.


Bell. There a Person of Quality fell in Love with her, and amongst other
Presents, gave her the finest Girl I ever saw, stolen out of England by some
Kidnappers.


Keep. What are they?


Bell. Rogues that make a Trade of Stealing Children and Selling them.


Merry. Was she a Gentlewoman?


Bell. She said so, and she seemed so.


Keep. Not so pretty as thou art I warrant her.


Bell. Her Father and Mother were Dead; her Brothers name she told us; my
Mother bred her as if she had been her own Child, so that most people thought
us Sisters; I came back with a Friend, the only Person I had then a Concern
with, who gave me all I have.


Merry. These are two Whiskers!


Bell. Why so?


Merry. Because you were never true to one Man: nor did he give you all you
have; my Friend here having presented you with two thousand Pound at least.


Bell. Will you let me go on with my Story? My Mother left this pretty Creature
Isabella almost grown a Woman, to an Uncle of mine, for some Money that she owed
him, and could not otherwise pay: He thinking she might yield a good Price,
carries her over into Spain, and there Sells her to one Dangerfield, who buys
her and puts her to wait on his Sister: he is now in England, and offers her me.


Merry. Did he know that she was formerly your Companion?


Bell. Not in the least; but since hearing of my concern with you, he seeks all
the excuses he can, not to perform his Promise; and says that he knows as soon
as I have, her he shall be slighted, and you received; for he has heard how
dearly I Love thee.


Keepw. All the Town knows there is no Love lost. Is this all?


Bell. No, I have a small request to thee my Dear.


Merry. Now for a Coach, new Bed, or the Payment of an old Debt.


Bell. You are mistaken Sir; could I help it I would not put my dear Keepwell
to the Charge of one of your Drunken Clubs in a Year.


Merry. You spend it him in Coach-hire, Puppy-water and Paint, every day of
your Life.


Bell. Peace, thou moving Dropsy, that wadlest with Fat, worse than a Goose
with Egg


Merry. No man that had to do with you, e're lost his Shape; Fluxing and
Sweating are great Preservatives.


Keep. This is rudeness and not Wit; come thou art my best Companion and she my
dearest Mistress. As our modern Poet has it; If not in Friendship, live at
least in Peace.


What is it thou would Command?


Bell. Command! only a trifling Suit I have.


Keep. It must be a strange one if I refuse it; Is it in my power?


Bell. It is.


Keep. Then speak and be sure to obtain it, as if thou ask'dst it of thy self.
I have not given thee any thing all this day.


Bell. It Is no Money matter: there are many Reasons why I would have this
Isabella from Dangerfield: First because we were bred together, like Sisters,
and of all the World I love her next thy dear self; and if I could restore her
to her Friends, who I hear are very considerable, I doubt not of a good Reward:
so that I shall never need trouble thee for any thing more.


Merry. This is a good Wheedle.


Keep. But how will you get her? You say Dangerfield repents him of his promise.


Bell. It Is but thy going into the Country for a day or two, and I shall easily
persuade that swaggering Fool out of her. You don't answer me.


Keep What should I answer thee, thou worst of Women?


Merry. She would only lie with this roaring Rascal a Night or two, while you
are in the Country: can you have the heart to deny her?


Keep. If I deny her, she will be outrageous; and if I do not, I shall have Elks
horns at my return. I understand you Isabella; and you were bred up like
Sisters, you would restore her to her Friends, and so Dangerfield must be
received, and I banished; and why? but that you love him better than ever you
did me, and are afraid this Young Wench should get the Lusty Stallion from you.


Bell. She loves me so, she would not be my Rival, though in thee, young, kind,
and handsome as thou art.


Keep. Is this Soldier then the only Man that made a considerable Present?
When has my Bounty failed? Didnot you ask the other Day a Blackamoor, and then
an Eunuch, out of a mere Humor, because Princes use 'em, and straight I pawned
a Ring to buy 'em for you? I should not urge my Bounty, did I not find that you
forget it. There was a Settlement drawing too.


Bell. Nay, rather than you shall take it ill, I will Renounce this Isabella,
the dear Companion of my Youth, for ever, and all the World beside.


Keep Did not you say you could renounce this Isabella, and all the World for
me?


Merry. Yes, rather than lose your Settlement.


Bell. I did; and will, my Dear! I can go into a Cloister, since I have lost my
power with you, I care not for the rest, I Will to a Monastery, and there I Will
Pray for you.


Keep. I scorn to be outdone in Kindness: I will go into the Country for a day
or two, and let Dangerfield do his worst. Go into a Monastery! I had rather
hold the Door my self.


Merry. When she is a Nun I Will be a Friar: They all say as much.


Keep. But, if she should, where should I have such another Dear, Pretty, Sweet
Rogue?


Merry. There are hundreds as fine Women to be had, by the day, by the week, or
how you will.


Keep. It Is not the first time she has threatened to go into a Monastery, upon
discontents between us: I was forced to give her a New Bed, the last Summer,
and Plate for her Chamber, or I had lost her.


Bell. It Is but two days, and I am thine for ever.


Keep. Hang two days among Friends.


Bell. It Is I shall be the greatest Sufferer, who must endure the Man I loath,
and part with him I love. Besides, this Dangerfield is such a troublesome
quarrelsome Fellow, I should never have one Minutes quiet, if you were in Town
together, for fear of some mischief or other.


Keep. Nay, there would be Bloodshed every hour, that is certain; I nenever
could endure a Rival in my Life.


Bell. I know thou art both brave and jealous, that makes me so afraid for
thee: If he should Kill thee, poor Dear, he has nothing to lose, and would
easily get his Pardon; but should thou Kill him, all the world cannot save
thee, thou have been such a Whig. Besides, I am too honest a Woman to have any
interest at Court.


Keep. It shall never come to that, I Will away into the Country, and as it
happens have a little business there; I shall come up so vigorous, and so
Loving; we will have a Sack-Posset, and go to Bod together, though it be at
Noonday: But see, my Friend, the Black a more and Eunuch be delivered to
Bellamira in my absence.


Merry. I will carry them my self, and try what Mettle Bellamira is made of in
his absence: she is the prettiest Wench in the Town, and his Present will make
me welcome.


Keep. For two long Days and todious Nights, Farewell.


Bell. I fear my Keepwell, thou think me one of those little Creatures of
the Town; but I have told thee nothing but the Truth: nor is there Man on Earth
I would prefer to thee. All I do, is merely in compassion to pretty Isabella,
in hope to restore her to her Brother, whom by some Tokens she gave me, I think
I have found, and am this Night to Treat with.


Keep. Farewell, my dearest Bellamira, I am gone.


Bell. Well, now I see thou do deserve my Love.


Enter Cuningham and Eustace. Cun. Yonder Is Merryman, Fat, Smooth, and looks
Young still; a very Bacchus incarnate.


Merry. I swallow more Wine, than Pills or Dyet-drink, sit up till Three, and
drink my three Bottles.


Cun. I met the pretty'st Creature in New Spring-Garden! her Gloves right
Marshal, her Petticoat of the New Rich Indian Stuffs, her Fan Colambor:
Angel-water was the worst Sent about her.

I am sure she was of Quality.


Merry. And I warrant, you think she came to meet you there?


Cun. Not so: She came to take her Fortune among the Young Fellows of the Town,
and Chance threw her upon me; I have found she lies in the Mall.


Merry. There are Whores of all sorts; but if she had lain in an Alley, you
might have more hope of her.


Cun. Have not you the best Wine and Tobacco, where you com


Merry. Yes, that I have.


Cun. Why then should you not think, a Man that makes it his business, as I do,
may have the finest Women?


Merry. I pay 'em well, and get custom to Taverns where I go; a Wench may
starve that has had to do with you; no Man will venture upon her, who has any
Reverence for his Nose: Nor have you any thing to give 'em but the Pox.


Cun. You can do as little to a Woman as I can give: And for your soundness, if
Palsy, Gout, and Dropsy may be called so, your drunken impotence is the
reason of it.


Eust. Will this Quarrel never be at end? Cuningham is the Darling of the
Ladies, and Merriman the delight of all good Fellows. What Is become of our Old
Friend Keepwel?


Merry. We have lost him: He was once an honest well humor'd Fellow, though he
had never much Wit, but since his Acquaintance with Bellamira.


Eust. What, she that was so well known at Jamaica?


Merry. That Is true, but he will not believe it: She has persuaded him 'twas an
Elder Sister's she is handsomer, and he more in Love with her than ever. You
know how miserable he was.


Eust. He always grudged his Club, if it came to above half a Crown.


Merry. How plain he went?


Eust. He bought all his Clothes of a Whole sale Man.


Merry. Now there is no Tailor curious enough for him.


Cun. It Is a great change, but I cannot blame him; she is a delicate Creature,
and I was one of the first that Debauched her.


Eust. I thought you would not have confessed so much Age.


Cun. I mean I was one of the first had her, after she came over: she Loved me
dearly, poor Rogue, but I was not able to maintain her.


Merry. One man may as well satisfy, as maintain her; she is the most
expensive Jade I ever knew; she has run Keepwell a thousand Pound in Debt
within this Twelve month: I have been at a woeful parting between them.


Cun. He has not turned her off I hope? For I go and Sup there sometimes, upon
the old account. She is one of my Piz Allez.


Merry. No; she has turned him off for two days: he has left an Eunuch in Town,
which I am to present her for him anon.


Cun. I Will tell you a Secret; I had like to have been surprised there by
Keepwell himselfe'ne now; we were just got to Bed together.


Eust. And how got you off?


Cun. She made him Knock half an hour at the Door, whilst I leapt out of one
of her lower Windows into a Boat that waited for me But Morriman, you must say
nothing upon honor, now you are trusted.


Merry. Not I, I have told him of thy lying with her and Forty others, an
hundred times, and he will never believe me; he is the most incorrigible Cully,
I begin to be of her side.


Cun. I will drink a Bottle more with thee at Night for that: A Man of honor
should always take the Ladies parts.


Eust. What made you run away? I thought you had been allowed to visit.


Cun. I am so, but not in my Shirt and Nightgown, as I was with her. She was
just out of a Bath, the Sweetest, Whitest, Plumpest, Kindest Rogue.


Eust. 'Twas a Damned disappointment.


Cun. Not quite, I took my leave of her like a Gentleman.


Merry. I wonder Keepwell continues sound, coming after thee in this manner.


Cun. There was a Plague in Sixty Six, but what is that to London now? there
was a Fire too: but it is since new Built, and more beautiful than ever; are
not you Sober now, though you were Drunk last Night?


Merry. Not quite.


Cun. A Dish of Coffee or two will make you so, and do you think there is no
Redemption in other Cases?

When they were first acquainted, I Writ all his Billet doux for him, for
Keepwell you know has nothing but the Purse and Dotage of a good Lover; he
would give me now and then five Guineas for a Song for her, which Ilet her know
was mine; when I saw her next, we Laughed at the poor Fool together.


Merry. I Will say that for him, he is fitted with a Friend and a Mistress.


Cun. You know he is but a dull silly Fellow.


Merry. And therefore you may very honestly pretend Friendship, borrow his
Money and lie with his Mistress.


Cun. A Pious Citizen that goes to Church twice a day, will play the Knave in a
Bargain; a Lawyer take your Fee, and for a good Sum of Money, be absent when
your Cause is tried; a Parson Marry you to a great Fortune without a License;
We are all Regues in our way, and I confess Woman is my weak side; And yonder
goes an odd Fellow, with a very pretty Wench: what a Toss she has with her
head, and a jett with her breech?


Merry. 'Slight, it is Smoothly, Dangerfield's man, carrying that pretty
Creature to Bellamira, for a Present from his Master.


Cun. She has as good a Face as Bellamira her self.

Eustace's Man brings him a Note.
Eust. Smallwit, Wildman, and Lyonel, have sent their excuses, and cannot Dine.


Merry. Let Us give the House something, and Dine there to Morrow: I am invited
to a Vension-Pasty, and a dozen-bottles among Four.


Cun. I have some Ladies to Entertain at Knightsbridge; and hate a nasty Tavern.


Eust. Since you are all provided for, I Will shift, for my self.

[Exeunt.
Enter Bellamira and Thisbe. Bell. He Is gone, and we are free as Mountain Air.


This. You have absolute Dominion over him; but to make him accessory to his
own disgrace, was such a Masterpiece!


Bell. Now will he entertain a better opinion of me than ever: he will think I do
nothing without his consent, since I once asked him it, and in so nice a Point.


This. What said Merryman, my sweet Guardian?


Bell. All he could, you must take him off for me.


This. I am but his second Inclination; a Drawer in a good Tavern has more
Interest in him, than I.


Bell. But Keepwell is the Loyalest Cully! nothing will make him Mutiny.


This. Sure you think he can read in no Book but his own, or you durst never
use him so.


Bell There are few of those Clerks now-adays: this is a Learned Age. When saw
you Cuningham?


This. He comes sometimes and professes his Love and Soundness to me.


Bell. Believe him in neither, they say he is a false Fellow.


This. Theard he was formerly a great Servant of yours.


Bell. What a Lying World this is! I never saw him in my Life.


This. That Is strange and live about this Town.


Bell. Is he handsome? Black? or Fair?


This. Between both.


Bell. Has he much Wit?


This. As if you did not know!


Bell. I swear, not I.


This Jilting Devil! I Would not know him so well for a Thousand Pound: but it is
the Trick of most of 'em; tho they own Twenty, they will forswear some one.


Bell. Oh, that I had thy Youth, and Beauty!


This. You have enough of both, considering your Judgment and Experience.


Bell. We Women are easiliest deceived, when we are most worth it: Cunning and
Wrinkles come together.


This. You have no reason to complain; all the young Fellows that come out of
France, pay Tribute to you, as certainly as to the Groom-Porter: I wonder
Keepwell is never told of it.


Bell. He has been told it a hundred times: Two or three Stories that the
Authors have not been able to make out, have don me great Service; and so
confirmed my Empire.


This. But you are in continual fear.


Bell. I have broke him of all his Censorious Acquaintance.


This. That was a great Point gained; but how?


Bell. I tell him such a one will Cheat him, another will bring him into
Quarrels, a third speaks ill of him behind his Back, a fourth is obnoxious to
the great ones, and will hinder his Preferment: So that I have scarce left him
one Friend that will tell him a true word.


This. You are a great Politician.


Bell. There goes more to our Trade, than a good Face: I have known many of
these unthinking Butterflyes, Debauched, Pox'd, and in Goal, the same Summer:
Let Us up into my Chamber; I must set my self out for Dangerfield he will be here
anon.


This. Will you use the Paint was sent in by the French Woman this Morning?


Bell. By all means: Lying and Painting are sure Baits to Catch a Fool with.


This. What sort of Fellow is that Dangerfield?


Bell. A Beau Garcon of Fifty, with a Blew Chin, stiff Beard, and soforth. --
Loves the Old Fashioned Greasy way of giving Treats, will Dance Country Dances
till he Sweat like a Running Footman; tires himself first, and then makes Love.


This. They say he has been Hansome.


Bell. 'Twas so long ago every Body has forgot it, but himself: He is a
pretender to Wit; but his is worse than none: as a Country Scraper is worse
than no Music at all,


This. And yet this Fellow for a little Money,


Bell. No, for a great deal of Money. I will make the Presents he gives me, my
Baits to Catch others with: fine, Clothes and rich Furniture, are great
Provocatives to those that don't pay for'em, which are the Men for our Turn.


This. Like the Gentlemen that live in Town, you have your pleasure in one
place, and receive your Rent from an other: it is the way to have your I enement
thrown into your Hands.


Bell. Keepwell has taken a Lease for Life, and laid out so much in
Improvemtnts, that I am secure of him; and for the rest, they shall pay me as
they are Able.


This. My Guardian and I have now and then a small Quarrel, about my keeping
you so much Company.


Bell. What, Merryman? I thought he had made Love to you.


This. He dos sometimes.


Bell. He has then forfeited his Charter and ought to Talk no more like a
Guardian.


This. Perhaps he dos not like it as a Lover.


Bell. Does he not see that we Govern the Town? have Power and Plenty follow
us? we Visit, Dance, Play at Cards, go to Hide-Park, St. James's, and Sup
together, and are a World among our Selves.


This. But like the Inhabitants of the other World, you neither Marry, nor are
given in Marrige; and he would have me fit for a Husband.


Bell. Get Money enough and you can never want a Husband. A Husband is a good
Bit to Close ones Stomach with, when Love's Feast is over. Who would begin a
Meal with Cheese? Come into my Chamber, and I will instruct thee farther in
these Mysteries.


ACT II. SCENE I
Keepwell, and Merryman. Merry. WHAT, not gone yet? hovering like a Ghost, about
your Treasure?


Keep. I stayed to see how my Presents took: you have delivered 'em, I hope,
what says my Bellamira?


Merry. The Meat's hardly out of my Mouth, and I am for no Exercise upon a full
Stomach: it is too far to walk yet.


Keep. Take a Coach,


Merry. That Is as bad as the Rack, to a Man of my Intemperate, and Voracious
Appetite: I am so full I should spill Terso at every jolt. We drank Gallons a
piece.


Keep. You are Drunk then.


Merry. No, Sober enough to be your Worship's Pimp, and diliver your Humane
Gelding to Bellamira.


Keep. But will you go about it Instantly, and make have?


Merry. Survey my Bulk: it was not built for have;

It Is the slow product of Tuns of Claret, Chines of Beef, Ven'son-Pastyes, and
so-forth.


Keep. Now you are in this humor, you will talk some Wit to her and spoil all.


Merry. I Will be there, before you are half a Mile out of Town, and say the
sweetest things of you!


Keep. Thou think I cannot leave my Bellamira, now it comes to the Point.


Merry. I am somewhat doubtful.


Keep. Yes if it were for three days, now I am resolved.


Merry. What, a whole three days! Thou have a Heart of Iron.


Keep. Could you be Sober so long?


Merry. Yes to save the Nation, or so.


Keep. Nothing less serve the turn?


Merry. Yes or to oblige Mrs. Thisbe, my Charge.


Keep. Thou have always Wine and Women in thy Head together: a sure sign thou
are but an indifferent Tilter -- Well, I am in have, be sure you go, and omit
nothing that may endear my small Present to her.

Exit
Merry. He Is gone; but here comes our Rival's Servant, with that Beautyful young
Creature, again: It seems Bellamira was not at home. I Will step aside and
observe her.


Enter Smoothly, and Isabella. Smooth. There is as much difference between Man
and Man, as between Man and Beast: This Fool my Master gives away this pretty
young Creature, to a stale Wench, I am but a Servant, and must obey; but were I
to choose.


Isa. Peace, Impudence; were I to choose, I Would choose a Halter before either of
you.


Smooth. I was not always thus a Servant, as you see me, I am a Gentleman, and
once had an Estate, but now it is gone, must live on others, as others did on me.


Isa. Perhaps so.


Smooth. I now am fain to Lie, and Flatter for my Bread, shift for my Clothes,
and humor every Idle Coxcomb to get a Piece or two: Does my Patron lose?
Fortune favors Fools: Does he Win? sweet is his hand, and happy are his
Servants. Is he Dwarfish? his Strength is the more compact: Is he Tall? such
the first Monarch's were, when Kingdoms went by Choice: Is he Ugly, and Witty
which must ever be? such Ovid was, whom Julia so prized: Is he Hansom? such was
Adonis, whom fair Venus Loved.


Isa. And were you never Cudgel'd, for this nauseous Flattery?


Smooth. There are a sort of Men who think themselves the first in all kinds,
and are the last; these I get acquainted with: nor do I attempt to please'em
with my Wit, but win their hearts an easier way, by Applauding theirs If any
of them tell an old Tale, that I have Read in Print, straight I never heard any
thing so well, and listen to it as if it were my Fathers last Will and
Testament. Does he offer at a Jest? I dye with Laughing, before his Mouth
opens. Does he walk Home, without taking Cold? he is hardy and fit to be a
General.


Isa. You are a fine Rogue all this while! And what else?


Smooth. In short, I say as they say, deny what they deny, like what they like,
and if they dispraise it again, I am ready to do so too; and find my account
very well in it; while those Fops, that are fond of showing their own Wit, are
hated by all my Customers; who are the only Men there is any thing to be gotten
by.


Merry. This is a notable Fellow; and if he finds Men Fools, is enough to
make'em Mad.


Isa. Were I a Man, I had rather dye than sell my words, and prostitute my
Voice to every Fool.


Smooth. Don't Lawyers, Physicians, and Courtiers, when they take Money for a
good Turn, sell their words? There was a blunt Comrade of mine of your mind;
but I found him the other day all in Rags, not a Penny in his Pocket, nor a
Friend to help him: I have nothing, and yet want nothing; strong and able;
other Men's Meat, and Drink, and Wives serve my Turn.


Isa. Leave your Prating, and move forward.


Smooth. Sure you are some disguised Princess, you take upon you so.


Isa. What I am I know not, and am only sure I am miserable.


Smooth. What Is here my Rivals Friend Merryman, before Bellanair's Door? I knew
him when I was last in Town. Your most Humble Servant Worthy Sir.


Merry. Yours, honest Smoothly.


Smooth. Will you not go in?


Merry. I have no business at present.


Smooth. You may be welcome, for your Friend Keepwell's sake.

Do you see nothing here you would not see?


Merry. Nothing but thy self.


Smooth. You keep your old blunt way; but, look you what here is! Look you what
here is! What will not Bellamira do for such a Bribe?


Merry. Every Dog has his day:


Smooth. Let me not keep you here, you were going some where else.


Merry. Not I.


Smooth. Pray then, will you Introduce me to Madam Bellamira?


Merry. You need not fear admittance, with such a Present.


Smooth. But perhaps you stand here, to see that no man brings any Message from
Dangerfield.


Merry. You are pleasant! but if I did I Would Cudgel you farther off.


Smooth. He is Angry, and the Fat Fool is Stout: I Will not provoke him.

Exeunt Smooth. and Isabella.
Merry. Yonder Is Lionel, Keepwell's younger Brother, he comes in have, and
seems to have something in his Head.


Enter Lionel. Lionel. I am undone! ruined! I have lost the sight of this
Pretty Creature, and shall never find her more! which way shall I go? whom
shall I enquire of? what shall I do, to have a Glimps of her? I have only this
comfort; where e're she is, she is too Beautiful to be long Concealed. From
henceforth, I blot all former Faces out of my heart: I am tired with these
daily Beauties of the Town, whom we see Painted and Pateh'd in the Afternoon in
the Play house, in the Evening at the Park, and at Night in the Drawing room;
so that we have half enjoyed 'em before we speak to'em


Merry. Lost! Undone! Beautiful! I am sure I heard these words plain: he is in
Love, and after the manner of that sort of Madmen is talking to himself, of his
Mistress; If he be we shall have fine work; there are Ten Keepwells in that
Lionel: he will commit Rapes, Burglaries, Fire houses, or any thing, but he will have
her; and for Money, he will throw it a way like Dirt. I pity his poor Father; but
he Grudged his Money for honest Terse, and so he is right enough served.


Lion. Eternal Palsies on that Cuningham's Hands, may he never be able to put
his Dice into the Box; but when he does may he throw out for ever. May he Win
of Beggars and lose to Bullies, and dote on Whores as Rotten as himself. But I
was mad to mind him: how I envy yon' Merryman, whose sluggish Blood moves in an
even stream, and never knows these Storms!


Merry. What Is the matter? you look as if you were Drunk.


Lion. I am worse; I am mad; I am any thing; I am in Love.


Merry. How Keepwell will Laugh at you! But with whom?


Lion. Not with a stale Wench, like him; nor any of the little Tinsel, short
Lived Beauties of the Town, squeezed into shape by Tailors, and starved into it
by their Mothers.


Merry. How then?


Lion A new turn of a Face, unknown till now to Nature's self, in all her
Numberless Varieties.


Merry. It Is wond'erous; you are Mauled; Cupid has shot you with a Blunderbus.


Lion. What Eyes! Teeth, white --


Merry As a new Tobacco-pipe


Lion. Peace Profane Wretch, thou art not fit to mingle in these Mysteries.
Her own Complexion; her Body solid and full of Juice; the Noblest Fabric of
unstinted Nature!


Merry. Her Age?


Lion. Seventeen.


Merry. I have drunk excellent Hockamore of that Age.


Lion. Damn thy dull Hockamore and thy base Jaded Pallat, that affects it;
Could I but get this Divine Creature into my hands, by Fraud, Force, Price,
Prayer, any way so that I enjoy her, I care not.


Merry. Who is she? she may be a Person of Quality, and you may bring an old
house upon your head


Lion. It Is but a Duel or two that way; and if her Relations be Numerous, we will
Fight Six to Six, and make an end on it.


Merry. What Country Woman is she?


Lion. I know not.


Merry. Where does she live?


Lion. I cannot tell,


Merry. We are upon a very cold Scent: where did you see her?


Lion. In the Street; with a Servant behind her.


Merry. How come you to lose her?


Lion. That Is it I was Cursing at, as I met you: Nor do I think there is a Man
whom all the Stars conspire against like me. What Crime have I committed, to be
thus Plagued?


Merry. The Stars are Pretty Twinkling Rogues, that light us home, when we are
Drunk sometimes, but neither care for you, nor me, nor any man.


Lion. You know Cuningham?


Merry. Intimately: a good honest Fellow; a little too much a Servant to the
Ladies, given to Gaming.


Lion. Pox of his Character!


Merry. The Pox is part of his Character indeed, but I had forgot that.


Lion. Will you not let me go on with my Story? This Fellow meets me in the
nick of time, while I was following this Divine Creature, pulls me aside, and
tells me I must be his Second; I go with him, we Fight, Disarm our Men, but when
I came back the Bird was flown. nor could I learn any News of her.


Merry. I hat's very unlucky.


Lion. 'Twas a Disaster never to be recovered, a Total overthrow to all my
happiness: I had not seen him neither these six Months.


Merry Why did you not refuse him?


Lion. He Is a Malicious Fellow, and would have told the whole Town of it, if I
had; it was Impossible. I lost her in this Street.


Merry. Are you sure of that? I Will be Sober a Twelve Month, if this be not the
very young Woman Dangerfield presented this Afternoon, to Belamira, your
Brothers Mistress.


Lion. There was a Man followed her.


Merry. The very same: and that was his Servant Smoothly.


Lion. You know her then?


Merry. Not I; but I know whither she went


Lion. Do know where she is, my Dear Merryman?


Merry. Don't I tell you she was presented to Bellamira by Dangerfield, your
Brother's Rival?


Lion. A Mighty Prince this Dangerfield, that is able to make such a Present: My
Brother will have a hard time on it.


Merry. You would say so indeed, if you saw his Present.


Lion. What is it?


Merry. An Eunuch.


Lion. What, that Illfavour'd Fellow he bought yesterday, that looks like an
old Woman or a Ginnoy Ape?


Merry. The same.


Lion. He that earries him will be kicked out of Doors with his Present.


Merry. I hope not so; for I have promised to diliver him.


Lion. I did not know Bellamira was our Neighbor.


Merr. She is lately come hither.


Lion. Is she very handsome?


Merr. She is well.


Lion. Not comparable to mine.


Merr. That Is your fancy: Of Children Mistresses, and Religions our own are
still the best.


Lion. But is there no way to come at her? Thou usest to be good at a dead
lift: I Will Fire the house and then at least I shall see her again.


Merr. Violent ways are to be used at last: I Will see what I can do for you.


Lion. Oh happy Eunuch! that art to live in the same house with this Divine
Creature.


Merr. Why so? the nearer he is to a fine Woman, the more sensible must he be
of his loss.


Lion. But he will see continually his fair fellow Servant, sit by sometimes and
talk with her, eat with her, and if nothing else, sleep near, and hear her
breath.


Merr. What if I should make you this happy man?


Lion. It is Impossible: but speak; men past recovery are pleased to talk of
Remedies.


Merr. I am entrusted to present this Eunuch to Bellamira: what if you put on
his Clothes, and went with me in his room?


Lion. I Would gladly change Conditions, Fortunes, and every thing but one with him.


Merr. I will present you instead of him; and you shall enjoy those rare
Felicities you reckoned but up now, you shall sit by her, dress and undress
her, touch, play with, and sleep near her; your age and Face will easily pass
you for an Eunuch, and somewhat mend your Brother's ill-favored Present.


Lion. You say right: I never knew a better design; let us about it instantly,
undress me, dress me, and bring me to her immediately.


Merr. You are too hot: I was but in jest all this while.


Lion. Cut my Throat, Stab me, if thou will not go on with this design.


Merr. Let me think a little: Is not this Plot too fine spun to hold? you must
be gelt indeed, or 'twill never pass; you will betray your self.


Lion. Never fear it, my Face is not so much as known among 'em, the Plot is
admirable, and cannot fail, what should I do there, if I were gest?


Merr. You might look upon, touch, and sleep near your fair Fellow Servants.


Lion. That will not do: I must and will enjoy her; thou wilt hear of me in Bedlam
else.


Merr. I shall have all the blame: besides, it is a dishonest action.


Lion. To save a Friend's life, is an honest action: nor can it be any wrong,
to Cozen those that Cozen all the World.


Merr. I Will serve you for once; but if any mischief comes on it, thank your self.


Lion. I Will dye, and never accuse thee.


Merr. You are strangely smitten at the first sight!


Lion. No. I saw her once when I was last in Spain, kneeled by her at Mass, and
talked of Love to her; but coul'd not learn her Name or Quality: next day, she
said she was to come for England.

I might have been dressed, and there by this time, le'ts away.

Exeunt
Enter Bellamira, Isabella, and This be. Bell. My dearest Isabella! now I have
gotten thee here, I could hug thee to pieces.


Isa. I am your Slave, your Servant, and all my Hopes the Creatures of your
Goodness.


Bell. How did thy Youth and Beauty escape the roaring Dangerfield?


Isa. He placed me with his Sister in the house, and she took care of me; but
if at any time he offered to be rude, I held a Dagger to my Breast, and vowed
to kill my self.


Bell. How chance he did not take it from thee?


Isa. He did, and then I vowed I Would starve my self to Death: he laughed at me a
while; but when he saw me pale, and weak, fully resolved to perish, he gave it
me again: and so I escaped.


Bell. My Isabella, tell me truly, were thou never in Love?


Isa. What mean you, Madam?


Bell. Did thou never find a Man more Charming than the rest, whose every
word reached through thy Ears, thy Heart, whom thou cou'd'st sit and gaze upon
all day, and sigh, and wish for all night?


Isa. I have so many defects already, why will you press me to own a weakness,
perhaps you will despise me for?


Bell. No, I my self have been in Love, and have had always some one Friend to
whom I would gladly sacrifice what I got from others.


Isa. If that be to be in Love, I never was.


Bell. That Is our way, who know the Perjuries and Vislanies of Men; How they
all begin alike, with Vows, Oaths, and Protestations; and end alike with
Slights and Scorns and Falsehood: some difference there may be for a while, but
no great matter.


Isa. And are they all of this deceitful make?


Bell. All that ever I met with; What is it a false hearted Man will not swear to
such a pretty young Creature as thou art?


Isa. And will they Lie too, when they have Sworn?


Bell. Most certainly; but we that have experience, mind words no more than
they themselv's do, and only regard their Presents. Say a kind thing! every
pitiful Fellow can do that: give me a Man that will do a kind thing.


Enter Thisbe. This. Are you upon that subject? I have a couple of Servants,
one is as much too Lean, as the other is too Fat; I would not lose one of 'em
for the World, they are Admirable in Consort, Grumbling Base, and Squeaking
Treble.


Bell. What, Merryman your Guardian and Cuningham?


This. The same; Men of Wit both: one a plain substantial Drunkard, I am sure
to hear of him when he gets a Bottle in his Head, for then he ever thinks of
Women; as Cowards do of Quarrelling, and most commonly I am she.


Bell. How does the other behave himself?


This. He Is seldom in a condition to drink Wine; but he will sit a whole
Afternoon at Cards, and say the softest things!


Bell. And the sharpest behind your back.


This. It Is all one for that, it is like I am even with him at the Years End.


Bell. But pretty Isabella will not make her Confession to us.


Isa. It Is not worth your hearing. When I was Sold to Dangerfield by your
wicked Uncle, in Spain I saw a man,


Bell. That Is my dear Girl! Come up with it.


Isa. Of the Divinest Form these Eyes had e're beheld.


This. Never be ashamed: Love, like the Small Pox, since it must be, is best had
while we are young.


Isa. He Kneeled by me one day at Mass, and looked, and said, and sighed, the
kindest things! He seemed surprised with me, as I was Charmed with him.


Bell. Damned wheadling Rogue! And all this at first sight I warrant.


Isa. We never met, but then: next day I came for England: but sure I never
shall be won to love another.


Bell. Pretty Innocence! this is a Nation of such men thou talk of; every
Street affords a dozen of 'em. Come, thou shall Love, and Love, and Love again,
never fear it.


This. We Will show her the Park, the Playhouse, and the Drawing Room.


Bell. She needs no Paint, for Complexion, but 'twill not be amiss to to use
Juniper Water, for good Humor, she is so melancholy, and looks as if she would
not be acquainted.


This. It is fit men make the advance.


Bell. Some are such Jades, they must be Spurred up, with a quick Eye, or wanton
Glance.


Enter Silence and Betty. Silence. Madam the Picture drawer stays for you: he
says you need not sit above half an hour.


This. This is some new Intrigue: Who is this Picture for?


Bell. It was begun for Keepwell, but I have promised it to Dangerfield. I hate
the boistrous Fool, he may have that, but never the Original, tho he shall pay
for every Inch on it.

Ex. all but Silence and Betty.
Betty. We are Servants and must be diligent in our Calling. I am sorry we are
like to be troubled with this puling Isabella, there is more ado with her, then
with my Mistress herself: she is so proud and Melancholy, one cannot get a word
from her in a day.


Sil. Who can blame her? she is well Born of a good Family in Devonshire; her
Father and Mother died when she was a Child, she has no friend left but her
Brother, and him she knows not where to find yet, and if she should, it is
doubtful after being so long lost, whether he would own her now.


Betty. As the World goes it is like he may be willing to save her Portion


Sil. She has nothing at present to depend upon, but the Friendship of
Bellamira: and if she be virtuous, as I believe she is, what a trouble must
that be to her! Go and see if she wants any thing.


Betty. Let Us both go I hate a strange Face.


Sil. Especially if it be better than your own.

Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I
Dangerfield, and Smoothly. Dang. I Fear poor Bellamira will lay it to Heart, I
have not seen her yet: how does she like my Present?


Smooth. She is Ravished with it: yet seems to Prise the Giver Incomparably
beyond the Gift.


Dang. I Will say that for Dangerfield, and a Figue for him, he makes his
Presents with the best Grace of any Man in England, they are always well
received.


Smooth. I have observed it ever. A Beating is better taken from you then any
Man living.


Dang. I thank 'em for that; who dares do otherwise?


Enter Merryman and Lionel. Merry. Hold your Countenance, for yonder is
Dangerfield.


Lion. Never doubt me: Tho I could laugh heartily, at this Martial Dress, and
Furious Mien.


Dang. What ever was bravely performed in the Army, I still had the Honor
on it; the General would have it so: to others he was not so Favorable.


Smooth. He that has your Wit, will make a small Service go a great way; and
often Reap in safety, the Fruit of other Men's dangers


Dang. Right: Not but I venture my Body as bravely as the meanest Soldier, when
the General will let me, but, to say the Truth he seldom will, he loves me so
Entirely,


Smooth. You charge as if you were Shot-free.


Dang. It Is my Comfort, that he that Shoots one Bullet into me, may chance to
drive another out. The General wares me next his Heart, and often Trusts the
Army to my single Conduct.


Smooth It shows he is well Skilled in Men.


Dang. And if at any time he is Tired with Impertinence of Suitors; the Noise
and tumults Incident to his great Charge; he steals away with a Friend or two
to me, there he unfolds his Wrinkled-Brows and Steeps his Cares in Wine within
my Tent.


Smooth. The General, it seems, understands his Pleasure, and knows good
Company.


Dang. No Man better. The Officers began to Envy me, and Mutter some od things;
speak out the Boldest of them dare not. How does this Feather become me?


Smooth. Most Victoriously; You look like the Black Prince when he, had just
Plumed the Prince of Denmark


Dang. Thou art a pretty Historian, I have been told I am like him: but I Will
tell thee, a certain young Captain, Bolder then the rest, seeing me Gay and
Frolic, lashing every Body with my Wit, as thou know my way is; Sneer'd me
in the Face, and asked me, if I would never have Sown my wild Oats? I told him
I could never Sow'em in a better time, than when there was such a Goose as he
by to pick'em up.


Smooth Ha, ha, ha! You put the Goose upon him finely there; but what said he?


Dang. Nothing: the whole Company Laughed on my side; and he sneaked away like
a Dog, with a Bottle at his Tail.


Smooth. I Will say that for you, You are the best at Repartees!


Merry. This is the most Flalttering Knave, and Dangerfield the greatest
Coxcomb, I ever saw.


Lion. He Swallows any thing: they are well met.


Dang. Did never hear how I served the Colonel, at Bartholomew-Fair?


Smooth. (He has told it me Fifty times; but I must prepare to Laugh at it
again.) Never Sir; I long to hear it.


Dang. I had a pretty Wench with me; he star'd her in the Face somewhat Rudely:
at last I told him, I wondered he that was but but a Hare himself, should have
a mind to a Cony!


Merry. That Is one of the vilest Quibbles, I ever heard.


Lion. Let Us hear how that Rogue will Flatter him for it.


Smooth. Ha, ha, ha! You had as good have called him Coward: a Hare is the
fearfullest of all Beasts. Ha, ha, ha! I could dye with Laughing, methinks I
see him poor Fool!


Dang. I meant it so; but he durst not understand me. From that time forward I
kept the whole Town in Awe with my Wit


Smooth. I would not come under your Lash, for a Thousand Pounds.


Dang. No, no, thou art an honest Fellow, and a great Judge of Wit and Parts.
Thou shall hear me Sing a Song that I made upon a Spanish Princess. SONG.
When first I made Love to my Cloris,
Cannon Oaths I brought down
To Batter the Town,
And I find her with Amorous Stories.
Billets Doux like small Shot did ply her,
And sometimes a Song
Went whizizng along,
But still I was never the nigher.
At last she sent Word by a Trumpet,
If I liked that Life
She would be my Wife,
But never be any Man's Strumpet.
I told her that Mars would not Marry,
And Swore by my Sears,
Single Combats, and Wars,
I Would rather Dig Stones in a Quarry.


But is Bellamira satisfied I have no concern for Isabella?


Smooth. Havo a care of that: on the Contrary do all you can to make her
Jealous. It Will keep her in Awe: and when she Names Keepwel, be sure you to
Answer her with Isabella: If she commend his Dancing, be sure to praise her
Singing; if she speak of his Shape, Extol her Face: give her as good as she
brings; 'twill make her Mad.


Dang. Ay, if she Loved me.


Smooth. How can she Choose? Your Person, your Parts, and your Reputation, are
able to Charm any Woman Living: they all Love Soldiers; and while she expects,
and Loves, what you give, she Loves you, and will fear that the Stream of your
Bounty should turn another way.


Dang. Thou say right; I wonder I should not think of it my self.


Smooth. If you had thought at all, you would certainly; and of a Thousand
better Devices than my poor Brains can furnish you with.


Enter Bellamira; and Silence. Bell. I think I heard the Thundering Voice of my
brave Man of War, welcome, my Hero, my Hercules! what would thy Enemies give
that I could hold thee thus for ever?


Dang. It would save'em Ten Thousand Men's Lives, besides Castles, Towns, and
their Dependances: but, my Life, my Joy, how do thou like my Present? Is It
not a fine Girl? I could have had what Money I would of my General abroad, or
here; but, I thought that below a Man of Honor: We had like to have Quarreled
about her.


Merr. This is a Bragging Coward, as sure as a Painted Whore has an ill
Complexion of her own: How bravely he begins with his own Honor, his Courage
and his General!


Lion. And how he magnifies his own Present! which, to say truth, another could
not praise too much.


Merr. I have a small Present from your banished Servant Keepwell; but you are
going out.


Bell. Not yet; but anon I must.


Dan. What, do we stay? I am in a Fever; I have not had Woman these two days.


Merry. I will but deliver what was committed to my Charge for her and then
leave the Fever you complain of, to her Cure.


Dan. Some rare business, I warrant, we know the depth of Keepwel's Purse.


Merry. You shall see that, this Girl here is of Ethiopia, of the Royal Blood
there. I le out lie him, if possible.


Dang. I bought a better for five Guineas, and gave her this Morning to my
Landladi's Daughter.


Smooth. She looks like a Warden Roasted in the Embers, or the outside of a
Gammon of Bacon.


Merry. Come forward, here is an Eunuch; a rare Jewel, how like you him?


Bell. He has a very good Face! How long have you been an Eunuch?


Lion. I never remember my self otherwise.


Merry. What faies Dangerfield, and Smoothly, ha, what fault do you find? They
are silent, that is praise enough for an Enemy. Try him in Italian, French,
Spanish, Music, Danceing.


Dan. If I had this Eunuch alone, he should find I were none.


Bell. Go in Pisquil, and look to your Charge.


Merry. And yet, Madam, my Friend that sends these Gifts, does not ask that you
should live for him alone. Nor does he tell of his Fights; Battles, Storms,
Sieges: nor does he boast of his Scars as some do; but, when it shall be no
trouble to you and when you please, think it enough if he then be Received.


Dang. You are very officious for your Friend Sir.


Merry. I shall take a time to tell you, what you are, Sir


Smooth. Officious for your Friend! Ha, ha, ha! You had as good have called him
Pimp.


Dang. What do Laugh at?


Smooth. At what you said to him even now.


Merry. Thou that cast stoop to Flatter him thus, would Eat Fire in a Fair
for thy living, or Rake thy Meat off from a Dunghill


Bell. Let Us not go together.

[Exit. Merryman.
Dang. I long to play my lower Tire of Guns at thee.


Bell. Go before to the Walk you know of by Kensington, and I Will meet you there.


Dang. I Will fly thither, as I were to beat up an Enemy's Quarters.

[Ex. Dang. and Smooth.
Bell. If Eustace comes hither; when I am away, desire him to stay: If not, to
come again: If he cannot, bring him to me; you know where I Sup: Be sure you
take care of Isabella, and let none come to her but the Eunuch.

[Ex. Omnes.
Enter Lionel, and Isabella. Isa. Why do gaze and follow me thus, as if thou
were my Shadow?


Pisq. I am the Shadow of a Man indeed.


Isa. Leave me; and when I want thy Attendance, I will send for thee.


Pisq. Bellamira charged me, not to stir from you, 'twou'd ill become me to
disobey her first Commands.


Isa. Thou art my Jailer then?


Pisq. Not so; I am your faithful Servant, and hope my Attendance, as it is to
me a Pleasure, is to you no Burden.


Isa. Were thou never in Spain?


Pisq. Why do you ask?


Isa. I know not, only a Foolish Curiosity I had: but 'is Impossible. Joy seeks
out Crowds, and Numbers; but Griefs, like mine affect Retirement.


Pisq. You do Indulge your Melancholy too much; If I may be so Bold, it strik's
an Air of Sadness through the House.


Isa. I would not have my Griefs Infectious: Go play among your Fellows.


Pisq. I have no power to stir.


Isa. How so?


Pisq. I fear you will do your self some mischief, when I am gone: I dare not trust
the Tempest on your Brow.


Isa. It is a harmless Storm, and will fall suddenly in Tears.

The more I look upon this Youth, the more I think on him I loved in Spain:
Those Eyes, that Face, and that bewitching shape!


Pisq. Pray leave me.

If I have offended, be gracious; and chide me; but do not thrust me from your
presence.


Isa. Alas! I find no fault with thee at all; It Is Fate and my unhappy Stars,
that I repine at.


Enter Betty. Betty. Madam, the Bath that was Commanded, is prepared.


Isa. There I may steep my Limbs, but not my Grief assuage.

[Exeunt.
Enter Eustace. Eust. The more I think of Bellamira's sending after me in this
manner, the more I am to seek what she means. When I went first to her, she
entertained me with a deal of Discourse, far fetched, nothing to the purpose:
At last she asked me, how long my Father and Mother had been Dead? I told her,
a great while; then if I had not a Seat in Devonshire, near the Sea? which I
have. May be she has a mind to it, and thinks to get it of me. At last, if I
had not lost a young Sister? who she was with, and what she had about her when
she was lost? What she asked all these Questions for, I cannot guess; unless
she would put her self upon me for that Sister, but if she be alive, she cannot
be above seventeen; and Bellarima is as old as my self. Now she shall speak her
mind ploinly, or trouble me no more. Is your Mistress within.


Enter Silence. Sil. No; but she desires to speak with you to Morrw, about the
old business.


Eust. Come hither, let me talk with you a little about the old business.


Sil. I Will come no nearer; I know your Tricks well enough.


Eust. Will Ten Guineas do you any harm?


Sil. Nor Twenty neither; but what shall I tell my Mistress? Will you come?


Eust. I go into the Country to Morrow.


Sil. Pray come: She says you will repent it, if you do not:


Eust. I cannot possibly.


Sil. Will you stay here at our house, till she comes in?


Eust. Yes if you will stay with me.


Sil. Not I. You do so touse and tumble one, and keep one so hot.


Eust. Thou art a pretty Maid, and may be a Mistress thy self. I have seen
worse Faces in Glass Coaches.


Sil. And better in Bridewell. I think I might serve for a Month or two; but
what then?


Eust. Nay, if you be so cautious, you will never have a house in the Mall.


Sil. Nor Dye in a Ditch, like Jane Shore.


Eust. Pattens, Worsted Stockins, and course Smocks, go with thee for a Fool.


Sil. Will you go to my Mistress where she sups anon, and I Will bring you to her?


Eust. But come hither, prithee come, you are as skittish, as if you were that
same all over. She is as Nimble as a Squirrel, there is no catching her.

(She runs from him.
Enter Cuningham, Thisbe, and her Maid. This. Come, now we are alone, sing me
the last New Song. SONG.
Thyrsis unjustly you Complain,
And tax my tender heart
With want of pity for your pain,
Or Sense of your desert.
By secret and Mysterious Springs,
Alas! our Passions move;
We Women are Fantastic things,
That like before we love.
You may be handsome, and have Wit,
Be secret and well-bred,
The Person Love must to us fit,
He only can succeed.
Some Dye, yet never are believed;
Others we trust too soon,
Helping our selves to be deceived,
And proud to be undone.



Cun. Your humble Servant Madam: I left some Friends of yours at the Rose;
Merryman begun your health in a Bumper. I had much ado to get away; but your
Commands -- --


This. No body here sent for you; and of all Men living, I least expected you


Cun. When I received this pretty Billet Doux, my Heart went pit-apat; and knew
'twas yours before I opened it.


This. It Is a false Heart, believe it not another time.


Cun. If it be false, it was yourBeauty first made it so.


This. Lightly come, lightly go; and if I lose it, to another.


Cun. No Madam, you Conquer like the King of France. Your Subjects for ever
after are at rest.


This. You said as much to the Flame-colour'd Petticoat in New Spring Garden.


Cun. She has Spies upon me; it is a good sign! There was a Lady I must confess
much of your hight, your shape and mien; at first I thought it was your self,
and therefore I accosted her: And when I was entered into discourse, she plied
me so fast with the Intrigues of the Town, I could not handsomely get off.


This. I am not jealous of her: You need not take all this pains to clear your
self Was she of Quality?


Cun Yes, sure: She knew me, and desired my Protection against some Bullies
that were there. Your Note here speaks of Company that were to meet at Cards;
but it is more obliging in you to be thus alone.


This. Thou incorrigible piece of Vanity! I neither sent for thee to Cards, nor
any thing else. Let Us see this Note: It Is a Scriv'ner's hand.

(Reads it.
Cun. I have heard yours commended, and am apt to hope --


This. The most that ever I knew any man.


Cun. Those pretty Lips should be corrected, for their pouting, and pressed
with Kisses into their former Figure.


This. You should be corrected, and made know your distance.


Cun. I am sorry to find you in so ill a humor, but I Will swear, that time at
Spring Garden, we searce spoke of any thing but your self: She as it is the
manner of fine Women one of another, maliciously enough, but I, with all the
tenderness and transport imaginable. I see Merryman coming; I will take some
fitter time for an Ecclaircissement.

[Exit.
This. This Fellow has Vanity enough to extract Love out of an affront.

and would Kiss the pretty Foot that should Kick him down Stairs: He thinks all
this is mere jealousy.


Enter Merryman. Merry. These are those that can come, come without being sent
for.


This. Or they should not come at all for me.


Merr. We have drunk every Letter of your Name twice over; and spelt it with a
double Eat last.


This. 'Twas done like a discret Guardian: You are drunk then.


Merr. No; half a score Glasses do but whet Wit and sharpen Appetite: A Bottle
is the Springtide of Love, and dull Sobriety the Lowest Ebb.


This. I love to see things at the worst, that I may know what to trust to.


Merr. You would not be seen so your self: Don't you Ladies Dress, Patch and
Curl, and Paint too, if there be occasion before you come abroad?


This. That Is to please our selv's, and in competition to one another.


Merr. And that competition is about us filthy Fellows Was not Cunning ham here?


This. He Is just gone.


Merr. I sent him to you: We had a mind to drink a Bottle by our selv's, and
could not get rid of him, till I contrived a Letter in your Name for him. He
showed it us like a vain Fool, immediately


This. He Will tell the whole Town: Pray undeceive him when y ou see him next;
for all I could say could not do it.


Merr. Have you any Mirabilis?


This. I should not see you so often if I had not.


Merr. We good Fellows have our Qualms, like Breeding Women.


This. And your great Bellies too, most of you: Which you go to lay at Epsome,
and Tunbridge Waters.


Merr. When we are Married I Will turn over a New Leaf.


This. Hold, it is not come to that yet; you are the envy of your Club Four
Hundred Pounds a Year, and neither Wife nor Child, and spend it all in Drink.


Merr. I am very conjugally given: I love of late to drink hand to hand with an
old Friend; have left off supping, and go to Bed at Ten.


This. These are signs of a Body far spent in the service.


Merr. I will leave off drinking, Eat much, and get Children innumerable.


This. Not till you have been Flux'd: You are an old sinner, and I dare not
venture upon you.


Merr: I am as sound as a Bell, Fat, Plump, and Juicy, and have drunk my Gallon
a day these seven Years.


This. However, 'twill mend your shape.


Merr. I have been told, I am as true a shaped Drunkard as heart can wish;
Great Belly, double Chin, thick Legs: You would not have a Pad look like a
Racer?


This. No; but I would have you thought to get your Children, if I Marry you.


Merr. I Will Cut any Man's Throat that says the contrary.


This. But they will whisper and make Libels: Your great Belly will be a
continual jest upon mine.


Mer. I will Drink Raking Rhenish, Eat Buttered Wheat, Sweat in the Bagnio, and
do any reasonable thing, to render my Person Gracious.


This. Every Jocky will do as much, to win a Tankard; but I must have no
Morning Draughts, no Qualms that keep off Dinner till three a Clock, no
Tun-belly'd Rogues, that fright Chair-men from the house, no Noisie Fools to
disturb the whole Street with Loyal Catches, and senseless Huzzah's.


Merr. I have some Provisoes to offer too, in order to our future Peace and
Quiet: I will have none of your Gaming Ladies to keep you up at Cards till I am
ready to go out in the Morning, so that we have scarce ^ime for the great end
of Matrimony. No meetings at the China-houses; where under pretense of Rafling
for a piece of Plate, or so, you get acquainted with all the Young Fellows in
Town; three such accidental meetings go to visit, and three visits to something
that shall be Nameless. No Epsome nor Tunbridge Waters, where Ladies and
Gentlemen walk and prate up acquaintance, as fast as if it were in a Tavern.


This. You must either get me with Child the first Year, or give me leave to
use the Lawful Means: I hope I may visit Bellamira.


Merr. She is not so handsome as she was, and begins to look something
procurish; she is more dangerous than any Man; one Setter destroys more
Patridge than ten Hawks, when you take me for better for worse, you must
forsake her and all her Works.


This. When you take me for Rich or for Poor, you shall either leave your Drink
or your Jealousy. I will not be troubled with an Italian and a Dutch Man,
bound up in one Greasy Volume.


Merr. It Is a mad Age, a Man is Laughed at for being a Cuckold, and wondered at
if he take any Care to prevent it; well, I will leave all to thy discretion;
and as thou have been careful of thy own Credit hitherto, hope thou will be as
tender of mine when I am thy Husband.


This. That Is all you have to trust too: Now to show you I will not be outdone
in Generosity, you shall Dine in the City, and get Drunk among your old
Companions sometimes; but I will have no Women brought into the Company, on any
pretense whatever.


Merr. My Land-lady, an Oyster-Wench, or so.


This. Not if she be under Fifty; you may be drunk at home: I will Dine with
you, to keep off Beer Glasses while you Eat.


Merr. Content: I have a beastly Bumper at my Meals; we will have two Beds, for
I will not come home drunk and get Girls, without I knew where to get Portions
for 'um; in this Age they sour and grow stale upon their Parents hands.
Luorece's will scarce off, but to Forraigners.


Enter a Servant. Serve. A young Gentleman in the Street hard by, says he must
speak with you immediately.


This. It Is One of your drunken Companions; you had best go to him, we shall
have him come hither else.


Merr. I would Kick the best Friend in Christendom down Stairs, should he offer
it. Adieu for a while.

[Exeunt
Enter Bellamira in Man's Clothes, to her Merryman. Mer. What Is you business
with me Sir?


Bell. If you will walk a little farther into the Square, I Will satisfy you,
Sir.

[They walk a little farther. Now we are alone, the time and place convenient,
I must tell you; you abused a person of Quality last Night, forced open her
Lodgings, beat her Servants, broke her Windows, and called her all the Names
imaginable.


Merr. That may very well be; I went home drunk, and scoured outragiously: But
what of that?


Bell. I am her Brother.


Merr. And come to swagger in her behalf?


Bell. I am come for satisfaction.


Merr. Her Name, Sir?


Bell. Emilia.


Merr. Her Lodging?


Bell. The Flower de Luce.


Merr. I always took it to be a Baudy-house,


Bell. It seems so; but I come to convince you to the contrary.


Merr. Sir, I believe you: And if you will bring me to wait on her, I will ask
her Pardon: I am as much ashamed of a rudness offered to a Person of Quality,
when I am sober, as any Man living.


Bell. I thought what a Fellow I should find.


Merr. My little Bully, will nothing serve you but Battle, Murder and sudden
Death?


Bell. I came to fight Sir; not to hear you prate.

They go to Fight, Bellamira pulls up. her Peruke.
Merr. Then pluck out, that I may Tap thee presently.


Bell. Hold, hold Merryman; do thou not know me yet?


Merr. Bellamira in disguise!


Bell. The same.


Merr. Why this to me? Faith you shall never find me backward to Man or Woman.


Bell. No, thou art a brave Fellow, I have occasion for such a one, and (now I
have tried you, and see you dare fight) all is well,


Merr. Am I to be your Ladyships Second?


Bell. An easier Business.


Merr. As how?


Bell. I have appointed Dangerfield to wait for me in the Walk near Kensington,
which I so much delight in: Thus disguised I intend to Rob him, and have chosen
thee for my Fellow-Adventurer. When we have frighted the roaring Fool
sufficiently, we will find some way to give him his Money again.


Merr. We may be hanged together very lovingly in earnest, though we Rob in test.


Bell. If he should discover, which he never will, I can prevail with him not
to Prosecute; Besides, the Lying Fool will swear for his Credit, we were at
least a dozen; my Heart is set upon this Frolic; don't deny me.


Merr It Is admirable! 'twill be the best News for my Friend Keepwell.


Bell. He shall know it in due time I hate this Danger field, and now I have
gotten Isabella out of his hands, I care not if he were hanged.


Merr. And shall we Cudgel his Buff Coat sufficiently?


Bell. 'Till it be as gentle as a Sheepskin.


Merr. Thou art a brave Wench, I Faith, I will drink thy Health hereafter by
the Name of the Pretty Padder. I will borrow a Vizor of some overgrown Baud,
and about it instantly. But shall we Sup together in Town afterward?


Bell. Sure you will not wrong Friend Keepwell so much?


Merr. Not for a World, if I thought you would not; but, he is at a distance,
the Temptation present, and not to be resisted by frail Man.


Bell. You were always an Enemy of mine; and vet I know not how, I ever liked
your blunt way? and could not hate you heartily for it.


Merr If you will make a Convert of me, this is the time.


Bell. You shall then promise me drunk or sober, to speak well of me to
Keepwell.


Mer. That Is too hard, but, if I speak any ill of you, drunk: I will promise to
deny it again when I am sober.


Bell. You shall never more tell him I will undo him, nor read him any discreet
Lectures about my extravagance in Clothes, Furniture, Equipage, Hours, or
Company.


Merr. I never did sow diffention but with intent you should make your benefit
of it; for I am told after every little Quarrel, he buys his peace with a Coach
and Horses, a Country House, Pearl Necklace, or some such trifle.


Bell. He does so; yet, but frequent Disputes may end in a Breach, and there
are many fine Women that lie upon the Catch, to get him from me.


Merr: Fear him not, next to you he loves Money, and will never begin such
another Expense in a new place. You have more Plate, than ten Christ'nings,
more China, than many a Shop, more good Clothes than the Play house.


Bell. You had like to have undone me for all that, with your Stories; but he
told me all when I had him alone.


Merr. I don't doubt it; I see advice is thrown away upon him, and I will
trouble him with no more; but, be thy Servant to all intents and purposes.

[Kisses her. Now the Peace is agreed on, we'll Sign and Seal anon.


Bell. You Will tell him one time or other when you are drunk together.


Merr. He Will not believe me if I should. Well I am a Rogue to betray my Friend
thus; but, who would not be taken off with such a Bribe? Besides, in matter of
Women, we are all in the State of Nature, every man's hand against every man.
Whatever we pretend.

[Exeunt.
Enter Eustace. Eust. I wonder what is become of Lionel; he has not appeared
this day or two. I will go to Bellamira's and know where she Sups that I may
meet her, and know the end of her affair with me. Who Is this walks this way? He
is transported, and talks to himself.


Enter Lionel. Lion. If a man cared to be alone he should be troubled with
forty Coxcombs, and ten times as many impertinent Questions: But now I am ready
to burst with Joy, and Secrets, I can meet no Friend to vent my self to.


Eust. This is Lionel, for all his disguise, I know him. How now, Lionel?
What Is the meaning of this habit? I never saw a man so overjoyed: are you in
your Wits?


Lion. Oh, my dear Friend! There is not a man on Earth, to whom I would so
gladly impart my secret Joy, or inward Grief as to thy self.


Eust. It Is the happiness of friendship that the one is improved, the other
lessened, by our doing so: But what means all this?


Lion. I am impatient till you know; this is the happiest day of all my Life:
And I could be contented to die this Minute, least some succeeding Misfortunes
should defile this sincere Joy. You know Bellamira, my Brothers Mistress.


Eust. I have seen her twice or thrice.


Lion. There was this day a young Maid given her by Dangerfield my Brothers
Rival, the finest Creature that ever my Eyes beheld; not above seventeen, a man
flying for his Life would stop to gaze upon her.


Eust. I am not of your opinion, but what of her?


Lion. Seeing her in the Street, I fell in Love with her. By good fortune, we
had an Eunuch, which my Brother had promised to Bellamira: Nor was he yet
dellver'd; Merriman, who undertook to carry him advised me, seeing me dying for
this young Woman.


Eust. What did he advise you?


Lion. To change Clothes with this Eunuch, and be presented to Bellamira, in
his stead.


Eust. What, for an Eunuch.


Lion. I have a pretty Voice, Smooth Chin.


Eust. What could you propose to your self?


Lion. To see her, and be alone sometimes with the Divine Creature: Do you
count all that nothing? In short, I was presented to Bellamira, and received
with great Joy, and without the least Suspicion, she left me at home, and
recommended this beautiful Creature to my sole care.


Eust. It Is impossible.


Lion. She did it.


Eust. Most discreetly.


Lion. Most fortunately. I Will tell thee more, she commanded no Body should come
near her, but my self; and that I should not stir from her, in the farthest
part of the house. I Blushed, looked down, and modestly said it should be done.


Eust. Oh Rogue! thy Discourse has Fingers in it.


Lion. Bellamira goes but to Supper; her Servants follow her, except some of
the meanest sort: Presently they prepare a Bath for the fair Stranger; this
beautiful Creature is called to go into the Bath.


Eust. What before you?


Lion. Yes, before an Eunuch sure. She goes in, returns, the Servants put her
to Bed: I ask if they have any service for me: Pisquil, says one, (for so I was
called) Take this Fan, and cool my Mistress with it, as she lies.


Eust. Oh, that I could have seen thee with those gloating Eyes, Fanning a
Naked Woman! an Asinego as thou art.


Lion. Presently all the Maids run, some one way, some another, as Servants do
when their Masters are abroad; in the mean time this beautiful Creature falls
asleep: I look about me, to see if all were fast, I Bar the Door,


Eust. What then?


Lion What then, my Eustace? Can you ask and know me? Should I have slipped so
fair, so wished, so unexpected an Opportunity, I must have been that Eunuch
that I seemed.


Eust. You ravished her then,


Lion. What else? I took her by Storm, having no leisure for a Siege; I found
her the same Woman I fell in Love with in Spain.


Eust. She we so often talked of?


Lion. The same: and which is more, she remembered me again: Never was Man so
Happy! never was Accident so Fortunate!


Eust. Did she not Cry out?


Lion. There was no Body within hearing.


Eust. 'Twas something a harsh way.


Lion. No Woman ever heartily fell out with a Man about that Business, I Will try
to soften her in my own Person!


Eust. Will Not you change your Clothes?


Lion. How shall I change 'em? Or whither shall I go? I dare not go home, for
fear of my Brother: Then again, if my Father should be come out of the Country!


Eust. Come to my house, out of the Street however.


Lion. Agreed.

[Exeunt
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Dangerfield, and Smoothly. Dan. It Is strange Bellamira appears not, we have
been here a great while.


Smooth. I wonder she mak's no more have to her own happiness! the Spanish
Ladies would not have served you so.


Dan. Nay, I Will speak a bold word; French, Spanish, or Italian; I was ever the
delight of Ladies, I was the Terror of Men.


Smooth. Perhaps she has been overturned, broke a Wheel, or some such Accident:
may be her sneaking Lover's returned.


Dan. Who Keepwell? that fearful Hind, that ran out of Town at the News of my
Arrival, least I should Kick him to Jelly?


Smooth. It Is almost Night, what if we should be Robbed here?


Dan. What if the Sky should fall? or a Flock of Sheep root a marching Army?
If all these Hedges were lined with Musketeers I would not yield.


Smooth. If a Hog should start out and rustle, he would run away. [Aside. A
Volley of Shot is Music to your great-Heart; but what shall poor I do?


Dan. This Fellow is as Cowardly as I am Rash, and Adventurous, Creep behind
me, and be as safe as in a Brazen Tower, I Will show thee how I killed Don Alonzo
in Spain.


Smooth. I dare not stand: You Will run such a Fellow as I through with a
Scabbardon.


Dan. On my Honor, as I love danger, I will not hurt thee. He ran furiously
upon me.


Smooth. And did you look so terribly, as you do now?


Dan. Worse if possible.


Smooth. He was a brave Man then.


Dan. The bravest Fellow I ever had to do with: He had Killed Nine Men in Duel,
made two and twenty Campagns, been in eight Sea Fights and thirteen pitched
Battles.


Enter Merryman and Bellamira. Merr. Here he is Fencing with his Man.


Smooth. Thieves, Thieves! Murder! Look to your self.


Bell. Your Money.


Merr. Deliver Sirrah.


Dan. Take it you Scoundrels, and thank Heaven I am not in an angry Mood


Merr. Will a good Cudgle put you into it?

[Lays him on.]
Dan. No: Venus, Venus, rules the day, I am all Peace and Love: My Vigor is
defign'd to other purposes than Fighting with Rascally Fellows.


Merr. We must have this Pearl out of your Ear.


Dan. 'Twas given me for my service at the Siege of Dunkirk, as a Mark of
Honor.


Bell. Make have, we shall be forced to Crop you else.


Merr. Let Us remove 'em a little farther, and tie 'em Back to Back, and leave
'em.


Dan I Will have satisfaction for this Affront, you Rascals, I scorn the slow
paced Revenge of Law, it is Blood I Will have.


Merr. That you may not forget, I will give you this farther Remembrance.


Bell. Come away with the Rascals.


Dan. Well, Stripling well, no more to be said.

[Exeunt. Thisbe in the Bailiffs Hands
1. Bay. I Will stay no longer sending up and down: Can you pay the Money?


This. In a short time I can.


2. Bay. Have you any Friend that will be bound with you?


This. I have; but I am so unfortunate, they are not within.


1. Bay. Come, come, away to Prison.


This. If you have the Hearts of Men, take Pity on my Youth. This is all the
Money I owe in the World, and I shall suddenly discharge it; but if you disgrace
me thus, I am undone for ever.


1. Bay. We are Officers, and must obey our Warrant. Come along.


Enter Cuningham and Eustace. Cun. What Is here Thisbe in the hands of Bailiffs!
I will Kill two Birds with one Stone at once, I will show my Courage, and my
Love in rescuing my Mistress. Let Us never suffer these Rascals to carry her off.


Eust. I will not Fight against the Law: A Bailiff and a Hangman are as
necessary as a Lord Chief Justice, in a Government.


Cun. I will draw and be Knocked down, in her Quarrel by my self then.


Eust. Hold, hold: I will draw my Purse and rescue her a surer way.


This. Is there no way for my deliverance?


Cun. I Will Bail her.


1 Bay. We must have City Security; no Covent G^rden Bully?


Eust. What Is the Sum?


1. Bay. Two Hundred Pound. What do we stand talking with her? away.


This. Oh I am Miserable!


Cun Hold, you shall have your choice of six Play Debts: Sir Thomas Whiskin ows
me three hundred pound; will you take that for your Money? or Harry Huthead
shall be your Play Master.


1. Bay. Nothing but our Money down, or good Security.


Eust. Why, Then here is your Money down you Rascals.


2 Bay. Now you say something. Much good may do you: She is very pretty, and as
cheap as Neck-Beef.


This This Redemption as I never can deserve, so I cannot too much acknowledge
your surprising Generosity to a Stranger, known to you by nothing but distress.


Eust. Preserve your thanks till you find to whom they are due, I am but the
Instrument of your deliverance, and was employed by a Servant of yours, who
could not come himself, for some reasons you shall know hereafter.


This. May I not know his Name? that I may return him his Money at least.


Eust. He charged me to the contrary.


Cun. I could almost forswear Play, since my ill Fortune has put me out of
condition of doing this small Service, but I was ready with my Sword.


This. It Is much better as it is.


Cun. I did not throw one mam in two hours, I lost three sets at Back-Gammon,
and a Tout at Tricktrack, all ready Money; the rude Fellows have frighted the
Roses from your Cheeks.


This. This Rogue my Tailor that Arrested me, came but three days ago to know
if I had any service to command him: There must be something farther in it.


Cun. Perhaps some envious Woman set him on: there is as much malice among the
Beauties as among Wits: Will you give me leave to wait on you home! there are
rude Fellows abroad, and you may meet with some Affront.


Eust. Madam we will secure you from that.


This. Your Servant.

[Exeunt.
Enter Keepwell and Silence. Keep. How does my dearest Bellamira? Does she not
think I have mortified my self enough.


Sil. You may guess: She is gone out with Dangerfield.


Keep. I know it too well


Sil. Oh this Villain, Viper, Satyr! where shall I find him? or how torment him
when I have found him? we are all undone, Abused Cheated!


Keep. My heart misgives me strangely, and I have scarce Courage to ask what is
the matter. Here have been Scourers, breakers of Windows.


Sil. As soon as he had his will of her, to run away, and leave us thus! but if
I light of him, I Will tear his Goatish Eyes out.


Keep. Here has been some disorder in my abscence: who is it you threaten thus?
whom do you speak of?


Sil. As if you did not know, and be hanged with your precious Gifts.


Keep. They are such your Mistress would never let me rest till she had 'em: if
she don't like 'em, now, she may thank her self.

But what is the matter?


Sil. The Eunuch you gave us made brave work!


Keep. Oh, is that all? not work for a Midwife, I am sure.


Sil. It may be in time. He has Ravished the young maid Dangerfield gave my
Mistress.


Keep. It Is impossible: he is as innocent as the Child Unborn.


Sil. What he is I cannot tell; but by his works, he is no more an Eunuch than
your self: the young Maid is all in Tears: We cannot get a Word from her: Pray
Heaven she does herself no mischief She casts down her Eyes, and sighs as if
her heart would break; The Rascal's no where to be found; it is well if he have
not robbed us at parting too.


Keep. I am strangely amazed he knows no place in Town no person, and has no
where to go, but to my House.


Sil. Let Us see if he be there. Our Maids have swom every one to have a Limb of
him.


Keep. I have heard these Eunuchs have been very amorous; but never heard of
such a Prank: besides this was taken in an Algerine, an Eunuch after the
Turkish manner.


Sil. He looked so demurely, I thought Butter would not have melted in his
Mouth, I hope you will make sure work with him before you send him again. But
see Isabella herself.


Enter Isabella. Keep. I Will speak to her, and know the truth.


Sil. You had better step aside and observe her: you will put her out of
Countenance.


Isa. Torn from my Parents and my Country young;
Then in a Foreign Land exposed to Sale.
After some few removes when but a Child,
I to the hands of Bellamira fell,
Then to rude Dangerfield by Fortunes spite
Strangely betrayed; and now again restored,
I know not how, nor why, nor on what score.
Misfortune sure like mine never was.
In every Change and State I still preserved
My Honor boldly by Contempt of Life,
Vowed the same hour should rob me of 'em both:
The Resolution was so new, it checked his Lust.
But what does it avail to keep from Thieves
That Wealth we must anon to Pirates lose?
No sooner here, but like an Eunuch,
A bold Lover com's and rifles me of all;
Vowed to return, Marry and take me hence;
But Men are False, Women believing Fools:
Yet this is he that Loved me when in Spain,
And my poor heart first kindled at his Fire
Till he returns I will not Cherish Life,
Nor sleep nor nourishment shall prop this Frame:
My Husband he will be or Murderer
[Exit.
Keep. Poor Lady! she has dissolved my Eyes. Her Passion's great; but I Will go
home and kill Pisquil: thou shall go and see the Execution.


Sil. We Will flay the Lustful Swine.

[Exeunt
Enter Bellamira, Dangerfield, and Smoothly. Bell. My dear man of War? bouncing
Bully! did thou not begin to despair of me?


Dan. When we were tied back to back and thrown into that Ditch, I began to
think we must have lain in the Field all Night, as I have done, for my part,
half my life time.


Bell. You have not been robbed I hope?


Dan. Yes, faith the Rogues surpised us e're we could get our Swords out


Bell. Not of much?


Dan. Of a hundred Pieces, and some Medals, given me by Foreign Princes and
States, for my good Service in the Wars.


Bell. I am the unhappiest woman in the World! and all this staying for me! how
many were the Rogues?


Dan. Half a Foot Company.


Smoo. Such as we used to Muster in Flanders.


Bell. How many is that English?


Dan. A dozen Armed with Sword and Pistol.


Smoo. There were more of 'em not far off if need had been.


Dan. The Captain of 'em was such another fat fellow as Merryman: I shall know
him again if I see him; and if I do; I make one entire bruise of him. He laid
on me most unmercifully.


Bell. Who unbound you?


Dan. An honest Country fellow, who came by, by accident.


Bell. I have been overthrown too by a Gentleman's Coachman, who threw us in the
dirt; and I was forced to go home to shift.


Dan. Know you the Livery? I will have satisfaction, or make him turn away his
saucy Servant: I am rusty, for want of Fighting.


Bell. If I did I wou^d tell you, you are so apt to thrust your self into
Quarrels; it is a sad thing to love a brave man, a Woman is ever in one fright
or other: if they have the discretion not to be Principals, they must be
Seconds in every idle business.


Dan I never failed but once, of disarming my man.


Smoo. And then you had the Misfortune to run him clean through the heart.


Dan. I fled into France upon it.


Bell. What if I help you to your Money and Jewels again?


Dan. I Will give you Fifty Pounds. Can you guess who robbed us?


Bell. No, but I^ll take you at your word. Stop here at Knightsbridge, there is
a Justice, swear your loss before him since you were robbed between Sun and
Sun, and the Country is obliged to make it good.


Smoo. Here Is Fifty pounds well gotten. This is a Witty Wench, I am half in
Love with her my self.


Dan. I had rather lose it all, then swear before one of those Children of the
Gown.


Bell. Nay you shall do it: 'twill soon be over, and then we'll Sup in Town.


Smoo. Now must I forswear my self, or lose my Place: Let me see, that I may
not be out: The Robbers were Twelve, the Money lost, a Hundred Pieces, besides
Medals and Rings to the value of as much more.

[Exeunt.
Enter Keepwell, Pisquil, Silence, Betty. Keep. Come out you Rogue, you Rascal:
will nothing go down with you, but, Maiden-heads?


Pisq. I beseech you, Sir


Keep. How came you hither again? What Is the meaning of these Clothes? speak;
if we had stayed never so little longer he had been gone, he was preparing for
his journey, I see.


Betty. Where is he? That I may stick my Bodkin in him.


Keep. Don't you see him?


Betty. No if I did, I Would teach him to come with his edged Tools amongst poor
harmless Maids.


Sil. It might have been some of our Cases; and I pity Isabella with all my
heart: But are you sure you have him fast?


Keep. Why there he is, just before you.


Sil. What that poor Wretch? That swallow face was never within our doors.
There Is a Ravisher indeed!


Bett. Could you think this was he that we complained of?


Keep. I never had any other.


Sil. This fellow is no more to our Pisquil, than a Calf is to a Lion.


Bett. He you sent us had a sweet Face, delicate Shape, quick Eye, and a
promising Countenance.


Keep. Fine Feathers make fine Birds: You see him now in plain Clothes, at his
worst.


Sil. There Is more in it then so: Ours was young, handsome in his prime; this is
a Withered, Worn-out, Weather-beaten, Weasil-fac'd Fellow.


Keep. I shall begin to think I dont't know my right hand from my left, if this
be true. Come hither Sirrah, Pisquil, did not I give Fifty pound for you?


Pisq. You did, Sir.


Bett. Now let me ask him a question: Do you know our house.


Pisq. No, nor you neither.


Sil. Merryman brought us a young fellow of Nineteen that would have known us
all over and over, if he had stayed.


Keep. How come you by these Clothes? Why don't you answer me, you Rascal?


Pisq. One Mr. Lionel came.


Keep. What, my Brother?


Pisq. He said so.


Keep. When?


Pisq. To day.


Keep. with whom?


Pisq. With Merryman only.


Keep. Did you know he was my Brother?


Pisq. Mr. Merryman told me so: he gave me these Clothes and took away mine;
then they went both together.


Keep. I am undone, Bellamira will never endure this affront, nor ever be
persuaded but I was privy to it.


Sil. It may cost you a Weeks Banishment or so; but what think you, am I sober?
am I in my right Wits? No, Ily'd! I was a Fool! the Eunuch was as Innocent as a
Lamb Poor Isabella! Is not she undone, ruined for ever.


Keep. No, he shall marry her and make her an honest woman, will not that
satisfy?


Pisq. Alas Sir I have nothing to satisfy a woman with neither by night nor by
day, I am a poor despicable Eunuch. If I Marry your Worship must get my
Children and keep 'em too.


Sil. My Mistress will never like that.


Keep. The Wench he Ravished is but a Servant Maid, or at most one that has no
friends, I Will give 'em a Farm of twenty pound a year, and make up all that way:


Pisq. I beseech you Sir Drown or Hang me out of the way, but name not Marriage
to a wretch in my condition.


Keep. Sirrah I Will have it so. Will nothing down with you but forbidden fruit?
you have no stomach to a Woman in a lawful way and behang'd.


Pisq. I am your true, your very Eunuch Pisquil! what pranks have been played
in my name I know not; let any of these Maids examine me, alas! I am under no
circumstances of Wedlock.


Betty. Out upon him filthy Creature, I would not touch him for a World.


Sil. I had rather handle a dead Corpse; three such Fellows were enough to breed
a Plague.


Bett. I Will take my Corporal Oath this is not he that was at our House.


Sil. I never saw two men in my life more unlike than this odious Fellow and
our Pisquil.


Keep. I am resolved he shall Marry her though it cost me Forty pound a year;
Bellamira's House must not be thus affronted.


Sil. Sir you mistake, Isabella is a Gentlewoman sits at Table with my
Mistress, and would not Marry such a fellow for all you are worth.


Keep What shall we do then?


Sil. Let Us find out the true Ravisher, if he refuse to marry her, take the Law
of him and Hang him.


Keep. Come hither Pisquil: Did Lionel put on thy Clothes and leave thee his?


Pisq. By all that is good he did.


Keep And put on thine?


Pisq. Yes in the Room.


Bett. He came to us indeed in a strange fashioned habit.


Keep. This Lionel is the most wicked, Impudent, and I the most unhappy of
mankind! I have sent a Stone-horse among Mares.


Sil. Now don't you think my Mistress has been finely served by you and your
lewd Brother?


Keep. I am undone if all this comes to Bellarmira's Ear: she talked of a great
Sum she hoped to get by restoring this young Woman to her Friends: I am afraid
it is I must pay it now; No man will own her, having been thus abused. Sirrah
deny all again instantly.


Pisq. Let me alone, Sir I Will set all right.


Keep. I Will get the truth out of thee, or I Will beat thee in a Mortar. When was
my Brother here?


Pisq. Four days ago.


Keep. Never since?


Pisq. No indeed Sir,


Keep. See what a Lying Rogue this is now! I have had him but two days, and he
says my Brother changed his Clothes with him four days ago.


Bett. He said quite otherwise but now, and that it was this day.


Keep. Damn him Rogue, he faulters in his Evidence, and I would not hang a Dog
upon his Testimony; are not you a fine Rascal to lay this villainy upon my
Innocent Brother?


Pisq. I do confess; pray Sir pardon me, I was afraid.


Keep. Get you out of my sight you lying Rogue.


Sil. He is a Lying Rogue now I dare swear.


Betty. He dares not stand to his first story: Keepwell has threatened him.


Sil. This is all Merryman's contrivance; but if I be not even with him, may I
dye a Maid. Well Dangerfield and my Mistress wore at high words after Supper:
She gave me her Gold and Jewels to carry home; a sure sign she will not stay long
behind.


Betty. I Will go Home.


Keep. I Will go to Merryman and learn the bottom of this business, that I may
know what to say to my offended Bellamira.


Enter Merryman and Bellamira. Merry. I will turn Turk but I will avoid Wine
hereafter, that Aeternal Foe to better sport, Can my dear Bellamira forgive her
poor entertainment.


Bell. Why not, as well as you do a weak Brother who can drink but his Bottle.
You may sit up till morning tho he leave you at Nine, the Application is easy.


Merr. I will leave my Mornings draught of Mum and Wormwood, and Breakfast
hereafter upon new laid Eggs, Amber greece and Gravy.


Bell. Trouble not your self, I will Breakfast before I come to you, and Sup
heartily before I go to bed.


Merr. This Paunch of mine shall down, I will no longer suffer my Virile virtue
to be Eclipsed by this Globe of Earth, Biscuit my Meat, Fennel Water and Vinegar
shall be my Drink this twelve Months.


Bell. Your Penance is too severe, merely for a sin of Omission, I like you
the better for it: Your honest nature would not suffer you to wrong your friend
too much, when it came to the point.


Merr. My honest overgrown body would not keep pace with lewd Will; for which
I am resolved to mortify it, no more Bumpers, no Dinners that last till
Midnight, no City Feast, no Huzzahs.


Bell. You are in Love elsewhere, and keep your self for pretty Mistress.
Thisbe.


Merr. I never saw Play, but I was willing to throw away what I had about me.


Bell. Well I must leave you, Keepwell I fear is in Town.


Merr. That word leave you, always puts me into a Cold Sweat, and if a man
were Cocked and Prim'd, is enough to make a man miss Fire. Cannot you stay one
Minute?


Bell. To what purpose, I have been here a great while, sure it is late, your
Company stay for you, the Bottles are upon the Table by this time.


Merr. Would you had never talked of going, I am the worst at paying Money upon
a Pinch, cannot you stay one quarter of an hour?


Bell. I have appointed business with Eustace and must be gone.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, Keepwell is coming up Stairs, I told him you were
asleep, he must needs speak with you.


Merr. Step in there, I Will send him away presently.


Enter Keepwell, he gets a glimpse of Bellamira. Keep. Merryman with a Wench,
nay then we are all Mortal.


Merr. It Is only a Wine Cooper's Daughter that has brought me some taste of
Pontack out of her Fathers Cellar.


Keep. Sings) Her Breasts of Delight, are two Bottles of White, and her Eyes
are two Cups of Canary. I hope we shall have no more Lessons of Thrist, no
pious Exhortations, no Lectures against Love: Why she has as good Clothes as my
Bellamira.


Merr. But I don't Pay for'em as you do.


Keep. Prithee let me see her, I have trusted thee with my Bell. a hundred
times.


Merr. You will not like her and then I shall be laughed at, besides this is the
first time, she is a young modest Sinner and I have given her my word.


Keep. What, art thou ashamed of her?


Merr. Nor proud of her neither, as you are of your Tyrant Bellamira.


Keep. Never speak against my Bell. she is the prittiest little pouting
tempestuous Rogue sometimes, but it is soon over, and then she is so calm again,
the Halcyon, might breed upon her Lips.


Merr. You are grown Poetical since you went into the Country.


Keep. Prithee let me see thy Punk, thy Cockatrice, thy Harlot.


Merr. Good words, you don't know who you speak off.


Keep. I Will set my foot against the door.


Merr. You will not be such a Brute.

[How shall we get rid of him?
Keep. I am very Rampant.


Merr. I have that will take down your Courage. Dangerfield has sent me a
Challenge for delivering your Eunuch and Black in his Presence.


Keep. Why did thou do it in his Presence?


Merr. It Is past now, and you must be my Second.


Keep. Pox on it I did not mean rampant for Fighting, I meant for the other
business, I have no malice to any man living but am wondrous loving.


Merr. We are to meet an hour hence, the time is short, I cannot possible find
another Friend; besides, it is partly your own quarrel.


Keep. Hang him he makes a Trade of Fighting, and kills men by the year.


Merr. We must try, what Mettle he is made off.


Keep. Let me alone, I will bring you off with Honor, and without Fighting.


Merr. How so?


Keep. The Officer of the Guard is my intimate Friend, I will acquaint him with
the Quarrel and get us all secured; I have escaped hitherto by his means, and
yet have sent and received some Challenges in my Life time; he saves more
Bloodshed than all the Parsons in Town with their Sermons against Duelling.


Merr. I have no great Lust for Fighting, if you can take it up handsomely,
with all my heart, but you must about it instantly for the time is short.


Keep. I am gone out be sure you stay at home.

[Exit.
Merr. I knew this was a sure way to be rid of him.

[He is gone.
Enter Bellamira. Bell And so must we, the Guard will be here presently else;
You could not help calling me Tyrant to Keepwell tho you knew I was within
hearing


Merr. I must talk a little after the old rate, 'twill breed suspicion in him
should I change my Note all of a sudden, but I will drink him upevery Night,
and send him to thee so loving.


Bell. Drink him down rather, pray, let him alone as he is.

[Exeunt.
Enter Silence and Eustace. Sil. Oh, Sir, how is it between my Mistress and her
Man of War?


Eust. Not so as it might be between thee and me, if thou would be ruled.


Sil. I am rull'd by my Friends and Relations.


Eust. They Will undo thee Silence, if thou heark'nest to 'em: thou will spend
thy Youth in Service, and in thy Age be eaten up with Children.


Sil. Better so than with the Pox: I had rather be a Cobblers Wife, than the
best Man's Whore in the Land.


Eust. This is a wicked Principle, and has undone more young Women!


Sil. If I must be ruined, I Will be ruined in an honest way.


Eust: A Woman ruined in an honest way is the vilest, contemptiblest thing
imaginable: give me a Woman ruined with a Coach and six Horses, a house in the
Mall, fine Equipage! and all this thou might be in a fair way to Compass.


Sil. But what of my Mistress and Dangerfield?


Eust. They are all to pieces.


Sil. About what?


Eust. About a young Maid Dangerfield gave her: nothing will serve but he will
have her again.


Sil. She will never meet with such a Loyal, Obedient Lover, as Keepwell.


Eust. He is the Top Cully of the Town. But here she comes her self.


Enter Bellamira. Bell. I believe he will come to take her away by force; but let
him offer to touch her with a Finger, I Will pluck his Eyes out. I can bear with
his impertinences and big words, while they are but words; but if he offer
violence, I know what he is at the bottom, and can find those that can Cudgel
him.


Eust. I have expected you a good while here.


Bell. Do you know that Dangerfield's last Quarrel and mine was a Concern of
yours?


Eust He was not Jealous of me?


Bell. No: but while I endeavored to restore your lost Sister, to you, as I
think in Conscience I ought; I suffered what you see, and more from him.


Eust. You have several times talked to me of a Sister of mine, lost from our
house in Devonshire; but I always looked upon it as a mere Wheedle.


Bell. One that has an ill name, is half hanged: but, I assure you, I was in
earnest, as I shall make appear to you by infallible Circumstances.


Eust. I lost indeed a Sister, about twelve years since, but where she is,
Heaven only knows.


Bell. Yes I know she is at home.


Eust. What at your house?


Bell. Yes at my house: my Mother bred her, as if she had been her own, you
need not be ashamed to own her.


Eust. She bred her up from a Child! I like that well: then this is not she
that Dangerfield gave her yesterday; and that Lionel Ravished.


Bell. I doubt not of your Gratitude, when you see her: She Is a delicate
Creature.


Eust. How old is She?


Bell. Seventeen.


Eust. The very Age that Lionel mentioned: I am undone again!

She had my Father's Picture on, when she was lost.


Bell. She has it still and kisses it a hundred times a day.


Eust A bite by a Monky upon her left arm.


Bell. She has so. If I show her you with these Tokens will you not thank me,
and own her?


Eust. Yes, if you have not taught her your own Trade.


Bell. By my Life, she is as innocent, as when you lost her first, we ever kept
a strict hand over her. By good fortune Keepwell gave me a fine Eunuch, to his
care I have instrusted her and charged him not to stir from her.


Eust. Hell, and Damnation! The Eunuch was Lionel. [Aside. I have heard as
much, Madam.


Bell. Who could tell you?


Eust. I know not: I heard in the Town, you had an Eunuch.


Bell. Now let us have a care we don't both lose her, for this is she that
Dangerfield gave and threatens to takeaway again.


Eust. It is too apparent, no sooner found, but lost, my Isabella: Lost, to thy
Fame thy Family for ever.


Bell. You seem disordered: are you we will?


Eust. A little surprised, at the unexpected discovery of my dear Sister. But
why did you not tell me this sooner?


Bell. I had her of Dangerfield but yesterday.


Eust. Did you not tell me you were bred up together?


Bell. Yes, but how we first met, how we parted, how Dangerfield got her, I
will tell you at more leisure, he threatens to take her away by force; you are
not afraid of him?


Eust. Of no man-less. I have a sudden Qualm come over me; I have drunk too
much Wine.


Bell. Come in I Will give you some Mirabilis.

[Exeunt.
Enter Dangerfield, Smoothly, Bullies, and Link Boys. Dan. I Will teach her to
provoke a man of Honor, Culverin, Wildfire, and Hackum, follow your Leader:
First I Will pull the house about their Ears.


Smoo. Spoken like your self.


Dan. I Will slit her Nose, then give her the Trant'vne.


Smoo. It will be a brave revenge, and make you Terrible through the World.


Dan. Advance Culverin, with the Link-boyes: Hackum command thou the right
Wing; and thou Wildfire the left.


Boys. Here, here, here.


Dan. I my self will bring up the Rear, give the Sign for the onset, and be
ready to assist you with my Conduct, if need be.


Smoo. What a Jewel is experience in a General!


Dan. I learnt this of Mont^^^li.


Eust. What bustle is that about the door?


Sil. Oh Mistress the House is beset: we are all undone.


Eust. Not with Thieves, I hope.


Bell. No, it is Dangerfield; fear him not, he dares do nothing: A mere
blustering Coward.


Hack. Shall we break the Windows?


Dang. Not yet my valiant Friends; I see Bellamira at her Belcony: I Will proffer
Peace; and that refused, make War.


Smoo. O, the difference between Man and Man! I never hear this Master of mine
speak, but am the wiser for it.


Dan. Answer me thou Punk, thou Cockatrice, thou Man-Leech, that suck'st their
Marrow, and their Money: When I gave thee Isabella, did not thou promise me
two days entirely to my self.


Bell. Why you overgrown Booby, gelt with muddy Ale, Brandy, and Tobacco; you
had 'em and could make no use of 'em.


Dan. Next did not you bring your Stallion there under my Roof, talk with him
in private, and after steal away to him?


Bell. I had some business with him, and found you had none with me, but
drinking and making my head-ake.


Smoo. Oh, Impudence! this to you, that are such a Hercules in Love, and War.


Dan. Restore me Isabella or I Will force her from you.


Eust. She restore her! Or you touch her! I should laugh at that.


Dan. Are you her Hector? I shall spoil your Mirth with a Brick-bat. Come down;
I Will fight thee hand to hand in the head of my Army.


Smoo No wise General will forsake his advantages, you shall not expose your self
so rashly.


Dan. Peace you Fool: if he comes, we will seize him; then offer him in exchange
of Prisoners, for Isabella. I here is a stratagem: he shall find I am a Soldier.


Smoo. The greatest I ever read of.


Eust. I will not venture my self among your Hell Hounds, but I shall find a
time.


Dan. You will not deliver Isabella then, by fair means?


Eust. Nor by foul neither: She is my Sister, too good to be thy Wise, and
shall be no Man's Servant.


Dan. I bought her young of her Friends, in Spain.


Eust. They had no right to Sell her; she is a freeborn English Woman, and I
will defend her with my life.


Smoo. You speak like an honest Gentleman: Bellamira has cheated my Master. Do
not make your self a Party; and consequently this great Man your Enemy.


Eust. Persuade that Calf he is a Lion if thou can; I scorn both him, and
thee.


Dan. Then it is no time to talk, salute 'em with a Volley.


Enter Merryman and Cuningham. Cun. Let Us give Bellamira a Serenade, as we go
by; for old acquaintance sake: she will take it kindly.


Merr. Dangerfield's there: we will break the Windows, call him Rogue and Rascal,
and so go on with our Music to Thisbe.


Cun. I hate these rude Frolicks.


Merr. The house is beset: What Is here, Scourers? Brick-bats mounting, and
Pispots descending?


Cun. We Will scour 'em for a Company of uncivil. Fellows, thus to disturb Lovers
at their innocent Recreations.


Merr. Strike up, we have no Drums and Trumpets, but we will swinge 'em by way of
Lute and Violin.


L. Boys. Fall on: this is our old Master Merryman; we use to light him home
drunk three or four times a week.

[The Link Boys revolt.
Dan. If our Soldiers revolt, shift every man for himself: This did Pompey,
when over power'd by Julius Caesar, at Pharsalia.

[Ex. Omnes.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Merryman, Cuningham. Cun. THis drinking does so muddle one's complexion and
take of one's mettle, a man the next day is but the wrong side of himself. I
was so doz'd I was an hour about a Billet douz.


Merr. We should look gratefully back upon the past pleasure and not peevishly
repine at the present suffering. What think you of a hair of the same Dog?


Cun. That saying has killed many an honest fellow, but do you remember we were
at Thisbe's?


Merr. Yes, and were let in; but have forgotten most of the rest.


Cun. You are a precious Guardian! You must even Marry her your self, you will
make her fit for no body else, with your disorderly Frolicks.


Merr. That Is it I would be at.

[Aside. But what said she?


Cun. She told me, she wond'red to see me in that disorder; squeezed me by the
hand, and bad me take more care of my health hereafter.


Merr. Now I remember me, she said you looked lamentably; and that, had you
come alone at that time of the night, she should have taken you for a Ghost;
that you smelt as if you had been buried a Fortnight.


Cun. She may say her Pleasure; but there are as fine Women as she of another
mind: I knew when she had no better a Complexion than my self.


Merr. When was that? Had she ever the Green Sickness or the Yellow Jaundies?


Cun. No, before she bought her Paint of the Italian. I look like a Ghost! Why,
I am the same man I was twenty Years ago; as vigorous, as Amorous, and I think
as taking amongst Men and Women. I had three Maiden-heads brought me last Week
by their Parents: I will leap the half Almond with you.


Merr. Thou ma'st, well be active, thou have no more flesh upon thy back, than
a Flea, and thy Bones have as much Quicksilver in 'em, as ten Bales of false
Dice: They will scarce lie still when thou art dead.


Cun. Thou art Picqu'd at Thisbe's concern for me: Well thou art an honest
Fellow; we will not dispute about her, tho we Rally one another now and then. I
have ten of as fine Women as she upon my hands at this time; she was but my Pis
allee: What will you say when you see me Married to one of the best Fortures
about the Town?


Merr I shall not wonder; Women have another Green Sickness in their Souls,
that sways 'em to the Trash of Mankind: but here comes Keepwell, his time of
Banishment is expired, as filthily fine as hands can make him.


Enter Keepwell. Keep. Sure Jealousy is the greatest Torment in the World, I
have had the dismallest Dreams! Methought I saw Dangerfield Rampant, and
Bellamira Couchant all Night long.


Merr. You consented, and can reasonably complain of none but your self.


Keep I consented she should make a Fool of him, and Cozen him of Isabella, but
no farther.


Merr. I saw her at Knightsbridge Garden with him; so fine, methought they were
the happiest Couple!


Keep. Pox on their happiness.


Merr. It may end in that indeed, they say Dangerfield is not very sound.


Cun. Women like wanton Whelps, fawn ever on the next that comes in their way,
but, when they see an old acquaintance, they run to him for all that; never be
discouraged.


Keep. At once I hate her, and I love her too; The chief thing I begged of her
was, that she would not be seen in public with this Dangerfield: she has no
mercy on my Reputation.


Merr. No more than on your Fortune: be wise and take this occasion.


Cun. All this makes for you Merryman: there is no such Soaker as a Lover in
affliction.


Merr. I had as live drink with a Gib'd Cat: they are always Mewing and
Wauling about her Inconstancy, Cruelty, or one silly thing or other.


Cun. Dangerfield has a sweet Calech.


Merr. There is no talk of any man now but him; the Bravest, the most Generous,
the most accomplished Gentleman!


Cun. You will make Keepwell hang himself.


Keep I Will fight him, my Courage is wound up, and I will strike him to the
heart.


Merr. You Will have an ill time on it; he kills an Humble Be flying with a single
Bullet, rides three managed Horses every morning, Fences two hours after, and
stinks of Gun Powder like the fifth of November.


Keep. Then let him be hanged, I Will have nothing to do with him.


Merr. It Is she is to blame, and not he: If a man Robs my Orchard, I shall
blame my Gardener more than the Thief.


Keep. He has done but what the best Lord in the Land would be proud to do: but
I will mawl her, break her Chin^, take down her Hangings, leave her no Plate
but the poor Thimble she began the World with.


Merr. Spoken like a man of Mettle! and shall we Sup together, and drink till
daylight, as we were wont?


Cun. Thou art one of Keepwell's evil Counselors; and if ever he and Bellamira
piece again, I shall see thee banished his presence for ever.


Keep. I will never be sober again, scarce cleanly, take Tobacco and lie in a
Bawdy House.


Cun: Merryman will Compound for Less.


Merr. Half drunk every night, and stark drunk once a week, is very fair.


Keep. I Will Rout her Instantly.


Cun. She has a great many Rich Clothes, let her wear out her Livery at least
in your Service.


Keep. That Is well thought, let her wear out her Clothes at least in my
Service, as he says.


Merr. You have almost worn out your self in here is: you look worse than he,
that begun twenty years before you.


Cun. Every man's Constitution will not run out into Fat, it is the Commendation
of a Capon: a good Cock is always lean as I am.


Merr. A good Coxcomb always thinks well of himself; why thou lean Rascal
Deer, thou visible Pox, thou Common shore of Physic, Reproach of Doctors, and
Ruin of Apothecari's, who Flux'st away thy Flesh as often as the Adder casts
his Skin, and art full as venomous.


Cun. I am sure you look like a full Moon or a Fat Bawd swelled with the Tooth
Ach.


Merr. When I walk the Streets, men say there goes an honest well natured Fat
Fellow to drink a bottle with, and a good Husband I warrant him.


Cun. A good Cuckold perhaps: but, the Ladies cry foh, there goes a greasy
Sot, a Chandlers Shop in the shape of a man, a mere Lump, a Sponge full of
Terse: whose mouth stinks worse than the Bung-hole of a Barrel, a Load of
manifest impotency, Guts and Garbage for the Bear-Garden.


Merr. Thou mere stake to hang Clothes upon, thou Scarrow, thou piece of
Shrivil'd Parchment, thou walking Skelleton that may be read upon alive,
can thou think any Woman so sharp set as to pick thy rotten Bones, which are
but the leaving of Pox, Mercury and Consumption?


Keep. Nay good Gentlemen, no heat, let us debate this matter calmly; will this
Quarrel about Fat and Lean never have an end?


Cun. It Is as irreconsilable as that of the Flesh and Spirit; Merryman will
never let it rest: I am always on the defensive part.


Keep. You never consider your poor Friend, tossed as I am between the Billows
of Love and Jealousy.


Merr. Well-now I have Tormented you sufficiently, it goes against my honest
nature to conceal your happiness from you any longer, Dangerfield is an ugly
niggardly Rogue, and Bellamira --


Keep. Was she never abroad with him in Public.


Merr. Nor in Private neither, but once and they fell out; well she loves you
most entirely, I could never have thought it.


Cun. She was all in Tears by that time you were on Horseback: I had the most
ado to Comfort her, and, yet I said a great many pretty things to her; and
never looked better in my Life.


Merr. I sat with her two hours and our whole discourse was of you, how much
she was obliged to you, and what a dear man you were.


Keep. I ever told you Merryman, you were too hard of belief and that there was
such a thing as true Love, and Constancy too.


Merr. I confess my error and shall hereafter think you can never do too much
for her. I will drink her health in a Bumper as long as I live, for her
fidelity to my Friend, and in his absence too.


Cun. If ever you leave her she will make her self away, that is certain, I have
heard her say so a hundred times.


Keep Nay, I always thought so, and durst never Chide, nor deny any thing; she
has such a spirit.


Enter Silence. Merr. But here comes Silence, who will tell you more.


Sil. My Mistress wonders you can be so long in Town and not see her.


Merr. What, as a whole hour?


Sil. You would not have been so long out of a Tavern.


Keep. I hear she is taken up with Dangerfield.


Sil. He Is a Calf, a Blockhead, and she scorns him.


Keep. Do you hear this, Merryman? He Is a Calf, a Blockhead, and she scorns him.


Merr. Did not I tell you as much: and you know I was of another mind?


Sil. My Mistress and Dangerfield, are quite fallen out: he gave her the pretty
Maid she told you of, and came last night with some drunken Bullies, to take
her away by force.


Cun. I am a witness of that: Merryman and I drove him away, and raised the
Seige.


Sil. My Mistress will refer all to Merryman.


Cun. Now they are in discourse, I will steal away to Mrs Thisbe, and make my
excuse for last night's disturbance.

[Exit.
Keep. Come Merryman, let us see what Bellamira can say for her self.

[Ex. Keep. and Sil.
Merr. I Will follow you instantly.

We were fellow Robbers; I must keep fair with Bellamira or she may get her own
Pardon, Peach, and hang me, besides I have received her fee; and am bound to
plead her cause.


Enter Lionel. Lion. I am the happiest man! Whom shall I praise first? Thee
that laid'st the Design; my self that executed it, or Fortune that gave it
success?


Merr. You have succeeded then?


Lion. Beyond expectation.


Merr. It was a bold design.


Lion. And a fortunate one for me: I must have di'd, if I had not enjoyed her.


Merr. I will not trouble your modesty for particulars, but why in this dress
still? Do you intend to live and die in your new service?


Lion. I could live and die with my new fellow Servant, I went to Eustace's,
thinking to have shifted, but the house was full of Company.


Merr. Are you not afraid of being known?


Lion. No, I met Cuningham and twenty of my acquaintance; they star'd at me
alittle.


Enter Eustace and Cuningham. Eust. Here he is, and Merryman with him, the vile
contriver of Isabella's ruin. Cunningham, I must use your Sword.


Cun. It Is at the service of any Gentleman, much more at yours that are my
Friend. But against whom?


Eust. You see the man.


Cun. What my old acquaintance Merryman, and that young fellow?


Eust. That young fellow is Lionel. When you hear it, you will say my Quarrel's
Just, the Injury not to be pardoned.


Lion. My dearest Eustace! The Man of all the World I wished to meet


Eust. And Lionel the Man of all the World I am bound to Curse.


Lion. Some Villain has abused me to my Friend: I Will cut his Throat.


Eust. That Villain is your self.


Lion. Villain! Death, I would have shared my Fortune, my Reputation, my all,
but Isabella, with that Man. and to be thus requited.


Eust. That Name has roused up my Revenge; Draw and prepare for thy defense.


Lion. What means my Friend is he become my Rival?


Eust. That should not make this breach

I Would turn the Boyish Passion out of doors,

And fly to the embraces of my Friend.


Lion. Am I reported to have wronged you inmy discourse?


Eust. I Would Kick the Liar should tell me so. O that I were so happy as to doubt!
You have accused your self.


Lion. Of what?


Eust. Of an injury so great, to me, and all our Family --


Lion. To you? Whose Injuries I count my own, and should alike resent 'em.


Eust. Revenge me then upon Lustful Lionel.


Lion. Sure you are mad, for what?


Eust. Why, for a Rape upon my Sister.


Lion. I know no Sister that you have.


Eust. That Is our misfortune, that thou knew'st her not; far had thou wronged
me with thy Will, I could kill thee as men do Wolves and Tigers; but now must
pay a cruel Sacrifice to Honor.


Lion. I understand you less and less.


Eust. Know then, (for it is just I tell our Quarrel ever we Fight) that
Isabella was my Sister.


Lion. What the young Maid at Bellamira's! It Is impossible.


Eust. By certain Tokens and Circumstances, to me invincible, I know her so.


Lion. You amaze me!


Merr. Lionel, thou were wrapped in thy Mother's Smock. Thy Isabella, whom thou
love of all the World is found the Sister of thy dearest friend. What then
remains, but that you Marry her?


Eust. I know his Honor is too nice: nothing remains but that we Fight.


Lion. I love my Isabella above my Life

And all the little niceties of Honor;

And had rather call her mine than be Crowned King of all the habitable World.


Eust. Then we are ti'd in stricter Bonds than ever. Oh my best Lionel!


Lion. Throw not away the Treasure of thy Love, Upon a Soil so Barren: -- my
Father --


Eust. I can easily satisfy all his scruples. She had five Thousand pounds
left her by an Uncle: to which I Will add to make her worthy of my dearest Friend.


Lion. I know not how to speak, and yet I must.


Eust. Thou found'st her apt and easy to thy Lust: Ha,


Lion. By all that is good, I hold her Innocent, as violated Temples.


Eust. Were not thou then a sacrilegious Villain?


Lion. It is confessed.


Merr. Now you have confessed, it is but doing Penance in a pair of
Matrimonial Sheets, and there is an end on it.


Eust. I was to blame, to trifle all this while. Draw.

Fight. Merr. disarms Cunn. and parts the other.
Cun. I must have a thrust at thy fat Guts.


Merr. Now are thy Skin and Bones, at my Mercy.


Eust. This satisfies my Honor; but my Revenge must find some other time.


Lion. What if I were long since contracted to another, and to be disinherited
if I went back.


Eust. You might have told me so? Yet what could that have done?


Lion. Perhaps you would not have believed me, and it might have looked like
Fear, till we had Fought; but now take the sad truth, and if thou will the Life
of Lionel: I have been sometime since contracted to Theodosia, the rich
Gold-smith's Daughter.


Cun. If that be all, you are as free as you were born. You are all men of
Honor, and I Will tell you a secret, I have this Morning privately Married that
pretty Creature.


Lion. It is impossible I should be so happy.


Cun. She heard I know not how, that you ravished a young Maid, and were in
Love elsewhere: I came in the lucky minute, and am now her Husband.


Merr. In the unlucky minute to her. How came she to think of thee?


Cun. She did not; her Maid that Governs her, was formerly a Servant to a
Mistress of mine, has often tasted of my Bounty and some other civilities have
past between us.


Merr. What could she find to say for thee?


Cun She told her Mistress, her Father was one of my Tenants, and that I had a
thousand a year in Northumberland, to her knowledge.


Merr. Thou art a luckie Fellow: the Women will venture Body and Soul to do
thee Service any way.


Cun. I had missed her for all that, but for a Hundred pound I gave a
Nonconformist Parson for his good word, Could I have thought the news of my
Marriage with Theodosia would have pleased you, you should have heard of it
sooner.


Lion. Joy, such as thou giv'st me now, be ever with thee.


Cun. I was half afraid we must have had a Tilt.


Lion. Will you be my Advocate to your offended Sister?


Eust. You need none, since your Designs are Honorable.


Lion. Let Us embrace like Brothers: for the next Priest shall make us so.


Enter Bellamira, Silence, Betty, and Keepwell. Sil. Madam, there is the Rogue
that has made all this work.


Bett. I never liked him, he has a sly look; and a Hawks Eye with him.


Sil. 'Twas a mercy any of us escaped


Bell. Peace you Fools; he is a Gentleman, and may make her Reparation. We are
undone ruined for ever! Your unfortunate Sister whom I undertook to restore you.


Eust. What of her?


Bell. She has been ravished, and by that Villain you embrace. But now I am
asham d to offer her thus stained and sulli'd; but 'twas no fault of mine.


Lion. Oh bring her instantly the Roman Lucrece, was not more virtuous; nor an
Estate to one in Goal for Debt more welcome, than she to Lionel.


Keep. Think what you do; Marry a Servant, my Father will be in Town anon.


Lion. She is the Sister of my dearest Eustace. And above me in Wealth, as in
desert. He cannot but approve my Choice.


Keep. When you are Married I Will take my pleasure like an Italian elder
Brother, and now my dearest Bellamira, we are safe for one seven years.


Lion. My Father's appetite of Grandchildren I Will undertake to satisfy, if
you will pardon my making bold with your house.


Bell. I take it the best way, and charge it all on Love, whose power we most
of us have felt. You seem a worthy Gentleman.


Lion. A poor younger Brother of your Servant Keepwell's.


Eust. How came you to find us here?


Bell. We heard that there were Swords drawn; but saw no such matter.


Enter Dangerfield and Smoothly. Smooth There she is; but so hemmed in with
friends and acquaintance, we had best let her alone.


Dan. She is a victorious Beauty, I will go and Surrender my self to her.


Smooth. Let Us make honorable Conditions.


Dan. I will vield to mercy, Hercules did so to Omphale.


Smooth. The Example's great.


Keep. What Is that thing in Buff.


Bell. It Is Dangerfield: I thought you had known him.


Keep. He looks like a Militia Captain upon a Training day.


Merr. You had best tell him so.


Keep. My heart's too big; I cannot endure to speak to him.


Dan. Who is that next Merryman?


Smooth. Your Rival Keepwell.


Dan. I can no more endure the sight of a Rival than a fighting Cock can: Hold
me, or I shall fly in his Face.


Bell. What would that fellow have?


Dan. Your Pardon, for my last-night's rudeness; and my Isabella, the pretty
Maid I gave you, if you please.


Eust. Name her no more: I tell thee she is my Sister a freeborn Subject of
England.


Lion. If thou do but name her tho in thy sleep, I Will cut thy Throat: She is
my Miscress.


Merr. Speak to him, Keepwell: we will bring you off.


Keep. She is to be my Sister-in-law; and I will flea thee, stuff thy Skin full
of Straw, and Set thee in my Cherry-Garden, if thou depart not.


Dan. I am utterly undone; if I find not some way into this Family: the less
hope see, the more I love this Bellamira.


Smooth. What if I get you received among 'em, according to your desert?


Dan. Command me and mine for ever: I Will give thee fifty Guineas hard Money in
hand, and the Sword I twice saved the Nation with.


Smooth. Retire a little, it is not fit you should be by, at your own
Commendations. I Will try what I can do; you have been a good Master to me.

[Exit. Dang. I hope all this good Company believes I followed this Fool my
Master more for my own sake than his?


Merr. None but himself ever doubted it.


Smooth I have thought of it seriously, and find you cannot do better than to
receive this Blunderbus, my Master, into your Family.


Keep. What? A Rival! I will as soon receive a Roaring Lion.


Smooth. Yes, such a one as he is: a Fool, a Blockhead, a Coward, a Knave that
never paid.


Merr. For his Cowardice I can answer: he stood to be robbed, like a Cow to be
Milk'd.


Bell. He carried me to Supper, and drank himself fast asleep by me.


Cun. If he be such a one, what should Ladies do with him?


Smooth. He loves Play; you may win his Money, and he has abundance: if he
refuse to Play, you may beat him till he will.


Cun. I have not heard of a more useful acquaintance, he must not be refused:


Smooth. You need not fear any Woman should like him he has been impotent these
seven years: when you are weary of him you may Kick him out of doors.


Eust. He is a man of a thousand: let me entreat for him.


Keep. He shall be admitted, but if he do not prove this Fool, this Coward you
speak of, you had better be hanged.


Smoo. My life for it. Now, Gentlemen, take me into your Protection, and then
Eat, Drink upon, and Laugh at the Fool my Master.


Merr. He deserves it abundantly, for keeping such a Rascal.


Keep. Call in Dangerfield, and let him know he is received without a Negative.


Smoo. Sir you may come in, the whole Company bids you welcome.


Re-enter Dangerfield. Keep. Most welcome, noble Dangerfield!


Cun. I shall be proud of your farther acquaintance.


Merr. I shall be glad to drink a Gallon of Wine with you at the Rose, we will
write you of our Club.


Bell. I never knew a Civiller person! I was once abroad with him, and he did
not offer me the least rudeness.


Dan. Gentlemen if any of you want a Second, I am at your service: And Ladies,
if any man speaks ill of you, or Lampoon you, I Will cut his throat: Thou have
charmed 'em; I thought they would have torn me to pieces even now: There are
Fifty Guineas I promised thee.


Smoo. I hope Sir, you will find I have deserved 'em; they did not know your
worth; but when I informed 'em of your good Qualities and Parts, I foresaw they
could do no less.


Dang. Nay, I never came in any place in my life, but when I was wellknown I
got the Love of Man, Woman, and Child.


Bell. Now you see what a fellow this Dangerfield was to be Jealous off.


Keep. Where there is no Jealousy, there is no Love.


Bell. I have had no other Proof of your Love these two months.


Keep. Thou shall have proofs of all kinds.


Bell. So you say always


Keep. I have been in the Country, and have brought where with to pay old
Scores, and will deal hereafter with ready Money.


Bell. We must have a general Act of Oblivion, now you are one of us no heart
burnings hereafter.


Dan. I declare I am in Charity with all the World, but that Fat Thief that
laid on me so unmercifully.


Bell. He must be comprehended too.


Dan. I cannot in Honor, unless you lay your positive commands:


Bell. You shall never question him. at Law, nor otherwise.


Dan. By these Hilts, I never will then.


Merr. Then here are the six Guineas you swore were a hundred, your false
Rings, silthy Medals, Table book, and other Pocket-Lumber.


Bell. And Merryman and I were the whole Dozen of Robbers, you swore against.


Eust. What, my valiant Bully, you and your man robbed by two; and one of 'em a
Woman!


Dan As I was going to draw, I heard a voice cry, hold, hold, thy dead doing
hand; strike not: it is thy Mistress, Dangerfield.


Eust. You Smoothly, you heard this voice too?


Smoo. As perfectly as my Master, one might have heard it to Knightsbridge:
besides there is something in a man of Honor that keeps him from striking a
Lady.


Enter Lionel with Isabella. Lion. Can you forgive your Lionel?

He never will commit a second Fault.


Merr. Not of the same kind, I Will answer for him.


Isa. My heart was yours, when we first met in Spain.

You seized the rest somewhat too rudely here:

But I am your Wife, and now am all obedience.


Eust. How shall I thank Heaven, and Bellamira for her care of thee?


Isa. My former troubles vanish like a Dream,

And am waked to perfect happiness

By that voice; Oh, my dearest Brother!


Eust. I should have known her any where; she is as little altered, as it is
possible.


Bell. Husband and Brother I must yield to them; but the third Joy is mine. My
Isabella was Lionel the man thou saw in Spain? And made that pretty
innocent description of?


Isa. The same: I never loved another, and now I never shall.


Lion. How many accidents have met, to make this happy day!

The least of which is half a Miracle.


Merr. Does not your mouth water, at these Amorous preparations?


This. Not at a greasy bit of a fat Drunkard. I am not ambitious of holding
your head in a morning, or carrying you to Hampsted, to get you a stomach to a
Drunken Supper.


Merr. Your proud heart will come down, when you have fasted from Man a year
longer, and been arrested once or twice more.


This. I might have gone to Goal for all my worshipful Guardian.


Merr. Oh, vanity! vanity! What Knight Errant, do you think would lay down two
Hundred pound for you.


This. Eustace knows best, he brought the Money; but whoever he were that sent
it, if he have but so much a year, I Will Marry him before any man in England.


Merr. What tho he love Wine, Women, and Tobacco, and were as Fat as I am?


This. Yes, with all your faults, and as many more of his own.


Eust. Then take her Merryman, she is thine, by her Consession: 'Twas his Money
that did satisfy the debt, and I was but employed by him.


Lion. We are all Witnesses; there is no going back.


Cun. She is proof against all Mankind, for I have Courted her these six
Months, yet never could obtain the least indecent favor.


This. Since it must be so, I hope you will prove as indulgent a Husband, as you
were a Guardian.


Merr. My little charge, if thou had not taken pity on me I should have
killed my self with Whoring and Drinking; but now I will beget Sons and
Daughters till threescore.


Cun. Gentlemen your Company is so good, I had almost forgot I was Married this
Morning. Lionel, I hope we shall have no suit in the Prerogative Court, tho I
have Married your Mistress.


Lion. Thou art my Redeemer, and have broken that Knot I should have been
troubled to untie. Theodosia was my Father's Choice, (her Bags were contracted
to his Acres.) But Isabella's mine.


Keep. These Roguish Fiddlers smell a Wedding already; since -- They are come
Let Us dance --

[They Dance.
Keep. My Bell. and I will lead a married Life,

Bating the odious Names of Man and Wife;

In Chains of Love alone we will be tied,

And every Night I Will use her like a Bride.


Merr. Wits, Whore-Masters, Gamesters, Drunkards, Bullies, We in our several
ways are all but Cullies.

[Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
LIke a young Wench that could not well forbear,
And yet is loath her Lewdness should appear.
Our modest Poet would have made away
In private, this mere l^mp you see to day.
We bid him lay the Bantling at our door
And for the event concern himself no more.
Poets of late with humane Sacrifice
Have feasted you like Heathen Deities.
In every Play they served you up a man
Nay some at Parties and whole Factions ran?
After such fare, how flat must Terence taste?
Yet his plain Tales have had the luck to last.
While your famed Authors, in their life time wast.
Ye all cry out the art of Writings lost
Yet nicer Judgments in perfection boast.
Strange Stars; malignant to Poetic strains
Yet so productive of Judicious brains.
What if you Judge, as ill as others Write?
And only loath for want of appetite;
No Jew into the Sanhedrim might come
That had no Issue of his own at home.
For barrenness supposes cruelty
No Childless man, might others Children try.
This wholesome Law would save us from the spite
Of all the furious Wits that cannot Write.
And you that do, we should not fear your doom
If you would Judge here but as you Judge at home;
Now Gallants most of you are so well bred
French has long since chased Latin from your head
And Terence yo have forgot or never read.
Faith spare'um both, lest your chance medly Wit
Miss the Translator and the Author hit.
FINIS.

