royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

A second Seasonable SPEECH Made by an Honorable MEMBER Of the HOUSE OF
COMMONS, DEMONSTRATING The Necessity of the KINGS Restoration by this present
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

A second Seasonable SPEECH Made by an Honorable Member of the House of
Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
IN this place, (the great Receipt of Grievances) give me leave to say, it is
not the least of mine, that Wisemen being believed to admire nothing: I see,
there is as great a necessity of my appearing sufficiently removed from that
rank of men, as there is, of my avowing, that, there is nothing here done,
which I do not admire. I have yet this of Felicity, that since I must want the
advantage of being by you reputed wise, now, when I desire, and need it most,
to enforce what I have to say: the Truths I am to discourse of are yet of
themselves so palpable, that an esteem of the Speaker needs contribute but
little to the procuring them a Belief. My Wonder, how great soever, equals not
my shame, that I see my self One of those Many, have sat so long in so great
an Exigency, and done so little. I look not upon the late Extravagancies and
Disorders, this Nation has labored under, so worthy my Dislike, or Admiration,
as our present Lethargy, and unactivenesse in not redressing those Distempers,
which, if sooner removed, must yet have been confessed, to have had too long a
continuance. That we came hither for this only end, will be sooner granted me
by all, then a reason given me by any, why 't is not done. If the difficulty be
too great for us, we did ill in re-assuming our Seats at all; and do yet worse,
in not leaving them now, to more enabled Persons. We have not the Plea of being
oppressed with Plenty. I cannot see such variety of ways apted for a Composure,
as need engage us to the delay of considering which is best: Providence, and
wise Fate having afforded us but one, least in a Liberty we should choose for
our selves a Blessing, far less, than kind Necessity intends us.

That the recalling of our King is this only way, is already grown almost as
visible as true: and were it but confessed by all of whom it is believed, I should
hear from the greatest part of this House, what now it hears alone from me.

Had we as little reason to fear, as we have too much, that if we bring not in
the King, he either already is, or shortly may be in a Capacity of coming in
unsent for: Methinks the knowledge of his Right, were alone enough to keep just
Persons (such as we would be conceived) from being accessory to his longer
absence. Had we but the Bravery of some Heathens Story gives us names of, we
should scorn there should be any could object to us, they wanted the Right and
Justice we had a Power to do them. We are already, and but too justly, reputed
to have been the occasion of our Prince's exile, we may with reason and equal
Truth, (for ought I know) be thought to have been the Contrivers of it too,
unless we evidence the contrary, by not suffering the Mischief to continue
longer, which is now in our power to remove.

Besides his right, inducement enough to engage his Subjects to his
restoration, there is eminent in him so great, and so confessed a worth, that
had he been born where he has been forced too long to reside, and had been
always as much a stranger, as he has been these late years to England, yet his
virtues singly considered, abstracted from any pretense, speak him the person
most worthy of our choice: and were he as destitute, as he is blessed with a
title, we could not pretermit him, without publishing our ignorance, or
disrespect, of the most noted, and most coveted perfection this day has a being.

To Omit (since it is impossible to enumerate all) the Excellencies whith are
least his, I mean his gifts of Nature, give me leave to remarque (what we have
most reason to know) some few of those many acquirements he is obliged to our
ill usage for. He has made his notices of all the Governments in Europe, and
knows the affairs of each State in Christendom, as well, nay perhaps (through
our faults) better than those of his own Country. He understands so perfectly
foreign Dialects, that in all Audiences, his Grandeur, not He, will require the
impertinencie of an interpreter. He has not altered his mind, in the variety
of climes, nor could be ever tempted, so much as to exchange his Religion, to
be re-established in that throne, his adversaries quite lost theirs, to
dispossesses him of. And after all, his enemies malice (by a most wise
contrivance) instead of rendering him (as they wished) absolutely incapable, has
but the more adapted, and fitted him for Empire.

This is so true, and so well understood, that we all believe, whatsoever our's
are, these will be the thoughts of the succeeding Parliament. These Nations,
and with good reason, do so much long for their Prince, and dread their being
by the next (as already by this Parliament) disappointed, that we must
rationally conceive, that to be ascertained of succeeding, they will make
Election of such persons, whose concerns, as well as affections, shall make
them active for his Introduction.

And, I appeal then to your own judgments, whether it is likely those Persons,
as to their particular Interest more unconcerned, and probably less knowing in
the affairs of the Nation, can or would obtain for any those terms, we are yet
in a Capacity of procuring both for them and us.

I must profess sincerely, 't would be as strange to me, as a miracle, did I
not know, that God infatuates whom he designs to destroy, that we can see the
King's return to be unavoidable, and yet be no ways Studious of serving him,
or at least our selves, in the managerie of his recall.

The people, though sensible enough, were the House of Lords readmitted with
how little reason then, we could pretend to be a Parliament, and therefore with
how much less, now they are excluded; would yet contentedly allow, we have
Authority enough, to act the things they wish, and without questioning by what
hand their felicity was conveyed to them, Enjoy it with a content incapable
of being allayed, even by a discovery of it is irregular procurement.

The General, that noble Personage, to whom, under God, we do and must owe all
the advantages of our past, and future changes, will be as far from opposing us
in this design, as the design is removed from the disadvantage of the Nation.
He himself is, I Am confident of the same opinion: and if he has given already
no notice of it to the House, it is not, that he does not look upon it as the
greatest expedient, but he only forbears to propose it, that he might not seem
to necessitate us, and by an overearly discovery of his own judgment, be
thought to take from us, the freedom of ours. Besides, we all see how much it is
his proper interest, and though he has honor enough, to endeavor the
happiness of his Prince without any other recompense than that of the
satisfaction he will receive from the sense of so brave an action, yet has he
no reason to believe he shall want any of the respects and honors, his
relation and deservings can oblige a just Prince to make him a return of.

Though I hope, now we have seen how much every thing advances the necessity
and facility of our Sovereigns return: there needs no new motives to engage our
powers and ministeries into a compliance with fate: give me leave yet to say,
that if there did, the very consideration, that we can thus only save our
sinking honor, and rescue the name of Parliaments from an inauspiciouness,
should i^ prove us in these thoughts, and press us to a resolvednesse. How
fair shall we appear in story? when from every pen, that amongst other ills
mentions our seclusion, there drops this observation, That we and villainy were
so inconsiste^^, that it was indispensably necessary that we should be removed,
when that was to take place, and that the succeeding mischiefs (acted whilst a
force often varied, never discontinued oppressed, the Parliament) vanished as
soon as Providence blessed us with an opportunity of evidencing by our removing
them, how far we had always been from having i^troc^ed them.

But to say no more in a business wherein I ought to hope, I have said already
more then needed: I shall only beg, that a concern of this moment may have
your first considerations, and that those Gentlemen (if there be any such)
whose Caprice and Petulancy shall against all reason engage them to an
opposition, would take care to be preassur'd, they may not be exposed, by
posting up their names, to the fury of the abused people. I wish their
apprehension of this danger may make them studious to prevent it; If it does
not, they run the hazard of this course (a trick already tried) which though I
do not approve, yet I must confess is abundantly apt to work a change, and to
render those persons sufficiently averse before, disposed, to tender the
peoples safety, as they do their own.

FINIS.

