THE Mulberry-Garden, A COMEDY. As it is Acted by His MAJESTY'S SERVANTS: AT
THE THEATER ROYAL.

Written by the Honorable Sir CHARLES SIDLEY.

LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the Lower
walk of the New Exchange. 1668.

TO HER GRACE THE DUCHESS OF RICHMOND and LENOX.
Madam,
It Is an unquestioned Privilege we Authors have of troubling whomsoever we
please with an Epistle Dedicatory, as we call it, when we print a Play; Kings
and Princes have never been able to exempt either themselves or their
Favorites from our Persecution. I think your Grace (for a Person of so great
Eminence, Beauty, Indulgence to Wit, and other Advantages that mark you out to
suffer under Addresses of this Nature) has escaped very well hitherto. For I do
not remember your Name yet made a Sanctuary to any of these Criminals: But,
Madam, your time is come, and you must bear it patiently. All the favor I can
show you, is that of a good Executioner, which is not to prolong your pain. You
see, Madam, here the unhappiness of being born in our time, in which to that
Virtue and Perfection* the Greeks and Romans would have given Temples (...),
the highest thing we dare dedicate, is a Play or ^ame such Tri^^es. (...) that
I now offer to your Grace, you were so kind to when it was in loose Sheets,
that by degrees you have trained it up to the confidence of appearing in Print
before you: And I hope you will find it no hard matter to pardon a Presumption
you have your self been accessory to, especially in one that is entirely,

MADAM, Your Graces Devoted and Obedient Servant, CHARLES SIDLEY.

Dramatis Personae.
Sir John (...). Sir Samuel Forecast. Harry Modish. Ned Estridge. Jack Wildish.
Snappum. Eugenio. Philander. Horatio. Officer and Assistants. Servant to Sir
Samuel Forecast. Musicians and Dancers. Prentices, and Sedan-men. Diana. (...).
Prologue.
NEw Poets (like fresh Beauties come to Town)
Have all that are decay (...) cry 'em down,
All that are envious, or that have writ ill:
For Wits and Heroes fain would during, kill.
Like Statesmen in disgrace, they ill endure
A better conduct should our good procure:
As an old Sinner, who in's youth has known
Most Women bad, dares venture upon none.
Our Author, seeing here the Fate of Plays,
The dangerous Rocks upon the Coast of Praise,
The cruel Critic and malicious Wit,
Who think themselves undone if a Play hit:
And like those Wretches who on shipwracks thrive,
Rage if the Vessel do the Storm outlive,
By others loss he (...),
But against tempting hope no man is armed:
Amongst great Gamesters, when deep play is seen,
Few that have money but at last come in:
He has known many with a trifling sum,
Into vast Fortunes by your favors run:
This gives him confidence to try his Fate,
And makes him hope he is not come too (...)
If you will undo him quite, like Roo^s begin*
And for this once in cunning let him win.
He hopes the Ladies at small faults will
And a new Poet, a new Servant think.
THE Mulberry Garden.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Sir John Everyoungs House stands. Enter Sir John Everyoung, and Sir Samuel
Forecast. Ever. WEll, for all this heat, let us every one
Govern his own Family as he has a mind to it;
I never vex my self that your Daughters
Live shut up as if they were in Spain or Italy;
Nor pray don't you trouble your self that mine
See Plays, Balls, and take their innocent Diversion,
As the Custom of the Country, and their age requires.

Forec. They are my Neeces, as they are your Daughters,
And I Will tell you, you spoil 'um with your own
Examples: youth may well be allowed to be
Stark mad, when they see age so Extravagant:
Is that a Dress for my elder Brother, and a
Reverend Justice?

Ever. Yes, and a properer than your little Cuffs,
Black Cap, and Boots there, for a Gentleman.

Forec. Of Eighteen I confess, but not of Fifty.

Ever. Yes, though he were as old as any before
The Flood; and for my part I Will not bate a Riband
For all the whole Tribe of you can say: you know
Your self every Fool would fain be thought wise;
And why an old man should not desire to be
Thought young, I see no Reason: as long as
I am whole at heart, I Am resolved my Clothes
Shall n'ere betray me.

Forec. There Is no need on it, your face does it sufficiently;
Come I Am ashamed to see you every day
Set out thus powdered, and trimmed, like an old Player,
To act a young Prince; your Periwig I like
Very well, it serves to keep your bald pate warm,
But that flirting Hat there looks as it were
Made rather for your Wit than your Head.
Pray which is most a-la-mode, Right
Reverend Spark? -- Points, or Laces? Girdle,
Or Shoulder-Belts? what say your Letters
Out of France?

Ever. Lord, what pains you take to Quarrel
At my Dress and Mirth, as if age were not
Tedious enough already, but we
Must add neglect of our selves, and moroseness
Toward others: Children now adays are
Not so fond of their Parents, that we
Need use any Art to make 'um hate us.

Fore. Well, go then, and carry your Daughters abroad,
And break their Bellies with Sillabub, it is the
Greatest kindness you can do 'um now;
As you have bred 'um, you may e'ne keep
'Um to your self, and save their Portions;
I believe no body will be very fond of a
Hide-Park Filly for a Wife; nor an old Boy
That looks like a Pedlar's Pack for a Father-in-Law.
But now I think on it, you are
Such a Spark, they would lose their Reputations
With you if they had any.

Ever. For ought I see good Brother, they stand
As fair in the opinion of the world as yours,
And have done nothing but what I like very well.

Fore. What do you count it nothing, to be all
Day abroad, to live more in their Coach
Than at home, and if they chance to keep
The House an Afternoon, to have the Yard
Full of Sedans, the Hall full of Footmen
And Pages, and their Chambers covered all over
With Feathers and Ribands, dancing and playing
At Cards with 'um till morning.

Ever. Why, where is the hurt of all this?

Fore. O no hurt at all; but if they were my Daughters
I should be looking for Cradles and Nurses,
I should be sorry to hear Diana or Althea
Went abroad without some discreet body
To look after them, or were at home indeed
Without employing their time in some piece
Of Huswifry, or at least some good Book.

Ever. You and I shall never hit it, for now I
Think those women who have been least
Used to Liberty, most apt to abuse it, when
They come to it.

Fore. O this fine believing Gentleman, I should
Laugh heartily to see him a Grandfather
Without a Son-in-Law.

Enter to them Victoria and Olivia. Vict. Sir if you don't use the Coach your
self,
My Sister and I would go abroad this Afternoon.

Ever. Take it Children, but don't keep the Horses
Out too late.

Fore. What! never ask 'um whither they are
Going? by your favor I Will put that Question
To 'um; Come hither Victoria, what visits
Do you intend this Afternoon?

Vict. None Sir, we were only going a Rambling.

Fore. A Rambling, methinks that word sounds
Very prettily in the mouth of a young Maid;
Next time I ask 'um whither they are going,
I believe they'I answer me, To drink
A Bottle or two: but whither pray?

Olivia. For that Sir we shall take counsel of the weather,
Either up into the City, or toward the Park.

Fore. What, none but you two?

Oliv. We intended to call on my Cousins
Althea and Diana.

Fore. They took Physic this morning, and
Are not well, you will but lose your labor.

Vict. Sir they sent for us but an hour ago.

Fore. You had better go without 'um, they
Are all undrest, to stay for 'um would
But make you lose the sweet of the Evening.

Ever. Brother, what are you jealous of them too?
I assure you they are no men in women's Clothes.

Fore. I am not jealous of 'um, but since you would
Have it so, I Would as lieve they would keep away.

Ever. And I Would as lieve you would keep away, till you
Understand your self better; what? you
Think your Daughters, like your Money,
Never safe, but under Lock and Key; who
Would you have 'um converse with, if not
With their Relations?

Fore. With those that are a kin to 'um in manners
And behavior, such as they may learn
Some goodness of; I see nothing they can
Learn here but vanity.

Vict. Sister they begin to be angry, come
Let Us leave 'um till the storm be over.

[Exeunt. Fore. What are they gone? I warrant
If we had been reading a Play, or Romance,
We should not have been rid of 'um so
Soon; but I Will spoil their sport at
My House

Ever. A precious Design, and worthy of your
Gravity! But, if you do Brother, I Will tell.
You one thing, you will go near to spoil
A match at cross purposes: farewell.

[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Modish his Chamber. Enter Henry Modish and Ned Estridge. Mod. Good morrow,
Ned, I thought I had left you
Too deep engaged last night to have been
Here thus early.

Estr. Why you sneaked away just as the Sport
Began, like a half-bred Cock that strikes
A Stroke or two briskly, and then runs.

Mod. Faith, I had so many Irons in the fire for
To day, I durst not run the hazard of
A disorder last night: but you know
My Heart was with you.

Estr. You would not have repented it, if your
Whole Body and Soul had been with us; Jack
Wildish sent for a dozen more of Champaigne
And a Brace of such Girls, as we should have
Made Honorable Love to, in any other
Place; and Sir John Everyoung was in the
Pleasantest Humor, I Would give a piece I
Could repeat the Satyr he made of the Country.

Mod. It would be good News to his Daughters,
For they say, now and then in a morning
He is of another mind.

Estr. That Is only while his head aches, they need
Not fear him; he swears he will never stir
Beyond Hide-Park or Colebys at farthest,
As long as he has an Acre left, they shall
All come to him: it is a pleasant old Fellow,
He has given me a hundred pounds for my
Gray beard, and is to ride himself this day
Month twice round the Park, against a bay
Stone-horse of Wildishes, for two hundred more.

Mod. Methought Wildish and you were very
Intimate, pray how long have you been
Acquainted?

Estr. Faith, about a week or so, times a thing only necessary
For the Friendship of vulgar Spirits: O here comes
The Gentleman we were speaking of; now Jack,
Enter Wildish. What small Petticoat do you come from?

Wild. E'ne such another as you are going to now
With all this Bravery: those Cravats that design
The Right Honorable, I Will lay a piece will be
Rumpl'd by a worse Woman than they were
Washed, yet before night.

Mod. Would all the world were of his mind, we
Young men should pass our time well.

Wild. O never the better for that; such Mounsieurs
As you by your Feathers are known to be Birds
Of prey, and though you catch nothing, you
Scare all; Besides, every good man is not acquainted
With this Principle among you, that you can be
In Love with nothing but your selves, and may
Be jealous of his Wife, when indeed you come
Innocently to take a view of your persons from
Head to feet in the great Glass; comb out your
Periwig, shake your Garnitures, and be gone.

Estr. What, do think we have no other way
Of Entertainment? No Discourse, Jack?

Wild. Yes, a little now and then about their dress,
Whether their Patches be too many or too few,
Too great or too small, whether her Hankerchief
Be Point de Venie or Rome; and having left behind
You some proof of your ability in the Mode,
Return to show your selves at the last Act.
Of a Play.

Mod. I dare swear, Jack, thy Acquaintance puts
Thee to none of these Critioisins, a plain Gorget.
And a black Scarf are all their varieties; and
Are you well Mistress? and what Company
Have you kept lately? thy most familiar
Questions. But Raillery apart. Say it were
A man's Fortune to prevail upon one of these
Thou believe so impregnable Forts, and to be
Received where never any but your self came
So near as to be denied; were not that a
Conquest?

Wild. As great as that of a place not tenible
Can be; the present Plunder indeed is somewhat,
But upon the first Siege you must look to be
Driven out: a Ladies heart is a kind of Fortification
That is easier surprised by being well manned,
And makes ever the strongest resistance of it self.

Estr. It Is true, Modish, for I have still observed,
That when one of these persons of Honor
Does a little forget her self, though at first
Through a secret Sympathy, and invincible
Inclination (as they call it) for one particular
Man, she ever after loves the whole Sex the
Better for it.

Wild. Right; for these good Creatures, Women,
Are like Cats, if once made tame, any one
May play with 'um; if not, there is no
Coming near 'um.

Mod. Thou think thou have mauled 'um now;
Why I tell thee, Jack, a Hector is not readier
To pick a Quarrel with a saucy Creditor,
And swear he will never pay the Rascal,
Then a man is to have one with his Mistress
Toward the latter end of an Amor; especially.
If it amount to a handsome occasion of
Leaving her, it is the kindest thing she can do
Then: what think you, Estridge?

Estr. Faith, I Am of your mind, yet I have known
Some unconscionable Ladies make their
Servants wait as long for a just Exception,
And almost as impatiently, as they did for the
First Favor.

Wild. Favor and Exception, Gentlemen, are words
I don't meet with in seven years, where
I go, my piece makes my Complement
When I come in, and my Excuse when I
Go away; and it is ever well taken too:
I have all the day to bestow upon my business,
The night upon my Friends, whilst you are
Kissing the Cards at Ombre, or presenting
Oranges at a Playhouse.

Estr. Thou never knew'st it seems what 'twas
To be in Love then.

Wild. No faith, I never let the Disease run on so far,
I always took it in time, and then a Bottle
Of Wine or two, and a she Friend is an approved
Remedy; there are men in the world though,
Who in that Distemper prescribe some
Serious Employment, continual Exercise,
Spare Diet, and the like; but they are Philosophers,
And in my opinion make the Remedy worse then
The Disease.

Estr. I do confess yours is the pleasantest Cure,
If it be one; but I doubt it only gives a little
Ease for the present, and like small Beer in the
Morning after a merry bout over night,
Does but make us the worse afterward.

Mod. I now, you talk to him of what he understands,
What you do tell him of Love for? who by
His own confession never knew what it was.

Wild. No, but I guess this same Love you speak
Of, Gentlemen, to be much like Longing in
Women, a fantastical appetite to some one
Thing above all others, which if they cannot
Get, the Lover miscarries of his passion,
And the Lady of her little one; or if they do, are
Both quickly satisfied, and it becomes for
Ever after very indifferent, if not loathsome.

Estr. Well, Modish, I perceive we shall do no
Good on him, let us take him to the Mulberry-Garden,
and see what the Ladies can do.

Wild. You shall excuse me, I have a small
Ramble of my own for an hour or two
This Afternoon: and so your Servant.
[Exit.
Mod. It Is time we were going,
I warrant they have walked every foot of
The Garden, twice over by this time:
They are mad to know, whether their
Friends in Town have dealt faithfully
With 'um of late, concerning the Mode.

Est. These Country Ladys for the first month
Take up their places in the Mulberry Garden,
As early as a Citizens Wife at a new Play.

Mod. And for the most part are as easily discovered;
They have always somewhat on, that is
Just left off by the Better Sort.

Est. They are the Antipodes of the Court; for
When a Fashion sets there, it rises
Among them.

[Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Victoria and Olivia. Vict. Sister, whatever the (...)
We don't see half (...)
To meet here anights, (...)
In Town.

Oliv. It Is true, but (...)
Walk at home (...)
Half a score young (...)
Well dressed, are a greater (...)
A Garden, than a Wildernes^ (...)
Orange, a Lemmon (...)
Of rich Vests and Silk (...)
Music than the purling (...)
Chirping of Birds, or any of our Country
Entertainments: and that (...)
Will afford us yet, (...)
Ar^ done.

Vict. Sister, what would you give to see
Estridge come in now?

Oliv. It Is impossible, he would not miss his
Devotion to the Park, for all I could give,
Such an Evening as this: besides the two
Garnitures he brought out of France are
Soiled, his Feather broke, and he has been
So out of humor these two days, there is
No enduring him; he lost his Money too
Last night I hear; and losing Gamesters
Are but ill company.

Vict. Fie Sister, you make him a saver with
A look; and Fine, in but thinking he is so*
You deserve not so complete a Servant,
But I hope you will be as obliging to
His face, as you are severe to him
Behind his back.

Oliv. The only way to oblige most men
Is to use 'um thus, a little (...)
Even to their faces, it gives 'um an
Opinion of our wit; (...)
A Spur to theirs: the great pleasure
Of Gaming were (...)
Another hands; and (...)
Another Hearts: there (...)
For good Play in the One, nor for Address
In the Other (...)
Of both. But what would you (...)

Vict. To see Horatio, (...)
I would all others happiness (...)
But he is now another* and (...)
Is not to nourish, (...)
I dare not hope my Capti^^ (...)
So many Charms contribute to (...)
Althea's Slave, let false (...)
Whilst I for freedom, (...)

Oliv. Fie Sister, leave this (...)

Enter to them Estridge and Modish. Estr. Ladys, it is our wonder to find any
body
Here at this time of Day, and no less our
Happiness to meet with you; all the world
Is at the Park, where we had been our
Selves, but that we saw your Livery
At the Gate.

Vict. I pray let us not keep you here Gentlemen,
Your Mistresses will curse us, and your
Selves too, by and by, if the Garden should
Not fill.

Est. If we wish any company, Ladies, it is for
Your sakes, not our own.

Mod. For my part I would never desire a
Garden fuller than this is now; we
Are two to two, and may be hand to
Hand when you please.

Oliv. I don't know what you think * but in
My mind the More the Merrler, especially
In these places.

Est. I, for show, Madam, but it happens in
Great Companys, as at Feast, we see ^
Great deal, and fall to heartly of nothing,
And for the most part rise hungry: and it is
With Lovers, Madam, as with great
Bellied Women, if they find what they
Long for, they care not whether there
Be any thing else or no.

Vict. What in love (...)
This place is a great softner of men's hearts.

Mod. How can it choose, having so many
Lovers sighs daily mixed (...)
A much better quality (...)
It could incline Ladies to believe, and look
With pity on those flames they (...).

Oliv. It Is too early to (...)
Flames and Pity would (...)
In the Evening.

Mod. It Is not with love, Madam, as with meaner
Arguments; I might entertain you with
My passion for an age, and yet have as
Much left for anon, as if I had not
Spoke one word; the Sea is easier emptied
Then a Lovers breast.

Oliv. What say you, Sir, is this your opinion too?

Est. Yes faith, Madam, and I think a Lover can
No more say at once, what he has to
Say to his Mistress, than a man can eat
At once for his whole life time*

Oliv. Nay, if it be so endless, I should beg of
My Servant, when ever I have one,
E'ne to keep it to himself for altogether.

Est. There you betray your ignorance,
With your pardon, Madam; to see the
Fair Olivia, and not love her, is not
More impossible, than to love her, and not
Tell her on it. Silent Lovers you may read
Of, and in Romances too, but Heavens
Forbid you should e're meet with any.

Oliv. If they knew how little they were like
To get by being otherwise, I Am confident
I should meet with none else.

Est. Well, Madam, I perceive Love, like Wine,
Makes our Discourse seem extravagant
To those that are not wound up to
The same height: But had you any spark
Of what I feel, I should have had
Another Answer.

Oliv. Why, what Answer,

Est. Nay, I know not, but some pretty one,
That love would have devised for you;
No more to be imagined by you ^ow,
Than what you shall talk of (...)
In your sleep. (...)
Will you do us the honor to eat (...)?

Oliv. Sister, let us go, so they will promise to say
Nothing but what they think to us when
We are there.

Mod. You may do what you please, Ned, but it is
A liberty I dare not use my self to, for
Fear of an ill habit.

Estr. You are very confident of our good opinion;
Ladies; I believe there are few women
In Town would accept of our Company
On these terms.

Vict. Faith, Sister, let us bate um that circu^^^^
Truth is a thing merely necessary for witnesse^*
And Historians, and in these places does out
Curb invention, and spoil good Company;
We will only confine 'um to what is
Probable.

Mod. Content, and I dare swear 'twill be better
For all Parties.

[Exeunt. SCENE IV.
Sir Samuel Forecasts House. Enter Alth^^ and Diana. Diana. We two, or none,
may of our Stars complain,
Who afford us nothing to share but pain;
Each bears her own, and the others portion too;
This cruel wonder can high friendship do.

Alth. To us how (...)
Since both had had what they on each bestowed!
But yet thy loss I rate (...) thy own*
Fate on thy Love till now did never frown*
Philander thee above the world did prize,
Thy Parents saw him almost with thy Eyes:
(...)
This hour that promised all, can nothing pay,
And Hymen steals his lighted Torch away.

Dian. Ah, dear Althea* let not thou and I
Contend who most exceeds in misery;
It is a dismal strife, since were my own
Less, I Would share thine till they were equal grown.
Curse on Ambition, why should Honor take
A present back again, that Love did make?
On thee Eugenio did his Life bestow,
To me Phila^^ his Service vow;
Yet both for (...) have those ties despised,
And now are (...) must be sacrificed.
Unkind Philan^^, had Love filled thy breast
With half those flames thou have so often expressed,
They had consumed in their purer fires
All other thoughts, and thou would never mind,
Who were for Kings, and who for Slaves designed.

Alth. The noble sense they show of the sad Fate
Of their dear Country, sets a higher rate
Upon their Love; for who that had a grain
Of Honor in him, could endure the Reign
Of proud Usurpers, whose (...) will,
Is all the Law by which men spare or kill;
And his true Prince in Banishment behold,
Worthy of more than Fortune can withold;
These monstrous with the crimes of prosperous Fate,
The other shining in his adverse State,
So that each stroke of Fortune does but seem
A step for his Heroic mind to climb,
Till he has got above her reach, and then
The Virtue she has tried she I love agen^
Though I must truly mouth their ill success,
I could not wish Eugenio had done less.

Dian. Had their high Virtue the least doubt endured,
Even with their death it had been cheaply cured:
But this brave Act is but to me and you,
A dangerous proof of what before we knew.

Alth. Though their true worth to us before were clear,
This Act has made it to the world appear;
None ever with that obstinacy loved,
But they were pleased to see their choice approved:
No joy complete to worthy minds can seem,
Which is not height'ned by the worlds esteem.

Dian. My heart, Althea, does less grieve it has
Ventured it is treasure in so loved a cause,
Then that Philander did not let me know
The danger he was like to undergo.

Alth. Sister, though Laws of Decency (...)
We shining Swords and glittering Armor (...)
Yet a decision of what is right or wrong,
As well as men's, does to our minds belong;
And we best show it when we most approve
Those men that fight in Quarrels which we love:
Though they of Courage have the ruder part,
The Virtue may become a woman's heart,
Though not (...)
Expose her Love, sure for her (...)
I knew Eugenio must that (...),
Nor could consent he should the danger shun;
And had Philander (...)
He without (...)

Dian. I must confess (...)
That he again should (...)
Let me the greatness of your mind admire,
Whilst I deplore the greatness of my (...),
A fire which lends (...)
To show how much what I (...)
How much he hazards (...)
From vent'ring him (...)
Whose danger had known, my Eyes, alas!
Had wept a Sea, he would have feared to pass;
But we so long of (...)
As if no further mischief did remain,
(...)
And all the Arrows from her Quiver sent.

Alth. When Fate would harm where Virtue does protect,
She does her guilt and impoten^e detect;
She can but rob the Virtuous of that rest,
She must restore, again with interest
And all the danger of these Heroes past,
Must needs consider their high worth at last.

Dian. What we ^^^ire, how fain we would believe,
And wish that Fortune knew not to deceive?
But she profusely to (...) presents makes,
And as unju^^^ (...) some others takes.
I fear she is (...) worth in debt,
She Will (...) use the whole's too great:
Like (...) her Bounties still appear,
Who give (...) that they from many tear.

Alth. In the mean time I fear our cruel friends
Will not consult our liking, but their ends;
I know they will press I should Horatio wed,
And promise thee unto some Strangers bed.

Dian. They may such Matches as they please provide,
But here I vow, I Will never he, a Brid^
To any but Philander; in that Heart
He taught to love, none else shall have apart.

Alth. I the like Vow to my (...)
Which Fates worst malice (...)
As Trees exposed to Storms (...)
Than those that do in peaceful (...)
So in all Noble minds, a virtuous Love
By opposition does the firmer prove

Dian. It Is fit, Althes, I now take my leave,
Whilst you prepare H^ratio to receive,

Alth. Farewell, Diana, and be sure you do
Nothing unworthy of your Love and Vow.

Exeunt Diana and (...) ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Samuel Forecast, Althea, (...) Wildish, and Olivia. Fore. DAughter,
we are much beholding (...)
The Portion I can give with (...)
Deserve a man of past half his Fortune;
Six thousand pounds a year, an Estate well (...)
Wooded, and I am told very improveable,
It makes me young again to think on it:
Eugenio I never liked, and as things stand
Now, am right glad we had no more to do
With him; But that I am one whose
Affection and good will to the State has sufficiently
Manifested it self, I might be thought
To have a hand in their Design, and so have
Been put in the Tower, and had my Fortune
Seized on: Eugenio shall never call a
Child of mine, Wife, as long as
I live.

Wild. But, Sir, your zeal to the Cause has put
You above those apprehensions.

Fore. You say right, Mr. Wildish, but we ^^not,
Be in this case too secure; and I am resolved*
Althea, to take off all suspicion, shall out
Of hand marry with Horatio.

Alth. Sir, I hope you will allow me some
Time to dismiss Eugenio from my thoughts.

Wild. And, pray Sir, what prejudice, what
Exception have you to Eugenio?

Fore. Originally this only, his Father made a
Purchase of some Land, that lay next hedge,
To mine, and gave a thousand pounds more
Than it was worth, only to buy it over my head:
Think no more on him upon my blessing,
He is not the man he was; he had an Estate,
It Is now sequestered, he dare not show his
Head; and besides, I would not have a Son-in-
Law of his principles, for six times his fortune;
I should be sorry to see any Child of mine
Soliciting her Husbands Composition at
A Committee.

Alth. Had (...) had the relation of a Wife
To Eugenio, (...) have thought nothing
A trouble the (...) ^ecome my Duty, and
Could as oh^^ (...) have shared an honorable
Suffering, as the most flourishing condition.

Fore. I charge you never receive visit, or
Message from him more, and tell your Sister
Diana, it is my pleasure she quit all
Correspondence with Philander.
They are both dangerous persons.
[ Turns to Wildish. These young Wenches, Mr. Wildish, have less
Forecast than Pigeons, so they be billing, they
Look no farther; n'ere think of building their
Nests, nor what shall become of their little ones.

Wild. Sir, I think they are in the right, let 'um increase
And multiply, and for the rest, trust him that set
'Um a work.

Fore. Mr. Wild^ ^ou are a merry Gentleman, but
I Will tell you, Mrs. Althea, as I have given you
Life, I Will take care you shall not make it miserable.

Alth. Sir, the happiness of life lies not in wealth, in
Title, or in show, but in the mind, which is not to
Be forced, and we are not the less slaves for being
Bound in Chains of Gold: A marriage with
Horatio may make me appear happy to the
Envious world, but like those destructive
Arts, which, while they seem to ^id, consume
Our native Beauties, indeed must prey upon
My inward peace.

Fore. I Will warrant you peace within, and without too;

Horatio is a well natured proper Gentleman,
And one that loves you.

Wild. Now there Sir Samuel I Am on your side,
For so the Fan be played with, the hand kissed;
In fine, the passion handsomely discharged, it is
No great matter who does it. As Children
Cry after their old Nurses, but 'till they
Are acquainted with their new: so young
Ladies regret the loss of one Servant, but
Till they have got the same familiarity
With another; which, by the way, is seldom
Long first.

Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, there is a man out of Paternoster
Row with Stuffs.

Fore. Bid him carry 'um into the next Room.
Come Althea, let us in and look upon 'um.

[Ex. Althea, and Sir Samuel. Manent Wildish and Olivia. Oliv. We Women are
ever sure of your good
Word, Mr. VVildish; when you have a Mistress,
I hope she will deserve it from you in particular,
And have in perfection all those good qualities
You so liberally bestow upon the whole Sex, in
Your Discourse.

VVild. Why, Madam, I thought you had understood
Raillery; faith I have so good an opinion of the Sex
I am ashamed to own it but to one of them in
Private; this is only the way of talking I have
Got among my Companions, where when we
Meet over a Bottle of Wine, it is held as great
A part of wit to rallee women handsomely behind
Their back, as to flatter 'um to their Faces.

Oliv. But why do you make us poor women the
Subject of your mirth?

Wild. You are grown of late so uncharitable and
Villainous hard-hearted, are encompassed with so
Many difficulties, as decency, honor, and (...)
That we men that love our pleasure, begin to
Hate you worse than Beggars do a Coach with
The Glasses drawn up, despair of Relief, and fall,
A Railing.

Oliv. And if some kind-hearted wretch do chance
To relieve one of you, like Beggars you tell it
Presently, (...) and more; I warrant you are fine
Fellows, a (...) is well helped up,
That has (...) you to her Servant.

Wild. Nay don't put me in among 'um, I am a
Mere Apostate, though not resolute enough
To endure the Martyrdoms of being continually
Laughed at by half a score of 'um: all that I
Have done of late, has been mere compliance,
As Papists go to Church for fear of the penalty.

Oliv. Pray, Sir, to what fair Saint do we owe your
Conversion?

Wild. Faith there are many in the World now would
Make you guess this half hour, telling you
First the color of her hair, her age, her
Country, and perhaps the first Letter of her name;
But I hate that way of fooling -- it is your
Self -- whom I love.

Oliv. Impudent fellow! don't you expect I should
Forbid you the house, or at least, for punishment
Of such rudeness, condemn your guilty passion
To eternal silence and despair? what! men
Have lived years in Deserts for their Mistresses
Sake, and yet have trembled when they spoke
Of love; which you venture at with as
Little Ceremony, as you would ask me how I
Slept last night.

Wild. I know not what Romances order in
This case, I ^^ere thought it would be mine*
And so have not much studied it: but prithee don't
Baulk a young Beginner; it is my first fault, and
So been't too severe, I shall relapse else
Beyond Redemption:

Oliv. Well, I Am content for once your ignorance
Should plead your pardon.

Wild. Nay Mrs. Olivia consider me a little further;
I have lost the pleasures of mirth, of Wine,
And Company; all things that were before
Delightful to me are no longer so; my
Life is grown but one continued Thought of
Your fair self: and is a pardon all that I
Must hope for?

Oliv. Come, leave your fooling, your old humor does
Better with you, a thousand times, then this
Whining Love. As there are some Perfumes
So strong, that they lose that name with
Most: So Complements may be so gross, that
They become injurious.

Wild. Why here is it now; there are so many cheats
In this Trade of Love too, that like Beggars, the
The true go unreliev'd, because we meet with now
And then a counterfeit; on my life Mrs. Olivia
The plenty I have ever lived in, puts me
As much out of countenance to ask a Charity
Of this kind, as I could be, should Fortune constrain
Me, to entreat one of the other; and would not
Trouble you could my pain admit redress
From any but your self.

Oliv. Sure, Mr. Wildish, you would think I had
An excellent opinion of my self, or an implicit
Faith in whatever you say, should I believe
All this now.

Wild. If I told a Surgeon, I had broke my leg,
Do you think he would not take my word?

Oliv. Yes sure.

Rild. Why should not you take it then for a wounded
Heart? they are neither of 'um matters to
Brag on; and I would no more lead the life
Of a Lover if I were free, then I would
That of a sick man if I were well.

Oliv. Methinks the sick men, as you call 'um,
Live so like the well, as one can scarce know
One from the other.

Wild. In your Chamber, perhaps; but abroad we
Find a thousand differences.

Oliv. As how, I pray?

Wild. Why, your true Lover leaves all Company
When the Sport begins, the Table when the Bottles
Are called for, the Gaming-house when the
Cards come up; is more afraid of an Engagement,
Than a Lawyer in Term-time;
Would less miss the last Act of a Play, the Park,
Or indeed any abominable old Ladies,
Where he may hope to see the party, then
A young Wench can Grayes-Inn-walks, the
First Sunday of her new Gown.

Oliv. What is this all?

Wild. Not half: ask him to sup, he has business;
Or if he promise, it is ten to one he fails, and
If he sees his Mistress, is so transported, that
He forgets to send his Excuse; if he cannot
Find her, and so chance to keep his word,
Sits in such dismal Dumps, that he spoils
The whole Company.

Oliv. And will you be such an Animal for my sake?

Wild. Faith I Am afraid so, but if not well used,
I shall find the way home again.

Oliv. Whatever you think, Sir, I shall contribute
No more to the keeping you my Servant,
Then I did to the making you so.

Wild. Well, do but use as proper means to keep
Me your Servant, as you have done to make
Me so, and I am satisfied.

Oliv. Why, what means?

Wild. As your Beauty bred my Affection,
So let your kindness nourish it.

Oliv. Mr. Wildish, you have been so pleasant
Upon this new Argument, that I had
Almost forgot my Visit to Diana.

Wild. I Am upon equal terms with you there;
For I have made Ned Estridge and Harry
Modish stay this half hour for me
At the French House: and so your Servant.

[Exeunt: SCENE II.
Enter Althea. Alth. Under what Tyranny are Women born!
Here we are bid to love, and there to scorn;
As if unfit to be allowed a part
In choosing him, that must have all our heart;
Or that our liking, like a headstrong beast,
Were made for nothing, but to be oppressed;
And below them, in this regard we are,
We may not fly the cruelty we fear.
The Horse may shake the Rider from his back,
The Dog his hated Master may forsake;
Yet nothing of their native worth impair,
Nor any conscious sting about them bear.
But if a Virgin an Escape contrive,
She must for ever in dishonor live,
Condemned within her self, despised of all,
Into worse mischiefs then she fled from, fall.
Duty commands I should Horatio wed,
Love does as strongly for Eugenio plead;
My mind, distracted thus, a storm abides
Like Seas, when winds blow full against their Tides.

Enter Horatio. Hora. Madam, methinks you look not pleased; I fear
My hapless passion did too late appear
For my content; and only now can prove
The wretched Triumph of some elder Love.
But, fair Althea, you were much to blame
With your own breath to blow a hopeless flame.
Ah! had you to its Childhood been severe,
As now to its full growth you cruel are,
'Thad died with half that pain it now must bear:
Young Plants with ease up by the Roots we tear;
But when well grown, the A^ must be employed,
And they with force and labor are destroyed.

Alth. Generous Horatio, forbear to blame
Me, as the cruel Author of your pain.
How could I know that you my Lover were,
Until your self your passion did declare?
How had it looked in me to have complained
Of thoughts, perhaps, you never entertained?
How could I check, alas, those hopes in you,
Your Heart did never harbor, that I knew?

Hora. Not know, Althea! why should the same eyes
So slowly see, so suddenly surprise?
The very minute I beheld your face,
You might in mine my growing passion trace,
Now trembling fear did her pale color spread,
Then springing hope brought back the ^^ative red:
Joy may be seen, and grief it self unfold,
And so may love, though it be never told.
In every look my passion was confessed,
And every action my high flame expressed.
As foolish Witnesses them Cause overthrow,
My Arts to hide it, did it clearer show.

Alth. But as fond Parents will not seen to know
A fault they needs must punish when they do;
So I at first was loath to see a crime
In one, I otherwise did so esteem:
For know, Horatio, setting Love apart,
None then your self is deeper in my Heart;
Your worth and honor I can value, though
I no requital to your flame allow.

Hora. You can give all things else above their due,
And yet wrong that which most belongs to you:
Madam, these words, sooth with a cruel art
Where I less feel, and wound a mortal part;
With friendship and esteem you strive in vain,
Kind Maid, to ease a Lover of his pain:
For where your Beauty once has raised a flame,
To offer less, and nothing, are the same.
Love and Ambition of their aim denied,
No other way can e're be satisfied.

Alth. You that could faithless to Victoria prove,
Methinks should blush even at the name of Love.
Her numerous Charms your loud accusers are,
And call Horatio false, as she is fair.

Hora. You should with pity, not displeasure see
The change that your own self creates in me.
The Roman Senate had their greatness worn
Perhaps till now, had Caesar never been born.
Darius self could not his Persians blame,
Because that Alexander overcame.
In Love like War, some Victor still there grows,
Whose spreading Empire nothing can oppose.

Alth. Countries are fixed, and cannot fly, although
They apprehend a certain overthrow.
Lovers, the force they cannot oppose, might shun,
And may with safety and with honor run.
Who then would pity him that stays to dye,
When Virtue and his Duty bid him fly?

Hora. Althea, In Loves wars all Heroes are,
Death does less terrible than flight appear;
As Gamesters, when they lose, still deeper set,
Helping ill Fortune to increase their debt:
So Lovers, when a Nymph gets half their heart,
Themselves, alas, betray the other part.

Alth. Victoria's wrongs my gratitude deter;
Your gifts to me are robberies from her.

Hora. I came at first, Althea, it is most true
With Love to her, and but Respect to you,
But, ah! how soon within my tortured breast
You of each others place are possessed.

Alth. Beauty, the wrongs of Beauty should revenge,
And the fair punish, when the faithless change.

Hora. I change Althea, but (as pious men
Become blessed Saints) never to change again.
If none your matchless Beauty must adore,
But such alone as never loved before,
You do unjustly, and too high advance
In Love th'already too great power of chance:
Since that you should their first affection be,
Let Us you their Fortune, not their passion see.

Alth. It lets me see they falsehood never knew.
And gives me leave to hope they will be true.

Hora. Sure none can faithless to such Beauty prove*
He that is in Heaven, can no higher move.

Alth. A Lovers Heaven in his Fancy lies,
Which Beauty often neglects, and often supplies.

Hora. It Is not, Althea, that you question mine,
But it is Eugenio's faith does brighter shine;
It Is he that makes Victoria's wrong your pain,
My Love a Crime, a Virtue your disdain.
These tales of falsehood, and of former Love,
Reproaches only, where we like not, prove.

Alth. Horatio, I am glad your dis-respect
Has turned so soon to Justice my neglect:
You that reproach me with a former Love,
Your self unfit but for my anger prove.
[Exit Althea.
Hora. O stay a while I sure you must joy to see
The torture you're so pleased to work in me;
Not that I hope I shall your pity find,
But that the sight may glut your cruel mind.
Nature inconstant to her own designs,
To a fair form a cruel temper joins;
She makes the heedless Lover kneel in vain,
And in Loves Temple, to adore Disdain.
[Exit Horatio.
Enter Sir Samuel Forecast and Jack Wildish. Fore. When am I to see your fair
and wealthy
Cousin, Mr. Wildish?

Wild. This minute if you please, Sir.

Fore. I doubt you are not stirring in the business,
You do not lay the necessity of marrying
Home enough to her: I might have got
Access ere now else, and our Counsel
Have been drawing the Writings.

Wild. It must be done by degrees: if I should
Have been too forward, it might have
Caused in her a suspicion of my purpose,
And so my worthy Friend Sir Samuel have
Come to her upon some prejudice,
Which I would not for half her Fortune.

Fore. Pray, Mr. Wildish, is she so concerned for
Her late Husband as the world talks?

Wild. Ten times more; looks upon his Picture
All day long, as earnestly as if she were
To copy it; since he died, has used no Pocket-
Handkerchers, but what was made of his old Shirts,
And wets two a day of 'um with her tear^;
Because he died on a Monday, fasts that day
Of the week; takes none into her Service
But Thomases, because 'twas his Christian
Name, and has now sent into Wales for a
Thomas ap Thomas to be her Gentleman Usher.

Fore. It Is strange she should so affect his name!
What think you then, if you called me
Sir Thomas Forecast?

Wild. Faith, Sir, what you please; but I think
It will be altogether needless, and if she should,
Come to discover, it might spoil all, ^ light,
She might mistrust your particular, if she
Should find you put a trick upon her in
Your name.

Fore. Well, I Will be ruled by you, Mr. VVildish,
You know her humor best.

VVild. I cannot but think how she will look upon
Me when I talk to her of another Husband;
But I Will venture, Sir (...)
Come let us away, her House is here hard by.

[They enter the Widows house VVild. I show the way, Sir.

[They find her looking upon her Husbands Picture, and does not see 'um. Fore.
Excellent woman, she sees us not! O the
Endless treasure of a virtuous Wife!
It extends even to our memories, and
Pictures.

[Wildish goes up, and speaks to her VVild. Madam, here is Sir Samuel Forecast
Come to wait on you.

Wid. Sir, I hope you will pardon me, if I have
Let my grief employ any part of that time
Which was due to my acknowledgment for
This favor; you were my Husbands friend,
And as such will ever be most welcome to me;
And though his too scrupulous kindness allowed
Me not the acquaintance, scarce the sight of
Any man; yet I did always place a value
Where he gave his esteem; especially,
So highly as he did to you.

Fore. Madam, I am much bound to you for your
Good opinion, and come to condole with you:
Your Husband was an honest, prudent, and a
Wealthy Gentleman, kept good hours, and even
Reckonings, loved me well, and we have drank
Many a Dish of Coffee together.

Wid. Sir, whilst you repeat his virtues, you do
But count my loss, and telling me how good
He was, makes me but more sensibly want him.

Fore. He and I were just of an age, and when
We were Boys, of a strength.

Wid. And what of that, Sir?

VVild. Why, Cousin it makes me think that Sir
Samuel would make as loving a Husband
To you, as your last was, and (...)
Troubles me heartily to see my (...)
Here not yet out of danger of smooth-fact
Younger Brothers, such as marry Wives only
To keep Wenches, and never bring 'um to Town
But to pass away some part of their Estates.

Fore. Some such there are; but Heaven bless the
Estate, and Widow of my good Friend your
Husband out of such hands.

Wid. Now I have brought you together,
I Will leave you; Cousin, you are not afraid to
Be left alone with Sir Samuel?
[Exit.
Wid. I know his Virtue, and my own too well.

Fore. Don't you find, Madam, business very troublesome?

Wid. I do indeed, and have the misfortune to be
Involved in it.

Fore. Have you many Lawsuits?

Wid. But one considerable, which being with
A man in power, in these corrupt times,
A Woman unfriended and unknown as I am,
Must expect to lose.

Fore. Of what value?

Wid. Five thousand pounds: I shall have enough
Left however, to make me happy with a man
That loves me.

Fore. Enough left! such another word would
Make me foreswear, not only thee but thy
Whole Sex; five thousand pounds well disposed,
Why I tell thee, it is able to procure us Judgments
On half the young Prodigals of this Age* thou
And I might live comfortably on the forbearance
Money, and let the Interest run on.

Wid. I did but put the worst, not that I doubt my
Title, if I have common Justice.

Fore. No, thou shall secure thy (...), I am a
Near Kinsman to the Judge, and a by way to
His favor.

Wid. How do you mean?

Fore. Why I have many times bought a thousand
Pounds worth of other men^ (...)
For a hundred.

Wid. I would not corrupt Justice for a world.

Fore. What again Widow? nay then I perceive
Thou do it on purpose to lose my heart:
But to say truth, it were unreasonable
To expect thy tender years should understand
The true worth of money, so far, that for its sake
To trample on those unprofitable and foolish principles
The honorable Beggars of former times Governed their
Lives by: But thou will one day know, that
Age has its beauties too, as well as youth, and
More universally adored.

Wid. Gravity and Wisdom, Sir, I know men may
Expect, but our Sex has no pretense to them.

Fore. No, wealth and power, Widow, which awe the grave
And wise; Gold and Silver are the best red and white;
The other, every Milk-Maid may boast equal with
A Countess.

Enter Sir John Everyoung, Modish, and Estridge, with Fiddles playing. Wid.
What rude fellow's that?

Ever. Hold, let us parlee first.
[To the Music* Faith, Widow, one that loves you but too well.

Wid. Love me! upon what acquaintance? I n'ere
Saw your face before in my days.

Ever. And do thou like it now?

Wid. Not so well as your self, you may be confident.

Ever. All this shall not cross my honest purpose, I
Came in mere charity to prevent thy ruin;
And if thou be'st not lost to all sense and reason,
Nay, even all natural appetite, I Will do it.

Wid. I know no ruin near this is the worst
Accident has befaln me a good while.

Ever. Hear me but out, and thou shall bless it;
Can thou be such a Traitor to flesh and blood,
As to count it nothing to be joined to that old Trunk
There? if he increase or multiply it*
Must be thy Bags; Interest, and Broakage
Are his best Instruments.

Wid. You don't consider that all this might be
As well applied to your sweet self.

Ever. Yes, most properly, why it is that makes me
Hate Matrimony, and puts me at distance
With, To have and to hold; I confess my Tick
Is not good, and I never desire to Game for more than
I have about me. Now second me.

Mod. The minute you marry, Widow, you are
Not worth a Groat, all is your Husbands;
And if hereafter you shall come to a sense
Of your unequal choice, and endeavor to
Repair it in some young and worthy friend;
The old Gentleman takes pet, turns you over
To a todious suit for Al^ money, which your
Friend furnishes you with money to follow,
For a while, and in times grows weary of it
Himself.

Estr. Then like an old Gamester, that has lost all
He has upon the square, your only way is
To turn Rook and play upon advantage.

Wid. Why, do you know these Gentlemen?

Fore. I, to my shame, the Ringleader of 'um is my
Brother, there is no remedy but patience.

Wid. Gentlemen, you talk at a strange rate
For the first time; but whom ever I marry
My virtue will secure him of my constancy.

Mod. Pray Madam, don't profane that honorable
Name; it is mere obstinacy to an old man,
A fault methinks you have too ingenious a
Countenance to be guilty of.

Ever. If thou (...)
Neglect the comfort of a Gallant, thou'st never
'Scape the scandal, having such a Husband.

Mod. If you are precise, Madam, they are give you
Your Chaplain; if you love (...)
Lawyer; if you (...)
You are undone.

Estr. If you take some honest Gentleman
(Which by my (...) I think is your best
Course) upon the first hard journey, as the world
Goes now, it is ten to one he falls lame of an
Old bruise.

Wid. You are very tender of my credit if you
Had been as careful, Gentleman, of your own
Sobriety, I fear I had mist all this good Counsel.

Ever. O! are you edified? if is good counsel then:
And for the warmth that ripened us to this care
Of thee, be thankful, and enquire no further.
But Brother, methinks you are over serious
For a man that comes a Sutering.

Widd. He does not find your mirth take so well.

[Enter Wildish apart. Wild. S'light here is Sir John Everyoung, he will spoil
All, if I don't take him off instantly.

[ Wild goes out, and brings in three of the Widows Maids. Fore. Brother*
Brother* these frolicks do you
No right in the eye of the World.

Ever. Hang the world, give me the pretty black-eye
Of the Widow.

[A So^g. Wild. Gentlemen, here is work for you,

Ever. A muss, a muss*
You see, Wildish, we found the House, though
You would not tell us where it was, it is
Dangerous to give a hint to men of our parts.
Brother, take your Widow, show her that
You are so far qualifie^ toward a Bridegroom,
As to lead a Country Dance.

Widd. I Will have no dancing in my House.

Fore. You see they are a little merry, humor 'um
In this, they (...)

Wid. Well, Sir (...)
To serve you.

[They Dance, and Forecast steals away. Mod. Sir Samuel gone?

Ever. Faith then the sport's at the best, let us all be gone:
Farewell Widow, I have done my part, if
Thou fallest now, say thou had fair warning.

[Ex. omnes. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Eugenio, and Philander. Eug. DEar friend, I am in doubt whether I shall
This escape, a blessing, or misfortune, call;
Since now I live to hear, Althea must
Be to her Duty, or to me unjust.
Ye Powers that were so kind, my life to spare,
Oh why was not my Love as much your care?
You saved my life, that I might live to feel
Despair can wound as mortally as Steel.
My cause till now my antidote has been,
Against all the mischief it could plunge me in;
The strictest Prison, I have freedom thought,
And been on Scaffolds without terror brought.
But these few words (Althea is a Bride)
More wound my Soul, than can the world beside.

Phil. Why does Eugenio Fancies entertain,
That are (...), (...) and his own pain
Like Boys, who in the dark, strange shapes create
In their own brain, themselves to tremble at*
Despair's the portion of the damned below,
And in a generous mind should never grow;
Trust to Althea's virtue, trust her love*
And you will safe in either of (...)

Eug. But sure no friend could so my quiet hate,
As this Report, of nothing, to create.

Phil. Perhaps her Father does no less intend,
And she, a while, her Answer may suspend.
Not that her virtue doubts, what it shall do,
But that she may gain time to speak with you:
Every black Cloud does not with Thunder swell,
Nor every symptom a Disease foretell.
Some storms blow over; though thy Fate appear
Thus gloomy now, anon it may be clear.

Eug. It may, but who can unconcerned be,
A Tempest heard, and his whole wealth at Sea?
I with more ease all other harms could bear,
Than of Althea's loss but simply hear.

Phil. All that we hear, we are not to believe.

Eug. Our hopes do oftener, than our fears deceive.

Phil. The advantage man (...)
He pays with interest in (...) conceits;
They cannot fear misfortune (...)
And when it is gone remember't not at all:
But man against his own Re^^ in Battle placed,
Feels mischiefs e're they come, and when they are pas^.
The smiles of Fortune (...)
Methinks, you should not (...)
How would Althea's Virtues grieve to find
Themselves suspected in (...) mind
Like Princes murdered on the Royal (...),
Where 'till that (...)

Eug. Sure my Althea (...)
These fears that spring but from excess of love.
Of love and courage none too much can (...).

Phil. But it is their use, (...)
Courage, when brutal, (...)
And love, grown jealous, can no merit have.

Eug. A higher mark of love there cannot be,
We doubt no Lover, whom we jealous see.

Phil. So Fevers are of life sure proof we know,
And yet our lives they (...)
Diseases, though well ^u^'d, our bodies ^ar,
And fears, although removed, our loves impair:
True love, like health, should no disorder know.

Eug. But who, alas^ such love, or health can show?
Our passions, like our selves, are framed to dye,
And have still something they must perish by;
We none (brave friend) for being hapless blame,
But all allow, it is baseness to be tame;
He that has raised this Tempest in my mind,
Shall in the Billows his own ruin (...);
I Will fight him instantly, and make him know,
I am not more his Rival than his Foe.

Phil. Thy life, alas (dear friend)'s no longer thine,
Thou have engaged it in a brave design:
Thy bleeding Country, and thy Princes Right,
Are the only Quarrels that thy Sword should fight,
If you into the Tyrant's hands should fall,
^Twou'd pull a sudden ruin on us all.
Which, if you stir, we may have cause to fear,
Since Tyrants Eyes and Hands are every where.

Eug. Now thou have touched me in the tendrest part,
Though Love possess, Honor must rule my heart;
My Nation's Fate's too great a Sacrifice
For me to make, though to Althea's Eyes;
No, I am calmed, and happy am to have
A friend so full of temper when I rave,
And hope the gods, whilst I my own neglect,
To fight their Quarrel, will my Love protect.

[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Victoria and Olivia. Vict. Sister, I doubt we are a little too free with
Our Servants, this Modish, and his friend
Estridge: few Plays gain Audience by being
In Print, and ^ewer women get Husbands by
Being too much known.

Oliv. But ours are most accomplished Mounsieurs,
Must be assaulted on all parts e're they will yield;
Must have their Ears charmed as well as Eyes:
'Twere ill husbandry in a Mercer to be thirsty
In his Patterns, it often disparages a good stuff;
And too great reserv'dness in one of us, especially
At the first, might give a discouragement to our
Further Acquaintance.

Vict. Now might I have my wish, I would come
All new, nay my voice and name should not
Be known; where I would be liked, I would have
The few Charms I am Mistress of, make their
Assault at an instant, all at one time:
For sure Horatio did their power subdue,
By conquering one, e're he another knew.

Oliv. Fie Sister, think no more of him; but to the
Matter in hand, who ever caught any thing
With a naked hook? nothing venture, nothing
Win, and for my part I am resolved to allow
All innocent liberty; this Matrimony is a
Pill will scarce down with a young man
Without guilding; let Estridge believe I am
In love with him, and when he leaves me,
He Will find I am not.

Enter to them Wildish. Wild. So he will, when he marrys you, or I am
Deceived, Madam.

Vict. What, turned Eaves^Dropper, Mr. Wildish?

Wild. No Ladys, but your heads are so taken up with
These Heirs Apparent, that you cannot see a
Younger Brother when he comes into the Room.

Oliv. Not when our backs are toward him; but
Otherwise as an elder, any where, but before
A Parson.

Wild. You are in the right; Jointure, and allowance
For Clothes, have clearly got the better off* Dear
Madam, I consider not your Portion, but your
Person; give your Estate where you please,
So you will but settle your affection upon me,
My Fate depends upon your Answer* and the like
Artillery of unlanded Lovers: But I never
Repine at that; for fine Women, like great
Tables, though they are maintained by men
Of Fortunes, are ever open to men of parts.

Oliv. Why now, Wildish, you talk like your self
Again; ever since I saw you last, I (...)
Been in most terrible apprehension^^
Whining Copy of Verses.

Wild. Expectation you mean, Madam, but it is
Not come to that yet; though I talk a little
Extravagantly when I see you, I am not so
Through pac't a Lover, but I can express
My self in Prose.

Vict. But you, being a new Convert, cannot give
Too many marks of your Devotion: and I should
Mistrust I were not as I ought to be in my
Servants heart, if I did not run sometimes
In his head, and then Verses follow infallibly.

Wild. Faith, Madam, that is much as the head lies,
There are some you may search every cranny
Over, and not find three Rimes; very good
Lovers too; and to say truth, it is unreasonable
A man should be put to seek fresh words
To express that to his Mistress, which has
Been as well said already by some body else;
I think it is very fair if he set his hand
To It, and that I am ready to do to the most
Passionate Copy of Verses you can find.

Oliv. How much Love and Constancy
Will you engage for then?

Wild. As much as you can find in that Paper there.

He gives a Paper to Olivia, she gives it to Victoria. Oliv. Sister here read
'um, I shall put the Accen^
In the wrong place, stop out of time, or
One mischief or other, and so put my poor
Servant into an Agony.

Vict. To a very young Lady.

[Reads the Title. Oliv. That Is I, Wildish: come, you have been
Dabling; proceed, Sister, I fear 'um not, I have
No more pity on a Rhyming Lover, than on
A Beggar that begs in a Tone.

Vict. Are not these Verses somewhat
Too weak to allone?

Wild. Faith, Madam, I am^^ your mind, put a
Tune to 'um, it is an easy Stanza.
Victoria singe. Ah Cloris! that I now could sit
As unconcerned, as when
Your Infant Beauty could beget
No pleasure, nor no pain.
2.
When I the Dawn used to admire,
And praised the coming day;
I little thought the growing fire
Must take my Rest away.
3.
Your Charms in harmless Childhood lay,
Like metals in the mine,
Age from no face took more away,
Then Youth concealed in thine.
4.
But as your Charms insensibly
To their perfection pressed,
Fond Love as unperceived did fly,
And in my Bosom rest.
5.
My passion with your Beauty grew,
And Cupid at my heart,
Still as his mother favored you,
Threw a new flaming Dart.
6.
Each glori'd in their manton part
To make a Lover ^e
Employed the utmost of hi^ Art,
To make a Beauty she.
7.
Though now I slowly bend to love
Uncertain of my Fate,
If your fair self my Chains approve,
I shall my freedom hate.
8.
Lovers, like dying men, may well
At first disordered be,
Since none alive can truly tell
What Fortune they must see.

Enter a Servant. Serve. There Is an old Gentleman below in a Chair
Enquires for Mr. Wildish; as fine as an Emperor,
My Master Sir John is no body to him; as he
Peeped through the glass, I thought it was Sir
Samuel Forecast.

Vict. It is (...)

Wild. Yes faith it is Ladies, I am privy to the plot.

Oliv. Good Mr. Wildish bring him up,
I would give any thing to see him.

Wild. Do you step into that Close^ then^ for I
Must swear the Coast is clear: set the door a
Little open, and you may see him perfectly,
His Bravery on my word is not designed
For this place, and he is so politic, that
He will think your seeing him may be
A prejudice to his design.

Wildish goes^ out, and brings in Sir Samuel Forecast. Wild. Sir Samuel, now
you shine, indeed* my
Cousin will be ravished to see you transform
Your self thus for her sake.

Fore. She is a tender ^iece, and though her discretion
Helps her to conceal it, in her heart cannot
But love a little Bravery; I have two Laces
In a Seam more than my Brother Everyoung,
And a Yard more in my Cravat.

Wild. Nay, you are most exact, and in this dress
Methinks not unlike Sir John.

Fore. I came only to show my self to you, and
Am for my Widow present^y; shall I have
Your Company?

Wild. I have a little business here, but I Will
Be with you by that time you are there, I see
You came in a Chair.

Fore. Do you think I had a mind to have the Boys
Follow me in the streets? pray be secret, Mr.
Wildish, for I would have no body know I am
In this Dress, but your self, and your fair Cousin,
For a world: and therefore I will make haste
From hence, do you follow me according
To your promise.
[Exit.
Wild. I shall, Sir Samuel.

Oliv. I never saw a City-Bridegroom so friz'd*
So laced, so perfumed, and so powdered in my (...)

Vict. I think verily he was painted too, I vow
I should not have known his Worship, if
You had not given us a hint of his Bravery before.

Wild. Well, I must recover my old Knight.
Farewell Ladies.

Oliv. Pray be here anon, and give us an account
Of this Adventure.

Vict. Certainly it must be very pleasant.

Wild. I shall obey you, Ladies.
[ Exit Wildish.
Enter Everyoung, Victoria, and Olivia laughing. Ever. Hey-day * what, are the
Girls mad?

Vict. No, Sir, but I think my Uncle Forecast's
(...) better.

Ever. Why, what of him?

Oliv. He is, Sir, at this time the greatest Spark in
London, dressed so like you, that if his condition
Required it, I should think, Sir, he were going
To a Scrivener to personate you for a good Sum.

Ever. Well, I Will handsel his new Clothes, and put him
As much out of conceit with Bravery as ever
He was in his life. Boy, call in the three
Prentices were brought before me for breaking
Windows last night.
Enter three Prentices. I suppose, young men, you would not scruple
At a small piece of service to the man that
Should procure your Liberties.

O^^n. Free us, and command us any thing.

Ever. Well then follow me, and when I show
You a certain Chair, take the Gentleman
Out of it, and cudgel him; I Will be at a little
Distance, and if you want help* be ready to
Assist you: be sure you call him Sir John
Everyoung, and tell him of a Lady he af^ronted.

1 Pren. We shall call him what you please, Sir,
And beat him as much as you please.

Exit Victoria and Olivia. SCENE changes.
Forecast coming by (...) his Chair. Ever. That Is the Chair.

They take out Forecast, and cudge^ him. Fore. If you have humanity, if you had
Women
To your Mothers, be more merciful,
Gentlemen, I never injured you, not saw^any
Of you in my life.

Pren. I perceive, Sir John Everyoung, you have
Forgot the affront you did a Lady last night.

Fore. What affront, Sir, what Lady?

Pren. The affront, Sir, was a great affront, and
The Lady, a great Lady, that thinks fit to
Have you beaten for it.

Fore. You mistake, Gentlemen, you mistake;
For as I am a true Servant to the State,
I never did kindness or injury to any Lady
Since I was in Commission.

2 Pren. A true Servant to the State, and a man in
Authority! he shall have three kicks more for that.

Enter Estridge and Modish. Estr. What, three upon one! who e're ^e be,
The Cause becomes a Gentleman^
Let Us rescue him at all adventures.

They draw, the Prentices run away. Fore. Estridge. and Modish! nay then I am
utterly
Undone, I have only escaped a little more
Beating, to be laughed (...)

Estr. Sir, we are very happy that our (...)
Led us this way, ^ince it has given us an
Opportunity of serving a Gentleman,
Especially oppressed by odds.

Fore. I shall (...)
Let me know where to wait on you, to give
You thanks for this your seasonable
Assistance: now, Gentlemen, my hurts
Require a Surgeon.

He (...) Mod. Nay, Sir, take your Hat and Sword along
With you; there they be,
[He looks a little for 'um.] I never heard any man speak so
Like Sir Samuel Forecast in my life.

Estr. But he is dressed very like Everyoung,
A mere medly between the two Brothers;
But we will see who he is before we go.

Mod. Have you received any hurt in your
Face, that you cover it with your (...)

Fore. A slight one only.

Estr. I have Sympathy-powder about me, if
You will give me your handkercher while
The blood is warm, will ^ure, it immediately.

Modish snatches it off, and discovers him. Estr. Sir Samuel Forecast, why do
you hide your
Self thus from your friends? we expected
Nothing for our pains, neither is your
Hurt so dangerous, but it might endure the Air.

Mod. Methinks you should rather have hid
Your self from your Enemies* but, Sir
Samuel, whatever the matter is, I never
Saw a man so fine in all my life.

Fore. Now the Broakers take all fine Clothes,
And the Gaol all that love um; they have
Helped me to fine beating.

Estr. Why do you think the Rogues would have
Had more mercy on your high crowned Hat,
Black Cap, and Boots.

Fore. No, but they took me for my Brother
Everyoung, who it seems, has lately affronted
A Lady, and I suffer for it.

Mod. The best advice we can give you, is to
Go home and shift, for fear of more mishaps.

Estr. Farewell, Sir Samuel

[Exeunt omnes. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
The Mulberry^Garden. Enter Jack Wildish. Wild. I Was to blame no earlier to
use my self
To these Women of Honor, (...)
For now like one that never practiced swimming,
Upon the first occasion I am lost; there are men
Would have fooled with (...)
Perhaps by this time, (...)
In one serious thought: your good Fencer always
Thrusts in Guard, he is but a Novice that receives
Hit for hit: this Modish and Estridge, I know
Not what to make of their continual Visits,
Methinks Love and Jealousy come too quick
Upon a man in one day.
Enter. Modish and Estridge. Here come the men* they are open enough to
Let me know all at large; but I would ^ain
Contrive it, that the Ladies might be witnesses
Of their Servants most invincible secrecy:
I Will steal off e're I am seen, and think (...).

Enter. Victoria and Olivia, as he goes out he meets 'um. Wild. Slip into that
Arbor, Ladies, and trust me
For once for a quarter of an hours diversion.

Oliv. Pray, Sister, let us go, he has somewhat in
His head, I Am confident.

He puts them into an Arbor, and meets Modish in a Walk, Wild. Your Servant,
Modish.

Mod. O your Servant!

Estr. Your Servant, Mr. Wildish.

Wild. What, is there store of Game ^iere, Gentlemen?

Mod. Troth little, or none, a few Citizens that
Have brought their Children out to air 'um,
And eat Cheese-cakes.

Wild. I thought this place had been so full of
Beauties, that like (...) of (...) in a Hare
Warren, you could not hunt one for another:
What think you of an Arbaur and a (...) of Rhenish.

Wildish brings 'um to the next Arbor to the Ladies. Estr. I like the mot^on
(...).

Wild. And how go the Ladies? will they go abroad
Alone? are they come to kissing ye^?

Estr. What Ladies?

Wild. Why, Sir John's Daughters, the Ladies.

Mod. You are (...).

Wild. I should be so indeed, if it were with me
As it is with you, Gentlemen, that have two
Such fine Women in love with you, and every
Night sitting up together till morning.

Mod. I go only to entertain Victoria in mere
Friendship to Ned Estridge; it is he that is the
Happy man.

Estr. It Is a part of friendship that you discharge
Very willingly, and very effectually, for
Sometimes we see neither of you in an hour;
And then you return, exclaiming against the
Heat of the weather, and cruelty of your Mistress.

Wild. What, that she kept him a little too hard
To It, or so?

Mod. Fie, Wildish, they are women of honor.

Wild. Well, here is their health, to make 'um amends.
And, faith they lose none with me, in being
Civil to an honest Gentleman, it is the only
Wealth is left poor women to exercise
Their good nature with: A friend at Court may
Get you a place, a General of an Army give
You an Employment, a Bishop a Church-Living,
And a fair Lady a good turn; every one in their
Way, and I hold him ungrateful that burys
An obligation of any sort in silence: besides
'Twere mere robbery to your friends, not to
Let u'm rejoice in your good fortune.

Mod. But say I have made a vow to the contrary;
Not that there is, or ever was, any such good
Fortune; and women's favors, like the gifts
Of Fairies, if once spoke of, vanish.

Wild. O your Servant, what say you Estridge?
Are you under a vow too, or are the favors
You have received, yet, only such as the hope
Of further obliges you to secrecy for a while?
But you are so serious, I doubt you intend
To commit matrimony.

Estr. Not as long as I can have simple forn^.
Cation for love or money: I am not for those
Ladies that deal by whole-sail, a bit off the
Spit serves my turn as well as the whole Joint,
And methinks has a prettier relish.

Wild. That is, metaphorically saying, you have
Sped with your Mrs. -- my service
[Drinks to him. To you, remembering the Bit off the Spit.
And how, is she buxam? does she think happiness
Consists in motion, or in rest? what Sect of
Philosophers is she of?

Estr. A Pythagorean; I, Sir, in all these cases say Nothing.

Wild. Nay, you had as good speak out now, and
Make me your confident.

Modish takes Estridge aside. Mod. Jack Wildish is an honest fellow, it is not a
Pins matter what we say to him; and they are
Two of the prettiest women in Town: it sounds
Handsomely, to boast some familiarity, you
Understand me: he knows 'um not, and will
Never find us out; I Will begin with him --
I wonder, Wildish, we could never get you along
With us; the Ladies have not vowed virginity,
They are no such Bugbears as you take 'um for.

Wild. I take 'um for honest women, or which is
E'ne as bad, pretenders to it.

Estr. There is no harm in pretending to it, that
Like a high price, only serves to keep off
I^^ Company.

Wild. Yes, yes, I know what kind of cattle they are^
Well enough, there is no having a simple Kiss
Amongst 'um without a journey into the
Country; nor getting 'um abroad without a Sister,
Or a Cousin at least, and then they must be at
Home too by ten a Clock, have the Syllabus, and
Tarts, brought into the ^oach to 'um* drink more*
Sugar than wine, and so foul all the Glasses, put
You to four or five pound charge, and let you
See nothing but themselves, that is ma^'s meat
For It; I have been once or twice plagued
With such Animals as these.

Mod. Can thou imagine, Wildish, we would fool
Away our time with such shadows of women
As thou describ'st? we have solid and substantial
Pleasures.

Wild. What? a Riband, or a lock of hair, I warrant.

Mod. No, two young juicy Girls, that stick as
Gloss to us, as the Bark to the tree, and part as
Unwillingly from us, as green fruit does from the
Stone; and all this through the reputation of sober
And discreet Servants to their pleasure: If such
A scandalous fellow as thou come into the House
Without our introduction, the Ladies would cry out,
O my Honor! as far as they could ^^e thee.

Wild. Methinks, Sir John Everyoung (an old smell-Smock as he is) should take
the alarm, and so

Remove these so juicy Girls.

Estr. I hope you don't think we mean his Daughters
All this while? (that were a trick indeed)
We speak of two Ladies that shall be nameless.

Wild. Faith, Gentlemen, I can speak of none such,
For all my acquaintance have (...) three
Names apiece, I assure you.

Mod. Well Jack, to return your civility in
The last health you began, here is to all those
Incomparable Ladies, that like Roman
Conquerors have two or three names
Apiece: But if thou would leave this
Rambling, thou would lose nothing by it*
There Is as hard drinking in Gentlemen Houses
Now adays, as at Taverns, and as hot service
In many a Lady^ Chamber, as at (...)

Wild. But how (...)
Reputation? there are your men of^ (...),
As well as Stuffs, and they go out again no body
Knows how.

Mod. It Is true, in the first place you must shake
Hands with your old friends, Hoquemore and
Burgundy for a while; leave your Chaste Ling,
And La-Fronds, dine with my Lord such a
One one day, my Lady what do you call'um another;
And be sure to talk on it in the next Company
You come into, drink Wine and Water at Table,
A Dish of Tea after Dinner, like nothing but
What is French, before the Ladies; lose your money
Very much like a Gentleman to 'um in the Afternoon,
And the work's done.

Wild. This is a hard Chapter.

Estr. If thou knew'st once the pleasure of such a
Sprightly Girl as Olivia, the kind quarrels,
The fondness, the pretty ^ullenness after a
Little absence, which must be charmed out
Of it with Kisses, and those thousand other
Devises that make a Lovers happiness; thou
Would think all this as easy, as lying a bed in
The Country in a wet morning.

Mod. Or, if he could but see Victoria's reserv'dness
A little mollifi'd, and brought to hand with a good
Supper and the Fidles.

Estr. Or Olivia in her morning dress, with her Guittar,
Singing to it most enticingly, and then as kind in
Her discourse, her little breasts swelling and po^ting
Out, as if they came half way to be Kis^.

Mod. Or the others haughty look melted into smiles,
The pretty combat of pride and pleasure in her
Face, at some certain times.

Estr. My Mistress is in the very spring of beauty.

Mod. And mine in the Midsommer of perfection.

Estr. Mine is --

Wild. Nay Gentlemen, one at once, and no quarrelling
I beseech you; you are happy men both, and have
Reason to be in love with your sweet lives, but I
Thought Victoria had so obstinately doted on
Her old Servant Horatio, that there had been
More hope of winning a Widow at her Husbands
Funeral, then of any favor for her now.

Mod. People will be talking, but on my word she will
Never break her heart for Horatio; I and my
Fellow Laborer, Time, have done his business.

Wild. You are the great Masters of your Art, these
Are the two Beauties, that the whole Town runs
Mad after.

Estr. We know it, we know it, and it is no small part
Of our felicity, to have that Lord send his
Coach and six to carry 'um to the Park; this
Gentleman offering to play at Angel-beast with 'um,
Though he scarce know the Cards, and has no more
Visible Estate then what he may lose at a sitting:
A third begging to give 'um the four and twenty
Violins, which his Father in the County hears
Of and disinherits for, whilst the Ladies put 'um
Off with some slight Excuses, and send the whole
Town over after us.

Wild. You have 'um it seems in most excellent order.

Mod. O there is no true pleasure but in your person
Of quality, the others love all men so well,
They can love none best: they are indeed
(Like your more generous Creatures) somewhat
Hard to tame, but I have seen a Lion as
Gentle as an Ox: time and industry will do
Any thing.

Estr. Come, drink a Glass round.

Mod. I cannot get down a drop of this Wine more
Without a Frolic.

Wild. Every^man name the woman that has
Obliged him last, and drink all their
Healths in a Brimmer.

Mod. Content, begin Estridge.

Estr. Olivia: now* Modish, name^ your^.

Mod. Victoria, Victoria: we must have
Your person too, Wildish.

Wild. Mrs. Betty.

Mod. Betty what?

Wild. Nay faith, I can go no further, and may
Very well be mistaken in that too.

Estr. Here Is a Lock of Hair, shall I dip it for one
Glass more?

Wild. Whose is it first?

Estr. Olivia's, whose should it be? black as Jet,
And shining as her Eyes: here is her Picture
Too in little.

( Wildish steps a little aside, and looks upon it.) Wild. O Impudence! his
Sisters Picture, he forgot
He showed me a month ago; this lock of
Hair, produced so confidently, frighted me
A little, till I saw the color.

Enter to them Snappum. Snap. Gentlemen, I beg your pardon for pressing
Thus rudely into your Company; but the business
Concerns no less then all my Fortunes: I
Have been long a Suitor to a rich Widow, and have
At last prevailed with her to marry me suddenly.

Estr. What is that to us, Sir?

Snap. Wildish, you will I hope make my Excuse to
Your friends: coming into the Garden about
Half an hour ago, I lost a Bracelet of her
Hair, wrought with her own hands, so that
There is no deceiving her with a counterfeit:
A Waiter here tells me, he saw one of you
Take up such a thing.

Wild. Is this it?

Estr. That Is mine, and composed of hair so dear
To me, that I would ^ight with Hector, the top
Of your order for least of 'um.

Snap. And I with Hercules for mine: but
Pray Mr. Wildish, let me see it; if it be that I look:
For, no body will quarrel for it, for it is full
Of gray hairs, I assure you.

Wild. Shall he see it?

Estr. No.

Wild. I Will make bold for once though.

Snap. It Is my old Woman's.

[Shows it him. Wild. By the mark I Will swear, for it is as grizl'd
As a Silver-hair'd Rabbet; I may venture to
Let him have it, Estridge, I suppose, may not I?

Estr. Yes, yes, now I remember me, I sent mine
To have a new string put to it.

Snappum goes off, Wildish follows him a little way. Wild. Adi^u, Snappum.

Snap. Are any of these Gentlemen good Bubbles,
Mr. Wildish?

Wild. What do I know, you had best ask 'um.

Snap. No, I thank you, Sir, I can be satisfied
On easier terms; but you were always a Lover
Of ingenuity, pray tell me.

Wild. Away, away.
[ Exit Snap. Wild. returns. I Am sorry your Mistress has gray hairs so young,
I doubt you are not kind to her, Estridge.

Mod. Nay, Wildish, don't insult upon a mistake.

Estridge is out of Countenance, and looking up and down^ sees the women in the
next Arbor. Estr. I think we have neighbors in the next
Arbor, and fine women they seem to
Be in their Masks.

Mod. Let Us entertain 'um -- what Ladies, come a
Padding for Hearts here in your Vizards?
A pretty device to make a man in Love
With he cannot tell who.

Estr. What, rob us of our Liberties without one
Word? not so much as stand and deliver?

Oliv. If we should rob you of your Hearts,
Gentlemen, 'twere but petty Larceny; Victoria
And Olivia would never send Hue and Cry after us.

Mod. You know us, Madam.

Oliv. Yes, Gentlemen, somewhat better then
We did this morning, though I always
Supposed no less.

Estr. Then what?

Oliv. Then that you were the vainest Coxcombs
In the whole Town, Fellows that would hate
A woman that were kind to you, because she
Takes from you the pleasure of belying her.

Estr. Olivia?

Oliv. The very same, Sir, whose Picture you have
In your Pocket, and about whose Hair you
Had like to have quarreled so manfully but now;
Who sends all the Town after you, and puts
Others off with slight Excuses; the obliging
Lady, whose health you drank by that name.

Estr. 'Twas another Olivia I meant, one
I knew abroad.

Vict. And another Victoria that you meant, Modish?

Mod. Right, right, my Landladies Daughter
At the Cheval d'Or, since gone into a Monastery.

Oliv. The Daughters of a French Everyoung,
I warrant too.

Estr. La Ieunesse was their Father, which is
All one with Everyoung in English.

Mod. On our Honors, Ladies, we were ever most
Tender of your dear Credits, and are heartily
Sorry our Mistresses light to be of your names.

Oliv. Pray will you do me favor to let
Me see my Picture, I Am confident it is very
Like me.

Estr. Your French Name-sakes you mean, Madam;
That mal adroit Wildish let it fall and broke.
The Crystal, and I sent it just now away
To have a new one put to it, as I hope to be
Saved Madam.

Mod. But, Madam, could you think me so
Senseless, as discourse of you at that rate?
Here Is Jack Wildish has heard us speak of
These Wenches a hundred times.

Wild. 'Slight, these fellows
[Wildish apart. Will lie themselves into credit again, if
I have not a care of 'um instantly: Gentlemen
I understand no winks, the few lies I Will
Venture upon I am resolved to keep for my
Own use.

Estr. Prithee Wildish help us but this once.

Wild. No, no, go on, methinks you are in a
Very fair way; I am a stranger, the Ladies
Will Not mind what I say.

Oliv. Yes, yes, we'll take your word.

Wild. Why then, Ladys, I assure you upon the Honor
Of a Gentleman, and by my friendship to those
Worthy persons I dare answer, they are too
Much Servants, to discourse so long of any
Thing but your selves: and for the French women
You know as much of 'um as I, having never
Heard title of 'um till this minute.

Vict. You have brought a very^ sufficient
Witness with you Gentlemen, we do
Believe him.

Mod. Ours is not the first good cause has been lost
By ill Witnesses: but I perceive, Ladys, you
Don't know Jack Wildish, he (...)
Droll in the whole Town; has a hundred
Of these fetches.

[To Wildish apart. Estr. Pox on it, thou may bring all off yet.

Wild. Faith my (...)
To deceive a Lady in a friends (...),
[alowd. To do it now, and in my own is all I can
Obtain of it.

[Estridge coms up to Wildish. Estr. 'S death, Sir

Wild. Nay Estridge,(...)
Mind it not, and it is uncivil (...)
Mistresses.

Mod. But that we are two to one, and scorn
Advantages, you should not carry it off thus*

Wild. I should be more (...)
Three to one: but some other time for
These matters.

Oliv. Never blame Wildish, we were all the
While in the next Arbor, so that if he had
Taken your Cue never so readily, 't had done
You little service.

Vict. Gentlemen this matter will bear no more
Raillery; we are sensible of our Honors, and
The injury your extravagant discourse might
Have done us, with any but so worthy a
Person as Mr. Wildish; but he we are
Confident understands himself too well
To have any ill thought of us from your
Vanity: we can do no less than forbid
You our House, and pray forbear it without
Further Ceremony.

Wildish takes Victoria; Estridge offers to take Olivia, she refuses. Oliv. No,
Sir, you will say I come to pick you up
In the Garden one time or other.

[Exeunt (...). Enter. Eugenio like an Officer, and three more* Sir. Samuel
Forecast above. Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, there are some Soldiers below, say
They must search your House for some
Suspicious person.

Fore. I warrant they mean Eugenio and Philander,
I am utterly undone, suspected for a Traitor,
And all long of those (...)
Very glad I have got my Christian Cloth
On again: go and let 'um in.

Euge. Sir, I hope you will excuse us, we do but
Follow our Orders, and^ having searched your
House for some dangerous persons (...)
Leave it you again in peace: (...) and
Philander were your Sons, and therefore
Most probably judged to have made
Your House their Sanctuary.

Fore. My House their Sanctuary! I had rather
It should be their Grave: since they made
The State their Enemy, I have been so too.

Euge. Then you have no thoughts of 'um for
Your Daughters?

Fore. No, Sir, I assure you: and to remove all doubt,
Althea's shortly to be married to Horatio
(One that will bid you welcome, Sir, if you
Please to come to the wedding) and I hope to
Dispose of Diana e're long to some honest
Gentleman of our party.

Enter Althea. Fore. I command you, on my blessing, to answer
All things this Gentleman questions you
About, precisely, as it were my self.

Euge. Sir, you do well, but you must retire
A little, whilst we examine your Daughters,
A man, though never so well meaning
Himself, cannot answer for others.

[Exit. Forecast. Euge. Lady, your Father here has showed
Himself a faithful Subject to the Common^
Wealth; it now remains to know what
Correspondence you entertain with Eugenio
And Philander, your former Servants.

Alth. Upon my honor not the least, we are
Too strictly watched to have a correspondence
With any man, and are too careful of our
Selves to hold one with persons so obnoxio^^.

Euge. Are you resolved you never will?

Alth. As things are now they never shall.

Euge. Must you then (...)

Alth. My Father tells me so, and I have (...)
Been Dutiful.

Euge. Horatio's. an accomplished Gentleman.

Alth. He is Sir, and worthy of more happiness
Than I can bring him to.

Euge. By Heaven, she loves him.
[aside. You loved Eugenio once, and gave vow for vow.

Alth. I did perhaps.

Euge. A Stranger and an Enemy as he is I pity him.

Alth. It Is noble in you, Sir, but we must all obey
Our Fortunes.

[Eugenio lets fall his Disguise. Euge. And curse 'um too, if they be all like
mine,
That love where beauty, and not virtue, shine.
O that the Tyrants knew that I were here!
Death does more lovely now than life appear.
Since thou art false, it is she alone has charms;
Neglected love rests only in your arms:
When I am dead you may your choice a vow
Without reproach, which sure you cannot now:
And I shall want the sense of all my wrongs,
My death both to my rest, and thine belongs.

Alth. Can this Eugenio be, and so unkind,
What strange Distemper rages in thy mind?
Could once my Soul of a base thought allow,
He that believes me false should find me so.

Euge. Must you not, Madam, with Horatio wed?
It Is a belief that your own words have bred.

Alth. Forgive my fear, if any word of mine
Unto that hateful sound seemed to incline:
Your rude appearance, of a Soldier, made
My tender heart, and very love afraid:
I durst not speak, what most I did believe,
But used such words as you would best receive.

Euge. Alas, Althea! what you told me here,
Did not create, although increase, my fear:
That you must make him happy, is not new,
Nor did I learn the killing sounds from you;
The Streets are full of it; and every where
I can of nothing but this Hymen hear.

Alth. It Is true, my Father does a match design
'Twixt me and this Horatio, and does join
Threats to Commands, urges the uncertain state
Of your affairs, your Party, and the Fate
Of such as do a well formed Power invade;
How they are always conquered or betrayed.
My Beauty fatal to it self the while
Inflames Horatio, and discourse (like Oil)
Foments the fire: of such a Love he tells,
As would prevail but where your Image dwells;
But still in vain the Heart I gave to you,
The one does threaten, and the other woo.

Euge. An absent Lover ill maintains the field:
Does not my Image to his presence yield?

Alth. I Am sure it ought; reproaches so severe,
They that deserve 'um not will never bear.
'Twere just that Faith which you so ill deserve,
For one of nobler thoughts I should reserve.

Euge. We often are made by a too great concern
(Like too much light) unable to discern.
The leave I gave to your surprise so late,
Now for my own distraction I entreat.
Where there is much of Love, there will appear
Mixed with our boldest hope some little fear.

Alth. That fear in a true Lover soon would dye,
Which to my Virtue is an Enemy.

Euge. Hope is the passion of a calmer breast,
But high concernments are with doubt oppressed.
To few, alas, is such assurance given
Not to fear Hell, although they hope for Heaven.
I not your Virtue, but my Fate accuse,
Which still does me with highest rigor use.

Alth. Though Fate, Eugenio, for Misfortune meant,
I would refuse to be the Instrument.
That dire necessity it seldom gave
Of harming them, whom we would only save.

Euge. But ^ark, I think I hear a noise of Swords.

Alth. The sound, alas, no room for doubt affords.
You might perhaps be safe in your disguise.
Spoke within by Soldiers. Where are the rest of 'um?
Down with the doors there.

Euge. Their sudden coming all such hope denies,
It Is me they seek, I am betrayed; but yet
Since I cannot shun, I Will try to break the net.
This Paper will inform your Sister where
She may of her unhappy Servant hear,
Make him remove, help him to shun that Fate
Which does for the unblest Eugenio wait.
My Rival in their head! by all the Gods,
Horatio, this is an unmanly odds;
Yet if on thee I can but fall revenged,
I life for death most happily have changed.

Hora. Eugenio. here! I thought of nothing less,
But my clear meaning this will best express.

He fights on Eugenio's side. Officer. Down with 'um both.

The Soldiers prevail, they are taken. Euge. Sir, let my life the cruel
forfeit pay,
And bear not rashly so much worth away.
Horatio. was too far by Virtue led,
And saved that blood he nobly should have shed:
He being my Rival feared the world might say,
He for my hated life this train did lay.
Honor engaged his Sword in my defense,
And Honor is a kind of Innocence.

Hora. Eugenio. leave to intercede for me,
I only grieve I could not rescue thee,
That so thou might thy preservation owe
To the same Virtue thou so ill did know:
And I some fitter time might make thee own
The injustice of thy mean aspersion,
To think I came thus rudely to invade
The place where all that I adore is laid;
And then to take my Rival in a snare,
Where if I would I knew I could not spare,
Was an affront thou with that life had paid,
Which I defended: but revenge shows base,
Which on our Honor more dependence has.

Euge. Some other time for this dispute we'll take,
Revenge by threatening we the harder make.

Officer. Come, Gentlemen, you must away, my
Orders press; you will have time enough to talk
Of these things in the Tower.

Enter two Soldiers bringing in Sir Samuel. Officer. Sir, you must along.

Fore. Who I! for what?

Offic. For harboring Eugenio here, a known
Enemy to the State.

Fore. You brought him with you for ought I know,
I never saw his face, I answered an Officer, and
Two Soldiers tha^ came to search for him
Even now, and as I thought, gave 'um satisfaction.
But when I heard the clashing of Swords, because
I would not be made accessory to any thing that
Might happen, I confess I retired into a
Corner of my Garret.

Offic. Sir, this will not satisfy, the Receiver is as
Bad as the Thief; I have found a Traitor
In your house, and you shall answer it.

Fore. Eugenio, you are an honest Gentleman,
Pray speak, did I know any thing of your
Being here?

Euge. Not in the least, Sir: but my word I fear
Will do you little service.

Enter Wildish. Wild. What, Sir Samuel, again under persecution?
Nay, faith, I can do you no service now, these
Are a sort of Gamesters I dare not meddle withal.

Fore. I am undone! here is Eugenio found in my
House, and they are carrying him to the Tower.

Wild. Come, bear up, Sir, if there come a turn,
You Will be a great man.

Fore. I shall be hanged on that side, and to speak
My own Conscience, I have deserved it.

Wild. No, to lie in Prison for concealing Cavaliers,
Will be great merit; and let me tell you as a friend,
There Is like to be a turn suddenly, it is thought the
General will declare like an honest man, I say
No more; therefore carry your self moderately,
This accident may chance to do you good service,
If you have the grace to make the right use on it:
But how came Eugenio and Horatio of a side?

Fore. I came but just now among 'um, and know
Nothing; but it is a strange thing a man cannot be
Believed in his own defense: carry me to Prison?
I Will see what Justices hand they have for it.

Offic. We shall find hands enough, never fear it.

Exeunt omnes. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Philander Solus. Phil. It Is strange I nothing of Eugenio hear,
So long an absence may be worth a fear:
His friendship was not wont to hide from me
Of his most secret thoughts the new Decree.
I doubt his Love impatient of delay,
Has to Althea found some desperate way,
His passion could not my slow cure attend,
On which, alas, he did in vain depend.
I was to blame, no sooner to provide
Against deluded hope's unruly tide;
Which now I fear has born him on a shelf,
Where he will unkindly perish by himself.
Enter Diana in Man's Clothes. Ha! a strange face! would I had not been seen;
But it is too good for Treason to lurk in.
Sure Gentle youth the place you have mistook,
I cannot be the man for whom you look.

Dian. Philander in your troubled face I read
Some apprehensions that you are betrayed:
But when you shall my woeful story hear,
A Juster sorrow will remove your fear.

Phil. Thou have my name, and yet I know thee not,
Quickly unty sweet youth this painful knot.

Dian. Know you this hand?

Phil. Alas it is my own,
This from Eugenio could be had or none:
Speak, is he dead? is this his Legacy?
And has he sent it, gentle youth, by thee?
Has he Horatio fought? killing, or slain,
He almost equally would breed my pain.

Dian. He and Horatio fought, but on a side.

Phil. What wonder beyond this can Fate provide.
I knew, Eugenio, thou went always brave,
And that thy Love was still thy Honour^ slave.

Dian. On your friends part you have the virtue brought,
But 'twas Horatio for Eugenio fought.

Phil. Such a prodigious union could not fail.

Dian. A Band of Soldiers did over both prevail.

Phil. Is my unhappy friend a Prisoner made?

Dian. He is, and close in the White Tower laid:
He bad me tell you so, that you might shun
The desperate hazard that his life must run.

Phil. How came he, gentle youth, thus to expose
My life to one whom he so little knows?

Dian. I am his near Relation, and have been
Privy to all Designs he has been in.
He bids you to remove without delay,
For you are endangered hourly by your stay:
The Soldiers about him a Paper took,
Which, though obscurely, of your Lodging spoke.

Phil. In vain we to that wretch good counsel give,
Resolved to perish, and unfit to live:
When he is gone, what business have I here?
What can again be worth a hope or fear?
The hour he dies this shall be my relief,
pointing to his Sword. If I could need another wound than grief.

Dian. How can you hope to please Eugenio's Ghost,
In killing him whom he esteems the most?
In life our friends we choose, but those we hate
We rather wish Companions of our Fate:
If I a present to his shade would send,
It should be of his Foe, and not his Friend.
But yet I hope Eugenio may escape;
Safety has come in an unlookt for shape.

Phil. That hope alone makes me consent to live.

Dian. Can you for life no other reason give*

Phil. None that, alas! is fit for thee to hear.

Dian. Does then Diana's heart so vile appear?

Phil. I hope thou will my better Genius prove,
Since thus thou know my business and my love.

Dian. She tells me you have often filled her Ears
With gentle words, and wet her arms with tears;
Vowed that your hope and fear, grief, and delight,
Her frowns or favors only could excite.

Phil. Why so I did, sweet youth, and told her true,
But I Am amazed it should be known by you.

Dian. Of late she has worn a face of discontent,
That seemed neglected friendship to lament:
Eugenio. to her Sister found a way,
Though various hazards in his passage lay.

Phil. Unwisely he the short-lived pleasure sought,
Too soon 'twas paid for, and too dearly bought*
Like Orpheus for one poor untimely look,
He has the hope of all he loved forsook.

Dian. That haste expressed a passion, though to blame:
Impatience is of love the best extreme.

Phil. That Heir's accursed, that for a present sum
Resigns the hope of all he has to come.
I would Diana to the world prefer,
And for her venture any thing but her.
But, gentle youth, methinks thou speak as though
Thou made a doubt, whether I loved or no.

Dian. Pray Heaven Diana may not: your fault was great,
To think of Honor when the day was set
For Hymen's Rites; when naught else could destroy
Your hopes, which then were ripening into joy,
You were a Traitor to the State declared,
And in the glittering toyls of Fate ensnared.

Phil. Be witness Heaven, and all ye Powers above,
That see our infant passions weakly move,
E're they have force into the face to climb,
Or to one action can our wills incline,
If ever, for one moment, in my breast
I gave to any (she inspired not) rest.

Dian. Why did you then such daring projects frame,
And danger court that not concerned your flame?

Phil. It Is true, before I knew Diana's charms,
I courted Fame in danger and in Arms,
And thought no Cause could lasting glory bring,
Like the just quarrel of our injured King.
Eugenio's friendship too that Fire improved,
And made me wed that Cause I ever loved:
What since I did was on a former score,
My Fate she cannot condemn, but must deplore.
I was in honor pre-engag'd too far,
E're to retire, and yet to merit her.
But whence could thou this hated knowledge gain?
He worse than kills, who makes me live in pain:
Thy Beauty, Youth, and Words do all persuade,
Thou happy in her nearest trust art made.
Diana here drops a Ring, pulling out a Handkerchief. Ye Gods! the Ring I to
Diana sent!
Do not frail man beyond his Nature tempt.
The good thou have done, I thus forget it all,
And let my vengeance on my Rival fall.
[He draws. Draw, or I Will leave thee dead upon the ground.

She pulls off her Perriwig. Dian. I dare not draw -- and sure you dare not
wound.

Phil. With sudden light I for a while am blind,
I sought a Rival, and a Mistress find;
Where I thought all my rage, my love is due,
So high a pitch my wishes never flew;
I am not by degrees to pleasure led,
Nor slowly made the doubtful steps to tread,
But in an instant, my exalted mind
Feels all her hopes set free, and fears confined:
So Kings in Battles that they gave for gone,
Redeem their own and win another Crown.

Dian. That Faith, which nothing should in question bring,
From a few words you doubt, and from a Ring:
How can I hope a lasting friendship, where
So light appearance brings so mean a fear?

Phil. Such a surprise a jealous pang might give
To any breast where so much love does live.
But why, Diana, in this strange disguise?
Was it to make me happier by surprise?

Dian. Could I my fear, as well as love overcome,
You Would been preserved, and never known by whom;
Such a concern I would not have betrayed,
Till I were surer of your passion made.

Phil. What accident ill understood, could prove
Of that dire force to make you doubt my love?
You needs must know how we were all betrayed,
And the hard escape I and Eugenio made;
And since, it had been fatal to be seen,
So that this Chamber my whole world has been.

Dian. What made me doubt, it matters not to know,
Let it suffice I do no longer so.
The dreadful Sword, which at my breast you held,
Though with much fear, I with more joy beheld:
For he that truly does his Rival hate,
Declares he loves his Mistress at that rate.

Phil. Look on thy self, and measure thence my love,
Think what a flame so bright a form must move:
That Knot be confident will ever last,
Which Passion tied, and Reason has made fast.

Dian. Farewell, Philander, think on what I Have said,
And kindly judge the weakness of a Maid.

Phil. Thou art too cruel in so short a stay;
Thus would I gaze my very sight away.

Dian. Though for your safety nothing was too dear,
Now give me leave for my own self to fear.
[Ex. Diana
Phil. She has appeared like Lightning to my sight,
Which when it is vanished, leaves a darker night.
[ Exit Philander.
Enter. Estridge and Modish. Estr. 'Twas certainly that Rogue Wildish that
betrayed
Us; the Arbor and Bottle of Wine, were his motions.

Mod. Without all peradventure, you saw the
Ladies, when they threw us off, took him home
With 'um, nothing could be plainer -- what think
You if one of us fought him?

Estr. Why, faith I think we had even as good let
That alone; hang him, he will fight; 'twas only
A trick he put upon us, and let us rall it off,
And serve him in his own kind.

Mod. As how?

Estr. Do you remember a certain Cousin of his
That Everyoung carried us to, the Widow of
A rich Alderman, who died suddenly, and left her
All he had? this Widow he intends for Sir Samuel
Forecast, and I make no question but he is to have
A round Sum for his good word.
What think you now, if I order it, that one
Of us marry this Widow, then I hope
We are sufficiently revenged?

Mod. But how is it possible?

Estr. Nothing so easy: her Maid has promised me
To persuade her to take a walk in the Mulberry*
Garden; this is a time there is little or no
Company there, it is but waiting at the door
With a trusty (...)
Force her whither (...)
Her own accord she will (...)

Mod. Why so?

Estr. If for no other, for the same reason that th^^
Eat Horseflesh in a Siege; because she can come
At nothing else.

Mod. If it were a foolish Girl, we might do
Somewhat with her indeed; but these Widows
Are like old Birds not to be tamed she will fight and
Scratch, and fly about, there will be no enduring her.

Estr. Fear nothing: when she considers she has no
Other way to save her Reputation, she will hear reason.

Mod. Well; but being equal Adventurers, how
Shall we agree about the Prize?

Estr. He that marries her, shall give the other a
Statute upon his Estate, for two thousand
Pounds, a pretty good Sum, and will serve to stop a gap.

Mod. Content, and I wish thee joy of her
With all my heart.

Estr. You shall find me as good a Play Master
As her Husband the old Alderman would
Have been: but stand close, here she comes.

Enter the Widow and her Maid, they (...) 'um. Wid. Thieves, Murderers,
Villains what do you mean?

Estr. Nothing, nothing, but lie make bold to stop
That pretty mouth of thine, Widow, for once.

They carry 'um off. Mod. Whither shall we carry 'um?

Estr. To a little house I have taken a quarter of
A mile off for that purpose, where no body
Could hear 'um, though they had Falconers
Or Huntsmens voices.

[Exeunt. Enter Sir. John Everyoung, and Sir Samuel Forecast. Ever. Give you
joy, Brother, give you joy.

Fore. Of what?

Ever. Why, of your Lieutenancy, of the Tower
Know you can be here upon no other (...) and
Indeed your fidelity to the (...)

Fore. Sir, give you joy of your new suit, and
Fair Perriwig there.

Ever. Faith, Brother, it site with no Fortune
To day, what are's the matter, I was never
Worse put together in all my life, and but to
Congratulate your advancement, would not
Have left the Company I dined with.

Fore. I hope to return your kind Visit in the Fleet,
And see your Daughters sell Ale and Cakes there,
And your Worship with ^ewer Trappings on;
For thither your extravagant Courses point.

Ever. May my Petriwig never know a good day,
Nor be taken for my own half again,
But come off always with my Hat, if it
Cost me above twelve pounds.

Fore. Pox on your Hat, and your Perriwig, can you
Tell how I shall get out?

Ever. No more then how you got in; but you are
Wise, and know business: alas, I know nothing
But how to sort Ribands, make Horse-matches,
Throw away my money at Dice, and keep my
Self out of the Tower.

Fore. O my ungracious Girls!

Ever. What of them? have they broke prison,
And taken Sanctuary in the Arms of some sturdy
Prentice, Fencing-master, Brother of the Blade,
Or any other inferior Rascat? you were
So strict to 'um, I never looked for other.

Fore. Not so fast; but if you can be serious for
A minute, do: they are virtuous, but Eugenio
A former Servant to Althea, since declared
A Traitor to the State, was taken in my house;
I suspected to have been privy to his being
There, and so carried along with him hither:
I protested my Innocence to the Officers, urged
My former Service, but all would nor do.

Ever. S'light of hope you had more wit, this is
The happiest accident that ever (...)
For an old notorious, Roundhead to be taken
For a Cavalier at this time; why I never
Thought it had been in you, this was a Stratagem
Might have become Machewile himself*

Fore. Why, what is the matter? all is well I hope.

Ever. Yes, never better, the General has this day to
Some persons of quality declared for the King;
All Cavaliers are immediately to have their
Liberty; therefore make haste to reconcile
With Eugenio and Philander: I have an order
For the delivery of all such Prisoners as are
Here upon the account of Loyalty to their Prince.

Fore. Philander and Eugenio, on my Daughters
Account, will do me all the service they can, and I
Hope to make some advantage of this imprisonment,

Ever. I Will go and release Eugenio, and bring him
To you; Horatio is discharged already: though,
We fall out now and then about trifles, we are
Brothers, and ought to serve one another
In matters of concern.

[Exeunt. Enter. Victoria, Olivia, and Wildish. Wild. You see now, Ladies, what
Fellows you cast
Your good opinions on: if I said any thing
That was disrespectful to either of you,
It ought to go for nothing, I was merely
Your decoy in the business.

Oliv. We are very well satisfied on all hands.

Vict. Sure they will never have the impudence
To trouble us again.

Oliv. Now would I were married to Estridge,
That I might plague him soundly.

Wild. How can you make that a Plague, Madam?

Oliv. A hundred ways: I would never come
Home till three a clock in the morning;
Tumble my own Handkercher my self, to make
Him jealous; break his soundest sleeps in
Commendation of his bosom-friend, and never
Leave till I have made 'um quarrel; fold up
All manner of Papers, like Love Letters,
And burn 'um just as he comes into the Room.

Wild. I can tell you how to be revenged on him
Beyond all this.

Oliv. Prithee how, Wildish?

Wild. Why, marry me, make a good Wife to me,
And let him hang himself for rage.

Oliv. I am not so inveterate an Enemy, I Will forgive
Him rather: if I were your Wife, I must board
Half a year with a Friend in the Country, tumble
About the other half in most villainous Hackneys,
Lie two pair of Stairs high, and wear black
Farrendine the whole year about; see you when
You had no Money to play, and then be kissed out
Of a Ring or a Bracelet.

Wild. I would not use a City Widow of five and fifty so,
With seven small Children: and am I to suffer
Nothing all this while?

Oliv. What can you suffer?

Wild. Why, the loss of that which is dearer than life,
My liberty; be known for a married man, and so
Put my self out of all capacity, of breaking Gold,
Promising marriage, or any other way of
Ensuring my self to scrupulous young Virgins
I shall like hereafter.

Oliv. That is to be taken from the occasion of
Playing the Rascal: is that all?

Wild. Not half; if I make but love to a Chambermaid,
I shall be answered, you have a sweet Lady of your
Own, and why will you wrong her? if I get
Acquainted with any young woman, after the fourth
Or fifth visit, be looked upon by her Father and Mother,
Worse than the Tax-Gatherers in a Country Village;
All this you count nothing.

Oliv. Not to a Lover, Wildish,

Wild. Well, there is no service so desperate,
That a gallant man will shrink at, if he like
His reward; and to give his hand thus to a woman,
In him that rightly understands what he does,
Is as bold an action as Mutius (...): yet
That I may use it hereafter where and when I please,
Upon my dear Olivia I Will venture it.

Oliv. Softly, when you please, and where I please.

Wild. Content Madam: will you do us the favor to
Be a Witness?

Vict. Well Mr. Wildish I Will dance barefoot
To serve you.

Wildish leads off Olivia. Oliv. Hold, hold Wildish, my heart fails me.

Mild. Slight, I had a qualm too, there is certainly
A more than ordinary providence attends me;
I shall escape yet, I am now in a twitter,
Like a Gamester upon a great by, that is
Heartily afraid he shall lose it, and yet his
Love to the money will not suffer him to draw
Stakes. I must have her.

Vict. Nay, now you are come thus far, e'^e go on,

Oliv. Well, Wildish, give me thy hand; the first
Time thou anger'st me, I Will have a Gallant;
And the next, make thee a Cuckold.

[Extunt. Enter. Horatio and Althea. Hora. Madam, you know your Father does
command.
That you should shortly give me your fair hand
Before a Priest; but since find no part
Goes along with it of your generous heart,
My mind the charming present can refuse,
Fearing t'indulge a passion you accuse;
My joy with your least trouble weighed must still
Appear, to my own self the greater ill.

Alth. Such words as these, Horatio, but heap more
Upon a debt that was too great before;
I Am covered with confusion when I weigh
How much I owe, how little I can pay:
You may with ease a fairer Mistress find,
And with more ease such worth will make her kind;
And if I e're that happy Virgin know,
I Will sue to make her pay you what I owe.

Hora. To change your thoughts, I will no longer try,
But with the stream I cannot turn, comply
I to Victoria will my suit renew,
And hope to find an Advocate in you.

Alth. You may command me, and Victoria's mind
Is of it self to you too well inclined.

Hora. All this methinks should your belief persuade,
I no contrivance with those Villains had,
To take my Rival in so mean a way,
But only came their sudden rage to stay:
All that confusion, and surprise could do,
My passion made me apprehend for you.

Alth. Horatio's Honor does too brightly shine,
To be accused of such a low design;
Had you within the bounds of friendship staid,
Your self and me you had both happy made.

Hora. With ease from friendship we to love are led,
That slipery path who can securely tread?

Enter Sir. Samuel Forecast, Sir John Everyoung, and Eugenio. Alth. I see my
Father, and Eugenio here,
And in all faces sudden joys appear.

Forecast, Everyoung, and Horatio seem to discourse. Euge. Fortune, I pardon
thee thy short-lived spite,
I for thy constant temper took a fit,
Thou Art kind, and gentle, and it is we are blind,
Who do mistrust the ways thou have designed
To make us blessed, though better than our own.

Alth. Can you have joy, and yet Althea none*

Euge. May I all misery first undergo,
E're joy divided from Althea know.

Alth. What is this wonder hangs upon thy tongue
Delay does only to ill news belong.

Euge. Madam, your Father licenses my flame,
And you alone can now oppose my claim;
That Cause which Armies did in vain support,
And noblest spirits did, successless, court
We in a bloodless triumph shining see,
Without the dire effects of Victory.
For in the Generals breast (the noblest Scene)
The Fate of England has transacted been:
On Albion's Throne he will our Monarch place,
Our Neighbors terror, and our Nations grace,
Whilst at his blessed approach, all factious minds
Vanish, like leaves before Autumnal Winds.

Alth. Such truth in love and loyalty you have shown,
What less for both could by just Heaven be done?

Euge. This happiness, though great, yet is not all,
My dearest friend I soon shall Brother call;
Diana must his deathless Flame repay.

Alth. Fate, to be pardoned, had no other way.

Euge. See how your Father kindly strives to evade
His former promise to Horatio made.

Alth. That work's so nobly in his breast begun,
That a few words will finish what is undone:
Horatio. does all happiness despise,
From my obedience, which my love denies.

Forecast to Eugenio. Fore. Horatio has released me of my promise to him,
And seeing your changeless love to one another,
Was resolved to have moved it to me, if I had
Not prevented him.

Euge. Such honor, noble youth, I must confess,
Gives wonder equal to my happiness.

Hora. Althea. I resign, my guilty flame
Was too unjust to reach so fair an aim:
Victoria's. wrongs did my success oppose,
And my lost passion its own penance grows.
So some Offenders are their duty taught
By the will effect and nature of their fault.

Eug. My apprehensions by these words are cleared.
And I dare love that Virtue which I feared.
In love alone this mystery we find,
Men best agree when of a different mind.

Hor. There now remains but one thing more to do,
It Is that Philander may be sent for too.
But see he comes.

[ Enter Philander. Fore. Brother, if your Daughter were here, we
Might have a Dance.
Sir, you are heartily welcome, I kept my Girl
Safe for you, she has not been so much as blown
Upon since you saw her; I knew honest men
Would not be always kept from their own,
There would come a time.

Phil. Sir, I was ever most obliged to you --
Eugenio here! then I am doubly blessed,
And only fear to be with joy oppressed.

Euge. The joys of Friendship well prepare our mind
For the high raptures we in love shall find:
The name of Brothers we shall soon obtain.

Phil. Friendship so perfect by no name can gain.
Enter Diana. Fate is at length ashamed, or weary grown
Upon a Flame you smiled so long, to frown;
As Vessels tossed upon the raging Main,
With greater joy the wisht-for Port obtain;
Our love this short, fierce tempest having past,
Will joys more high, since less expected, taste.

Dian. But in the Storm did you throw nothing out?

Phil. Wrong not my love with so unkind a doubt.

Enter Ever. Vict. Oliv. Wild. Ever. Wildish, you are an honest fellow, I Am glad
I found thee.

Wild. Sir, the honest fellow desires to be known to
You by another name, having newly married your
Daughter Olivia.

Ever. When, pray Mr. Wildish?

Wild. Just now, Sir, the words are scarce out of our Mouths.

Ever. Well, this is a day I could not have been angry
If thou had got her with Child upon a Contract;
But you might have asked my leave, e're you
Went about to make me a Grandfather.

Wild. If I had had a good Jointure to offer, so I
Would, but if I do make you a Grandfather,
It Is not done maliciously, I Will swear.

Hora. My guilty Cause my self I dare not plead,
But beg your innocence will intercede:
Since all my fault your matchless beauty made,
Your goodness now should my excuse persuade.

Alth. I in Victoria will my interest try,
You, and me both, she hardly shall deny.

Hora. Victoria's. mind I cannot hope to move,
Unless a Parents power assist my love;
Her duty will not your commands withstand,
She Will take a worthless Servant from your hand.

Ever. I Am sure she can have no exception to so
Deserving a person as Horatio; Lovers, like Spaniels, do
But show their metal in a little ranging: though you
Had a twittering to Althea, you will make never the
Worse Husband to Victoria. Victoria!

Vict. Sir, what is your pleasure?

Ever. That which will prove yours in the end: I
Charge you upon my blessing, give Horatio your
Hand, go and be married with your Cousins,
And make but one work of it.

Vict. Sir, I am all obedience: who e're strove
At once against her duty, and her lover.

Wild. But Estridge, what fine Lady have you got there

Estr. A certain Widow which I have cast my
Self away upon: a Kinswoman of yours, Wildish,
That you formerly designed for the Right Worshipful
Sir, Formal there: do you know her now? --
Sir we made bold with her without your consent.

Wild. Old acquaintance, I says, how is it? I have made
As bold, and been as welcome too, as e're you will be
Sir: but why did you steal a marriage thus?

Wid. You know I always loved stolen pleasures, but
This marriage stole me; your old Knight was
Uncertain, came on by inches, this Gentleman
Leapt into the matter, forced me into a Coach, and
Married me in an instant: I could have been
Content to have been a Lady, that I might have
Taken place of my Mistress when she comes to Town.
But a Bird in the hand --.

Estr. Why, have you a Mistress?

Wid. As sure as you have had a hundred,
And now have a Wife.

Mod. I doubt as things go, I shall scarce find you
As good a Play Master as the old Alderman.

Estridge pulls his hand from her, and looks angry. Wild. Nay, never use her
ill now, 'twas none of her
Fault, she is a very good Creature, and one
That I placed to personate my Cousin, on purpose
To catch Sir Samuel Forecast; you know he
Took the forfeiture of a Mortgage that concerned
A very good Friend of mine, and I was resolved to
Be revenged of him; if you will needs run your
Head into the Noose that is prepared for another,
Who can help it? my Cousin is married in Ireland,
Whither she went last Summer to look after
Some money, due to her last Husband.

Wid. I am her Housekeeper though, and can bid
You welcome till she returns.

Oliv. A pretty pert thing, I like her humor, she
Carries it off well: but Wildish, you shall visit
Her no more now we are married.

Wild Fear not, Estridge will take order for that. Horatio to Victoria. Hora.
How I do hate my self! that could so long
At once such Beauty and such Goodness wrong.

Vict. My kindness has forgot you were to blame,
You guilt consumed in your reviving flame.

Ever. Now you are all paired, let us have a Dance.

After the Dance, a great shout within. Euge. I hear the peoples voice in
joyful cries,
Like conquering Troops over flying Enemies;
They seem to teach us in a ruder way
The Honor due to this all-healing day.

Phil. Let Us part a while, and vye who shall express
The highest sense of this great happiness.

Epilogue.
POets of all men have the hardest Game,
Their best Endeavors can no Favors claim.
The Lawyer, if overthrown, though by the Laws,
He quits himself, and lays it on your Cause.
The Soldier is esteemed a Man of War,
And Honor gains, if he but bravely dare.
The grave Physician, if his Patient dye,
He shakes his head, and blames Mortality.
Only poor Poets their own faults must bear,
Therefore grave Judges be not too severe:
Our Author humbly hopes to escape your Rage,
Being no known Offender on the Stage,
He came by chance, is a mere Traveller;
All Countries Civil unto Strangers are:
Yet faith he is armed how e're your Censures go,
And can prevent the harm, though not the blow.
No Poet can from this one Comfort fall,
The best never pleased, nor worst displeased you all.
FINIS.

