AN ACROSTICK Upon the Name of Mrs ELIZABETH BALL.
Even as the Dew within a Rose,
Love captivates poor me, and shows
In Charms of Beauty Fetters ly,
Sent from thy comely Face, and Eye,
All twisted round my bleeding Heart,
Bound fast with Love, in every Part.
'Ere thou pass Sentence on my Death,
Take pity on me, and bequeath
Health by a single Smile, that I
Be not so soon compelled to Die.
All that I beg at present's this,
Let Love present me with a Kiss;
Lest not obtaining my desire,
My Life into your breast expire.
JAMES SEGVIN.

Then let not Beauty make you proud,
My Passion to despise;
Nor blushing tincture of your Blood,
Nor sweetness of your Eyes:
To Age, and Time, you must resign,
What Nature fondly lent;
And you shall wish you had been mine,
And die, for discontent.
TO Mrs ELIZABETH BALL.
FOR Heaven's sake, what d' you mean to do?
Keep me, or let me go, one of the two;
Youth and warm hours let me not idly lose,
The little Time that Love does choose;
If always here I must not stay,
Let me be gone, whilst yet it is day;
Lest I faint, and benighted lose my way.
It Is dismal, One so long to Love
In vain; till to Love more as vain must prove:
To hunt so long on nimble prey, till we
Too weary to make others be;
Alas, it is folly to remain,
And waste our Army thus in vain,
Before a City which will never be taken.
At several hopes wisely to fly,
Ought not to be esteemed Inconstancy;
It Is more Inconstant always to pursue
A thing that always flies from you;
For that at last may meet a bound,
But no end can to this be found,
It Is naught but a perpetual fruitless Round.
When it does Hardness meet and Pride,
My Love does then rebound to another side;
But if ought that is soft and yielding hit;
It lodges and stays in it.
Whatever it is shall first love me,
That it my Heaven may truly be,
I shall be sure to giv't Eternity.
Go bid the Needle his dear North forsake,
To which with trembling rev'erence it does bend;
Go bid th'Stones a journey upwards make;
Go bid the ambitious Flame no more ascend:
And when these false to their old motions prove,
Then shall I cease Thee, Thee alone to Love.
The fast-link'd Chain of Everlasting Fate
Does nothing tie more strong, than Me to You;
My fixed Love hangs not on your Love or Hate;
But will be still the same, whatever you do.
You cannot kill my Love with your disdain,
Wound it you may, and make it live in pain.
JAMES SEGVIN.


