THE BOWELS OF Tender Mercy SEALED IN THE Everlasting Covenant, WHEREIN Is set
forth the Nature, Conditions and Excellencies of it, and how a Sinner should do
to enter into it, and the danger of refusing this COVENANT RELATION.

ALSO THE Treasures of Grace, Blessings, Comforts, Promises and Privileges
that are comprised in the Covenant of Gods Free and Rich Mercy made in JESUS
CHRIST with BELIEVERS.

By that Faithful and Reverend Divine Mr Obadiah Sedgwick B. D. late Minister
of the Gospel in Covent Garden, London.

Perfected and intended for the Press, therefore corrected and lately revised
by himself, and published by his own Manuscript, allowed by himself in his
lifetime, by those whom he entrusted with this work for that purpose.

LONDON, Printed By Edward Mottershed, for Adoniram Byfield, and are to be sold
by Joseph Cranford, at the Sign of the Castle and Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1661.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
HAD not the Reverend Author of this Book requested our Attestation unto all
the Pieces which after his death should be printed in his Name, there would not
have been any need to preface this Treatise with an Epistle. The Title Page
suggesting the subject matter of the ensuing Discourse, may be sufficient to
encourage the real self-studying Christian to peruse it; especially such who
have been experimentally acquainted with the many practical Pieces, which have
been heretofore sent unto the Press from the same hand. The Bowels of Tender
Mercy sealed in the Everlasting Covenant; How full of sweetness is this one
short Sentence! Every word has its weight and worth. When aged, dying David,
upon the Review of his own Condition and Relations, had mentioned the
Everlasting Covenant made with himself, ordered in all things and sure: He
adds, This is all my salvation and all my desire, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Who knows
all the Treasures of Grace and Comforts, which are comprised in the Covenant of
Gods free and rich Mercy, made in Jesus Christ? Is there any spiritual want,
which may not be supplied, or any soul-discouragement, which may not be
conquered, yea, or any concernment, wherein the humble, believing Christian may
not be much advantaged by the improvement of this Covenant, thus grounded and
thus confirmed? As nothing is so sweet, as Gods tender mercy unto a sin-sick
soul, so there can be no such confirmation unto feeble faith, as the
unchangeable engagements of the Almighty, through Jesus Christ. Therefore prize
with thanks, and improve with diligence, this and suchlike holy helps, which
Divine Providence puts into thine hand. By so doing, thou shall glorify the
Everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ, and advance the power of Godliness, with
peace and joy in thine own heart, through him, in whom we are

Thy Friends and Servants, Humphrey Chambers, D. D. Edmund Calamy. Simeon Ash.
Adoniram Byfield.


THE BOWELS OF TENDER MERCY Sealed (...) Covenant.
The First Part.
CHAP. I.
Isaiah 55. 3. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David.
(...).

In the words, you (...)

1. The matter of the (...) with you.

2. The Amplification of that Covenant, or if you please, the qualification of
that Covenant [An everlasting Covenant, The sure mercies of David.

You see the words give me occasion to speak of the great mystery of
godliness, wrapped up in the Everlasting Covenant, the nature whereof I shall
especially apply my self to open to you.

This Proposition or Doctrine lies clear and full in the Text.

That theris a Covenant which God makes between himself and all who believe in
Christ. I will make a Covenant with you.

For the explication of this, I shall speak There is a Covenant betwixt God and
believers. Of a Covenant in general.


1. Of a Covenant in general. 2. In special.

1. Of a Covenant in general, where I will show you First, What it is.

Secondly, That there is a Covenant betwixt God and Believers.

Thirdly, Why God makes such a Covenant with them.

SECT. I.
Quest. 1. WHat A Covenant is. What it is.


Answ. 1. A Covenant in General, is a compact or mutual Described.
agreement betwixt parties, in which they bind each other to the performance
of what they do (by agreement) promise to each other. Conference, and
conference, proposals and proposals, offers and offers, arguings and arguings
(simply) do not constitute a Covenant: Things may be propounded, and yet
rejected. Nor does the liking of what is propounded do it; Approbation and
consent of one party, no nor yet his obligation, can (formally) make up a
Covenant, but there must be actus mutuus, a mutual consent, a mutual promise, a
mutual agreement, a mutual engagement or obligation, and this makes up a
Covenant, as to the substance of it. As to the Covenant of Marriage, it is not
speaking, nor liking, not promise by one party, but the liking, and consent,
and promise must be mutual, else it makes not up the Covenant of Marriage; so
it is in this.

2. Covenants, are either, Covenants are Sinful.


1. Sinful. They have made a Covenant with death and hell, Isa. 28. 18. How do
they make a Covenant together? They engage themselves in the service of sin,
and expect to be as secure from death and hell as if they had made a formal
Covenant and Agreement with them.

2. Civil. Which are the binding arguments betwixt man and man, in matters
Civil.
of a worldly consideration for goods, wares, lands, peace, or the like; as the
Covenant betwixt Abraham and Abimilech, and betwixt Ahab and Benhadad, etc.

3. Sacred. As the Covenant betwixt God and man. Sacred. Betwixt God and man.


It is observable that there was no state in which man was at any time, but God
made a Covenant with him; as soon as he was created, and as soon as he fell,
God made a Covenant with him.

And Gods Covenant with man (I speak only in the general) does consist in a In
what it consists.
free promise on Gods part, with a stipulation of duty on man's part. There is a
Susception on Gods part, and an engagement on man's part; God promises some
good, and man promises obedience; Their concurrence in these, or their
obliging Agreement in these make up the Covenant. God promises life and all
good to man, and man promises all obedience to God; God promises what he
pleases, and requires what he pleases, and man promises unto God what God
requires.

And here by the way note, that in every Covenant betwixt God and man, the
whole draught of it depends upon the Sovereign will and pleasure of God, who
proposes what rewards he pleases, and imposes what terms he pleases, and
draws up the Covenant in what terms he pleases. And the reason hereof lies in
the absolute power and authority of God over man, who is infinitely inferior
to God, and wholly subordinate to him; and therefore man may not indent with
him, by proposing Articles of Agreement, but he must accept what the Lord is
pleased to propose, either by way of duty on man's part, or by way of promise on
Gods part. And well he may do so, inrespect of that Infinite Goodness and
Wisdom in God, who knows much better how to lay the frame of a Covenant
betwixt himself and man, than man can know how to draw a Covenant betwixt
himself and God.

SECT. II.
2. THat there is a Covenant which God makes betwixt himself and believers:
There is such a Covenant.
So you have it often expressed in Scripture, Genesis 17. 2. I will make my
Covenant betwixt me and thee, verse 7. I will establish my Covenant betwixt me
and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations after thee, to be good
unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. Deuteronomy. 4. 23. Take heed unto your selves
lest you forget the Covenant of the Lord your God, which he made with you. 2 Samuel 23. 5. He has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things
and sure. Psalm. 50. 5. Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made
a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. Jer. 31. 31. Behold, the days come (says the
Lord) I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house
of Judah, which is repeated by the Apostle, Heb. 8. 8. all which places do
manifestly prove that there is a Covenant betwixt God and Believers.

Against this a great objection will lie; There are some who argue, that there
Sect. 2. Obj. The Covenant is only betwixt God and Christ.
is no Covenant made betwixt God and us; there is only a Covenant betwixt God
and Christ, by virtue of which all Good is derived unto us: The ground of this
opinion is drawn from Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises
made; he says not, And to seeds, as of many, but as of one, And to thy seed,
which is Christ. Whence they infer, there is no Covenant at all made to us,
but only with Christ, or to Christ.

This opinion considered, and cleared in three particulars.
this were true, how can this Text I am now upon be true? which says, I will
make an everlasting Covenant, not only for you, but with you. For the better
stating and clearing of this doubt and difficulty, I will deliver my self in
these Propositions. 1. That there is a Covenant made betwixt God the Father and
his Son Jesus Christ. 2. That there is a Covenant made betwixt God and every
believing person. 3. That the place alleged does not infringe this truth.


1. That there is a Covenant made betwixt God the Father, and his Son Jesus
There is a Covenant betwixt God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ.
Christ, touching the whole business of man's salvation. Hence it is, that
Christ is called the Covenant; I will give thee for a Covenant of the people,
says the Lord, speaking of Christ, Isa. 49. 8. In hope of eternal life, which
God who cannot lie, promised before the world began, Tit. 1. 2. This promise,
which was ante tempora seculorum, was made to Christ. I have manifested thy
name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world; thine they were, and
thou gave them me, Joh. 17. 6.

All that makes up a Covenant, passed betwixt the Father and the Son. On the
Father part. He d^signed Christ to the office of Mediator.


1. On the Fathers part.

1. He designed his Son unto the office of Mediator; him has God the Father
sealed, John 6. 27. Set apart, marked out for that work; and the Apostle Peter
speaking of our Redemption by the precious blood of Christ, says, that Christ
was foreordained (thereunto) before the foundation of the world, 1 Pet. 1. 20.

And hereunto did Christ consent and agree, Heb. 10. 7. Then said I, lo I come
(in the volum of thy book it is written of me) to do thy will O God; and
again, ver. 9. lo I come to do thy will O God.

2. He promised to give him the Spirit in abundant measure. The Spirit of the
He promised to give him the Spirit in abundant measure.
Lord shall rest upon him, Isa. 11. 2. I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall
bring forth judgment to the Genetiles, Isa. 42. 1. The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, Isa. 61. 1. God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him, Joh. 3. 34.

3. He promised to assist him in that great work: I the Lord have called thee
And to assist him in that great work.
in Righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, and give thee
for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, Isa. 42. 6. What is
that holding of Christ by the hand, but his effectual supporting and
strengthening of him to finish the work which he agreed to undertake?

4. He promised a blessed success to this undertaking; he shall see his seed,
And a blessed success to his undertaking.
and he shall see the travail of his soul, Isa. 53. 10. Nations that know thee
not, shall run unto thee, Isa. 55. 5.

5. He promised him Dominion and Sovereignty. His arm shall rule for him, And
dominion and sovereignty
Isa. 40. 10. He shall sit in judgment in the earth, and the Isles shall wait
for his Law, Isa. 42. 4. He shall judge amongst many Nations, Mic. 4. 3.

6. He promised to glorify him after all, Joh. 17. 5. Now Father, glorify
thou And to glorify him after all.
me.

2. Christ an his part consents to the Father; undertakes the will and work of
On Christ's part. He consents to him, undertakes his work. Depends on him,
discharges it, and expects the glory promised. There is a Covenant with Christ
personally and mystically considered.
his Father; Depends on his Father, Trusts on him for help; The Lord will help
me, Isa. 50. 7, 9. My God shall be my strength, Isa. 49. 5. And he discharges
all the work agreed on for the Redemption and salvation of the elect. I have
finished the work thou gave me to do; And expects the glory promised by the
Father. I would be tedious to speak all that might be said concerning this high
Covenant betwixt God the Father, and Christ, touching the elect, and all that
concerns them.

I might add, that as there is a Covenant betwixt God and Christ personally
considered, so also betwixt God and Christ mystically considered; Take him as
the Head of the Church, his body, the Covenant principally looks at Christ, I
will be your God; this principally looks at Christ, and I will be your Father;
this principally looks at Christ, and so the maine promises, as those of Life,
of Grace, of Justification, so they principally look at Christ. As there was a
respect to the people of God in the Covenant betwixt the Father and Jesus
Christ, so there was a respect to Christ in the Covenant betwixt God and his
people.

2. Nevertheless, though there be such a Covenant betwixt God the Father, Yet
there is a Covenant betwixt God and his people. Proved.
and his Son Jesus Christ; yet there is a Covenant made betwixt God and his
people.

The places above mentioned, do expressly prove it when God says, I will be
their God, and they shall be my people; I will marry you unto my self, and I
will bring you into the bond of my Covenant, (...). 20. 37. and we are said to
enter into Covenant with the Lord, Deuteronomy. 29. 12. These expressions plainly
prove a Covenant betwixt God and us. And truly, unanswerable Arguments evince
this Truth.

1. Christ is said to be the Mediator of this Covenant, Heb. 9. 15. Now he
could not be the Mediator of this Covenant betwixt God and himself, but of the
Covenant Because Christ is the Mediator of it.
betwixt God and us.

2. To whom the seals of the Covenant are given, with them is the Covenant
made; the seals of the Covenant and the Covenant (go to the same persons) The
seals of the Covenant are given unto his people.
but the seals of the Covenant are for and to believers. Abraham received the
sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11.

3. How can we plead the Covenant betwixt God and us, if there were no such
Gods people plead this Covenant.
Covenant? Remember thy Covenant; Oh how can God be said to remember his
Covenant, and to do us good for and according to his Covenant with us, if there
were not a Covenant betwixt God and us?

Lastly, How is God said to be faithful in Covenant with us? and how are we God
is faithful in his Covenant with us, and we are faithful with God. Gal. 3. 16.
opened and cleared
said to be faithful in Covenant with God? and why are we exhorted to be so?
and how can there be such a sin as breach of Covenant, for which God will be
avenged, if there were no Covenant betwixt God and us?

3. The place mentioned in Gal. 3. 16. does not contradict this truth, where it
is said, The promises are made to Abraham, and to his seed, not seeds, as
speaking of many, but seed, as of one, and to thy seed which is Christ.

This place surely will not carry it out, that there is no Covenant with us but
with Christ. For,

1. How do you read in this place of Promises made to Abraham, (the promises
were made to Abraham;) if there were no promises but to Christ; or how can the
promises be made only to Christ, and yet to Abraham?

2. The promises were made to Abraham, and then to his seed which is Christ; if
Christ here should be understood personally, the order here mentioned could not
hold; for then Christ should come to claim the promises in Abraham's right, and
not Abraham in his.

3. By Christ in this place, is not meant Christ personally, but Christ
mystically considered, the Church of Christ, the company of believers, and
those are the seed of Abraham, who is styled The father of the faithful. And
truly, I know not why men do so wrest this Text, which the Apostle only
mentions to prove that all that are justified, are justified not by works, but
by faith; forasmuch as the promise of Grace to this purpose was made to Abraham
and his seed, to all Believers; as ver. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are you
Abraham's seed, and Heirs according to the Promise.

SECT. III.
4. BEfore I pass from the general consideration of a Covenant, made betwixt
Why God makes a Covenant betwixt himself and his people. To put an honor upon
his people, Dut. 26 18, 19.
God and us, it may be demanded why the Lord is pleased to make a Covenant
betwixt himself and his people.

The causes thereof amongst many others may be these.

1. To put an honor upon his people. Some do derive the word Berith, (which
signifies the Covenant) from a root which signifies to purify, and to
separate, and to select; and verily, the Lord when he makes a Covenant with
any, he does separate them from others, looks on them, takes them and ownes
them for his peculiar people, and agrees with them as the chosen and choycest
of all others. The first staff in Zach. 11. 10. is called beauty, and this was
the Covenant: And indeed it is a high honor to be in Covenant with God, there
is a fourfould honor to us in this.

1. One in that God in this becomes ours, and we are made nigh unto him. A
fourfold honor in this.


2. A second in that God is ours, and we his in a very peculiar way of relation.

3. In that God in Covenant, opens his love, and all his treasures to us, tells
us of his special grace and love, and great intentions of good to us.

4. In that he obliges himself to us in his faithfulness, to perform all his
Covenant. In all this there is a great favor done unto, and a great honor put
upon us. Hence when the Lord told Abraham, that he would make a Covenant with
him, Abraham fell upon his face, Genesis 17. 2, 3. he was amazed at so great a
love and honor; and why? It is a special favor for God to make a Covenant
with us; hence that of David, Who am I, O Lord? etc. 2 Samuel 7. 18.

2. That we might know what to expect from God, and upon what terms; for the
That we might know what to expect from God.
Covenant, as it is a Declaration of all the good which God will bestow upon
us, so it is also a Rule or Direction what we are to be and to do; here you may
see all that we need, and all that God requires.

3. That we might be encouraged in our whole course of obedience; there being
sufficiency promised, and security enough given by God in this Covenant for all
To encourage us in obedience
good, unto all such who are faithful in Covenant with him. Walk before me and
be thou perfect, and I will be a God all-sufficient unto thee, Genesis 17. 1. All
the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth to them that keep his Covenant,
Psalm. 25. 10.

4. That we might be bound fast unto himself; the Covenant binds fast on both
parts; God binds himself to us, and we also are bound by it to him, Jer. 13.
11. To bind us fast to God.
As the girdle cleaves to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto
me the whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Judah, says the Lord,
that they might be unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and
for a glory.

Thus you have heard in the general what a Covenant is, and that there is such
a Covenant betwixt God and believers, and Reasons also in the General, why God
makes a Covenant with them.

CHAP. II. Of the Covenant in special.
I Shall now descend to something more special, to show unto you, what that
Covenant is which God makes between himself and his people.

There are who do distinguish of a twofold Covenant.

1. There is Foedus absolutum, which is such a promise of God, as takes in no
stipulation or condition at all, that There is an absolute Covenant.
runs altogether upon absolute terms; such a Covenant was that which God
made with Noah, that he would never drown the world any more, Genesis 9. 11. and
such a kind of Covenant is that, when God promises to give faith and
perseverance unto his elect, Heb. 8. 10, etc. Both these Covenants are
absolute, and without any condition; there is nothing in them but what is
folded up in the promises themselves.

2. Foedus Hypotheticum, which is a gracious promise on Gods part, with an
obligation to duty on our part; for although it be natural to God, to
recompense And an Hypothetical Covenant.
any good, as it is to punish any evil; And although man does owe unto God
whatsoever God covenanteth with him for; yet it so pleases his Divine Will
thus to deal with us, that in binding of us to duty unto himself, he binds
himself in reward unto us, and promises such and such a recompense, upon the
condition of such and such a performance.

Now this kind of Covenant is twofold. The Covenant is either The Covenant of
nature;


1. Foedus Naturae, (as some style it) or Foedus operum, the Covenant of works
as we usually call it; the Apostle calls it the Law of works, Romans 3. 27. This
is the Covenant which God made with man in the state of innocence before the
fall; wherein God promised unto man life and happiness, upon condition of
perfect and personal obedience; and it is summed up by the Apostle, Gal. 3. 12.
Do this and live. God having created man upright after his own Image, and so
having furnished him with all abilities sufficient for obedience, thereupon he
made a Covenant with him for life upon the condition of obedience; I say, he
made such a Covenant with Adam as a public person; and as he promised life to
him and his posterity, in case of obedience, so he threatened death and a curse
unto him and his posterity in case of disobedience. In the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely die, Genesis 2. 17. Cursedis every one that continues
not in all things written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10.

2. Faedus Gratiae, the Covenant of Grace, the Apostle calls it the law of
faith, Or the Covenant of grace.
Romans 3. 27. and it is especially expressed thus, He that believes shall be
saved, Mark 16. 16. The just shall live by faith, Gal. 3. 11.

This is that Covenant of which the Text speaks, and of which (by Gods
assistance) This is styled
I intend to discourse.

This Covenant, which is sometimes styled the Covenant of life; life is
restored, The Covenant of life.
and life is promised, and life is settled by the Covenant; no life for a sinner
out of it.

And sometimes it is styled a Covenant of peace; Numb. 25. 12. Behold I give
Covenant of peace.
unto him my Covenant of Peace. Peace is the comprehension of all blessings and
prosperity; our good is in this good Covenant of grace; and all peace flows
out of it, peace with God, and peace of cosncience.

And sometimes it is called a Covenant of salt, Number. 18. 19. 2 Chronicles. 13. 5. A
A Covenant of salt.
firm, sure, uncorruptible Covenant which lasts for ever.

Sometimes it is styled the promise, Psalm. 105. 42. He remembered his holy
promise, The promise.
and Abraham his servant.

It is called the promise by way of eminency; it is made up altogether of
promises; all on Gods part, which he will do, is under promise; and all on our
part which we are to do, is likewise under promise.

Sometimes it is called the mercy and the truth, Mic. 7. 20. Thou will perform
The mercy and the truth.
the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham.

The Covenant is called mercy, because mercy only drew this Covenant; It was
mere mercy which moved God to make new bonds with us, yea all mercy is wrapped
up in it. And it is called Truth, because the Lord God who makes this Covenant,
will certainly and truly perform all that good and mercy, which (in it) he
makes over unto his people.

Hence also it is called the oath, Luke 2. 73. The oath which he swear unto The
Oath.
our father Abraham. You do not read of Gods Oath in the Covenant of works
(that Covenant wanted a Mediator, and was not sealed with an oath) but in this
Covenant of grace there is the oath of God, to declare unto us, and to confirm
us, as touching the immutability of his will and purpose, for the
accomplishment of all that good mentioned in this Covenant.

And it is called a Testament, and a new Testament, Matthew. 26. 28. My A
Testament, and New Testament.
blood of the New Testament, Heb. 9. 15. He is the Mediator of the New
Testament. A Testament is, Testatio mentis, that which we commonly call a man's
Will, about the bestowing of his estate amongst his children, etc. The new
Covenant is called a Testament, because it is ratified and confirmed by the
death of the Testator, and because it is as it were his last Will written down.
There are precious Legacies bestowed and settled by God the Father in this
Covenant upon all his children, and all of them are confirmed and ratified to
them by the death of Christ.

This Covenant of grace (thus gloriously set out in the Scripture) wherein God
proclaims all his goodness to us, which is the foundation of all our lives
and comforts, hopes and happiness, which is the foundation of all godliness
and holy walking, which is a sure and our only anchor, I am now in a more
distinct way to discourse of.

In the handling whereof, I shall confine my self to these six particulars. 1.
The differences of this Covenant of grace from the Covenant of works. 2. The
proper nature of this Covenant in the absolute consideration of it. 3. The
adjuncts and properties of this Covenant. 4. The condition of the Covenant of
grace. 5. The Mediator of this Covenant. 6. The special gifts and legacies
that are bequeathed in this Testament.


CHAP. III. Differences of the Covenant of grace, from the Covenant of works.
THe differences of this Covenant of grace from that Covenant of works.
Although there are some things wherein both these Covenants agree; As, 1. In
the general end, which is the Seven things in which they agree.
glory of God. 2. In the persons contracting and covenanting, which are God and
man. 3. In the intrinsecal form, there is a condition and restipulation in
both. 4. In some things promised in them both, and required (as to the matter
of them) in both. 5. In the Author, God is the Author of them both. 6. In the
form of inscription; as in that, the Law of works was written in the heart of
Adam; so in this, the Law of grace is written in the heart of every one
confederated. 7. In the unchangeablenesse, both of the one and of the other;
both of them are immutable. Although that Covenant of works (as it is a
Covenant for life) cease unto believers, yet it stands in force, upon and
against all unbelievers.

I say, notwithstanding all these general concordancies, correspondencies, and
agreements between them, they do yet differ in nine particulars; which I Nine
things in which they differ.
shall the rather mention, that you may understand the infinite goodness of
God in making this Covenant of grace; and his infinite mercy in it, and your
own happiness by it, if any of you be brought into the Covenant.

And also to affect your hearts, that you may press the more after a personal
interest therein.

Thus then the Covenant of works and of grace do differ.

1. In their special end. The end which God aimed at in the Covenant of works,
was, the declaration and magnifying of his justice; and his end in making In
their special end.
the Covenant of grace, is the declaration and magnifying of his mercy. In the
Covenant of works, it is, Do this and live; if you sin, you dye for it: Here
is no place for Repentance, no place for mercy. In the Covenant of works, when
Adam had sinned, there was no commission of enquiry, whether he repented or not
of what he had done; the enquiry was only of the fact, What have thou done?
Have thou eaten of the tree, whereof I said unto thee, Thou shall not eat? and
being found guilty, death and curse are pronounced against him, Genesis 3. 11, 19.
Thus it is in the Covenant of works. The soul that sins shall die, (...). 18.
4. In this, God reveals his wrath from heaven against all unrighteousness and
ungodliness of men, Romans 1. 18. And thus he makes his power and justice known
in that Covenant. But in the Covenant of grace, his intention and purpose is to
glorify his mercy, to proclaim his glory. The Lord, The Lord merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth; forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin, Exodus 34. 6, 7. This is the Covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel after those days, etc. I will be merciful
to their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no
more, Heb. 8. 10, 12.

In this Covenant, there is place for repentance, and mercy for the penitent.
Repent, that your sins may be blotted out, Acts 3. 19. He that forsakes his
sins shall have mercy, Prove. 28. 13. So that as to the Covenant of works, you
must be altogether perfect, and always so; if you sin at all, you are cast
and condemned; But as to the Covenant of grace, the sinner being penitent, is
received to mercy, and spared. This is one great difference betwixt the
Covenant of Works and of Grace.

2. In the condition of man, with whom God does Covenant. The Covenant In the
condition of man with whom God does Covenant
of works was made with man as perfect, upright, innocent, and then sinlesse;
and therefore it is called by some, Pactum Amicitiae, a Covenant of friendship:
because before the fall, there was nothing of variance or enmity betwixt God
and man; that estate was an estate of love and kindness, and friendship; God
was Adams friend, and Adam was a friend to God; they agreed together, and
conversed as loving friends. But the Covenant of grace, was made with man as
breaking friendship, as fallen off by sin; as under the estate of emnity,
when his sins had separated betwixt him and his God; and therefore this
Covenant is called Pactum Reconciliationis, a Covenant of Reconciliation, an
agreement made betwixt parties who had fallen out. The Lord was pleased to look
after man again, and to take pity on him, and to propose new Articles of life
unto him.

3. In their foundations. The Covenant of works (as to our part) was founded In
their foundations.
upon the strength of that righteous nature which God gave unto Adam, and in
him unto us: so that his standing was upon his own bottom, upon the
sufficiency of his own power and will, with which he was created. But the
foundation of the Covenant of grace is Jesus Christ, not our own strength, but
the strength of Christ who is the Rock, the Cornerstone, the foundation-stone,
upon which you are built. And this is one reason why Adam fell, and lost that
life promised in the Covenant of works; and why such as are brought into the
Covenant of grace fall not, so as to lose that blessed life promised unto them.
Adam had more inherent strength of grace than we have; he at his first creation
was without all sin, yet he being left to the strength of his own will,
willingly brake with God, willingly transgressed, and lost all; But we, though
weaker in our selves than he, yet being brought into this Covenant of grace,
though we meet with as great temptations as he, yet fall not as he did, because
the foundation of our strength is greater than his. Jesus Christ holds us in
his own hands, Joh. 10. 28. And we are kept by the power of God through faith
unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

4. The Covenant of works was made without a Mediator. There was no The one
made without a Mediator.
dayes-man betwixt God and man, none to stand between them; There was none, and
needed none, because there was no difference then betwixt God and man; Man was
then righteous, perfectly righteous; A Mediator is a third person betwixt two
different parties, to make up the breach which arises betwixt them; but when
the Covenant of works was made betwixt God and man, all was righteousness; and
therefore all was peace; there was no use of a Mediator to bring them into
peace, and set them at one, who were hitherto in perfect love and union. But in
the Covenant of grace there is a Mediator; The other with a Mediator.
Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12. 24. Man being fallen, there
is now a necessity of a Mediator to satisfy Gods Justice, to destroy enmity,
to make peace, to bring us near to God again, and to gain us confidence and
acceptance with God. The Covenant of grace, could not have been drawn up
without a Mediator; God would never have treated with sinners but by a
Mediator, who should satisfy him for the wrong and injury done unto him, and
who should set mercy (as it were) at liberty, to shower and fall down on sinful
man, and who should undertake to see all Articles performed.

Objection. It may be objected, that the Law given at Mount Sinai, was a
Covenant of works, and yet that was delivered by the hand of a Mediator, Gal.
3. 19.

Sol. I shall say no more to this at present, but that the Law given on Mount
Sinai, though materially it respected works, yet formally and intentionally, it
was not then given and established as a Covenant of works, by which we should
be justified and live; this I shall afterward make evident, and therefore
shall say no more unto it at the present.

5. The Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace, do differ in the
condition In the condition of life promised.
of life promised in both. Life is promised in both Covenants, but upon
different conditions. Do this and live, says the Covenant of works; Believe on
Jesus Christ and live, says the Covenant of grace. The condition of the one,
consists in giving; The condition of the other, consists in receiving; The
condition of the one, is to give in a perfect righteousness of our own unto
God; and the condition of the other is, by faith to receive a perfect
righteousness from Christ. In the Covenant of nature or of works, there is
forum justitiae, where the sentence of absolution passes if we be found
righteous; and the sentence of condemnation, if we be found unrighteous; the
question is not then about faith, but love; not whether you believed, but
whether you obeyed. But in the Covenant of grace, there is forum misericordiae;
and the sentence of absolution, passes not upon our doing, but upon our
believing; and the sentence of condemnation passes upon all unbelievers.

Now here fall in two notable questions.

1. Question. Whither faith were not required in the Covenant of works? Whether
faith were not required in the Covenant of works. How faith was rerequired.


Sol. To this I answer three things.

1. Faith was required in the Covenant of works, as Faith may be taken, either
for a dependence on God the only Author of being and blessing, or for an
expectation of that good of life, which God promised with a reliance upon God
for it; or for a persuasion of Gods love to him, and acceptance of his
obedience whilst continuing upright with God. As to these considerations of
faith, Adam (who lived under the Covenant of works) had faith, and did exercise
it: for he was bound to acknowledge God as the only fountain of his good, and
to depend upon him as so: And he was bound to believe the possession of that
life which God promised to him, whilst he should continue perfectly obedient:
and likewise he was bound to be persuaded of the love of God unto him in that
course of obedience, and also the acceptance of his obediential services unto
God.

2. But that faith which respected the Covenant of works, was different from
that faith which respects the Covenant of grace, and is now required. For, 1.
How not required.
That faith was such as looked on a promise of life made by God to a perfect
creature, and as so continuing; but that faith which respects the Covenant of
grace, looks upon the promise of God in Christ, made in respect to us sinners,
and lost in our selves.

2. That faith looked on God as a creator, and preserver, but this faith looks
on God as a Redeemer, and merciful Father.

3. That faith was natural, concreated with Adam, not raised, nor infused in a
Gospel-way: but this faith is now promised, and infused in a supernatural way,
by the Spirit of Christ, through the dispensation of the Gospel.

4. That faith could not be at all in any, but so long as he was perfectly
righteous; and therefore it ceased upon the cessation of that righteousness;
it was principally grounded upon inherent Righteousness. But, this faith is in
a sinner, who has no righteousness of his own, but relies upon the
righteousness of another, even the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

3. Although there was a kind of faith in Adam under the Covenant of works,
Faith not required in both, for the same end.
yet that faith was not for this end and purpose, to be the condition of that
Covenant. There it was a part of his righteousness, but was not stipulated as
the condition of life, as that upon which his life and justification did
depend. But the faith required in the Covenant of grace, comes in purposely as
the condition of life, and justification for the sinner.

2. Quest. Whither the Covenant of grace does not require works, as well
Whether the Covenant of grace requires works. Works are required in both.
as the Covenant of nature or of works; If so, what difference is there then
between them as to doing?

Sol. Questionless, the Covenant of grace requires good works. This is a
faithful saying (says Paul, Tit. 3. 8.) and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which believe in God, might be careful to maintain
good works; these things are good and profitable unto men. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, Matthew. 5. 16. But yet
there is a vast difference betwixt the good works as required in the Covenant
of works, But with a difference.
and as required in the Covenant of grace.

They differ in their spring and fountain, and they differ in their manner of
Wherein this difference lies.
working; but herein especially they differ as to these Covenants; that in the
one, they are a condition of life; but in the other, Testimonies and Evidences
of life; in the one, they are the matter of life and justification; in the
other, they are nothing at all; they are no part, no reason, they have no
intrest or hand at all in the justification of a sinner; Faith (therein) wholly
excludes them, and fixes only on the righteousness of Christ. Although they
are always present in the justified man, yet they are never present in his
justification before God.

6. The Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace do differ thus; The In the
one, the least sin undoes the sinner.
least sin undoes the sinner under the Covenant of works, but it does not so in
the Covenant of grace. The Covenant of works passes sentence against you, upon
the least obliquity; Cursed is every one that continues not in every thing to
do it; and you have no remedy against this sentence in the Covenant of works:
But it is not so in the Covenant of grace. This is a Remedy, and a Sanctuary,
and a City of Refuge, against the sentence passed in the Covenant of works. In
the other there is a remedy.
If the condemned and distressed sinner, can fly unto, and reach to the
Covenant of grace, Christ will satisfy for him, and make his peace, and
procure mercy for him. Nay, the Covenant of grace deals more favorably with
us; It does not cast us out for every transgression, but as a father pities his
child that serves him, so does the Lord pity them that fear him, Psalm. 103.
13. Unless we utterly violate the Covenant of grace, we may yet find grace and
mercy. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

7. The Covenant of works, if we could attain unto it, would now be matter The
one would be matter of glorying in our selves.
of glorying in our selves; If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof
to glory, Romans 4. 2. The elder brother (who represented these workmen) how did
he boast himself? These many years did I serve thee, neither transgressed I at
any time thy Commandment, etc. Luke 15. 29. I am not as other men, said that
proud Pharisee; you might have challenged life by a debt, by the Covenant of
works; To him that works, is the Reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt,
Romans 4. 4. You might have earned happiness, if I may so speak, at your fingers
ends, and might have demanded your wages after you had done your work; But, the
Covenant of grace cuts off all boasting, and glorying The other cuts off all
boasting
in our selves. Where is boasting then? it is excluded; by what Law? of works;
nay, but by the Law of faith, Romans 3. 27. And Jesus Christ is made unto us of
God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; That according as
it is written, he that glories, might glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. You
cannot glory in your wisdom, for that you have from Christ; nor in your
sanctification, for that you have from Christ, etc. you have all from Christ,
therefore all your glorying must be in Christ.

There is a twofold glorying, one in the Testimony of conscience; this you may
have who are under the Covenant of grace, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Another is A twofold
glorying.
in the confidence of our own works. This the Covenant of grace does utterly
exclude. God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ; Gal. 6. 14. All is of grace; by the Covenant of grace, all is given,
and freely given. Christ is given, and grace is given, and mercy is given, and
life is given, and salvation is given; and therefore all boasting and glorying
in our selves, is excluded by the Covenant of grace.

8. They differ thus; The Covenant of works breeds terrors and fear, and The
one breeds fear and terror.
despair; If a man expect life by it, his heart must sink within him,
considering how short he is of that righteousness therein required for life,
as also that abundance of unrighteousness in himself, exposing him to wrath,
from a just God.

But the Covenant of grace, is a ministration of life and peace, and joy, and
The other is a ministration of life.
boldness; you have here a sure refuge to fly unto, a sure Rock to stand upon,
and a sure Anchor to trust unto.

9. There are many other differences between them; as the impossibility of
Other differences summed up.
life by the one, as the case now stands; and the certainty of life by the
other; and the diversity of life promised in the one, from that in the other;
and a difference in respect of the seals for the one, and for the other; And a
difference in respect of extent. The Covenant of works was with all men, but
this with believers only. And a difference in respect of Appeals; though you
may appeal from the Covenant of works to the Covenant of grace, yet there is no
appeal from the Covenant of grace, etc. But I shall not stay any longer upon
this first particular, only by the way make some few Uses from the
consideration of both these Covenants.

1. Use. In what a miserable condition are all unbelievers, and impenitent
persons, who are strangers and forreiners to the Covenant of grace, enemies to
Christ, and therefore utterly disinterested in the Covenant of grace. Surely,
In what a miserable condition are all unbelievers.
mercy is not to be found in any other Covenant but in this. In the Covenant of
works you are condemned and accursed, by reason of transgression; your lives
are forfeited, you are under the curse (cursed is every one, etc.) Neither does
the Covenant of works mitigate or reverse, or alter the sentence: It admits of
no mercy at all. Mercy which is the only remedy against it, is found only in
the Covenant of grace. There is the Throne of grace set up, and there is the
Mercy-seat to be found. But unbelievers, because they refuse Christ; and
impenitent sinners because they choose their sins, exclude themselves from
Christ and from this Covenant of grace; and therefore they shall live and die
accursed and condemned men.

2. Use. See and admire the infinite goodness of God in making this Covenant
Admire the goodness of God in making this Covenant of grace.
of grace, not insisting on the other Covenant of works, not holding us unto
it; to take us as it were out of the hand of justice, and to put us into the
hand of mercy; not to sue the old bond, but to make a new treaty, that so he
might pardon our former transgressions; What infinite goodness was this! Oh!
this was exceeding pity, and exceeding kindness, and exceeding goodness, to
take off the yoke of bondage, and to bring us into the bond of a new Covenant;
to set up a Mediator, to make another Covenant where we might yet find life,
mercy, and peace; not to deal with us in justice, but in mercy; not according
to the desert of our doings, but according to the riches of his grace in Christ.

3. Use. Here is singular support unto troubled consciences: unto all who are
Here is support for troubled consciences.
wounded with the sense of their sins, and of their own inability to satisfy
Gods justice; and of their utter unworthiness of mercy; Indeed if you look
into the Covenant of works in this condition, there is no comfort for you, no
help for you, no hope for you; That Covenant speaks not one word of grace, of
mercy, of peace, of hope at all; but if it sends you sinners, it pronounces
you cursed. Yet in this case, if you look to the Covenant of grace, there is
hope and help: The Covenant of grace looks not at the righteous, but at
sinners; and it holds out a satisfaction made by Christ, which could never be
made by the sinner; and as it has mercy for sinners, so it communicates that
mercy freely unto every mourning, brokenhearted, penitent, and believing
sinner; yea, it does not only comprehend mercy, but every grace which makes us
capable of mercy, and that to be freely given by God to them that seek him.

4. Use. Take heed of resting upon your own works, of seeking life and
justification Rest not upon your works.
from them, and for them; this is to set up the Covenant of works, and this is
to seek life and justification in a way where it is impossible for a sinner to
find it, and you utterly overthrow the Covenant of grace by it. The Covenant of
works (by which if you will be justified) supposes personal, perfect and
steadfast righteousness; neither admits it of any repentance, nor will it make
a new composition with you after your sinnings; but as it will clear and acquit
you upon perfect and steadfast righteousness, so it will unalterably condemn you
for any unrighteousness.

5. Use. By no means slight nor neglect Christ any longer, but hearken Slight
not Christ any longer.
to his voice, consider and embrace his offers; he is the door at which you
must first enter, if you would be interested in the Covenant, and by him you
must be delivered from the Covenant of works. Grace and truth, mercy and peace,
love and life are by Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IV. The proper nature of the Covenant.
THe proper nature of the Covenant of grace, in the absolute consideration
thereof; this I shall lay down in this description of it.

The Covenant of grace is a new compact or agreement, which The Covenant
described.
God made with sinful man, out of his own mere mercy and grace, wherein he
promises that he will be our God, and that we shall be his people; and
undertakes to give everlasting life, and all that conduces thereunto, unto all
who believe in Christ.

There are diverse things considerable in this description, which I desire And
opened.
to open.

1. This Covenant is a new compact and agreement betwixt God and man; There was
another agreement before this; a Covenant of another nature, and upon other It
is a new Covenant with man.
terms and considerations, and for another end: But man stood not to that
agreement, he did voluntarily transgress it, and thereby deprived himself of
all the benefits promised in that Covenant, and fell under that death and
curse, which God had threatened for the breach and transgression of it: Now the
new Covenant is (as it were) a plank after that shipwreck; It is another
Indenture for life: it is not the same agreement renewed, nor the former Lease
or Bond renewed, but a new one, of another kind and nature, made with man in
another condition and capacity, and upon another condition.

God (presently) made a new Covenant, or agreement with fallen man, different
from the former made with created righteous man. If he had not done so, If it
had not been so, All mankind had been lost.


1. All mankind had been eternally lost: Sinful man could never have been
recovered, never have been restored to life, but by a Covenant of grace;
nothing but grace can recover the lost sinner. Romans 3. 19. Every mouth must be
stopped, and all the world become guilty before God. Ver. 20. Therefore by the
deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight, for by the
Law is the knowledge of sin.

2. The Lord had lost all the glory of his mercy, if he had left us to the
sentence God had lost all the glory of his mercy.
of the first Covenant. Indeed there his justice, and wrath, and severity had
been exceedingly magnified, but his mercy had not risen and appeared at all
unto us, had not God made this new Covenant with us, being become sinners, and
so fit objects of his mercy.

Now the intent of God was to exalt his mercy, and that man should know the
greatness and exceeding riches of it; and therefore God was pleased to make a
new treaty, this Covenant of grace.

3. There had been no news of a Christ, nor thought of him else. As Christ
There had been no news of a Christ.
is never effectually given unto any, but unto the lost; so he was never made
known until the fall of man. And remember it, That as Christ was not, so he
could not be revealed in a Covenant of works, whilst life was held by that
tenure. Christ is not to be found there, where life is claimed by a
righteousness of our own; he is only to be found in a Covenant of grace, which
gives life unto sinners upon the righteousness of another. Romans 3. 21. But now
the righteousness of God without the law is manifested. Ver. 22. Even the
righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon
all that believe.

These are the principal reasons, why God made a new Agreement, another
Covenant, a Covenant of grace with sinful man; namely, because he would not
lose all mankind, nor leave them despairing; and, Because he would exalt his
own mercy, and likewise give his Son Jesus Christ, and lay upon his shoulders,
the Redemption and salvation of his people.

2. This Covenant is such an agreement with sinful man, as springs and rises
^is Covenant springs from the mercy and grace of God.
from the mercy and the grace of God; Hence you have these expressions;
According to his mercy he saved us, Tit. 3. 6. By grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.
5. That in the ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his grace,
in his kindness toward us through Christ, ver. 7. This Covenant may be
considered Mercy and grace appears in this Covenant.
several ways, and in all of them, you may see the mere mercy and grace of God.

1. In respect of the constitution of it: Nothing out of God, and nothing in
God but his mere mercy and his own grace, laid out and appointed this In the
constitution of it.
Covenant of grace with sinners: Grace was the foundation of it.

2. In respect of admission: It is the mere mercy and grace of God which In
admission to it.
opens the door, and takes in the sinner into this Covenant with himself. I
will love them freely, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy.

3. In respect of dispensation. All the communications from it, and all the In
the dispensation of it.
impartings of the treasures of it, are the flowings of mercy, and the
overflowings of the grace of God.

But I am now only to speak of the mercy and grace of God, as the foundation,
Mercy is the foundation of it. For,
the causa impulsiva; these alone are the moving cause, why God made this new
Covenant. For,

1. There could be no cause or reason in us: we were become sinners, we were
There could be no cause or reason in us.
become miserable. Ezekiel. 16. 6. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in
thy blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live: yea, I said unto
thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live. Ver. 8. Now when I passed by thee, and
looked upon thee, Behold, thy time was the time of love, and I spread my skirt
over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into
Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine, says the Lord. This was our
condition, a sinful, polluted, loathsome condition, when God set his love upon
us, and entered into a Covenant with us.

2. There was sufficient and pregnant cause on our part, why the Lord should
There was cause in us to the contrary.
never have looked after us, or accepted of us any more. Jer. 3. 7. They say,
If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shall
he return unto her again? Surely, if a woman commit adultery, it is a mere act
of favor, if her husband accepts of her again: We brake the Covenant of our
God, and therefore the Lord might have given us a bill of divorce for that
transgression; but instead thereof to offer terms of life and love, oh, this
was this very mercy, and this very grace!

3. Nay, more than this; when we had thus sinned, and injured God, and Yet God
gives us a better estate upon better terms.
forfeited all, deserving nothing but rejection and curse, then for God to draw
a Covenant which continued a better estate for us, and upon better terms for
us; what is mercy? and what is grace, if this be not!

SECT. I.
3. THis Covenant of grace, is such a compact wherein God promises, That In
this Covenant God promises to be our God, and that we shall be his people. It
is a Covenant of promise.
he will be our God, and that we shall be his people.

Here are three things observable.

1. That this Covenant is a Covenant of promise, altogether of promise; God
therein promises all that does concern himself or us. There are many things in
it which do concern himself, and many things which do concern us, and they are
all of them under promise. The rewards (if I may so call them) on his part, of
life, and mercy, and grace, and salvation, they are all promised; and the
services, qualities, duties, on our part, in reference unto him as our God, are
also promised by him. What he will perform, and what we are to perform,
although they be different things, yet in this Covenant both of them are
promised; He promises to love us, and he promises that we shall love him; He
promises, that he will forgive our sins; and he promises, that we shall
repent of our sins; He promises that he will help us; and he promises, that
we shall walk in his Satutes; He promises that he will save us; and he
promises that we shall believe to the saving of our souls.

In the other Covenant of works, there God promises life, and man promises
obedience; God was to perform his part, and man was to perform his part, and
man's performance depended upon his own strength: But in this Covenant, God
promises all, and he undertakes all; He undertakes to give all that he
promises, and promises to give all that he requires. I will give a new
heart; I will cause you to pass into the band of the Covenant; I will cause
you to know me, to trust in my Name, to love me, to feate me, to walk in my
Statutes, and to do them: He will subdue our iniquities, etc.

2. In this Covenant, he promises that he will be our God. I will establish He
promises to be our God.
my Covenant betwixt me and thee, and thy seed after thee, to be God unto thee
and to thy seed after thee, Genesis 17. 7. This is the Covenant that I will make
with the house of Israel, etc. I will be their God, etc. Jer. 31. 33. And I
will be their God, (...). 11. 20. They shall say, The Lord is my God, Zachariah
13. 9.

This one thing which God promises (I will be your God) it is as one Paraeus
in Genesis 17.
rightly speaks, Anima foederis, the very soul of all the Covenant: It is summa
Foederis, the excellency, the very quintessence of it. It is far more than
that, I will pardon you; than that, I will help you, I will bless you; or
that, I will save you. As Christ spoke concerning that command of loving the
Lord with all thy heart, this is the great Commandment; So may we say of this
part of the Covenant of this promise, I will be your God; it is the great part
of the Covenant, it is the great promise of the Covenant of grace: Indeed it is
the sum of all; All is contained in it; and therefore David said, Happy is
that people, whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144. 15.

Quest. But some may demand, What great matter is comprehended in this, What is
comprehended under it.
when God says in the Covenant, I will be your God? I will be a God to you: Is
he not the God of the whole world? Is he not a God to all the people of the
earth.

Sol. I answer, That he is so, he is the God of the whole earth, and there is
no God besides him; He is a God to all the creatures, in respect of their
production, they were all made and formed by him, they are the work of his
hands; And in respect of preservation, In him we live, and move, and have our
being, Act. 17. 28. There is a Relation betwixt him and all creatures: But this
is inconsiderable in comparison of this Covenant Relation unto his people,
wherein he says, I will be a God to you, or your God. This relation is of all
other the highest, and nearest; as when a man promises unto a woman, I will be
a husband unto you; this takes in love, and nearness, and care, and
maintenance.

There are four things comprehended in this. Four things comprehended in it.
Reconciliatio^.


1. Reconciliation unto you. I will be your God i. e. I will be reconciled to
you, I will never be an enemy to you; All enmity betwixt you and me is at an
end, I accept of you into a state of love, my love is toward you, you have
found grace in my sight, I will marry you unto my self in loving kindnesses; my
love shall rest upon you.

2. Donation of himself. I will be your God, i. e. I will bestow my self upon
Donation of himself.
you: you shall have a propriety in me; I am God, even thy God, Psalm. 50. 7.
This God is our God, Psalm. 48. 14. He gives himself (as it were) into your
possession, into your hands: As when the Indenture is drawn and sealed, the
land falls into your pocket: and therefore, whenever you find him
covenanting, you find him (as it were) giving away himself, granting a right
unto himself, and a possession and enjoyment of himself. After the Lord had
made a Covenant with Abraham, he thereupon styles himself the God of Abraham,
and so the God of Isaac, and of Jacob, and of Israel; and thus making a
Covenant with all the faithful, he thereupon is theirs, their God, and their
Father. They have as much right unto him, and propriety in him, as the wife in
and to the husband, who becomes hers by a Covenant of Marriage. My Beloved is
mine, and I am his. This is a wonderful truth, that God (in the Covenant of
grace) gives himself: Consider God,

1. Either Essentially, in his eternal, self-sufficient, holy, blessed,
infinite, glorious Being and Attributes: as thus considered he is yours, makes
all over unto you really.

2. Or, Personally, as a Father; He is your Father, John 20. 17. I am a Father
to Israel, Jer. 31. 9. As the Son, as God manifested in the flesh, he is your
Christ; Christ gives himself to be yours. And as the holy Ghost, so also he is
yours. Oh what a Covenant is this, wherein the covenanted have such a
propriety. The eternal God is my God; The All-sufficient God is my God; The
holy Ghost is my God; The merciful God is my God; The omnipotent, loving,
gracious God is my God; and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is my Father;
and Jesus Christ, God the Son is my God; and God the holy Ghost is mine. I
have an interest in him and them, and I have a communion and fellowship with
them.

3. Engagement of himself, with all that he has, and all that he can do. What
Engagement of himself.
a God can be or can do for your good; Thus far does God engage unto his
people when he makes a Covenant with them to be their God; he makes over
himself, and all, by bond unto you: what I am, I am to you, and for you; and
what I have or can do, it shall be for you. I am the holy God, I will be
Holiness to you; I am the merciful God, I will be merciful to your
transgressions; I am the gracious God, I will show favor to you, and will
freely love and bless you; I am the All-sufficient God, and I will be a Sun
and a Shield unto you; I am the Omnipotent God, I will up old you by the right
hand of my power; I am All, and will be All in All unto you; I am God blessed
for ever; and I will be Blessedness to you; for my Covenant with you, is the
engagement of my self, and of all good unto you.

4. Perpetuity. I will be a God unto you, or I will be your God in a Covenant
of Grace; it is as if he should say, I will be a God unto you, as long as I am
God; Perpetuity.
I am God for ever; and I will be your God for ever. This God is our God for
ever and ever, Psalm. 48. 14. I will love you and bless you for ever. Did I not
say aright, when I told you, that Gods engaging of himself to be our God in the
Covenant, was the soul, the life, the sum of the Covenant? what can we have
more, or desire more? A God to be our God, a merciful, gracious, blessed,
blessing God, to be our merciful, gracious, our blessed, our blessing God, and
all this as long as he is God, for ever, and for ever.

3. In this Covenant he promises, that we shall be his people, Jer. 31. 33. I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. So Ezekiel. 11. 20. They shall be
He promises we shall be his people.
my people, and I will be their God. Zach. 13, 9. I will say It is my people,
and they shall say The Lord is my God. This is the Covenant; This mutual
engagement on either side is it, I will be your God, and you shall be my
people. This is a Marriage, I will be your Husband, and you shall be my wife: I
take you to to be my Husband; and I take you to be my wife; This Reciprocal
consent, and this Reciprocal agreement, Thou shall be mine, and I will be
thine; Thou shall be for me, and I will be for thee, Hos. 3. 3. this makes the
marriage: So the Reciprocal acceptance, consent, and agreement betwixt God and
us makes up the Covenant between us, in the very formal and vital nature of it.

Here are two questions unto which I would speak a few things.

you shall be my people; or what it is to be a people in Covenant with God.
What it is to be a people in Covenant.


As there is some singular thing in that Covenant expression, I will be your
God, or I will be a God to you; So there is some special thing in that Covenant
expression likewise, you shall be my people, or you shall be to me for a
people: And if I mistake not, there are three things in it.

A Separation; you shall not be any others, nor for any other but for my self;
Three things in it. A separation.
and this is expressey declared, Deuteronomy. 29. 12, 13. That thou should enter
into Covenant with the Lord thy God -- That he may establish thee to day for a
people unto himself: and chap. 7. 6. The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a
sp^cial people unto himself; and chap. 16. 6. The Lord has chosen thee to be a
peculiar people unto himself. 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Come out from amongst them, and
be ye separate says the Lord -- And I will be a Father unto you, and you shall
be my sons and daughters, says the Lord God Almighty.

2. A dedi^ation of our selves to God. A kind of consecration, wherein we
choose him to be our God, and bind our selves to him to be his. A willing A
dedication of our selves to God.
choice, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God --
verse 18. And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people.
Isa. 63. 19. We are thine, thou never barest rule over them, they were not
called by thy name. Isa. 64. 9. Behold, see we beseech thee, we are all thy
people. Psalm. 116. 16. Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant. Psalm.
119. 94. I am thine, save me, etc.

3. An obligation to hearken unto him, to obey him, and to walk with him. An
obligation to obey him.
Deuteronomy. 27. 9, 10. Take heed and hearken O Israel; this day thou art become the
people of the Lord thy God, Thou shall therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy
God, and do his c^mmandments, and his statutes which I command thee this day.
Jos. 24. 22. Ye are witnesses against your selves that you have chosen the Lord
to serve him; and they said, we are witnesses.

How we come to be his people, whether by any voluntary act of our own, or How
we come to be Gods people in Covenant.
by the sole effect of his grace, because he says, ye shall be my people.

For the resolution of this, know, that the Covenant may be considered two ways.

As to the Platform of its constitution: which shows of what form the
contracting is, when God declares that he as a God makes over himself unto his
The Covenant may be considered As to the Platform of its constitution. As to
the real execution of it
people and his people make over themselves unto him.

2. As to the real and effectual execution of this, in an actual and mutual
acceptance of each other, and obligation of themselves to each other. Thus
considered, you must distinguish betwixt the act of voluntary consent in the
people or persons covenanting with God, and betwixt the cause of that willing
consent, election and estimation; There is a voluntary consent in all the
people of the Covenant, They do take the Lord to be their God, and they do
resign, surrender up, and give themselves to be his people, and agree to walk
with him; But then this arises not from their own power and ability, but only
from the love and power of the Grace of God, who in effectual vocation, does
not only say You shall be my people, but also makes them so to be; They become
his people, but he makes them willing to be so; They agree to all that he
requires, but it is because he enables them so to do.

Before I pass from this, I shall make some Use of it.

Use 1. Is this the New Covenant, That God is to us a God, and that we are to
him a people? That he promises that he will be our God, and we promise that we
will be his people? and is this the vital and chief part of the Covenant, that
This is matter of admiration.
God is, and will be our God? Oh then, what matter of admiration is this? What
wonders of love and kindness are manifested in this! Judas (not Iscariot)
wondered at the peculiar manifestations of Christ unto the Disciples, John 14.
22. What is the cause that thou will show thy self to us, and not unto the
world! And David wondered at Gods Promise to establish his house and throne for
ever before him, 2 Samuel 7. 16. Then went King David and sat before the Lord,
and he said, Who am I O Lord God! and what is my house that thou have brought
me hitherto! verse 18. And this was yet a small thing in thy sight Oh Lord God,
but ^hou have spoken of thy servants house for a great while to ^ome; and is
this the manner of man Oh Lord God! verse 19. And Moses wondered at the great
work of Providence in the deliverance of Israel, and drowning of Phar^oh, Who
is like unto thee O Lord amongst the gods, who is like thee! Glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders, Exodus 15. 11. All these things,
and many more there are, which afford wonder and admiration to us; But this one
thing, that God is our God, and that he promises in the Covenant to be our
God, and that we shall be his people, is of all other the most amazing truth,
and the most wonderful goodness; Behold what manner of love the Father has
And is most wonderful.
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God, 1 John 3. 1.
This is most wonderful, whether you consider, 1. God himself. 2. Or our selves.
Or, Whether we consider
3ly. The comprehensive efficacy of this. Or, 4ly. Other things in comparison
with this. Or, 5ly. The fullness of it.

1. If you consider God himself. In himself, he is the Almighty God, the God
himself.
great possessor of heaven and earth, the eternal God, infinite in holiness,
and wisdom, and power, there is no end of his greatness: He is the Lord, the
Lord merci^ul, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth,
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, a God high above all gods.

Now what wonder is it, that this God will so far abase himself as to become
our God, to give himself, and to bestow himself upon us, and to own us for his
people, his peculiar, his choice treasure.

2. If you consider us in our selves: What is man that thou art mindful of Us
in our selves.
him! or the son of man that thou visitest him! says David, Psalm 8. 4.
Much more wonderful is it to say, What is sinful man, that thou regardest him!
or what is fallen man, that thou should enter into Covenant with him! It was
much that the great God should make a Covenant with man in the state of
innocence; it is much more that he should renew a Covenant with him in the
state of enmity: for the righteous God to covenant with righteous man, is not
so wonderful, as for the holy God to make a Covenant with unholy man: To be a
friend unto a friend is much less than to be a friend unto an enemy: To show
favor to one who never deserved wrath, is inferior to this, viz. to show the
greatest kindness to one who deserves the greatest wrath, and utter rejection.
As to requite evil for good, is the greatest ingratitude; so to return good for
evil, is the greatest kindness.

3. If you consider the comprehensive efficacy of this, that God is to us a God
The comprehensive efficacy of this.
in Covenant. This comprehends in it, all good, all love, all mercy, all
blessings whatsoever. If God be our God, all good must be our good: heaven and
earth are settled upon you: all is given unto you, when God gives himself unto
you: He is your Sun, and your Shield; He will give grace and glory, and no
good thing will he withhold. How wonderful is this, that God should be our God
in a Covenant of grace! We wonder at Adams interests, and possessions: But the
interests and enjoyments of the sinner, being brought into this Covenant with
God, as they are more certain and stable, so they are more high and full. You
are now interessed in such mercies, and in such fruitions which Adam never did,
or could taste of in his original state of righteousness. All other gifts in
comparison with this.


4. If you consider all other gifts in comparison with this gift, I will be
your God. The gifts which God bestows upon his people, are very many, and very
rich, yet none of them is comparable unto this gift of himself in Covenant.
None of his earthly and temporal gifts; these are lower than his spiritual and
eternal gifts: they are far short of them, and therefore far short of God.
The least spiritual gift transcends all earthly and temporal gifts. And none of
his spiritual gifts, I say none of these is to be matched or compared with
himself. Grace is not such a gift as the God of grace: Mercy is not such a gift
as the God of mercy: Peace is not such a gift as the God of peace: Nor
holiness, as is the God of holiness: Nor happiness, as is the God of
happiness: No, nor Christ himself; for the end of giving of Christ is to bring
us unto God, to the enjoyment of him; and surely the end for which any thing is
given, is above the means for which it is given.

5. If you consider the fullness of this, That God gives himself unto us to be
our God. It is the uppermost, and it is the utmost of all Donations: As there
is nothing better, so there is nothing more to be given. God cannot give you a
greater, nor a better, nor any more good, when he has given unto you himself.
It is as much as you must, and as much as you can expect and desire; you cannot
have more on earth, and you cannot have more in heaven. The enjoyment of God
himself for our God, is All. And now tell me whether this be not-wonderful and
amazing, that such a God should give himself to such miserable, poor, loathsome
and unworthy sinners in such a gracious Covenant.

Use. 2. Is this the Covenant of grace (at least the most noble and vital part
of Try our selves whether we be in Covenant with God.
it) that God is our God, and that we are his people? then let us try our
selves whether we be within this Covenant of grace, yea or no. Can you (upon
good grounds) say, This God is our God, or the Lord is my God; My God, and my
Lord, and my Father. Laban could say, the God of your Father, ^en. 31. 29. and
Pharaoh could say, entreat the Lord your God, Exodus 10. 17. but neither of
these could say, the Lord my God. You read of some to whom the Lord speaks, Ye
are not my people, and I will not be your God, Hos. 1. 9. and the Apostle
speaks of some, who were strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. This is one difference
betwixt the Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace, that the one is
universal, extending to all mankind, but the other is particular, and is
restrained only to Believers: There is no distinction of persons in the one,
but there is a limitation of persons in the other. God is not a God (in a
Covenant of grace) unto all, nor can all look on him and own him as their God
in Covenant.

Now because this is a very weighty business, I shall therefore propound four
things to discourse upon. 1. Some clear characters of such people who (as yet)
have not the Lord to be their God in Covenant. 2. The extreme misery and
infelicity of such persons. 3. The infallible evidences by which you may know
that the Lord is your God in the Covenant of grace. 4. The admirable comforts
proper to those who can (upon that account) say, that God is to them a God, and
that the Lord is their God in Covenant.


SECT. II
1. THE Characters of such a people, who as yet have not the Lord to be their
Characters of a people not in Covenant.
God in Covenant. I shall present unto you four of them, viz universal absence.
2. Special disagreement. 3. A contrary league. 4. Positive unbelief.

1. Universal absence of all those covenant-tokens which God always bestows on
them with whom he is a God in Covenant: God is never a God in Covenant
Universal absence.
to any, but some new and excellent qualities are derived from God; even the
excellencies expressed in his Covenant are imprinted in all with whom God is a
God in Covenant. God is a God of the living, and not of the dead: If God be
your God, you are a changed people, another kind of people than in times past
you were. You have new hearts and a new spirit: And an heart is given unto you
to know the Lord, and to love the Lord, and to fear the Lord your God, as he
promises to all with whom he is a God in Covenant: And therefore if no
Covenant grace is to be found in a man's heart, if no change, if no knowledge,
if no love of God, no fear of God, this man cannot say God is my God; he cannot
say God has covenanted with me to be my God. Hence it is that the Apostle
speaking of the Ephesians, as under their natural, sinful condition, being dead
in sins and trespasses, and walking according to the course of the world, and
having their conversation in the lusts of the flesh, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. he
says of them, that at that time they were without Christ, and without the
Covenant, and without God in the world, ver. 12.

Object. It is true, that Renewing Grace is not an Antecedent in the Covenant.

Sol. Yet it is true, that it is a Consequent of the Covenant; It is not a
Cause why God is our God, yet it is an Immediate effect of this when God is our
God: God does not say, If you bring a changed and renewed heart, then I will be
your God; but yet, when God says in Covenant, I will be your God, he says
also I will give you a new heart, etc.

2. Special Di^agreement. In all Covenants drawn up betwixt person and Special
disagreement.
person, there must be a mutual agreement, or else it is not a Covenant,
neither is it binding, neither is there, or can there be a propriety. If a man
offer himself upon such and such terms to be a husband unto a woman, it she
disagree, if she cannot like the person, or his terms, here is no Covenant
betwixt them; she cannot say This man is my husband; so if the Lord offers
himself to be our God, but he and we differ upon terms proposed, he proposes
such terms as we cannot like, and will not yield unto; now it is evident that
he is not our God in Covenant, nor can we say This God is our God. God says, I
am content to be your God; but then you must be content to be holy, Levit. 11.
44. I am the Lord your God, ye shall therefore sanctify your selves, and you
shall be holy, for I am holy. Now if a person replies, but I will not be holy,
of all things whatsoever I cannot abide holiness, I hate it, and I scorn it,
and I will never yield unto it; this person has not God to be his God in
Covenant, for he utterly disagrees, he cannot endure a holy God, and he will
not be holy as God is holy. Again, God says, you would have me to be the Lord
your God in Covenant; If so, then you must obey the voice of the Lord your God,
and do what he commands, Deuteronomy. 27. 10. If you will have me for your God, I must
rule you, and guide you, and prescribe unto you, what to do, and what to avoid;
but if a person replies, I will not have God to rule me, and to order me, I
will do what I think good, and will live as I list; I profess to thee, God is
none of thy God; thou refusest him, and do not come up to his Covenant
proposals. What a silly thing is it, for any of you, to own God for your God,
whilst you utterly disagree with him in his proposals, especially in those
which must necessarily constitute you to be his people? viz. sanctity and
subjection. A contrary League.


3. A contrary League. When the people would make a Covenant that God should be
their God, and him they would serve, mark how it is expressed, Josh. 24. 23,
25. Now therefore put away the strange gods that ar^ amongst you, and incline
your heart to the Lord God of Israel. Intimating that God woul never be their
God, if they would not put away their idols: If a man's heart be in league and
Covenant with any sin, it cannot be in Covenant with God. Did God ever say, I
will be a God to any man who loves his sins, and will not part with them! I
tell you the Lord abhorres that man, and threatens all his curses against him,
and will wound and destroy him that still goes on in his trespasses. And
therefore if any amongst you sets his heart on sin, if he says I love this
sin, and I will not forsake it, (I will not forsake my pride, I will not
forsake my lying, and I will not forsake my slandering, I will not forsake my
drunkenness, or my uncleanness, etc.) by this he may know that God is none of
his God in Covenant, nor is he any of the people in Covenant with God. Thou art
in a contrary Covenant, in a Covenant wherein God will never agree with thee,
Psalm. 50. 16. Unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my
Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou
hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee. There are two Covenants,
unto which if a man cleaves, God is not in Covenant with him; one is the
Covenant of good works, for justification and life: This is inconsistent with
an interest in the Covenant of grace. The other is the Covenant with bad works:
In this thou put'st off God, and rejectest him, and God puts off thee, and
rejects thee: And thou may know that thou art in Covenant with sin, if
thou have a strong affection to it, and do habitually yield a willing
subjection to it.

4. Positive unbelief. When the sinner refuses Christ, will not come to him,
Positive unbelief.
not consent to take and receive him for King, Priest, and Prophet; Ye will not
com^ to me that ^e might have life, John 5. 4. We will not have this man to
reign over us, Luke 19. 14. Christ offers himself, and calls, and entreats,
and promises, but they will not hearken; now, he that will not have Christ to
be his Christ, cannot have God to be his God; For as much as God becomes our
God and our Father only in Christ. By Christ only we are brought near unto him,
and enjoy him as our God in Covenant.

SECT. III.
2. THE extreme misery and infelicity of such persons who have not God The
misery of such who have not God for their God.
to be their God in Covenant. The misery is so great, and so sad, that I know
not well how to express it to you.

1. You are wholly and utterly excluded from all good and happiness. You They
are utterly excluded from all good.
have nothing to do with happiness, nor with any thing conducing to it. There
is a merciful, loving, gracious, blessed God; but thou have no portion in this
God. There is a precious Christ, a mighty Redeemer, and only Savior; but thou
have no propriety in this Christ: There are great and precious promises, there
are tender compassions in God; there are admirable undertakings for all good,
for soul and body: But what are all these to him who is not in Covenant, who
has not God for his God? A man reads a Lease of lands, and goods, and houses;
these are something to the heirs; but what are they to an enemy, or to a
stranger? A person is very great and mighty, etc. but what is this to the woman
who will not marry him? Ah, how sad is this, God has love, and not for me;
has mercy, but not for me; is happiness, but is not so to me! Well did one
cry out Quid est Deus, nisi meus, what is God if he be not my God! If he be not
merciful to me, and good to me, and blessedness to me. They have none to go
unto in any distress.


2. You have none to go unto in any distress and want. In the times of your
distress whither will you fly, or to whom can you go? Wants are upon your
bodies, and there is no creature to help you; anguish is upon your conscience,
and there is no creature to quiet you: Danger is near your souls, and there is
no creature to save you; whither will you go, in life for blessing, or in death
for life? All good is treasured up in the Covenant, and conveyed to them that
have God for their God; you must first have a propriety in God himself, before
you can have a right unto, or a propriety in the good things that are to be had
by God. O but he is no God to thee, he is none of thine, nor has he engaged
himself to thee for any good whatsoever.

3. You are altogether exposed unto all evil. If God be not your God, assuredly
They are altogether exposed to all evil.
then he is your Judge: If he be not your friend, then he is your enemy: If you
be not under his love, you are then under his wrath: If his promises are not
for you, his threatenings are against you: If he be not your loving God in
Covenant, he is your wrathful God out of Covenant: If he be not your pardoning
God in Covenant, he is your condemning God out of Covenant: If you have reason
to expect mercy from him, because he is your God, you have as much reason to
expect judgment from him because he is your God. I will tell you what God is,
and will be to you, if he be not your God in Covenant; He is a just God, who
will render unto you according to your works; He is a holy God, who will loath
you, and abhor and reject you: He is a faithful God, who will certai^ly
execute the fierenesse of his wrath, and all the evil which he has threatened
in his Word against you, and you shall never escape that judgment; it shall
certainly befall you, and abide on you to all eternity.

4. Against all this, you have no remedy, no hope. All the hope of a sinner
Against this they have no remedy.
is in a Mediator; but Christ is the Mediator of the Covenant; There is no
Mediator to be found in any Covenant but this of Grace, and this you have no
part in, God is not your God.

SECT. IV.
3. THE Infallible evidences by which we may know that God is our God The
evidences that God is our God in in Covenant.
in Covenant. I will present unto you seven Evidences for this, and I beseech
you to ponder them seriously: You may know that God is your God, and that you
are his people in Covenant.

1. By answerable and reciprocal acts. 2. By inclusive and exclusive interests
and properties. 3. By your choice and peculiar enjoyments, or (at least) your
desires of them. 4. By the subordination and conformity of your hearts unto his
authority and will. 5. By your sweet contentment and satisfaction in the
manifestations of God in any part of his Covenant unto your souls. 6. By your
dependence on God as your God in Covenant. 7. By your Covenant-care and
carriage.
First, You may know that God is your God, and that you are his people, by your
The answerable and reciprocal acts betwixt God and us. On Gods part. His
choosing act.
answerable and reciprocal acts between God and you.

There are four acts which God does express when he becomes our God in
Covenant.

1. There is his choosing act; he makes choice of us before any other to be his
people. The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself,
above all the people that are upon the face of the earth, Deuteronomy. 7. 6.

2. There is his loving act. When I passed by thee, and looked on thee, Behold
His loving act.
thy time was the time of love. And I swear unto thee, and entered into Covenant
with thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16. 18.

3. There is his engaging act: He binds himself to be our God, by Promise, His
engaging act.
and by Oath, Ezekiel. 16. I swear unto thee.

4. There is his imparting act: He does in this Covenant bestow himself, and
His imparting act.
all that he has, or can do, upon us. I am thine, and I will bless thee, and
do thee good. And all these acts are free, not compelled; and they are also
fixed acts, never will he reverse or alter them.

Answerable unto these acts of God, are the Acts in such who are the people of
On our part.
God by Covenant: What God acts toward them, they do act by the instinct of
his Spirit toward him. They do also,

1. Choose him before all other to be their God. You have chosen you the Lord
to serve him, Josh. 24. 22. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God,
We choose him.
Deuteronomy. 26. 27. As the wife owns the husband, this is the man on whom her heart
is set, and none but him.

2. Love him; I love the Lord, said David, Psalm. 116. 1. Thou shall love the
Love him.
Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 11. 1. We loved him because he loved us first, 1 John 4.
19. Oh how dear is his presence and his favor to them, how sweet are their
mutual communions?

3. Engage themselves unto him: Many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in
Engage our selves to him.
that day, and shall be my people, Zech. 2. 11. They yield themselves unto the
Lord, (or as it is in the original, they give the hand unto the Lord) 2 Chronicles.
30. 8. As the custom is, when men make a Covenant or Agreement, they strike
hands, or take one another by the hand, arguing hereby their consent and
engagement, as the people in Ezra 10. 19. gave their hands that they would put
away their wives. So in covenanting with God, we give out the hand unto him;
(i. e.) we give up our selves unto him, and bind our selves unto him.

4. Impart themselves, and all that they have, or can do unto him; their hearts
Impart our selves to him.
and lives, and gifts, and services, that God may have all; and draw out your
All, All your hearts, all your graces, all your parts and lives, and estates,
Josh. 24. 17. The Lord is our God. Ver. 24. The Lord our God will we serve.
Romans 14. 7. None of us lives to himself. Verse 8. Whether we live, we live
unto the Lord, etc. Now is it thus with us? have we indeed chosen the Lord to
be our God? and are we engaged unto him, and love him, and own him, and are
become his, and none but his, and have we made over our selves, and all that we
have unto him, and count nothing, no, not our lives too dear for him? The Lord
has passed by thousands, and has set his heart on you; and have you passed by
all others, and set your hearts only on him? But are you sure that you have not
chosen some other Object with him, or before him? only the Lord God is chosen
by you, and set up by you. No sinful object, and no earthly object is set up:
And are you so become his, as that you will be his for ever? you are bound to
him, you cleave unto him; nothing shall part you and your God; no outward
preferments, afflictions, and crosses: do you count it your only happiness to
enjoy him, and your only unhappiness to be deprived of him? do you say, None
but God, none but God? as the Martyr said, None but Christ. But are you so his,
that he is the greatest desire, and the greatest delight, and the greatly
beloved of your souls? Whom have I in heaven but thee? There is none on earth
that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73. 25. Nay, but may the Lord make use of you
as his? If he should say, I must use your wisdom, or your power, or your
authority, or your zeal, or your estate, or your lives, for the service of my
glory: Can you now answer, O Lord, I am thine, I am thy servant, all that I
have is thine, and all that I can do is thine? thou shall command my heart, my
parts, my estate, my life, my All, etc.

2. You may know whether the Lord be your God, and you be his people, By our
mutual interests and properties.
By your mutual interests, and proprieties inclusively, and exclusively; God
has an interest in you, and you have an interest in God: he has a propriety
in you, and you have a propriety in him; in all that he has you have an
interest, and in all that you have he has an interest; what he is, he is for
you; and what you are, you are for him; he is only for you, and you are only
for him: None has that interest in you as God has, if indeed he be your God;
Nay, you have not such an interest in your selves, as God has in you; you are
not your own, you are wholly his, if indeed he be your God, and you be his
people; No Sin can say, You are mine; and no Creature can say, You are mine;
only God can say, You are mine; As in the Covenant of Marriage, none but the
Husband can say, This woman is mine; So if God be our God in Covenant, none can
say, You are mine, but God only. Levit. 20. 26. You shall be holy unto me, for
I the Lord am holy, and have severed you from other people, that you should be
mine. Ezekiel. 16. 8. I entered into Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine.
Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. O sirs! these two words (mine
and thine) make up the Covenant; Nay, if I may be rightly understood, this one
word (mine) makes up the Covenant, when you sum up all, it is in this, God is
mine, he is my God, he is my Lord, he is my Father, he is my friend, he is my
mercy, he is my wisdom, he is my counsel, he is my rock, he is my help, he is
my comfort, he is my hope, he is my salvation, he is my portion, he is my life,
he is my happiness. Domine ubi sunt omnia mea, tuscis, said Paulinus; And when
God looks on any person in Covenant with him, he can say, This person is mine,
he is my child and my friend, and my servant; I have all his heart, and all his
love, and all his hope, and all his trust, and all his delight, and all his
desire, and all his fear, and all his service, etc.

3. You may know whether God be your God, By your choice and pecul'ar By your
choice and peculiar enjoyments.
enjoyments; or (at least) by your desire of them; your Covenant enjoyments;
your desire to enjoy Covenant-mercies and blessings; if God be your God in
Covenant? you do enjoy him, and such things from him as no oath people in the
earth do enjoy; what peculiar things do we enjoy, I will tell you.

1. You enjoy that loving-kindesse, and favor as none else do enjoy: Remember
The loving kindness of God.
me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people, Psalm. 106. 4.

2. You enjoy that pardoning mercy as none else do enjoy; Thou have forgiven
Pardoning mercy.
the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their sin, Psalm. 85. 2.

3. You enjoy that power of renewing grace which none else do enjoy; That Power
of renewing grace.
cleansing from sin, Jer. 33. 8. That subduing of sin, Micah 7. 19. That
freedom from sin; Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are under
grace, Romans 6. 14. That newness of heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26.

4. You enjoy that peace and comfort which none others do enjoy; He will Peace
and comfort.
speak peace unto his people, Psalm. 85. 8. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people,
says your God, Isa. 40. 1. Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion, for lo, I
come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, says the Lord, Zach. 2. 10.

Object. Oh, But we have handly found any of these Covenant enjoyments.

Sol. I answer, every one to whom God is a God in Covenant.

1. Either has expressly found every one of them.

2. Or his great desires, and longings of heart are after these Covenant
enjoyments; O a reconciled God, a loving God, a pardoning God, a sanctifying
God, a Peace-speaking God, etc. above all things else whatsoever, these are
most eminently, and most earnestly, and most constantly to be found in the
hearts desire of that person who indeed has God to be his God; Let the
conscience speak, and bear witness whether this be not so. All you who have
God to be your God, and who are his people this day; Now tell me you who hear
this Sermon, and perhaps think that God is your God, what are your enjoyments,
your portions, your possessions; what Covenant-gift, or work is to be found in
your souls; And what are the great things after which you so pant, and sigh? Is
it the favor of God, is it the mercy of God, is it renewing, and subduing
grace? I have nothing until I have these, and I cannot be satisfied until I
have these. O Lord, be my God; O Lord forgive iniquity, remember me graciously,
love me freely, heal my soul, etc.

4. You may know that God is your God, and that you are his people by your By
the conformity of your wills to Gods Will.
subordination, and by your conformity of your wills to Gods Will; Beloved, the
Covenant betwixt God and us, takes in these two things.

1. Subordination. For it is an agreement betwixt a Superior and an Inferior;
betwixt the great God who is the Lord of all, and poor miserable man, who is
inferior to him, and is to subject himself to his God, as to his Lord and
Sovereign, to be ruled by him, and guided by him.

2. Conformity of will; for it is a Covenant of love, in which both parties
have as it were but one heart, and one mind, and one will between them; and so
in this Covenant [if we have God for our God; and if we be his people] what God
likes, that do we like; and what our God loves, that do we love; and what our
God hates, that do we hate; and what our God wills, that do we will; and what
God would have done, that would we have done. This Covenant is an agreement,
and mutual consent in all things; It will not permit us to give limits to God,
because he is our sovereign Lord; Nor will it admit contrarieties and
contradictions 'twixt God and us; And therefore in this Covenant, God writes
his law in our hearts; i. e. he puts into our hearts such spiritual principles,
as makes our will delightfully conformable unto his Will.

Alas! if there be an opposition 'twixt our hearts and God, a contradiction in
our minds and wills unto his mind and Will, this enmity plainly testifies, that
he is not our God, and that we are none of his people; if you be at that point,
that your judgment, and your will, and your lusts shall rule, and sway, and
govern, and command, and that God must stoop and yield to your thoughts, and to
your pleasures, and to your wills, etc. But by this it appears that he is your
God, and that you are his people, if God does rule, and you do obey; if he
commands, and you do hearken; if his mind rules your judgment, if his Will
rules your will, if his love rules your love, if his Law rules your lives; O
Lord, what thou love I love, what thou command I approve; good is the Word
of the Lord, the Commandment is holy and just, and good.

5. You may know whether God be your God in Covenant, by the sweet By our sweet
contentment in the manifestations of God to us.
contentment, and satisfaction, in the manifestations of your God in any part
or branch of his Covenant into your souls. If the Lord at any time be pleased
to answer the desires of your souls in Covenant-love, or in Covenant-mercy, or
in Covenant-grace, or in Covenant-strength, or in Covenant-peace; O what a
heavenly satisfaction is this! But a glimpse of the favor of your God; but a
taste of the mercy of your God; never so little of grace or peace which is an
Embassage, a Letter, a Token from God, that he is your God; this is such a life
to you, it is such a rejoicing, it is such a cordial, it is such a sweet day to
your souls; It is a thousand times more than to hear news, that the highest of
earthly preferments is yours, or that the largest of earthly possessions are
yours; Covenant-manifestations are most precious unto all who are in Covenant.
Psalm. 35. 3. Say unto my soul, thou art my salvation.

6. You may know that God is your God, and that you are his people, by your
dependence on God as your God in Covenant; you will go to him, and By our
dependence on God as our God in Covenant.
rest on him in all your occasions; I will cry unto God most high, unto God*
that performs all things for me, Psalm. 57. 2. Thou art my God, early will I
seek thee, Psalm. 63. 1. So, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he
will save us, Isa. 25. 9. I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of
my salvation; my God will hear me, Micah 7. 7, etc. You will go to him and none
else; to your all-sufficient God, to your Sun, and to your shield; Remember
thy Covenant, O my God, which thou have made, and save me, etc. You may know
that God is your God, by your care, and your carriage in walking with him, and
before him, according to the Covenant; I am the Almighty God, walk before me
and be thou perfect, Genesis 17. 1. You are a choice and peculiar people, and you
will lead choice and peculiar lives.

SECT. V.
4. THe comforts from this, that God is our God, and that we are his people: I
Comforts from this that God is our God.
shall propound these, 1. In general. 2. In particular.

1. In the general, it is our happiness, and blessedness, so the Scripture
affirms, Psalm. 33. 12. Blessed is the Nation, whose God is the Lord, and the In
general. This is our Blessedness.
people whom he has chosen for his inheritance. Psalm. 144. 15. Happy is the
people whose God is the Lord. We lost our happiness, when we lost our God; and
we then recover our happiness, when we recover God to be our God; there are
Three things make up a blessedness for us. Chiefnesse of good.
three things necessary to make up a blessedness for us.

1. Chiefnesse of good; Man's happiness must be the best of good. No good
[below man] can be the happiness of man; and therefore man's happiness cannot
be placed in the enjoyment of any created thing whatsoever, (suppose it be any
gracious qualities) because there is a good better than all these, and that is
God himself.

2. Fullness of good; it must be such a good as comprehends all the good
Fullness of good
which the soul of man does or can need and desire, and is capable of; if the
good be too short, and failing, that it is not suitable, or it is not extensive,
if it cannot fully reach unto, and fill up the soul; it is not blessedness,
for blessedness is perfect; it cannot consist with want; now such a good God
only is.

3. Fruition of, and propriety in that good: Objective blessedness may be
Fruition of that good.
without our fruition; but our formal blessedness does consist in our
enjoyment of that blessedness in union with it, and communion of it; and all
these are to be found when God is our God, and when we are his people in
Covenant; That God (who is the chiefest good, and most full and infinite good)
we stand possessed of, and enjoy him as so unto all eternity. This is our God
for ever and ever.

But to speak more exactly to this great truth: give me favor to open three
things unto you, etc.

1. That God is, and that he only is our blessedness. 2. What that is which
makes up our blessedness in God. 3. That every one who has God to be his God,
does enjoy every thing which makes up that blessedness.
1. That God is, and that he only is our blessedness, this will presently
appear God is, and he only is our blessedness, Proved. Blessedness is
perfection. God is perfection.
by these three Arguments.

1. Blessedness is perfection, and it is the chiefest perfection; it raises
our condition, and so raises it, that it cannot be raised any higher or
further; and therefore the Apostle describing the blessedness of the Saints in
heaven, says, that thus the spirits of just men are made perfect, Heb. 12. 24.
But God is perfection, and he is the chiefest perfection; not only as to
himself, but also as to us; that he is perfection to himself, is evident by his
own al-sufficiency, and by his own infiniteness (al-sufficiency is perfection,
and infiniteness is perfection, and independency on any, is a perfection of,
and no it, self) and that he is a perfection, and the chiefest of perfection
unto us is as evident; for,

1. The more or less you enjoy of him, the more, or the less perfect you are;
The more or less you enjoy of God, the more or less perfect.
you climb up to your perfection, as you climb up in your enjoyments of him:
the more that you are brought into a likeness of him, and into a fellowship
with him, and a participation of his grace and love, and glory, the more
perfect you are.

2. The more you do enjoy of him, the less need you will have of other things;
The more you enjoy him, the less need of other things.
And when you come fully to enjoy him, all your needs, and all your wants will
be at an end. As nothing can be added to God, because he is an infinite
perfection; So nothing can be added to our blessedness, besides God himself,
when we come to enjoy him, and therefore he alone is our perfection.

3. He fully makes up the wants of your souls; and therefore he is our
perfection. He fully makes up the wants of our souls.
Survey all the wants and complaints of the soul; he can supply them all; and
all from himself alone; and therefore certainly God is our perfection.

4. Yea, go where you will, and pitch on any objects whatsoever, and In all
other enjoyments, our condition is low without God. Blessedness is our rest.
let them all fall into your possession, yet, is your condition low, imperfect,
needy, unhappy, unless you come to enjoy God; therefore he only is your
perfection.

2. Blessedness is a quietation. It is our rest, our center where our souls
quietly rest, and neither do, nor can move any further. It is our Fathers house
unto which we are traveling, and unto which when we arrive, we are then at our
journies end.

Blessedness is that enjoyment, beyond which we cannot move in our desires,
for any better or further enjoyment: It concludes and puts a full period to all
the motions of the soul; Now God is, and he only is the quiet, rest, and end of
the soul. O Lord, says Austin, My heart was made for thee, God, and he only is
our rest
and never is at re^^ till it come unto thee. There is a restlessenesse in man
in all other enjoyments; his soul rests not, though he enjoyes honors, or
riches, or friends, or health, or liberty; yea, though he enjoyes grace and
comfort; But when he comes to enjoy God himself, now he is at rest; Now he can
say as David, Return to thy rest, O my soul, Psalm. 116. 7. There is no more to
be desired or enjoyed; for blessedness is a complete and fixed satisfaction to
the soul; it fills up all wants, and all desires, and therefore it gives rest
and quiet; and so does God; The Rabbis say, that all the letters in the Name
Jehovah, are litterae quiescentes, letters of rest. Blessedness is that good
which is most desirable.


3. Blessedness is that good which is most desirable, and most delightful; for
it is the greatest goodness, and therefore is most desirable, and because so,
therefore it is the most delightful: It is the end for which all other things
are desired, and it is the full possession of all that we have longed and
waited for. Now God is the most desirable good; He is so in himself, (for he is
goodness God is the most desirable good.
it self, and he is desirable for himself alone, and so is no other good) And
he is so in the hearts of his people: Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there
is none on earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73. 25. And God is the most
delightful good; there cannot be any object whatsoever, which can so please,
and so take, and so affect, and glad and rejoice the heart, as God does; His
manifestations are a very Paradise, and a very heaven in the hearts of his
people; they make them to rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

2. What that is in and from God which makes up our blessedness, or a
blessedness What that is, in and from God, which is a blessedness unto us.
Propriety.
unto us.

There are four things which do it.

1. Propriety. Though God be an infinite blessedness in and to himself, whether
we have any interest and propriety in him or not, yet he is not our blessedness
without propriety; he must be our God, if he be our blessedness. Propriety in
blessedness, is our blessedness. He is rich who has riches, and he is great
who has greatness; the seeing of lands, makes no estate unto us, but the
possession of them, and propriety in them, this does it.

2. Conformity; as our unhappiness consists in dissimilitude (the more unlike
Conformity.
any man is to God, the more unhappy is that man) where nothing of God appears,
there nothing of happiness appears, (for there can be nothing but darkness,
where there is nothing of light.) So on the contrary, our happiness depends
upon similitude with God; The more like we are to him, the more blessed are we.
The Apostle delivers this as our very blessedness, that when he appears we
shall be like him, 1 John 3. 2. Hence it is, that holy persons are styled
blessed persons: Blessed are the pure in heart, Matthew. 5. 8. and holiness is
happiness. Imperfect holiness, is imperfect happiness; and perfect holiness
is perfect happiness. The more holy you are, the more like to God you are; and
the more like you are to him, the more blessed you are. The more you partake of
the Divine Nature, (which is the only blessed Nature) the more do you partake
of blessedness, for God is now the more yours.

3. Union. As dissimilitude with God, hinders God from being our blessedness:
Union.
so likewise does distance from God; this must necessarily be so; for if God be
blessedness, then a distance from God, is likewise a distance from blessedness;
of necessity there must be a nearness; yea, such a nearness as makes a union,
which must make up a blessedness unto us; and indeed here lies our
blessedness, that God unites himself unto us, and we are united to him. He
unites God unites himself to us. By way of donation.
himself unto us,

1. By way of donation; in that he gives himself unto us, even as an husband
gives himself unto the wife, Hos. 2. 19.

2. By way of inhabitation; in that he dwells in us by his Spirit, 1 John 3.
24. By way of Inhabitation.
We know that he dwells in us by the Spirit which he has given us. 2 Cor. 6.
16. I will dwell in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

3. By way of affection; for as we are united to Christ by Faith, so God is By
way of affection.
united to us by love; when he loves us, he joins himself to us (union being
an immediate effect of love) and where he unites himself, there he is a
blessedness.

4. Communion. This Communion of God with us, is our great happiness on earth,
and shall be our everlasting happiness in heaven, and it does consist Communion.
in Gods gracious opening and manifesting of himself unto the soul; not simply
in his loving of us, but especially in the manifesting that love unto us; not
simply in his delight, but especially in manifesting that delight of his in us
toward us, and in the imparting of his goodness to us; and verily in this
communion does our blessedness consist; namely, that God does manifest himself
in love, and grace, and glory to us.

3. That every one who has God for his God in Covenant, does enjoy every
Everyone who has God for his God, does enjoy all these things. He has an
interest in God.
one of these things which makes up blessedness; This so clear, that I shall
not need to insist upon it.

1. He has an interest in God; yea, such an interest that includes propriety;
he can say, This God is my God, and this God is my portion. Psalm. 118. 28. Thou
art my God, and I will praise thee; Thou art my God, and I will exalt thee.
Psalm. 119. 57. Thou art my portion, O Lord. Psalm. 73. 26. God is the strength
of my heart, and my portion for ever. Bernard says, Lord, whatsoever we give
thee, unless we give our selves unto thee, it does not satisfy thee; So we
must say, Lord, whatsoever thou give to us, it cannot satisfy us. It is
somewhat to say, This house is mine, and these lands are mine, and these
parents and friends are mine; but it is infinitely more to say, This God is
mine, this God is my portion. The greater that God is above all others, the
greater is the comfort and the blessedness, that he is mine.

2. He has a conformity unto God: for he now is made partaker of the He has a
conformity unto God.
Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and is changed into the same image, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
He carries the very marks and characters of the holy, merciful, good, patient,
wise, loving God in his soul.

3. He has union with God, and God with him; therefore he is said to be He
has union with God.
married to the Lord. Thy Maker is thy husband, Isa. 54. 5. And to be joined to
the Lord, 1 Cor. 6. 17. God is in him, and dwells in him: His heart is the
Temple of the Holy Ghost; And the Father loves him, John 14. 23. If any man
love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him.

4. He has communion with God; Our fellowship is with the Father, and He has
communion with God.
with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3. The Communion of the holy Ghost be
with you, 2 Cor. 13. 14. Oh what happiness is this! If all that God the Father
will impart, or if all that God the Son will impart, or if all that God the
holy Ghost will impar^* can make you blessed, you have it all. God has
communion with you, and you have communion with him; he loves you; I will marry
you to my self in loving kindness, Hos. 2. 19. and you love him; We love him,
because he loved us first, 1 John 4. 19. He delights in you; Thou shall be
called Hephzibah, for the Lord delights in thee, Isa. 62. 4. and you take
delight in God. God is manifesting himself, and communicating his love and
goodness to you to all eternity.

2. Thus have you the comfort in the general, from this, that God is your
Comforts in particular.
God. I shall now proceed to handle the comforts in particular, which belong
unto you; and they are these. If God be your God,

1. Then you are the particular objects of the eternal love of God, and of all
his gracious, unchangeable and infallible purposes, intentions and thoughts. 2.
Then all the glorious Attributes of God are engaged unto you for good, for your
good, for all your good, altogether for all your good. 3. Then Jesus Christ,
and all the Offices of Christ, and all the works, and all the sweet fruits of
his Redemption, Intercession, and Mediatourship are yours, and for your good.
4. Then the Holy Ghost, and all the excellent and choice works of the Spirit,
his graces, assistance, guidance, refreshings, joys, comforts, sealings, are
your portion and assured possession. 5. Then there is a communion and
conjunction of the whole Trinity, in all the businesses of your eternal
blessedness. 6. Then all the promises of God are yours. 7. Then all the
privileges and immunities annexed to the Covenant of grace, are yours. 8. Then
all is yours.
Greater and better comforts than these, neither men nor Angels can possibly
present unto you. And I desire the rather to discourse of them, that you who
are the people of God, and have chosen him to be your God, and find him to be
so, may know your blessedness, even in this alone, that God is your God: And
that others, who as yet are out of Covenant, hearing the surpassing happiness
of being in Covenant with God, and Gods being in Covenant with us, may be
awakened, excited and allured, to come off from their sins and sinful ways,
and may strive earnestly to enjoy this God for their God, and that they may
become his people.

SECT. VI.
1. IF God be your God, then you are the particular objects of his eternal
love, If God be our God, we are the objects of Gods eternal love, and of all
his gracious purposes.
and of all his gracious and unchangeable, and infallible purposes, intentions,
and thoughts; and so you may safely conclude that you are the vessels of mercy,
on whom God will make known the riches of his glory, Romans 9. 23. The Apostle in
that Chapter discourses of the eternal love and grace of God in election
(which he calls The purpose of God according to election, ver. 11. and his
love, ver. 13. and his having mercy on whom he will have mercy, ver. 15. 18)
and those persons whom he has thus loved and elected, he calls vessels of
mercy before prepared unto glory, ver. 23. Now the question might be, how we may
know whether we be in that number, whether we be the persons on whom that love,
and that election was fixed. This he resolves by our interest in the Covenant,
ver. 24. Even us whom he has called. Ver. 25. As he says also in Hosea, I
will call them my people which were not my people; and her beloved, which was
not beloved. Ver. 26. And it shall come to pass, that in that place where it
was said unto you, you are not my people, where they shall be called the
children of the living God: as if he had said, we know that God has loved us,
and that he has had mercy on us, and that he has elected us; for he has
called us out of our sinful condition, and brought us into Covenant with
himself; he is our God, and we are his people; he is our Father, and we are his
children; we are the children of the living God. Now what an unspeakable
comfort is this, namely, a certain knowledge of the love of God, and of the
election of God, that our names are written in heaven in the book of life, out
of which they shall never be blotted? 1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner of love
the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God!
as if he had said, no love like unto this love; This was wonderful love, that
he should be out Father, and we should be his children. 2 These. 2. 13. We are
bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved of the Lord,
because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation. Mark, the Apostle
judges their election to be a just obligation of continual thanks, that God
should be blessed for that, every day of our lives for ever and ever, because
he has chosen us, and ordained us to salvation. Luke 10. 20. Rather rejoice,
because your names are written in heaven. Oh, to be interessed in that love of
God, out of which Christ comes, and mercy comes, and all our good comes! To be
interessed in that love which is so free, so liberal, so invariable! To be
interessed in that election, which passes by others, but clasps us; which
intends for us no less than eternal glory, which will infallibly bring into us,
all that will bring us unto glory! To be interessed in that election which
begins in choycest love, and ends in fullest blessedness! Certainly, these are
grounds of highest comfort, and of sweetest joy: and in these are all such
interessed, who have God to be their God, and who are his people in Covenant.
These, and noen but they are the beloved and chosen o God.

SECT. VII.
2. IF God be your God, then all the glorious Attributes of God, are engag^d
All the glorious Attributes of God are engaged for their good.
unto you for your good; for when God is our God, then himself as considered in
his essence, and as considered in his attributes or glories, he thus is ours;
God and all that belongs to a God are for us, and for our good. As when the
Covenant of Marriage is finished betwixt the Husband and the wife, now the
Husband is hers, and all that belongs unto the Husband is hers, she shall be
the better for his riches, and for his honors, and for his wisdom, and for
his power, and for his kindness: So when God is our God in Covenant, he is
ours, and all that he has is ours: ours, though not for Denomination (as if he
made us Gods, or made us omnipotent, and infinite, and eternal) yet ours for
fruition: himself and all his attributes, we do and shall enjoy for our good
and benefit.

I will mention some of those attributes of God, and will show you your good of
and by them, and will demonstrate it, that they and all their good are engaged
to all the people to whom God is a God in Covenant.

1. God is al-sufficiency. I am God Almighty (or all-sufficient) says God to
Abraham, God is al-sufficiency, and this is engaged.
Genesis 17. 1. (i. e.) I am an infinitely perfect^fulness to my self, and of my
self; I am absolutely enough, and need or want nothing; and I will be enough, I
will be a fullness to you, you shall not need any other but my self, to supply
you with any good which you shall want, or to secure you from any evil which
you fear. This is al-sufficiency, To be enough, and to be without any want, and
to be enough to us, and to fill up all our wants; and this al-sufficiency, God
does ^ngage himself to be unto every one with whom he is a God in Covenant,
Genesis 15. 1. Fear not, Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.
What is that? It is as much as if he had said, I am thy al-sufficiency, and
will see unto thee, that thou shall have enough, thou shall not want any thing.
Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. Psalm. 34. 9. There is
no want to them that fear him. Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord God is a Sun and shield;
The Lord will give grace and glory, no good thing will he withold from them
that walk uprightly. Now this is the comfort belonging to you, That your God is
al-sufficiency, and he is your al-sufficiency; all that you have comes from
him; and all that you want, shall be supplied by him; and he has enough of his
own fully to help you in any condition, and at any time, and he alone is enough
unto you.

Consider, any want whatsoever (whether spiritual or temporal, whether inward
or outward) your God will be an al-sufficiency to you. Do you want grace? do
you want peace in conscience? do you want the joy of the holy Ghost? do you
want strength against corruptions, or against temptations? God is sufficient
for them all: He can and will give more grace, Jam. 4. 6. He can and will speak
peace unto his people, Psalm. 85. 8. He can and will give you fullness of joy,
Psalm. 16. 11. Exceeding joy, like that in harvest, Isa. 9. 3. and in Isa. 12.
3. With joy shall ye draw waters out of the wells of salvation: and he can and
will be sufficiency against your corruptions; Sin shall not have dominion
over you, for you are under grace, Romans 6. 14. And against your temptations; M^
grace is sufficient for thee; and my strength is made perfect in weakness, 2
Cor. 12. 9. And for any outward want; My God (says Paul in Phil. 4. 19.) shall
supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus: Bread
shall be given him, and his water shall be sure, Isa. 33. 16. The earth is the
Lords and the fullness thereof: If all the earth can help you, you shall not
want any good; nay, if the earth, or means do fail, God himself will not fail
you, but will create good, and help, and salvation for you.

2. God is mercifulness: The Lord, the Lord God merciful, etc. Exodus 34. 6.
The Lord your God is merciful, 2 Chronicles. 30. 9. Turn unto the Lord your God, God
is mercifulness.
for he is gracious and merciful, Joel 2. 13.

Mercifulness or mercy, does especially denote two things in God.

1. One is tender compassion; and therefore the mercies of God are frequently
Mercy denotes in God, Tender compassion.
styled his bowels; (Psalm. 25. 6. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies) or thy
bowels of mercies. So Psalm. 51. 1. According to the multitude of thy bowels of
mercies; and so in the New Testament, Through the bowels of the mercy of our
God, Luke 1. 78. It is remarkable, that the same word in the Hebrew, Chalde,
Syriack, and Arabic, which signifies bowels, is used for mercy: which notes
two things.

1. That the mercies of God to his, are most inward, tender, affectionate
compassions, like the bowels of a father, and of a mother to his dearest
children being in misery.

2. That not only the effects of mercy, are the portion of Gods people, but the
very heart of God acts toward them, and yearns over them: when he shows mercy
to them, mercy comes from his very heart and bowels.

2. Another is, forgiveness of sins; that essential propension in God to
pardon sin, to pass by transgression, to blot out iniquity, and never to
remember Forgiveness of sins.
sin any more. This is the Attribute of God, which is his great glory, and
his great delight, and our only hope and life. There is a depth in this mercy,
more than that in the Sea, and a height in this mercy, above all the thoughts
of men; and a breadth in this mercy; it can pardon many sins, great sins,
abundant sins; and a length in this mercy; it is everlasting, and endures for
ever: This is the mercy, or mercifulness of God! And to enjoy God in this
Attribute (as our merciful God, as pitying, as pardoning us, as forgiving and
forgetting all our sins, and never remembering them any more) O what a comfort,
what a settling, what a joy, and a rest is this!

Consider,

1. It is the great care, and the great desire almost of every man, especially
in distresses of conscience, and times of sickness and death; Be merciful unto
me, O Lord, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. O that my sins were pardoned,
and how shall I get my sins pardoned! He that does not regard the holy, does
yet prize and esteem very much the merciful God. Every sinner does like and
long for mercy.

2. All Controversy is at an end, when mercy pardons sin. Now enmity is
slain, and wrath and curse go off (for these follow sin as unpardoned) but if
sin be pardoned, all punishment is pardoned, and God is reconciled, and your
souls are graciously accepted, and clasped with love and favor.

3. When mercy pardons sin, then conscience is at rest; The broken bones are
at ease and rejoice, Psalm. 51. (True peace follows full remission of sins)
and then joy comes into the heart (Be of good comfort, thy sins are forgive^)
And then confidence of access unto God comes into the soul, and then hope of
salvation is raised in the soul.

Now mark what I say, If God be your God, then he is your merciful God. And God
is your merciful God.
Heb. 8. 10. This is his Covenant, I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people. Ver. 12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their
sins will I remember no more. Isa. 40. 1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people,
says your God. Ver. 2. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her,
that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned. Jer. 33. 8. I
will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned, and whereby they
have transgressed against me. Micah 7. 19. Thou will cast all their sins into
the depth of the sea. Ver. 20. Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the
mercy to Abraham. Six comforts to those who have God their merciful God. He
will forgive you, though not others.


There are six excellent comforts unto you who have God to be your merciful God.

1. That he will forgive you. Though the sins of others are sealed up, and
stand upon record against their souls, yet your sins shall be forgiven. The
sins of others are written, and stand upon record, but yours are blotted out.
He will forgive your great sins.


2. That he will forgive your great sins, as well as your small sins: From
all your filthiness, and from all your Idols, will I cl^anse you, Ezekiel. 36.

3. That he will forgive all your sins, though they have been many, though He
will forgive all your sins.
there has been a multitude of them. Your God (who is rich in mercy, and has
riches of mercy, and multitude of mercies) will abundantly pardon them, Isa.
55. 7.

4. That he will freely forgive them; I am he that blotteth out thy He will
freely forgive them.
transgressions for mine own sake, and I will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43.
25. and Luke 7. 42. He will everlastingly forgive.


5. That he will everlastingly forgive your sins; so forgive them, as never
to mention them more. All his transgressions which he has committed, they
shall not be mentioned unto him, Ezekiel. 18. 22. Though they be sought for, there
shall be none, and they shall not be found, for I will pardon them whom I
reserve, Jer. 50. 20.

6. That your God will certainly do this; I will surely have mercy upon him, He
will certainly do this. God is holiness.
Jer. 31. 20.

3. God is holiness; He is an holy God, Joshua 24. 19. I am the Lord your God,
ye shall be holy, for I am holy, Levit. 11. 44. (Holy, holy Lord God Almighty,
Rev. 4. 8.) Glorious in holiness, Exodus 15. 11.

Gods holiness, is his infinitely pureness without all sin, yea, hating of
it. Being also the cause of all the holiness and purity in the creature.

This is one of the great excellencies and the glories of God; He were not God
if he were not holy; and the more that any one partakes of holiness, the more
excellent is he. Six things affirmed of holiness. It is a glory attributed to
every person in the Trinity. Unto the Father Unto the Son. Unto the Spirit


There are six things which we can affirm of holiness.

1. It is a glory attributed unto every person of the Trinity. It is attributed

Unto the Father: Holy Father, keep through thine own Name, those whom thou
have given me, John 17. 11. Unto the Son, that holy child Jesus, Acts 4. 27.
These things says he that is holy, Rev. 3. 7. Unto the Spirit, who is called
the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 3. 11. and the holy Spirit. Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the
holy Spirit of God

2. It is a glory attributed unto all creatures, and persons, and things of
excellency. It is attributed to all creatures, and things of excellency.
The holy Angels, Matthew. 25. 31. The holy Prophets, Luke 1. 70. The holy
Scriptures, Romans 1. 2. 2 Timothy 3. 15, The great City, the holy Jerusalem
descending out of heaven from God, Rev. 21. 10. Holy men of God, 2 Pet. 1. 21.

And indeed holiness is our glory, and therefore the Spirit of grace is called
the Spirit of glory, Heb. 10. 29. 1 Pet. 4. 14. And they who are styled holy,
Isa. 4. 3. are styled the glory, ver. 5.

3. It is necessary unto glory, unto that glory which shall be revealed, unto
It is necessary unto glory.
the exceedingly exceeding weight of glory, unto that eternal glory, that
heavenly happiness, as a means is necessary to an end; as a lower step to arise
unto an higher. Heb. 12. 14. Follow holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord. 1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this hope, purifieth himself as he
is pure.

4. It is necessary unto your present communion with God. He cannot take
delight in you, nor will he be near you, nor impart himself unto you, unless
It is necessary to our present communion with God.
you be holy. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and
what communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6. 14. You read in the Law,
that all was holy which had a respect unto God; the Altar was holy, and the
Temple was holy, and the offerings were holy, and the persons who offered them
were holy; To intimate unto us that there could or might not be any communion
with the holy God without holiness.

5. It is the pawn and pledge of future glory, the first fruits of the Spirit,
It is the pawn and pledge of future glory.
Romans 8. 23. The earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 22. The sealing of the holy
Spirit is styled the earnest of our purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.

6. It is the distinguishing character of the Covenant. No people are an holy
people, but the people of the Covenant, and all those people are holy, It is
the distinguishing character of the Covenant.
1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye are a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood. Ver. 9. Ye are an
holy Nation, a peculiar people, Isa. 4. 3. He that is left in Zion, and he that
remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy; even every one that is written
among the living in Jerusalem. 1 Cor. 3. 17. The Temple of God is holy, which
Temple ye are.

Now if God be your God, He is and will be your holy God; He will Comforts from
this, that God will be a holy God to you. He will make you holy.
be an holy God unto you, and that affords you many comforts.

1. He will make you holy: (They shall call them the holy people, the Redeemed
of the Lord, Isa. 62. 12.) He will give his holy Spirit unto you, Luke 11. 13.
Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him? Isa. 63. 11. As you read of
Joshuah the High Priest; The Lord said, Take away his filthy garments from him.
Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee
with change of raiment, Zach. 3. 4. So the Lord deals with every person unto
whom he is a God in Covenant; He cleanses them from all their filthinesses (I
will cleanse them from all their iniquities, Jer. 33. 8.) I will sprinkle
clean water upon you, and you shall be clean, Ezekiel. 36. 25. So Ezekiel. 37. 23.
They shall not desile themselves any more with their Idels, but I will cleanse
them, so shall they be my people, and I will be their God.

2. He will increase your holiness: He will sanctify you throughout, 1 These.
He will increase your holiness.
5. 23. (He will give more grace, James 4. 6.) He will strengthen what he has
wrought, Psalm. 68. 28. Holiness is like the waters of the Sanctuary, in Ezekiel.
47. ^. 4, 5. To the ancles, to the knees, and then a river that could not be
passed over. It is the field which the Lord will bless and prosper. It is the
garden he will water. He will end forth judgment unto victory, Mat. 12. 20. 2
Cor. 3. 18. We are changed into the same image, from glory to glory.

3. He will preserve your holiness, and you (being holy) in holiness; To the
end he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness, 1 These. 3. 13. and
He will preserve our holiness.
1 These. 5. 23. I pray God that your whole spirit and soul, and body be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 24.
Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it, Phil. 1. 6. He which has
begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.

4. He loves your holiness, and takes delight in it, for it is his own Image,
and He loves your holiness.
his own work, the fruit of his own grace, the birth of his own Spirit.

5. He will crown your holiness; ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
He will crown our holiness.
everlasting life, Romans 6. 22. Blessed are the poor in heart, for they shall
see God, Matthew. 5. 8. Therefore is holiness called a change from glory to
glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Holiness at first is weak and little, at length it is much
and strong, at last it shall be perfect and glorious. At first it is like a
spark of fire covered with ashes, at length it is like a burning fire, at last
like a flaming fire; at first it is in groans and desires, at length it is in
conflicts and combats, at last it is in victory and glory.

4. God is an Omniscient God; he knows all things whatsoever, and all persons,
God is an omniscient God.
and all conditions, and all the hearts, and all the counsels, and thoughts,
and words, and ways of all men, at all times, and in all places, and that most
clearly and perfectly by his own infinite light; he knows all that is past, and
all that is present, and all that is future, and all that is possible, Heb. 4.
13. There is not any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things
are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

Consider this place (seriously) which declares Gods Omniscience. There is not
any creature that is not manifest in his sight. There be many millions of
millions of creatures, and they be far and near over all the world; but
whatsoever they are, and wheresoever they are, they are manifest in his fight;
though they be hid from us, yet they are known to God; and though they be out
of our fight, yet are they manifest in his sight; they are before his eyes
which run to and fro throughout all the world.

And all things are naked and open to his eyes,] there is no darkness twixt him
and them, no curtain is drawn over his eye; they are as naked to him as the
child which is newly born is unto our eye, or as every pile of grass is
discovered by the Sun at noon day: or as the parts of a diseased body, etc.
Psalm. 139. 2. Thou know my down-lying, and my up-rising, thou understandest
my thoughts afar off, verse 3. Thou art acquainted with all my ways, vese 4.
There is not a word in my tongue, but lo O Lord thou know it altogether.

Quest. You will say This is granted; it is very unquestionable that God is
omniscient, that he knows all things. But what is this for the comfort and good
of What comfort have we by this.
his people? what good have they by being interested in an all-knowing God?

Sol. 1. The good and comfort thereby is exceeding great; for Gods omniscience
This is the key to open all his other Attributes.
is (as it were) the Key to open all his other Attributes; it is the spring
which sets them all to work, and without which they could not work at all for
your good.

Though the Lord be an All Sufficiency, yet unless he were omniscient, unless
he did know all your wants, what good could his all sufficiency do you? And
though the Lord be of a very merciful nature, ready to pity and help, yet
unless he did know your miseries, he could not help you in your miseries. It
is his omniscience which does (if I may be so bold to express it) acquaint and
inform all his other glorious Attributes, and put them on, and draw them out to
work for our good.

2. That the omniscient God is your God, this is an unspeakable comfort unto It
is comfortable if we consider,
you, whether you consider what he knows, or how he knows, as concerning your
selves.

For what he knows as concerning your selves and your conditions. The Lord What
he knows as concerning our selves. The integrity of our hearts.
knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

He knows the integrity of your hearts, notwithstanding all your weakness and
failings. But the High places were not taken away, nevertheless the heart of
Asa was perfect all his days, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. 2 Samuel 7. 20. Thou Lord know
thy servant, John 2. 17. Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee.

He knows all your wants, and all your distresses. I know thy works, and
tribulation All our wants.
and poverty, says Christ to the Church of Smyrna, Rev. 2. 9. Your heavenly
Father knows that you have need of all these things, Matthew. 6. 32.

He knows all your desires, and prayers, and tears, Romans 8. 27. He that
searches All our desires.
the heart, knows what is the mind of the Spirit. Psalm. 38. 9. Lord, all my
desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee, Psalm. 56. 8. Put
thou my tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy book?

He knows all your active and passive service, in his cause for his glory; all
the All our active and passive service. How he knows us and our conditions.
With a knowledge Of approbation.
good that ever you have done, and all the evil that ever you have suffered,
Rev. 2.

How he knows you, and all your conditions.

He does know all the conditions of his people with a knowledge

1. Of Approbation: The Lord knows the way of the righteous, Psalm. 1. 6. that
is, he likes their way, he approves of their way; so Rev. 2. 9. I know thy
works, that is, I like them exceeding well, I am pleased to see them.

2. Of Compassion: The Lord said, I have surely seen the afflictions of my
people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their
Taskmasters; for Of compassion.
I know their sorrows, Exodus 3. 7. If one loved us much, but did not know our
wants and conditions; if one did know all our conditions, but did not love us,
it were sad; but God knows and loves, etc. As a father knows the distresses and
wants of his child, and pities the child in that condition; his bowels are
troubled for him, and if he can, he will relieve him; so, etc.

3. Of Condescension: (that is,) he knows your wants and desires, and he will
help you, and he will supply you; Your heavenly Father knows that you need all
Of condescension.
these things, Matthew. 6. 32. What is that? that is, he will supply your need
according to his riches and glory; so Exodus 3. 7. I know their sorrows. This is
explained in verse 8. And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that Land unto a good Land; so Nahum. 1.
7. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him: (that is) He will do them good, they shall find him to be
as good as his word, and he will help and deliver them.

3. The Omniscience of God is a comfort unto you against all your enemies
counsels, plots, reproaches, injuries, Jer. 8. 23. Lord thou know all their
counsels against me to slay me, Psalm. 69. 19. Thou have known my reproach and
my shame, The omniscience of God is comfort a against all our enemies.
and my dishonor, mine adversaries are all before thee, Isa. 37. 28. I know
thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me. And
how does the Lord know your enemies, and their plots, etc. even with
detestation and derision, and opposition, and judgment, and destruction.

4. The omniscience of God is a comfort unto you, in this respect, that it is a
foundation and fountain of all saving knowledge in you: God knows you, and you
shall It is comfort, as it is a fountain of all saving knowledge.
know him, (I will betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know
the Lord, Hosea 2. 20. They shall all know me, Jer. 31. 34.

He knows you for his people, and you shall know the Lord for your God, 2 Timothy
2. 19. The Lord knows who are his; they shall know that I am the Lord their
God, Ezekiel. 28. 26. so Ezekiel. 39. 22.

He perfectly knows you, and the time shall be that you shall perfectly know
him; you shall know, even as you are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

5. Another Attribute of God is this: He is a wise God, mighty in wisdom, God
is a wise God. And we are better for his wisdom. Our wise God orders every
thing that befalls us for our good.
Job 36. 5. God only wise, Romans 16. 27. and this God is your God, and you are
the better for his wisdom. For,

1. Your wise God guides and orders every thing that befalls you for your good;
(omnia bona, or in bonum) all things shall work together for good unto them
that love him, Romans 8. 28. Sometimes you have abundance, and that shall do you
good; sometimes you have wants, and that shall do you good; sometimes you have
honor and respect, and that shall do you good; sometimes you have dishonor
and reproach, and that shall do thee good; sometimes you have enjoyments, and
they shall do you good; and sometimes you have losses, and these shall do you
good; sometimes you have liberty, and that shall do you good; and sometimes you
have afflictions and crosses, and they shall do you good. Though there be
diversities and contrarieties as to the outward condition, yet the tempest and
the calm, the Winter and the Summer, all that befalls you, shall fall out for
good, because all that befalls you comes from your wise God, who orders and
guides all your contigencies for your good, and his own glory.

2. You shall not fai^e or miss of any good whatsoever: God has promised you
in You shall not fail or miss of any good in its season.
its season; the appointing and choosing, and hitting of seasons peculiarly
belong to wisdom. Therefore Solomon says, A wise man's heart discerns both
time and judgment, Eccles. 8. 5. And all things are beautiful in their season,
when a good word is spoken in season, and when help and deliverance comes in
season, and when any mercy comes in the right season, it is more precious, and
the more acceptable. The Lord has undertaken all the conditions of all his
people; he has promised peace to their afflicted consciences, and comfort to
their mourning souls, and help unto their distressed spirits, and audience to
their fervent prayers, and strength unto their fainting hearts. Now though the
Lord does a while delay you, though he does not presently give you what you
ask, though he takes a time before he speak, though he does not take your time,
yet because he is a faithful God, therefore he will take a time; and because he
is a wise God, therefore he will take the best time: He will answer you, he
will help you, he will succor you in an acceptable time, in the right season
which is the best part of time. 2 Cor. 6. 2. He says I have heard thee in a
time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee.

3. He will give you the best counsel and advice, because he is a most wise
God; He will give you the best counsel and advice.
wisdom it self can counsel best, Jer. 32. 19. He is great in counsel, and
mighty in works, Isa. 28. 29. He is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in
working, Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! we are many times in straits, in difficulties, and in
Jehoshaphats case, we know not what to do; it is not in man that walks to
direct his steps: we grope as in the dark, and often times are dead in our own
thoughts, and want wisdom what course to take, and what way to resolve on; but
now if you be the people of God, this is your comfort, your God is a wise God,
and he can direct and counsel you, Psalm. 73. 21. Thou shall guide me with thy
counsel, and afterward receive me to glory; ver. 32. 8. I will instruct thee,
and teach the in the way which thou shall go, I will guide thee with mine eyes,
Isa. 30. 21. Thine cars shall hear a word behind thee, saying, this is the
way, walk ye in it, James 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God
that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given
him. The wise God can resolve all your doubts, and clear up unto you all your
paths, and show you the path of life, and show you all the ways how to find
peace and rest for your souls.

4. He will be too hard for all your enemies in all their cunning plots and
devices. He will be too hard for your enemies in their cunning plots.


Our Savior says that the Children of this world are wiser in their
generation than the children of light: they are too cunning, two crafty for
them, but yet God is too hard for them: his wisdom is beyond all their policy,
Job 5. 12. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise, ver. 13. He takes the wise in their own
craftiness, and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong: did not the
wise God do this to Pharaoh, to Balack, to Saul, to Achitophel, to Haman? did
he not exceed them, and disapoint them?

5. He will proportion your trials, temptations, and afflictions; for he is a
wise He will proportion your trials.
God; therefore he will debate with you, and correct you in measure, neither
will he lay upon you more than is right, Esaias 27. 8. Job 34. 23. A father will
not give the child as much physic as he can pour into the cup, only so much
as is fit for his recovery. And no heavier burden will he lay on, than his
child is able to bear: So the wise God he keeps time and measure; you shall
never have an affliction, but when you need it, nor shall any temptation befall
you, but God will enable you to bear it, for he is a wise God.

6. He means you no hurt in any particular denials, or in any particular
removals He means you no hurt in any particular denials.
of outward blessings: He has his reasons for them both, and those very strong
and sufficient to satisfy you; you wonder sometimes that God deals so with
you, as never to accomplish such a desire of yours, or presently to take away
such a comfort of yours. O but your God is a good God, and he is a wise God, he
knows that you know not what ye ask when you ask to be so rich, and to be so
great. And he knows the danger into which you may fall by a long enjoyment of
an earthly comfort, what a loss to his glory and to your own souls; and he
knows how to set your hearts upon himself by breaking off your hearts from
poor, vain, earthly and sensual comforts.

7. Your wise God will find means and ways to bring in unto you all the good
Your wise God will find means to bring all your promised good to pass. Your
wise God will give you wisdom.
which he has promised unto you; your when, and your how, fall within the
compass of your wise God, (that is) the fittest time, and the best way, and
means of your enjoyments; the golden Candlestick had seven lamps and seven
pipes.

8. Your wise God will give you wisdom, and make you wise, spiritually wise,
wise for salvation, and wise in your conversation and walkings, wise in Christ,
1 Cor. 4. 10. Wise Stewards, Luke 12. 42. Wise Virgins, Matthew. 25. 2, 4. Wise
to know the day of your visitation, to redeem the time, to remember your latter
end, to choose the better part, and the best paths, and to look at eternity,
and to prefer things eternal before temporal, to make sure of Christ, and
Grace, and Glory.

6. A sixth Attribute of God, is Omnipotency; your God is Elshadai, God
Almighty; God is omnipotency.
above seventy times is he styled so in Scripture, Psalm. 62. 11. God has
spoken once, twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto God, 1 Chronicles.
29. 11. Thine O Lord is the greatness and the power, ver. 12. In thine hand is
power and might, Job 37. 23. Touching the Almighty we cannot find him out, he
is excellent in power, Psalm. 132. 2. The mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 147. 5.
Great is the Lord, and of great power, Psalm. 45. 3. Most mighty, Matthew. 19. 26.
with God all things are possible. This Omnipotency is a divine Attribute
whereby God is (of himself alone) infinitely able to do whatsoever he will do,
and whatsoever he undertakes to do, and whatsoever is possible to be done. We
have God is an infinite essence, and therefore of infinite power.
a true saying, that Po^entia sequitur essentiam, there is always a
commensuration twixt the essence of a thing and the power of it. A limited
essence has but a limited power: and therefore every creature has but a
limited power, because it has a limited essence; The fire and water can do
some things (as such Elements) but more they cannot do; The Sun and Moon and
the rest of the Stars can also do many things, in their Sphere, and without
that they can do nothing; So men and Angels they are able to do much, but still
their power is contracted and bounded according to their essence; but God is of
an infinite essence, there He is a most perfect essence and therefore must
needs be omnipotent.
are no bounds unto his being, and therefore he is of infinite power.

Again, there cannot be any imperfection and want in God: The divine essence is
a most perfect essence, and therefore it must needs be Omnipotent. If there
were any thing which God could not do or perform, there should then be some
insufficiency and defect, and weakness in his nature.

And besides all this, there would be an uncertain foundation for our faith to
rest There would be an uncertain foundation for our says to rest on, if God
were not able to supply all.
upon God, If there should be any thing concerning us or his Church, to which
he were not able to help and supply them in, or to accomplish; This being a
certain truth that the people of God do principally stand in need of those
things which do require even an Omnipotent God to produce or cause them, their
graces and comforts exceeding all created power to effect them.

I could add more reasons for the demonstration of Gods Omnipotency; (viz.) 1.
The Creation of the world, wherein that which was not at all was immediately
formed into a being, and that formation depended only upon his Word. 2. The
providential upholding, or sustentation of the whole world, and guidance, of
every creature in every motion. 3. The wonderful works wrought by God,
exceeding all created power. 4. And the Conversion of the hearts of sinners;
but those already mentioned are sa^isfying and sufficient to our purpose.

Quest. But now you may reply, What comfort is this to the people of God, that
What comfort is this that our God is omnipotent.
their God (he that says in his Covenant, I will be to you a God) is God
Omnipotent?

Sol. There are six choice comforts from this unto you who have the Omnipotent
God to be your God.

1. You may cast all your care upon him, whatsoever your wants be, (for soul or
You may cast all your care upon him.
body) be they never so many, and never so great, and never so often, your God
who is Omnipotent is able to supply them, Ephesians. 3. 20. He is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think: you ask many things, and
you think of many things, and you need many things, and your God is able to
supply you in all these; able, yea abundantly able, abundantly able, yea,
exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or think; his power exceeds all
your wants: There are some wants that your friends can help you in, you may go
to such a friend and say unto him, Lend me so much money to pay a debt, and he
is able to help you, and yet there are some wants that no friend nor man can be
a help unto you in them. When the famine was very grievous in Samaria, a woman
cried to the King of Israel, Help my Lord O King; and he said, If the Lord do
not help thee, whence shall I help thee? out of the barne-floor, or out of the
wine press? 2 Kings 6. 26, 27. As if he had said, In this thy strait, I am not
able to help thee. Beloved, our wants may quickly rise above the power of man;
but they can never rise above the power of God; every spiritual want exceeds
the power of all creatures, but no corporal or spiritual want exceeds the power
of God; you need knowledge, your God is able to give it; and you need wisdom,
your God is able to give it; and you need mercy and grace, and comfort, and
strength, and deliverance, and faith, patience, love, meekness, joy, peace,
and friends, and bread, and house, etc. God (your God) is able to supply every
want that is present, or that is possible. We read of the Israelites, that
being in bondage they wanted liberty, and God gave it them; and being near the
Red Sea, they wanted salvation, and God gave it; and being in the Wilderness,
they wanted water, the Rock is smitten, and water is given; and they wanted
bread, and God rained down Manna; and they wanted flesh, and God sent them
Quails, etc.

If any man had such a friend who had power enough for all sorts of supplies,
let his wants and straits be what they may be, yet he were able to help all. O
says he, I am well, I have a friend who can help me in all my wants and
straits; Such a friend (amongst men) cannot I confess be found; but such a God
may be found, who can perform all things for you, who has power enough to help
against all temptations, and against all corruptions, and in all afflictions,
and in all necessities, yea, and in all extremities.

2. He alone can do you good; you need none but your God to do you good: He
alone can do you good.
Omnipotency is (of it self) sufficient for all your helps and supplies; as it
can do all things, so it can do all things from it self: No creature is alone
able or sufficient to be an help unto you without God, but God alone is able to
help you without any creature; for he is omnipotent. Suppose you be in danger,
God alone is able to deliver you; suppose you be under trouble of Spirit, God
alone is able to comfort you; suppose you need mercy, God alone is able to
pardon you; suppose you be under outward wants, God alone is able to supply
you; Omnipotency needs the help of none; unto your help, it can create
salvation, and command loving kindnesses, and deliverances, and any good.

3. When God will do you good, none can hinder him or you from the enjoyment
When God will do you good, none can hinder him.
of that good: If he will bless you, you shall be blessed; is there any power
able to hinder Omnipotency? as the Apostle spoke in another case, (1 Cor. 10.
22.) Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we stronger than he? So say I,
Will any contend with the Almighty God? Can they bind his hand? Are they
stronger than the Almighty and Omnipotent God? Isa. 46. 9. I am God, and there
is none else; I am God, and there is none like me, verse 10. My Counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure. Isa. 40. 15. Behold the Nations are as a
drop of a buck^^, and are counted as the small dust of the balance; ver. 17.
All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than
nothing and vanity. Beloved! you cannot put any supposition as a prejudice unto
Gods Omnipotency; you cannot say, were my Adversaries not so many or mighty;
were my temptations not so high and strong; were my distresses not so deep and
low? were my wants not so many and great, then God could do me good, and help
me; These are vain and weak suppositions in reference unto God; for although
the power of men and devils, and the greatness of want and distresses may
exceed out power, yet nothing is too hard for God; there are no difficulties,
there are no impediments unto the Omnipotent God: If God be for us, who can be
against us? says the Apostle, Romans 8. 31. As if he should say, if God will
preserve you, you shall be safe; if God will bless you, you shall be blessed;
if God will do you good, none can hinder.

4. Then all his promises shall be accomplished unto you: Those promises All
his promises shall be accomplished unto you.
which are so many and so great, and so precious, which are your treasures,
your munition of rocks, your hopes and confidences, and the bonds and security
which God gives unto you, they shall certainly be performed unto you.

There are three things concerning God which do assure you of the performance
of his promises.

First, His Will; the will of his goodness is in the making of all his
promises; and the will of his resolution is for the performing of them: Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the oath to Abraham, Micah 7. 20.

2. His unchangeablenesse or unfaithfulness: I will not suffer my faithfulness
to fail, Psalm. 89. 33. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my lips, Verse 34. He is faithful that promised, Heb. 10. 23.

3. His Power or Omnipotency; being fully persuaded that what he had promised,
he was able to perform, Romans 4. 21. Beloved! your God does never over engage
himself unto you, his goodness does not surpass his ability; he promises unto
his people in general, riches of grace and glory; and he has promised to some
of his people in particular, such blessings as exceeded all the possible
capacities of reason; and yet he easily brought all about, he performed all;
for he is an Omnipotent God infinitely able to do, etc.

5. He can then raise and advance the work which he has wrought; he can He can
raise and advance the work which he has wrought.
bring forth judgment unto victory; as it was said of Zerubbabel, the hands of
Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house, his hands also shall finish
it, Zach. 4. 9. Or as the Lord spoke about the house of Eli, (1 Samuel 3. 12.)
when I begin I will make an end: So say I, has God begun in your hearts any
work of grace? has he sown the seed in the field? has he planted the
Vineyard? he is able to finish his work; he who was able to give grace, is able
to make all grace to abound; he that planteth grace, is able also to water it,
and to increase it, and to bring it to perfection, to give life to the dead,
and to give strength to the weak, to convert a sinner, and to subdue sins,
for he is an Omnipotent God. And so likewise for your joy and peace which are
but weak, your God is able to fill you with joy in believing, to make your joy
unspeakable and full of glory; he is able to give you peace that passes
understanding, and to make it as a River. And so for temptations which do so
much distress you, your God is not only able to restrain Satan, but also to
bruise him under your feet, Romans 16. 20. It is a certain truth that Omnipotency
has no bounds or limits; you cannot say that God who works thus far, can
work no farther; as he can work all things unto their being, so he can work
them up to that perfection of being of which they are capable.

6. If your God be an Omnipotent God, then you who are his people are
altogether Then his people are altogether safe and secure For their bodies,
safe and su^^, both in respect of your bodies, and in respect of your souls.
For your bodies: Is not he safe who has Omnipotency to be his guard and
shield? is not Omnipotency it self safety enough unto you? Deuteronomy. 33. 26. There
is none like unto the God of Jeruson who rides upon the heaven in thy help,
and in his excellency on the sky ver. 27. The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are the everlasting arms. And likewise for your souls, they shall
never be lost; nay, they shall assuredly be kept and preserved to glory, John
10. 27. My sheep And for their souls.
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, ver. 28. And I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck
them out of my Fathers hands, ver. 29. My Father which gave them me, is greater
than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hands. Mark here
the comfort and assurance which Christ gives, and the reason thereof. My sheep
shall never perish, but they shall have eternal life. This is the comfort, and
this comfort he grounds upon the power of God: (he is greater than all, and no
man is able, etc.) As if he should say, many assay to hinder them and deceive
of that life, but they are not able, they are in my Fathers hand, (in the
keeping of his power) and he is greater (he is stronger) than all, put them all
together, he is too strong for them. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation. There is not power enough in our selves to
keep out selves, but there is power enough in God; and we are kept by the power
of God (even unto salvation) until we come to the heavenly glory.

7. If your God be an Omnipotent God, he can easily help you and enable you He
can easily help you and enable you to all good.
in and to all good: What shall I say more for your comfort from the
Omnipotency of your God? it is an universal comfort unto you in all conditions
of life and death. Tu non potes, sed Dominus tuus potest, said Chrysostom; he
is able to enable you for all your duties, I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13.

He is able to comfort you in all your sorrows, 2 Cor. 1. 4.
He is able to deliver you from all your sins and troubles.
He is able to keep you from falling, Jude ver. 24.
He is able to raise you up being fallen.
He is able to feed you all your days, Genesis 48. 15.
He is able to deliver you from the power of death, Heb. 2. 14.
He is able to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with
exceeding joy, Jude ver. 24.
7. A seventh Attribute wherein God is engaged unto you, is faithfulness; your
Gods faithfulness is engaged for you.
God is often styled a faithful God; (that is,) one that stands to his word,
and keeps his Covenant, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. The Lord thy God he is God, the faithful
God, who keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, etc. 1 Kings 8.
23. Lord God of Israel, etc. who keep Covenant and mercy with thy servants,
Nehem. 9. 32. Our God who keep Covenant and mercy.

There are four things in the faithfulness of God. Four things in the
faithfulness of God. Sincerity of intention.


1. Sincerity of intention: God is faithful, (that is) he really intends all
the good of which he speaks, and which he promises unto you; his heart goes
with his word; he does not speak one thing, and mind another; ptomise much,
and never intend to do any thing; but his word of promise is bottomed upon the
real purpose of his will.

2. Fixednesse of resolution; God is faithful, (that is) he is steadfast, he is
still Fixednesse of resolution.
in the same mind, he is not variable and changeable, he will never alter his
word, he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13.

3. Certainty of execution, or performance. God is faithful (that is) will
Certainty of execution.
certainly perform unto you whatsoever good he has promised, Genesis 28. 15. I
will surely do thee good, and I will not leave thee until I have done that
which I have spoken unto thee of, said God to Jacob, Jer. 31. 20. I will surely
have mercy upon him, says the Lord God, chap. 32. 41. I will rejoice over them
to do them good, and I will plant them in this Land assuredly with my whole
heart, with my whole soul. Hab. 2. 3. The vision is yet for an appointed time;
but at the end it shall speak and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come. Micah 7. 20. Thou will perform the truth to
Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham which thou have sworn unto our fathers from
the days of old.

4. Fullness and exactness of performance, not failing his people in any one
Fullness and exactness of performance.
promise, Jer. 32. 42. I will bring upon them all the good that I have promised
them, Josh. 23. 14. Ye know that in all your hearts, and in all your souls,
that not one thing has failed of all the good things which the Lord your God
spoke concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing has
This faithfulness is your exceeding comfort.
failed thereof. 1 Kings 8. 5, 6. There has not failed one word of all his
good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant: This is the
faithfulness of God, and this is your exceeding comfort, that your God is a
faithful God; he remembers his Covenant for ever, and his word to a thousand
generations, Psalm. 105. 8. Were he (as he is) an all sufficiency and full of
mercy, and Omnifcient, and Wise, and Omnipotent, and never so abundant in
goodness, yet if he were not faithful, you could have no comfort in any of his
Attributes, nor in any of his promises, nor yet any confidence or assurance at
all: But this faithfulness of God gives life (as it were) unto all his
Attributes, and unto all his Promises, and unto all our hopes and confidences.
What are a thousand Bonds and Indentures if they were not sealed? what are a
million of promises and protestations from a man who is unfaithful, who regards
not his word, who will break his word with you; faithfulness is all in all; a
faithful heart, a faithful friend, a faithful God, and this is the great
satisfaction of all our doubts and fears: But will God do me good? but will he
perform what he has promised? if I were sure that he were sure, he will not
fail me, this would stay me, this would satisfy me, I had enough. Now you
have it cleared out unto you, that your God is a faithful God.

Quest. But you may perhaps desire to know the particular portions of comfort
from this, that your God in Covenant is a faithful God.

Sol. I will present a few of them unto you.

1. The faithfulness of God is a sure pledge unto you for all your enjoyments:
For, This is a sure pledge of all our enjoyments.
It is (if I may so express it) the very seal of God to perform all the Bond
of his Covenant; the security which God gives you for all his engagements, as
full assurance as God can make for the performance of all his promises; it is a
sure foundation for your faith to rest upon, a foundation that cannot be
shaken, and which shall never be removed; you are as sure to enjoy all the good
which God has promised to you as God is God, and as God is your God: In hope
of eternal life which God that cannot lie, has promised, Titus 1. 2. God has
promised to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us from our sins, and he is
faithful to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness,
1 John 1. 9. God has promised to sanctify us throughout. And faithful is he
who has called ^s, who will also do it, 1 These. 5. 24. God has promised to
establish us, and to keep us from evil. And the Lord is faithful who will
establish you, and keep you from evil, 2 These. 3. 3.

2. The faithfulness of God is a mighty and effectual, and prevailing Plea This
is an effectual, and prevailing plea with God.
with your God. O Lord! This is my want and distress; and that is thy promise
for help; and thou art faithful who have promised, in thy truth, and in thy
faithfulness to answer me; keep Covenant with me, remember thy word, do not
fail me! why? this comes close to God, this concerns him near; he has taken
his Oath upon it, that he will not lie, that he will not deceive, that he will
not fail his people.

3. The faithfulness of God is enough to answer all your fears and doubts; O It
is enough to answer all our fears and doubts
they are such great things, and they are such hard things, and unto sense and
reason, such improbable and impossible things, and who am I, etc.

Sol. Why? do thou find these things promised by God unto thee? God wants not
power to do them, and he is faithful, and will do them; the faithful God will
perform every good thing which he has promised; though thy unbelief many
times says, He will not; and thy fears dispute how he can; though thy reason
fail thee, and though thy sense fail thee, and though thy heart fail thee;
yet thy God will never fail thee, thy faithful God will not fail thee. God is
faithful, and he will not suffer thee to be tempted above what thou art able,
etc. 1 Cor. 10. 15.

4. The faithfulness of God is a support unto you under all his silence, and
under It is a support under all his delays.
all his delayings of the good which he has promised, and you do so earnestly
crave: Your prayers are not in vain, your waitings are not in vain: Perhaps you
have waited at the gate of heaven (many a day, yea, and many a year) for
assurance of mercy, for power over such a sin, for victory over evil thoughts
and temptations, and afflictions, and yet you are not heard, and still you are
put off, and hereupon your heart begins to faint (God will not do me this good,
and he will not remember his promise) O but do you remember that your God is a
faithful God; and a faithful God cannot lie, a faithful God will keep his
Covenant, will remember his Covenant, will perform his Covenant; he may be
silent unto your prayers; he may delay you long; but he is faithful; he has
his time, and he will surely take his time to answer and succor you.

5. The faithfulness of God will break down all contrarieties, and
contradictions, It will break down all contradictions and oppositions.
and oppositions; Heaven and earth shall sooner fail and pass, than that one
Word or title of Gods promise shall fail or perish; his Word of promise shall
take effect, though all the Devils in hell oppose it, and though all the men on
earth oppose it, and though all the powers of unbelief oppose it; this stands
in the way, and that stands in the way, but yet God is faithful, and his
promise shall be made good; Sarah was old, etc. But she judged him faithful who
had promised, Heb. 11. God should never be trusted, if he were not faithful.

8. Graciousness is another Attribute of your God; your God is a gracious God
is a gracious God.
God, and he is and will be a gracious God unto all his people. Exodus 34. 6.
The Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious. Psalm. 86. 15. Thou, O Lord, art a
God full of compassion, and gracious.

The graciousness of God is such an Attribute of God, whereby he does
favorably and freely love, and choose, and bless, and do all good unto his
people without any desert, and notwithstanding any unworthiness on their part:
It is the reason and account of all his actings toward them: It is all the
Plea you have to all the good which God does promise. You must distinguish
'twixt the actions and blessings of God; and 'twixt the ground or reason of
them.

There are many and great blessings which God intends and confirms upon his
people; and the cause of them all, is the graciousnesse of God. Gods
graciousness the cause of all blessings. Of The love of God.
Viz.

1. The love of God is an unspeakable blessing, and the graciousness of God is
the reason of that love: I will love them freely, Hos. 14. 4. He set his love
upon you, because he loved you, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8.

2. The election of God is an unspeakable blessing, and the foundation of that
election is the graciousness of God; There is a reward according to the election
of The election of God.
grace, Romans 11. 5.

3. R^demption by Christ is also a wonderful blessing, and this was according
to the riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 7. Redemption by Christ.


4. Calling us in^o Christ; and the reason of this also is his grace, 2 Timothy 1.
9. Calling into Christ. Justifying us.


5. The justifying of us is an inestimable mercy: And He justifies us freely by
his grace, Romans 3. 24.

6. And the saving of us, is the completing of us, and of all our blessings;
Saving of us.
and by grace are we saved, Ephesians. 2. 5, 8. This is certain, that Gods
graciousness is the fountain of all our good, and it is the reason of all our
enjoyments and hopes; If the Lord were not gracious, if he should look on us,
and act toward us upon the account of our worthiness, we should never have
enjoyed the least of his mercies. You might have heard of mercy, but should
never have been the better for it; and you might have heard of all the
promises, but should never have enjoyed the good of any one of them, if God
were not a gracious God; but because he is your gracious God, and will deal
with you altogether from the Throne of grace in a gracious way; This is it
which puts life into you, and sweetly draws out the desires and confidences of
your hearts.

Quest. You may demand, But what comfort is this unto the people of God, that
there God is a gracious God, and that he will deal with them altogether in a
What comfort from hence, that our God is gracious.
gracious way, and upon gracious terms.

Sol. The comforts from this are very choice and precious; I will mention some
of them unto you.

1. Because your God is a gracious God, therefore there can be nothing to
discourage There can be nothing to discourage us in our addresses to him, and
expectations from him.
or hinder you in your addresses unto him, and expectations from him. The
graciousnesse of God answers all the doubts of the heart, and all the
temptations of Satan.

There are four things which are apt to discourage our hearts, when we think of
drawing near to God.

1. One is the greatness of our sins. 2. A second, is the greatness of Gods
mercies we need. 3. A third is the greatness of our unworthiness. 4. A fourth
is the greatness of our evil deserts.
My sins are so great, that I cannot expect that God will ever do me good:
The mercies and blessings that I need, are so great, and I can lay down nothing
for them. And I am unworthy of the least of mercies; nay, I deserve to be
rejected and cursed! But now the graciousnesse of God is able effectually to
remove all these discouragements.

1. Your sins are great, and therefore you are afraid that the merciful God
will not pardon them: But then remember, that the merciful God is a gracious
Not the greatness of our sins.
God: As he has riches of mercy, so he has riches of grace: And as he
promises to forgive the sins of his people, so he promises to forgive their
sins freely (the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his grace,
Ephesians. 1. 7.) And this remember withal, that the gracious God forgives the
greatest sins, as well as the least sins of his people upon the same terms
of graciousnesse. In Luke 7. we read of a less debtor who owed fifty pence;
and of a greater debtor, who owed five hundred pence, ver. 41. and the
Creditor freely forgave them both, verse 42. so, etc. Your God has not one way
to forgive less sins, and another way to forgive greater sins; but though
the sins be different, yet the terms or reasons of forgiveness is one and the
same, viz. the free grace of God.

2. O but the mercies and blessings which I need, are so high and so great, Not
the greatness of the mercies that we need.
surely those cannot come off but upon hard terms, and I have nothing to lay
down for them.

I answer, your God is a gracious God; Your God in his Covenant, has promised
all sorts of good unto you; corporal, and spiritual; small and great; And
remember it for ever, that all the bonds of Gods Covenant are paid in upon the
same rate: Grace was the reason of making all the promises, and Grace is the
reason of the performance of every good: you shall have the greatest good upon
the self-same terms as you have the least.

3. O but I am so unworthy of these mercies! What am I, and what is there in
Not the greatness of our unworthiness.
me for God to look on, to affect and to move God to do such great things for
my soul!

Why! there is nothing in you, but an extreme need of these great good things
promised by God, and an absolute unworthiness of them: O but your God is a
gracious God; and as an unworthy sinner may go to a gracious God, so a gracious
God will give all that he has promised to his people, though they be unworthy.
Graciousness finds the price of all mercies in it self, it is the only reason
of our enjoyments.

4. But I deserve to be rejected in my suits, and to be oursed. Not the
greatness of our evil deserts.


It Is true, and so you should find it, if God dealt with you according to your
deservings; but your God is a gracious God, and deals with his people, not in
a rigorous way, but in a gracious way, of loving kindness and mercies.

2. Is the gracious God your God? then all your mercies are sure: you shall
assuredly possess them, and inherit them: The children of grace are the surest
Then all your mercies are sure
heirs of mercy: It is of grace that the promise might be sure, Romans 4. 16.
Beloved! If God had Covenanted with you to be your God upon a respect to your
works, and not upon a sole respect to his own graciousnesse; and if he had
promised you mercies, and other blessings, upon a bargain for your goodness,
and not upon a foundation in his own graciousnesse; neither could God be sure
to you, nor could the mercies of God be sure to you. Adam had as much (in a way
of works) to have perpetuated, and ensured, and settled God and mercies upon
himself, and more than ever we shall have, and yet all became unsure unto him;
much more would it be with us, if God and we should traffic that way; If God
should say to any of us, I promise to be your God, and to give you all
blessings, upon condition of your perfect, constant obedience; your never
failing obeying of my will, shall be the condition, and the reason of your
certain enjoyment of me! I dare aver it, that our enjoyment of God, and the
good things by him promised would not be certain, or sure unto us not one day,
not one hour, nay, hardly one minute. But there comes the certainty of
enjoying of God, and of his promised mercies, viz. the grace or the
graciousness of God, I am freely yours, I will love you freely, I will bless
you freely for mine own sake, though not for your sake.

Our obedience is a weak and unstedfast reason, but Gods grace is a full and
constant reason for all our mercies, and for all our pleas, and for all our
enjoyments. Then you have plea enough to deal with God. The immutability or
unchangeableness of God.


3. Is the gracious God your God in Covenant? you have then plea enough, and
reason enough to deal with God: It is the best plea you can make, Lord, do me
good for thine own sake.

9. Immutability, or unchangeableness^ is another Attribute of God; your God is
an unchangeable God, and he will be so to you, Mal. 3. 6. I am the Lord, I
change not. Jam. 1. 17. With him there is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning. So Numb. 23. 19. God is not man, that he should lie, neither the son
of man, that he should repent.

Consider God either

1. In his essence, so he is unchangeable; the essence of God cannot be
changed; In his essence.
it is impossible that it should be, forasmuch as every change is either to the
better, or to the worse; There cannot be a change in God to the better, because
he is in himself an infinite perfection; nor can he be changed to the worse,
because then he should not be God, if any defect or want were incident unto
him; Besides, in every change there is a new succession for being, or manner of
being; but God is eternal, and he is infinite; therefore he cannot be otherwise
than he is.

2. In his decrees, so also he is unchangeable; these foundations stand sure,
In his decrees.
2 Timothy 19. Isa. 14. 24. Surely, as I have thought, so shall it come to pass;
and as I have purposed, so shall it stand. Ver. 27. The Lord of Hosts has
purposed, and who shall disanull it? The Decrees of God are laid upon the
counsel and wisdom of God, and such grounds within himself, that there cannot
be any new reason or stronger, to alter his decrees.

3. In his promises and Covenant with his people. All his promises are yea In
his promises
and Amen to the praise of his glory. 2 Cor. 1. 20. My Covenant will I not
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips, Psalm. 89. 34.

4. In his love, there he is unchangeable to his people; whom he loves, he In
his love.
dosh love to the end for ever. Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto me for
ever, in loving kindness and mercies.

5. In his gifts. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.
In his gifts.
29. If the Lord calls you to be his people, you shall be his people for ever:
And if the Lord give you Christ, and faith, and the other graces of the Spirit,
you shall have them for ever; he will not repent that he bestows these upon
you.

O what a comfort is this unto the people of God, who have an unchangeable
Comfort that our God is unchangeable.
G^d to be their God! Not without cause does the Apostle in Heb. 6. 17, 18.
declare that the immutability of God is a choice ground for our strong
consolation. You would have but weak consolation (yea, I question whether you
would have any consolation at all) if your God were a changeable God; His
election of you, would afford you little comfort, if God would change that
purpose of his, and after that reject you; his love of you would yield you
little comfort, if after that, he would change his love and hate you! his
promises of grace and glory, of mercy and life, what comfort would these be to
you, if God should alter his words of blessings into words of curses: if he
should put in your names in the book of life, and then cross out your names; if
he should make his Will, and then alter his Will! Your faith could never be
certain, and your conscience could never be settled, and your hopes could never
be sure, and your fruitions could never be stable, if your God were a
changeable God: But here now is your strong consolation, That your God is an
immutable God: His faithfulness is unchangeable, his love is unchangeable, his
Omnipotency is unchangeable, his graciousness is unchangeable, his promises are
unchangeable.

And there are six precious comforts unto you, who have this unchangeable God
Six comforts from hence. The unchangeable God will never cast you off.
to be your God.

1. The unchan eable God will never cast you off; He may correct his children,
but he will never reject them. Romans 11. 1. Has God cast away his people? God
forbid. Ver. 2. God has not cast away his people whom he foreknew. 2 Timothy 2.
19. Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the
Lord knows who are his. If God should choose and own you for his, and then
refuse and disown you for his, he were a changeable God. He will be your God for
ever.


2. The unchangeable God, if he be your God, he will be your God for ever and
ever. This God is our God for ever and ever, Psalm. 48. 14. If he should be your
God, and yet cease to be your God, he could not then be your unchangeable God:
but because he is an unchangeable God, he remains your merciful, your loving,
your gracious God for ever; as long as he is God, he will continue to be your
God.

3. The unchangeable God ever lives. David speaking of the earth, and of He
ever lives.
the heavens, delivers himself thus in Psalm 102. 26. They shall perish, but
thou shall endure; all of them shall wax old like a garment: as a vesture shall
thou change them, and they shall be changed. Ver. 27. But thou art the same,
and thy years shall have no end: He endures for ever, his mercy endures for
ever, his loving kindness endures for ever, his Word abides and endures for
ever; look on other things, they are changeable, and we see them to be changed;
men love, and hate; they prosper, and they wither; they do us good, and then
they die, and can never do us good more: But the unchangeable God still lives,
he is still the same, and ever lives to love you for ever, and to bless you
for ever, and to show mercy to you for ever. Though you have not a father to go
unto (for he is dead) and though you have not a friend to go unto (for every
one of them is dead) yet you have a God to go unto who lives for ever, and
lives unchangeable; yea, though your friend does live, and now grows strange to
you, and will not know you, yet your God will know you, and own you, and
regard, and help you, for he is an unchangeable God.

4. In all your wants and distresses, and new occasions, you may still look up
to In all your wants and new occasions, you may still look up to your God
your God, for he is unchangeable, and his promises are unchangeable: He did
pity you, and he will pity you; he did hear you, and he will hear you; he did
help you, and he will help you; he did comfort you, and he will comfort you;
for he is still the same God, the same unchangeable God: ye are sure to be
heard, and you are sure to speed; for he is unchangeable in his love, and in
his promises unto you.

5. Then your spiritual condition is everlastingly sure and safe: He has
chosen Your spiritual condition is everlastingly sure and safe.
you from the beginning unto salvation, 2 These. 2. 13. And his election is
unchangeable; he has promised that whosoever Believes shall not perish, but
have everlasting life, John 3. 16. Yea, this is the promise which he has
promised us, even eternal life, 1 John 2. 25. And his promises are
unchangeable; he gives you Christ, and all the graces of the Spirit which bring
unto salvation; and all his gifts are unchangeable, Romans 11. 29.

6. Though you be very changeable toward God, yet he is still unchangeable
toward Though you be changeable toward God, yet he is unchangeable toward
you.
you; you many times forget him, and fall, and fail, and leave him, but God
will never forget you, never falsify with you, leave nor forsake you. 2 Timothy
2. 13. If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself:
Sometimes you love him more, sometimes less; sometimes you please him, and many
times you grieve him; sometimes you keep close in walking with God, and many
times you wander from him, yet he is unchangeable. He will not destroy you,
because he is unchangeable. If he should change as often as we do, Now you offend
me, now I will be your God no longer; I will love you, bless, preserve you no
more; then there were cause of exceeding trouble.

10. Omnipresence; Your God is an Omnipresent God, he is everywhere; Gods
Omnipresence.
included in no place, excluded from no place. Non est ubi, ubi non est Deus. 1
King. 8. 27. Behold the heaven, and the heaven of heavens cannot contain him;
how much less this house that I have builded? Isa. 66. 1. The heaven is my
Throne, and the earth is my footstool. Jer. 23. 24. Can any hide himself in
secret places that I shall not see him, says the Lord? Do not I fill heaven
and earth? says the Lord, Prove. 15. 3. The eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding the evil and the good. Psalm. 139. 7. Whither shall I go from
thy Spirit? or whither shall I fly from thy pres^nce? Verse 8. If I ascend up
into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there.
Verse 9. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts
of the sea: Verse 10. Even there shall thine hand l^ad me, and thy right hand
shall hold me. Angels are of a limited presence, because of a limited essence;
and the bodies of men have their circumscription by limited place; every
creature has his limited Ubi, or place; but God is an infinite, and immense
being, whose Center is everywhere, and whose circumference is now here.

What a comfort is this to the people of God? The comfort of this. God is every
where, and in every place, and so always present with them.


1. That this God is everywhere, and in every place; that they are in the
presence of God, and their God is always present with them.

God himself delivers this as a comfort and support unto all his people (I will
be with you) in respect of all dangers, troubles, and difficult services.

To Isaac, Genesis 26. 3. I will be with thee, and will bless thee. To Jacob,
Genesis 28. 5. Behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither
thou go. To Moses, Exodus 3. 12. Certainly I will be with thee. To Joshuah,
Josh. 1. 5. As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee. To all his people, Isa. 41. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with
thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God. If your God be Omnipresent, then
wheresoever you are, your God is present with you. Suppose a man were
injuriously dealt withal, would it not be a comfort to him, if the Judge (the
righteous Judge) himself were present, to see how violent men dealt with him?
Suppose a man were in trouble, in exile with David, or in prison with Joseph,
would it not be a comfort to him, if his loving Father were present with him,
or his kindest friend? O Christian, be thou in any condition whatsoever, in any
Country, in any place whatsoever, thy God, thy Judge, thy Father, thy best
Friend is with thee. Psalm. 91. 15. I will be with thee in trouble; I will
deliver him, and honor him. Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the waters,
I will be with thee, etc.

2. As your God is present everywhere, so he is at once, and wholly present
everywhere God is at once and wholly present every where with his essence and
Attributes.
with all his essence, and all his Attributes; He is not sometimes present in
one place, and then by a local mutation present in another place, but he is at
once at the self-same time present in every place; neither is he present partly
in one place, and partly in another place, a piece of him here, and a piece of
him there; but in his infinite and complete essence, he is present every where;
you may not imagine that the all-sufficient God is in one place, and the
merciful God in another, and the wise God in another, and the good God in
another, and the Omnipotent God in another place, etc. No, but that one and
self-same God in his essence, and in all his glorious Attributes is every
where; and wheresoever he is present, all his Attributes and excellencies are
present with him, altogether present: for his essence is undivided, his
Attributes are inseparable from his essence.

O what a comfort is this to all you who are the people of God! Some of you
live in one Country, and some of you live in another Country; and sometimes
you have occasions to live in one place, and sometimes in another place, and
yet every where, all of you have the same God in all his excellencies present
with you, and he has his God and Father present with him; you have him present
in this Land, and if you should have occasion to remove to another Land (many
thousand miles hence) there are you, and there is your God present with you,
your all-sufficient God, your Almighty God, your merciful God, your wise God,
etc. Go where you will, there are six things present with you. 1. Much weakness
is present in your hearts. 2. Many temptations present from Satan. 3. Many
adversaties are present from the world, and many afflictions too. 4. Good
Angels are present with you. 5. A good conscience is continually present. And
lastly, a good God is present in all his excellencies for your good.

3. Although God be present every where, ratione essentiae, yet he is in a more
God is in an especial manner present with his people.
special manner present with his people, ratione influentiae. There is the
presence of his special providence, and there is the presence of his special
grace; and thus he is every where present with and for his people: Hence it is
that ordinarily where you read of Gods presence with his people, you shall
find some other special thing annexed to that presence, as I will be with thee
and bless thee, and I will be with thee, and help thee, and I will be with
thee, and deliver thee, and I will be with thee, and strengthen thee, and
uphold thee, and save thee, etc. Jer. 15. 20. Hushai's presence with David was
a burden, 2 Samuel 15. 33. Jobs wifes presence was but a vexation unto him; our
friends presence is many times fruitless, but Gods presence is a blessing,
comfort, help, (indeed) He is present with wicked men, but the more present he
is with them, the worse it is for them; the presence of his knowledge, and the
presence of his power, and the presence of his wrath, etc. But the presence
with his people, is a very gracious presence, and a blessing presence, and a
blessed presence; he is always present with them for good.

4. Here is yet one comfort more unto you; if your God be every where present,
Then you shall not stay long for any good you need.
(and therefore present every where with you) then you shall not stay long for
any good that you need, because your God is near unto you; he is nigh unto all
them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth, Psalm. 145. 18.
What Nation is there who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is in
all things that we call upon him for? Deuteronomy. 4. 7. The nearness or remoteness
of a friend is very material and considerable in our distresses and wants; I
have such a friend, and he would help me, but he lives so far off; and such a
one is able to counsel me and comfort me, but he is now absent, and I may be
undone before I can hear from him; but it is not thus with you who have God to
be your God; he is always nigh unto you: As Christ said unto his Disciples,
Mat. 28. 20. Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world: So your
God is present with you always, as long as you live in the world. Do you want
comfort? the God of consolation is present with you, very near unto you. Do you
want grace? the God of all grace is present with you. Do you want peace? the
God of peace is present with you. Do you want mercy? the Father of mercies i^s
present with you. Do you want friends? the God of love is always present. Do
you want safety? the Omnipotent God is present with you. Do you want any thing?
the All-sufficient God is always present with you. What the Apostle spoke
concerning the word of faith, in Romans 10. 8. It is nigh thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart; That is as true of God in all his glorious
excellencies for his people.

11. Sovereignty or Dominion, this is another Attribute of God; he is (I think)
Gods Sovereignty engaged for our good.
a thousand times in Scripture called the Lord, the Lord, etc. and to him is
Dominion ascribed, Dominion for ever and ever, 1 Pet. 4. 11. chap. 5. 11. He is
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15. The Lord has prepared his
Throne in heaven, and his Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103. 19. All that is
in the heaven and the earth is thine; thine is the Kingdom O Lord, and thou
art exalted as head above all; thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is
power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great and give strength to
all, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12.

One does well distinguish of a twofold Sovereignty or Dominion in God. There
is A twofold Sovereignty.


1. Jurisdictionis, which is his Sovereign authority to govern all men, and all
Of jurisdicti^n.
creatures; he may command what he will, and forbid what he pleases, and
permit what he lists, and appoint what punishments, and what rewards as seem
best to himself.

2. Porprietatis, which is his right or prerogative to dispose of all things
and Of propriety.
persons, and use them as he pleases; and in this respect all the world, and
all in the world are his servants, Genesis 14. 22. The Lord, the most High God,
Possessor of heaven and earth: And this Dominion or Sovereignty is natural unto
him, as he is God, the God of all the world, and Lord of all; neither is it
controled by men or Angels: If God will destroy or abase, or weaken, or
afflict, or raise, or bless, the creatures must yield unto his Sovereign Will.

And truly this is an unspeakable comfort to the people of God, that their God
The comfort of this.
is Lord of all, and Lord over all; that the Sovereignty is his alone, and the
Dominion is only his, that their God is above all gods, and that their God is
above all Lords, and that all the creatures in their whole being and working
are under him; that if he says to one Go, he goes, and if he says to another
Come, he comes; and if he say to one Do this, he does it; and if he says to
another Be still, he cease; this is a comfort unto you against all the wicked
in the world, and as touching all the serviceablenesse of all the creatures in
the World.

1. If your God has the Sovereign Dominion, Then issues and events shall The
issues and events shall not be as men contrive.
no^ be as men contrive, as they will, or as they desire; for there is a
greater than they which rules and reigns in the Kingdom of men; Be still, and
know that I am God, Psalm. 46. 10. All the powers, and all the policies, and all
the rage, and malice of all the wicked on earth, are under the Dominion of God;
he permits them, and he restrains them, and he confounds and destroys them;
thus far shall they go, and no farther.

2. Again, If Sovereignty and Dominion are proper to God, then you can never
Then you can never be brought in^o any straits but God is able to help you.
be brought in^o any straits, but God is able to help you, and to deliver you:
for he is Lord of all. He is the Lord of life, and the Lord of safety, and the
Lord of deliverances, and the Lord of comforts. All the creatures are at his
command; if he will open the hearts of men, they shall pity you and help you in
your wants; if he says to one, Go and comfort such a Christian, go and counsel
him, go and deliver him, be a friend unto him, he shall come unto thee, and be
this unto thee: The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.

3. What shall I say more? seeing Sovereignty and Dominion belong to your Then
all the Ordinances of grace are at his command.
God, Therefore all the Ordinances of grace and life are at his command, and
they shall yield out their strength, and drop down their fatness at his will
and pleasure; he can open them, and he can let out all their joys and
revivings, and consolations, they shall be effectual means of all-saving good
unto you upon his command.

12. He is and will be a good God unto you: The Lord is good, Psalm. 136. He
will be a good God unto you. Ten things concerning the goodness of God to his
people. He intends them good. He will bring unto them the good promised. He
delights in doing good. He accounts this his honor.
1. Thou Lord art Good, Psalm. 86. 5. And truly God is good to Israel, Psalm. 73.
1. O how great is thy goodn^sse which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee, Psalm. 31. 19.

There are ten things concerning the goodness of God unto his people.

1. He intends them good; I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says
the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an un ex^ected end,
Jer. 29. 11.

2. He will bring upon them all the good which he has promised them, Jer. 32.
42.

3. He delights in doing good unto them, I will rejoice over them to do them
good, Jer. 32. 41.

4. He looks upon his doing good unto his people, as his honor and praise; it
shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an h^nour before all the Nations of
the earth which shall hear all the good that I do unto them, Jer. 33. 9.

5. He thinks no good too good for them; he will give grace and glory, and He
thinks no good too good for them. He will never cease from doing good. He will
do them good every day. He prevents us with goodness. He does more good than
they seek for. He reserves the best good to the last.
no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11.

6. He will never cease from doing them good; Surely, goodness and mercy shall
follow me all the days of my life, Psalm. 23. 6. See also Jer. 32. 40.

7. He will do them good every day, his mercy is n^w every morning, Lam. 3. 23.
Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with benefits, Psalm. 68. 19.

8. He is so ready to do you good* that he oftentimes prevents you with his
goodness; before they call I will ^^swer, Isa. 65. 14.

9. He does them more good than they look for; Thou did terrible things which
we looked not for, Isa. 64. 3. When the Lord turned again the captivity of
Zion, we were like them that dream, Psalm. 1 26. 1.

10. He reserves the best good to the last: For besides all the good which he
does for his people in this life, there is also an inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for them, 1 Pet. 1.
4. Eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, etc. 1 Cor. 2. 9.

13. He is a very kind God unto his people; Thou art a God of great kindness,
He is a very kind God unto hi^ people. This contains four things in it.
Nehem. 9. 17. He has showed me his loving kindness, Psalm. 31. 21. His
merciful kindness is great toward us, Psalm. 117. 2.

The kindness of God contains four things in it.

1. The sweetness of his loving nature unto his people without the least
disdain of them, and harshnesse toward them; he will not bruise the bruised
reed, nor The sweetness of his nature.
despise the day of small things. 2. The easiness of the communication of
himself and goodness unto them, The easiness of his communications. His
favorable encouragings.
as waters flow out from a full fountain. 3. His favorable encouragings, and
acceptance of them in their persons and addresses unto him; as the father ran
and embraced the returning child, and fell on his neck and kissed him. 4. His
respectful tenders; helpful, forwardness of dealing with his people His
respectful tenders.
in all gentleness and elemency.
And therefore he is said to pity and spare his people, as a father pities his
child, (Psalm. 103. 13.) and spares his child that serves him, (Mal. 3. 17.)
and to draw his people with loving kindness, Jer. 31. 3. and to draw them with
bands of love, Hosea 11. 4. and to take them by the arms, Hosea 11. 3. and
gently to lead them, and to carry them in his bosom, Isa. 40. 11. and to
dandle them upon his knees, Isa. 66. 12. and to speak comfortably unto them,
Hosea 2. 14. In the Old Testament he would commune with his people, and give
out all his answers at the Mercyseat: And in the New Testament he gives them
audience at the Throne of grace and mercy, and would have them in all their
petitions to look upon him as their Father, Our Father, etc.) Though the
distance be infinite 'twixt him and us, yet he represents himself unto us
altogether as a kind God and Father, and makes kind promises unto us, and
gives us his own Twelve things may assure you God will be kind to his people.
His relations to them. His love is exceeding great unto them. His tender
apprehensions of any unkindness offered unto you. His daily passing by your
failings.
Son to be our Mediator, that so we may still find favor in his eyes.

There are twelve things which may assure you that your God is and will be a
kind God unto you.

1. His relations to you; Thy Maker is thy husband, Isa. 54. 5. I will marry
thee unto my self in loving kindness, Hosea 2. 19.

2. His love is exceeding great unto you; he loves you above all the people in
the world, and his choice delight is in you, you are his Hephzibahs and
Benlahs, because the Lord delights in you, Isa. 62. 4.

3. His tender apprehension of any unkind and harsh injuries offered unto you:
he that touches you, touches the apple of his eye.

4. His daily passing by the many failings and weaknesses; he pities them, and
will not mark them, nor insist upon them.

5. His easy reception of you into favor; if he sees but a tear in your eyes,
he His easy reception of you into favor.
will be gracious to the voice of your tears; I have heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself, I will surely have mercy on him.

6. His sympathy with you in your distresses and afflictions; in all their
afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them, His
sympathy with you in your distresses.
Isa. 63. 9.

7. His yearning bowels toward you; My bowels are troubled for him, Jer. His
yearning bowels toward you.
31. 20. and longings to do you good; He does wait that he may be gracious
unto you, Isa. 30. 18.

8. His speed to close with you, and to show his affections unto you. He flies
His speed to close with you.
upon the wings of the wind, and leaps over the Mountains, and hastens, and
runs to show himself reconciled unto you, Luke 15.

9. His great donations; he bestows no less on you than Christ, and grace, and
His great donations.
glory.

10. His quick ear to all your petitions, and such a full compliance with His
quick care to all your petitions.
you, that he will deny you nothing which you ask according to his will; If we
ask any thing according to his will he hears us.

11. His looking after you, and special charge that men speak comfortably unto
you, Isa. 40. 1. 2. and that you never come with fears to him, nor go away from
His looking after you.
him with sadness. Go in peace, Be of good comfort, Come boldly to the Throne
of grace, Heb. 4.

12. His gracious entertainment of you, and communions with you, and
manifestations His gracious entertainment of you.
unto you; so that you are as it were many times lifted up to heaven, and
filled with joy unspeakable and glorious. Beloved! This is unspeakable comfort
and encouragement unto you that your God is a kind God, and will deal with you
in loving kindnesses; Consider that of necessity you have to deal with him, and
that every day and hour of your life; and that he is not an hard Master, nor
of an harsh nature, nor rough in his words, or looks, or deeds: He will not
seek, not will he take advantages against you; so as that you may come with
boldness into his presence, and need not to fear his intentions or dealings
with you; Never did father or mother deal more gently with their tender
infants, never did loving husband deal more kindly with his most beloved wife,
than your kindest God will deal with you; and this affords unto you five
comforts.

1. You have free access to him, the door is always open; Should the child
fear to go to his tender Father? 2. You may come with full opening of your soul
and wants to him; he is kind and willing to hear all. 3. You may have good
hope; if any will use you well, it is your kind God. 4. You are sure of quick
dispatch; kindness makes no unnecessary delays, no vain excuses. 5. When men
deal unkindly with you, yet you shall find kind dealing from your God; Psalm.
27. 10. When my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord will take ms up.
14. Lastly, Eternity is another Attribute of God, your God is an eternal God;
Gods Eternity.
from everlasting to everlasting thou art God, Psalm. 90. 2. The Eternal God is
thy refuge, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. He inhabits Eternity, Isa. 57. 15.

Eternity is an interminable being and dutation before any time, and beyond all
time; it is a fixed duration without beginning or ending: If you should imagine
as many thousand myriads of years before time was as there are sands on the
Seashore, and of ten thousand thousand times more myriads after time shall not
be, you could not in the one or the other make any discovery of the being or
duration of God; the Eternity of God is beyond all possible conception of
measure or time. God ever was, ever is, and ever shall be.

Though the manifestations of himself unto the creatures are in time, yet his
essence or being never did nor shall be bound up by time; look backward or
forward, God from Eternity to Eternity is a most self-sufficient, infinite,
perfect, blessed being, the first cause of our being, and without any cause of
his own being; an eternal infinite fullness and possession to himself, and of
himself: what God is, he was from Eternity; and what God is, he will be so to
Eternity: The comfort of it is.
This very Attribute is that which drops myrrh and oil, and honey it is one
of the sweetest and strongest comforts unto you who are the people of God.

1. It sweetens all his love and mercy, and goodness unto you; God is Eternal,
It sweetens all his love and mercy, and goodness to you.
and his love to you is an Eternal love; there never shall come the time when
his love or his kindness, or his goodness, or his mercy shall cease toward
you; All the creatures slip away, and come to their end, and though one
creature outlives another, yet every creature at last is at his journies end:
There is an end of this man and his power, and an end of that man and his love;
but God never comes to an end, and his power and his love never comes to an
end: O what is this that God is God, and that he is our God for ever and ever,
that his love is an Eternal love, and his mercy is an Eternal mercy, and his
fullness is an Eternal fullness, and his blessedness is an Eternal
blessedness.

2. It gives you confidence in all your space of time which you are to live,
still It gives confidence to live upon God as long as we live.
to live upon your God: for there is no newness, nor alteration, nor weariness,
nor weakness in Eternity; no want or waste in Eternity, Eternity is full to all
Eternity: God is full of mercy and grace, and power, etc. The Eternal God is in
all times the self-same perfection and all sufficiency; there is no variation
or diminution, or contigency in Eternity; his power and mercy, and wisdom, and
knowledge, and love, and kindness are still at the same height.

3. The Eternal God has time enough to make all his promises good unto you; He
has time enough to make all his promises good. Though life be short, yet he
has promised to give eternal life.
you need not fear that he will dye in debt unto you; Eternity never dies, but
has time enough in it.

4. Though your life be not Eternal, but short, yet your Eternal God has
promised to give unto you Eternal life, 1 John 2. 25. This is the promise which
he has promised us, even Eternal life: Happiness were not happiness without
Eternity; Eternity of happiness is a full possession, and a present possession,
and an invincible possession, and endless possession of the blessed God for
ever, and ever, and ever.

5. This is comfort in all losses; I dye, but God will surely visit you,
Comfort in all losses.
said Joseph; as if he had said, I cannot live to do you good, but God lives
for ever; what though this comfort dies, yet the God of all comfort lives.

Thus have you heard the singular and manifold comforts of having God to be
your God, from the excellency of all his glorious Attributes, in respect of
which (because he is your God) he is engaged unto you. I thought to have added
unto all this another discourse of Gods engagement in his Attributes unto his
people. viz. That his Attributes were engaged unto you conjunctively; and that
conjunctive engagement was, 1. Universal, not this or that Attribute of God,
but this and that, every one of his Attributes. 2. Special, as his
al-sufficiency and faithfulness, his goodness and graciousness, his power and
wisdom, his mercifulness and unchangeableness, his omnipresence and kindness,
his Sovereignty and eternity.

But then I fear I should be too tedious unto you, therefore let what has been
spoken be sufficient to give you a taste of that happiness which the people of
God enjoy, by having God to be their God, upon this account, that their God is
engaged unto them in all his Attributes for their good.

SECT. VIII.
3. NOw follows a third singular comfort unto all who have God to be their If
God be your God, then Christ is your Christ.
God in Covenant, which is this, If God be your God, then Christ is your
Christ: To whom God is a God, unto them Christ is a Christ; if God be your God,
then Jesus Christ is yours; as Christ spoke unto his Father, All mine are
thine, and thine are mine, John 17. 10. All that have an interest in me, have
an interest in thee; and all that have a relation to thee, have also a relation
to me; We may so safely say, All who have propriety in God, have propriety in
Christ: If God says unto you I am your Father, Christ says unto you I am your
Savior; whom the Father owns, he does own; whom the Father loves, he loves.
This is certain that God the Father has not one sort of people, and Christ
another sort of people; that there are some to whom God has relation, and
there are others to whom Christ has relation. No: but what relation God has
to any, and what propriety God has in any, the same has Christ; and what
relation and propriety any have in God, the same have they unto Christ: I and
my Father are one. Then if you be Gods, then you are Christ's; and if God be
yours, then Christ is yours; he is given to you, and you are given to him: Unto
us a Son is given, Esaias 9. 6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, John
17. 6.

Now if God be your God, Then Christ is yours in these respects.

1. He is yours as to his person: He himself is yours, not yours only in the
respect Christ is yours as to his person.
of his graces and works, but yours also in respect of his person; as it was
his person who gave himself for you, (Christ has given himself for us, Ephesians.
5. 2.) so it is the person of Christ who gives himself unto you; my beloved is
mine, and I am his, Cant. 2. 16.

The union and relation 'twixt you and Christ is as real, as that between the
husband and the wife, as that between the head and the body, as that between
the Vine and the branches; as the husband can say This woman is my wife, and
the wife can say This man is my husband; so truly does Christ say This believer
is mine; so can the believer say This Christ is mine; that Christ who is the
Son of God, the brightness of his Fathers glory, who is immortal, God with
us, who is God blessed for ever, who is the Lord of glory, whose Name is
Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace; The Savior of sinners, the Redeemer, the Light and Life of the world,
the desire of all Nations, who is altogether lovely, and most excellent and
precious; in comparison of whom, Paul counted all things but loss and dung,
this Christ is your Christ; this Christ in whom is life, and without whom there
is no life; this Christ in whom is salvation, and without whom there is no
salvation; this Christ in whom is blessedness, and without whom there is
nothing but curse and misery; this Christ in whom is hope, and without whom
there is no hope; this Christ is your Christ.

But let us a little more distinctly consider our happiness and comfort, that
Christ, Comfort from this that the person of Christ is ours. It is more to
enjoy Christ himself, than to enjoy all things without him.
the person of Christ is ours.

1. It is more to enjoy Jesus Christ himself, than to enjoy any or all other
things without himself: Could you enjoy every good, and every comfort which
every creature in the whole world does contain, as all these are nothing in
comparison of Christ, (what is the Candle to the Sun? what is the glory of
the grass to the glory of the only begotten of the Father? what is the chafe
unto the wheat? the soul of man is above all these, much more is Christ; so
they are nothing in a separation from Christ; unless the figure stands before,
all that follows are but empty ciphres, which signify nothing, so unless you
have Christ, your greatness is but a cipher, your riches are but a cipher;
they are neither a blessedness unto you, nor yet a blessing, nor yet a way to
the one or to the other; Christ alone has more worth in him, more wealth in
him, more delight in him, more greatness in him, than can be possibly found in
all the creatures, although dividedly or conjunctively considered; and
therefore Moses preferred even the reproaches of Christ, before a^l the
treasures in Egypt, Heb. 11. Take me the greatest man on earth; if he be a
Christlesse man, he is but a cursed man, and all that he has, is but a curse
unto him; and take me the meanest man on earth, if Christ be his, he is a
blessed man; and all that he has, is a blessing unto him.

2. It is m^re to enjoy Jesus Christ himself, than to enjoy any, or all the
benefits It is more to enjoy Christ himself than to enjoy all benefits
depending on him.
depending on Christ; The benefits I say, from the enjoyment of Christ are very
precious (how precious is the peace which flows out of his blood, and the joy
which comes in by his Spirit, and the graces, and the gifts from him!) yet
Christ himself is more precious, more sweet, more lovely, and more desirable:
If the Image be so precious, much more the pattern it self; if the tokens and
gifts be so precious, much more is the giver himself; if the words of his
mouth, and the kisses of his lips are so sweet, much more sweet is the
enjoyment of Christ himself; therefore Paul rejoices especially in this, that
Christ loved him, and gave himself for him, Gal. 2. 20. And above all things,
desires to be fo^nd in him, Phil. 3. 9. No, not the knowledge of Christ (though
it were the excellency of knowledge) could suffice him; it was Christ himself
after whom he principally looked, and in whom he would be found.

3. All is enjoyed by the enjoyment of Christ. All is enjoyed

1. Equivalently; there is as much in Christ, as answers all other enjoyments
All is enjoyed by the en^oyment of Christ, Equivalently.
(Ipse unus erit tibi omnia, quia in ipso uno bono bona sunt omnia) the wisdom
of Christ does more than answer all other wisdom; and the knowledge of Christ
does more than answer all other knowledge; and the love of Christ does more
than answer all other love; and the unsearchable riches of Christ does more
than answer all other riches; and the delights in Christ do more than answer
all other pleasures.

2. Really; if you enjoy Christ himself, you do actually enjoy all the glorious
benefits by Christ, with the enjoyments of himself. If the field be yours, the
Really.
treasure in the field is yours indeed; in some civil enjoyments, there is an
exceptio juris; sometimes such a Manor you shall enjoy, but such or such
particulars are excepted and reserved; But it is not thus in your spiritual
enjoyments, (in the enjoyment of Christ) there is no exception, no clause, no
distinction; but if Christ be yours, all of Christ is yours; his love is yours,
his righteousness is yours, his wisdom, his holiness, his Redemption, all is
yours.

4. Jesus Christ h^mself, his person is the greatest blessing, and choicest
gift, that Jesus Christ himself is the greatest and choicest gift that God can
give unto you.
God has or can give unto you; for all the other blessings fall into our
possession and enjoyment by Christ alone; all your enjoyments are bestowed by
the enjoyment of Christ himself; the loving God, the merciful God,
righteousness, holiness, as long as Christ is Christ, you shall have
possession of them. Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ. Jesus Christ (if I may so express it) is the outlet of all
blessings, and he is the inlet to all our blessings; Look on our blessings as
descending from God to us, Jesus Christ is (as it were) the outlet of them
all; they are let out unto us by Christ; God himself becomes our God in Christ,
and he loves us in Christ, and chooses us in Christ, and is merciful and
gracious unto us in Christ, and shows the exceeding riches of his grace in
his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. And look on our blessings as
desired from God by us, we are let or brought into the enjoyment of them by
Christ; We lost all by the first Adam, and we come to enjoy all again by
Christ; Jesus Christ is (as it were) the root upon which all our mercies and
comforts, and hopes do live again and grow.

You obtain your access by Christ unto the Father, and your persons come to be
accepted in Christ, and all your services; He holds up all your Communions, and
makes them effectual and sure: God would not look on you, nor regard you, nor
let fall one glimpse or beam of his favor upon you, were it not for Christ;
it is Christ which makes you nigh, and dear, and lovely, and delightful, and
precious, and for whose sake you come to be sons and heirs of love and mercy,
and peace, and all the blessings which you do possess, or ever shall enjoy in
this world, or in the world to come.

5. Your condition cannot be otherwise than safe and comfortable, and blessed,
Your condition cannot be otherwise than safe, if Christ be yours.
if Christ be yours. As it cannot be well with any without Christ, so it cannot
be ill with any who have Christ: There is no condemnation unto you; you are now
passed from death to life; he is your life, and he that has the Son has
life; and he is your hope, (Christ in you the hope of glory) and he is your
Rock on which you are built; he is your peace, he is your glory, he is your
head, he is your Savior; in one word, the enjoyment of Christ makes life and
death comfortable.

2. Christ is yours as to all his Offices; You know that Christ is the anointed
Christ ^s yours as to all his offices.
of God; He was set apart, and ordained, and called, and sent, and undertook
all the work of salvation for sinners; and for the accomplishing of that
salvation, he was installed a Prophet, a Priest, and a King.

By reason of our sinful fall, there were (if I may so call them) three
diseases falling upon us.

One was Ignorance, and this Christ does heal as he is our Prophet.

A second was Alienation from God, and this Christ does heal as he is our
Priest.

A third is Impotency to come back to God, and this Christ does heal as he is
our King.

As he is a Prophet, he does open and unfold salvation; and as he is a Priest,
he does acquire and procure salvation; and as he is a King, he does apply that
salvation unto us.

The Prophetical Office of Christ, is that by which he does perfectly and
effectually reveal the whole saving Will of God.

The Priestly Office of Christ, is that by which he does expiate all our
sins, and does reconcile us unto God.

The Kingly Office of Christ, is that by which he does with authority and power
dispense and administer all things which do belong unto the everlasting
salvation of his people.

Beloved, All the works of our redemption, and reconciliation, and salvation,
do depend on Jesus Christ as invested with the threefold Office of Prophet,
Priest, and King; his whole Mediatourship is contained in them, and so is all
our comfort and hope; and therefore I will speak briefly unto every one of them.

1. Jesus Christ is a Prophet, and he is your Prophet. He is that Prophet whom
Christ is yours as a Prophet.
God had promised to raise up, Acts 3. 22. And whom all are commanded to hear,
verse 23. And this was he who was anointed by the Spirit of the Lord, to preach
the Cospel to the poor, Luke 4 18. And this is he in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3. who knows the Father, and by
whom alone the knowledge of the Father is revealed, Matthew 11. 27. who is in the
bosom of the Father, and declares him unto us. John 1. 18. who is the Angel of
the Covenant. Malachi 3. 1. unto whom the great Commission of opening the
mystery of salvation is granted and sealed.

Now there are four singular comforts unto you, which have God to be your God
in Covenant and consequently have Jesus Christ to be your Prophet. Four
comforts from hence. He has i^ in his commission to teach us.


1. He has it in his Commission to teach you, They shall be all taught of God,
Joh. 6. 45. yea it is his express Commission to preach the Gospel unto you,
Luke. 4. 18. to open and reveal that Mystery which was kept secret since the
world began, and to make it manifest. Romans 16. 25, 26. even the Mystery which
has been hid from ages, and from generations, but now is made manifest unto
his Saints, Col. 1. 26. Though others sit in darkness and see no light, yet
unto you (through Christ) there arises light in darkness; and your eyes shall
and do see the salvation of the Lord, and the glory of the Lord: the light
shines in your hearts, the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. he makes known unto you, the true life, and
the true way of life, the mystery of salvation.

2. He has it in his commission to instruct and teach you the whole mind and
will of To instruct and teach us the while mind and will of God.
God in every thing which concerns your salvation: all things that I have heard
of the Father, I have made known unto you, Joh. 15. 15.

As he discovers unto us infallibly the reality, and the quality of our
salvation, so there is not any one truth, nor any one path necessary unto that
salvation, but he opens it, and reveals it, whether it respect our faith, or
our obedience: he is the anno^nting which teaches you of all things and is
truth, and is no lie, 1 John 2. 27.

3. He is that Prophet who does teach, not only by his word, but also by his
Spirit: others can speak only to the ears of men, but he can speak to the
hearts of He teaches not only by his Word, but by his Spirit.
men, he can imprimere in mentem, as well as mentem exprimere, write his Law in
the heart, as well and as easily as he can deliver and make it known to our
minds: when he teaches you that you must believe, he does by his Spirit cause
you to believe; when be says that you must be born again, he does by his
Spirit make you new creatures: there is not any one grace, or duty, or path of
li^e which he sets before you (who are in covenant with God) but he works in
you those very graces, and puts forth a strength to perform all those duties,
and to walk in those paths.

4. As a Prophet he is anointed to preeah good tidings, Isa. 61. 1. the
Apostle calls it preaching of peace, Ephesians. 2 17. and not only the Prophet
Isaiah in that He is anointed o^ preach good tidings.
place, but also Christ himself in Luke 4. 18. tells you what those good
tidings are, what that Gospel is, namely to hind up, and heal the
broken-heared, liberty and deliverance to the captives, sight to the blind, to
give beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for
the spirit of heaviness.

O what comfort is here for you who are the people of God, and have Christ to
be your Christ, and your Prophet? Here are glad tidings for you, and your
Christ is anointed to preach them unto you when your hearts are broken and
bruised, you have a Christ to bind them up, and to heal them with his own
precious blood; I dyed for you, says Christ, this is my blood which was shed
for you, for the remission of your sins, to reconcile you, to make peace for
you, says Christ: and when you find your selves captives, and as it were shut
up on prison, Christ your Prophet comes to you by his Spirit and breaks open
the prison doors, and sets you at liberty from your sins, from Satan, from
your fears, and tears, and all the powers and chains of darkness: and when
your soul sits in darkness and sees no light, when they feed on tears, and are
overwhelmed with sorrows and heaviness, your Christ (who is your Prophet) can,
and will speak words of life unto you, and words of joy unto you: why are your
hearts troub^ed? said he to his Disciples; woman why weepest thou? said he to
Mary; daughter go in peace; so to another, son, be of good comfort.

There is no Prophet like your Prophet, who knows so much of the mind of God,
who reveals it so fully, so faithfully, so infallibly, so powerfully, so
sweetly, so savingly. Christ is a Priest, and your Priest.


Jesus Christ is a Priest, and he is anointed to be your Priest, Psalm. 110. 4.
The Lord has sworn and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedeck, vide Heb. 6. 20. Heb 7. 17. Cap. 4. 14. we have a great
High Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God.

I shall not insist on this Argument, to tell you how Christ was called and
qualified for his priestly Office, nor of the differences 'twixt him and all
other Priests: nor how that his Sacrifice was his humane nature, and the Altar
was his Divine Nature, and himself according to both these natures was the
Priest; My intention is only in few words to touch at this Office of Christ as
our Mediator: and then to express unto you, the chief comforts from your
interest in him, as to this his Office of Priesthood.

There are two Acts wherein his Priestly Office consists. Two acts of his
Priestly Office. Oblation.


1. One was the oblation of himself once for all; as a perfect Sacrifice for
the expiation of sin, and reconcil^ng us to God, Heb. 9. 14. Through the
eternal Spirit, he offered himself, without spot to God, verse 26. he appeared
to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, verse 28. Christ was once offered
to bear the sins of many, Romans 5. 10. when we were enemies we were reconciled
to God by the death of his Son, Col. 1. 20. He made peace though the blood of
his Cross, Heb. 2. 17. a merciful and faithful High Priest, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people.

2. The other is, His Intercession for us: This man (says the Apostle) because
Intercession.
he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, Heb. 7. 24. wherefore he
is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them: and therefore as to this interceding part
of his Priestly Office, Christ is said to appear for us in the presence of God,
Heb. 9. 24. as the Attorney appears for his Client in Court to answer for him;
and likewise he is called our Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1. to plead
for us, and to obtain for us, etc.

But some may now reply, We know all this, that Christ is a Priest, and a
Mediator of Redemption and of Intercession; that he offered up himself, that
he died, shed his blood, was sacrificed, and that he ever lives to make
Intercession.

Sol. What c^mfort we have by this.
I will show you what comfort you have by this, and I pray you mark it: There
are four unspeakable comforts unto you who are Christ's, from this, that he is
your High Priest, who offered himself for you, and lives to make Intercession
for you.

1. All your sins were laid upon him: for in that respect he was your Priest,
in by his oblation.
that respect also he was your Surety, Heb. 7. 21, 22. what is that? That? That
is, All our sin^es were ^ayed upon him.
he became bound to God, responsible unto him for all your sins, for all that
God in justice could charge upon you, and demand for satisfaction. Our
salvation was laid on one that is mighty.

As Judah became a surety to Jacob for Benjamin, he engaged himself to his
Father, I will be surety for him, of my hand shall thou require him; if I bring
him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for
ever, Genesis 43. 9. Thus Jesus Christ is our Priest, and therefore our Surety
with his Father; Father, I will take upon me all the sins of thy people; I will
be bound to answer for them, I will sacrifice my self for them, at my hands do
thou require satisfaction for their sins, and a full compensation unto thy
justice: I will die, I will lay down my life, I will make my soul an offering
for sins, I will become a curse, I will endure thy wrath.

O what a Comfort is this, that there is a Christ to answer for that which we
could not answer!

H^ discharged all our deb^s and bonds. The debt of obedience, and of
punishment.
2. He discharged all your debts and bonds: There is a twofold debt which lay
upon us; one was the debt of obedience unto the Law; And this Christ did pay by
fulfilling all Righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15. The other was the debt of
punishment for our transgressions, and this debt also Christ discharged by his
death on the Cross, and being made a curse for us to redeem us from the curse,
Gal. 3. 13. Hence it is that we are said to be bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.
20. and that Christ is called our ransom, Lutron, Matthew. 20 28. and
Antilutron, 1 Timothy 2. 6. the words do signify a valuable price laid down for
another ransom: the blood of christ (the Son of God) was a valuable price, a
sufficient price; it was as much as would serve the turn to take off all
enmities, and to take away sin, and to satisfy Divine justice, and indeed so
it did: and therefore you read that in his blood we have redemption, even the
forgiveness of our sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. and his death was such a full
compensation to Divine Justice, that the Apostle makes a challenge to all, Romans
8. 33 Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? and ver. 3^. Who is
he that condemns? it is Christ that died; as if he had said, Crist has
satisfied and discharged all.

O what comfort is ^his unto us, to have such an high Priest, who himself bare
all our sins, even all our sins, left not one unsatisfied for? laid down a full
ransom, a full price, such an expiatory ^acrifice, such a satisfactory
^acrifice, as that now we are out of the hands of justice, and wrath, and
death, and curse, and hell and are reconciled, and made near, and deal
altogether under the throne of Grace and Mercy.

3. As our Priest in offering himself for us, his Scacrifice being (as the
^cripture There is not only satis^action, bu^ merit in his oblation.
speaks) the blood o^ God (that is) of one that is God, there is more therefore
in it than mere payment, or satisfaction; there was merit also in it to
acquire, and procure, and purchase all Spiritual good and all Eternal good for
the people of God: not only immunities from evil in sin and death, but
privileges, and dignities of sons, and heirs, yea all grace, and all love,
and all peace, and all glory; even that glorious inheritance purchased by his
blood.

You may now look on ^od as your Father, and on Heaven as your inheritance,
se^led on you by the love of God, and purchased for you by the blood of Jesus
Christ.

4. What shall I say more? Jesus Christ is your Priest for Intercession also;
Do Comfort from his intercession.
you know your happiness by this, and in this? your Christ is now entered into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father: and therefore he
intercedes for you, he presents himself as your Surety, ^s your Redeemer, in
all his susceptions and endurances and discharges and purchases for you, in the
price which he laid down and in the merits of that price, and so negotiates,
and obtaines for you, and still is effectually letting d^wn unto you the
virtues, and purchases of his life and death, until you come at length to ^he
highest and full enjoyment of himself in glory. Father, I purchased this for
him, I paid dearly for it etc. And therefore some (not without ground) ascribe
all the purchases of Christ (for the application of them unt^ us) unto the
Intercession of Christ.

I will say no more but th^s, That all your communions with the Father, all
your audiences, all your acceptances, all your answers, in graces, in comforts,
in hopes, in helps in present, in future enjoyments, owe themselves unto christ
as your Priest, in the Oblation of himself for you, and in the intercession of
him unto the Father for you.

3. Jesus Christ is a King, and he is your King: He is called a King, Psalm. 2.
6. and Jesus Christ is a Kin^, and your King. He m^kes subjects by his Word and
Spirit. He m^k^s all his Subjects freemen. He m^kes all his Subjects Kings.
he is called King of Saints, Rev. 15. 3. He is such a King, as there is not
the like.

A King by contract in respect of God, by conquest in respect of us.

1. He makes Subjects by the power of his Word and Spirit effectually calling
us out of the kingdom of darkness, into his own gracious Kingdom.

2. He makes all his Subjects freemen; If the S^n shall make you free, you are
free indeed, Joh. 8 36.

3. He makes all his Subjects Kings; He has made us unto our God Kings and
Priests, Rev. 4. 10

4. He rules all his Subjects by Righteous Laws: therefore he is called
Melchisedeck, He rules them by righ^eous Laws.
which signifies a King of Righteousness: and his Kingdom is called a
Righteous Kingdom.

5. He is the King of Salem, of peace as well as of Righteousness. Men never
He is a King of peace.
enjoy peace, at least such a peace anywhere as in the Kingdom of Christ; there
is no man that obeyes him, and is ruled by him, but finds peace, Gal. 6. His
kingdom is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

6. He as a King seeks your good, and all that he does has a respect to your
good: all He seeks your good, and all he does is with respect to your good. He
will protect and secu^e you.
his dispensations are good, and for your good: he seeks your welfare and
happiness, speaks kindly to you, hears your groans, answers your complaints,
and pleads for the poor and needy.

7. He is a King for Prot^ction: He will protect and secure you against all
your Enemies, Devils, Sins, Men, the worst and greatest, and will subdue them,
and trample them under his feet: His enemies shall be his footstool.

8. He has great rewards, an infinite treasure to bestow on all his people; he
will accept He has great rewards for you.
of their service, and reward every one of them with a crown of life.

O how happy are the people who have the Lord to be their God! and who have
(therefore) Christ to be their Christ: a Christ who is such a Prophet, such a
Priest, and such a King.

I will not stay you any longer in this one part of your Covenant-happiness,
viz. That Christ is yours; only I think it fit to sum up in a few particulars
the general comforts which I have mentioned or insinuated already in the Person
and Offices of Christ. Thus then; if Christ be yours, Then 1. Life is yours,
Christ is your life, and he that has the Son has life, Col. 3. 4. 1 John 5.
12.

2. Love is yours, Christ loves all his with a love of Kindness, and
tenderness, and benevolence, and benificence.

3. All that Christ did or suffered, in order to man's salvation, all is yours,
your good, and for your good.

4. His Redemption is yours, he has Redeemed you from wrath, and curse, and
sin, and Satan, and death, and hell.

5. You are certainly partakers of the forgiveness of all your sins.

6. You are perfectly reconciled unto God, who is now your God, and your Father.

7. You are accepted and approved with God in the Righteousness of Christ,
which is now yours, as Christ himself is yours.

8. You now receive the adoption of sons; as you are the brethren of Christ, so
are you with him in the same relation of sons unto God.

9. You are clothed with the same Spirit wherewith Christ himself was
anointed; the self same Spirit which is in Christ as your Head, is in you as
his Members.

10. He is your Apology against all Satan's accusations, and your own sins and
fears: There is no condemnation unto them that are in Christ Jesus, for it is
Christ that died.

11. He is the living Root and foundation of all your graces and comforts.

12. All his victories shall extend to you, over Satan, the world, your sins,
and death.

13. You are no more strangers, nor Forreiners, but are made nigh by the blood
of Christ.

14. You have all the sights of God in his glory, as he is the Lord, gracious,
and merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth.

15. You enjoy liberty of Access by his blood to the throne of grace.

16. You shall assuredly speed well in all your suites, be heard, and answered
upon his account.

17. He will take special care of you, and will own, and help, and succor, and
supply you, as long as you have a day to live on earth.

18. He is your Defense; as he is exceedingly sensible of all your Injuries, so
he will certa^nly judge all your enemies

19 By him you are heirs of the same glory and Kingdom which the Father has
bestowed on him, and which he has prepared for you

20. He will never part with you, nor forsake you, but will love and keep you
to the end.

21. He will entertain you with sweet communions in the day of your pilgrimage:
and as you are walking, and traveling through the vale of tears, many a kind
word, many a good look many a feast all you have, where he will sup with you,
and you shall sup with him; many refreshings, and joys, and revivings of your
spirits.

22. You shall infallibly poss^sse and enjoy all the grace, and comfort, and
blessing, and blessedness which he has purchased for you in this life, and in
the life to come, even to all eternity: he is ever with you whilst you are on
earth, and you shall for ever be with him when you dye, and come to Heaven.

SECT. IX.
4. A Fourth singular comfort unto you who have God to be your God, is this,
The Spirit of God is yours.
then the Spirit of God is yours. He also is given unto you; for this is one
part of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within you. 1 These. 4.
8. He has given unto us his holy Spirit. 1 John 4. 13. Hereby know we that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. Nehem. 9.
20. Thou gave them also thy good Spirit. Acts 5. 32. The holy Ghost whom God
has given to them that obey him.

The Spirit of God may be considered seven ways, and as to every one of them
The spirit is ours in respect of his Titles and Attributes. The Spirit of God
of Christ, of Glory.
he is yours; In respect, 1 Of his ^itles, or Attributes. 2. Of his gifts and
fruits. 3 Of his works or operations. 4. Of his helps or virtues. 5. Of his
joys and comforts. 6. Of his Office or Function. 7. Of his presence or abode.

1. The Spirit is yours in respect of his Titles and Attributes: he is called
sometimes,

1. The Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. and the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9. and
the Spirit of glory, 1 Pet. 4. 14. This very Spirit is given unto you, who have
God to be your God; we have received the Spirit which is of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, Gal. 4. 6. O what a
glory is this? what a dignity? what a comfort? that the same Spirit which is in
Christ, is also in you? that you have Christ, and you have the Spirit of Christ.

2. The holy Spirit: Grieve not the holy Spirit of God. Ephess. 4. 30. sealed
with The holy Spirit.
that holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13. above eighty times is the Spirit of
God styled the holy Ghost, or Spirit, in the Scripture. And under this notion
also is he given unto you; as we are said in Heb. 3. 14. to be partakers of
Christ, so are we said in Heb. 6. 4. to be partakers of the holy Ghost: and as
Christ is said to be given unto us, Isa. 9. 6. so the Holy Ghost is said to be
given unto us, Acts 5. 32. 1 These. 4. 8.

This is the excellency of the Spirit of God, that he is holy, and this is our
excellency that we are holy, and the holy Spirit is given unto us for this end,
to make us holy (like unto the Father, and the Son, and himself) hence it is
that we are said to be sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Romans 15. 16. 2 These. 2.
13. 1 Pet. 1. 2.

3. The free Spirit; so he is called, Psalm. 51. 12. Uphold me with thy free
Spirit The free Spirit.
He is a free Spirit on a two fold account; 1. Because he works where and on
whom, and when, and how he himself pleases: he blows where he lists, Joh. 3.
8. 2. And he is a ^ree Spirit, in as much as all spiritual freedom and liberty
is received of us from him; hence the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 17. where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is liberty.

4. The good Spirit by Spirit is good, ^sa. 143 10 Thou gave them of thy good
Spirit, The good Spirit*
Neh. 9. 20. The Spirit is essentially good, and counsels good: he is indeed a
good Spirit unto us; All the good thoughts in us, and all the good desires in
us, and all the good we have or shall receive from God in Christ, is handed to
us by this good Spirit, yea and all the sweet sights of God himself that ever
we enjoyed, and all the tastes that ever we have had of Jesus Christ, and all
the joys and contentments in our souls, we are beholding unto this good Spirit
for every one of them; though in some respect you are not beholding unto the
Spirit for dying, and suffering, and satisfying, and reconciling, and
purchasing for you, yet this I may safely affirm, that for all the enjoyments
of all the sweet comforts depending on the sufferings of Christ, you are
singularly beholding to the good spirit for them; you never could have partaked
of Christ, nor of any one good purchased by Christ, had it not been for this
good Spirit.

5. The powerful or mighty Spirit: The Spirit of the Lord is called the Spirit
of The powerful Spirit.
might, Isa. 11. 2. The power of the holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13. the power of the
Spirit of God, verse 19. the power of the Highest, Luke 1. 35. It was the power
of this Spirit which did convince you of your sins, and which did break your
heard hearts, and did rescue and deliver you from the power of darkness; which
does subdue your iniquities, and pull down your strong bolds: It was, and is
this powerful Spirit by whom the Ministrations, or Ordinances of the Gospel
have been, and still are of power with you. The Word is called the sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. The Ministrations of them selves are weak, it is the
concomitant presence of the Spirit which makes them powerful and lively for
your conversion, comfort, and salvation; you had lain in the same condition,
and darkness, and bondage, and death with other men, had not the powerful and
mighty Spirit of God put forth the greatness of his own strength to the
alteration of your hearts by his own grace.

2. The Spirit is yours in respect of his gifts and fruits; You read in 1 Cor.
12. The Spirit is ours in respect of his gifts or fruits.
14. of diversities of gifts of the Spirit for edification, or to profit
withal, ver. 7. and you read of the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8. 23.
and of the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22.

The Spirit of God (as to these gifts and fruits) is called the Spirit of
grace, Zach. 12. 10. and the Spirit of wisdom, Isa. 11. 2. and the Spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord: and the Spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13.
and the Spirit of love, 2 Timothy 1. 7. and the Spirit of supplication, Zach. 12
10. the fruit of the Spirit, says the Apostle in Gal. 5. 22. is love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, (and ver. 23.) meekness,
temperance.

There are six things which I would briefly observe concerning the graces, or
fruits Six things concerning the graces of the Spirit. They are the beauties of
a Christian. They are necessary to salvation.
of the Spirit.

1. They are the Beauties, Glories, Ornaments, Chains, Pearls, Jewels of a
Christian; you have no excellencies till you partake of them, but are dead,
loathsome, polluted and vile.

These are the very image of God.

2. They are necessary unto salvation: No man can be saved without them. They
are the way to the kingdom, though they be not the cause of reigning in the
kingdom: without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

3. They are pledges of salvation: therefore called the first fruits, which
were They are pledges of salvation.
the beginnings and the pledges of the full harvest: and also the earnest of
the Spirit which he leaves with us to assure us of that glorious happiness
which we are to receive shortly in fullness.

4. They are given to none but unto such as shall be saved. There are the
common gifts of the Spirit, which are for the edification of others. These they
may have They are given to none but such as shall be saved.
who shall perish, like those who helped to build the Ark, and yet were
drowned. But there are the special gifts of the Spirit which are for Renovation
of the soul, and for the preparation of it for glory. These are given to none
but unto such who are elected unto salvation: As many as were ordained to
eternal life believed, Act. 13. 48. Matthew. 11. 25. Hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes.

5. Every gift or grace, which accompanies salvation, is (by the Spirit) given
Every grace accompanying salvation, is given to every child of God.
to every child of God; to every one who has God to be his God in Covenant:
every one of them has every saving grace of the Spirit.

1. The spirit of grace; I will pour upon the house of David, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace, Zach. 12. 10. 2. The Spirit of
knowledge. They shall all know me from the least of them unto the greatest of
them, Jer. 31. 34. 3. The Spirit of wi^d^me. The Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ give unto you the Spirit of wisdom, Ephesians. 1. 17. 4. The Spirit of faith;
We have the same Spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13. You are all the children o^ God
by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 26. To them that have obtained like precious
faith with us, 2 Pet. 1. 1. 5. The Spirit of love, 2 Timothy 1. 7. Ye your selv^s
ar^ taught of God to love one another, 1 These. 4. 9.
What should I speak of godly sorrow, repentance, humbleness, meekness,
patience? etc. whatsoever gift is necessary to our salvation, the Spirit does
certainly work in every one of the people of God, although not in the same
measure, proportion and height, yet to the same truth, and for the same
efficacy unto their salvation.

Every child of God has the same Spirit of grace, and faith, and love; and
though one Christians graces may fall short of another for the quantity, yet
they do not fall short for the present quality, nor for the future glory; The
weakest grace of the Spirit, is able to change the heart and save the soul.

6. The Spirit does cherish, and preserve, and keep all those saving gifts of
his The Spirit does cherish and prese ve all those saving gifts in us.
in you: As a Parent who begers the children, he looks unto those children, and
maintains and keeps them; All your graces are the births of the Spirit of
grace; and as they are the effects of his power, so also are they the objects
of his care; and therefore as they receive life from his presence in the
Ordinances, so shall they receive strength, and growth, and stability from his
continual influence upon them; We are s^rengthened with might by his Spirit in
the inner man, Ephesians. 3. 16. As we are changed from our shameful condition to
glory by the Spirit, so by the same Spirit are we changed from glory to glory,
2 Cor. 3. 18.

3. The Spirit is yours in respect of his works or operations: And truly, this
The Spirit is theirs in respect of his works and operatio^s.
consideration makes out an exceeding happiness unto the people of God, in as
much as the participation of all their happiness depends upon the workings of
the Spirit of God in whom they are interested by this Covenant of grace.

There are five choice works which the Spirit does for all the people of God,
Five choice works which the Spirit does for all Gods people He does unite
Christ and them.
who have God to be their God.

1. He does unite Christ and them; Although the benefits by Christ are
unexpressibly precious, yet the fruition of them is impossible without a
precedent union with Christ (forasmuch as union is a necessary foundation for
Communion) you must be in Christ, and being his, himself and all his benefits
become yours.

Now it is the Spirit which makes up this union; as love makes the union 'twixt
Christian and Christian; and as faith makes up the union from us to Christ (for
we are planted into Christ, and are espoused unto Christ, and live in Christ by
faith) so the Spirit makes the union 'twixt Christ and us; there being no other
way for him to be joined unto us, and to become Relatively ours, but by his own
Spirit; it is the Spirit which does let out the heart of Christ to us, and who
does bring in our hearts unto Christ; it is the Spirit by whom Christ applies
himself unto us, and apprehends us, and by whom we also do apprehend and apply
Christ; by his Spirit he takes hold of us, and by the same Spirit it is that we
take hold of him. In a word, it is the Spirit by whom Christ speaks to our
hearts, and by whose light we see the excellencies of Christ, and the great
love of Christ, and who gives Christ (as it were) into our hands, and mightily
allures and prevails upon our hearts, to give themselves unto Christ again; as
Christ had never been effectually revealed unto you but by the Spirit, so you
had never been effectually brought to Christ but by the Spirit; you had been
Christlesse for ever without him.

And now consider the happiness in having this Spirit, which has wrought so
effectually as to unite Christ and you, and you and Christ, that Christ is
yours, and you are his; by him are you persuaded and drawn, and brought into
the possession of Christ, and all the benefits by Jesus Christ.

2. He does conform us unto Christ; We all (says the Apostle in 2 Cor. 3. 18.)
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image, He does conform us unto Christ.
from glory to glory by the Spirit of the Lord. As by the Spirit we do discern
a most glorious nature of holiness in Christ, so by the Spirit we are changed
into the same image of holiness. Hence are we said to be born again b^ the
Spirit, John 3. 5, 6. and to be renewed by the holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. And to be
sanctified by him, 1 Pet. 1. 2.

You read that Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, and he was anointed by
the Spirit; So is every Christian; he becomes a Christian by the Spirit, and he
is anointed by the Spirit: The ointment indeed is first poured upon our head,
and then upon us; but as it is the same spirit in us which is in Christ, so it
is the same anointing; only it is in Christ as the head, and without measure;
and as in the pattern unto which we are conformed by the Spirit. As by the
unction of the Spirit, we become like Christ in nature, so also in Relation;
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying
Abba-Father, Gal. 4. 6.

Now judge of the blessedness of having the Spirit; He is the cause of our
union, and he is the cause of our unction: he brings us into Christ, and he
anoints us with the same grace wherewith Christ himself was anointed, so that
we are like Christ himself; we are anointed with the same Spirit, and therefore
we must needs be excellent and choice persons, and very lovely in the eyes of
God.

3. He does reveal unto us, the highest, and the choicest things of salvation;
He is called the Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17. because he opens He
reveals to us the choicest things of salvation.
and reveals those things unto the people of God, which are hid from the eyes
of others.

There are five precious things which the Spirit reveals unto you. He reveals,


1. The mystery of life unto you; even Jesus Christ, who cannot be known The
mystery of life.
or acknowledged but by the Spirit. Flesh and blood cannot reveal him: No man
can confess him; No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost,
1 Cor. 12. 3. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
wisdom, which God ordained before the world, unto our glory, 1 Cor. 2. 7.

2. The love of God unto you: The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, The
love of God.
by the holy Ghost which is given unto us, Romans 5. 5. He makes the greatness
of the love, and your propriety in it known unto you, and the exceeding riches
of grace, etc.

3. The presenc of Christ within you: Hereby we know that he abides in us, by
the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3. 24. Christ without, nay, Christ
The presence of Christ.
within us, is not discerned by us without the Spirit.

4. The wonderful glory prepared for us: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
The glory prepared for us.
for them that love him: But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for
the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10.

5. The most precious gifts bostowed on us: In this life we have received the
The most precious gifts bostowed on us.
Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us
of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. The sight of your own graces, is by the assistance of the
Spirit.

O what a happiness is all this, to know Jesus Christ, and as present in my
soul! To know the love of God in mine heart! To know the exceedingly exceeding
weight of glory prepared, and prepared for me! and to know all that God has
freely given me, in order unto that exceeding glory! This, etc.

4. He fits us for that salvation which Christ has purchased for us. As the He
fits us for that salvation which Christ has purchased for us.
blood of Christ did purchase our salvation, so the Spirit of Christ does fit
us for the enjoyment thereof; He makes us meet to ^e partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light: The Apostle speaking of this salvation,
under several expressions in 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. he adds in the fifth verse,
Now he which has w^ough^ us for the self-same thing, is God, who has given
unto us the earnest of his Spirit. And this fitting work of his upon us for the
salvation purchased by Christ, he does execute,

Partly by cleansing and purifying ou^ sinful hear^s, and mortifying those
lusts, which otherwise would render us unfit, and incapable of that glorious
salvation.

Partly by endowing and beautifying the soul with Christ and his
righteousness, and his graces, that thereby an entrance may be made for us,
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.
11.

Partly by leading and upholding us in all the ways of Christ, until we come
to receive the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls.

5. I will add but one work more of the Spirit on your behalf, which is this,
He works all our works in us and for us.
He works all your works in you, and for you: Consider your works, either of
faith or obedience; your works of faith in reference to the promises of God;
and your work of obedience in reference to the precepts of God; although you
are the persons who do believe the one, and obey the other, yet it is the
Spirit of Christ which is the cause, and the powerful principle of those in
you. He it is who does make your hearts to believe, and who does cause you to
walk in his Statutes, and do them, Ezekiel. 36. 27.

4. The Spirit is yours, in respect of his help or virtue; The Spirit helps
our The Spirit is ours in respect of his help and virtue.
infirmities, Romans 8. 26.

And there are six things wherein the Spirit is an help unto all the people of
God.

1. In all their Communions with God. 2. In the weaknesses of all their graces.
3. In the actings of every grace. 4. In the conflicts of grace. 5. In the
darkness upon their spirits. 6. In the (...) of their souls.
1. The Spirit (...) them in in all their communions with God; in their
Meditations He help them in all their communions with God.
of God, in their hearing of the Word of God, in their addresses of prayer unto
God; and as to this, the Apostle gives a special instance in that, Romans 8. 26.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us,
with groanings which cannot be uttered. When we are to pray, there is in us
sometimes an infirmity of ignorance; we know not what to pray for, either for
the matter, or for the manner; and there is in us sometimes an infirmity of
deadness and dullness; we cannot pray with that fervency as we should, or as
we would. But now the Spirit helps these infirmities by way of instruction;
Teaching us what (especially) to pray for; and by way of causation, in making
intercession for us (that is) in quickening and enabling us to pray with
groanings (that is) with such full and strong affections of heart, as cannot be
uttered or expressed by words; Our streightened, and narrow, and barren hearts,
are many times by the influence and assistance of Gods Spirit, enlarged and
opened, and filled with a Spirit of supplication; with such an ardency, with
such an earnestness, with such a copiousnesse, that after we have long
insisted with God, yet we have not opened half our minds and desires unto God;
it excites all our graces, and sets them a work: such an help is the Spirit
unto us in praying unto God.

2. The Spirit helps them in the weakness of their graces; He waters the
plants, In the weakness of their graces.
and blows upon the buds, and draws on his works of grace toward perfection:
He does (as it were) Nurse them up, and breed, and brood them up. He helps your
^imme knowledge, by adding light unto light, and opening more and more the eyes
of your understanding to know the things of God in Christ. He helps the weak
and staggering faith, by adding faith unto faith, in answering your doubts, and
evidencing your grounds and interests in Jesus Christ. He is the wind which
blows upon your garden, and makes the Spices there of to flow out, Cant. 4. 16.

3. The Spirit helps them in the actings of every grace. You know In the
actings of every grace.
the distinction of gratia praeveniens and gratia subsequens: gratia operans
and gratia cooperans.

It is the Spirit which works grace in us; and it is the Spirit which makes
grace (wrought in us) to work. You are not able (of your selves) to use the
graces given unto you (when you please) without the influence and assistance of
the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of God I am that I am: and his
grace bestowed upon me was not in vain. I labored, yet not I, but the grace of
God in me. Can you trust when you will? and mourn when you will? and fear when
you will? and command your thoughs and passions when you will? and patiently
bear the hand of God when you will? The light (if it were cut off from the
influence and presence of the Sun) would not be light, nor give light at all:
The arm if it were cut off from the body, it could not stir at all. Though
the arm be grafted into the body, yet it stirs by influence from the head.

No grace that we have could move or act at all, were it not acted and moved by
the Spirit of Christ; and therefore when you are to believe, he helps you to
believe; and when you are to repent, he helps you to repent; and when you are
to bless, he helps you to bless; and when you are to suffer, etc.

His hand is upon your hand, his strength is upon your strength, his grace is
upon his own grace; As all your graces have their being from his power of life,
so they have their working from his power of influence too. He it is who
works in you to will and to do.

4. The Spirit helps them in the conflicts of grace; when inward temptations
arise In the conflicts or grace.
out of your own hearts, and when outward temptations (...) in from Satan,
alas, your own strength is insufficient to conquer for you; (...) maintain the
fight for you, unless the Spirit of God put forth his actual help; unless he
take your part, what one temptation of lust, of doubt, of fear, is not too
hard for you? and what one temptation from Satan is not too strong for you?
Every little touch throws down, or hazards the weak child; so this, etc. But
this is your comfort, that in all your spiritual conflicts you are sure of the
Spirits presence to own his own graces, and to defend and secure them. His
gracious presence shall be sufficient for you, 2 Cor. 12. 9. and his power
makes it self manifest in your weakness; he will be near to help you,
strengthen you, to make you to resist, and to conquer, and to be more than
conquerours through Christ that loved you. We are strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10.

5. The Spirit helps them in the darknesses upon their spirits; my meaning is,
In the darkness of our spirits.
in all the with-drawments of Gods favor and light of countenance, and in all
the sad apprehensions of their own spiritual condition; when they think God is
become their enemy, and that themselves are forgotten of God, and cast off by
God, and have no interest, nor hope in Christ. Now in these times the Spirit of
God works and helps, supplies, supports, stirs up faith against hope to believe
in hope, and against our own feelings, yet to pray, and trust, and wait, and
look for God.

6. He helps them in the captivities of their souls: As when sin or Satan In
the captivity of our souls.
(in this or that particular) have been too subtle, and too strong for them,
and have prevailed over them, so that they are fallen and not able to rise;
even then in this condition does the Spirit of God by his wonderful graces,
help them up again; he makes them to see their sins, and bewail them, and
raise them by renewing and strengthening faith on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus he dealt with David, with Peter, etc. As the finding of us in our lost
estate, so the raising of us from our fallen estate, is done by the help of the
Spirit.

5. The Spirit is yours in respect of his joys ^r comforts; You read of the He
is ours in respect of his joys and comforts.
joy of the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. And of the comforts of the holy Ghost,
Acts 9, 31. And that Christ himself calls him the Comforter, John 16. 7. The
Spirit is given unto you, not only to unite you to Christ, not only to conform
you unto Christ, not only to lead you in the ways of Christ, not only to help
you in the services of Christ, but also to comfort your hearts in Christ.

The Spirit is a comforter in three respects. He is a Comforter, As he opens to
us all the springs of comfort. As he actuates our faith in the^ As he applies
them to our souls.


1. He opens unto you all the true springs of comfort; It is he who opens unto
you the fountain of mercy, and the fountain of the love and grace of God, and
the fountain of the blood of Christ.

2. He actuates your faith to look on all these fountains of joy, and wells of
comfort, as set open for the good and help of your souls.

3. He applies all of them unto your souls: he makes it evident that God loves
your souls, and that Christ died for your souls, and that you are justified by
faith in him, and are reconciled and pardoned, and accepted unto life; and
hereupon he fills you with all joy in believing, even with joy unspeakable and
glorious. You cannot imagine what a comfort it is to have the Spirit of God to
be our comfort; for

1. His comforts are choice comforts; There is no more comparison 'twixt the
His comforts are choice comforts.
comforts of the world, and the comforts of the Spirit, than between the light
of the Candle, and the light of the Sun; they are the very comforts of God;
they are the very drops out of the Wells of Salvation; they are drawn out from
the proper and only grounds of joy. They are comforts which (of all other) do
most punctually answer the distresses of your souls.

2. He can comfort you under all your discomfirts; Who comfort us in all our
He cancomfort under all discomforts.
tribulations, 2 Cor. 1. 4. Yea, under the deepest and saddest disconsolations;
In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul, Psalm.
94. 19. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, etc. thy rod
and thy staff they comfort me, Psalm. 23. 4. He heals the broken in heart,
and binds up their wounds, Psalm. 147. 3.

3. He can comfort you when there is none else to comfort you; when you have He
can comfort when there is none else to comfort.
neither father nor mother, sister nor brother, companion nor friend; when you
are in prison, in exile, in the loss of all, yet he alone (when you are alone)
can comfort your souls, he can show you the salvation of the Lord, speak peace,
assure you of mercy, and cause you to rejoice.

4. H^ can comfort you, and none shall hind^r him; neither men, nor devils, He
can comfort and none shall hinder ^im.
nor your own fears and doubts; He can create your peace and joys, and make
comf^rts for you, and make you to drink of them; And as none can take away your
joys, so none shall be able to hinder them.

6. The Spirit is yours in respect of his offices; There are three special
offices belonging He is ours in respect of his offices. Three offices of the
Spirit. To make all the Ordinances of Christ effectual to us.
unto the Spirit.

1. One is to make all the Ordinances of Christ powerful and effectual unto
you; Take the doctrines of the Gospel, they are not effectual without the
Spirit; and take the se^ls of the Gospel, they are not effectual unto you
without the Spirit; There are excellent precepts in the Gospel, and excellent
offers in the Gospel, and excellent promises in the Gospel; the Gospel commands
us to repent, to mourn, to deny our selves, to renounce all for Christ, to come
and believe on Christ; but it is the Spirit which makes all these commands
effectual: and the Gospel offers Jesus Christ to poor sinners, and thi^sty
sinners, and presents singular arguments to persuade and allure and draw the
hearts of sinners; but it is the Spirit which makes all those offers, and all
those arguments effectual; and the Gospel promises all heavenly good of love,
of grace, of peace, of joy, etc. but it is the Spirit which makes all these
effectual. And therefore the New Testam^nt is called the m^n^stration, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit who gives l^fe, 2 Cor. 3. 6. And the Gospel has
excellent seals of mercy and forgiveness, but it is the Spirit, etc. It is the
peculiar office of the Spirit to make all the Gospel effectual, and effectual
to the elect of God, to the people of God; There is not one part or branch of
the Gospel, but the Spirit is (virtute officii) to make it effectual to you. He
is to give you sufficiency of strength for all Evangelical obedience; and he is
to open and apply unto you, all the good in Christ, and all the comforts in the
attributes of God, and promises of God; and he is to make out unto you, all the
mercy and blessings, and happiness sealed in Baptism, and the Lords Supper;
And as Christ never failed in any Office which he undertook, so the Spirit will
not fail, but perform and accomplish all and every thing that belongs to his
Office; and therefore you shall have all the good intended to you in any
Gospel-Ordinance whatsoever.

2. Another is, To witness unto us our present standing in grace, and relation
To witness our present standing in grace.
unto God: you read this plainly in Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. 1 John 5. 8. Th^re
are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blo^d.

A Witness is one who gives in a Testimony against a man, or for a man; and he
is of use in all doubtful and litigious cases, in all suits and trials; Satan
puts it many times in debate by his accusations, Thou art not right, thou art
not the child of God, thou presumest, thou deeceivest thy self; In this or such
like cases, there are two Witnesses for the Christian. 1. One is his own
Spirit. 2. The other is Gods Sp^r^t; Says conscience (this is the spirit of
man) I know that his heart is ^ight, and that he belongs to God. And says the
Spirit of God (who searches the heart, and knows me, and all which himself
has wrought in the heart) and I know that he is born again, for I regenerated
him; and I know that he is a child of God, for he has received the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby he cries Abba-Father.

And verily a greater Testimony, and surer witness cannot be had then the
Testimony and Witness of the Spirit of God who knows all things, and is truth.

3. A third Office of the Spirit is to seal us in respect of our future
happiness; To seal us in respect of our future happiness.
and this also the Scriptures expressly deliver, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after ye
believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise. Verse 14. Which is
the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession. Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are
sealed unto the day of redemption; The sealing of the Spirit is that assuring
confirmation unto the hearts of believers, that the heavenly inheritance
purchased by the blood of Christ is theirs; and that they (when this day of
full Redemption comes) shall assuredly possess and enjoy it.

Beloved, what can be said more to express the happiness and comfort of the
people of God, in having God to be their God? the Father is theirs, the Son
of God is theirs, and the Spirit of God is theirs; theirs in his graces, theirs
in his comforts, theirs in Offices witnessing their present condition in grace,
and assuring them of their future inheritance in glory; what more happiness
can be enjoyed on earth than this!

7. Lastly. The Spirit is yours in respect of his presence. Joh. 14. 17. The
Spirit He is ours in respect of his presence.
of truth dwells with you. Romans 8. 11. By his Spirit that dwells in you. 2 Timothy 1. 14. By the holy Ghost which dwells in us. It is observable concerning
the presence of the Trinity, that every one of the persons is said to dwell in
believers; God the Father does dwell in them, 2 Cor. 6. 16. The Son does
dwell in them; Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 2. 17. The holy Ghost
likewise dwells in us.

O happy soul, who art made such a Temple wherein God the Father, and God the
Son, and God the holy Ghost dwells! what can thou want? what do thou
enjoy? how great is thy excellency? how perfect is thy beauty? how full is thy
glory?

Dwelling, notes a special presence, and it notes a constant and permanent
presence; and truly, such is the dwelling of the Spirit of God in the children
of God; it is a gracious residence, and it is an abiding residence; he never
leaves you. John 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.

Can you reach this comfort of the perpetual presence of the Spirit in you and
with you? Let me tell you The bodily presence of Christ, is not comfortable
without the presence of the Spirit. The absence of Christ is made up by the
presence of the Spirit. The presence of the Spirit makes all to be present with
us You are safe and sure with whom the Spirit is.


1. The presence of Christ (I mean his bodily presence only) was not
comfortable without the presence of the Spirit. It is the Spirit that
quickens, the flesh profits nothing, so Christ, Joh. 6. 63.

2. The absence of Christ now in heaven, is made up unto us by the presence of
his Spirit now within us here on earth. The Spirit only supplies his absence,
and makes our condition as good, and as happy as if Christ himself were present
with us.

3. The presence of the Spirit makes all to be present with us; all are present
by the presence of the Spirit; God comes to be present, and Christ comes to be
present, and joy and salvation come to be present by the presence of the Spirit.

4. And are you not safe and sure with whom the Spirit of God is, and will be
alway^s present? He is present with your souls, with your faith, with your
graces, and he can give you present strength, and present help, and present
victory, and present comforts.

SECT. X.
5. A Fifth singular comfort unto you who have God to be your God in Covenant,
There is a conjunction of the whole Trinity in all the businesses of our
eternal blessedness.
is this, viz. A common conjunction of the whole Trinity in all the busin^sses
of your et^rnal blessedness; This is an exceeding high point, and of exceeding
comfort unto you, that there is an union in the Trinity of persons in their
gracious respects unto your salvation.

There is an union, or common conjunction of the persons of the Trinity. First,
In respect of love. Secondly, In respect of consent, and in respect of A
conjunction of the three persons.
purpose. Thirdly, In respect of operation. Fourthly, In respect of Relation.
Fifthly, In respect of engagement. Sixthly, In respect of Communion.

1. In respect of love; what is that? That is, every one of the persons does
love In respect of love.
you. John 16. 27. The Father himse^f loves you. Ephesians. 3. 19. To know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge. Romans 15. 30. The love of the Spirit.

There is a twofold love in the persons of the Trinity.

1. A natural and necessary love, so they love each other. The Father and the
Son and the Spirit do so love one another, as that they cannot but love one
another.

2. A voluntary and gracious love; with this love all who are in Covenant with
God, are loved of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Spirit.

This love of the Trinity may be considered both in respect of the properties
of This love may be considered In respect of the properties of it. It is the
highest of all love.
it, and in respect of the fruits and virtues of it.

1. In respect of the properties of it.

1. It is the highest of all loves. Nothing which is in the creature can
possibly be of that height, as that which is in God; Holiness in the creature,
is not so high as holiness in God; goodness in the creature, is not so high
as goodness in God; mercy in the creature, is not so high as mercy in God;
love in the creature, is ^ot so high as love in God.

Love in God is purest love; there is no mixture in that love; love in God is
perfect love; there is no defect or want in that love; The love of Parents to
their children, and the love of husband and wife, they are but weak shadows of
the unutterable and unconceivable love of God unto his people; As the essence
of the Trinity is the highest essence, so the love of the Trinity is the
highest love; you cannot be loved by any that is higher than the Trinity; nor
can there be any love higher or equal to their love.

2. It is a most special love; not only in this respect, that no other people
(besides your selves) ate dignified with this kind of love; but also in this
respect, that It is a most special love.
the love of the persons even unto your selves, is most choice and wonderful;
and this you do read concerning the love

Of the Father, which is in the same Meridian unto you who are the children of
the Covenant, as it is unto Jesus Christ. John 17. 23. That the world may know
that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. And ver. 26.
That the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

What love the Father has to Jesus Christ, such a love has the Father unto
you who are Christ's; and this does appear in four particulars. 1. When he
elected Christ, he did then elect you. 2. When he did purpose to give Christ to
you, he did then purpose to give you to Christ. 3. That you are of the same
relation unto him with Christ; and therefore Christ is not ashamed to call you
brethren. 4. That you are heirs of the same Kingdom and glory with Christ.

Of the Son, who loved you to the utmost height and depth, and expression of
love; Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends, Joh. 15. 13. Ye are my friends, ver. 14. so Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ loved
us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God.

And so for the Spirit; He loves you so, that he lays out the utmost of his
power, and the choicest of his gifts and graces upon your souls.

3. It is the sweetest of all loves; There is no love whatsoever which affords
more delight, contentment, and satisfaction unto the hearts of men: Thy love is
better It is the sweetest of all loves.
than wine, so the Church speaks of Christ, Cant. 1. 2. Thy loving kindness is
better than life; so speaks David of the love of God, Psalm. 63. 3. Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, 1 John 3. 1. so sweet is the
love of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Spirit, that in the
apprehension and enjoyment thereof, the soul is satisfied as with marrow; It
is a kind of heaven unto us; every faculty of the soul is affected with it,
and by it is filled with joys, and praises, and love again to God.

4. It is a most tender love: the Fathers love unto you is so, and the Sons
love unto It is a most tender love.
you is so, and the love of the Spirit is so unto you; The love of every o^^ is
tender, in a mavelous sensiblenesse of your persons and conditions, and in as
mavelous a readiness to help and bless you; There is not any one want upon
you, not any one distress, but every one of the persons in Trinity is
apprehensive of it, and looks on it with tender bowels of compassion; I pity
them says the Father, I will help him says Christ the Son, I will support and
comfort him in this condition, says the holy Ghost.

5. It is a most free love: every one of the persons loves you with a love
which arises It is most free love.
only from love, not from any thing in your selves, nor for any benefit which
can arise from you unto your selves; but only because they will love you, and
are so pleased to love you: the love of the Father does not find you, but make
you children; the love of Christ does not find you, but make you righteous;
the love of the Spirit does not find you, but make you holy: It is a
communicating love: all the favor which you have, and all the good which you
have, you have it wholly upon the mere account of the freeness and goodness
of their love.

6. It is a most permanent love: There is no change of it, nor end unto it; see
Romans It is a most permanent love.
8. 35. to the end. God is your eternal Father, and Christ your eternal Priest,
and the Spirit is your eternal Comforter: there is no end of themselves, and
there is no end of their love unto your sel^es.

Secondly, In respect of the fruits and virtues of it.

The fruits and virtues of the love of the Trinity unto you, are high and
glorious. In respect of the fruits and virtues of this love This love is the
foundation of all the good of heaven and earth
I will mention some of them.

1. This love is the foundation of all the building, the springs of all the
streams; all that future glory in heaven, and all the possible enjoyments on
earth (in reference unto that glory) they all flow from this love: all the
kind thoughts of God, and purposes, and Counsels, and Acts are built upon this
foundation of love.

2. This love is the moving wheel, it is that which sets all the Attributes of
God This love is the moving wheel.
a working for you (the Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness, and Mercifulness, and
Graciousnesse, and faithfulness of God) yea which sets every person of the
Trinity a working for you; It is the love of the Father which did put him upon
the thoughts, and upon the gift of Christ: It is the love of the Son which did
put him upon the giving of himself, upon dying for you: And it is the love of
the Spirit which did put him upon the giving of himself unto you, and working
all his works for you.

3. This love is the reason of their delight in you; you are made near by it,
and become This love is the reason of their delight in you.
exceeding dear unto every one of them: the Father takes pleasure in you, and
so does the Son, and so does the Spirit; they take delight in your persons, and
in your graces, and in your services: and every one of them manifests himself
unto you, and makes known their relations unto you.

4. This love is at cost and charges for you, and it makes all easy and
joyful: there is not a person of the Trinity but is glad (if I may so express
it) with all his heart This love is at cost and charges for you.
to do you good: it is no burden to the Father to promise, nor to the Son to
purchase, nor to the holy Ghost to apply the riches of Grace and Glory unto you.

This love is that which makes them restless until they have done you good;
(the Father waits to be gracious, and to show mercy! How do I long until it be
accomplished, said Christ of his sufferings for us, etc.) and unweariable in
the doing of us good.

5. This love of their is that which makes them so dreadful and heavy unto your
enemies; This love makes them so dreadful to your enmies.
so high in the ways of your defense, and so high in the works of vengeance on
your Adversaries; enemies to your enemies, and friend unto your friends; God by
his Spirit fills their hearts with terrors, and puts them into streights, and
drives your enemies to their feet: and Christ rides conquering, bathing his
sword in blood.

6. This love of theirs is the reason why they do all of them bear with all
your infirmaties, yea and cover the multitude of your sins, that they deal so
gently with This love is the reason why they all bear with your infirmities
Five comforts from this.
you, and accept of your weakest performances, and defires, and tears, and
sighs, and greans, and pass by all your failings, etc. Thus have you heard of
the common union of the Trinity in their love unto you, which I think is a
clear ground of wonderful contentment; for being interested in this their
common love of you,

1. All fears and doubts are silenced in all your approaches unto God; The
Father All fears and doubts are silenced in all your approaches unto God. You
cannot but speed very well in prayer.
unto whom you pray, he loves you: the Son by whom you pray, he loves you: the
Spirit who helps you to pray, he also loves you: If you have the love of every
one of them, there is no just cause of any distrustful fears.

2. Nay, how can it be, but that you must speed very well? Love gives the
kindest, and fullest, and easiest, and sweetest answers and helps! what, will
not the loving God and Father, the loving Christ and Savior, the loving Spirit
and Comforter, what will they not do for you?

3. Whatsoever God is in his greatness, the better it is for all you, who are
thus beloved of him. I do confess that the greater God is, (if he loves us
not) the Whatsoever God is in his greatness, the better it is for you.
more dreadful is our apprehension of him: but the greater that he is, (if he
loves us) this is the more comfortable unto us: The greatness of his power,
who loves us; The greatnsse of his Alsufficiency, who loves us; The greatness
of his Mercifulness, Wisdom, Knowledge, Faithfulness, etc. who loves us; can
you have a greater encouragement then this; that God who knows all things, who
has all things, who can do all things, who will perform all things, this God
loves me! unquestionably therefore I shall be the better for that power, etc.

4. The common love of the Trinity assures you against damnation, and
perishing; This common love assu es you against damnation, and of salvation.
and of salvation, and blessedness: Love preserves, but destroys not: love
brings us near, but rejects, and forsakes not: for how can it possibly be, that
any man should perish and be lost, who is interested in the highest, and
dearest, and unchangable love of God? who has the ordaining love of the Father
unto salvation, and the meriting love of Christ to purchase salvation, and the
applying love of the Spirit, effectually undertaking to guide and lead him unto
salvation. I confess that if God did not love you, there could be no salvation
for you; ^or were the love of the Trinity divided and parted, so that though
the Father loved you, intending your salvation, but the Son would not undertake
it with his love to die for you, to procure salvation; or if the Son and Father
would consent in their love, but the holy Ghost would not love you, so far as
to bring you into Christ, to be partakers of him, and of salvation, then there
would be a manifest uncertainty of your salvation; or if all of them did love
you with a changeable love.

5. Lastly, it cannot be that you should want any necessary good; If that
argument It cannot be that you should want any necessary good.
of Christ's be strong against the fear of wants (Matthew. 6.) For your heavenly
Father knows that you have need of all these things: surely this is stronger;
Your Father loves you, therefore you shall not want them.

2. There is a conjunctive union, as in the love of the Trinity, so in the will
and There is a conjunctive union in the will and purpose of the Trinity in the
matters of our salvation.
consent, and purpose of the Trinity in the matters of your salvation. There
was one mutual will between them from eternity, and there is one and the same
mutual will between them unto eternity: what the Father did will, the Son did
will, and the same did the Holy Ghost will: and what the Father did propose for
your salvation for the matter and manner, unto all of that did the Son and
holy Ghost consent and agree: and what the Father did intend and purpose with
respect unto the salvation of the Elect, that same did the Son and the holy
Ghost intend and purpose also.

As the will of the Father was not, nor could be hid from the other persons,
(every one of them being one and the same God) so there was a mutual will and
liking, and determination in every one of them, as to all the matter
appertaining unto our salvation.

Though it be most true, that the persons of the Trinity be in their respective
subsistences so different, that the Father neither is, nor can be the Son, nor
the Son the Father: nor the holy Ghost either; yet it is as true, that every
one of them is the same Deity, and had the same will in and for man's salvation:
that some should be elected of God and find mercy, and have salvation: there
was a mutual will and consent twixt the three persons in the Trinity. That
Jesus Christ (the Son of God) should have these bestowed upon him, and he be
charged to procure their salvation, by being incarnated, and by being humbled
to the death, even to the death of the Cross; as to this also, there was a
mutual will and consent in the Trinity; I will give and send you, says the
Father; Lo I come, I will give my self, says the Son; and I will anoint and
sanctify you for this, says the Spirit; that the holy Ghost should be sent to
open and apply the salvation of God unto the Elect of God the Father, and to
the redeemed by Christ the Son, this also fell into their common will, and
consent, and purpose, in respect werereof the holy Ghost is said to be sent and
given from the Father and from the Son, Joh. 14. 26. The Comforter which is the
holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, etc. Joh. 15. 26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto
you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father,
he shall testify of me.

I will not enlarge my self in this discourse at this time, because it will
fall in more fully when I come to speak of the parties interested in the
Covenant: only let me tell you who are in Covenant with God, that your comforts
are exceeding great, even from this, That there was, and is a mutual will,
consent, agreement, and purpose of the whole Trinity concerning you and your
salvation; for this will concerning you, and your salvation,

1. It is the gracious will of Gods decree. 2. It is a fixed and invariable
will. 3. It is an effectual, and infallible will.
4. And (I if may not be mistaken) it is the binding will, or argument of all
the persons, unto which every one of them (as it were) sets his seal, and in
which they are all of them bound up, and according unto which every one of them
does act, or express himself for our salvation; O what infinite love, and
goodness and wisdom is this, that our salvation should be thus contrived, and
ordered, and distinctly undertaken and agreed upon with one common consent of
will and purpose by the whole Trinity of persons, every one of them
contributing his whole self, and heart, and power toward it! Surely your
salvation must be precious, and excellent, and sure, and we our selves as sure
in our enjoyment of it.

3. There is a conjunctivenesse of operation: every person of the Trinity does
act There is a conjunctivenesse of operation.
or work for the good and salvation, as will and intend it, Joh. 5. 17. My
Father works hitherto, and I work, verse. 19. whatsoever things he does,
these also does the Son likewise, John 14. 31. as the Father gave me
commandment so do I.

The Mission and Donation of Christ to save us, this is the work of the Father.

The giving of himself for our Redemption and Reconciliation, this is the work
of the Son.

The calling of us, and Renewing, and Regenerating of us, this is the work of
the holy Ghost.

Indeed there is such an excellent cooperation of the whole Trinity in the
business of our salvation, that the greatest works conducing thereunto are
promiscuously attributed to every one of them, as our Vocation, and
Justification, and Adoption, and Sanctification, and Glorification; all these
are sometimes attributed to the Father, and sometimes to the Son, and sometimes
to the holy Ghost.

Sanctification is thus promiscuously attributed unto them.

1. To the Father, Jude ver. 1. Sanctified by God the Father. 2. To the Son, 1
Cor. 1. 2. That are sanctified in Christ Jesus. 3. To the holy Ghost, Romans 15.
16. Being sanctified by the holy Ghost.
Justification is also thus attributed to them.

1. To the Father, Romans 8. 33. It is God that justifies. 2. To the Son, Romans
9. 5. Being now justified by his blood. 3. To the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 11. But
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of our
Lord Jesus by the Spirit of our God.
Vocation likewise is thus attributed unto them.

1. To the Father, 1 Pet. 1. 15. As he who has called you is holy, etc. 2. To
the Son, Romans 1. 6. Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ. 3. To
the holy Ghost, whose mighty power it is which brings us into Christ.
The like you may read of Adoption ascribed unto the Father, Ephesians. 1. 5, unto
the Son, Gal. 4. 6. and unto the holy Ghost, Romans 8. 15.

We have a rule, that opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, although the
modus operandi and the Terminus actionis may be distinct; and questionless as
all the Attributes of God are affirmed of every person, so all the operations
proper to God, are common also unto them.

Now what a glory and comfort is this, that every one of the Divine persons
has a hand in every thing which concerns our salvation! As they do all of them
consent unto it, and resolve upon it, so every one of them does work toward
it; We look upon that passage as of great weight, and stay, and comfort unto
us, in Romans 8. 28. All things (viz. here below in common contingencies) work
together for good to them that love God! How much more is this for our support
and comfort, that all the Trinity, that every person in the Trinity is working
together for our salvation, that God the Father is working, and God the Son,
and God the holy Ghost!

As they say about the Incarnation of Christ, that every one of the Persons in
the Trinity had a hand in it, though the second person only was Incarnated (as
three may weave a garment, which one of them only wears) thus may we say of our
salvation, that every person of the Trinity acts, and works toward it, and
will still so work, until they have come to the last work, until they have
finished that work in our eternal glorification.

4. There is a common union also of Relation and Interest of all the persons in
every There is a common union of Relation and Interest of all the persons in
every Believer, and of every Believer to them.
believer, and of every believer to them. Every one of the persons has an
interest in you, and relation to you.

1. The Father has an interest in you, 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters. 2. The ^on has an interest in
you, Christ in us, Col. 1. 27. 3. And the holy Ghost has an interest in you,
he dwells in us, and abides in us, 2 Timothy 1. 14. and you also have an interest
in every one of the persons.
1. You are in the Father, the Church that is in God the Father, 1 These. 1. 1.
2. You are in the Son, Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. 30. 3. You are
in the Spirit, He that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. I
also have the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 7. 40.
Now this common relation and interest of every person in the Trinity as to
you, and the mutual relation and interest again as to them, is a matter of such
infinite consequence, and full happiness, as indeed I am not able to unfold
it; I will only touch at a few things in relation to one of these persons, and
that is God the Father. If God be your God in Covenant, then he is your Father,
and you are his Consider this in relation to God the Father.
children: the Apostle admires at this, in 1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner of
love the Father has showed us, that we should be called the sons of God: the
dignity is most high, that we should be the sons of the most High; But let us
view the comforts of it. There are six comforts from this, that our God is our
Father.

1. Your Father is the Father of mercies. Blessed be God, even the Father of
our Your Father is the Father of mercies.
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. God is the Father, 1.
Of Christ. 2ly. Of every believer. 3ly. And of mercies. All mercies are in the
Father, and from the Father. And shall you want mercies who are in so near a
Relation to the Father of Mercies?

2. Your Father does love you exceedingly: Is Ephraim my dear son, is he a
pleasant Your Father does love you exceedingly.
child? Jer. 31. 20. love is frequently given to God the Father, Joh. 14. 23.
1 John 2. 15. Cap. 3. 1, etc. his Jewels, Mal. 3.

3. Though you have offended him, yet if you mournfully return unto him, he
will Though you have offended him, yet if you return he will be gracious. Your
Father has enough to help you. You may easily prevail with your Father for
all necessary good. You shall be heirs who are children of this Father. There
is a common engagement of the whole Trinity unto you.
be very gracious unto you, and receive you kindly. When the Prodigal child
came back to his Father, his Father faw him yet a great way off, and ran, and
fell on his neck, and kissed him, Luke 15. 20.

4. Your Father has enough to help you, and he will take care of you; In my
Fathers house there is bread enough, and to spare, Luke 15. 17. Your heavenly
Father knows that you have need of all these things, Matthew. 6. 32.

5. You may easily prevail with your Father for any necessary good; If you
being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask him? Matthew. 7.
11.

6. You shall be heirs, who are children of this Father. If Sons, then Heirs,
Romans 8. 17. Heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. Luke 12. 23. It is your
Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Matthew. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

5 There is a common engagement of the whole Trinity unto you; every one of the
persons is engaged to you. The Father is engaged to you, to do all that a God
and Father can and will do for his children. The Son is engaged to you, to do
all that a Christ, and Mediator, and a Redeemer and Savior can and will do
for his Members. The Holy Ghost is engaged to you, to do all that a Spirit of
truth, knowledge, faith, comfort, can do for those who do come to the Father
and the Son.

6. Lastly, There is a communion twixt you and every person of the Trinity, 1 John 1. 3. Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 13. 14. Thereis a communion but wixt you and every person of the Trinity.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and communion of the
Holy Ghost be with you all. Communions with a Father, with a Sayiour, with a
Comforter; And verily these communions are most gracious and heavenly in
respect of every one of them: when the Father manifests himself unto you in the
Relation and Testimonies of your loving God and Father; And whom Christ
discovers himself unto as your Head, and as your Lord, as your Savior, in your
interests in him, and his in you: and when the Holy Ghost opens himself unto
you in the strengthening of your graces, in his comforts, and evidences, and
assurances, and fealings, why! These things are as life to the dead, and as
rain to the thirsty land; they are an exceeding refreshing unto you, they are
a most heavenly tranquillity and joy, and satisfaction unto your hearts.

And thus have you heard of the happiness of those people who have God to be
their God in Covenant, in respect of his Attributes, and in respect of Christ,
and in respect of the Spirit, and in respect of every person of the Trinity,
and in their conjunctive relation and operations.

I will proceed a little further to some of the rest of the comforts depending
upon Gods being your God, which I mentioned at the first.

SECT. XI.
6. IF God be your God in Covenant, and you be his people, then all the
promises If God be ours then all the promises are ours.
of God are also yours. As you are the children of God, so you are the children
of promise; and as you are the heirs of God, so you are the heirs of promise;
and as your title is clear unto you, so your possession is sure; you shall
certainly inherit all the good comprehended in them.

I have discoursed largely of the promises in general, and shall God willing
(in the prosecution of this discourse of the Covenant) speak more of the
promises in particular; and therefore I shall at this time only touch at two
things, viz.

1. The real statings of the promises upon all who have God to be their God in
Covenant. 2. Their singular happiness thereby, that all the promises of God
are theirs.
1. The promises do belong to all who are in Covenant with God; They The
promises do belong to all who are in Covenant with God.
are stated and settled upon them; They are the heritage of the servants of the
Lord; the childrens bread; Unto us are given exceeding great and precious
promises, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

The very nature and constitution of the Covenant do evince this, which is a
very cluster of promises, I will be merciful to your transgressions, I will
cleanse you from all your Idols, and from all your uncleanness, I will put my
Spirit within you, I will bless you, I will do you good, I will hear you, and
deliver you; He will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold
from them that walk uprightly; In hope of eternal life which God has promised
unto them that love him, etc.

Again, which way Christ goes, that way the promises go; Now Christ belongs to
every believer; therefore the promises also belong etc.

This truth no man can question, but he who will question the Scriptures
themselves; or a distressed sinner who questions his relations unto God, and
thereupon questions the relation of the promises unto himself; nevertheless ex
part Rei, it is certain if God be yours, then his promises are yours, etc.

2. But now let us see the happiness and comfort from this, that all the
promises Comfort from this, that the promises are ours.
of God are ours.

There are twelve things which we may confidently affirm of the promises of
God, all which afford sweet comfort unto the people of God.

1. They are bonds of love; They are every one of them the draughts of The
promises are bands of love.
Gods special love unto you. God does not first make promises, and then love
us; but he first loves us, and therefore draws his bonds of promises; God does
not enter into these Bonds by force against his will unwillingly, but, etc. The
promises do plainly tell you how great the love of God is to you, how great his
goodness is to you; they are the transcript of his mind and heart; Because I
love you, I will therefore do all this good for you, and in these I bind my
self unto you.

2. They are susceptions of grace; whatsoever promise God makes to you, They
are susceptions of grace.
grace is the foundation of it, and grace is in the performance of it. It is
freely made, and as freely made good; nothing moved God to make the promises,
but his own grace; and there is no reason why we enjoy the good of them, but
Gods own grace, I will do you good, and all this good I will do for my own
sake; you shall have it as freely as ever child had kindness from a father.

3. They are full treasures. All my springs are in thee, said David, Psalm. 87.
7. They are full treasures.
So may we say of the promises, All my helps, all my goods are in you. The
promises as they depend for their constitution upon the love and goodness of
God, so likewise upon the prescience and wisdom of God; God foresaw all the
exigences and wants, and straits of his people, and drew up the promises with
sufficient provisions and supplies, and helps, to answer all their conditions.
There is not any good whatsoever which you do actually want, or can possibly
want, but there is a full stock, and a peculiar supply for it in the promises.

4. They are the best security. All the promises are the word of a God, and
They are the best security.
given upon the honor of a God that they shall be made good. The
al-sufficiency of God, the Omniscience of God, the loving kindness of God, the
omnipotency of God, and the faithfulness of God, yea, and the oath of God, are
full security, sufficient pawnes and earnests for all the good which God
promises un^o you.

5. They are sure payments. We say when an honest man passes his word for They
are sure payments.
a little money, O, it is a sure as if it were in the purse; Gods word of
promise is much more sure: for as his nature or being is eternal, so his word
of promise is unchangeable. The vision will speak, it will surely come, so Hab.
2. 3. I will pl^nt them in this land assuredly. Jer. 32. 41. My Covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips, Psalm. 89. 34.
Therefore the promises are many times said to be performed before they be
performed; and the things promised are said to be given and done, before they
be given and done, because, when God promises to do his people any good, it is
as sure as if it were already done.

6. They are present stays; Though you have not friends always present They
are present stays.
with you to stay you; and though you have not as yet the things promised
present with you to stay you, yet you have the promises of your God still
present with you, to stay your hearts, and to uphold them.

There are four things still present with the people of God to stay their
hearts. 1. A good God. 2. A good Christ. 3. The good Spirit of God. 4. The good
promises of God; Either God does you good, gives it into your hands, or says
he will do good, which is enough for faith to stay and rest your hearts upon.

7. They are living and lasting fountains; Wells still full of waters; and
stars They are living and lasting fountains.
still full of ligh; Could you ^^ve a thousand years, or to thousands of
generations, there would be no diminution in the promises; They are as full of
mercy as ever, and as sure a word of truth as ever; though your wants be more
or less, higher or lower, it is all one; One promise has as much mercy in it
as will last as long as you shall live; and another promise has as much grace,
and another has as much comfort as will serve you all your days; and the same
abundance still remains for all the people of God, as long as the world lasts.

8. They are the quickest dispensations. God comes not off slowly, or hardly,
They are the quickest dispensations.
or unwillingly, or sparingly, in the performance of them. Op^n thy mouth wide
and I will fill it, Psalm. 81. 10. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
deliver thee, Psalm. 50. 15. Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are
yet speaking I will hear, Isa. 65. 24. One prayer many times melts these
clouds; as in Jacobs case, one act of faith many times gets your supplies. As
in Jehosaphats case, when you look by faith upon the promises, you are then
trading with the good and kind God, by your mighty Advocate Jesus Christ, In
whom all the promises of God are Yea and Amen.

9. They are seasonable helps. The promises do contain our best good; and They
are seasonable helps.
They do always dispense it in the best time. Jer. 5. 29. Let us fear the
Lord our God, who gives rain, both the former and the latter in his season; He
reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest; Thus does God with his
promises unto his people; they shall be made good in their season; they are as
the appointed weeks of the harvest; Every week is not a harvest week; when the
corn is ripe, then is that time come to put in the sickle, and to reap with
joy. As yet thou have not such a mercy, such an help, such a desired and
promised blessing; the reason is because it is not the season for the rain to
fall; it is not yet the week of thy harvest: therefore still seek, and trust,
and wait; for there is an appointed week for the harvest, and then thou shall
reap all the good which thy God has promised, and which thy soul has desired.

10. They are sufficient inducements and encouragements to pray unto God, They
are sufficient encouragements to pray to God and to depend on him.
and to depend upon God. May you not come to your God who is good in himself,
and who has promised to do you good? May you not trust him who is faithful in
all his promises? 2 Samuel 7. 28. O Lord God, thou art that God, and thy words be
true, and thou have promised this goodness unto thy servant. Ver. 29. Now
therefore let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may
continue for ever before thee; for thou O Lord God, have spoken it, and with
thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for ever. So David; The
promises as they are Gods assurances to help us, so they are secret inducements
to us to depend upon his help.

11. They are powerful pleas; The best and the strongest Arguments to plead
with God. Your worthiness is no argument to use with God; your necessity They
are powerful pleas.
is an argument to move him (we know not what to do, said Jehosaphat, etc.) But
Gods promises are your best and strongest pleas; Do me good, O Lord, though I
deserve it not; but yet do me good, because thou have promised to do me good;
Thou saydst I will surely do thee good, said Jacob, Genesis 32. 12. Remember thy
word upon which thou have caused thy servant to hope, said David, Psalm 119.
49. Remember, break not thy Covenant with us, said the Church, Jer. 14. 21.

12. They are satisfying answers. To all our fears, to all our thoughts, to all
difficulties, to all improbabilities, to all silences, to all contrary times,
to all They are satisfying answers.
delays, yet God has promised to hear, and help, and do me good. Isa. 50. 10.
He that sits in darkness, and feeth no light, let him trust on the Name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God. Psalm. 73. 26. My flesh and my heart fails, but
God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Though you do not
know when God will do you good; though you do not know what way God has to do
you good; though you see no pro^ability in all the world for your good; though
you see every thing still contrary to your good; yet if God has promised you
any needful good, it shall certainly fall into your possession, even because
God has promised it; He alone is sufficient to make all good to be yours,
whatsoever he has promised unto you.

SECT. XII.
7. A seventh comfort for you who have God to be your God in Covenant, is If
God be ours, then all the immunities and privileges annexed to the Covenant
are ours.
this, Then all the immunities and privileges annexed to the Covenant of
grace, for the people of that Covenant, they are yours.

I will speak something unto both these this day, that you who are the people
of God, may see more of your happiness in having God to be your God.

1. The immunities or liberties by the Covenant of grace for such as are in
Covenant. Ten immunities by the Covenant. From the revenging wrath of God.


They have ten excellent and most comfortable liberties by it.

1. They have immunity from the revenging wrath of God. There is (you know) Ira
patris, and ira judicis:

A paternal anger or wrath; from this they are not free; In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer, Isa. 54. 8.

A judicial anger or wrath, which consists in two things. 1. In a resolution,
by no means to clear the wicked, to acquit, to pass by offenses, to be
pacified. 2. In a pouring forth the vials of his just vengeance upon
transgressors, according to the demerits of their sins and wickednesses;
There is a cup in the hand of the Lord, and the wine is red, it is full of
mixture, and he pours out of the same, but the dreggs thereof, all the wicked
of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them, Psalm. 75. 8. This judicial
wrath of God, it is expressed against sinners partly in this life, in the
dreadful terrors of conscience, and in the dreadful destruction of ungodly men
who are consumed by the wrath of God, as the dry stubble is by the flaming and
devouring fire; and partly in the life to come, which is called Gods reserved
wrath, and his prepared wrath, and the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5. Nahum 1. 2. He
reserveth wrath for his enemies. Matthew. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels.

From this judicial wrath of God (whither present or future) are all the people
in Covenant with God, freed and delivered by Christ who is their Atonement,
Romans 5. 10, 11. Propitiati^n, 1 John 2. 1. Romans 5. 9. Much more being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him, 1 These. 1.
10. Jesus who delivered us from the wrath to come. 1 These. 5. 9. God has not
appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now this our immunity is a singular comfort unto us. It is a great matter to
be delivered from the wrath of man; what is it then to be freed from the wrath
of God! You may observe in others, how dreadful the expectation of future wrath
is unto sinners, and how unsupportable the burden of it is unto their
consciences; how it turns all their delights into gall and wormwood; how it
shakes the foundations of their souls, and fills them with restless
amazements, and horrors, and despaires; And you read of that hell of his wrath
on them in hell, which makes the damned to gnash their teeth, to cry out and
roar, to curse, and blaspheme, which they cannot endure, and which they cannot
escape.

But you who are the people of his Covenant, as you shall never fall under the
power of that future wrath of God, so you shall never taste one drop of Gods
judicial revenging wrath any one moment of your present life; whatsoever your
troubles, and crosses, and sadnesses may be, yet there is no judicial wrath in
them; Christ has fully drunk off the cup for you, and satisfied the justice of
God, who by his blood is reconciled and well-pleased with you.

2. They have immunity from the dominion of sin; Sin shall not have
dominion From the dominion of sin
over you, for you are under grace, Romans 6. 14. Here you see expressly, that
there is a freedom from the dominion of sin, even upon this account, that we
are under the Covenant of grace. Though you be not totally freed from the
inhabitation of sin (for sin does dwell in us, whiles we dwell on earth)
and though you be not totally freed from the rebellion of sin (for peccatum
hostis est quamdiu est, The flesh luste^h against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17. and
there is a law in our members, warring against the law of our minds, Romans 7.
23. yet you are totally freed from the dominion of sin, which consists in the
effectual Rule, Command, and Sovereign strength of sin, and a free, and full,
and willing subjection or obedience unto the Law and authority of sin; and
verily this freedom or deliverance, is a wonderful mercy and happiness unto
the people of God whither you consider,

1. The great and utmost distance twixt you and God.

2. The basen^sse of servitude, in which every one lives, over whom sin has
dominion; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in bondage,
2 Pet. 2. 19. You were but very slaves to your lusts, and to the devil, whiles
sin did rule over you.

3. The height of enmity. As you were the basest of slaves, so you were the
worst of enemies; living not only as aliens without God, but as desperate
enemies, opposing and fighting against God.

4. The superfluity of naughtiness (a full contrariety) your whole hearts, and
your whole lives, were nothing else but a constant dishonor unto God, and
contradiction to his Will and Glory.

5. The certainty of destruction which would infallibly have attended you, had
not the mercy and grace of God rescued and delivered you; I say, certain
destruction to your souls; as there is a certain destruction to the life of our
bodies, if we fall into the sea and lie under it.

6. The sweet and immediate communion 'twixt the deliverance from the dominion
of sin, and admission to the Kingdom of Christ: It is a translation from
death to life. The Apostle joins these together in Colos. 5. 13. Who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
Kingdom of his dear Son.

3. They have immunity or freedom from the damnation meritoriously depending
upon the guilt of sin. As salvation depends upon the merits of Christ, so
From damnation for sin.
does damnation depend on the merit of sin. There is so much merit in sin,
as to render us obnoxious, not only to temporal destruction, but also to
eternal destruction; for the wages of sin is death, even that death which
stands in opposition to eternal life, Romans 6. 23.

But from the effectual redundancy of this damnation upon your persons, you are
every one freed who are in Covenant with God; For there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. And whosoever believes in him, shall
not perish, but have eternal life, John 3. 15. And the ground of this your
immunity from the damnation due unto you for your sins, is the satisfaction
which Christ has made for your sins unto the justice of God; and thereupon
the obtaining of riches of mercy from your God, who (according to his Covenant
with you) blots out, and forgives all your sins, and never remembers them any
more.

For this is a sure truth, that remission of sins, and actual damnation for
sins, are incompatible, or inconsistent. Now whether this be any cause of
comfort that you and your sins are parted, and that you and hell are for ever
separated, I leave it to any one of you to judge: for mine own part, I do look
upon four things as very great mercies. 1. That I am delivered from the power
of sin. 2. That I enjoy the pardon of sin. 3. That I shall never be damned
for sin. 4. That I shall be saved, notwithstanding all my sins.

4. They have immunity or freedom from justification by the Law, from all
legal From justification by the Law.
trials for life: Although you are not freed from the Law as it is a rule for
life, yet you are freed from the Law as it is a Covenant of life; although you
are not freed from the Law as it is the image of the good and holy will of God,
yet because you are under the Covenant of grace, you are freed from the Law as
it is a reason of salvation and justification. The Covenant of grace takes you
off from that Court and that Bar which pronounces life upon your own good
works; and pronounces death upon your own evil works; Romans 3. 28. We conclude
that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. Gal. 3. 11. No
man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, for the just shall live by
faith. As the Law calls for perfect and personal righteousness of our own; so
the Law will not justify you, it will not give life unto you, unless it finds
that righteousness in you; you live not, if you be not perfectly righteous;
absolution is pronounced upon your own perfect innocence, and condemnation is
pronounced upon any defect or breach: And verily upon this account, no man
living can or shall be justified; therefore here is comfort, that being in
Christ, and in this Covenant of grace, ye are justified from all things from
which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses; See the Apostle, Acts 13.
39. Your life does not lie now in your own righteousness, but in the
righteousness of Christ; nor does it depend upon your own works, but upon the
obedience of Christ. That expression of Luther is an excellent expression,
Christus solus me justificat contra mea mala opera, and sine operibus meis
bonis. Though my works have been very good, yet not those, but Christ does
justify me; and though my works have been very ill, yet the righteousness of
Christ can and will justify me; my evil works shall not damn me, and my good
works cannot acquit me; it is Christ, it is Christ, and not the Law which
justifies me.

5. They have immunity or liberty from the rigor of the Law: The Law in the
rigor of it exacts of us a most absolute obedience, a most exquisite and full
obedience, From the rigor of the Law.
it will not abate us the least grain or scruple, if it be not every way
adequate, (for matter, and manner, and measure) your obedience will not pass,
nor will it be accepted according to the rigor of the Law; Cursed is every one
who does not continue in every thing that is written to do it. But when once
you are under the Covenant of grace, when once God is your God, and you are his
people, neither you nor your services are judged by the exactness of your
services, but by the sincerity of your hearts: Though much be wanting which the
Law prescribes, yet if that be present, which your merciful God and Father
delights in, viz. uprightness of Spirit, your sighs and groans, and tears, and
desires shall pass and be accepted instead of more full and ample
performances, 2 Cor. 8. 12. If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not. Mal. 3.
17. I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him. Psalm.
51. 17. A broken and a contrite heart O God thou will not despise. Zach. 4. 10.
Who has despised the day of small things?

6. They have immunity from the terror or coercive power of the Law: Namely,
From the coercive power of the Law.
from obeying the commands of it upon the mere principles of slavish fear of
the threatenings annexed unto the breach of the Law. You do now obey the Law,
not as slaves, but as sons; not out of fear of wrath, but out of love to your
Father. That Spirit of bondage, (Romans 8. 15.) and that spirit of fear, (2 Timothy
1. 7.) is removed, and a spirit of love comes in the room thereof. Though there
were no rewards to allure, and though there were no severe threats to terrify
you, yet you would serve your God with willing minds, and with willing hearts,
2 Chronicles. 28. 9. Psalm. 110. 3. There is such a heavenly sutablenesse and
superconnaturalnesse 'twixt the Law of your God and your hearts, that it is
your delight to meditate in it, and to walk up unto it in all things; there is
no constraint on you but the love of your good God.

7. They have immunity from the curse of the Law: Christ has redeemed us From
the curse of the Law.
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. Indeed
afflictions, and fatherly chastisements, or corrections, may befall the people
of God in this life, (whom the Lord loves he chastneth, and scourges every
son whom he receives, Heb. 12. 6.) but no curses befall them. Though the cup
be bitter, yet there is no poison in it; though it be a cross, yet it is not a
curse; their wounds are healing wounds, and their afflictions are instructions,
and their losses are their gains; for nothing comes as a curse which does us
good.

8. They have immunity from the Kingdom and power of darkness: You are no From
the Kingdom of darkness.
longer under the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that works in
the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. The Devil is dispossessed, and cast
down, and cast out; he is still your enemy, but he shall never be your Lord
more; he may tempt you and disquiet you, but command and rule over you he shall
never do. Though the Devil be very busy and active with you, yet he shall
never regain possession, never con^uer your graces, never part you and your
God, never hinder you of your inheritance.

9. They have immunity from death; there is the first death, and the second
From death.
death; or there is a threefold death; there is the death of the soul, and the
death of the body, and the death of soul and body. 1. Spiritual death, that is,
the death of the soul. 2. Corporal death, that is, the death of the body. 3.
Eternal death, that is, the death of soul and body. Now all the people of God
are freed from spiritual death by the grace of Christ, and from eternal death
by the blood of Christ, and from corporal death, though not absolutely or
simply, yet respectively, so far forth as sin has made it dreadful, and our
enemy, and prejudicial to us; Though you must dye, yet your death is but your
sleep, and is but your strait passage into life: The death of death is removed
from you by the death of Christ. Vide Heb. 2. 15. 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. O
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be to God who has
given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

10. What can I say more? they have immunity from all evil in this life, and in
the life to come; you are freed or delivered from an evil conscience, which
never From all evil.
leaves accusing and condemn^ng; from this present evil world and the
corruptions thereof, from every evil work and way, from evil men, from all the
evil which remains for evil men in hell.

God in this Covenant secures you against all; why? what comforts are there in
these things! and what confidence! and what encouragements! and what support
unto your souls! Why do you fear so often? and why are your hearts troubled?
Surely, you do not know your selves to be the people of God, or else you do not
fully know the liberties and immunities of the people of God.

Sometimes you fear the heavy wrath of God; but why do you so? He is your God
and your Father, and full of compassions and loving kindnesses; he will not
deal with you as a revenging Judge, but as a loving and merciful Father; he is
at peace with you, and reconciled unto you: Sometimes you fear the damnation
and curse belonging unto sin; But why do you so? Christ has dyed and
satisfied for your sins, and he was made a curse for you, and there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ. Sometimes you fear because of the
powerful motions and conflicts, and rebellions of sin in your hearts: but why
do you so? seeing that sin shall not have dominion over you, and Christ in
you is daily mortifying and destroying the body of sin; neither shall any
Lord reign in you, but your Savior who dyed for you.

Sometimes you fear because of the imperfection of your graces; but why do you
so? It is not your weakness or want of holiness, but Christ's perfect
righteousness which is imputed unto you for life, and for justification.

Sometimes you fear because of the weakness of your obediential services and
performances; but why do you so? your God in Covenant works all his works in
you, and he owns your persons, and will accept the weakest offerings of an
upright heart in and for Christ.

Sometimes you fear because of the strong temptations of Satan; but why do you
so? grace sufficient shall be given unto you, and your God will shortly bruise
Satan under your feet.

Sometimes you fear men because of their malice and power; and why do you so?
your God will restrain the rage of man, and frustrate the counsels of the
Heathen, and break the arms of the ungodly, and knows how to deliver you.

Sometimes you fear to dye; but why are you afraid of death? which is but the
last Style to go over, and then you are at your Fathers house; death to you is
but an end of your sins and miseries, and only a quick passage into your
eternal happiness.

Secondly, The privileges which you enjoy by being under the Covenant of
grace, Privileges by being in Covenant.
by having God to be your God in Covenant.

There are diverse rights and possessions, and liberties, and privileges which
you do enjoy, and none but you who are the people of God, and have him to be
your God: And I will propound these

1. In the general: Where be you pleased to take notice of five things. In
general.


1. Whatsoever privileges believers have, those are yours who are the people
of God: The privileges of faith are yours; all that faith can pretend unto
from a Whatsoever privileges believers have, are yours.
right in Christ, and a title by Christ as Mediator, in respect of suffering,
of satisfying, of purchasing, of victorious conquest, of interceding, they are
all of them yours; whatsoever advantage a soul may get by Christ, and
whatsoever advantage Christ is to a believing soul, that is yours.

2. Whatsoever privileges belong to the friends of God, they do belong unto
you: All the people of God are styled the friends of God, James ^. 23. and the
friends What priviedges belong to the friends of God, are yours?
of Christ, John 15. 14, 15. Cant. 5. 1. Friends (as friends) have free
access, courteous welcome and entertainment, liberty of speaking, familiarity
of converse, delightful communion, confident imparting and openings of their
hearts one to another, cheerful counsel, and helps of one another; th^se in a
spiritual way do you enjoy with your God, and from your God, who because you
are the people of God, are therefore the friends of God.

3. Whatsoever privileges do belong to the sons and children of God, these
also do belong to you; for you are all the children of God by faith in Christ
Jesus, The privileges of the children of God are yours.
Gal. 3. 26. I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 18. You are the children of the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 14.
1. Children have the privileges of nearness, of residence in their fathers
house, of dependence on their father, of presence, of confidence, etc.

4. Whatsoever are the privileges of the Kingdom of God, those are yours who
are the people of God. It is a Kingdom of righteousness, of peace, of joy, of
The privileges of the Kingdom of God are yours. The privileges of the heirs
of this Kingdom are yours. In special: You have twelve privileges. Liberty of
appeal.
safety, of blessing, of honor, of immortality, etc.

5. Whatsoever are the privileges of the heirs of this Kingdom, those also
do belong to you. Forasmuch as if you be children, you are then (...), Romans 8.
17. All the Charter and conveyances, and assurances, and hopes, and at length
possessions of the heavenly inheritance are yours.

2. In special, you have twelve excellent privileges, which I will touch upon
a little.

1. You have liberty of appeal, and that appeal is accepted and ratified; you
have the liberty to appeal

1. From the Judgment Seat, to the Mercy-seat. 2. From the merits of sin to
the merits of Christ. 3. From a condemning conscience to an acquiting God. 4.
From the Law to the Gospel. 5. From your own unworthiness to Christ's
righteousness. 6. From your own feeling unto Gods promises.
When you see your selves cast at the bar of justice, you may decline the
sentence by flying unto the Throne of mercy; O Lord, justice condemns me, but
let mercy succor and save me; when your hearts are overwhelmed in the
apprehension and consideration of your many sins, and the great guilt of
them, you may then appeal to the infinitely precious and surpassing merits of
Christ; wh^re sin abounded, grace did much more abound; and as sin has
reigned unto death, even so does grace reign through righteousness unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5. 20, 21. When your conscience
condemns you for sins past, then may you appeal unto your God for mercy to
pardon you: God be merciful unto me a sinner, says the Publican. Pardon my
sin O Lord, for it is great, says David.

When the Law indites and pursues you as guilty, then may you appeal to the
Gospel as the Sanctuary to receive and secure your distressed souls; when your
hearts fail you because of your own unworthiness, then may you appeal to the
righteousness of Christ, and so be justified in the sight of God.

When you feel your selves (as to your own sense) utterly destitute, left,
lost, forsaken, then may you appeal to the ptomises of God, and there find
your selves still owned and loved, and plentifully and graciously assured.

2. You have this privilege, that all your communions with God are by a Your
communions with God are by a Meditour.
Media^or, and Advocate, and Intercessor: Or you pray not in your own names,
but in the Name of your Christ and Mediator; and you plead not in your own
names, but in the Name of your Christ; and you speed not in your own name, but
in the Name of your Christ; nay, you believe and hope not in your own names,
but in the Name of Christ.

There are two sad things for any man: 1. To be left alone unto himself, so as
to have no part in Christ. 2. To go alone in his approaches to God without a
Christ to plead for him, to have no Christ to own him, to step in for him, to
undertake for him. But this is your privilege, and this is your comfort who
are the people of God, that you never deal with your God but by a Mediator;
when you appear before your God, Jesus Christ appears with you, and he appears
for you; when you do invocare, then he does advocare; when you put up your
petitions, then does he make intercession; he is your Advocate with the Father,
and he ever lives to make intercession for you.

3. You have this privilege, that you trade altogether at the mercy-seat, and
You trade altogether at the mercy-seat.
at the Throne of grace: God deals with you in no other Court but that of
mercy, and answers you from no other Throne but that of grace, and you deal
with God at that Seat and that Throne only: When you have any sins to be
pardoned, you may go to your merciful God, and to your gracious God, and your
merciful God will pardon them, and your gracious God will freely pardon them:
When you would have any kind of good and help, you may go to your good and
kind God, and he will give it; and to your gracious God, and he will freely
give it.

4. You have this privilege, that you may go to your God when you will: You
may go to your God when you will.
There is no space of time whatsoever but the door is open to you, and your God
is at leisure to speak with you. You have liberty of access, and that liberty
is never restrained; let your occasions be never so urgent, never so many, you
may freely speak with your Father; yea, though there be ten thousand
Petitioners before him, yet you may put in your request, and shall be owned,
and heard.

5. You have this privilege, that you may not only come into the presence You
may with confidence wrestle with God.
of your God, but you may with confidence urge him, and importune him, and
wrestle with him, and still renew and reinforce your requests; you may take
hold of him, and challenge, and expostulate with him, and stay him, and not let
him alone, nor let him go until he blesses you: And so large allowance of
blessedness is granted unto you, that you may (in some sort) command God; it
is the Highest Expression that you read of, Isaiah 45. 11.

6. You have this privilege, by having God to be your God, and by being his
You may enter into, and survey all the treasures of heaven, and lay claim to
them.
people, that you may enter in and survey all the rich treasures and jewels of
heaven; and when you have so done, you may lay claim unto them all, and say, O
Lord, all these are mine by thy promise, and by my right in Christ. Thou art
mine, and thy mercy is mine, and thy Christ is mine, and thy grace is mine, and
that glory is mine; all this is the purchase of Christ, and all this is mine.

7. You have this privilege also, that all the seals of the Covenant of grace
All the seals of the Covenant are restrained to you alone.
are restrained unto your selves alone: As the Covenant is none but yours, and
with you, so the seals of the Covenant are none but yours, and unto you only:
The seals of the Covenant are to confirm you, and to assure you, and to revive
and comfort you, and to establish you; there is not any ungodly person on the
earth who has right unto the seals of the Covenant, and the reason is because
he has no interest in the Covenant it self; you only are the people of the
Covenant, and therefore you only have right to the seals of the Covenant.

8. You have this privilege, that you may expect help from your God, for all
the works which you owe to God: You may go to him for grace, for strength, You
may expect help from God in all your works.
for sufficiency to work in you both to will and to do; both to believe and to
suffer, Phil. 2. 13. and chap. 1. 29. Give thy strength unto thy servant, Psalm.
86. 16. He will give s^rength unto his people, Psalm. 29. 11. Gods promises are
joined with his commands; this thou would have me to do, O Lord give thy
Spirit unto me, and cause me to do it.

9. You have this privilege, that your all is in another; Your life stands in
the life of another; and your righteousness in the righteousness of another;
Your all is in another.
and your satisfying in the satisfaction of another; and your defense in the
death of another; and your title and claim in the obedience and purchase, and
right of another, and your acceptance in another; your life lies in the life of
Christ; and your righteousness is the righteousness of Christ, and your
satisfying is the satisfaction of Christ, and your defense and answer to all
inditements and accusations is the death of Christ, and your claim and title
is the obedience and purchase of Christ; your power is in the power of Christ,
and your acceptance is in Christ. This is a privilege indeed, that you are
wholly made up in another, and by another; that you shall never be found in
your own righteousness, but only in the righteousness of Christ, and shall
never be tried by your own righteousness, but by the righteousness of Christ,
etc.

10. You have this privilege, that you live upon free cost all your days: The
You live upon free cost.
Covenant of God will find and provide enough for you; you never need to load
your selves with anxious thought or care; For your God and Father cares for
you; all your burdens, and all your cares are taken off; Be careful for
nothing, cast all your care on him, for he cares for you. He lays up for his
children, and he lays out upon his children; his Covenant will find food for
your bellies, and raiment for your backs, and mercy and salvation for your
souls, etc.

11. You have this privilege, that all the gracious and sweet manifestations
of All the gracious manifestations of heaven are to you only.
heaven are unto you only: None know the Father but you, none taste of the
loving kindness of God but you, none sup with Christ but you, none partake of
the joys and comforts of the Holy Ghost but you, none have that hope and
assurance of glory but you, none eat of the Manna but you who have a new name
given unto you; heavenly banquets for the soul are provided only for you. The
Angels of God, ministering Spirits for you.


12. You have this privilege, that the very Angels of God are ministering
Spirits sent forth to minister for you who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.
14. They pitch their tenth, and encampe round about them that fear God, Psalm.
34. 7. This seems an high privilege, and yet you have an higher than this; For
as the Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people from henceforth, even for ^ver, Psalm. 125. 2.

13. What can I say more? Is this any privilege that whilst you live, you God
will be your God in life and death.
may live upon your God and Father, and when you dye, you shall go to (...) God
and Father? This also is yours who have God to be your God in Coven^^^; God
will be your God in life, and God will be your God in death, and God will be
your God after death; whiles you live he is yours, and with you; and when you
dye, he is yours, and you shall be with him reigning in glory for ever and
ever, and ever.

Thus have you heard a few things of your happiness in respect of your
Immunities and Privileges, by having God to be your God in Covenant. I will
(...) comfort more unto you, and then put an end to this (...).

SECT. XIII.
THere is yet one comfort more from this that God is your God, which is this,
If God be your God, then all is yours: As he said Christ^^ (...), and omnia,
Christ is mine, and all is mine; so Deus men's, and omnia (...)* If If God be
ours, all is ours.
God be your God, then heaven and earth are yours; whatsoever there is in all
the world that may do you good, it shall be yours: The Apostle expressly
delivers as much in 1 Cor. ^. ^1. All things are yours. Ver. 22. Whether Paul
or (...), or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things ^^ come, (...) yours. He does not in these expressions intend that
Christians have a civil, and common interest in all men's earthly possessions,
but this is it which he intend, viz. That God ordains all things for the good
of his people, and makes them serviceable thereunto. All those choice gifts
which he bestows on Ministers, (...) Apostles or others they are bestowed on
them for the good of his Church; And all the things of the world, whatsoever
good they may afford, they are to let out the same for the good and comfort of
the people of God; and all the conditions and states of things are for their
good, life shall do them good, and d^^th shall be for their good, and all the
vicissitude of things are for their good; the present postute of things, and
the future state of things, (whether of prosperity or adversity) all
occurrences whatsoever are for their good, Romans 8. ^^. We know that all things
work together for good to them that love God, to th^^ that are called according
to his purpose: As if you consider ungodly and wicked men, (who are none of the
people of God) there is nothing in all the world that does them good: The
Ordinances of Christ (by reason of the unbelief of their hearts) do them no
good; they are the favor of death unto d^^th unto them, and not the savor of
life (...) life; the blessings of God do them no good, they prove curses unto
them, (...) table is a s^^^e unto them, and their rich^^ (...) thorns (...)
them, and their prosperity is a ruin unto them; the judgments of God do them
no good, they learn not righteousness by them, they harden their hearts under
them, and grow more obstinately wicked; Wherefore should ye be smitten any
more? ye revolt more and more: So on the contr^ry, all the dispensations of
God, (either of the world, or in the world) they are for good to the people of
God.

Outward mercies are blessings to them; they eat and drink, and rejoice, and
praise and bless the Lord their God. Outward afflictions are mercies to them,
they do them good; It is good for me that I have been afflicted, said David,
Psalm. 119. 71. By these things men live, says Hezekiah; he chastises us for
our profit or good, says the Apostle, Heb. 12. 10. Wants and enjoyments,
honors and dishonours, sickness and health, smiles and frowns, life and
death, all does them good.

There are four things, which I beseech you who are the people of God to
remember.

1. All the good in the World is in the Fathers hands; it is the Fathers for
possession, All the good in the world is in the Fathers hands
(he is the possessor of Heaven and Earth; Genesis 14. 22.) and for Dominion, The
earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24. 1. Both riches and
honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thy hand is power and
might, and in thy hand it is to wake great, and to give strength unto all, 1 Chronicles. 29. 12.

2. When God makes a Covenant with you, he does also take in all the creatures,
God makes a Covenant with the creature to be serviceable for your good.
and lays a bond of special command upon them to be serviceable to your good:
he does not leave them out, but covenants with them to do you good: This is (I
confess) a strange expression that God should make a Covenant with other
creatures for the good of service unto his own people; and yet this you may
expressly read in Hos. 2. 18. In that day will I make a Covenant for them with
the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping
things of the ground; and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle
out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely. ver. 19. And I will
betroth thee unto me, for ever. ver. 21. And I will hear, says the Lord, I
will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth. ver. 22. And the earth
shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.

There are two choice things observable in these words. 1. One is, that God
makes a Covenant with his people to bring them into a near and sweet relation
unto himself, this you find (in verse 19.) I will betroth thee unto me for
ever. 2. A second is, That God makes a Covenant for his people, and that is
twofold.

1. For their security, to secure them against all danger and evil: and this
you find (in verse 18.) I will make a Covenant for them with the beasts of the
field; etc. No creature shall do them hurt, neither the beasts of the field,
nor fowls of the air, nor the creeping things of the earth, nor no wicked
enemies who bend the bow, and draw the sword, and prepare to the bottle; As
when a Covenant is between Nation and Nation, all the people are thereby bound
up from all acts of hostility and mischief; so the Lord by making a Covenant
with the beasts and fowls, etc. he does therein bind them up from being
prejudicial to his people.

A second is for their prosperity: and this you may find (in verse 21. 22.) I
will hear the heavent, and the heavens shall hear the earth, and the earth
shall hear the ^^rn, and the wine and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel. As
if all the creatures (when we are in covenant with God) were so many
supplicants and Petitioners unto God, entreating of him that they might be used
for a blessing unto us. The heavens do (as it were) beg of God that they may
send down seasonable showers, and seasonable influences; and the earth does (as
it were) beg of God, that it may be made fruitful by those influences of
heaven, etc. And God does promise to hear every one of them for Jezreel.

3. All the creatures are in the hand of the Father; and as all creatures are
All creatures are in a subordination to the will of your God.
brought into the bond of the Covenant for you, so all the creatures of the
world are in a subordination, and a necessary submission unto the will and
pleasure of your God. If he says to any of them Go, it goes, or to any of
them Come, and it comes; your God has an overruling Providence over them:
all their power, and operations, and motions are at the sole will and command
of him; they act as God will have them act, and when God will have them act,
and for them for whom God will have them to act; and shall not all this be for
you for your good who are the people of his Covenant, and the children of his
love?

If all this cannot satisfy you, then know, that as God has the command of
all As God has the command of all good in the creature, so he has engaged to
settle it upon you.
creature good and comforts, so he has engaged himself unto you to settle that
kind of good upon you. Though the earth, and the things of the earth, be not
your only portion, and be not your best portion, yet it is a part of your
portion, Psalm. 37. 22. Such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth, verse
29. The righteous shall inherit the land: He will not suffer the righteous to
want: he watches over you to do you good.

I do not know any one outward blessing, but God has promised it to his
people; length of days, and riches, and honor and peace, Prove. 3. 16, 17.
Food, and raiment, and liberty, and safety, and friends, and children, the
former, and the latter rain, etc. Joseph's blessing from Jacob is their
portion, Genesis 49. 25. The God of thy Father shall help thee, and the Almighty
shall bless thee with the blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep
that lies under, with blessings of the breast, and of the womb. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come.

And for Heaven it self, it is the Kingdom prepared for you, and an inheritance
reserved for you.

I will say no more to you who are the people of God concerning your interests
in For your interest in earthly blessings, You have the surest enjoyment of
them. You shall have the comfortablest enjoyment of them.
these earthly things, but this;

1. You shall have the surest enjoyment of them: Bread shall be given unto you,
and your waters shall be sure, Isa. 33. 16. The Lord will never leave you nor
forsake you, Heb. 13. 5.

2. You shall have the comfortablest enjoyment of them. The blessing of the
Lord it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, Prove. 10. 22. He makes
me to lie down in green pastures. He leads me besides the still waters, Psalm.
23. 2. A little that the righteous has, is better than the riches of many
wicked, Psalm. 37 16.

Your outward mercies are all of them sweet drops distilled out of the love,
and out of the Covenant of your God; And are enjoyed together with the
apprehension of God reconciled to you in Christ, and with peace in conscience,
and joy in the holy Ghost.

3. You have the easiest enjoyment of them. They come in at a more easy rate:
the You have the easiest enjoyment of them.
enjoyments of wicked men do cost them dear; many times they cost them their
souls, and at all times they cost them painful drudgings and vexing cares: but
the people of God enjoy upon praying terms, and believing terms, and safe
terms.

4. You have the longest enjoyment of them: Surely goodness and mercy shall
follow You have the longest enjoyment of them.
me all the days of my life, Psalm. 23. 6. Hearken unto me O house of Jacob,
etc. which are born by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb: and
even to your old age I am he, and even to hoary hairs I will carry you, Isa.
46. 3. 4.

SECT. XIV.
UNto this I add a Use of instruction, which respects the people of God in
Covenant. Use 3. Instructions for the people of God in Covenant. Thankfully
bless your God for bringing you into Covenant.


The instructions for them who are the people of God, and do enjoy him for
their God in Covenant.

1. You cannot do less than thankfully to bless your God for bringing of you
into Covenant with himself: This is such exceeding grace, and exceeding mercy,
and exceeding love, and exceeding favor, and exceeding honor, and exceeding
happiness, it cannot be but your souls must bless him for this blessing. If
one should meet with a poor man, and tell him I have set my love upon you, and
I will settle upon you such a Lordship worth so many thousands a year; nay, and
I will settle such a Manor which has all sorts of accommodations upon you,
which is worth many thousands more, etc. O how our hearts would melt at this
kindness, and this bounty. Met we ever with such a friend in all our life, we
would speak of him, and praise him, etc. The Lord has chosen you for his
people, he has set his love upon you, he is entered into Covenant with you, and
is become your God: he has bestowed himself upon you, and engaged all his
glorious Attributes unto you, and given his Christ, and his Spirit unto you,
and settled grace and glory upon you, and all his promises: and all Spiritual
privileges, and the good of Heaven and Earth; surely your souls must needs
adore this riches of grace, it cannot be but you must be enlarged with
blessings and praises, etc.

2. Have ye such a God to be your God in Covenant? Then make use of your God,
Make use of your God in all your occasions, wants, troubles.
and go unto him in all your occasions, in all your wants, in all your
troubles, and straits, Psalm. 63. 1. O God thou art my God, early will I seek
thee. Beloved, Gods relation unto you, and your propriety in him, are choice
grounds, and strong engagements for prayers, and for confidence; you find the
Saints improving their interest in God both these ways.

For Prayers, Psalm. 13. 3. Consider and hear me, O Lord my God, Psalm. 109. 26.
Help me, O Lord my God.

For confidence that their prayers shall have success, and be answered, Mich.
7. 7. I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation: my
God will hear me.

There are but two things on which you can possibly fix, and fasten any
scruple, or doubt in respect of God: one is, whether he be able to help you:
the other is, whether he be willing so to do: and as to both these your hearts
may easily be satisfied. For

Because he is a God, therefore he is able to do you any good. And because he
is your God, therefore he is certainly willing, and most ^eady to do you any
good. There are four things which (if you did seriously consider of them) would
be of special help unto you, against your fears, and would streng then your
hearts in all your approaches unto God.

1. That Gods relation unto you, as your God, is a relation of the dearest
love, and kindness, and grace, and mercy, and peace, and bowels of compassion.

2. That Gods Covenanting with you to be a God unto you, it is the highest
engagement which God can lay upon himself, and the fullest assurance which he
can give unto you, that he will be your God. His Covenant engagement unto you
has all his glory and Attributes pawned in it, and the highest ratification,
even his Oath, and the blood of Christ to seal it.

3. That as far as your God stands engaged unto you in his Covenant, so far may
you go unto him, and confidently rest upon him, that he will do you good; be
your wants never so many, yet if your God has undertaken the supply of them,
you may be confident.

4. That so long as God remains and continues to be your God; so long may you
(who are his people) draw near unto him, and beseech him, and be confident of
all the good for which he stands engaged unto you in his Covenant. He remains
and continues to be your God for ever and ever, and therefore all your days
may you go to him and expect good, and help from him.

3. Is it such an exceeding and complete happiness to have God to be our God in
Encourage your selves in the Lord your God.
Covenant? Then the people of God should encourage themselves in the Lord their
God, and make up themselves in their Covenant interest against all the
discouragements which they meet with in the world. There are the Creature
interests, and there are the Covenant interests; you are many times deprived of
the former. The world loves his own, and the world hates you, and deals hardly
and deceitfully with you. The world slights, and contemns, and reproaches, and
withdraws, and opposes, and troubles you, and persecutes you! Now in such cases
you should not suffer discouragements to sink and tear your hearts: you should
remember

1. That you are not of the world, but are chosen out of the world.

2. That you have a Covenant interest (God is your God in Covenant) and by
virtue of that Covenant interest, you shall find that in your God, which is
denied you in the world: As the Church spoke, Isa. 63. 16. Doubtless, thou art
our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledget us not.
Thou, O Lord art our Father, our Redeemer, etc. You shall find it better in
your God, then it can ever be found in the world: You cannot find love, and
kindness, and favor, and good dealing, and faithfulness, and help from the
world; O but you shall find at that time love, and kindness, and favor, and
tender dealing, and faithfulness, and help from your God. Though men will not
love you, yet your God will love you; though men will curse you, yet God will
bless you; though men forsake you, yet your God will help you; Yea and you
shall find the love of your God in Covenant, and his countenance, and his
presence, and his gooness a thousand thousand times more sweet, and refreshing,
and comforting, then all the comforts could be to you, which are denied unto
you by the weak Creature.

O Christians! Be not so dijected upon Creature with-drawments, and upon
Creature failings, or upon Creature oppositions: there is enough in your God,
and there is better in your God; There is fullness in him, and a living
fullness: you have all, and abound by enjoying God to be your God. Though you
have not the Candle, yet you have the Sun: though not the dirty puddles, yet
you have streams and fountains. Reckon the enjoyment of God for your God,
reckon this as something reckon on it as your best and fullest good. Assuredly
it is enough to make up your happiness, and that which is enough to make you
happy. It is enough to countervaile all other things which can never make you
happy.

4. Give diligence to make out unto your souls this Covenant relation twixt
God Make out your Covenant Relation.
and you; as you have a real interest in God, so rest not until you do attain
unto a personal evidence that God is your God, and that you are his people:
until you can say as the Church in Isa. 64. 8. But now, O Lord, thou art our
Father. verse 9. Behold, see we beseech thee, we are all thy people.

Two things I would briefly speak concerning this duty.

1. You may attain unto this personal evidence, and certainty of knowledge;
That You may attain to this personal evidence.
God is your God, and that you are his people for as much as

1. You have expreesse promises for this in Zach. 13. 9. They shall call upon
my Name, and I will hear them, I will say It is my people, and they shall say,
The Lord is my God. So Ezekiel. 34. 30. Thus shall they know that I the Lord their
God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel are my peaple, says
the Lord God.

2. Both the graces of the Spirit, and the testimony of the Spirit can make the
Covenant relation evident unto you. The graces in you are the infallible
characters that God is indeed your God, and that you are indeed his people. The
Spirit of grace is given only unto the people of God, and unto every one of the
people of God; and besides that you have the testimony of the Spirit, Romans 8.
15. Yea have received the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba Gather. Verse
16. The Spirit it self be^^eth witness with our spirit, that we are the
Children of God. You should strive to attain to this evidence. The advantage of
it. For the settling of the heart.


2. You should strive to attain unto this personal evidence of your relation:
Next to your being in the Covenant, I do not know any one thing of that
advantage unto you, as the knowledge (upon sure grounds) that God is your God
in Covenant.

It is of singular advantage and benefit unto you.

1. For the settling of the heart. If this Covenant relation were known of you,
you may say as David, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, Psalm. 116. 7. Your
souls cannot be settled by knowing what is happiness, but by knowing your
propriety in happiness, whiles your propriety is unsettled, all is unsettled
within you; and if that be obtained, all is peace, and at peace; I know that
this God is my God.

2. For the Comfort and joy of your hearts: It is fruition joined with
knowledge For the comfort of your hearts.
which is the Spring of all delight and comfort: You have heard the precious
comforts which belong unto the people of God, who have God to be their God, and
yet none of them have made comfort within your souls, because you are doubtful
whether God be your God: it is certain you cannot taste the comforts, whiles
you fear your title and interest: But if your interest were clear, your joy
would be full: happiness known to be ours, is a necessary cause of joy. The
Saints in glory have most joy, because they have the fullest knowledge of the
enjoyment of their happiness.

3. For your confidence in approaching unto God, and in the application of the
several For your confidence in approaching to God.
promises of God, your ways to God would be always open and fair; in all
your duties, and in all the Ordinances you might say I am now going to my God
and Father to help me: and that promise is my portion, and this promise is my
hope; They are all of them mine, for God himself is mine: He has given them
(every one of them) unto me, (2 Pet. 1. 4.) That I might not fear, that I might
have strong hope, and consolation, and encouragement. I will say no more unto
you, but this, the knowledge of your Covenant Relation unto God, it is the life
of your lives, and the life of your prayers, and the life of your confidences,
and the life of your hope, and the life of your comforts, it is your Paradise,
and your Heaven here on earth.

5. Maintain and justify your Covenant Relation (when once it is made manifest
Maintain and justify your Covenant Relation. Four things we should always
maintain. The unchangeableness of out Covenant Relation.
unto you) against all the suggestions of Satan, and against all the risings
and oppositions of your own unbelief.

I here are four things especially which you should still maintain, and make
good, for at them does Satan most strike at.

1. The unchangeablenesse of the Covenant Relation: This God is our God for
ever and ever. He will be our Guide even unto death, Psalm. 48. 14. For I am
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. You are many times under Spiritual s^^ences (God seems
not to regard your prayers) and many times under Spiritual delays (God puts
you off from day to day) and many times under Spiritual desertions (God hides
his face from you) and Satan in such cases puts it upon you to question and
disown your Covenant Relation; If God were your God, it would not be thus.

But notwithstanding all these, or any other trials of your selves, yet God
still maintains his interest in you, and your relation to himself. God has not
cast away his people whom he foreknew, says the Apostle, Romans 11. 2. I am the
Lord, I change not, Mal. 3. 6. I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face
from the house of Jacob, and will look for him, Isa. 8. 17. But Zion said, the
Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me; Can a woman forget her
sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her womb? Yea,
they may forget, yet I will not forget thee! Behold, I have graven thee upon
the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. So Hosea 2 19. I
will betroth thee unto me for ever, and Heb. 13. 5. I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee.

2. The tenderness of your Covenant Relation. The tenderness of Gods love The
tenderness of your Covenant Relation.
unto you, and the tenderness of Gods care over you; Do not suffer Satan to
raise jealousies, and do not you nourish any jealousies about these; if you do
so, you dishonor your God by them, and make your souls to serve him with
bitterness; your God loves you with as tender love as ever Father loved his
dearest child, Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? my bowels are
troubled for him, Jer. 31. 20. His love is set upon you, Deuteronomy. 7. 7. And he
does rest in his love, Zeph. 3. 17. He loves you with an everlasting love, and
therefore draws you with loving kindness, Jer. 31. 3. And your God has a most
tender care over you, as a man has over his jewels, (which are his chiefest
treasures) I will make up my jewels, Mal. 3. 17. and as a man has over the
apple of his eye; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple
of his eye, Deuteronomy. 32. 10. And as an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over
her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her wings,
verse 11. So the Lord, etc.

3. The goodness of the Covenant relation; that God still is, and will be The
goodness of the Covenant relation.
good unto you, that he prepares of his goodness for, and he prepares mercy
and truth for you, and lays up exceeding goodness for you, reserves it for
you, and is never weary, nor will ever turn away from you from doing of you
good.

4. The graciousnesse of your God in Covenant; that as at the first when he
took The graciousnesse of your God in Covenant.
you into the Covenant, this was the work of his own grace, so all along in the
dispensations of the Covenant, the Lord still acts in a way of grace toward
you always, and altogether upon free terms; he freely loved you, and he
freely chose you, and he freely called you, and still he freely blesses you,
and does good unto you, and upon gracious terms he deals with you all the
days of your life, in all things for which you have to deal with him.

6. Walk and live like a people who have such a God to be your God in Covenant;
Walk and live like a people in Covenant with God.
as your relation is different from all other peoples relation, so your
conversation should be different from the conversation of all other people; as
your condition is now higher than the condition of other people, (for God
exalts you by making you to be his people, so the word avouching signifies in
Deuteronomy. 26. 18.) so your walking must be better than that of other people; and as
your enjoyments and hopes transcendently exceed all other men's, so your returns
must be in some proportion answerable unto your great interest in so good a
God; and as God by becoming your God makes you high above all Nations, which he
has made in praise, and in name, and in honor, Deuteronomy. 26. 19. so has he
formed you for himself, that you should show forth his praise, Esaias 43. 21. You
are a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People,
that ye should show forth the praise of him who has called you out of
darkness into his marvelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Which in time past were not a
people, ^ut are now the people of God, which had not obtained mercy, but now
have obtained mercy, verse 10.

Quest. If any of you demand how that people should live and walk who have How
a people in Covenant should walk.
God to be their God in Covenant.

Sol. I answer; Such a people should walk,

1. By faith, in a continual dependence upon their living and giving God. 2. In
a singular love and delight in their good and merciful God. 3. With holiness
before their Holy and Omnipresent God. 4. With uprightness before their
Omniscient and All-sufficient God. 5. Without inordinate cares before their
Faithful and Never-failing God. 6. Without inordinate fears before their
Almighty God. 7. Without offense or grieving of their Loving God. 8. With all
contentedness and well-pleasednesse of Spirit before their Wise and gracious
God. 9. With all humility before their Great and Merciful God. 10. With all
cheerfulness and gladness of heart before their Blessing and Blessed God. 11.
In all constancy of obedience before their Eternal God. 12. In all the kinds of
zeal for the honor of that God who has so much honored them as to be their
God.
1. You who are the people of God, and have God to be your God in Covenant,
Live and walk by faith, in dependence upon the living God.
you should live and walk by faith in a continual dependence upon your engaged,
and promising God. 2 Cor. 5. 7. We walk by faith, not by sight. Hab. 2. 4. The
just shall live by his faith. Psalm. 115. 9. O Israel trust thou in the Lord, he
is their help and their shield. ver. 10. O house of Aaron trust in the Lord, he
is their help and their shield. ver. 11. Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the
Lord, he is their help and their shield. And mark the reasons annexed, why
every one of these should trust in the Lord, ver. 12. The Lord has been
mindful of us; (you have had experience of his goodness for the time past, and
therefore trust in him, and you shall every one of you find him to be your
good God still for the time to come, therefore still trust in him) he will
bless us, he will bless us, He will bless the house of Israel, he will bless
the house of Aaron. ver. 13. He will bless them that fear the Lord both great
and small.

There are six Arguments to persuade you unto this one duty. viz. to depend
Arguments for it.
upon your God by faith.

1. Because he is your God and your Father, and this comprehends within He is
your God and Father.
it all the foundations and grounds for your faith and dependence.

He is an infinite all sufficiency and goodness, and he undertakes all your
helps and supplies, and stands engaged unto you for whatsoever is necessary to
life and godliness, and gives unto you so many promises as so many bonds and
assurances that he will do you good; and besides all this he is able to
perform them, and likewise faithful in his word; yea, and besides all this, he
loves you above all the people in the world, and looks on you with tender
compassions (...) loving kindnesses, and assures you that he will do you good
for his own Names sake: What can there be more? and what can he said more to
draw and persuade any to depend on a God, and to rely upon him?

2. Because you are his people: Should not a people seek unto their God? You
are his people.
says the Prophet, Esaias 8. 19. Whether should children go but to their father?
I am a Father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn, Jer. 31. 9. And wilt
not thou cry unto me My Father? Thou art the guide of my youth, Jer. 3. 4. Upon
whom should the wife depend but upon her husband? why! The Lord is married unto
you, Jer. 3. 14. Thy Maker is thy husband, Esaias 54. 5. And how is he married
unto you? why! In righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and
in mercies, and in failhfulness^, Hosea 2. 19, 20. Truly even this alone that
you are his people, lays bond enough upon you to depend and trust upon your
God; for what is it to be his people, but to choose him alone to be your God,
and for to acknowledge him by trusting upon him, and loving of him, and obeying
of him? if he be a God not worthy of your trust, you are a people not worthy of
his love and care.

3. Because your God has given unto you that choice grace of faith for this
God has given faith for this end.
end, to act all along upon the Covenant of grace; that he has given faith
unto you, it is unquestioanble; otherwise you were not his people; now your
faith is given unto you for four ends.

One is for entrance, that you might become his people, and choose him for your
God.

A second is for acquaintance, that you as such a people might hold communion
with such a God.

A third is for discovery, that you might be able to find out and behold all
the undertakings and promises of your good God.

A fourth is for relianc^, that you might be able to trust upon him for all
that good which he has promised unto you.

Faith is the eye which is given for to see our good, and it is the feet which
are given us to carry us to the fountain of our good, and it is the hand which
is given to lay hold, to take, to receive all the good which our God has
promised us.

4. Because it concerns you above all people to honor your God; And how can
you It concerns you above all people to honor your God.
honor him, if you will not trust him? faith has (if I may so express my
thought) all the glory of God in its hand; you cannot possibly put more honor
upon God than by believing and depending on him; this is indeed to set him up
as a God, as the original of all, etc.

5. Because you know his Name; How often have you found it good for you You
know his Name.
to draw near to God? And when you have laid the whole burden on his promises
by faith, you have always found him a very faithful and helpful God: Now says
David, They that know thy Name will trust in thee.

6. Have you any other to depend upon? Every creature (naturally) is in a You
have no other to depend upon.
state of dependency; it is weak and wanting, and an insufficiency to it self,
and therefore it must lean upon some stronger prop than it self. And do not you
find it so with your selves? find you no wants at all? can you be a
sufficiency unto your selves under those wants? will any or can any but God
supply the wants of the people of God? Most of your wants are above all
Creature helps.

2. You who are the people of God, should walk in an exceeding love of your
Walk in an exceeding love of your loving God.
good and loving God. Matthew. 22. 37. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
1 John 4. 19. We love him because he first loved us. Deuteronomy. 11. 1. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God. Psalm. 31. 23. O love the Lord all ye his Sairts.

There is a love of desire: O God, thou art my God, my soul thirsts for thee,
Psalm. 63. 1.

Of delight: Delight thy self in the Lord, Psalm. 37. 4. In thy presence is
fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11.

Of Admirat^on; who is a God like unto thee? Micah 7. 18.

Of Satisfaction; I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness, Psalm.
17. 15. Lord, show us the Father and it suffices us, John 14. 8. Thy favor is
better than life, Psalm. 63. 3.

Of Adhaesion; never to part with God nor forsake him: I held him fast, I would
not let him go, Cant. 3. I and you should love as with the choicest kind of
love, (Foederal love) so with the highest degrees of love; you should love him
more than all the world, and more than all your friends, and more than all your
kindred, more than father or mother, sister or brother, and more than your
nearest relation, than husband or wife, and more than all your possessions, and
more than your own safeties, and more than your own lives, yea, and more than
your own souls; you should love your God sine omnibus, and super omnia, without
all, and above all, etc. And verily there are most choice, and most strong
reasons for all this in the Covenant alone, because he is your God; for because
he is your God, therefore For,


1. He loves you with an unutterable love, the purest and highest love, with a
fatherly He loves you.
love, with a faithful love, with a tender love, with an everlasting love. The
Schoolmen distinguish of amor gratuitus, and of amor debitus; our love is but
of debt which we owe to God; Gods love is a gracious gift unto us; we love him,
but can add nothing to him; he loves us, and his love makes us up for ever; he
begins in love only from his love; and we love when he sheds abroad his love
into our hearts; he loves, and receives nothing from us; we love, and receive
all from him.

2. He blesses you, provides for you, bestows all upon you, enricheth you, He
blesses you.
gives Christ, and Mercy, and Grace, and Peace, and Glory. Who would not love a
God who is Goodness it self? and Love it self? and Blessedness it self? who
would not but love a God who is his God, who delivers from hell, who quickens
from death, who pardons all sins, who cleanses from all iniquity, who makes us
near unto himself, who puts his Name upon us, who speaks peace to our
consciences, who blesses us with all blessings, who guides and keeps, and
feeds us all our days, who will give eternal life at last! Walk in all manner
of holiness before your holy God. In holiness of dsposition.


3. You who are the people of God, you should walk in all manner of holiness
before your Holy and Omnipresent God.

There is an holiness,

1. Of Disposition, which is the renewing of the heart by the Holy Ghost. Lev.
11. 44. I am the Lord your God, ye shall therefore sanctify your selves, and
ye shall be holy, for I am holy. ver. 45. I am the Lord that brings you up
out of the Land of Egypt, to be your God, ye shall therefore be holy, for I am
holy. Lev. 19. 2. Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy. Of
Conversation.


2. Of Conversation: 1 Pet. 1. 15. Be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly, and
unblameably we behaved our selves amongst you that believe. Esaias 35. 8. And an
highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of
holiness. Luke 1. 74. That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out
of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear. ver. 35. In
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. Which
consists*


This holiness of Conversation consists partly, In a separation from all
sinful ways.


1. In separation from all sinful and polluted ways, and courses of the world;
Come out from among them, and separate your selves, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Having these
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2
Cor. 7. 1. Walk not as other Gentiles walk, Ephesians. 4. 17. Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. In exercising our selves
in all holy duties. In doing our civil works with holy hearts, and to holy
ends. Reasons why such should walk in holiness. Holiness suits with the end
of the Covenant


2. In the exercising of our selves in all holy duties and works, and that
after an holy manner with godly fear and reverence.

3. In the managing of the civil works and employments of our ordinary callings
with spiritual and holy hearts, and for spiritual and holy ends; so that
whither we deal with God, or with men, whither you deal in heavenly businesses,
or in earthly, something of holiness flows out and appears in them both. Esaias
23. 18. Her Merchandise shall be holiness to the Lord. Now that the people of
God (who have him to be their God) should be holy, and should live very holy
lives, it may be thus demonstrated:

1. If you consider the scope and end of the Covenant, or of taking us into
Covenant; the end of the Covenant is to glorify the riches of Gods mercy and
grace; (for the praise of the glory of his grace) and the end of taking us into
Covenant, is, that we might glorify God who is so rich in mercy and grace unto
us. See 1 Pet. 2. 9. upon either of these accounts his people must be holy, and
live holily; for should they live profanely and unholily, this would pollute
the Name of their God, and extremely dishonor it, Ezekiel. 36. 21, 22. and cause
his Name to be blasphemed, Romans 2. 24. It is the life of holiness which makes
his Name to be glorified openly amongst men, as it is the life of faith which
makes it to be glorified secretly in the heart. Ma^th. 5. 16. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
which is in heaven.

2. You are taken into Covenant, that there might be a near relation 'twixt
Holiness fits for communion with God.
you and your God, and that there might be a delight full communion between God
and you; but holiness is necessary to both these; you must be sanctified if
you will be near unto him; for unholinesse is the greatest distance from God,
who is holiness it self; neither will he have fellowship with you without
holiness, because similitude is the foundation of communion; there can be no
fellowship 'twixt light and darkness, nor 'twixt God and Belial, 2 Cor. 6. 14.
All your communions with God are in acts of holiness, as a^l his communions
with you are by his holy Spirit.

3. The people of God are made high above all Nations, in praise, and in name,
and in honor. Deuteronomy. 26. 19. They are the exc^ll^nt on the earth. Psalm. 16. 3.
Holiness is our praise and honor.
A precious people. Jer. 15. 19. A peculiar treasure unto the Lord, Exodus 19.
5. But then he adds in verse 6. And ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests,
and an holy Nation. Why; How can you be above all other in praise, and in name,
and in honor, if your hearts and lives continued in the same inglorious
condition, and course of wickedness and sinfulness with others? Or how could
you be said to be the excellent on earth, if your hearts and lives, were as
base and common as the vilest on earth? No certainly, but it is holiness which
raises your natures, and it is holiness which raises your lives; As God is
said to be Glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15. 11. so his Church (or people) is
said to be glorious, when it is holy and without blame, Ephesians. 5. 27.

4. You have certainty and Testimony from your holiness, that you are indeed
Holiness is the character of Gods people.
the people of God. As Jesus Christ was declared to be the Son of God, when
with power he was raised from the dead by the Spirit of holiness, Romans 1. 4.
So are we really manifested or declared to be the sons of God, when we are
regenerated and renewed by the holy Ghost, Titus 3. 5. Holiness is as it were
the mark of Christ, and seal of the Spirit, and the Character of all the people
of God.

4. You who are the people of God, should walk with uprightness before the
Walkwith uprightness before the omniscient God.
Omniscient and All-sufficient God. This is that which the Lord himself
prescribed, when he made a Covenant with Abram, Genesis 17. 1. I am the Almighty
God, walk before me and be thou perfect. And David presses it upon Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. So Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Thou
shall be perfect with the Lo^d thy God. Beloved! This is a special duty which
concerns you who are the people of God; the Lord your God does insist upon
this; and though he bears with you in many things, yet assuredly he expects
this from all his people, To be upright, and to walk uprightly.

Quest. But you may demand, What is it to be perfect or upright and to walk so
To walk uprightly, is
before God?

Sol. I answer, it is

1. To walk without guile. This is the periphrasis of an upright man, that To
walk without guile.
he is one in whose spirit there is no guile, Psalm. 32. 2. (that is) his heart
is sound and real, there is truth in his inward parts; he is one who loves God
with his very heart, and hates sin with his very soul: and so, to walk
uprightly, it is to walk plainly; To walk before God in truth, as H^zekiah
expresses it in Isa. 38. 3. Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, etc. It is not to make a show, a pretense, as
if we would follow the Lord, as if we would obey his voice, as if we would
order our conversation according to his Word; but it is unfeignedly to
endeavor this, to walk in all well-pleasing before God; He that walks
uprightly, he does choose the ways of God for his ways, and sets up the Will
of God (revealed in h^s Word) as the rule of his course, and cordially strives
to come up unto that Will of God.

2. To wa^k with a single respect unto God, without mixture of ways, and
mixture To walk with a single respect to God.
of ends; upright men are therefore styled simple men, Matthew 10. 16. That is
simple which is without mixture; which is not partly one thing, and partly
another thing; partly gold, and partly dross; partly honey, and partly wax,
pattly mire, and partly water; but it is Homogeneal, all alike to the substance
of it: So upright men are single or simple men; they have but one heart, and
but one object, and but one way or path, and but one end or aim. God only is
t^^ great object of (...) and Gods way only is the path of their life; and Gods
glory is only the end of their working and walking; It is not sin and God, it
is not the world and God, it is not a trade of sin and a trade of holy
profession, it is not their own praise and Gods glory, their own benefit and
Gods honor that they mingle together; This is hypocrisy: But it is God only
whom they set up, and his ways only wherein they walk, and his glory only
which they seek: And therefore the course of all their actions, has a sincere
reference and subserviency thereunto, so that God may have glory.

3. To walk uprightly, is to walk fully and wholly with God. Beloved, this is a
very truth, To walk fully and wholly with God.
That when a man's heart is false and unfound, there is then aninequality and
disproportion 'twixt the Will of God and his hear^ this heart cannot possibly
extend it self to the extent of Gods Will, nor raise it self to the height of
Gods will: the will of God seems too large, and too strict; some one thing or
other it requires too much, and something or other it forbids too much; but if
a person be upright, his heart and Gods will be commensuerable; though the act
be short, yet the heart is not short; the heart of an upright man is as full of
obedience, as Gods Commands are of righteousness: and he strives to come up
fully and wholly to the Will of his God. Mr servant Caleb has followed me
fully, Numb. 14. 24. They seek him with their whole heart, Psalm. 119. 2. They
are perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us go on to
perfection, Heb. 6. 1. They go from strength to strength, Psa. 84. 7. I strive
if by any means, etc. Phil. 3. 11.

O Christians! This perfect walking with God, this becomes the people of God;
and this is most pleasing to God, when your hearts indeed are set on God, and
let out for God, and continually set on the Word of God; when your ways are
still the ways of God, and your works the works of God, and your paths the
paths of God: when there is no way of wickedness wherein you may be found: and
when there is no path of holiness and righteousness wherein you are not to be
found: when you love your God with all your hearts, and serve your God with all
your might: when you would not willingly do the least evil, but fear it; nor
knowingly omit or neglect the greatest duty, but assay and comply with it: when
your weaknesses are your griefs, and the highest pitches of holiness are your
desires and aims: when though you fall, yet you will rise; and when you have
got some ground, you must still go further: when you are exactly careful to do
your utmost in the fruits of righteousness, and give glory to God alone; when
you study your services, and his praises alone, this is to walk uprightly, this
is to be perfect with your perfect God, this is to be wholly his, as he is
wholly yours; this is to bestow all on him, who bestows all on you; this is to
value the enjoyment of your God alone, as a sufficient portion and satisfaction
that you need not at all to swerve from him, and this is to count your God most
worthy of your hearts, and of your lives; this is the honor of your
Covenant Relation, the delight of your God, the beauty of your lives, the path
of your peace, the joy of your conscience, and the forerunner of your glory.

5. You who are the people of God, should walk without inordinate care before
Walk without inordinate care before your faithful God.
your careful, faithful, never-failing God. Matthew. 6. 31. Take no thought,
saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be
clothed? Verse 32. For your heavenly Father knows you have need of all these
things. James 5. 7. Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you.

I will tell you what your inordinate cares for the things of this life
Inordinate cares are Your burdens.
are.

1. They are your burdens: David calls them so, Psalm 55. 27. They sit more
heavy upon your spirits, than your wants do; they are like the guilt of sin
in the conscience, which makes us to go heavy all the day long.

2. They are vexations. They pierce us through with many sorrows. 1 Timothy Your
vexations.
6. 10. Scratching, tearing, wounding thorns, as our Savior calls them.

3. They are vanities: As the King of Assyria distressed Ahaz, but helped him
not at all: so our inordinate cares are are fruitful troubles, but fruitless
They are vanities.
helps; They cannot add one cubit to our stature, Matthew. 6. 27.

4. They are Indec^rums; fit for Heathens who know not God; nay, unfit They are
Indecorums.
for Christians who know and also enjoy God for their God.

5. They are dishonours unto you and unto your Relation; As if God were worse
than an Infidel, that he will not provide for his own They are dishonours.
household.

6. They are very sins; they justle aside the glory of the Covenant, and the
fidelity They are very sins. Twelve things in respect of God to remove our
cares. His sufficiency
and sufficiency of divine providence.

But to let these things pass, I beseech you who are the people of God, to
remember and consider twelve things in respect of your God, to remove your
cares.

1. His sufficiency. He is able to supply all your wants, and to succor you in
all your distresses.

2. His Omnisciency: He knows every want and strait that lies upon you; as
Omnisciency.
all his works, so all your wants are known unto him; He knows that you have
need of all these things.

3. His Authority: The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; Authority.
All the creatures, and all your helps are in his hands, and depend on his
Command.

4. His Willingness: He is willing to do you good, or else he had never
promised Willingness.
all good unto you; he is your Father.

5. His Engagement: He binds himself by Covenant to supply you. He must
Engagement.
wrong himself if he should forget you.

6. His tenderness: His love (as you have often heard) is more to you than
Tenderness.
all the world.

7. His Bounty: He has given you Christ, and grace, and will give you glory;
Bounty.
and how shall he not with these give you all other things!

8. His Fidelity: He is faithful who has promised; he never yet brake his
Fidelity.
word, or did fail his people.

9. His extent of undertaking for all your life long: I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. His extent of undertaking for us all our life.
The accounts of his careful proyisions. His undertaking for our posterity.


10. The accounts and reports of his careful provisions, by his own people, and
their opinion of him. Genesis 48. 15. The God which fed me all my life long unto
this day, said Jacob. Psalm. 37. 25. I have been young, and now am old, yet have
I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his ^eed begging bread.

11. God undertakes even for your children and posterity also, and is it likely
that he will fail your selves? The generation of the upright shall be blessed,
Psalm. 112. 2. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, Genesis 17. 7.

12. He does good to his enemies, therefore he cannot forget his friends; If he
feeds the dogs, surely he will feed his children; If he provides for the
Ravens, His doing good to his enemies.
surely he will provide for his people.

6. You who are the people of God, should walk without inordinate fears, Walk
without inordinate fears.
even upon this account, because you have God to be your God. Genesis 15. 1. Fear
not Abram, I am thy shield, and thy exc^eding great reward. Isa. 41. 10. Fear
thou not, for I am with thee; Be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will u^ hold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness^. Isa. 43. 1. Fear not, for I have Redeemed thee, I
have called thee by name, Thou art mine. Verse 2. When thou passest through the
waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers they shall not overflow
thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flames kindle upon thee. Verse 3. For I am the Lord thy God, the holy
One of Israel thy Savior.

There are seven fears against which the Covenant Interest should secure the
Our Covenant interest should secure us against
hearts of the people of God.

1. A fear what man can do. 2. A fear what Satan can do. 3. A fear what God
will do. 4. A fear what we our selves shall do. 5. A fear what ours shall do.
6. A fear what the Churches of Christ shall do. 7. A fear what death may do.
1. Your Covenant Interest and relation should secure you against the fear what
The fear of what man can do.
man can do; Psalm. 118. 6. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can
do unto me.

We are sometimes afraid of the power of man, and why are we so? I, even I am
he that comfort you; who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a man
that shall die, and the son of man, that shall be made as grass? And
forgettest the Lord thy Maker, Isa. 51. 12, 13.

Of the rage and fury o^ man! and why are we so? Thou have feared continually,
because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to de^^roy; And where
is the fury of the oppressor? Isa. 51. 13. Surely the wrath of man shall praise
thee, and the remainder of wrath sh^lt thou restrain, Psalm. 76. 10.

Of the plots and combinations of men! and why are we so? Say ye not a
confederacy to all them to whom this people shall say a confederacy; neither
fear ye their fear, nor be afraid! Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and
let him be your fear, and let him be your dread; and he shall be for a
Sanctuary So in verse 9. Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be
broken in pieces, etc. Verse 10. Take counsel together, and it shall come to
naught, speak the word, and it shall not stand, for God is with us.

2. Your Covenant Interest and relation should secure you against the fears
Against the fear of what Satan can do.
of what Satan can do. You are many times exceeding afraid of the dreadful
power of Satan, as if he might command you, and force you to such sinful
thoughts, and sinful acts which make your hearts to tremble; you think he is
too strong for you, and you shall never be able to withstand him any longer,
and your hearts are almost crushed and sunk with fear of Satan's power; but what
(...) Satan do? Nil potest diabolus ^isi missus vel permissus, He is but a
creature, and he is a wicked creature, and he is a conquered creature, and he
is a chained creature, and he is a cursed creature. Christ has conquered him,
and therefore you shall conquer him: all the victories of Christ do reach unto
you; God does chain him, and restrain his power and working, Thus far he shall
go and no farther; God will give you grace sufficient to resist, and withstand
him, and will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength, and at last,
yea shortly, will bruise Satan under your feet. Grea^er is he that is in you,
than h^^ that is in the world. He Rules the world which troubles and tempts
you, but your God will not suffer you to be led into temptation.

3. Your Covenant Interest and Relation should secure your hearts against the
Against the fears of what God will do.
fears of what God will do; You see sometimes great changes and alterations,
and judgments in the earth, how terrible God is to the inhabitants thereof,
what desolations he makes, how he shakes the mountains, and makes the hills to
fall down at his presence, his fire burns and consumes and goes on, and no man
knows the power of his wrath, nor can say, when or where his indignation will
end and cease; But in all the dark and dreadful dispensations of Gods
providence, the people of God have no cause to fear, for he has an hiding
plac^ from the storm for them, and his chambers of protection for them, until
the indignation be over; His eyes are over ^^e righteous: it shall surely be
well with them that fear before him: every thing shall work for good unto them:
and should public calamities involve you with other people, yet your God will
either support you under them, or deliver you out of them, or translate you
into a better place and condition, free from all sin and misery, and trouble,
into the place of eternal rest and happiness.

4. Your Covenant Interest and Relation should secure your hearts from the
Against the fears of what our selves shall do.
fear of what we our selves shall do: what will become of us in the latter end!
we often times fear that we shall never hold out, and persevere in the paths of
righteousness, and we fear that providence will not hold out, that we shall
not have enough to sustain us all our days; But why do we fear these fears? is
not Christ the Finisher of our Fath, who is the Author of our Faith? and will
not God perfect the work which he has begun? and are we not kept by his
power through Faith unto salvation? and has he not promised that he will never
depart from us? and to put his fear into our hearts, that we shall never
depart from him? And as for an outward enough and sufficiency for all our
days; alas, why do we fear future supplies, who live every day upon present
mercies? Our God has said that he will never leave us nor forsake us, and that
bread shall be given us, and our waters shall be sure; Jesus Christ yesterday
and to day, and the sa^e^ for ever: so your God is an al-sufficiency for all
times, in all times, and unto all times; there is no end of his goodness, nor
of his care, nor of his love.

5. Your Covenant Interest and Relation should secure your hearts against
Against the fears of what ours shall do.
the fears of what yours shall do, and what will become of them when you are
dead; you have but little your selves, and shall leave less unto your
children; But O that we had more faith, for then we should have less fears! but
remember a few things.

1. Be more careful what good you may do your childrens fouls, than fearful
what good God will do for your childrens bodies; if your children be only your
children, they are then heirs of vanity and sin, and misery; but did you
take care to make them Gods children, they should be heirs of mercy and
blessing.

2. Though you die, yet your God ever lives, whose care and bounty is not
restrained to one person, or to one generation, but extends unto believers, and
unto their seed after them. Genesis 17. 7. And thou art the helper of the
fatherless, Psalm. 68. 5. In thee the fatherless finds mercy, Hosea 14. 3.

3. Though you cannot find provision for your children after you, and
therefore fear, yet you may find promises for your children, and therefore you
should not fear; if you cannot leave them with a portion, yet if you can leave
them with a promise of God, it may very well quiet and satisfy you: and this
you may; Psalm. 112. 2. The generation of the upright shall be blessed. Psalm.
102. 28. The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
established before thee.

6. Your Covenant Interest and Relation should secure your hearts against the
Against the fears of what shall become of the Churches of Christ.
fears of what shall become of the Churches of Christ, especially in times of
heresies and seducements, and of threatenings, and endeavors to subvert the
Ordinances, and all Gospel Ministrations; And truly many do fear (in respect of
these) at this time; but we should not inordinately fear in respect of them:
for there are no people in the world, that have Christ so near them, and God so
engaged unto them, as the Church. The foundation of the Church is too strong
for the gates of hell; and the Church of God will always be found a very
burdensome-stone for all people; All that burden themselves with it shall be
cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against
it, Zach. 12. 3. And as for the Ordinances and Ministrations of Christ in his
Churches, they shall continue as long as Christ has a Church on earth; as long
as the Covenant abides, a people of the Covenant shall abide, and as long as
the people of the Covenant abides, the Ordinances for those people shall abide;
no not all the corrupt opinions of men, nor powers of men shall ever be able to
pluck the Sun out of heaven, nor drive out the everlasting Gospel from the
earth. If any thing should make us to fear the continuance of those amongst us,
it is only our unthankfulness, and our unfruitfulnesse, and our contempt, and
scorn of them.

7. Lastly, your Covenant Interest and relation, should secure your hearts
against Against the fears of death.
the fear of death; you should not fear to live, not yet to dye, who have God
to be in Covenant; for the sting of death is gone; it is taken out by the death
of Christ, 1 Cor. 15. Death separates soul and body, but it can never separate
you from the love of God, Romans 8.

The Covenant holds beyond death; it does not bring you only into a present
enjoyment of God, but it is to bring you into a fall, perfect, and everlasting
enjoyment of God in glory; the Covenant yields you the least part of your good,
of your portion, of your happiness in this life; the greatest and fullest
portion of good promised unto you by God in this Covenant, lies in the arrears,
in the reserves, in the full possession of the inheritance after death; and
then why should you fear to dye, and go to take a full possession? why should
you fear to dye, and to enter into the joy of your Master? why should you fear
to dye, and go home to receive all the desires of your hearts, and all the
eternal preparations of glorious blessedness for your souls?

7. You who are the people of God, and have him to be your God in Covenant,
Walk without offending God.
you should walk without offending of him, and without displeasing or grieving
of your good God. Mal. 1. 6. A son honors his Father, and a servant his
Master. If then I be a Father, where is mine honor? And if I be a Master,
where is my fear? friends in Covenant carefully avoid mutual offenses and
provocations, you should fear the Lord and his goodness, Hosea 3. 5. Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Seeing that Thou our God have given
us such deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandments! etc. Ezra
9. 13, 14. so seeing that the Lord is become our God, and has delivered us
from wrath, and made us to be his people, should we grieve him by sinning
against him! Grieve not the Spirit of God by whom ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. Walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, Colos. 1.
10. It were an excellent height if we could say unto God, as he spoke unto his
people in Micah 6. 3. O my people, what have I done unto thee, and wherein have
I wearied thee? So if we could say, O our God what have we done against thee,
and wherein have we displeased and grieved thee!

There are nine sins which if they be found in the people of God, they do
extremely Sins much displeasing God. Gross transgressions.
offend and displease their God.

1. Gross transgressions; when their spots are not the spots of his children,
Deuteronomy. 32. 5. David's adultery displeased the Lord, 2 Samuel 11. 27.

2. Murmuring complaints against the dispensations of their God, Numb. 11. 1.
Murmuring complaints against his dispensations.
When that people complained, it displeased the Lord; (...) the Lord heard it,
and his anger was kindled. ver. 4. They f^ll a lusting, and wept again, and
said Who shall give us flesh to eat? ver. 10. And the anger of the Lord was
kindled greatly.

3. Their manual divisions and contentions, and envyings, and evil-speakings,
Mu^ual divisions.
and reproachings of one another, these dishonor themselves, and grieve the
Spirit, and offend their Father.

4. Spiritual pride, and loftiness of heart, being vainly puffed up with
knowledge, Spiritual pride.
or any spiritual seize and enjoyments, foolish boastings.

5. Carnal security, and carelessness of their hearts and ways, and turning
Carnal security.
the grace of God into wantonness.

6. Unfruitfulness and barrenness under the Gospels Ordinances and
Unfruitfulnesse.
helps.

7. Conformity unto the world, fashioning themselves thereunto, and complying
Conformity unto the world.
with the ungodly.

8. Lukewarmnesse of spirit in the cause of God, and of the truths of Christ,
and of the power of godliness, suffering all these to be opposed and
blasphemed. Lukewarmnesse.


9. Particular unbeliefs and distrusts, as in Moses case, etc. when their faith
Particular unbeliefs.
has a special call to honor God amongst people in difficulties, etc. These
and some other sins, if found among the people of God, do exceedingly
displease and grieve him; and therefore be you very watchful against them, yea,
and against all Reasons why we should be watchful against all sinnings.
sinnings whatsoever; because,

1. Your God has showed you exceeding riches of grace and mercy: There is
mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared.

2. Your relation to so holy a God, should make you to fear all unholy actions;
you should be holy, as your heavenly Father is holy.

3. Your receipts have been high, and your returns should be answerable; you
have received favor, and Christ, and the Spirit, and hopes of heaven, and
should you offend your God after all this! O what ingratitude (worst of
ingratitude) were this!

4. You will extremely darken your communions with God by it, and your
heavenly relation by it, your Sun will set at Noon day.

5. You will break up the peace in conscience, and conscience will lay hold on
you from all your interest comforts received.

6. God doh usually correct and chastise his people in this life very severely
and sharply for their disobedience.

8. You who are the people of God, should walk with all contentedness and Walk
with all contentedness and well-pleasednesse.
well-pleasednesse of spirit, for you have God to be your God; says David,
Psalm. 16. 5. The Lord is the portion of mine in eritance; and ver. 6. I have a
goodly heritage: That man will be contented with nothing, who cannot find
contentment in the enjoyment of all things.

There are three things which I desire you to take notice of. For,


1. That God is the portion of his people: Thou art my portion O Lord, Psalm.
God is the portion of his people.
119. 57. All the world is too low and too little to make up a portion for any
one holy or godly man; he sets not out any estate as your portion but himself:
If the Lord should say to a godly man I will give you all the world, and that
shall be all your portion; O Lord, would he say, let others have that portion,
but I beseech thee give me thy self.

2. That God alone is portion enough; all sufficiency is (questionless) a
sufficient God alone is portion enough.
portion; as Joseph said unto his brethren, Genesis 45. 20. (by the command of
Pharaoh) Regard not your stuff, for the good of all the Land of Egypt is
yours; so may we say to all the people of God, Regard not, be not troubled so
much for the poor stuff of earthly revenues, for the all-sufficient God is
yours. The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore I shall not want, Psalm. 23. 1. He
that wants nothing has enough: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great
r^ward, Genesis 15. 1. H^ ^ho is secured from all evil, and is blessed with all
blessings, certainly this man has enough.

3. That your fruition of God for your God, sweetens any outward portion, be
Out fruition of God sweatens any outward po^tion.
it never so little; the little of earth with the enjoyment of God as loving,
as reconciled, as accepting of us in Christ, as shining in his favor on our
souls, as our God in Covenant; how satisfying, how delightful a portion is
this! The small Ring with the rich Diamond, cannot that delight and please you!

Object. O but I have very little of these outward.

Sol. A little of them is enough, much is but a superfluity, and is like the
water that runs besides the Mill. Though but a little, yet It is enough. It is
blessed.


2. Your little is blessed, it is the cluster of grapes with the blessing of the
Lord; a little wholesome food is better than a feast that is poisoned; so, etc.

3. Your little will last. As the Widows Oil ran out still, and ran out so
much It will last.
as served to sustain her all the time of Famine, so God by little and little
will preserve you all your days.

4. Though little in hand, yet still sufficient, and of the best in promise,
which will There is sufficient in the promise.
rain Manna down upon you all the time of your journying and traveling, until
you come to Canaan.

9. You who are the people of God, should walk with all humility before God,
Walk with all humility before God.
Micah 6. 8. What does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

There are four goodly sights.

1. To see a pardoning God, and a mournful sinner. 2. To see a promising God,
and a believing sinner. 3. To see a good God, and a thankful sinner. 4. To see
a gracious God, and an humble sinner.
No people are raised so high as the people of God, and no people with such
lowliness and humbleness as these.

To walk humbly, is to walk

1. With a sense of our own unworthhyness; I am not worthy of the least of all
the With a sense of our own unworthiness.
mercies, of all the truth, which thou have showed unto thy servant, said
Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. Who am I, and what is my house, that thou have brought me
hitherto? said David, 2 Samuel 7. 18.

2. With a sense of our own insufficiencies: we are not sufficient of our
selves to With a sense of our own insufficiency.
think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
O Lord, I know the way of man is not in himself. It is not in man to direct his
steps, Jer. 10. 23.

3. With a full acknowledgement of the grace of God, as the reason and cause of
With a full acknowledgement of the grace of God.
our all: By the grace of God I am what I am: And I labored more abundantly
then they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me, said Paul, 1
Cor. 15. 10.

4. With a low opinion of our selves, as 1 Cor. 4. 6. That not one of you be
puffed up With a low opinion of our selves.
for one against another, verse 7. For who makes thee to differ? and what have
thou that thou did not receive. Now if thou did receive it, why do thou
glory, as if thou had not received it? Why they should walk humbly. Because
They are saved by mercy. Their enjoyments are the gifts of grace.


And there are five Reasons which the people of God have to walk humbly.

1. Because they are all saved by mercy, and brought into their high relation
by the mere love of their God: In his mercy he saved them; and in your blood
he set his love upon you, and said unto you, live.

2. Because all the great enjoyments which they have, they are the mere gifts
of grace: Ye are called by grace, and justified by grace, and adopted by grace,
and renewed by grace, and saved by grace.

3. Because you continually live in a dependence upon God. All your actings are
in his strength, and all your communions with him are by his presence, and by
his power; They live in dependency upon God.
your graces, and your comforts, and particular abilities, would die in your
hands, if he should but withdraw and leave you.

4. Because your God is a great God, and you are but Dust and Ashes before him:
Their God is a great God.
And besides that, he knows so much of you, that you have cause to be vile in
your own eyes, and to lie low before him.

5. Because you do so little for so good a God: You make but poor returns in
proportion They do so little for so good a God.
to your exceeding great receipts: your best performances and acts of obedience,
are so short to his mercies, that you need mercy still to pass you by.

You should walk with all cheerfulness, and gladness of heart, before your
blessing Walk with all cheerfulness.
and blessed God, Psalm. 100. 2. Serve the Lord with gladness, Deuteronomy. 28. 47.
Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse, and gladness of
heart for the abundance of all things. O how cheerful should your life be, who
enjoy such a God to be your God: This enjoyment should be like a good
conscience, which is a continual feast: yet God is my God, and Christ is my
Christ, and mercy and glory are mine: Yea, it should make you exceeding forward
and cheerful in the services of your God: not calling them your burdens, but
delights: you should rejoice in him, and rejoice to obey him, and delight to do
his will, account it your meat and drink, and you should a bound in the work of
the Lord.

11. You should be constant in walking before him: you should never be weary of
him, nor of his works: you should think a short life too short for the serving,
Be constant in walking before him.
and the honoring of such a God: as the Martyr was troubled because he had but
one life to part with for Christ; so should we, because we have no more lives,
or no longer time of life to bless and praise our good and gracious God: you
should serve him in holiness, and righteousness all your days, Luke 2. Surely
goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I will dwell
in the house of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 23. 6.

12. You who ate the people of God, should walk before him in all zeal, for
the honor of that God who has so much honored you, as to make you his Walk
before him in all zeal.
people. What shall I do for my God! you should deny your selves, and extend
your selves, and improve all your gifts, and graces, and powers for the
services of his glory; you should not count your time, nor riches, nor honors,
nor lives dear unto you, so that you might honor and glorify such a God as
your God is, and is to you: you should speak, and pray, and study, and act, and
enact for him, who is so good a portion, and will be your everlasting and
blessed God.

SECT. XV.


And that Use shall be a Use of Exhortation, even unto them who are not (as
yet) Exhortation to them that are not in Covenant with God; To get into a
Covenant Relation.
the people of God in Covenant; That they would not content themselves in that
estate, to be Forrainers, and strangers, and enemies, but that they would beg,
and strive to come into a Covenant Relation with God, that they would take him
for their God, and submit themselves unto him as his people in Covenant.

Now this Exhortation I shall direct unto two sorts of sinners. 1. Unto such as
to this day have obstinately refused to become the people of God. 2ly. Unto
such who are troubled for their obstinate disobedience, and would fain become
the people of God, but are afraid that God will never admit them into Covenant,
that he will never be a God to them, etc.

1. Unto such who hitherto have obstinately refused to become the people of
God, and to own God for their God in Covenant. What is the Almighty that we
should serve Such as obstinately refuse this Covenant Relation.
him, spoke they in Job 21. 15. Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice?
said Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 2. Let us break his bands asunder, and cast away his
cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3. They would not walk in his ways, neither were they
obedient to his Laws, Isa. 42. 24. I will pour out my Spirit upon you, I will
make known my words unto you: I called and ye refused, I have stretched out my
hand, and no man regarded, ye have set at naught all my counsels, Prove. 1. 23,
24, 25. Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11. 24.
This showed his contempt of worldly honors standing in Opposition to the
enjoyment of communion with the people of God. But many refuse to become the
sons of God, and to become the people of God, although they hear of the
infinite happiness in being the people of God, and in the enjoyment of God to
be their God; They look upon it as their great loss to part with their sinful
lusts, and they look upon it as their exceeding prejudice and disgrace to be
counted the people of God, and they look upon it as their heavy burden to be
brought into the Covenant, and yiedling up themselves unto God alone.

For such a sort of ignorant and perverse people, I would pray unto God that he
Considerations to awaken them.
would open their eyes, and convince their hearts, and awaken them from the
sleep of death. And if they be capable of any faithful counsel and advice, I
would present a few serious Considerations unto them, which perhaps may
persuade ^h^m to hearken, and to desire to come into Covenant with God.

1. You are never able to stand out, and live under the Covenant of Works.
There You are not able to stand out and live under the Covenant of works.
are but two Covenants which we must abide by; In one of them all men of
necessity must be found: either in the Covenant of Grace, or in the Covenant of
Works; These are like the two Masters of whom Christ does speak, that one
cannot serve them both either he will hate the one and love the other, or else
he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Matthew. 6. 24. So no man can be
under both these Covenants at once; if he refuse the one, he chooses the other;
and if he chooses the one, he refuses the other: If you refuse to come into
the Covenant of Grace, of necessity you remain under the Covenant of Works; and
then you are as surely lost and destroyed, as you now live: for the Covenant of
works condemns and curses the sinner (cursed is every one wh^ c^ntinues not in
every thing that is written to do it, Gal 3. 10.) And you are exceedingly
sinful; the Law of God finds you so, and your own consciences testify against
you as so; Neither have you any way to escape that curse of the Law, nor the
wrath of God revealed against all unrighteousness, and ungodliness, but in the
Covenant of Grace (because there only a Savior and mercy is to be found) but
you perversely refuse to enter into that Covenant with God. If you will not
consent to a Covenant Relation, you cannot e^pect the Covenant advantages.


2. If you will not consent unto a Covenant Relation, it is but presumption to
expect the Covenant advantages.

The Covenant advantages are the hopes and enjoyments of lovingkindnesse, of
pardoning mercies, of the joys of the Holy Ghost, of peace in conscience, of
special protection, of sanctified blessings, and of eternal glory and
salvation. But these do necessarily presuppose a Covenant Relation (that is)
That we must take God for our God, and become his people. For to none but these
has God ever promised, and on none but these has God ever settled or intended
to settle such choice blessings: For others God says, What have thou to do to
take my Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? If you will
have none of me, you shall have none of my mercies; and if you will not be my
people, I will not be your God. Never deceive your selves with vain
confidences, I will never pardon you, I will never bless you, I will never
justify you, I will never save you: If the woman will not consent to marry the
man, it is but a vain simplicity in him to presume of his interest in her
estate, so, etc.

3. For any sinner wh^ hears of this Covenant of grace, and yet excludes
himself, It is exceeding folly to exc^ude our selves from this
Covenant Relation.
(as every one does who refuses to submit unto the terms of relation) this
does declare exceeding folly; O what folly is it to slight our only help, our
only hope, our only remedy, our only salvation? To reject all happiness, and
our only happiness.

Exceeding impiety: Certainly our hearts are unspeakably hardened, or are
utterly and exceeding impiety.
Atheistical, or hellishly desperate, that we care not though we loose our
precious souls, and forsake our mercies, and forfeit heaven: assuredly we have
sordid thoughts of God, and of the happiness of enjoying God for our God, and
of all that God promises to give, in that we refuse to be his people, and had
rather enjoy our filthy and damning lusts. Their condition is unspeakably
miserable, helpless, and hopeless.


4. Your condition is, and will be unspeakably miserable, helpless, and
hopeless: And this appears in four particulars.

First, You will utterly deprive your souls of all hopes and pleas for mercy
and glory.

Secondly, That you wilfully do this, though God treats with you in a way of
mercy and grace, for mercy and grace.

Thirdly, That you now stand alone, and must do so in your accounts before God,
without a Mediator to answer for you; you alone must answer God for all your
sins, and for all your abominations.

Fourthly, That God will magnify the power of his wrath and justice upon you
for despising of him, and of his grace, and of his mercy, and of all his glory,
etc. of all sinners, you will fall under the heaviest condemnation.

3. Unto such who fain would be the people of God, but are afraid that God will
never Such as would fain be in Covenant, but fear God will not admit them;
Should consider It is possible for them to be the people of God.
admit of them into Covenant, that he will never be a God unto them.

To these I have six things to present, which I would desire them carefully to
remember.

1. Do not despair, though as yet you find not your selves to be the people of
Gods Covenant; it is possible for you to be his people; And there are three
grounds to keep you from despair.

1. One because God has made them to be his people which were not his people:
which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God; which had
not obtained mercy, but have now obtained mercy 1 Pet. 2. 10.

2. A second, because God has looked mercifully upon as grievous sinners as ye
have been, and has brought them into the Covenant, Ezekiel. 16. 6. When I passed
by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy blood, Live, yea I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood,
Live, verse 8. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time
was the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness, yea I swear unto thee, and en^red into a Covenant with thee, says
the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.

3. Because you have an express promise that God will make you to be his
people, which were not his people, Hosea 2. 23. I will have mercy upon her,
that had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them which were not my people,
Thou art my people, and they shall say Thou art my God.

2. Great sinners are not absolutely excluded from coming into this Covenant of
Great sinners are not absolutely excluded.
grace; O Sirs, this Covenant is only for sinners, and this Covenant contains
an infinite Mediator, and super-abundant riches of grace and mercy, so that the
Lord gets him a Name, and a praise, and an honor amongst all the Nations of
the earth; and God in this Covenant does promise to pardon abundantly, to
forgive iniquity, transgression and sin, to cleanse from all filthiness, and
from all Idols, and to pardon all iniquities whereby we have sinned, and have
transgressed against him; Thou have wearied me with thine iniquities, and made
me to serve with thy sins; yet I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and I will not remember thy sins: Thou have
spoken, and done evil things as thou could; she is gone upon every high
Mountain, and under every green Tree, and there has played the harlot, and I
said after she had done all these things, Turn thou unto me! So that it is not
the greatness of former sins which make you utterly incapable of being
received into this Covenant: Though a man's sins have been high in their
guilt, and multiplied in the practice, and stretched out by many aggravating
circumstances, yet if now his soul does mourn ovet them, and lament; if now he
is willing to give a bill of Divorce unto them, if he sees his former
abominations, and loathes them, I dare assure him that God will take him into
this Covenant; the Covenant of grace and mercy is set open for him; Come in
says God, I will be merciful unto your Transgressions, and I will receive you
graciously, your sins shall be mentioned no more.

3. Though a sinner has no deservingnesse in him, no worthiness at all, yet
he may be received into this Covenant of grace: When a poor sinner hears of A
sinner that has no worthiness at all, may be taken into Covenant.
all that goodness which God is, and which God will extend to such as will
enter into Covenant with him, and of all those mercies and blessings, etc. O
says he, I shall never have this God, and I shall never enjoy these blessings!
what am I but a very sinful creature, worthy to be excluded, and to be denied,
but unworthy to enjoy such a God, and to p^^^ake of such mercies; sins I have
enough for which God may loath me, but worthiness have I none, to give me
favor and acceptance in the eyes of God.

S^l. Let me give answer to remove this fear and this vexation out of the heart
of the troubled and doubting sinner.

1. A personal worthiness is not expected, nor imposed by God for admission
into A personal worthiness is not expected for admission into this Covenant.
this Covenant; he never said to any sinner, If you be worthy of mercy, then I
will show you mercy; and if you be worthy to enjoy me, then I will be your God.
Never did this come into the thoughts of God to make a new Covenant upon terms
of worthiness on our part; nor in any one place of Scripture has God let fall
such a passage, or such a heavy condition upon the sinner; for then no sinner
could ever have had any hope of coming into this Covenant; sinfulness and
unworthiness being necessarily inseparable.

2. A personal worthiness is inconsistent with a Covenant of grace; for a A
personal worthiness is inconsistent with the Covenant of grace.
Covenant of grace is a giving Covenant, and it is a freely giving Covenant;
God loves you here freely, and he here forgives you freely: I will love them
freely, Hosea 14. 4. I am he that blotteth out thy sins for mine own sake,
Esaias 43. 25. This were a strange thing indeed, that God should make a Covenant
of grace to relieve the sinner against the Covenant of works, and yet should
make our works the foundation and reason of his grace! No, says the Apostle,
There is a remnant according to the election of grace; And if by grace, then it
is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of works,
then it is no more grace, otherwise works is no more works. God admits not into
this Covenant upon the reason and account of works, nor does he let out the
good of this Covenant upon any such account; this were not to advance his
grace, but to destory his grace.

3. The acknowledging of our unworthiness is more proper and answerable to The
acknowledging of our unworthiness is more proper to this Covenant, than a
pleading out worthiness*
this Covenant, than a pleading or a fancying of our worthiness. I will go home
to my Father, and say, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee,
I am not worthy to be called thy son: Mark, he comes home confessing his
sins, and acknowledging his unworthiness, and he was accepted and pitied,
and embraced, and received, etc. O Lord, though our iniquities testify against
us, do thou it for thy Names sake; for our backslidings are many, we have
sinned against thee; so they plead: This indeed is the right posture for one
who would be admitted into this Covenar, not to come like a proud Pharisee, but
like an humble Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner; not to come as the
Jews did for one to Christ, he is worthy; but as the Centurion did unto
Christ, I am not worthy that thou should come under the roof of my house. O
Lord, I have been a wretched sinner, and the greatest of sinners; I deserve
nothing but wrath and hell; I beseech thee to look on me in mercy, for mercies
sake pity me, for mercies sake own me, for mercies sake be my God, and make me
one of thy people, etc. Merita mea misericordia tua, says Bernard, my merits
are only thy mercies! Thou art the Lord meriful and gracious, O save me freely,
accept of me freely, etc.

4. It is not unworthiness which hinders any from this Covenant, but
unwillingnesse; It is not unwo^thinesse, but unwillingnesse which hinders from
the Covenant.
Not the want of deserts, but the want of an heart; for this covenanting is not
a bargain, but a match, where willingness of consent is only insisted upon; My
son (says God) give me thy heart, and hearken unto me and your souls shall
live; and if you be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of ^he Land. If
a mighty Prince should offer himself to match with a poor maid, alas, it is not
worthiness that he intends or expects, nothing does he require of her but to
be willing to take him; so when the Lord treats with sinners to come into
Covenant with him, it is not their worthiness which he articles about; all
that he requires is to be willing to take him for their God, and to be willing
to become his people.

4. Though a sinner finds in himself a wan^ ^f holy qualities, and many vile A
sinner may come and be accepted into Covenant, though he find in himself a want
of holy qualit^es, and many vile corruptions.
corruptions not yet mortified, yet he may come and be accepted into Covenant
with God: If a poor sinner be willing to have his heart changed, though as yet
he finds not that change: and if he be willing to have his sins mortified
and subdued, though as yet he does not find them so: this sinner may come, and
desire to be admitted into Covenant, and God does not except against him.

Objection. When we are persuading sinners to come into his Covenant, O no, say
they! they are afraid, and dare not come as yet; but could they once find some
change wrought in their hearts, and some power over their sins, and some
strength to walk better before God, then they would hearken and come!

Solution. But do you indeed understand your selves or this Covenant of grace,
that you thus argue and dispute your selves out of an interest in the Covenant?
I pray you whence does grace come? out of what Spring does it arise? would you
be Gods unto your selves, before you take God to be your God? is your healing
and salvation in your selves, or of your selves? In me is thy strength, says
God; Is it possible for the dead to quicken themselves? is not our change only
from the Spirit of the Lord? and is not the new heart, and new spirit
undertaken and promised in the Covenant? will you presume to give your selves,
that which God only undertakes to give unto you?

Nevertheless a few words for your relief. For,


1. The first gift which God gives unto sinners, is himself in Christ; He does
The first gift which God gives to sinners is himself in Christ.
not first give you grace and strength against sin, and then become your God;
but first he becomes your God, and being so, he promises to give grace and
glory to you; as communion with Christ is not precedent unto, but a subsequent
of union with him; y^^ have not the righteousness of Christ, and the
redemption of Christ first, and after them the enjoyment of Christ himself; but
first you have Christ, and after that you enjoy communion in all his benefits;
So first God is your God, and then comes in all the graces of the Spirit, and
power against sin, and strength for new obedience.

2. God does not expect that you should bring, but receive; not bring holiness
to him, and power to him, but receive holiness from him, and power from God
does not expect that you should bring, but receive.
him; Does the Physician expect that his Patient should bring physic to him,
or receive physic from him? Do we bring water to the fountain? no, but we do
fetch it from the fountain. The Lord does not impose this on you, that you
should first make your selves holy, and then come into Covenant; but this is it
which he says, Take me to be your God, and I will make you holy, and I will
subdue your iniquities: the giving, changing, strengthening, working part
belongs to God; the craving, the willing, the receiving part belongs to you.
God is willing to give these, and if you be willing to receive these, This is
enough for admission into Covenant.

3. To say all: The qualities of grace are not the necessary an^ecedents for
entrance The qualities of grace, and the fruits and consequents of the Covenant.
into, but they are the gracious fruits and consequents of the Covenant. When
you are brought into Covenant, then are all graces brought into your hearts;
then if you seek unto your God, and trust on him, he will send forth his Spirit
into your hearts.

5. The knowledge of God to be our God in Covenant, i^ not prerequired before
The knowledge of God to be our God in
we take God to be our God in Covenant. I confess some knowledge of God is
prerequired, as this, That God is willing to take a sinner into Covenant; till
Covenant, is not prerequired before we take him to be our God.
this be laid in, the sinner will never close with God; but to know that this
God is my God, this is neither prerequired, not is it possibl^ for any sinner
to attain unto this, before he does take God to be his God in Covenant. Yet is
this an ordinary perplexity and hinderance with many brokenhearted sinners; O
if we could but be assured that God were our God, then we would venture to come
into Covenant with him! and did we know our selves to be his people, then we
would close with him!

Beloved, For,


1. It is impossible to begin the Covenant with a reflexive act. Can any woman
It is impossible to begin the Covenant with a reflexive act.
know such a man to be her husband, until she has taken him to be her
husband? Would ye build the top of the house before you have laid the
foundation? Reflexive acts are the last acts; never are they the first acts in
the Covenant; Nay, it were a very delusion and falsehood, to know that God is
your God, before you take him to be so: he is not your God, neither are you his
people, until you consent to take him for your God.

2. The only way to know your interest in the Covenant, is to accept of the
Covenant: The only way to know your interest in the Covenant, is to accept of
it.
As to know that your sins are pardoned, the way to this, is to believe the
promise of pardon; and to know that Christ is yours, the way is first to
receive and embrace Christ by faith: So the way to know that God is your God,
is first to take him to be your God, to become his people.

6. God will refuse none from this Covenant, who are indeed willing to have God
will refuse none from this Covenant, who are willing to have him to be their
God.
him to be their God in Covenant: as Christ spoke in Revel. 22. 19. Whosoever
will, let him come and drink of the water of life freely: so say I, Whosoever
is willing to have God to be his God, and to close with God as God manifests
himself a God in Covenant, let him come, God will be his God in Covenant.

Quest. How is that? will you say.

Sol. Thus it i^ The Lord says, I am God Almighty; I (...) the Lord, the Lord,
graci^u^, and merciful, long-suffering, abundant in (...) and truth, forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin; Will you accept of such a God to be your
God? O with all our hearts! we are undone unless the merci^ul and gracious God
be our God! And says God, I am an holy God; I the Lord am holy; the Lord thy
God is an holy God; I am of purer eyes than to behold sin, I hate and abhor
it; and if you will have me to be your God, you must be holy as I am holy; your
hearts must be holy, and your lives must be holy; you must be willing to
renounce and forsake every one of your sinful lusts, and every one of your
sinful ways; Are you willing to be holy in all manner of conversation? if your
hearts can answer to the Lord; O Lord! I have been a sinful wretch, and I have
a sinful heart, which is the burden of my soul! I am content to be made holy, I
beseech thee make me holy; I should bless thee with all my soul, if thou
would be pleased to give thy holy Spirit to me, if thou would change my
heart by thy renewing grace, if thou would cleanse me from all my
uncleanness, if thou would mortify and subdue in me every sinful lust and
affection; And says God, I am the great and mighty God, the Lord of all, the
Lord of Lords, and I give Laws to all my people, and will be feared and
obeyed, and I will have you to set up my Will for your Rule, and I will have
you to do the work which I appoint you, and to walk only in such paths of
righteousness and obedience as I require and prescribe.

Are you willing to receive the Law from my mouth? and to obey my win? and to
do all that I command you? though men dislike it, and men reproach you for it,
if now you can answer, O Lord we are willing, thus to take thee for our God,
and in all these respects to be thine, then God will own you as his people in
Covenant.

Quest. But O Lord, how shall we be able to compass this, and to attain all
this?

Sol. Nay, that is not the question says God, but are you willing thus to take
me for your God? if you be cordially willing thus to take me, I will be your
God, and I am your God; and according to my Covenant, I engage my self unto
you, to give you holiness, to change your hearts, and to give you mercy, to
pardon your sins, and to give you grace and power to mortify your lusts, and
to give you strength to obey my Will, to walk in my Statutes, and to do them
all.

O Sirs, this willingness, such a willingness as this to accept of God to be
our God, this is accepted, and this is enough to enter you into this gracious
Covenant with God; and truly, this willingness to accept of God to be your
God, comes from God willingness, and Gods goodness, and Gods power, and Gods
grace to make you to be his people; None have this willingness wrought in
them, but those only whom God will take into Covenant with him.

Some are willing in their straits, to have the merciful God to be their God,
but they are not willing to have the holy God to be their God. Some are willing
to have the gracious God, and the rewarding God to be their God, but they are
not willing to have the commanding and ruling God to be their God; These indeed
would not have God to be their God in Covenant; but if you find willing hearts
in all respects to close with God, as he wholly and fully manifests himself to
be a God in Covenant, that he should universally form you up unto himself, fear
not, come to him, he will certainly be your God.

SECT. XVI.
THe last Use from this discourse of the Covenant, shall be of direction, wh^t
5. Use.
course any sinner should take that he may be brought into this Covenant of
Direction, what course a sinner should take to be brought into this Covenant.
grace; The necessity and happiness whereof he has heard so much.

The Directions which I would commend unto you for this, are these.

1. Go unto God, and beseech him to be your God, and to make you to be his
people; Beg of God to be your God, and make you his people.
for none can make God to be a God in Covenant unto him, but God himself; and
none can take God to be his God in Covenant, but from the strength of God
alone. Hence it is, that as to the first entrance into the Covenant, we (for
our parts) are rather passive than active; and are rather Covenanted than
Covenanting; God must make us to be his, before we can come to be his; yea he
must make us willing to be his, before we can be willing to be so; and
therefore (if you have observed it) not only the making of a new Covenant is
settled and raised by the gracious Will of God, but the bringing of us into
that Covenant, does totally depend upon the gracious and powerful pleasure of
the same God; I will be their God, and they shall be my people: As to bring in
a sinner unto Christ, it is not sufficient that he is the effect of his
purchase; but it is likewise required that he be the fruit of his conquest.
Jesus Christ must by his Spirit rescue him out of the possession of sin and
Satan; So to bring a sinner into Covenant with God, it is not enough that the
sinner lies within the intention of grace, but it is moreover requisite, that
God do put forth the mighty efficacy of his grace to subdue the heart and will
of the sinner unto himself.

For the carrying on of this Direction, I would lay down six Positions.

1. That there is not in any sinner a self-sufficiency to close with God in a
way There is not in any sinner a self-sufficiency to close with God in Covenant.
of Covenant; for as the Covenant of grace is a truth of mere supernatural
Revelation (no light of nature reveals it, or discovers it) so the bringing of
the sinner into this Covenant, is a merely supernatural work. There is nothing
in the sinner actively to contribute toward it; nay, all that is in the
sinner, is naturally averse and contrary unto it; his natural judgment does
reason against it, and contradict it; and his natural will does resist and
oppose it, unbelief being predominant in both; and therefore the work being
only the work of a God, the sinner has no way to take but to go to God to work
his own work in him, and for him.

2. The heart of a sinner, how ever it be naturally averse to God, and to fall
The resistance of the heart is conquerable by the power of God.
in with him, yet the disobedience and resistance of it, is conquerable and
sub^uable by the Almighty power of God, with whom nothing is impossible, and
for whom nothing is too hard; He can quicken the dead, and give sight to the
blind, and ears to the deaf, and deliver from the power of darkness, and
take away the heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh; And as it is in his
liberty to form creatures into what kind of being he pleases, so it is in
his power to make any creature yielding unto any part of his Will as he
resolves: he can abase the pride of man's heart, and break the hardness of
man's heart, and heal the stoutnesse and the stubbornness of man's will, and
turn it which way soever he pleases, and fashion it (by a Commanding Power)
into the obedience of his own Will.

3. There is no sinner (for ought that I know, living under the Gospel) who No
sinner living under the Gospel, can infallibly conclude he is excluded from the
Covenant.
can infallibly determine it, that God has peremptorily excepted against him,
and absolutely excluded him from the Covenant; (that is) That God will never be
a God to him, nor will he ever make him to be one of his people: Although at
the present a sinner may certainly know that he is out of the Covenant, and he
is none of his people; yet he does not know that God will never be his God, and
that he shall never be one of Gods people; because, First, God reveals no such
thing. Secondly, God does reveal that some who are not his people, shall yet be
his people. Thirdly, God ordinarily calls them to be his people who were not
his people. Fourthly, The times and seasons of that call are unknown to the
children of men; even these seasons also does God reserve unto himself, and
keep in his own hand and breast; therefore we should pray to God to bring us
into Covenant; for who does know what his purpose of grace may be, and what his
thoughts of mercy are toward him?

4. The sinner, although he does not know the secret intention of God, yet he
Though the sinner know not the secret intention of God, yet he knows his
gracious invitations.
does know the gracious invitation of God; to leave his sins, and to believe
in Christ, and to come into Covenant with him, and that he will show mercy to
him. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
turn to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon, Isa. 55. 7. I think that there is no sinner living under the
Gospel, but he lives under an external call; the Covenant of grace is (in some
measure) made known unto him, and the glorious riches of mercy and grace, and
he receives many a summons to come into Christ, to believe, to accept of God to
be his God, and to be one of his people; and also he knows upon what gracious
terms God is contented to be his God: Now, because God is pleased in and by
the Gospel, not only to reveal the Covenant of grace unto sinners, but also to
treat indefinitely with sinners, and to offer mercy, and life, and salvation
unto them, if they will come in and accept of himself in Christ. Truly here is
a very heartening, encouraging ground at the least, to pray him to be our God,
and to make us to be his people.

5. God himself does propound this very way of prayer and seeking of him, as a
means to find him to be our God, and to make us to be his people. When he God
himself does propound this way of prayer and seeking him, as a means to find
him to be our God.
sets out himself in relation to this Covenant-work in Ezekiel 36. from verse
25. to 36: he adds in verse 37. thus says the Lord God, I will yet be
enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them, etc. as if he should
say, All this I promise to be unto you, and to do for you; and do you enquire
of me, or pray unto me, and all this you shall receive from me, etc. So here in
Isa. 55. having declared the Covenant which he would make with us from verse 3.
to verse 6. and in particular, that Christ should have Nations run unto him
that did not know him; he prescribes this duty of praying and seeking of him,
verse 6. S^ek ^e the Lord whiles he may be found; and call ye upon him whil^s
he is near; as if he should say, Thus graciously do I represent my self what I
will be; therefore seek me, and call upon me, and I will be thus unto you.

6. Nay, once more God does promise expressly, that upon our praying he will God
does expressly promise upon our praying ^e will be our God.
be our God, and that we shall be his people. And truly this puts the clearest
light, and fullest life into this Direction; See a place for this, Zech. 13. 9.
They shall call upon my Name, and I will hear them; I will say, It is my
people; and they shall say, The Lord is my God. But now remember one thing,
that as prayer is a means for this work, so it must be a cordial and
affectionate praying; not a formal superficial, careless form, but the desires
of the heart must be in that praying, and the fervency and wrestlings of the
heart: If your hearts were but set on this, to have God to be your God, and to
become his people, and if you did seek this with your whole hearts: O God I
cannot be satisfied until thou art pleased to become my God, etc. the Lord
would certainly answer the desires of your hearts.

2. If you would have God to be your God in Covenant, you must then break Break
your Covenant with sin.
your Covenant with sin.

There are two Covenants which are inconsistent with this Covenant of grace. 1.
One is the Covenant of good works. 2. The other is the Covenant with bad works;
If one will set up his confidence on his own good works, he makes void the
Covenant of grace; and if one will set his heart upon his sin, saying, I will
not leave my sins, I love them, I will not forsake them; This man disables
himself, he does debar and exclude himself; God will not be his God, he will
not make a Covenant with him; and indeed this sinner will not make a Covenant
with God.

There are three things which God stands upon if we will have him to be ours in
Covenant.

1. He insists upon your wills; you must be willing to be mine, says God, to
be married unto me, to take me for your Husband. 2. He insists upon your
hearts; you must love me, I must have your heart, your love must be mine. 3. He
insists upon your service; you must be willing to obey and serve me; I must be
your Lord, and you must be my servants.
But ^ one of these will be, if you keep up a Covenant with sin: you will
never be willing to be his, if you resolve to keep your sins; and you cannot
love the Lord, if you love your sins; neither can you serve him, if you will
obey sin as your Lord; There is an absolute incompatibility for this, both on
Gods part, and on your part, and on the Covenants part.

1. On Gods part; for he cannot nor will not make any agreement with
unrighteousness, nor hold communion with any who will hold communion with
darkness; he is of purer eyes than to behold sin; much more than to agree
with sin; it is contrary to his nature, it were dishonorable for him so to
do, to admit a competition with that which he so much threatens; and which his
soul does hate and abhor.

2. On our part; your hearts cannot be brought to hold up a Covenant with God,
and yet to hold up a Covenant with your sins; you cannot love God, and that
which is contrary to God; you cannot love sin, and that which is contrary to
sin at the same time; for if you love the Lord, you will hate sin; and if
you love sin, you will hate the Lord.

3. On the Covenants part; the Covenant of God is to change the sinful heart,
it is to subdue iniquity, it is to cleanse us from all our uncleanesses, it is
to make us an holy people unto the Lord; so that of necessity you must resolve
on it to break off your Covenant with sin, if you will have God to be your God
in Covenant, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Come one from among them, and be ye separated says
the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, ver. 18. and
will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the
Lord Almighty: Mark this place, it shows expressly the way of coming into the
Covenant; you must not make agreement with darkness, nor with Idols, you must
separate from them, you must have nothing to do with any uncleanesse, (that
is,) you must resolve never to join your selves to any sin, never to love or
serve it; and then says God, I will receive you; what is that? that is, then I
will be your God, I will take you into Covenant, I will own you for mine, I
will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters: Are you
sure that you will be so? yea, for thus says the Lord Almighty, Ezekiel. 11. 18.
They shall come thither, and they shall take away all the detestable things
thereof, and all the abominations thereof, verse 19. And I will give them one
heart, and I will put a new spirit within them, etc. verse 20. That they may
walk in my Statutes, and do them, and they shall be my people, and I will be
their God. Therefore examine your hearts what sin lies there, which makes a
breach, which keeps up enmity 'twixt you and God, and put it far away, etc.

3. If you would have the Lord to be your God in Covenant, then judge your
Judge your selves for your breach of Covenant with God.
selves for your ancient breach of the first Covenant with him, and for your
sins since that, and confess your absolute unworthiness to be admitted and
received into another Covenant with him.

O when a soul comes to be afflicted for sins, and to acknowledge it self
unworthy of mercies, this soul is in a right posture for mercies. God made a
Covenant with us in Adam, and stated life upon us in case of obedience; but we
presently brake Covenant with him, and proved unfaithful, and dealt
treacherously with him, fell off from him for a thing of naught, and all the
days of our lives have we been sinning, and dishonouring and provoking of him,
so that had we our desert, so far might God be from accepting of us into a
new Covenant, that he might justly condemn us for our transgressing of the old
Covenant; if we did seriously and sadly review these things, till our hearts
were humbled within us, and that we saw our life to be the free gift of God
again, and that we stood at his mercy only to spare us and pity us, and accept
of us; and in this posture come to God, and cry out, O save me for thy mercies
sake: Lord, I have undone my self, I have left thee, I have lost thee, I have
dealt unfaithfully with thee, I have sinned exceedingly against thee, I have
gone far from thee; yet I come back to thee; I hear thou art a merciful God,
though I am a sinful wretch; I hear that thou art a gracious God, though I am
an unworthy sinner; I hear that thou have made a new Covenant to relieve and
succor them who have violated the first Covenant; I hear that this Covenant is
full of grace and mercy, and pity, and help, and happiness; I come to thee to
make peace with thee, to be reconciled unto me, to show me favor; I perish if
thou reject me; I live if thou accept of me; I can bring nothing, I can
challenge nothing; only thou say, That thou will have mercy on whom thou will
have mercy; and may not a poor miserable unworthy sinner be made capable of thy
mercy? may he not be received unto mercy? why else did thou give Christ? why
else did thou set up a Covenant of grace? O Lord receive me graciously, and
love me freely, and for thine own sake become my God, and make me to be one of
thy people: Verily, this is a moving way, and this is a taking way, for God
does look upon the humble and contrite spirit, and he will hear the desire of
the humble, He will prepare their hearts, and cause his ear to hear, Ezekiel. 16.
61. Thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, etc. ver. 62. And I will
establish my Covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord.

4. If you would have God to be your God in Covenant, then you must get Get
faith.
faith; for God is a God in Covenant only with believers: and there are three
degrees of faith necessary unto this work; one is a faith of acceptance; a
second Three degrees of faith necessary.
is a faith of dependence; a third is a faith of reliance; I will explain my
self in all these.

1. A faith of acceptance is necessary to put us into the Covenant, and to
find A faith of acceptance.
God to be our God; that is, we must have so much faith as to accept of Christ,
and to unite us unto Christ; for in that union twixt us and Christ, in this
relation of God to us is he to be found; By him we have access unto the
Father, Ephesians. 2. Out of Christ you shall never find God to be reconciled unto
you, nor to be your God: As to Christ, God first is a God in Covenant, and
Father in Covenant; so to us, God becomes our God and our Father upon our being
in Christ. Christ received the Covenant for himself, and for all who are his;
he is as it were the head, and the principal in the Covenant; all his come into
Covenant under him as in relation to him.

2. A faith of dependence upon Christ particularly for his great satisfactions
A faith of dependence.
unto God; that is, we must depend upon the blood of Christ, and by faith offer
that up as a satisfaction for all our sins and transgressions which have all
this while kept God and us at distance and difference; his blood is the
sacrifice by which Gods justice is satisfied; and truly until divine justice
be satisfied for our sins, there is no hope of a Covenant to be made 'twixt
God and us; and therefore by faith look upon the blood of Christ, and offer up
that blood by faith; Lord, here is the blood of the Covenant, here is the blood
of Christ to satisfy for my sins, and to expiate my sins; now in this
blood of his become my God in Covenant.

3. A faith of reliance upon the mediation of Christ as the atonement and A
faith of reliance.
peace, and reconciliation; Christ did make peace by his blood, and he did
reconcile us by it, Colos. 1. 20, 21. And we who were sometimes afar off, are
made nigh by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13.

I know not a more exact way to get God to be our God, than by getting into
Christ, in whom alone our reunion with God is to be found, and by whom alone
God and we are knit together again; not without cause is he called the Mediator
of the new Covenant, who undertakes between God and us, (as you shall hear ere
long) he undertakes to take away all which may keep up the difference 'twixt
us, and he undertakes to present all which may make a reconciliation betwixt
us; he does make the way so open, and so clear, that our entrance into Covenant
will certainly follow, if once we were possessed of him by faith; his blood
being shed for the remission of our sins, and likewise to procure a
reconciliation 'twixt God and us; and therefore above all things strive for
faith to unite you to Christ, and then by faith plead out the reconciliation
purchased by Christ.

5. Apply your selves unto the Ordinances of Christ* which are the means to
work all these things in you, and particularly this faith which is so
necessary, and so immediate Apply your selves to the Ordinances of Christ.
to our admission into the Covenant. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom you also trusted
after that you heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your salvation; the
Gospel is that Ordinance by which God makes known the Covenant of grace, and by
which faith is wrought to bring us into Christ, and by him into Covenant with
God, and by which our faith is so enlarged and confirmed, that at length we
come to know that God is indeed our God in Covenant.

6. I will add one direction more as an help to bring us into the Covenant,
Seriously meditate,
and taking of God to be our God; and that is a serious meditation of God
himself, and of the nature of this Covenant of grace.

1. A serious meditation of God; there is nothing in him to discourage you Of
God.
from coming into Covenant with him; and there is all in him to encourage you.

1. There is nothing in him to discourage you from coming into Covenant with
him: There is nothing in him to discourage us.
He does not in this Covenant treat with you for any personal satisfaction, for
the wrong which you have done him, neither does he insist for any goodness
that you should work in your own hearts, nor does he except against you for any
unworthiness in you, nor does he distinguish you away for the greatness of
your former transgressions, nor yet does deny you hope and access, although
you have a long time denied him audience unto his gracious offers, nor does he
capitulate with you in your own name, but by a Mediator, who is most pleasing
to him, and prevalent with him.

2. There is all in and from him to encourage you to come into Covenant There
is all in and from him to encourage you.
with him; for he does express himself to be a merciful God toward sinners;
to be a gracious God to the sinners that come to him, to be a tender God easily
moved at the tears and cries of those who would be his people; to be a willing
God to accept of you, and to close with you; and therefore he first makes known
this Covenant, and he first offers to treat with you about this Covenant, and
he makes the terms of agreement as fair as grace it self can frame them; and
he out of his own cost provided and sent Jesus Christ to be both the Messenger
of the Covenant, and the Mediator of the Covenant; and besides all this, he
affords unto you the Gospel to work faith in you, that so you may become the
people of his Covenant; and moreover, he makes promises unto you of every thing
which belongs to the making of a people to be the people of his Covenant; yea,
and he promises his own Spirit to them that ask him, by whose mighty operation
we come indeed to be his people. Truly a serious meditation of all this, might
conduce much to persuade our hearts to come in unto him, and take him for our
God in Covenant.

A second meditation of the nature of this Covenant of grace, both as to the Of
the nature of this Covenant; both, As to the composition of it.
composition of it, and to the happiness in and by it.

1. This Covenant of grace is so modeled and framed with as winning and
alluring a way for sinners, as possibly can be drawn out by the wisdom of a
kind and good God. It is made with all advantages to the sinner, so that if
there be any loosing or damnifying, it falls rather to God than to the sinner;
all the expressions of it are upon the account of Gods grace. And it is made
with such tender respects to poor sinners, that all the active part to make
them to be the people of God is undertaken by God himself; he undertakes to
make us to be his people, to give himself, to give Christ, to give his Spirit,
to give a new heart, to give the Spirit of prayer, to give the Spirit of faith,
to give pardoning mercy, to give all* O how might all this (if seriously and
rightly meditated upon) melt in our hearts to God, and make us willing to take
him for our God!

2. And as the Covenant of grace is framed to allure in the sinner, so when the
sinner is brought in, it settles upon him the only true happiness, and all
true happiness And as to out happiness in and by it.
with certainty, and to all eternity. As soon as ever you take God to be your
God, and are become his people, immediately is blessedness settled upon you as
your portion, and as your portion for ever: Psalm. 34. 12. Blessed is the Nation
whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he has chosen for his own
inheritance. Psalm. 144. Happy is the people whose God is the Lord*

CHAP. V.
Isaiah 55. 3. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David.
I Have discoursed of the Covenant of grace as it stands in opposition to the
Covenant of works; and likewise of the vital nature of it, the very marrow and
sum of it, in those expressions, I will be to you a God, and you shall be to
me a people.

I am now in the third place to open unto you this Covenant in the adjuncts or
properties of it, which do (as it were) blazon and ennamel this Covenant, or
set it out in beautiful colors to the eyes of us poor and distressed sinners;
as God appeared unto Moses in his glory, when he made himself known unto him in
his gracious Attributes; so this Covenant appears in The adjuncts or properties
of the Covenant.
wonderful glory when it is opened in the admirable adjuncts or properties of
it.

There are twelve adjuncts given unto this Covenant.

1. It is a new Covenant. 2. It is a plentiful or perfect Covenant. 3. It is a
bountiful and giving Covenant. 4. It is a free or gracious Covenant. 5. It is a
well-ordered Covenant. 6. It is a pure or holy Covenant. 7. It is a sure or
steadfast Covenant. 8. It is the last Covenant. 9. It is an everlasting
Covenant. 10. It is the best Covenant. 11. It is a clear and open, and plain
Covenant. 12. It is the only Covenant.
SECT. I.
1. THis Covenant is a New Covenant; I will make a new Covenant with It is a
new Covenant.
the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, Jet. 31. 31. Behold the
days come, says the Lord, when I will make a New Covenant with the house of
Israel, and with the house of Judah, Heb. 8. 8.

In Scripture the word (New) is diversely taken.

1. Sometimes that is styled New, which succeeds another; in Exodus 1. 8. there
The several exceptions of the word New in Scripture. It succeeds another
Covenant.
arose a New King; in Acts 7. 18. this New King is called another King: In this
respect this Covenant is a New Covenant, it succeeds another Covenant, a former
Covenan^ it follows the Covenant of works.

Quest. It may be argued Why the Covenant of works should be first, and the
Covenant of grace next?

Sol. We may be satisfied concerning this order: First, from the pleasure of
The reason of the order of the two Covenants.
God, that he would have it thus. Secondly, from the wisdom of God, who by
this order glorifies his justice in the one, and his mercy in the other.
Thirdly, From the capacity of man, who being at the first created righteous,
was thereby fitted for a Covenant of works, and his created condition was
unmeet for a Covenant of grace; but being fallen, his sinful condition became
fit and meet for a Covenant of grace, and utterly unfit for a Covenant of works.

2. Sometimes that is styled New which is wonderful, unusual, the like not It
is a wonderful Covenant.
heard of before; The Lord has created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall
compass a man, Jer. 31. 22. That a Virgin should conceive and bring forth a
man-child, this was a new thing, it was wonderful indeed, so Isa. 43. 19.
Behold, I will do a New thing, I will even make a way in the Wilderness, and
Rivers in the Desert; this was a new work, (that is) wonderful and unusual; In
this respect also is the Covenant of grace styled New, (that is) it is a
wonderful Covenant; how wonderful is it, that the Lord who was so exceedingly
dishonored, and injured, and provoked by sinners, should yet so infinitely
condescend to sinners, as to treat afresh with them, and to offer life unto
them upon better and surer terms than before; and should promise such exceeding
mercies, and give such a gracious Redeemer and Mediator!

There are four things wherein and for which God will be eternally admired. 1.
In making this Covenant of grace. 2. In giving his only Son for a Savior. 3.
In bringing any sinner to Christ, and into the Covenant. 4. In the glorifying
of them that believe.

3. Sometimes that is styled New, which is excellent and very necessary, John
It is an excellent Covenant.
13. 34. A New Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another; this
Commandment is a new Commandment; that is, it is a rare, an excellent, a
necessary Commandment; so Revel. 2. 17. To him that overcomes I will give a New
name; that is, an excellent name, to be one of the sons of God, which is
called a dignity, an excellent privilege, John 1. 12. In this respect also is
the Covenant of grace styled New, it is an excellent Covenant, and very If it
be considered,
necessary.

It is excellent, consider it either comparatively; no Covenant like unto this;
Comparatively.
that Covenant of works falls exceeding short of it; and that Covenant with
nature for the preservation of common life, is not to be compared with it.

Or absolutely in it self; it is all of excellencies; an excellent love, an
excellent Absolutely.
Christ, the most excellent mercies, and the only excellent happiness.

Or respectively unto us; our hopes, our helps, our comforts, our life, our
Respectively.
eternal life lies in this Covenant; all the good which we do enjoy, or can
enjoy, or shall ever enjoy, all our springs are in it.

4. Sometimes that is styled New, which is diverse from what it was before; It
is diverse from the Covenant of works, and from it self.
2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; that is, he is
not such a creature as he was before; he is renewed, he is changed into the
image of the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. In this respect also is the
Covenant styled New, not only because it is diverse from the Covenant of works,
(in the foundation and condition, and qualifications of the persons in
Covenant) but also because it is diverse from it self, in respect of the
administration of it, after that Christ was manifested in the flesh, and died,
and rose again; from the different administration it is called Old and New.

Now it appears with open face, without any veil of legal Shadows and
Ceremonies at all. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; and
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son; and whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life. It is now like a
new Lease fairly written over with a new hand, and new seals, and new
witnesses: Though this Covenant be the same for substance in Abraham's and Moses
time, yet (upon the coming of Christ) it is new for the manner of
administration; it has not those seals of Circumcision and the Passover, nor
Sacrifices, nor Ceremonies, nor Types, and Legal Figures which formerly it had;
it has now the Mediator himself to deliver it, and his new seals of Baptism,
and the Supper, and is established after a new manner, even by the blood of
Christ: and has many new institutions and adjuncts, etc.

This is the Covenant which God makes with us, even a New Covenant, a Covenant
of life upon new terms, a Covenant which has a new foundation, a Covenant
which has new promises, a Covenant which has a new original, and spring, a
Covenant which has a new way of claim and title, a Covenant which gives new
hopes, and a Covenant which has new seals and confirmations.

bless the Lord even for this that he has made all things New, and especially
for making a new Bless God for this New Covenant.
Covenant; had the Lord utterly left us, when we left him; had he held us to
that first Covenant of works, and proceeded against us for the breach of that
Covenant, we had every one of us for ever been condemned and lost; but he was
pleased to make a new Covenant with us, where mercy is to be found for sinners,
and a Redeemer for transgressors, and a Mediator 'twixt himself and us, and our
lives may yet be found in his grace and love, and Christ, and all this
springing from his own grace and love! What should oblige our hearts, and raise
our thankfulness if this does not?

2. Then there is no reason for distressed sinners to sink and despair,
although they have been Covenant-breakers, and are never able to recompense
God, nor There is no reason for sinners to despair.
to raise up themselves; for this new Covenant is made for the refuge and
support of such sinners: And herein God reveals himself to be a God forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin, and to receive satisfaction for a sinner,
though not from the sinner; I say for a sinner by a Mediator who has likewise
purchased reconciliation and favor, and mercy, and salvation for us.

3. Not to refuse this Covenant, this new Covenant; for as it is said of
Christ, Refuse not this Covenant.
That there is no other Name given to us by which we must be saved, Acts 4. 12.
so there is no Covenant but this new Covenant which can relieve and save a
sinner: as it was with men in the time of the Deluge and the Ark, all that got
into the Ark were saved; and all who entered not into the Ark were lost; so all
who get into this new Covenant, they live and are saved; and all who enter not
into this New Covenant, shall dye in their sins and perish.

SECT. II.
2. A Second propriety of the Covenant is this, it is a very perfect,
plentiful, It is a perfect and plentiful Covenant.
and rich Covenant. And this will appear we^her you will consider,

1. The Author of this Covenant. 2. Or the Mediator of this Covenant. 3. Or the
Covenant it self. It appears, by The Author of this Covenant.


1. The Author of this Covenant, who therein sets out all his gracious fullness;
here you shall find him full of love, and therefore the Apostle calls his
love, a great love, Ephesians. 2. 4. and an exalted love; God commends his love
toward us, in that whiles we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, Romans 5. 8.
And Saint John calls it a wonderful love; Behold what manner of love the Father
ha^h bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God! 1 John 3. 1.
Nay, Christ himself calls it an unexpressible love. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. John. 3. 16. And the Apostle repeats
the love of God as the character and pattern of all love; Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for us.

In mercy, in relation to this Covenant he is said to be rich in mercy, Ephesians.
2. 4. God who is rich in mercy; nay, to have riches of mercy. Ephesians. 3. 16.
According to the riches ^f his glory; nay, to show the exceeding riches of his
grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 7. nay, to be
exceeding abundant; 1 Timothy 1. 14. The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant,
abundant mercy, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively
hope; where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, Romans 5. 20. Sin does
exceedingly abound by way of extension, and by way of intension, in practice,
in degrees, and in deserts; but the mercy or grace of God, it does over-abound;
it is more than enough for the pardoning of the greatest sinners; yea, of all
the sins of all his people; his mercy is like himself, infinite and
unsearchable: And therefore the Church cries out, Who is a God like unto thee?
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage, etc.

In goodness; not only full of an essential goodness, (which is his own
eternal and infinite perfection) but also full of a Covenant goodness; O how
great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that trust in thee
before the sons of men! Psalm. 31. 19. He is great in goodness, Nehem. 9. 35.
He is abundant in goodness, Exodus 34. 6. How great is his goodness? Zach. 9.
17. The riches of his goodness, Romans 2. 4. No good thing will he withold,
Psalm. 84. 11.

2. The Mediator of this Covenant; how full and rich is Jesus Christ? Of his By
the Mediator of this Covenant.
fullness do all we receive, he fills all in all: The Godhead dwells bodily in
him, in him are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; there are the
unsearchable riches of Christ; he is a perfect Redeemer, and is able to save to
the utmost.

3. The Covenant it self: There is nothing left out, and there is nothing which
can be added unto it; the wisdom and goodness of God have made it a By the
Covenant it self.
complete storehouse and treasury of all the good, and of all the help which
all the children of God have, do, or ever shall need. Here is grace, and here
is glory; here is all things pertaining to life, and all things pertaining to
godliness; here is for the life present, and for the life which is to come;
here are all sorts of comforts for the distressed, and all sorts of helps for
the needy, and all sorts of defenses for the exposed; here is the Sun, and
the Shield, and exceeding great reward.

stay and comfort to all the people of Gods Covenant; other people are in want,
and know not whether to go for help, or for any good; but This is stay to Gods
people.
you have a good God to go unto, and a good Covenant to go unto. Other people
may know whither to go for this or that particular good, but they know not
whither to go for all the good which they do need; they may go to one friend
for counsel, and to another for alms, and to another for physic; but to whom
can they go for mercy to pardon their sins, or for peace to ease their
troubled souls? but you who are the people of God, you have a Covenant to go
unto which contains all manner of good for all the conditions of your souls,
and for all the conditions of your bodies. Here is mercy to pardon, and
loving-kindnesse to comfort, and righteousness to justify, and grace to
sanctify, and peace to quiet, and glory to save; here is food for the body,
and raiment, and safety, and blessing, and defense; here is all; others may
give, and find a little help, and a little comfort, and a little provision;
but you have a Covenant to go unto which can give you all things richly to
enjoy, abundant goodness, abundant compassions, abundant mercies, abundant
love, abundant grace, abundant joy, abundant consolation, and abundant
salvation; all things, all good things are treasured up in this Covenant, and
there they are in their perfection; not one good without another, but all good
together; not a little of one, and a little of another, but every good in
perfection and fullness; a perfect God, and a perfect Mediator, and perfect
love and mercy, and righteousness, etc.

2. This is an exceeding encouragemtnt unto you under any wants, or in any And
an encouragement in wants to go to God in faith.
great distresses, to go by faith unto your God, who has made a full and
perfect Covenant with you. O thou distressed sinner, here is mercy enough laid
up for thee, and here is peace enough, and goodness enough, and power enough,
and grace enough, and help enough. God does not promise unto you a little of
his mercy, nor a little of his kindness, nor a little of the righteousness of
Christ, nor a little of holiness, nor a little of spiritual joy; Psalm. 81. 10.
Open thy mouth wide, (enlarge the desires of your hearts, you do not crave
enough) and I will fill it, (I will plentifully answer, and satisfy you) Eat O
friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly O beloved! Phil. 4. 19. My God shall
supply all your need, according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ. Heb. 4.
16. Let us come boldly unto the Throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and
grace to help in time of need; you have no cause to be dejected, either with
the multitude of your wants, or with the depth and greatness of your
distresses; nor have you any cause to doubt and fear the supply and redress of
these; for God has made a full, rich and perfect Covenant with you; whiles
there are answerable supplies, and super-abounding helps, and these in a
Covenant, and for you, there is more reason to set your faith on work to fetch
in the supplies, than to set your fear on work because of your wants; in all
your distressed and needy conditions, be pleased to look on this Covenant,
(seriously do so) bring your wants and distresses thither, and there shall you
find proper helps, and plentiful engagements; and now stir up your faith to
believe, and to take hold on God: Lord, here is the mercy which I need, and
here is the exceeding riches of mercy which I do need, and here is the love,
the great love, and here is the grace, the abundant grace, and here is the
comfort, and the abundant comfort, and here is the strength, the greatness of
that strength which I do need, here it is laid up for thee by me; I come unto
thee in the Name of Christ, (whose I am) and I beseech thee abundantly to
pardon me, to supply all my need according to thy riches in glory.

SECT. III.
3. A Third property of this Covenant, is, that it is a giving Covenant; Genesis
17. 2. I will make my Covenant between thee and me; in the Original It is a
giving Covenant.
it is, I will give thee my Covenant; as God spoke unto Phineas, Number. 25. 12. I
give unto him my Covenant of peace; so he does give a Covenant unto his people,
Isa. 42. 6. I give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the
Gentiles. Isa. 55. 4. Behold I have given him for a witness to the people;
survey In it,
the Covenant all over, you shall find it to be a giving Covenant in all the
particulars of it.

God gives himself to be ours, therefore he is called our Husband, Isa. 54. 5.
The husband gives himself to the wife, so does God to us. God gives himself to
be ours.


And he gives Christ; he gave his only begotten Son, John 3. 16. and Christ
did give himself, Gal. 2. 20. He gives Christ.


And he gives his love, Cant. 7. 12. There will I give thee my love. His love.
His peace Eternal life. His Spirit.


And he gives his peace. John 14. 27. My peace I give unto you.

And he gives eternal life. John 10. 28. I give unto them eternal life.

And he gives his Spirit. He will give the holy Spirit to them that ask him,
Luke 11. 13.

And he gives the new heart, and the new spirit. Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also
will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you. A new heart.


And he gives faith; Unto you it is given to believe. Phil. 1. 29. By grace are
Faith.
you saved through faith. It is the gift of God, Ephesians. 28.

And he gives repentance. Acts 11. 18. Then has God given (or granted) unto
Repentance.
the Gentiles repentance unto life.

And he gives mercy. 2 Timothy 1. 16. The Lord give mercy to the house of
Onesiphorus. Mercy.


And he also freely gives us all things. Romans 8. 32. He gives grace, and he
gives All things.
glory, Psalm. 84. 11.

And he gives unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by them we
Great and precious promises
might be partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

This Covenant is a Covenant of gifts; all that God promises in it, is given;
and all that God requires of us is given; and all that we are to give again to
God, is first given unto us by God. Reasons why it is so, from


And there are two reasons, why this Covenant is an altogether giving Covenant.

1. One is our universal brokennesse, and impotency, and insufficiency; our
sinful Our universal insufficiency.
fall has so ship-wrack't and ruined us, that we have nothing at all left us;
we are naked, and poor, and miserable, Rev. 3. 17. Without strength, Romans 5. 6.
Not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
What have thou that thou have not received? I Cor. 4. 7. Such a brok^n vessel
is the sinner, such a self-undoing, and destitute creatures; like the Prodigal
who spent all, and had neither bread nor raiment, nor shoes, nor any thing; and
therefore his father must provide all, and give all; he must give him housing,
and he must give him raiment, and he must give him shoes for his feet, and he
must give him meat to eat, and wine to drink. Where the creature is universally
miserable, and utterly impotent, there must be nothing but giving; Mercy must
give all, or the sinner is undone.

2. Another is Gods inten^ion and purpose in this Covenant, and that in the
Gods intention and purpose in this Covenant.
praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 6, His intent in making this
Covenant, is wholly and only to exalt himself, to proclaim his own glory; and
therefore he will give all, and the sinner is to receive all, that all the
glory and praise of mercy, of grace, of blessings, may be returned unto himself
al^ne. Romans 11. 35. Who has first given to him? and it shall be recomp^nced
unto him again. Ver. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all
things, to wh^m be glory for ever, Amen.

poor and needy may traffic at it. If it were a buying and selling Covenant
(in proper sense) then Then the poor and needy may traffic at it.
poor sinners must despair; but it is a giving Covenant, and therefore poor
sinners have hope; May not the poor (who keep no house of their own) yet go to
the rich man's door where all is given?

When we survey our hearts and conditions, we find a world of wants, and when
we survey the Covenant, we find a Heaven of supplies.

Objection. But then we fear, and dispute, and reason, But how shall we get
this mercy, and gain that blessing, and enjoy that help? We have nothing, and
we can bring nothing; the Well indeed is deep, but we have nothing to draw.

S^l. True, but yet God can give all, though you can bring nothing; and
according to the tenor of this Covenant, He will give all, the greatest and the
least; But will he give me food and raiment? yes, he will give you bread, and
he will give you double clothing.

O, But will he give me Grace? yes, he will give grace and glory.

O, But will he give me Christ? yes he will give his Christ, that greatest gift
that ever was given to sinners; he is the gift of God; O but will he give me
mercy to pardon my sins? and all my sins? yes, he will show mercy, and will
forgive all thy sins whereby thou have sinned against him; O but will he give
me Faith? yes, he will draw you to Christ, and put forth an Almighty power to
make you to believe; O but will he give me another heart? yes, I will give thee
a new heart, etc. O but I must pray if I would have these, and I cannot pray!
why? and it is his Covenant to give you the Spirit of grace and supplication;
Let these things quiet your sorrowful and troubled souls; There is enough in
the Covenant for you, and all that is there, is to be given.

2. Be content to come and receive, seeing God is pleased in this Covenant to
be Be content to come and receive.
giving: He is all upon the giving hand, and we should be all upon the
rec^iving hand; The givi^g works is Gods work, and the receiving work is our
work; he finds the gift, you must open your hand and take it. O what a blessed
Covenant is this, wherein you may have all for asking and receiving! Mat. 7. 7.
Ask, and it shall be given. James 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask
of God that gives to all men liberally, and it shall be given him. John 4. 10.
If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to
drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living
water.

Now there are four qualities, which if you could get them, you Which we shall
do if we have these qualities.
would then be content and willing to come unto God, and beg of him, and
receive of him what he will give (and without these you will not do so.)

1. One is poverty of spirit; you must be poor in spirit: the poor man speaks
Poverty of spirit.
supplications, says Solomon; It was poor Lazarus that came to the rich man's
d^or; and it is the poor sinner (one who is truly sensible of his spiritual
wants and miseries) who will come to the door of mercy, and cry out, O Father
of mercies give me mercy! O God of grace give me grace! O give me Christ, etc.
If you be rich and increased, and stand in need of nothing (as Laodicea was) if
you have enough of your own; if you think that you are righteous, and need not
Christ, and need not mercy, etc. you will never come to God, and beg him to
give you these.

2. A second is hum^lity of heart; a proud man scorns to beg, and scorns
Humility of heart.
to receive; he will not be beholding to any body; it is the humble man who
will acknowledge mercy, and bless for mercy, and beg for mercy, and be glad he
may have mercy upon receiving terms. God gives grace to the humble, and the
humble are thankfully contented to receive grace from God.

3. A praying heart, will be glad to be receiving. A praying heart. Faith.


4. A fourth is Faith; Faith is a receiving grace; therefore believing is
styled receiving; To as many as received him, he gave this dignity to be the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on him. Faith receives Christ, and
receives mercy, and receives love, and receives righteousness, and receives
blessings, and receives all the gifts of God. Though God has all to give, yet
you have no hand to receive, until you get faith.

3. Is the Covenant a giving Covenant? Is it such a Covenant wherein the Lord
undertakes to give all the good mentioned therein? This then yields Comfort to
the people of God. Hence they may conclude.
manifold comfort to the people of God, who are in Covenant with him.

1. If God undertakes to give all, then certainly he undertakes to find all
good for us; If he undertakes to give a Christ, he must find out that He will
find all good for us.
Christ; and if he undertakes to give you mercy, he then must find out that
mercy, etc.

2. If God undertakes to give all, then he must find all from himself, and And
find all from himself.
of his own; Men many times give away that which is none of their own; but God
gives nothing but what is his own, but what comes out of his own stock and
treasury.

3. If God undertakes to give all in the Covenance, then you shall be surely
helped; You shall be surely helped.
you have good reason to expect it, for your Father has all to give; How much
more shall your heavenly Father give good things to them that ask? will not a
father give to his poor child? Certainly your God is an infinite God, a most
gracious and glorious God, and perfectly all-sufficient; he has heaven and
earth in his own possession; he has all the good to dispose of which is good;
he must needs be infinite in mercy, who can give all mercies, and infinite in
grace, who can give all grace, and infinite in glory, who can give all glory,
etc. For as this shows his infiniteness that he has all good to give, so this
shows his perfection, that when he has given all this, yet there is no
diminution made in his stock at all.

4. If God undertakes to give you all that is in his Covenant, then
unquestisnably Then he does unquestionably love you.
he loves you. Indeed he gives many things to the wicked his enemies, whom he
hares; but to undertake to give all the good in the Covenant, this proceeds
from his great love, and from his special love; Does not God love you, who is
willing to give you his love? and to give you his Christ the Son of his love?
and to give you all the graces of his Spirit, the fruits of his love? Then God
will not deny the least mercies.


5. If God undertakes to give you all, even the greatest of mercies, can you
reasonably imagine that he will stick with you for the least of necessary
mercies and blessings? How shall he not with him, freely also give ^^ all
things?

SECT. IV.
A fourth property of this Covenant is this, It is a free or gracious Covenant;
It is a free and gracious Covenant.
By grace are ye saved, Ephesians. 2. 5. By grace are ye saved, Verse 8. Now our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, who has loved us, and has
given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, 2 These. 2. 16.
Being justified freely by his grace, Romans 3. 24. I will love them freely; Hosea
14. 4. Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely, Revel. 22. 17.
I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life
freely, Revel. 21. 6. He freely forgave them both, Luke 7. 42. The things that
are freely given unto us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

This Covenant is gracious or free in three respects. 1. For the constitution
of Free in three respects.
it. 2. For the reception into it. 3. For the donations from it.

1. For the exceeding framing out, or constituting of this Covenant, when For
the constitution of it, in respect of
was it? and with whom was it? and whence was it? All these will plainly
demonstrate, that this Covenant is a very free and gracious Covenant.

1. Consider the time when it was made and set forth; why immediately upon The
time when it was made.
the fall; then when mankind had sinned and transgressed the first Covenant;
then when God might have glorified his justice upon all sinners, yet then was
the time that he promised this Covenant; The seed of the woman shall break, the
Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. Surely this must needs be gracious, then to set up a
Throne of grace, when sinful man was to receive his sentence at the Bar of
Justice.

2. Consider the persons with whom this Covenant is made; It was made not The
persons with whom the Covenant is made.
with fallen Angels, but with men; why not with them, as well as with us? no
answer can be given but this of grace; I will be gracious to whom I will be
gracious; and I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy; Nay, and why with
fallen men at all? no answer can be given for this neither, but only the grace
of God, and his own good pleasure; so it pleased him, and so it seemed good
unto him.

3. Consider whence the making of this Covenant did arise; Did it arise from
Whence the making of this Covenant did arise.
any goodness in any man? O no, All the world was found guilty before God, and
every mouth was stopped by reason of sin, Romans 3. 19. Or did it arise from
any desire or entreaty of man? not at all; but as man first brought in sin
and death, so God first thought of mercy and life. He is found of them that
sought him not, Isa. 65. 1. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in ^^
is thy help, Hosea 13. 9. The Lord set his love upon you to take you into
Covenant, etc. because he loved you, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8.

2. For the reception into this Covenant, here the graciousnesse or freeness
of it For our reception into it.
will also manifestly appear.

Consider the persons taken or brought into this Covenant either absolutely in
The persons taken into the Covenant considered,
themselves, or respectively in their dealing toward God, or comparatively
with others; As to all these considerations, this Covenant is a very gracious
and free Covenant.

1. Consider the persons now taken into Covenant, what they were is themselves.
In themselves.
The Prophet tells you what they were, in Ezekiel 16. 3. Thy birth and thy
Nativity was of the Lord of Canaan; thy Father was an Am^rite, and thy mother
an Hittite. Ver. 4. Thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou wasted in water to
supple thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at all. Ver. 5. No eye
pitied thee to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion on thee; but thou
wast cast out into the open field, to the loathing of thy person in the day
that thou wast born. Ver. 6. And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted
in thine own blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I
said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live. Ver. 8. Now when I passed by
thee, and looked upon thee, be hold thy time was the time of love, and I spread
my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; yea, I swear unto thee, and
entered into Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.
Yea, and the Apostle tells us what persons they were, whom yet God took into
Covenant. Titus 3. 3. We our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating one another. Ver. 4. But after that the kindness and love
of God our Savior toward man appeared. Ver. 5. Not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us. In these places we
see that there can be nothing found in us, either as to our natures, or as to
our works, which might move God to take us into Covenant; but enough in both
for him to reject us; and yet notwithstanding both, he is pleased to enter into
Covenant with us, and save us; This must needs be grace and mercy.

2. Consider the persons taken now into Covenant, in their former
respectivenesse of state and actions toward God; The Apostle says, That
whiles we were In their former respectivenesse of state and actions toward God.
yet enemies, Christ dyed for us; And when we were enemies we were reconciled
to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 8, 10. Surely mercy shown to enemies,
must needs be free mercy; and to receive enemies into favor, this must be
gracious favor; yet to do this to enemies even in their hostility, for God to
take his enemies into his hands of mercy, and become a singular friend to them,
even in the time of their raging and fighting against him; this must needs be
of grace. It was remarkable favor in David, to spare the life of Saul his
enemies much more in God, not only to spare the lives of sinners and enemies,
but to give them their souls and his Christ, and his mercy, and his salvation.
You read of those in Acts 2. 23. they were men who had by wicked hands
crucified and slain the Lord Jesus; and verse 13. at the present were ^^^^king
at the Apostles, as if they had been a company of drunkards; These men are full
of new wine; Yet these men, and at this time, and in this posture, God laid
hold on by his grace, and convinced them, and humbled them, and gave them
faith, and brought them into this Covenant with himself, as you may see from
verse 37. to 47. The like you read of Saul, when he was raging and waxing ^^d,
and breathing out persecutions against Christ, and against the Church of
Christ; Being in this woeful wretched posture, the Lord takes hold of him, and
left him not until he had brought him into this blessed Covenant of grace and
mercy.

3. Consider persons comparatively with other persons; you shall find that the
Comparatively with other Persons.
taking of any person into Covenant is gracious and free; in comparing of
persons with persons, ordinarily God passes by those on whom we should six
admiration, and look at some cause and reasons of pre-acceptation, and chooses
those, and brings in those in whom nothing at all is to be pre-supposed.
Sometimes he passes by the greater persons, and takes in the meaner persons,
he passes by the wise, and takes in the foolish; he passes by the mighty, and
takes in the weak; he passes by the noble, and takes in the base. 1 Cor. 1.
2^. Not many wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called.
Ver. 27. But God has chosen the foolish things of the world, and the weak
things of the world. Ver. 28. and base things of the world, and things which
are despised, and things which are not. Ver. 29. that no flesh should glory in
his presence. So sometimes of persons, whereof some are more notorious and
wicked, and vile, and others are not so abominable; he is pleased to leave the
lesser sort of sinners, and to bring in the vilest of sinners; Publicans and
Harlots were brought in into the Kingdom of God, when the superstitious and
righteous Pharisees were excluded; Paul the chiefest of sinners was taken in,
and others were left; Mary Magdalon was brought in, and others past by; and why
does God do this, but that men should acknowledge that it is no worthiness of
the sin; that brings him in, nor any unworthiness of the sinner that shuts
him out? but all springs from the grace of God alone; that he brings not in any
sinner upon his own account, but only upon the account of free grace.

3. Lastly, the Covenant is free as to the dispensations and donations of it;
what Free as to the dispensations and donations of it.
is that? that is all that drops out of this Covenant; all that good flowing
from it, and running down upon us, are only gracious flowings, only free
bounties and gifts. The Papists talk of a meritum de congruo, whiles we are in
the state of nature; and of a meritum de condigno, after we are in the state of
grace. But we know no merit but that of sin which deserves damnation; and the
merit of Christ which deserves salvation; All our standing, and all our
expectation it the grace of God, that is the reason of all our enjoyments; God
does not give us Christ because we deserve a Christ, but because he is pleased
freely to bestow Christ upon us; God does not forgive our sins for our own
sake, but for his own Name sake. God does not love us for any thing in us, but
he loves us freely, because he is pleased to love us; God does not save us for
any works of ours, but he saves us for his mercies sake; God does not bless us
for our goodness sake, but he blesses us only for his Christ's sake, and his
promises sake: God does not justify us for the sake of our own righteousness,
but he justifies us freely by his own grace, through the Redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 24.

Objection. But some may say, God is not free in doing of his people good,
because he has by promise bound himself to do them good.

Solution. I answer. 1. It was the freeness of his grace to make all those
promises. 2. Though he binds himself in promises to do us good, yet he does
not accomplish those promises upon the reason of our goodness or deserts, but
upon the account of his own mercifulness, and goodness, and graciousnesse.

Obj. But he promises many things conditionally, and lets them out upon such
and such conditions, and herefore not freely.

Sol. I answer.

1. Every kind of condition is not opposite to grace, as I shall shortly
demonstrate unto you.

2. Whatsoever condition he makes with his people for the enjoyment of any
good, he does freely give, and work that condition in them.

3. No condition on our part has any reason of merit in it, which is the thing
opposite to grace, but it is only a means by which we come certainly to enjoy
that which God is pleased graciously to give; In this respect we are said to be
justified by faith, and to be saved by faith, and yet we are also justified by
grace, and saved by grace; Faith you see is put in as a condition, and yet it
excludes not grace; Nay, because by faith, therefore by grace; for our faith
and Gods grace can well agree, though Gods grace and man's deserts can never
agree.

Now lets make a little Use of all this.

to bless God for all this! O Beloved! Bless God for this.
it is grace which is the life of this Covenant, and which is life to our
souls; it is not all the love that is promised in the Covenant, it is not all
the mercy that is promised in the Covenant, it is not all the holiness that is
promised in the Covenant, it is not all the comforts and joys, and peace, and
blessings which are promised in the Covenant, it is not that eternal life, and
glorious salvation promised in the Covenant, it is not Jesus Christ, and all
the purchases of Christ drawn into this Covenant; none of these, nor all these
would be any hope, or any encouragement, or any life at all unto us, were the
graciousnesse of the Covenant left out. If the Lord should say unto us, Here is
the sweetest love that ever sinner tasted of, but you must deserve it; alas,
then I cannot expect it. Here is the precious Christ, the Author of salvation,
but you must deserve him; alas then I shall never enjoy him; here is pardoning
mercy to forgive all your sins, but you must deserve it; O then I shall never
partake of it. As he said Toll meum and toll Deum, so say I, Toll gratiam
and toll omnia; take away grace, and take away all; then take away Christ, and
take away God, and take away mercy, and take away heaven, and take away hope,
and take away all; the sinner is utterly lost upon any account, but that of
grace only; it is this graciousnesse which makes him capable, and makes him
hopeful; here is a loving God, and he will love you freely; here is a merciful
God, and he will pardon you freely; here is a converting God, and he will
receive you graciously; here is a good God, and he will bless you graciously,
etc. Now the sinner begins to have hope, and begins to hearken; If there be a
Covenant of grace, why should I despair? If it be altogether gracious, if it
be raised by grace, and published by grace, and admits and receives by grace,
and lets out all by grace, there is yet hope that I may escape perishing, that
I may be delivered, that I may find mercy and favor; grace looks for no
worthiness, and grace passes by all unworthiness, and grace may look on, and
pity and help the greatest of sinners; blessed be God who has sweetened all
his mercies, and all his undertakings, and all his blessings, and all his
givings, with freeness and graciousnesse.

2. Is the Covenant which God makes with with us, a free and gracious Covenant?
then stand out no longer; be aliens to God no longer, be strangers to his Th^n
stand out no longer.
Covenant no longer; grace makes your way clear and open; it beats down all the
mountains that did stand in your way.

It is said of Abraham, that against hope he believed in hope: so against all
the unhopefulnesse from your selves, you should believe from the hopefulnesse
in the Covenant of grace; yea, and above hope, believe in hope; when you
consider the greatness of the blessings in the Covenant, they seem to be above
hope; but when you consider the graciousnesse in the bestowing of them, they
are now under hope; Ho, all you that hear me this day, hearken unto me; The
graciousnesse of the Covenant will prove unto you either your sweetest
salvation, or else your heaviest condemnation; if it does not prove a strong
encouragement to bring you into the Covenant, it will certainly prove the
heaviest and bitterest aggravation upon you for standing out against the
Covenant. O beloved, yet be serious and wise, and make in to God! you may be
received graciously; your sins have been exceeding great, but the Covenant
holds out more exceeding mercy joined with more exceeding grace. Romans 5. 20.
Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound; If you come in to God, his
Covenant is to forgive all your sins, and to forgive them freely. Your
worthiness is none at all, and yet you may come in, and God according to his
Covenant will love you freely; you may have all freely, a God, a Christ, love,
mercy, forgiveness, the holy Spirit, then new heart, the salvation of your
souls freely. Therefore,

1. Refuse him not, and do not trifle away your precious souls, whiles you
Refuse not Gods offer.
have a day of grace, and a Covenant of grace tendered unto you to come in;
Beware you refuse not him that speaks, neither neglect so great salvation.
God neither will, nor possibly can fall lower or easier than he does with you
in his gracious Covenant.

2. Fear not whether you shall be looked on, or received of God: he says he
will Fear not your acceptance.
receive you graciously; If a company of poor men were envited by a rich man,
Come and I will give you money, and receive and feed you freely, you shall have
all your wants supplied freely, would they be afraid to accept the offer? Do
not make another Covenant than God is willing to make with you; neither make
any other Articles than God himself has annexed unto this Covenant; he says
it is a gracious Covenant; say not you it is not so; he has said he will
receive you graciously a say not you but he will not; he says that he will
love you freely, and justify you freely, and save you freely; do not you say,
But God will do none of these; O no! God is truth it self, and he will perform
the truth to Jacob, and his mercy to Abraham, Micah 7. 20. Therefore fear not,
but catch and take hold on this grace of God.

3. Come in and make thy supplications to God. Come in and confess thy sins,
Come in and make thy supplications to God.
and thy unworthiness, and cry out unto God in the Name of Christ, O Lord, I
have sinned against thee, and I am unworthy to be made one of thy people; but
yet look on me graciously, and bring me into the Bond of thy Covenant; Thou
say thou will give all, and all freely; O save me freely, and love me
freely, and justify me freely! freely give me Christ, and freely give me
faith, and freely give me mercy, etc.

3. Is the Covenant which God makes with us a gracious Covenant? Let all in
Covenant remember, To be humble all their days.
Then let all who are brought into Covenant remember two things.

1. To be humble all their days; you differ indeed from other men now, and you
have a different relation from them, and different conditions from them, and
different enjoyments from them, and different hopes from them; I, but who or
what made you thus to differ? nothing in you, nothing of your own; you were in
the same lump of sin and confusion, and in the same common Rode of
destruction with other men; it was the mere grace of God that made the
difference; it was his free love, and his free mercy, and his free Spirit, and
his free call, and his free giving of Christ unto you, and of faith unto you;
therefore do not bless your selves but grace; nor glory in your selves but in
grace; was it not the root which bred and bare the branches? glory in the root,
but do not glory in your selves; glory in the grace of God which is the only
root of your lives, hopes, enjoyments, all.

2. Remember still that you are in a Covenant of grace. The Covenant is not
That you are still in a Covenant of grace
a Covenant of grace only, whiles you are brought in, but it is a Covenant of
grace after that you are brought in unto it; you could find nothing to rest on
before; nor must you find any thing to rest on but the grace of God, after
that you are got into the Covenant of grace; you shall find wants still, and
weaknesses still, and unworthiness still; but withal remember that you are
under a Covenant of grace still; what is that? my meaning is, that God will
still deal with you in a gracious way, and you may go unto him still upon his
own gracious terms, and (as so) expect continual helps and supplies from him.
Save me for thy mercies sake, said David. Receive us graciously, said the
Church; As your admission into the Covenant owes it self wholly to the grace of
God, so your pleading and expectations, and confidences must still look at the
same grace; for as he loves you freely, so he blesses you freely: and as he
has done you much good already upon gracious reasons, so he will continue to
do you good, and good all your days upon the same terms.

O how vainly and simply do we trouble and disquiet our own souls, as if the
gracious Covenant were sometimes free, and sometimes not free; that some of the
things promised in the Covenant must drop out freely, and yet other things must
be pumped out by something of our own; that the lesser mercies are free, but
the greater mercies must come off upon harder terms and conditions; that our
coming into Covenant, this is all of grace; but our receipts from the Covenant,
these are not so! truly these are many times our thoughts; but the Lord knows
that the thoughts of man are vain, and these are so; for as we are found by
grace, and made by grace, so we live, and are brought up by grace till we come
to glory. And as our admissions into the Covenant are only gracious, so all our
receptions are so, and must be so all our days, that God alone may have all
the glory.

SECT. V.
5. A Fifth property of this Covenant, is this, It is an ordered Covenant, a
well-ordered Covenant. 2 Samuel 23. 5. He has made with me an everlasting This
Covenant is a well ordered Covenant.
Covenant, ordered in all things and sure: This Covenant is not a casual,
sudden, rash, confused, indigested work, but it is an ordered work; it is made
upon the counsel, and wisdom, and love, and care of the infinite and perfect
God, and still so managed and carried on.

There are five things which do show that this Covenant is an ordered Covenant,
and a well-ordered Covenant. As appears,


1. The adequate sutablenesse or answerablenesse of it to all and every one of
the By the adequate sutablenesse of it to all a sinners wants.
sinners wants, and straits, and mis^ries, and necessities, and desires. Let
any want whatsoever befall a sinner, let his strait and necessity be what it
may be, yet here is an help, and here is a remedy, and here is a suitable
succor for him in this Covenant. Do thou want a reconciled God? here he is;
do thou want a Christ? here he is; do thou want faith, holiness,
patience, meekness, love, any spiritual grace? here it is; do thou want
peace and rest, and ease, and joy, and comfort for a troubled conscience? here
it is; do thou want any thing which respects thy soul? here it is; or any
thing that respects thy body? here it is; take any sinner under any want at any
time of his life, the Covenant contains an answerable help, and therefore it is
an ordered Covenant, and a well-ordered Covenant; that Common Wealth is
well-ordered, where no wholesome Law, and no wholesome Remedy is wanting for
the people.

2. The right placing of all persons, and of all things in this Covenant; By
the right placing of all persons, and all things in this Covenant.
things are well-ordered, when they are well-placed; a thing out of place is
out of order; when the Master is in his place, and the servants in their place
and the children in their place, now the family is rightly ordered. Now in the
Covenant all the persons are set in their right places; Christ keeps his place
as Mediator, and God the Father keeps his place as a Donor, and the believing
sinner his place as a receiver; here it is revealed what Christ is to do, and
what the Father will do, and what the believer is to do; and all things are set
in their right place, not promiscuously and confusedly, but with an orderly
regard unto sinners; every one has a right proportion set out, every one has
a right portion set out; here is hope for one that despairs, and here is ease
for one that is laden, and here is peace for one who is brokenhearted, and
here is mercy for one that is penitent, and here is a Christ for one that has
faith, and here is redemption for one in bondage, and here is righteousness
for one that is ungodly, and here is graciousnesse for one that is unworthy,
and here is riches for one that is poor, and here is help for one that is
needy, and here is strength for one that is weak, and here is balm for one
that is wounded; mercy is well-ordered, and comfort is well-ordered; and a
Mediator well-ordered, and righteousness well-ordered, etc.

3. The motions or workings of all things in this Covenant to the right end;
The motions and workings of all things in this Covenant to the right end.
when every thing acts to its right end, this shows a right ordering; now in
this Covenant every thing works to the right end, which is to the praise and
glory of Gods grace; God himself works for this, and Jesus Christ works for
this, and every good thing given and received works for this, and every
believer who is brought into Covenant works for this. Christ is given, and
mercy is given, and grace is given, and glory is given, and because all is
given, therefore all exalts the glory of Gods grace. Christ is the surety, and
Christ is sent, and Christ dyed, and Christ made satisfaction, and Christ made
peace, and Christ purchased all for the sinner, and this also exalts the grace
of God toward sinners; the sinner is called by grace, and made a believer, and
as a believer he receives all by grace, and he acts in the strength of grace,
and is led on and preserved by grace, and what he is, he is by grace, and what
he works, he works by grace, and what he hopes for, he hopes for by grace, and
that which he rests on is grace, and what he magnifies and sets up, is not
himself, nor any thing of his own, but only the grace of God.

4. All the good of the Covenant is dispensed in a right season; and this All
the good of the Covenant is dispensed in a right season.
also shows that it is a well-ordered Covenant: when things are out of time,
they are out of order. If Snow or Frost should come in the time of Harvest,
this would be disorderly; and if physic should come when the person is dead,
this would be disorderly. Things are well-ordered, when they come neither too
soon, nor too late, but in the very season when we need them, and when they
will do us good: And after this manner are all the dispensations of this
Covenant; they are let out, and come in the very time and minute of our ^eed.
When a poor sinner knows not what to do, then does Christ appear, and then does
mercy appear, and then does help appear: Isa. 41. 17. When the poor and needy
seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord
will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. 2 Cor. 6. 2. He
says I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I
succored thee; when David's heart was overwhelmed and ready to faint, then God
took him up and comforted him: And when the Church was as a woman forsaken, and
grieved in spirit, then says God, with everlasting kindness will I have mercy
on thee; when Ephraim was ashamed, and even confounded, then says God, My
bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on him; when Paul was
pressed above measure, and his own strength was found insufficient against
Satan's temptations, then he received an answer, my grace is ^ufficient for
thee. O beloved! thus is the Covenant ordered that you shall have mercy in the
fit time, and help in the best time, and deliverance in the best time, and
answers to your prayers in the best time; though you have not your desires
presently answered, yet your God is a gracious God, and therefore intends your
good; and he is a wise God, and therefore knows the best time; and he is a
faithful God, and therefore will lose no time.

5. This Covenant is so framed, that there is still a strong foundation It is
so framed, that there is still a strong foundation of hope and confidence for a
poor sinner. A foundation laid, For the admission of poor sinners. For the
impetration of all the good a sinner needs.
of hope and confidence for a poor sinner; and by this it appears that it is a
well-ordered Covenant; here is a firm foundation laid.

1. For the admission of poor sinners; If a Christ and Mediator, if mercy in
all the abundance of it, if free grace in all the glory of it, may be esteemed
a fair foundation for hope and confidence, here every one of them stands ready
to make way for the sinner, I will satisfy for all his sins, and make peace
for him, says Christ the Mediator; I will forgive and abundantly pardon all
his sins, says the merciful God; I will love him freely, and receive him
graciously, says the God of love and grace.

2. For the impetration and assecution of all the good that a poor sinner does
need or can desire: For in this Covenant there is a Christ who merits all, and
a God who promises to give all, and has bound himself to perform all, and who
rejoices over his people to do them good, and accounts it his praise and
honor to accomplish and perform unto them all the good which he promises
unto them, and puts them upon it still to call, and still to trust, and still
to receive from him.

3. For the preservation and continuation of them in this Covenant; for the For
the preservation of them in this Covenant.
Lord has sworn the everlastingnesse of it, and he gives all effectually to
hold up and maintain an everlasting union and communion 'twixt himself and his
people, and keeps them by his own power through faith unto salvation, and
charges none other but Jesus Christ himself to look to them, and to keep them
in his Name; and he undertakes this charge, and will fully execute it, and
faithfully; and therefore as he conquers all the enemies of his servants,
(sin and Satan, and the world) so he furnishes them with all graces
accompaning salvation, and still strengthens those graces until they come to
receive the end of their faith, even the salvation of their souls; Then the
wisdom of God is in this Covenant, as well as his goodness. Therefore do not
displace the order God has set in his Covenant. By interesting our selves in
the benefits of the Covenant, before we interest our selves in God.
upon which the received sinner may with confidence plead for all good, and
which will keep them for ever fast with God.

Is the Covenant of grace an ordered Covenant, and a well-ordered Covenant?
then certainly the wisdom of God is in it, as well as the goodness of God: the
goodness of God is in it, as to all the mercies and blessings wherewith this
Covenant is furnished; and the wisdom of God is in it, as to the placing and
disposing, and dispensing of all those mercies and blessings: Therefore take
heed of displacing that order which God has set in his Covenant; we do
displace the order of the Covenant, and consequently do presume to correct the
wisdom of God, when

1. We do apply and interest our selves in the benefits of the Covenant; before
we do apply God himself, and interest our selves in him; to lay hold on his
mercies before we lay hold on himself; to appropriate the purchase of Christ
before we do embrace and appropriate Christ himself; this is to disorder and
displace the Covenant, which first propounds God himself, and Christ himself to
be received, and then the portion of all good things promised after this.

2. We do disjoyne the things in the Covenant which God has ordered to come By
disjoyning those things God has put together. By expecting the gifts of the
Covenant, without the reasons of the Covenant. By limiting God in the
dispensations of his Covenant.
together; as when we will have the mercy of the Covenant, but not the
repentance of the Covenant; and the hope in Christ, from faith in Christ; and
the promised salvation without the promised holiness which leads unto that
salvation.

3. We do expect the gifts of the Covenant, without the reasons of the
Covenant; upon the account of our goodness, and not upon the account of Gods
graciousnesse.

4. We do limit God in the dispensations of his Covenant; in his answers, helps
and blessings, to our time, and to our measure, and to our haste, and do not
submit and leave these to the times of his wisdom and faithfulness.

then let no man ever think to enjoy God, or any good from Gods Covenant, but
in that way which God himself has declared; you must believe and repent, There
is no enjoying God (...) in his own way.
etc.

then doubt not of the enjoyment of mercy and blessedness, you who are his
people; but come with confidence unto your God, who has ordered love, and
mercy, and peace, and comfort, and His people should not doubt of the enjoyment
of mercy.
blessings, and happiness for you.

SECT. VI.
6. A Sixth property of this Covenant, is this, it is a holy Covenant, Luke It
is a holy Covenant.
1. 72. To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy
Covenant. Dan. 11. 28. His heart shall be against the holy Covenant. Psalm. 105.
42. He remembered his holy promise, etc. The Covenant is styled holy in sundry
respects.

1. In respect of the parties interested in the Covenant; viz. God and his In
respect of the parties interested in it.
people, both of them are holy; God is holy, he is an holy God, Josh. 24. 19.
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty. Romans 4. 8. His people are holy; that thou
may be an holy people to the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 26. 19. The people of thy
holiness. Esaias 63. 18. The holy people. Dan. 12. 7. To them that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus. 1. Cor. 1. 2. A holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1
Pet. 2. 9. The Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. 1 Cor. 3. 17.
Although before we are brought into the Covenant, we are a wicked and unholy,
defiled and polluted people; yet when we are brought into the Covenant, then we
are made holy, we are changed and washed, and sanctified, and are made
partakers of his holiness.

2. In respect of the condition of the Covenant; faith (as you shall hear
shortly) In respect of the condition of the Covenant.
is the condition of this Covenant, and true faith is a holy faith; building up
your selves in your most holy faith, Jude ver. 20. Purifying their hearts by
faith, Acts 15. 9. Which are sanctified by faith, Acts 26. 18. Faith unites us
to the holy Christ, and to the holy God, and draws holiness from Christ, and
sets up that holy Christ in our hearts.

3. In respect of the matter promised in the Covenant; holiness is one
principal In respect of the matter promised.
thing promised in it. God does promise to give his holy Spirit, Luke 11. 13.
and to cleanse us from all iniquity, Jer. 33. 8. and from all unrighteousness,
1 John 1. 9. and to refine us with refining fire, Mal. 3. 2. Jerusalem shall
be holy, Joel. 3. 17. and to sanctify us and purify us; I am the Lord who
sanctifies you, Lev. 20. 8. The God of peace sanctify you wholly, 1 These. 5.
23. I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth,
John 17. 19. By the which will we are sanctified, Heb. 10. 10. The change of a
sinful heart, the giving of a new heart, and a new spirit; the taking away the
heart of stone, and the giving of an heart of flesh; the work of regeneration,
and of renovation, these are expressly the matter in the Covenant.

4. The Author of this Covenant does expressly command holiness; Be ye holy, The
Author of this Covenant commands holiness.
for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. Speak unto all the Congregation of the children
of Israel, and say unto them, ye shall be holy; for I the Lord your God am
holy, Lev. 19. 2. Whatsoever things are pious, whatsoever things are lovely,
etc. think on these things, Phil. 4. 8. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, 1 These. 4. 3. Having therefore these promises, let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

5. This Covenant does exceedingly encourage holiness; Blessed are the pure
The Covenant does encourage holiness.
in heart, for they shall see God, Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed are the undefiled in
the way, Psalm. 119. 1. Being now become the servants of God, ye have your fruit
unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6. 22. God is glorious in
holiness, Exodus 15. 11. The Saints are the excellent on the earth, Psalm. 16.
3. Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me
by sacrifice, Psalm. 50. 5. This honor have all his Saints, Psalm. 149. 9. He
will keep the feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2. 9. The Lord forsakes not his
Saints, Psalm, 37. 28. He preserves the souls of his Saints, Psalm. 97. 10. He
delivers them out of the hands of the wicked, ibid. The Saints shall judge
the world, 1 Cor. 6. 8. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, 2
These. 1. 10.

6. All about the Covenant respects holiness, and makes for holiness; all
that work of renovation promised in the Covenant, all that deliverance promised
All about the Covenant respects holiness.
in the Covenant, is, that now we should serve the Lord in holiness and
righteousness; all the mercies promised lead to holiness, to the love of God,
to the fear of God, to repentance; all the glory and happiness there promised,
take in holiness as a way thereunto; the Christ there is made unto us
sanctification as well as redemption; the Spirit of Christ is there to
sanctify, and there to comfort and seal us; the two broad seals of the
Covenant have holiness written in them; baptism is a Laver of regeneration,
and the Lords Supper seals a further communion with Christ in his graces, in
his life, and in his death, in his death, and in his resurrection; what shall I
say? every Covenant Ordinance is instituted either for the begetting, or for
the increasing and perfecting of holiness. Nay, let me add one thing more,
every dealing of God with his people in Covenant, it is to further holiness;
his dealing in the way of promises, is that by them that we might be made
partakers of the divine nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4. His dealing with them in his
calling of them to Christ, is that they might be new creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
His dealing with them by his Spirit, is that they might be born again, John 3.
3. His dealing with them by afflictions, is that their sins might be purged
away, Isa. 27. 9. and that they may be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10.

7. The Covenant is very strict against all unholinesse, against external
unholinesse It is very strict against all unholinesse.
in Conversation, and against internal unholinesse in affection or heart; 2
Cor. 6. 17. Be ye separate and touch no unclean thing. Jude ver. 23. Hating
even the garment spotted by the flesh. 1 These. 5. 22. Abstain from all
appearance of evil. Romans 8. 9. Abhor that which is evil. Psalm. 97. 10. Ye
that love the Lord, hate evil. Titus 3. 11. The grace of God that brings
salvation has appeared to all men; ver. 12. Teaching us that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts; we should live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present world. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having these promises, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. Gal. 5. 24. They that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.

Quest. Now if you should demand why God makes a Covenant which is thus Why it
must be a holy Covenant. Because it must be suitable to his nature.
holy?

Sol. I answer: first, because his Covenant must be suitable to his own nature,
the which it were not, if it were not holy. His nature is holiness it self,
and he will never set up a Covenant to make us unlike himself.

2. He sets up a Covenant to show and communicate his love unto us, and Else he
could not communicate his love to us.
therefore it must be a holy Covenant, to purge away our sinfulness, which he
is of purer eyes than to behold, and which his soul hates.

3. He makes a Covenant with us, that he and we might have a communion Else we
cannot have communion with him.
together; that we might have fellowship with the Father, and the Son; but
what communion can there be 'twixt light and darkness?

4. He makes this Covenant, to restore us again, and to repair his own The
Covenant is to repair Gods image in us.
image in us, and to conform us unto himself; but our conforming unto him, is
by the transforming of our minds, by changing us into his own image, from
glory to glory, by making us holy as he is holy.

5. It would be infinite dishonor to God if his Covenant were not a holy
Covenant, Else it would be unworthy of him.
it would not be worthy of him. God intended in making this Covenant to
magnify himself in praise and glory; but he should lose all praise and glory,
if he had made a Covenant which were not holy, ot which would dispense with
holiness; unholinesse being the only dishonor to God, and the pulling down of
his glory; God in this Covenant promises riches of mercy and grace, and glory
to his people; but how absurd and dishonorable were it thus to do, if his
people should continue a vile and profane, and sinful, and sensual people? if
there were no difference 'twixt the precious and the vile.

6. He makes a Covenant and brings people into it, that so they may be Else not
meet to be partakers of glory.
made meet to be partakers of the glory that is prepared and shall be revealed;
unless the Covenant were holy, and did work holiness, we could never be
fitted and prepared, nor made meet for a glorious enjoyment of God, and
communion with him; seeing that every one who has that hope purifieth himself
as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. And without holiness no man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12. 14. And except a man he born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God,
John 3. 3.

then no unholy person has as yet an interest in the Covenant. You are pleased
in the having of all that mercy, and of Then no unholy person has as yet an
interest in ^he Covenant.
all that goodness, and of all that graciousnesse, of all that happiness in
this Covenant: O but you have no portion in God, nor in any of these, if you be
unholy persons; for all unholy persons are out of this holy Covenant: I do not
say that an unholy person is simply excluded from hopes of being brought into
the Covenant; but this I say, if a person still remain unholy, he is still out
of the Covenant, because all actually in Covenant with God are made holy, they
have a new heart given unto them: There are two things show persons are not in
Covenant.

1. Privative unholinesse. 2. Counterfeit holiness.
1. Visible unholinesse shuts men out of this Covenant.

Now there are seven things which do show that a man is (as yet) absolutely He
is absolutely unholy.
unholy.

1. When his heart does secretly loath the Majesty and presence of holiness; he
Whose heart does secretly loath the presence of holiness. Who loathes the
generation of the Saints. Who can reproach the beauties of holiness. Who will
venture the loss of Gods favor, rather than forsake his lusts. Who opposes
the Ordinances, because they press holiness. Who counts it a disgrace to be
holy. Who lives in open profaness.
looks on holiness as his enemy, that would rent off his heart from sinful
lusts, which he does infinitely prize and favor.

2. When he loathes the generation of the Saints; utterly declines their
fellowship, and can by no means agree with persons of holiness, even upon this
account only, because they are so, but opposes, disgraceth, reproacheth them,
and is glad if he can make them odious.

3. Who can reproach the beauties of holiness, and offer despite to the Spirit
of grace, making holiness the peculiar object of his scoffs and mocks, and
derision, these are the Saints, the holy ones, etc.

4. Who will rather venture the loss of Gods favor and mercy, and the promises
of salvation, than that he will forsake his sinful lus^s and unholy ways;
hates to be instructed and reproved, and reformed.

5. Who therefore opposes and would subvert and supplant all the Ordinances of
Christ, because they press and urge holiness, and because they discover and
reprove unholinesse, and will not suffer him to go on quietly and desperately
in paths of profanesse and ungodliness; resists the Holy Spirit in his
motions.

6. Who counts it a disgrace for him to be holy, or to be esteemed so.

7. Who lives in open profanesse, Sabbath-breaking, drunkenness, perjury,
lying, etc.

2. Nay, not only visible and open profanesse discovers men to be out of the
holy Covenant, but also formal and pretended, and counterfeit holiness; for
the Formal and counterfeit holiness.
Covenant is really holy, and all persons in the Covenant are really holy, and
the Covenant promises and works in them not a seeming, not a counterfeit,
but a real and solid holiness.

Now there are six signs of a man who has not real holiness, but only a
counterfeit holiness. Signs of counterfeit holiness. Though he may do some
holy duties, yet he is not humbled for former unholy doings. Though in outward
profession he seems to be holy, yet there is no renewing work of grace upon his
heart.


1. Though he be taken up with the performance of some holy duties, yet his
heart was never thoroughly humbled for his former unholy ^^doings: His
unholinesse either in the long want of holiness, or in the long opposition of
holiness, or in the long practices of unholinesse, never was a burden to his
soul, nor lay heavy, never wrought trouble nor shame in him.

2. Though in his outward profession he seem to be holy, yet there is no
renewing work of grace upon his heart, his heart is not renewed nor changed,
but has the same old lusts still, and the same old love unto them, and delight
in them. There is no difference 'twixt himself and himself, no war at all,
but all is at peace within him, which shows that he never had holiness in
truth; true holiness will displace the affections, and change your souls, and
make a separation and an opposition, etc.

3. Though the man seems to be holy, yet he will not be more holy; he has got
into his circle from whence you shall not stir him; he has put on his form
of holiness Though he seems to be holy, yet he will not be more holy.
which his wise forefathers left him, and who so is short of that, he counts
him naught; and who so exceeds that, he counts him precise and vainglorious;
that man was never holy, who strives not to be more holy.

4. Though the man seems to be holy, yet he does not cordially delight in holy
Though he seems to be holy, yet he does not cordially delight in holy persons.
He allows himself in some way of wickedness.
persons; his companions if they be not profane, yet they are vain and empty,
fruitless and helpless to his soul: If a person be godly and holy indeed,
then to except against this, and find fault with that in him, shows his
ungodliness is unpleasing to him, and he is as weary of him, as the Israelites
were of Manna.

5. Though he seems to be holy, yet he allows himself in some way of
wickedness, inpride or covetousness, or in uncleanness, or some other sinful
way, he holds it fast, and will not forsake it.

6. Who cannot sit quietly under a soul-searching Ministry which strikes at
superstition and formality, and hypocrisy; but would raise his heart to higher
He cannot bear a soul-searching Ministry,
principles, and better affections, and a more spiritual way of serving God,
than a mere opus operatum.

O now this persons soul is stung; and have I not all this while known how to
serve God? and must I now learn a new way to heaven?

Well, think of these things both sorts of you, for neither the one nor the
other are interested in this Covenant of grace, which is an holy Covenant, but
you are yet an unholy people.

behold the parting way, behold the reason why so few men are persuaded to
hearken, and to enter into Covenant See the reason why so few enter into
Covenant with God.
with God; we stand wondering what the reason is or may be, that a company of
sinners hearing of that infinite happiness to be enjoyed in the Covenant of
grace, and hearing of the manifold blessings comprised in it, of the joy
unspeakable therein, of the peace that passes all understanding, of the full
forgiveness of sins, and of the sweet manifestations of the love of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Spirit, and of the assurings of eternal
salvation unto all the persons who enter into this Covenant; I say, we wonder
that after all this, there are so few who enquire the way, or embrace the way
of entering into such a Covenant where God makes over himself in such a gracious
and glorious manner to his people; but here lies the stick, here lies the
bar, here lies the great exception against the Covenant; viz. it is an holy
Covenant.

Demand of persons, and if it were fit of every person here this day.

Would you not be the people of Gods love? would you have God to love your
souls? yes, we would; and would you not be the people of Gods mercies? would
you not have God mercifully to pardon all your sins, and all your
transgressions? O by all means; and would you not be the people of Gods
blessings? would you not have God to give you his love freely, and his mercy
freely, and his Christ freely, and salvation freely? that we would:

What is that which hinders then? why, verily nothing but this holiness; O but
God will give this holiness as freely as he gives his mercy, but we care not
for it; O but God will give you riches of mercy with it, but we care not for
it; O but it is the means to bring you to glory, but we care not for it; O but
God himself is a holy God, and his people must be holy as he is holy, yet we
care not for it; O but you shall never have God to be your God, nor mercy to be
your mercy, nor Christ to be your Savior, nor heaven to be your inheritance,
unless you are willing to be holy but we will not be holy.

Quest. It is a very considerable question, why of all the terms that God
stands for, (in respect of the Covenant) this of holiness is disliked? and of
all the Why is the holiness of the Covenant so much disliked.
good things which God does promise in his Covenant, this of holiness only is
excepted against; and of all the Attributes wherein God manifests himself to
men, though they seem content and willing to imitate God in many of them, (as
in love and mercy, and goodness, etc. yet they are so averse to the holiness
of God, which (if it be lawful to make comparison) is one of the highest
glories of God.

Sol. Surely there are choice reasons to be given for this peculiar opposition
and exception against holiness.

1. One reason may be this, the nature of the sinner; he loves sin, his
Because of the nature of the sinner.
heart is set upon it, he serves it, he is married unto it, he delights in it;
now such a nature is an enmity against holiness, it stands in a peculiar
opposition and contrariety unto it; it is not subject to the Law of God, nor
can be subject, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 7. so say I, it is enmity against
the holiness of God, it is not subject unto it, nor indeed can be.

2. Another reason may be this, The nature of holiness; holiness is that work
The nature of holiness.
of God which utterly subverts the state of sin, breaks down all the powers
of it, crucifies the body of it, separates 'twixt the heart and sin, changes
the heart of the sinner, turns the love of sin into the hatred of sin, and
the delights in sin, into sorrow for sin; makes us new creatures, will not
suffer the sinner to enjoy his old lusts, and his old ways, brings a new frame
of Spirit, and a new course of life; it is absolutely contrary, and it is
utterly destructive of the sinful condition, and straightly binds the whole man
to the whole will of God; and all these things are grievous unto a natural man.

3. A third reason of it may be this, The obloquie and scorns, and reproaches,
The reproaches and persecutions of the world against holiness.
and persecutions of the world against holiness; the men of the world draw
their arrows, and spit all their venom against holiness, they hate it, and
deride it, and opose it, and discounterance and defame it, and load it with all
sorts of defamation; and car^al men love the world, and fear the world; they
love the praise of the world, and the peace of the world, and the ease of the
world, and the favor and opinion of the world; men must suffer reproaches and
persecutions, and troubles, if they will be holy; but they cannot suffer in
their names, nor in their delights, nor in their profits, nor in their
friendship, and therefore they will not be holy: I say no more to you but this,
if you will not be holy, then you profess you will not be the people of God,
and that you will not have God to be God, and he will not be your God, nor
shall you be his people, and hence it follows that he will never show mercy to
you, nor peace to you, nor his salvation to you; get thee a portion wherein
thou can, but in him, but in his mercy, but in his Christ, but in his glory,
thou shall never have part nor portion.

is lively comfort for all holy persons; let men judge of you as they please,
and deal with you as they list, Comfort for all holy persons.
and oppose you as they do, yet this is your comfort, God is your God, and you
are his people.

Beloved! never dispute it, nor fear it, if you be an holy people, God is your
God in Covenant; for, 1. Holiness is in none but such as are in Covenant; 2.
All in Covenant have holiness wrought in them; holiness is a Covenant gift,
it drops only out of the Covenant of grace, and every one in Covenant resembles
that God with whom he is in Covenant; he is holy, as his heavenly Father is
holy; And let me tell you, if you have a share in the holiness of the Covenant,
you shall have a share also in the happiness of the Covenant; if the holy God
be your God, then the merciful God is your God, and the loving God is your God,
and the blessing God is your God, and the blessed God is your God, and the
everlasting God is your everlasting God: Nay, let me settle this comfort yet
closer upon your hearts, though as yet you want much in the degrees and measure
of ho^inesse, yet if there be holiness in truth wrought in you, be it never so
little, yet if it be true holiness, it is a true character that God is your
God, and that you are his people in Covenant.

Quest. That is the thing which we so much fear, how may it be known! when
there is yet so much rubbish of sinful corruption dwelling in us?

Sol. For answer to this, remember that there are six things which do show that
your holiness is true holiness, though it may be but weak and How may true
holiness be known. It takes off the heart from all sin.
little.

1. True holiness (though never so weak) it fetches off the heart from all
sin, and sets the heart against all sin, it works in compliance with all sin;
it takes off the heart from the love of every sin, and raises in the heart an
opposition and conflict with every sin, though as yet it cannot expel all sin,
yet it will oppose all sin; though as yet it cannot conquer all sin, yet it
will conflict with all sin; the least degree of light opposes all degrees of
darkness; as the least spark of fire is contrary to a Sea of water.

2. True holiness, though it can do but little, yet it is an universal
conformity to all the Will of God. There is an answerablenesse 'twixt the whole
Will of God, It is an universal conformi^y to all the Will of God.
and the least and weakest true holiness; it approves all the holy and good
Will of God, it sets up all the Will of God, it delights in all the Will of
God, it strives to come up in all well-pleasing in all things to all the Will
of God.

3. True holiness is perfecting holiness; though it be not perfect holiness,
It is perfecting holiness.
yet it is perfecting holiness; it prays, and hears, and looks up to the
holy God to sanctify us wholly, to pour out his holy Spirit, to make all grace
to abound; it sets up the holiness of God as a pattern, and strives for a
fullness of holiness; to be holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. To purify
our selves as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3.

4. True holiness makes us to prize and love holiness wheresoever we find
it.; It makes to prize and love holiness where we find it.
and the more holy, the more love; to love an holy God, an holy Christ, the
holy Ghost, the holy Scriptures, the holy Sabbath, and all holy duties, all
holy persons, be they rich, or be they poor; be they useful to us, or be they
strangers to us; holiness loves all holiness.

5. True holiness is another nature, a divine nature; and makes the greatest
It is another nature.
change, and alteration in the soul, that it is capable of; It changes a man's
heart, and life, service, will, affections, and all. The man is a new creature,
and is changed into the Image of Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

6. True holiness is exceeding powerful: there is a mighty power in it; A It
is exceeding powerful.
man never is able to come up to the Will of God, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? to deny himself, to hate every sin, to love all good, to delight in
the Lord, to walk with God, till he find working in him the power of holiness.

an holy Covenant? then strive to be holy persons; bewail your former
unholinesse, and want of holiness, and oppositions, and Strive to be holy
persons.
contempts, and reproaches of holiness; and as you desire to en^oy G^d for
your God, and the mercies, and comforts, and hopes, and happiness of the
Covenant, so desire to be holy. If holiness be one of the great ingredients,
if it be the lively testimony of the people in Covenant with God, if it be the
express Will and Command of God for all in Covenant with him, if it be the
excellency of your natures, if it be the necessary and certain way of
happiness; then be not ashamed, be not averse to holiness any more, etc.

Quest. And what is to be done, that we may be holy? What is to be done that we
may be holy. Beg of God to make you holy.


Sol. I will tell you what is to be done.

1. Beseech the holy God to make you holy; holiness is attributed to God. 1.
Essentially; he is holiness it self. 2. Infinitely; there are no bounds of his
holiness. And 3. Causally; and therefore Christ prayed for his Disciples to
his Father, John 17. 17. Sanctify them, etc. And the Apostle for the
Thessalon^ans, 1 These. 5. 23. The God of peace sanctify you. And God has
promised to give his holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. And he has
sanctified those that were very unholy. 1 Cor. 6. 11, 12. Such were some of
you, but you are washed, but you are sanctified. And besides all this, this
prayer is well-pleasing to God, Lord, make me holy, I would not grieve and
dishonor thee any more, I would not be vile.

2. Attend the holy Word, and wait upon God therein to work holiness in Attend
to the holy Word.
you. John 15. 3. Ye are clean through the Word which I spoke unto you John 17.
17. Sanctify them through thy Word, thy Word is truth. The Word is compared to
cleansing water; to Fullers soap which whitens; to refining fire which
separates the dross, and purifies the metal; the hearts of sinners are
changed by it; so was Paul's; and so those Jews in Acts 2. and 3. and 4.

3. Get Faith to unite you to Christ, who is made Sanctification to us, 1 Cor.
1. 30. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. Get faith to
unite us to Christ. Make use of the promises.


4. Make use of the promises, as 2 Cor. 7. 1.

SECT. VII.
A seventh property of this Covenant, is this, It is a sure and steadfast
Covenant. It is a sure and steadfast Covenant.
Deuteronomy. 7. 9. The Lord thy God he is God, the faithful God which keeps
Covenant with them that love him. 2 Chronicles. 6. 14. O Lord God which keep
Covenant. 2 Samuel 23. 5. He has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered
in all things and sure. Psa. 19. 7. The testimony of the Lord is sure. Psalm.
93. 5. Thy testimonies are very sure.

That is called sure, A thing is called sure which is not a lie.


1. Which is not a lie, but a truth; In this respect the Covenant is a sure
Covenant. It is no lie, Psalm. 89. 35. I will not lie unto David, Hab. 2. 7. At
the end the vision shall speak and not lie, Titus 1. 2. In hope of eternal
life, which God that cannot lie promised before the world began: It is a truth,
Micah 7. 20. Thou will perform the truth unto Jacob. Psalm 132. 11. The Lord
has sworn in truth. Psalm 91. 4. His truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

2. Which will not fail, but will certainly come to pass; it will be
accomplished, it will answer hope, and expectation every way. In this respect
also Which will not fail.
the Covenant is sure. Psalm. 89. 33. I will not suffer my faithfulness to
fail. Hab. 2. 3. It will surely come; though it tarry, wait for it. Jer. 32.
41. I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this
Land assuredly. Verse 42. I will bring upon them all the good that I have
promised them. 1 Kings 8. 56. There has not failed one word of all his good
promise.

3. Which alters not: In this respect also is the Covenant sure. Psalm. 89. 28.
My Covenant shall stand fast with him. Verse 34. My Covenant will I not Which
alters not.
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Isa. 54. 10. The
mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down; but my mercy shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace fall away, says the
Lord that has compassion on thee. 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the promises of God in him
are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us.

There are two things unto which I would briefly speak concerning this property
of the Covenant, namely the surenesse or certainty of it.

1. Quest. How it may be demonstrated, That the Covenant of grace is a sure How
it is demonstrated to be a sure Covenant. It depends upon the counsel, purpose,
and love of God.
Covenant.

Sol. There are six things to demonstrate or clear it. Viz.

1. This Covenant depends upon the counsel of God, and the purpose of God, and
love of God, immutable and sure grounds; these are (as it were) the springs and
the foundations of the Covenant of grace, viz. Gods love unto us, his counsel
wisely and deliberately contriving for us, and his purpose resolving and
intending everlasting good unto us.

Now every one of these is sure and certain; The love of God is unchangeable;
wh^m he loves once, he loves for ever; I have loved thee with an everlasting
love, Jer. 31. 3.

The counsel of God is immutable, wherein (speaking of this Covenant, Heb. 6.
17.) God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the
immutability of his counsel (confirmed it by an oath.)

The purpose of God is sure. So the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of
God stands sure; that foundation of God is his election, which is compared to
a foundation, because it is that upon which all our good and happiness is
built, and because as a foundation it abides firm and sure.

2. This Covenant has as firm and sure Ingredients as can be desired. It has
firm and sure ingredients.


There is in it,

1. The presence of what is necessary to the certain performance of the
Covenant. The presence of what is necessary to the performance of it; as,
There are two things necessary thereunto. 1. The power of God. 2. The Will of
God; if God be able, and if God will perform his Covenant, it is then sure.
Now let us consider both these in reference to the Covenant.

1. The power of God; power is necessary to give a being unto all undertakings;
The power of God.
If a poor man promises much, yet there is no certainty of it, because though
he be very willing, yet he is very unable; the engagement exceeds his stock of
ability. But God is able to perform all the good promised to his people in the
Covenant. Romans 4. 21. Abraham was fully persuaded that what God had promised,
he was able also to perform.

For the clear understanding of this, remember four particulars.

1. There is not any one promise of God, but has the power of God accompanying
No promise of God, but has the power of God engaged for it.
it, and engaged for it; whether for temporal things, see an excellent place
for this, Numb. 11. 18. The Lord will give you flesh and you shall eat. Ver.
19. Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor ten, nor twenty, but a whole
month. Verse 20. And Moses said verse 21. The people are six hundred thousand
footmen, and thou have said, I will give them flesh for a whole month; Shall
(ver. 22.) the flocks and herds be slain for them to suffice them? or shall the
fish of the sea be gathered together for them? as if he had said, But art thou
able to make this promise good? the Lord said unto Moses, verse 23. Is the
Lords hand waxed short? Thou shall see whether my word shall come to pass unto
thee or not; he did make it good. Or whether the promise be for spiritual
things, there is the power of God accompanying it, Micah 7. 18. Who is a strong
God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity. He is able to pardon all our
sins, and able to change our hearts, and to subdue our iniquities, and to
write his Law in our hearts, and to make all grace to abound, and to keep us
from falling, and to preserve us to his heavenly glory; We are kept by the
power of God.

2. This power is a supreme and over-topping power; it is an exceeding power;
This power is a supreme power.
a power that cannot be hindered; If he will bless, who can curse? If he be
with us, who can be against us?

No creature can raise up and stay it; it is such a power as bears down all
before it. All that Pharaoh could do, could not make or hinder the power of God
from delivering his people according to his promise; nor all the Kings could
hinder their possessing of promised Canaan.

3. This power is independent; it takes not in any assistance to help it, but
is alone This power is independent.
sufficient to it self, and unto all its works, and unto all the purposes of
God; there is enough of his power as to creation, so to conversion, and
pardoning, and blessing.

4. This power is an enduring power; it still abides in strength; Behold the
Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save, Isa. 59. 1. His power remains
the same This power is an enduring power.
for ever.

2. The Will of God in reference to the Covenant, to perform what God has
promised. Micah 7. 20. Thou will perform the truth to Jacob. Jer. 33. 14. The
Will of God.
I will perform that good thing which I have promised to the house of Israel.
1 These. 5. 24. Faithful is he that calls you, who will also do it. Phil. 1.
6. He that has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ.

God was never forced to make it, or to enter into this Bond, but out of his
own accord willingly became ours; and this willingness was not extrinsecal,
depending upon the persuasion of another; but it was intrinsecal, arising only
from his own entire love unto us.

Quest. But the question may be concerning the kinds of Gods Will, as to the
performance The kinds of Gods will.
of this Covenant.

Sol. For answer unto that, take these particulars.

1. The will of God for the performance of his Covenant, it is a peremptory and
perfect Will; it is a Will resolved, a Will of purpose, or according to
purpose; It is a peremptory and perfect will.
not an incomplete Will, it may be I will, and it may be I will not; not a
wishing, but this is my purpose, my decree, I am resolved on it to bless my
people, to bring upon them all the good of my Covenant.

2. This Will is grounded on it sel^; it is a well-guided Will; it does not
depend It is grounded on it self.
on any thing in us, for then it might not be sure; but only the good pleasure
of his Will which is most sure. Ezekiel. 36. 22. Not for your sakes O house of
Israel, but for mine holy Namesake. Isa. 48. 11. For mine own sake, even for
mine own sake will I do it. Deuteronomy. 7. 8. Because the Lord loved you, and because
he would keep the Oath which he had sworn unto your Fathers, has the Lord
brought you out with a mighty hand.

3. This Will is fixed and unalterable; must not the Covenant then be sure? It
is fixed and unalterable.
Psalm. 89. 34. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
out of my lips. Verse 35. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not
lie unto David.

And this willingness he has expressed,

1. In his promise^; yea, promise upon promise, that he will bring upon them
all the good that he has promised them, Jer. 32. 42. and Jer. 33. 14. and
Micah 7. 20, etc.

2. In his Oath to all this; I have sworn by my holiness that I will not lie
unto David, Psalm. 89. 35. He confirmed it by his Oath, says the Apostle in
Heb. 6. 17. and an Oath for confirmation is an end of all strife, ver. 16. Luke
1. 72. To perform the mercy promised to our f^thers, and to remember his holy
Covenant. Ver. 73. The Oath which he swear to our Father Abraham; surely God
will not break his word of promise and lie; surely God will not break his Oath
and be perjured.

3. This Covenant is gracious; and therefore it is sure, as the Apostle speaks,
It is gracious.
Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of faith, that it might b^ by grace; to the end
the promise might b^ sure to all the seed; The former Covenant was not sure,
because it was of works, and rested upon our own strength and performance; but
this Covenant i^ sure because it is of grace, and rests not on any sufficiency
in us, but only on the goodness and the sufficiency of Gods grace; God in this
Covenant does promise to give us all things freely, to work all our works in us
and for us; not to deal with us according to our deserts, but according to the
riches of his mercy.

4. This Covenant is confirmed by the blood of Jesus Christ, which is called It
is confirmed by the blood of Christ.
the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. Matthew. 26. 28. This is my
blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the Remission of sins.
Heb. 9. 15. For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of death for the Redemption of the transgressions that were under the
first Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of an eternal
inheritance. Ver. 17. A Testament is of force after men are dead.

It is called a Covenant, and a Testament.

1. A Covenant in respect of God, and a Testament in respect of Christ.

2. A Covenant in respect of the manner of Agreement; and a Testament in
respect of the manner of confirming. Jesus Christ died as a Testator, and by
his death confirmed the Testamentary gift before made of life and salvation.

5. I might add more demonstrations of this truth, as the sealings of the
Spirit, The sealing of the Spirit, and sealings of the Ordinances.
and the sealings of the Ordinances, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which are
the seals of this Will, and the sealings of the people of God in their
continual experience of the truth, and certainty of the Covenant, in the
performance of the Covenant. Psalm. 105. 8. He has remembered his Covenant for
ever. Psalm. 119. 65. Thou have dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according
to thy Word.

2. Quest. Why God makes a suit Covenant with his people? Why God makes a sure
Covenant. Certainty is a ground of faith


Sol. The reasons are these.

1. Certainty is a ground of faith; We are commanded to believe, and to be
persuaded, and to stand, and rest, etc. and to rejoice in believing, Romans 15.
13. If the Covenant were uncertain, and unsure, your faith would never be
certain and sure. Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw n^^r with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith; But how could we draw near in that f^ll assurance of faith;
Surely by believing, and being fully persuaded to enjoy what God has promised,
unless there were a certainty in the Covenant, viz. That God will certainly
perform what he has promised unto us? there cannot possibly be a certainty of
faith upon uncertain promises.

2. Certainty is a ground of peace; this Covenant is styled a Covenant of
peace, Certainty is a ground of peace
because it settles, and quiets, and establishes our hearts; yea, and the
Covenant breeds perfect peace; it stills all the fears, and doubts, and
thoughts of heart, and therefore it must needs be a sure Covenant; and being
so, we have strong consolation, Heb. 6. 18.

Two things are necessary to the settling of peace in the soul; either 1. An
actual fruition. 2. A certain expectation. Were the Covenant uncertain (it may
be God will be my God, it may be he will not be my God; it may be he will
pardon my sins, it may be he will not pardon my sins; it may be he will save my
soul, and it may be he will not save my soul) this uncertainty on Gods part,
would leave an uncertainty on our part; and either of these uncertainties,
would certainly leave us to an uncertain, distracted, unsettled conscience; O I
can never be sure that God will be mine, that mercy shall be mine, etc.

3. Certainty is the ground of hope and of patience; God would have his people
Certainty is the ground of hope and patience.
to hope in him; and to wait for him; to hope in his mercy, and to wait for his
promise. Psalm. 130. 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord. Lam. 3. 26. It is good that
a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. 1 Pet.
1. 13. Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end; and
therefore the Covenant is sure, and must be so, for hope is upheld by a sure
and steadfast Anchor, Heb. 6. 19. and patience by a sure word of promise; wait
for it, for it will surely come, Hab. 2. 3. God says it twice in Joel 2. 26,
27. My people shall never be ashamed, and my people shall never be ashamed, and
Isa. 49. 23. Thou shall know that I am the Lord, for they shall not be ashamed
that wait for me; and Romans 5. 5. Hope makes not ashamed. O but we should be
ashamed of our hope, and ashamed of our patience, if we should look for a God,
and wait for a God, who either could not help us, or else would fail us.

4. The certainty of the Covenant, is the great glory of the Covenant; it is
more The certainty of the Covenant is the glory of it.
glory to God to make a sure Covenant, than an unsure Covenant; to be certain
in his word, than uncertain; to be a faithful God, than an unfaithful God; and
we glorify him more upon the account of the surenesse of his Covenant; here is
mercy promised, and this mercy is sure; all the mercies in this Covenant are
the sure mercies of David; here is Christ promised, and this Christ is a sure
foundation, Isa. 38. 16. Here is grace and glory promised, and they are sure;
and here are necessary outward blessings promised, and they are sure waters. O
how this exalts the goodness of God! all of it is sure, and our poor souls,
if they come into Covenant, shall surely enjoy all the good thereof, mercy, and
grace, and righteousness, and joy, and peace, and spiritual life.

5. God makes a Covenant that is sure, because he would draw the hearts of his
God would draw the hearts of his people to himself alone.
people to himself alone. There are four things which will draw and fix the
heart where it can discover them.

1. One is goodness; this is the good which I need. 2. A second is fullness;
here is all the good which I need. 3. A third is freeness; all this good is to
be had freely. 4. A fourth is certainty; I shall not fail of any part of this
good; why these are apt to work on the heart, and to draw it, and to fix it:
and all these God puts into the Covenant which he makes with his people: it is
good, it is full, it is free, and it is certain; I will do you good, says God,
and I will do you all good, and I will do it freely, and I will do it
assuredly; why then to whom should we go? thou have all the words of eternal
life; on whom should we trust but on thy self alone, O Lord, who art so full a
goodness, and so sweet a graciousnesse, and so unquestionable a faithfulness
and truth!
6. This Covenant which God makes with his people is sure, because none of None
of Gods people shall ever have cause to complain of him
the people of God shall ever have cause (just cause) to complain of him, or to
blame him; David in a distempered fit mutters out (Psalm. 77. 8.) Is his mercy
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? But he corrects
himself for this in verse 10. I said, This is my infirmity, etc. But if indeed
God should not make good his Covenant, if that should fail, if it were unsure,
then many bills of complaint would come in against him; Lord, thou did hold
out a word of promise, and commandedst me to rest on it, and saydst, Thou
would not fail me; and lo I have quit all other confidences, and cast all my
hopes upon thy Word (which thou saydst was sure and faithful) and yet thou have
deceived and wronged me; O no, none shall ever be able thus to complain of
God, or to charge him, being truth and faithfulness it self.

a privilege it is to have God to be our God, and for any of us to be the It
is a singular privilege to have God for our God, and to be his people.
people of his Covenant. Herein they do excel all other people, namely that
their Relation is higher, their condition is better, their hopes are greater,
their possessions are sweeter, and their supplies are sure.

Wicked men (who are out of Covenant) have nothing sure; their lives are
unsure; They shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found; yea, they
shall be chased away as a vision of the night, Job 20. 8. Their pleasures and
delights are unsure; They take the Timbrel and the Harp, and rejoice at the
sound of the Organ, and in a moment they go down to the grave, Job 22. 12, 13.
Their wealth and riches are unsure; Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in
the world, and increase in riches; surely thou did set them in slippery
places, how are they brought into desolation as in a moment? Psalm. 73. 12, 18,
19. Their honors and greatness are unsure; Their inward thought is, that
their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all
generations; They call their Lands after their own names: nevertheless, man
being in honor abides not; he is like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. 11,
12. Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the
clouds, yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung: they that have seen him
shall say, Where is he? Thus Zophar in Job 20. 6, 7. Their hopes are unsure;
The eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape; and their hope
shall be as the giving up of the Ghost, Job 11. 20. Whose hope shall be cut
off, and whose trust shall be a spiders webb, Job 8. 14. The expectation of the
wicked shall perish, Prove. 10. 28. Their possessions are unsure; Thou fool,
this night shall they take away thy soul, then whose shall all those things be
which thou have provided? Luke 12. 20. When wicked men are in dangers, they are
not sure of preservation; when they are in troubles, they are not sure of
deliverance; when they are in straits, they are not sure of help; when they are
in terrors of conscience, they are not sure of mercy; when they come to die,
they are not sure of salvation; nothing is sure unto the wicked, but wrath and
destruction; But now on the contrary, all things are sure in the Covenant for
the people of God. The love in the Covenant is a sure love; and the mercies in
the Covenant are sure mercies; and the peace, and the joys, and all the
blessings of it are sure; yea, the meanest as well as the greatest, even his
bread, and his waters are sure, and eternal life is sure, etc.

An encouragement to troubled souls to come into Covenant.
may not this be a great encouragement unto troubled and distressed souls, to
come into Covenant with God? not to stand off through fears and disputes (but
I shall not be accepted, but I shall not find mercy) but to come in with faith
and confidence.

There are five things which may in a special manner, affect and encourage Five
encouragements from
poor brokenhearted sinners to venture in, and to close with God in his
Covenant.

1. One is the thoughts of God toward them his thoughts are thoughts of mercy
and peace toward you, Jer. 29. 11. The thoughts of God toward them. The
compassions of God for them. The designation of Christ to them.


2. A second is the affectionate compassions of God for them. To this man will
I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my
Word, Isa. 66. 2.

3. The designation of Christ is in reference unto them; The Lord has anointed
me (says Christ, Isaiah 61. 1.) to preach good tidings to the meek; He has
sent me to bind up the brokenhearted.

4. A fourth is the particular calls and invitations of God directed unto them.
Let The invitation of God directed to them.
him that is athirst come; and whosoever will, let him come, and take the
waters of life freely, Rev. 22. 17.

5. A fifth is the several assurances which he is pleased to give unto them.
You The several assurances he gives them.
shall not be rejected, says Christ; Him that c^mes to me, I will in no wise
reject, says Christ, John 6. 37. You shall not be despised, says God himself.
Who has despised the day of small things? Zach. 4. 10. Nay, you shall be
graciously accepted; I will love them freely, Hosea 14. 4. And you shall surely
find mercy; I will surely have mercy on him, said God of Ephraim, Jer. 31. 20.
And though your sins have been many and great, yet they shall certainly be
pardoned; If the wicked will turn from all his sins, etc. he shall surely live,
and not die; All his transgressions which he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him, Ezekiel. 18. 21. 22. Why, what sweeter encouragement than
this, You shall find mercy? and what stronger encouragement than this, you
shall surely find mercy? God will be your God, and he will certainly be so; he
will lovingly receive you, and certainly he will do so; and he will pardon all
your transgressions, and certainly he will do so. Plenitudo gratiae, and
certitudo gratiae; these should work off all fears and troubles in our hearts,
etc.

blessed are the people who are in Covenant; for all the good in the Covenant
is Blessed are they who are in Covenant.
sure to them, and shall be theirs assuredly; God is surely their God, and he
has said unto them as once to Jacob (Genesis 32. 12.) I will surely do thee good.

Peruse (I beseech you) all the Covenant of God, and consider what riches and
treasures, and mercies, and blessings, and hopes, and Reversions, and promises
you find there; either you are possessed of them all, or shortly shall be
possessed of every one of them; all is laid out upon you, or is surely laid up
for you; what you have is sure, and what you want is sure also; you have sure
possessions, and you have sure promises.

Beloved, though nothing out of the Covenant is sure, yet all things in the
Covenant is sure; not only sure certitudine veritatis in a way of ttuth, but
also sure certitudine haereditatis in a way of performance; not only sure quoad
causam and ratione pacti as to the cause and the nature of Gods Covenant, but
sure also quoad effectum and ratione facti as to the effect and fruition of
them; you shall have all the mercy, and all the grace, and all the glory which
God promises. You may have a man's promise, and a man's Bond, and yet you may
not be sure, for the man may die, or his estate may fail and break; but it is
not so here in Gods Covenant with you; he never dies, and he never breaks (he
is an eternal infiniteness and al-sufficiency) and his Word abides the same
for ever; yea, one may be an heir to a great estate, yet he may not be sure to
enjoy that great estate; either death, or miscarriages, or violence may deprive
him of the right; but the people of God are sure heirs of all the promised
good in the Covenant, and they shall not fail to enjoy all; they have the
promises of all good, and they have promises that God will assuredly perform
all his promises, and they have his Oath annexed unto those promises, Heb. 6.
13. when God made a promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater,
he swear by himself. Ver. 14. Saying, Surely, blessing, I w^ll bless thee; as
if he should say, Surely, surely as I am God I will bless thee; now what shall
we say to these things? how good is our God! how rich is his Covenant! how
blessed are the people who have the Lord to be their God in Covenant! The
Covenant is good, and the Covenant is full, and the Covenant is sure; Then if
the Covenant be a Covenant of blessings, and blessedness, you who are in
Covenant are blessed, and shall be surely blessed.

few instructions. Instructions.


1. In the apprehension of your wants, and of the suitable good which God In the
apprehension of your wants be much in prayer.
has promised unto his people, pray, and never cease; seek, and ask, and
knock; if you find your names written in the Covenant, and your supplies
written in the promises, now pray without ceasing, pray without fainting; you
are sure to speed, and therefore be sure to pray: your labor is not in vain in
the Lord, said the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. ^8. So say I, your prayers unto the Lord
shall not be in vain; consider that place in Isa. 45. 19. I said not to the
seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain, I the Lord speak in righteousness; as if he
should say, I never did put you upon fruitless service; you never lost your
labor when you sought me; whenever you sought me, you did find me; I have
been still as good as my word, I the Lord speak righteousness; I do not
deceive any, but what I promise to be unto them that seek unto me to do for
them, that I will be, and that I will certainly do for them.

There are three reasons why we should make our requests known unto God, why we
should pray unto him, and hold, and keep up prayers.

1. One is, because he is only the fountain of all good.

2. A second is, because he has promised all good.

3. A third is, because he will surely perform all the good which he has
promised. Psalm. 57. 2. I will cry unto God most high, unto God that performs
all things for me. Verse 3. He shall send from heaven, and save me; God shall
send forth his mercy, and his truth. Mark the place, David is resolved to pray
unto God to draw nigh, and to call upon him for help; and why will he do so?
because God is the most high God, he is able to help me, and because God has
promised me help, and he will perform all that he has promised me; yea, he
will certainly do so, for he will send forth his mercy and his truth; that is,
I shall certainly enjoy the mercy which he has graciously promised, and will
truly perform. A beggar will many times ask where he is not sure to receive an
alms, he will hazard many a request; but it is not so with you who are the
people of God; you never hazard one prayer which you make, if it be grounded
upon the promise made to you; and the reason is because the Covenant is sure,
and God is faithful who has promised; what the Apostle spoke about well-doing,
in Gal. 6. 9. Let us not be weary of well-doing, for in due season we shall
reap if we faint not; that I say of praying, be not weary of praying, (say not
it is in vain) but continue praying for the mercy, for the grace, for the help,
for the comfort which your souls do need; for in due season you shall reap if
you faint not; when you sow the seed in the earth, you shall find it to come
up and bring forth in the season of it, not as soon as you sow it, yet in the
due season you shall hear of it again; so sow your prayers in heaven, (prayers
are the seed which the soul does sow) and you shall reap in due season, though
you be not presently answered, yet when the season of answering comes, you
shall certainly be answered.

2. Look out for more than as yet you have received and do enjoy: Beloved! Look
out for more than as yet you have received.
this you shall experimentally find, that the more you do study your own
hearts, the more wants and weakness you shall find in them; and the more that
you study the Covenant of grace, the more riches of grace, and mercy, and glory
you shall find in it. As the Queen of Sheba, though she heard much of the
wisdom of Solomon, yet she found more than as much more when she came and
conferred with him; so besides all the good which you have heard in the
Covenant, or have received from the Covenant, if you would search further into
it, you should yet find those unsearchable riches of Christ, and such depths
and heighths of love and mercy, that you never espied before; there is much
more grace, and much more love, and much more mercy, and much more peace than
ever your souls as yet tasted of; you shall find greater things promised, than
ever you as yet have partaken of.

Object. You will confess so there are.

Sol. And sit you still, and stand you complaining, and will not you make out
for them? do not you know,

1. That the whole Covenant is your portion, that God has promised to give all
unto you, to give grace and glory, and to withold no good thing from you?

2. That all is sure in the Covenant, that there is no difference of any good
which God has promised as to the graciousnesse, and as to the certainty of
giving; why, all the good of the Covenant is freely given unto you, and shall
certainly be given unto you; and therefore you who are the people of God, be
not satisfied with the little which you have, but enlarge your hearts, and
enlarge your desires, and enlarge your confidences, for there is much more in
the Covenant, than as yet you have got out of the Covenant; and there it is
laid up for you, and it will be as surely performed as any blessing which
hitherto you have enjoyed.

Beloved! the Covenant is not sure in one pa^^^ and unsure in another part;
this mercy promised is sure, but that mercy promised is unsure; the lesser is
sure, but the greater is unsure; but all of it, and all in it are sure; pardon
of lesser sins is sure, and pardon of greater sins is sure, yea, pardon of
all your sins is sure! and as a pardoning mercy is sure, so healing mercy is
sure, and helping mercy is sure; God will as certainly heal and renew your
hearts, as he will pardon your sinful doings; and God will as certainly subdue
your strong corruptions, and powerful temptations, as he will do you any other
good, and he will as surely give you peace in conscience, and Christ, and
eternal life, and the joys of the holy Ghost, as well and as certainly as he
has given any truth of grace to you. You think this may be had, and that may
be had, but you seldom come up with faith to believe that all shall be had; O
Sirs, we frequently forget that the Covenant of God is a sure Covenant, and
sure in all things; but let us strive to raise our faith unto that height, and
to that latitude, that all the Covenant is sure; there is not one word of it
which it shall fail, God will surely perform all his good promises of the
Covenant; what you possess, you think is sure, yea, and all that God promises
is sure; and therefore stir up your hearts, and look up to God with as much
confidence for all which yet you want, be it never so much, and never so great,
for God will surely make good all his Covenant to you; you have found the
Covenant sure in many things; O but the Covenant is sure in all things; all the
promises of God are Yea and Amen, etc.

3. Be not discouraged, nor despond, nor despair, for the Covenant Be not
discouraged.
is sure; there are four times when our hearts are very apt to fail us.

1. One is long delays of earnest prayers; See Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the
words of my roaring? Verse 2. O my God I cry in the daytime, but thou hear
not, and in the night-season, and am not silent.

2. Another is, seeming dislike and discouragement of seeking; Lam. 3. 7. He
has made my chain heavy. Ver. 8. Also when I cry and shout, he shuts out
my prayers. Matthew. 15. 23. He answered her not a word. Verse 24. I am not sent
but to the lost sheep of Israel. Ver. 26. It is not meet to take the childrens
bread, and cast it to dogs.

3. A third is, a sensible contradicting or denial of our requests; as Heztkiah
spoke, for peace I have great bitterness: So when we pray for peace in
conscience, then we feel more distress and trouble in conscience; and when we
pray against temptations, then we find more powerful and violent temptations;
and when we pray for deliverance from sin, we then feel more strong assaults
and turbulent motions of sin.

4. A fourth is, when Gods dealings of providence seem quite opposite to his
undertakings in his promise. Judges 6. 12. The Lord is with thee thou mighty
man of valor, said the Angel to Gideon. Ver. 13. And Gideon said unto him, If
the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where are all his
miracles which our forefathers told us of? Did not the Lord bring us out of
Egypt? but now the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us into the hand of the
Midianices, neither have thou delivered thy people at all, Exodus 5. 23. And so
David, to whom God promised a Kingdom, but instead thereof, he was banished
the Kingdom, and his life was sought for, and pursued by Saul; whereupon he
concludes instantly that all men are liars, Psalm. 116. 11. In all these cases
(and many more) we are very apt to be discouraged, and to question (at least)
the surenesse of Gods Covenant, and to cry out with David, Psalm. 77. 7. Will
the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? Ver. 8. Is his
mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Ver. 9. Has
God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?
Nevertheless, notwithstanding all these contigencies, and seeming
contrarieties, and manifold delays, and strange dealings of God with his
people, his Covenant with them is sure, and it shall certainly be performed; as
no work of man, so no work of God does or shall frustrate the Covenant of God
with his people.

Therefore for the better support of your hearts under all these dealings of
God with you, carefully remember a few positions.

1. They are trials of our faith, but no testimonies of Gods unfaithfulness;
He that sits in darkness, and sees no light, let him trust in the Name of the
Lord, and stay himself upon the God of Jacob, Isa. 50. 10. We think that we
dare to rely on the word of promise, as a truth of God, as a sure word which
will not fail us. Now God by these contrary dealings, tries the faith of his
servants; there is still my promise to hear, and to do you good, and here to
your sense and feeling is something directly contrary unto it; Can you in this
condition glorify my good and faithful Word? Though all these clouds arise,
yet the Sun will break forth; though all this befalls me, I shall yet see him
to be the help of my countenance, and my God; his Word is a tried Word, I will
not fail; God who cannot lie has promised: Though he kill me, yet will I trust
in him, Job 13. 15. why, Beloved! this is one principal end of Gods dealing
with us, in ways contrary to his promises, namely, to try and to demonstrate
what our faith is in his promises.

2. They are reasons of our patience, but no characters of Gods change; be ye
followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises, says
the Apostle in Heb. 6. 12. God is pleased to hide himself from our prayers, and
seems to neglect them, in this he tries our faith; and God is pleased many
times to delay his answers, in this he exercises our patience; he will be
acknowledged not only as a good God, but also as a wise God, and his delays are
not his denials, but only his trials, and therefore hear himself speaking in
this case, Hab. 2. 3. The Vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end
it shall speak and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will
surely come, it will not tarry, Micah 7. 7. I will wait for the God of my
salvation, my God will hear me.

3. They are discoveries of many men's hypocrisy, but no evidences of Gods
mutability; You shall have a company of men boast of their strong faith in God,
and of their great love to God, and how they trust in him with all their
hearts; this they speak in the days of their prosperity; but let the Lord put
forth his hand upon them, let him but blast their Jonah's Guord, let him cut
off those arms of flesh upon which indeed they do depend, let him but break
down their creature-supports, and comforts, and hopes, and hold out never so
many suitable and faithful promises; why, they have no hopes; a word of promise
is of no life or support at all unto them: This evil is of the Lord, why should
I wait for the Lord any longer? said that wicked Prince in 2 Kings 6. 33.
Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him, Hab. 2. 4.

4. They are many times the displayings of the best men's infirmities, but no
tokens of any uncertainty in Gods Covenant: The best men though they may attain
to the knowledge of the truth of that grace in their hearts, yet they may be
much deceived as to the measure and strength of that grace; and as many other
things can declare this unto them, so do these delays and respites, and
contrary dealings of God, much, very much show it: Alas, what expressions (in
such cases.) have fallen from the lips of precious men? what complaints? what
impatience? what charges of God himself? what disputes? what exceeding
weaknesses? Psalm. 116. 11. I said in mine haste All men are liars; thus David
in that condition. Jer. 15. 18. Will thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and
as waters that fail? what a sad expression is this? Jonah 4. 3. Take away I
beseech thee my life from me, for it is better for me to dye than to live.
Verse 9. I do well to be angry, even unto death. Job 3. 3. Let the day perish
wherein I was born, and the night wherein it was said there is a man-child
conc^ived, etc.

You see what strange weaknesses God does discover in the hearts of his own
people by delays, by his dealings with them in ways sensibly contrary to his
promises, by which they come more fully to know themselves, and to be humbled
before him, and to seek unto him for more assistance; and notwithstanding all
this, yet the Covenant of God is sure to his people, he will yet perform all
the good which he promises unto them, though under all this they may discern
their own weaknesses and unworthiness.

5. They do serve for the greater demonstration of his truth, and are no
diminutions of it at all; that notwithstanding all visibly contrary workings,
and notwithstanding all the fears and doubtings, and contrary opinions of his
own servants, yet God will be true, though every man be a liar; his word shall
stand, and his Covenant be found true and sure, Psalm. 31. 22. I said in my
haste I am cut off from before thine eyes; nevertheless thou heardest the
voice of my supplications when I cried unto thee.

4. Then be upright, do not use any indirect ways or sinful shufflings; what
Be upright.
need of these? the Covenant contains as much good as you need, and it is sure
for the performance of all, Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, so
shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. Ver. 4. Delight thy
self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desire of thine heart. Ver.
5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass.

SECT. VIII.
8. THe eighth property of this Covenant is this, It is the last Covenant, it
It is the last Covenant. It succeeds a former Covenant.
may be called the last Covenant in a twofold respect.

1. Because it succeds a former Covenant, and removes it; See Heb. 8. 13. In
that he says a new Covenant, he has made the first old; now that which
decays, and waxes old, is ready to vanish away.

2. Because no Covenant shall ever succeed this; If any Covenant should succeed
No Covenant shall ever succeed it.
this, it must be a Covenant either of works, or of grace; not a Covenant of
works, for that would bring us all under a curse, and make our condition
utterly desperate; nor a Covenant of grace, because more grace cannot be shown
in any other Covenant than in this; here is all grace, and all mercy, and Jesus
Christ with all his righteousness, Mediatorship, merit, purchase; this
Covenant is so perfect, and is so every way accommodated to the condition of
sinners, that nothing can be altered, nor can be added, nor mended, therefore
it is the last Covenant.

O therefore take heed what you do; stand not off, refuse not to come into this
Covenant, sin not against this Covenant, for that he offers it no more, it is
the last Covenant; no hope, no mercy, no love, no Christ, no acceptance, no
life but in this.

SECT. IX.
9. THe ninth property of this Covenant is, It is an everlasting Covenant; so
It is an everlasting Covenant.
the Text, I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, Isa. 55. 3. Incline
your ear and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live, And I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Genesis 17. 7. I
will stablish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, for an
everlasting Covenant, to be God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. 2 Samuel
23. 5. He has m^de with me an ^verlasting Covenant, etc. Psalm. 105. 9. Which
Cov^nant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac. Ver. 10. And confirm^d
the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting Cov^nant. Isa.
61. 8. I w^ll dir^ct their work in truth, and I w^ll make an everlasting
Covenant with them. Jer. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them
that I w^ll not t^rn away from them to do them good. Heb. 13. 20. Through the
blood of the everlasting Covenant. Hosea 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto me for
ever. Psalm. 48. 14. This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide
ev^n unto death.

All the things of the Covenant are styled everlasting, viz. All the things of
the Covenant are styled everlasting.


1. God is an everlasting God, Romans 16. 26. 2. Jesus Christ is the everlasting
Father, Isa. 9. 6. And a Priest for ever, Heb. 6. 20. 3. The Holy Ghost is the
eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. and he abides with us for ever, John 14. 16. 4. The
mercy of God is everlasting, Psalm. 100. 5. his mercy is everlasting; and Psalm.
103. 17. it is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him; and
Psalm. 136. from verse 1. to 26. six and twenty times it is there said, his
mercy endures for ever. 5. The goodness of God is everlasting, it endures
continually, Psalm. 52. 1. 6. The love of God is an everlasting love; Jer. 31.
33. I have loved thee with an everlasting love. 7. The kindness of God is
everlasting, Isaiah 54. 8. with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. 8. The righteousness of the Covenant is an
everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. 9. The forgiveness in the Covenant is
everlasting, Jerem. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember
their sins no more. Micah 7. 9. Thou will cast all their sins into the
depth of the Sea. 10. The grace or holiness of the Covenant is everlasting; it
is called abiding seed, 1 John 3. 9. and the immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. being
born ag^in, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible; it is living water,
John 4. 10. springing up to everlasting life, ver. 14. 11. The joy of it is
everlasting, Isa. 51. 11. and none shall take it from us, John 16. 22. 12. So
is the Consolation of the Covenant, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. Who has given us
everlasting Consolation and good hope throu^h grace. 13. The life of the
Covenant is everlasting J^hn 3. 16. he that believes shall not perish, but have
everlasting life; 1 John 2. 25. This is the promise which he has promised us,
even eternal life.
For the opening of this excellent and comfortable adjunct of the Covenant,
remember,

1. That the word everlasting has two acceptions; it does denote; The word
everlasting a^e^ for A^ong duration. A perpetual duration. This Covenant is
everlasting.


1. Sometimes a long duration; in which respect the old Covenant clothed with
figures and ceremonies, is called everlasting, because it was to endure, and
did endure a long time.

2. Sometimes a perpetual duration, and a duration which shall last for ever;
in this respect the new Covenant is everlasting; it shall never cease, never be
broken, never be altered.

2. And it is an everlasting Covenant in a twofold respect.

1. Ex part faederantis, in respect of God, who will never break Covenant In
respect of God.
with his people, but is their God, and will be their God for ever and ever.

2. Ex part confaederatorum, in respect of the people of God, who are brought
In respect of his people.
into Covenant, and shall continue in Covenant for ever and ever; you have both
these expressed in Jer. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them,
that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in
their hearts that they shall not depart from me. Mark the place, it shows that
the Covenant is everlasting on Gods part, and also on our part; on Gods part, I
will never turn away from them to do them good; and on our part, They shall
never depart from me; how so? I will put my fear in their hearts that they
shall not depart from me, (even that fear spoken of in ver. 39. that they may
fear me for ever)

There are three things which I would deliver concerning the everlastingnesse
of the Covenant.

1. Some clear demonstrations of it from the Scripture. 2. The reasons why the
Covenant of grace is and must be everlasting. 3. Some useful applications of
this unto our selves.
1. The demonstrations of the everlastingnesse of the Covenant, in respect of
the The everlastingnesse of the Covenant demonstrated. From the consideration
of God himself in relation to his people. The election of God.
people in Covenant; I shall present unto you four arguments to demonstrate
that it is so.

1. The first argument I will take from the consideration of God himself in
relation unto his people, as (1. his election of them) 2. His love to them. 3.
His power for them. 4. (His presence with them) 5. His promises to them.

1. The election of God, all the people in the Covenant are the elect of God;
thine they were, and thou gave them me, says Christ, John 17. 6. As many as
were ordained to eternal life believed, Acts 13. 48.

Now there are three things in election.

1. It is a gracious decree not depending on any forinsecal causes. 2. It is an
unalterable decree, not raised on any mutable causes. 3. It is an effectual
decree, letting forth and communicating all the things which will infallibly
bring unto salvation; Romans 8. 30. Whom he did predestinate; which if it be so,
then certainly the Covenant is everlasting, forasmuch as everlasting life, and
all that conduces thereunto is unalterably decreed in Gods election, and from
that effectually communicated unto all in Covenant.
2. The love of God; that God does love his people, is most clear in the
Scriptures; The love of God. After what manner God loves his people. As he
loves Jesus Christ.
but after what manner does he love them? we read five things of Gods love to
his.

1. That God does love his people after the same manner that he loves Jesus
Christ himself, and with the same love. John 17. 23. That the world may know
that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. Ver. 26. I
have declared unto them thy Name, that the love wherewith thou have loved me,
may be in them, and I in them.

2. That God does love his people with an insuperable, and with and inseparable
With an insuperable and inseparable love.
love. Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or perils,
or sword? Ver. 37. Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through
him that loved us. Ver. 38. I am persuaded that neither death nor life, n^r
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come:
Ver. 39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

3. That God does love his people with a most gracious love, with a love With a
most gracious love.
kindled only from love. Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. The Lord did set his love upon you,
because the Lord loved you. Hosea 14. 4. I will love them freely, that is, upon
the sole account and reason of my own love unto them; yea, his love was the
only impulsive cause why he entered into Covenant with them, and by oath engaged
himself unto them; Ezekiel. 16. 8. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon
thee, behold thy time was the time of love, and I swear unto thee, and entered
into Covenant with thee says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.

4. That the Lord does love his people with a most tender love; therefore he is
With a most tender love.
said to betroth them unto himself in loving kindness, and in mercies, Hosea
2. 19. Loving kindness is a most affectionate love, and mercies are tender
bowels of love; his love is more tender than the tenderest love of the mother
to her sucking child, Isa. 49. 15. yea, his love is such to his people, that
he delights in them, Isa. 62. 4. and rejoices over them, ver. 5. and does rest
in his love, Zeph. 3. 17.

5. That the Lord does love his people with a love from everlasting, With a
love from everlasting to everlasting.
and to everlasting. Jer. 31. 3. Yea, I have loved them with an everlasting
love. Hosea 2. 19. I will marry thee unto my self for ever in loving kindness.

Certainly the Covenant 'twixt God and his people must hold and continue for
ever, it must last for ever, where there is such a love of God to his people,
viz. such a love to them as to Christ himself; such a love from which nothing
shall be able to separate; such a love as depends only upon his own love, and
which is so tender, and so affectionate, and is everlasting. If a Covenant made
only by love, and if a people brought into that Covenant only by love, and
loved at such a rate and height, even to the giving of the Son of God to save
them; I say, if yet such a Covenant may be broken, and if such a people may be
cast off, then is the truest and faithfullest love, and bond never to be
trusted more, neither can be sure, if this love be not sure.

3. The power of God in relation to his people in Covenant, which is a securing
The power of God, which is A securing power.
and preserving power.

1. A securing power; it secures their union with, and relation unto Christ,
and that for ever; peruse that excellent place in John 10. 27. My sheep hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me. Ver. 28. And I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out
of my hand. Ver. 29. My Father which gave them me is greater than all, and no
man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand: Here is a description of such
as are believers, and are in Covenant, (they are called the Sheep of Christ)
and such as he knows and owns to be so, and they hear his voice and follow him;
here is also a description of their sure and safe condition, they shall never
perish, they shall never be parted from Christ, ver. 28. and here is a
description of the cause or reason thereof, viz. the greatness of the power of
God, (He is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my hands)
as if he had said, If these should miss of heaven, and if these should perish,
it must be for want of power in me, that I am not able to keep them; some other
power there must be which is stronger than the power of God, by whose hand they
are held and kept; but my Father is greater than all, and none is able to pluck
them out of his hands, therefore they shall never perish, but they shall have
eternal life; and if so, then the Covenant 'twixt God and his people is an
everlasting Covenant.

2. A preserving power, that God preserves his people, the Scripture does
abundantly A preserving power.
testify unto us, and if I can make it evident that he by his power preserves
them unto everlasting glory, I think then that the everlastingnesse of the
Covenant will appear unto you; and for that see 1 Pet. 1. 5. who are kept by
the power of God through faith unto salvation: Mark, he speaks of the people,
(whom ver. 2. he calls the elect of God the Father, and sanctified by the
Spirit; and ver. 3. begotten again) and of those he says that they are kept;
by what power? by the power of God; by what means? through faith; unto what?
unto salvation, until they come to receive that incorruptible and undefiled
inheritance that fades not away, which is reserved in heaven for them, ver. 3.
2 Timothy 4. 18. The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve
me to his heavenly Kingdom. 2 Thessalonians. 5. 23. I pray God your whole spirit and
soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Ver. 24. Faithful is he that call^th you, who also will do it: why,
what can more clearly demonstrate the everlastingnesse of the Covenant with the
people of God than this? that they are kept by the power of God unto salvation;
that they are preserved unto his heavenly Kingdom; that God will preserve
their whole spirit, and their whole soul, and their whole body blameless unto
the coming of Christ.

4. The presence of God with his people; he is so present with his people, The
presence of God with his people.
that he is said to be nigh unto them, and to be with them; and to go along
with them, and to hold them in his hand, and to hold their hand, and to bear
them up, nay, so as to dwell in them, and walk in them; and this presence it is
a watchful presence: Isa. 27. 3. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every
moment lest any hurt it; I will keep it night and day; and it is such a
powerful presence, you need no other, and no more but Gods presence; if he be
with you, who can be against you? I will tell you, Gods presence is enough to
comfort you, and it is enough to strengthen you, and it is enough to uphold
you, and it is enough to raise you, and it is enough to protect you, and it is
enough to save you: If God be present with your hearts, this is enough to make
your graces to act: If God be present with your graces, this is enough to
strengthen them, and enough to preserve them. Now God is present with every one
of his people, as to their bodies, as to their souls, as to their graces, and
in a special manner, and for ever; I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee;
the Lord is round about his people for evermore, etc.

5. The promises of God; these also do clear the everlastingnesse The promises
of God. God promises to work in his people, what m^kes them st^dfast as A real
work of grace.
of the Covenant, which I shall show unto you in six particulars.

1. God does promise to work in his people whatsoever conduces (on their part)
to the perpetuity or everlastingnesse of the Covenant. There are five things
which will make us steadfast and firm in Covenant.

1. One is a real work of grace on the heart; (when the heart is indeed changed
or renewed) though counterfeit grace will fail, yet real grace is permanent:
And God has promised this unto his people, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart will I
give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you.

2. Another is a sincere heart; though hypocrisy be vanishing, yet sincerity A
sincere heart.
will continue; there is faithfulness and steadfastness in sincerity, and God
has promised to give this heart unto his people, Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will give
them one heart, and one way, Zach. 8. 3. Jerusalem shall be called a City of
truth; and ver. 8. They shall be my people, and I will be their God in truth
and righteousness. Isa. 1. 22. Then shall thou be called the City of
righteousness, the faithful City.

3. A third is entire and exceeding love; this will hold out unto the death;
yea Entire love.
it is stronger than death; and this has God also promised to give his people.
Deuteronomy 30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart
of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul.

4. A fourth is the fear of himself (which is the beginning of wisdom, and The
fear of God.
the deliverance from sin) this also God promises to give unto his people in
that Covenant. Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me.

5. A fifth is sound faith. 1. Of union. 2. Dependence; both these he Sound
faith.
promises. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Zion which cannot be
removed, but abides fast for ever. John 6. 45. They shall be all taught of
God; every man therefore that has heard and learned of the father comes to
me. Zeph. 3. 12. And they shall trust in the Name of the Lord. Hab. 2. 4. The
just shall live by his faith.

2. God does expressly promise to keep his people from falling away from him,
God promises to keep his people from falling.
and that he will never leave nor forsake them. 1 Samuel 12. 22. The Lord will
not forsake his people for his great Namesake, because it has pleased the
Lord to make you his people. Psalm. 37. 24. Though he fall, he shall not be
utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. Ver. 28. The Lord
forsakes not his Saints, they are preserved for ever. Psalm 94. 18. When I
said my foot slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up. Hosea 14. 4. I will heal
their backslidings. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. The Lord is faithful who shall stablish you.

3. God does expressly promise to strengthen and increase their grace; The
righteous God promises to strengthen and increase their grace.
shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and
stronger, Job 17. 9. The path of the just shall be as the shining light that
shines more and more unto the perfect day. Prove. 4. 18. He will make all grace
to abound; he will work in us to will and to do of his own good pleasure; Those
that are planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our
God; they shall still bring forth fruit in old age.

4. God does promise to confirm his people unto the end, and to finish the work
God promises to confirm his people to the end.
which he has begun in them. 1 Cor. 1. 8. He shall confirm you to the end,
that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus. Phil. 1. 6. Being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you,
will perform it (will perfect it) he will carry it on until the day of Jesus
Christ.

5. God does promise to break down all which might else cause his people to God
promises to overpower whatsoever may make, his people t^ break Covenant.
break off the Covenant; There are but five causes supposable for the breaking
off that Covenant on our part, and God removes every one of them from his
people.

1. One is the power of sin; but God has promised to subdue our iniquities,
Mic. 7. 19. And sin shall not have dominion over us, Romans 6. 14.

2. A second is the power of Satan; but God has promised, that he will not
suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but will with the temptation
also make a way to escape. 1 Cor. 10. 13. He has promised that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against his people. Matthew. 16. 18. He has promised,
that the seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. and that
he will bruise Satan under our feet, Romans 16. 20. and resist the devil, and he
shall fly from you, James 4. 7.

3. A third is the power of the world; but said Christ to his Disciples, John
16. 33. Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world; and 1 John 5. 4.
Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world; and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even over faith.

4. A fourth is the supposed liberty and inconstancy of man's will; that a man
(if he will) he may cast off his God, and give over to be one of his people;
but this God promises to remove, by giving of his own Spirit, which shall
cause us to walk in his Statutes, and to keep his Laws and to do them, Ezekiel
36. 27. and Jeremiah 32. 39. I will give them one heart, and one way, that they
may fear me for ever.

5. A supposition that God will substract or withdraw his grace from his
people; Neither shall this be; for the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance; so Romans 11. 29. And Mary has chosen the good part which shall not
be taken from her, Luke 10. 42.

2. A second Argument to demonstrate the everlastingnesse of the Covenant
'twixt God and his people, shall be taken from several considerations of Christ
From several considerations of Christ and believers.
and believers who are the people in Cov^nant.

1. Christ's suretiship. 2. Christ's Mediatorship. 3. Christ's union with them. 4.
Christ's love. 5. Christ's intercession. 6. Christ's promises and preparations for
them.

1. The suretiship of Christ; in Heb. 7. 22. Christ is said to be made a surety
The suretiship of Christ.
of a better Covenant; (so I conceive the word should be rendered, viz.
Covenant, and not Testament; for a surety is not of a Testament, but of a
Covenant) A surety is one who is engaged and stands bound for another, and is
responsable for him; as Judah for Benjamine, Genesis 43. 9. I will be surety for
him, of my hands shall they require him. And in matters of contract 'twixt
person and persons, a surety is taken in for this very end, That the contract
may be made sure and good, may not fail, but be truly and perfectly performed;
and the surety is a distinct person undertaking and engaging in the behalf of
him who is of himself the more weak and insufficient contractor. As to this
consideration, Christ is styled the surety of the Covenant, because he is a
third person engaged not so much for God, as unto God on our behalf, that all
that we are obliged for in Covenant unto God, shall be truly and faithfuly made
good and performed; He (as our surety) stands bound to fill us with those
graces, to give us those affections, and to supply us with such a sufficiency
of strength, as for ever to cleave unto the Lord in dependence and love, and to
walk before him in truth, and to serve him in holiness and righteousness all
out days.

2. The Mediatorship of Christ; you know that he is styled the Mediator of The
Mediatorship of Christ.
the Covenant, Heb. 12. 24. You know that this is one difference 'twixt the
Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace; that had no Mediator, but this
has; there God dealt with Adam as a righteous person, and Adam had no other
bottom and foundation for his standing, but his own created righteousness; as
long as he kept that, the Covenant remained; and when he lost that, the
Covenant was broken, for there was no Mediator to make up the breach. But now
for the Covenant of grace, there is a Mediator, upon whose shoulder the weight
of the Covenant rests; and as long as that Mediator lasts (which is for ever)
so long that Covenant of grace shall last; This Mediator is Jesus Christ, who
(as Mediator) does confirm the Covenant by satisfying for sin, and making
peace and reconciliation, not suffering any enmity and difference to remain
between God and his people; but he does (if I may so express it) keep up the
League 'twixt them both, by his merit with the Father, and by his Spirit with
believers; by his Priestly Office he establishes peace with God; and by his
Kingly Office he establishes the hearts of the children of God; his very
Office (as Mediator) is to unite God and us together, and to preserve that
union for ever; if at any time we sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
even Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins; and
when we are weak, he then puts out his strength to conquer temptations for us.

All these things considered, it is clear, that because of Christ's
Mediatorship, the Covenant of grace must be everlasting.

3. The union 'twixt Christ and the people of the Covenant. That there is an
The union betwixt Christ and his people.
union 'twixt Christ and believers, is most evident in Scripture; I am my
Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine, so the Church speaks of Christ, Cant. 6. 3.
in respect of which union, Christ and believers are styled the head and the
body, Ephesians. 1. 22. A foundation, and a building, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5.
A Vine and the branches, John 15. 5. A husband and wife, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Ephesians. 5.
32. And Christ dwells in us, and we in him, John 6. 54. He lives in us,
Galatians 2. 20. (Christ lives in me) and we live in him, Col. 3. 3.

This union 'twixt Christ and us, it has two properties.

It is,

1. Unio arcta, a very near union; so near is that union, that (in a
proportion) it does answer the union 'twixt Christ and God his Father (John 17.
22. That they may be one, even as we are one) and that we are entitled with the
very Name of Christ himself, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and that we are said to die with
Christ, and to live and rise with Christ; and our sufferings are styled his
sufferings, Col. 1. 24. and the persecution of Christians, the persecution of
Christ; Acts 9. 4, 5. Why persecutest thou me?

2. Firma, a very firm and lasting union; therefore our marriage with him, is
called an everlasting marriage, Hosea 2. 19. And Christ says of every believer
(who has union with him) that he dwells in him, John 6. 56. that he will not
lose him, ver. 39. that he has everlasting life, ver. 47. that he shall not
die, but live for ever, ver. 50, 51.

And indeed by virtue of this union with Christ, all believers do enjoy an
everlasting influence, and an everlasting communion with God in Christ, etc.

4. The love of Christ unto believers who are the people of God in Covenant,
The love of Christ unto believers.
the Scriptures are very high in the expression of it; John 15. 9. As the
Father has loved me, so have I loved you; continue ye in my love. Ephesians. 5. 2.
Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an
offering and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. Rev. 1. 5. Unto
him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. John 13. 1.
Having loved his own, he loved them to the end. Ephesians. 3. 19. The love of
Christ, which passes knowledge.

His love is a fruitful love, a watchful love, an entire love, a faithful love,
an helpful love, and a preserving and upholding love; is it imaginable that
Jesus Christ having so much love to die for his people that they might not
perish, will after that leave them unto themselves, that they may break the
Covenant, and so perish?

5. The prayers and intercession of Christ; the intercession of Christ is
everlasting; The prayers and Intercession of Christ.
He ever lives to make intercession; he is our Advocate who appears for us,
and our Intercessor who speaks for us; and his prayers and intercession do
prevail with the Father; Thou hear me always, Joh. 11. 42. Now you may read
of four Petitions which Christ did put up for his, for their constancy and
perseverance in the Covenant. Luke 22. 32. I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not. Joh. 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. Joh. 17. 11. Holy
Father, keep through thine own Name those that thou have given me. Ver. 20.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word. Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have
given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have
given me, before the foundation of the world.

6. Christ's promises and preparations, and what are these? Romans 8. 1. Th^re is
Christ's promises and preparations.
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Mark 16. 16. He that
believes shall be saved. John 3. 16. Whosoever believes in him shall not
perish, but have eternal life. John 14. 2. In my Fathers house are many
Mansions, I go to prepare a place for you.

7. I might add to all these the work of Christ on the hearts of believers, in
destroying The work of Christ on the hearts of believers.
the works of the devil, in crucifying of their lusts, in healing of their
natures, in quickening of their graces, in conquering of temptations, in
drawing out their affections, etc.

8. The titles of Christ. 1. Our Rock. 2. Our life. 3. Our peace. 4. Our hope.
The Titles of Christ.
5. Our Shepherd. 6. Our Father. 7. Our friend. 8. Our Brother. 9. Our Head.
10. Our Husband. 11. Our King. 12. Our Savior.

Verily the Covenant must needs be everlasting 'twixt us and our God, who have
such a Christ so engaged for us, so mediating for us, so strictly united to us,
so exceedingly loving of us, so continually watchful, and careful, and helpful,
ever loving, ever praying, ever helping, and resolved to save us.

3. A third Argument to demonstrate the everlastingnesse of the Covenant, shall
From the Spirit of God, which every one has who is in Covenant with God.
be taken from the Spirit of God, which every one has who is in Covenant with
God; Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within you.

Now there are ten works which the Spirit of God does for all the people of God.

1. He does change their hearts; 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord. 2. He does mortify their sinful lusts; Romans
8. 13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body. 3. He makes
known the things of God unto them, and teaches them all things; 1 Cor. 2. 10.
But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit. 1 John 2. 27. Teaches you of
all things. 4. He does powerfully enable them for all the works of obedience.
Ezekiel 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, and you shall keep my judgments, and do them. 5. He does dwell in
them. Romans 8. 11. and he dwells in them for ever. Joh. 14. 17. and dwelling in
them, he makes them a fit habitation for God, Ephesians. 2. 22. 6. He does guide and
lead them. Joh. 16. 13. The Spirit of truth, he will guide you into all truth.
Romans 8. 14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.
7. He does sustain or uphold them. Psalm. 51. 12. Uphold me with thy free
Spirit. 8. He helps them in their infirmities, Romans 8. 26. and supplies them,
Phil. 1. 19. 9. He bears witness that they are the children of God; and if
children, then heirs; Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 16,
17. 10. He Seals them unto the day of Redemption. Ephesians. 4. 30. and moreover
abides in their hearts; he is the earnest of their inheritance, until the
Redemption of the purchased possession.
4. A fourth Argument to demonstrate the everlastingnesse of the Covenant From
some considerations in the people of God. They are born again of incorruptible
seed. Partakers of the divine nature. They are the house built upon the Rock.
They are delivered from the power of darkness. Their hearts are set on God,
and only on him.
'twixt God and his people, shall have respect to some considerations in the
people of God.

1. They are born again; not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the
Word of God which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23.

2. They are partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and of the life of
Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 11.

3. They are the house built upon the Rock, which fell not, because it was
builded upon a Rock, Mat. 7. 25. and that Rock is Christ, who is a sure
foundation, Isa. 38. 16.

4. They are delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the
Kingdom of Christ, Colossians 1. 13. And his Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom; unto the Son he says, Thy Throne is for ever and ever, Heb. 1. 8.

5. Their hearts are superlatively set on God, and only on him; Whom have I in
heaven but thee? and there is none that I desire upon earth besides thee; God
is my portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 25, 26.

6. They are strenghthened with might by his Spirit, and rooted, and grounded
in They are strengthened with might. They are the Pillars in the Temple of God.
They are the inheritance of God.
love, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17.

7. They are the Pillars in the Temple of God, and shall go no more out,
Revelations 3. 12.

8. They are the inheritance of God, his portion, his peculiar treasure, and
purchased with the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 19. He would never pay so dear a
price for them, and then put them off; Isa. 49. 25. And Israel mine
Inheritance. Zach. 2. 12. The Lord shall inherit Judah his portion. Deuteronomy. 32.
9. The Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. Psamle
135. 4. The Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar
treasure.

9. The commands and ways, and communions with God, are no burdans to them;
The commands of God are not burdensome, but delightful to the^.
not grievous, because they are born of God and love him; 1 John 5. 3. But
pleasing and delightful. The Law of God is written in their hearts, Jer. 31.
33. Psalm. 119. 16. I will delight my self in thy Statutes. Ver. 24. Thy
Testimonies are my delight. Cant. 2. 3. I sat down under his shadow with great
delight, and his fruit was sweet unto my taste.

10. They hate evil, Psalm. 97. 10. and loath their abominations, Ezekiel They
hate evil.
36. and have crucified the flesh, with the lusts and affections thereof,
Galations 5.

11. They are a people who live by faith, and are much in prayer, that God They
live by faith, and are much in prayer.
would work all his works in them and for them, that he would not leave them,
nor forsake them; that he would preserve and uphold, and confirm, and stablish
them unto the end. They work out their own salvation with fear and trembling.

2. The reason why the Covenant which God makes with his people, is an
everlasting Reasons of it. In respect of God.
Covenant, and shall be so.

1. There are reasons for this in respect of God.

1. His Wisdom has contrived this Covenant in a way of everlastingnesse, His
wisdom.
which appears in three particulars. 1. He lays the foundation of it not upon
our selves, but Christ; not on our will and power, but on the power and
sufficiency of Jesus Christ. 2. He engages himself for himself, and for his
people, to keep them unto himself, and from falling, and to continue them to be
his people for ever; not only to give them grace, but to preserve that grace;
not only to begin a good work, but also to finish it. 3. He promises mercy
to pardon the sins of his people, and grace to heal their backslidings.

None of these were in the Covenant of works, and therefore that lasted not;
but all these are in the Covenant of grace, and therefore it is everlasting.

2. His purpose; his purpose in making of this Covenant was to exalt, and
glorify, His purpose.
and magnify the greatness of his love, and the riches of his grace and mercy
unto his people. Now there are four things which magnify God in these. First,
his graciousnesse, freely to make us to be his people. A second is his
goodness, in the plentiful blessing of his people. And thirdly his
faithfulness, that he will surely bless his people. And fourthly his
everlastingnesse, that he will never forsake his people, and never will turn
away from doing of them good.

Why, this exalts his mercy indeed that it endures for ever; and his love
indeed that it continues for ever; and his grace indeed, that as it is free, so
it is everlasting. In respect of his people. The everlastingnesse of the
Covenant, is a just reason of perfect thankfulness


2. There are reasons for this in respect of his people. I will mention a few
of them.

1. The everlastingnesse of the Covenant, is a just reason of full and perfect
thankfulness; Psalm. 100. 4. Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into
his Courts with praise; Be thankful unto him, and bless his Name. Verse 5. For
the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting. Psalm. 136. 1. O give thanks unto
the Lord, for h^ is good, for his mercy endures for ever.

2. His people have cause now to trust on him for ever. Isa. 26. 4. Trust ye in
His people have now cause to trust in him for ever.
the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. Psalm. 62.
8. Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your heart before him, God is
a refuge for us, Selah.

opinion is very false, which delivers out unto us such a Covenant of grace as
is mutable, and alterable, and may be broken off, and cease between God For
confutation of that opinion, that the Covenant is mutable, and alterable.
and his people.

That a man may be made a child of God, and yet may become the child of the
Devil; that he may be graffed into Christ, and yet may be broken off from
Christ; that he may have true faith and grace, and yet he may lose true faith
and grace; that he may find love and mercy from God, and yet may so sin, as
actually to forfeit (and that for ever) all the love and mercy of God.
Certainly this is a very sad assertion, that any person should be translated
from death to life, that he should be delivered from the power of Satan, and
translated into the Kingdom of Christ, that he should be effectually called,
and become a believer, and thereupon a Son of God, and heir of glory; that
he should for a while believe and rejoice in his God, and be sealed with the
holy Spirit of promise, and yet upon a sudden (notwithstanding all the love and
promises, and engagements of God unto him in Covenant) his Sun should set at
noonday, he and his God should part and be utter enemies again, that he should
cast off God from being his God: and God should forsake and cast him off from
being any of his people; and as it is a sad opinion, so it is an opinion
utterly inconsistent with this truth of the everlastingnesse of the Covenant of
grace. A relation which cease to be, that relation is not everlasting; and
that agreement or Covenant which is broken and frustrated, that Covenant is not
everlasting; to be temporary, and to be everlasting, are questionless,
inconsistent; neither will that evasion of a temporarinesse on our part, and
everlastingnesse of the Covenant on Gods part, any way patch up the business,
because there is no such Covenant of grace which God has made with his people.
Jer. 31. 31. Behold the days come, says the Lord, I will make a new Covenant
with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah. Ver. 32. Not according
to the Covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I took them by
the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which my Covenant they brake,
although I was an husband unto them, says the Lord; Mark the place, God makes
no such Covenant as shall be broken on our part, but such a Covenant as shall
hold and be kept on our part, as well as on his part; verse 33. But this shall
be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; after those days,
says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people, etc. And cap. 32.
40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

The principal (if not the only) ground of this breaking and falling opinion,
is a supposition of a power in the will of man, according to the pleasure and
use whereof, the Covenant of Gods grace must stand or fall, must continue or
break off.

And to speak plainly according to the Arminian doctrine, all the stability,
and state of a sinners salvation, is made to depend upon the will of a sinner;
the election of God, the conversion of a sinner, the beneficial Redemption by
Christ, the perseverance in Christ and grace; all of these do lie at the mercy
of the will of a poor sinner; and truly I must confess, that if the Covenant
of grace had no surer foundation then man's w^ll, it may quickly cease to be an
everlasting Covenant. But we read of other and better foundations (for the
perpetuity of this Covenant) th^n man's will; we read that it is grounded on the
immutable counsel of God, and on his absolute promises, and on his Oath, and on
the blood of Christ confirming and establishing of it, and on his power, and
intercession, and presence, and love, and Spirit, and faithfulness.

But as to the opinion of these men (which indeed is none other, but that of
the To state the stability of the Covenant upon the will of man,
Pelagians, and Papists, and Arminians) Give me favor to speak a few words.

1. It is very improbable that God would make a new Covenant with us, and state
the stability and everlastingnesse of it upon the will of us sinners; for
hereby,

1. There should be no difference (as to the ground of safety and certainty) Is
very improbable.
'twixt this Covenant of grace and that of works; for if Adam had improved the
power and liberty of his will, he had continued, and had enjoyed the life which
God promised unto him. Now wherein does the grace of this Covenant exceed the
other of Works, if eternal life be left unto the pleasure of our will, as
formerly it was to Adams?

2. Nay it should be harder, and more unsafe for us to be in the Covenant of
grace, than it was for Adam to be in the Covenant of works; because in that
condition Adams will was created with a perfect righteousness, and conformity,
and sufficiency to have continued in that Covenant; but we are fallen with him,
and have lost that perfectly inherent righteousness; and the grace which comes
in the room of it, is very weak and imperfect; so that as to the perpetuating
of the Covenant, we should be extremely disadvantaged in comparison of our
imperfect holiness, with his perfect righteousness; and thus we by grace
should have only a less power and strength to continue in Covenant with God,
than Adam had.

3. God undertakes more for our part in this Covenant, than he did for Adam in
that Covenant; for there he did give a sufficiency of righteousness, and so
left man unto himself; but here he does not only call us to be his people, and
give us grace to make us to be so, but also promises and engages his own
power, and his Christ, and the Spirit of grace to assist and uphold, and
preserve, and confirm, and stablish us unto the end.

Surely then it is not probable that he would leave the issue of so much mercy
and happiness to the power and sole pleasure of our own will.

4. That God should glory so much in making this Covenant with his people, and
please to speak so much of his great kindness, and riches of grace and mercy,
and of what he has done, and will do for them; and yet when all comes to all,
it is no more but this, if your will pleases, you shall enjoy all this.

2. It is very incongruous to make the Covenant thus to depend (for the
lastingnesse Is very incongruous.
of it) on the power and pleasure of man's will; it would rob Gods grace of all
the glory for our abiding in the Covenant; for as the sole blame would be ours,
if we did break the Covenant; so the sole praise and honor must be ours, if we
(by our own wills) do continue and perpetuate the Covenant; God will give this,
and will give that if we continue steadfast in his Covenant; and that
steadfastness depends only upon the power and pleasure of his will (God, say
they, no where promises that gift absolutely, but we must look for that in our
selves) And I beseech you now tell me, where the glory of our perseverance unto
glory must light; shall the grace of God have it? no, it is not the fruit or
work of Gods grace determining; then the man must have it, who did so manage
and stir, and improve his will as to hold out to the end; and thus by placing
the lastingnesse of the Covenant upon the power of man's will, the creature gets
away the glory from the Creator; and Gods grace which should reign in this
Covenant, must lose the Crown unto the supposed power and pleasure of man's will.

3. It is very uncomfortable to ground the lastingnesse of the Covenant upon It
is very uncomfortable.
the power and pleasure of man's will; for hence it will necessarily follow,
that you cannot (till the very last minute of your breathing) come to any
certain conclusion of your state in grace, nor of your portion in glory; Why
so? because it is in the power of your own will, whither you will stand or
fall, hold fast, or break off relation with God; it may be you will, it may be
you will not; perhaps your own corruptions may be too strong for you, or Satan's
temptations, or something from the world, and then your hearts fall off from
God, and you are lost for ever; so that it is impossible (by this doctrine)
ever to have any settled comfort, fixed peace, or steadfast hope; because all
the happiness of your estate is but conditional upon the good behavior of
your own wills, which is very changeable.

Obj. But therefore we will pray the more to God, that our wills may not be led
aside from him, but keep fast to him and his ways.

Sol. True, and this is indeed a direct course to stand fast in the Covenant;
but then consider, that this course will break the neck of that opinion which
makes the lastingnesse of the Covenant to depend upon the sole power and
pleasure of man's will.

For when you pray to God for his grace, and his strength, and his continued
presence, that you may (thereby) continue with him in Covenant, you do herein
deny your own power and sufficiency, and you do acknowledge that you are strong
in his strength, and not in your own might; and consequently that the
lastingnesse of the Covenant does not depend on the power of the will, but upon
the presence, and power, and assistance of his grace, and so fall in with us,
that the Covenant is everlasting; not in respect of man's will, but in respect
of Gods grace.

4. I will add one consideration more; it is not possible (I speak ex
hypothesi, It is impossible
in reference to the Will, and Power, and Truth of God revealed in the
Covenant) that the people of God really brought into Covenant with him, should
break off the Covenant with him, and so make it mutable and void on their part;
Suppose but this, that the Covenant shall not fail nor cease on Gods part
(that God will be but true to perform what he has promised unto his people) I
then affirm that it is not possible that the Covenant should fail on our
part; my reason is this, Because the full performance of the Covenant on Gods
part, does essentially and naturally include the performance of it on our part,
and prevents all breaking and voiding of the Covenant.

God in this Covenant does promise unto his people,

1. That he will be their God for ever. 2. That he will never cast them off. 3.
That he will never forsake them. 4. That nothing shall separate from his love.
5. That he will never turn away from them to do them good. 6. That if his
people transgress, he will visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquities with stripes; nevertheless his loving kindness he will not take
away from them, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail. 7. That he will be
merciful to their transgression, and will heal their backssiding. 8. That he
will give them his Spirit which shall cause them to walk in his Statutes, and
to do them. 9. That he will give them an heart to fear him for ever, and that
he will put his fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from him.
10. That he will confirm his people unto the end, and that he will perform or
perfect the good work which he has begun in them, until the day of Jesus
Christ: and that he will preserve their whole soul and body blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now I say, grant me but this supposition, That God will be faithful to make
good these promises unto his people (which the Scripture peremptorily says he
will, and that it is impossible for him to lie, Heb. 6. 18. and God who cannot
lie has promised, Titus 1. 2.) it will hence necessarily follow, That it is
impossible the Covenant should be broken, and made void by the people of God:
For upon the performance of these promises on Gods part, the Covenant comes to
be performed on his peoples part.

absolute and conditional promises. But



2. Secondly, what avail any conditional promises as to this case? what room
or place have they here, as if the Covenant should be everlasting, if it were
everlasting? or the people of God should still continue in Covenant, if they
did continue in Covenant, or as if God would give them an heart to fear him for
ever, if they did fear him for ever! or that they should never depart from him,
if they never did depart from him.

This Tautology is worse then his, Sub montibus illis Inquit erant and erant
sub montibus illis.

And thus by what I have delivered, it does manifestly appear that the Covenant
of Grace is not an alterable, fading, ceasing Covenant, but everlasting, both
in respect of God, and also in respect of the people of God.





The people of God have the laws of God written in their hearts, and their
hearts are circumcised to love the Lord their God, and they know their own self
weakness and insufficiency, and are taught to fear the Lord and his goodness,
and to live by faith, and to be watchful in Prayer, that so they may be
preserved from every evil way. Yea, and the more they are assured of the
immutability of Gods love, and of their relation unto him, the more are their
hearts knit in love unto him, the love of Christ constrains them, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
and the more conscienciously tender are they to walk in godly fear and
reverence, and in all well-pleasing before him, and to answer everlasting love
with everlasting love.

I now proceed to a second Use from this adjunct or property of the Covenant.
Is the Covenant which God makes with his people an everlasting Covenant? Then
Then happy are the people who are in this Covenant.
happy are the people who are in this Covenant.

Beloved, It is everlastingness which makes hell to be hell, and heaven to be
heaven: As the misery of misery lies in the lastingness, and everlastingness of
it, (and it will be thus dreadful, and it will be thus for ever and ever) so
the happiness of happiness lies in the everlastingness of it. This God is our
God for ever and ever. This makes the enjoyment of God to be a most happy
enjoyment: His mercy endures for ever, he loves us with an everlasting love; O
what happiness is this to be the children of love, and to be the people of
mercy for ever? Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever; this
is happiness indeed, that Jesus Christ is ours, and that we are his for
everlasting! everlastingness does include in it three Everlastingness includes
in it A privation of a contrary estate and relation for ever.
things.

1. One is a privation of a contrary estate, and of a contrary Relation for
ever: For if the estate or relation be changed, it cannot be everlasting: and
this shows the singular comfort and happiness of the people of God, that their
estate and relation shall never fall into a contrary estate and relation. They
are in the estate of life, and they shall never fall into the estate of death;
They are in the estate of salvation, and they shall never fall into the estate
of condemnation. They are the children of God, and the members of Christ, and
they shall never pass into a relation contrary to this: Because every
everlasting estate and relation is a perpetual absence or privation of a
contrary estate.

2. A second is, a continuation of the same being and relation: for whatsoever
is A continuation of the same being and relation.
everlasting that must continue, it must not be broken off? if it be broken
off, it is not everlasting.

O what a happiness is this that your Sun never sets; that your day still
continues, your God still continues, and still continues to be your God! your
God still loves you, and his love still continues toward you; Jesus Christ
still continues, and he continues still to be your Redemption, your
Righteousness, your Peace, and your salvation.

3. A third is, an endless perpetuity: you can never come to the end of
everlastingness: An endless perpetuity.
you may see an end of your worldly riches (they fly away) and you may see an
end of your friends (they die away) and you may see an end of your lives (man
dies and wastes away, and man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? Job 14.
10.) But you shall never see an end of the everlasting Covenant: Time is the
measure of all the world, but everlastingness is the measure of the Covenant of
Grace; as long as everlastingness lasts, and as far as everlastingness goes, so
long does the Covenant last, and so far does the Covenant extend.
Everlastingness has no end, and the everlasting Covenant has no end: why!
This heightens, and this sweetens the Covenant of grace! God is our God, and we
are his people to everlasting, without end: Though afflictions fall in, though
losses, though persecutions, though death it self, yet the Covenant goes on and
lasts. God is your portion for ever, he has married you to himself for ever in
loving kindness, and mercy, and judgment, and faithfulness.

O Christian, what can thou have more then to have God to be thy God? O
Christian! what would thou have more, then to have God to be thy God for
ever? A sure enjoyment, a perfect enjoyment, and an everlasting enjoyment:
These are the utmost of thy desires.

This may serve as a cordial to Gods people. Against their fears of falling
away from God. Object.
away from them.

1. The everlastingnesse of the Covenant is or should be a cordial unto the
people of God, against their fears of falling away from God.

How often do we hear these complaints; and doubts, and misgivings? Indeed the
Lord has showed me great mercy; He did not leave me to my sinful heart and
life, he did pity and call me, and brought me in to Christ, and made me one of
his people, who aforetime was none of his people! But I still find such a body
of sin, such a law in my members warring against the Law of mind, so many
sinful corruptions within, and so many strong and violent temptation without,
and so much weakness and insufficency in my self, that fear I shall never hold
out unto the end, I shall one day fail, and loose all my interest in God, and
in Christ, and grace. Consider


To this sad complaint I would briefly speak three things. There is a twofold
fear.


1. There is a twofold fear: There is a a fear of unbelief, and this is a
vexing, and distressing, and disabling fear, it loosens our confidence in God,
and in his A fear of unbelief, this is to be resiste^.
promises: It is a naughty fear, and beware of it, and resist it, and bewail
it: And there is a fear of tenderness and jealousy, in regard of the Natural
deceitfulness of our own hearts, and of the supernatural weakness of our own
strength, this is a A fear of tenderness and jealousy, is good.
good fear; and blessed is the man that thus fears always: The weak child
fears, and thereupon cries out to the Parent to take him, to hold him, to
support him, and by his fear of falling he is preserved from falling. So the
child of God fears, and thereupon he cries out unto his God! Lord help thy
servant! forsake me not, make haste to deliver me! keep me, who cannot keep my
self; establish my goings, Thou have promised to keep and preserve the feet of
thy Saints; This fear is that fear which God has promised to put into the
hearts of his people that they shall not depart from him; And indeed this fear
is their strength; the more of this fear, the more safe they are. Let him that
stands take heed lest he fall; Thou stand by faith, Be not high-minded but
fear, work out your salvation with fear and trembling?

2. Your standing or continuing in the Covenant, does not depend upon your own
Our standing does not depend upon our own strength.
strength, nor does God leave you unto that, but it does depend on his
strength, and on his power, Ephesians. 3. 16. That he would grant you (according to
the riches of his grace) to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man, Mic. 4. 5. We will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and
ever, Zach. 10. 12. I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up
and down in his name, says the Lord: Though your strength be insufficient, yet
the strength of your God and of your Christ is sufficient for you. 1 Pet. 1. 5.
We are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. 2 Cor. 12. 9. My
grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness.

3. The Lord is able to keep you from falling, and to preserve you faultlesse
before The Lord is able to keep you from falling.
the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, Jude ver. 24. Nay and he will
keep you from falling: Wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling, Psalm. 56.
13. Thou have delivered my feet from falling, Psalm. 116. 8. He will keep the
feet of his saints, 1 Samuel 2. 9. When I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy, O
Lord, held me up, Psalm 94. 18.

2. The everlastingnesse of the Covenant should be a Cordial to the people of
God in the time of desertions, when they are apt to question whether God be not
Against desertion.
fallen off from them, and has forsaken them? But consult these Promises, and
you may find these fears removed, Isa. 49. 14. Zion said, The Lord has
forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. ver. 15. Can a woman forget her
sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea
they may forget, yet I will not forget thee. ver. 16. Behold, I have graven
thee upon the palms of my hands, Thy walls are continually before me. Isa. 54.
7. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I
gather thee. ver. 8. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment,
but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy
Redeemer. ver. 10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee.

bless God (and not your selves) for your standing, and for your continuing
inCovenant with him. Bless God and not your selves for your standing in
Covenant with him.


There are three things for which we should bless God. 1. For his restraining
grace. 2. For his converting grace. 3. For his confirming grace, that he will,
and does keep you steadfast to himself in Covenant.

O beloved! we could never keep our selves, nor establish our selves; were it
not for the goodness, and the power, and the love, and the faithfulness of our
God, we should break with God, and turn aside from him, and leave all: truly it
is almost a wonder that the people of God do hold out in keeping Covenant with
God, considering

1. The daily and frequent discouragements which they meet with in the world,
the continual scorns, and threats, and persecutions, and affronts to their
persons and godliness.

2. The manifold allurements, snares and temptations unto sin, and sinful
ways, by wicked example, and promises, and hopes, and connivencies:
wickedness in judgment, in practice, is a general infection; the common air
is infected with this plague; it is therefore the more hard to keep our health.

3. The malice of Satan and his power and subtilty is exceeding great: he
desires to sift and winnow us as wheat, he threw down the third part of the
Stars: he helped to break the first Covenant: There is not any one of the
people of God but may say of him as David of his enemies, Psalm. 118. 13. Thou
have thrust sore at me that I might fall, but the Lord helped me.

4. How strongly some of the people of God have been hazarded in the lasting
part of the Covenant? Solomon, Peter, Asa, insomuch as many from their falls
have erected the Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints.

5. Those many remaining Principles for inconstancy and failing: as spiritual
pride, unbelief, hypocrysie, and worldliness, much of every one of these still
in our hearts.

6. Add to all these the exceeding weakness in all our graces. How little
faith, how weak love, and how apt to be shaken, and offended! Truly we must
acknowledge that what we are, we are by the grace of God; and that if we be
strong, we are strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, and that it
is the Lord who keeps us by the strength of the Covenant to continue steadfast
and faithful to the end, etc.

abuse this sweet heavenly truth of the everlastingness of the Covenant twixt
God and his people; as therefore to venture upon great transgressions, and say
God will raise me again, and show me mercy again, for his covenant lasts for
Abuse not this sweet and heavenly truth.
ever, Let me do what I list, etc.

To such I would present a few words.

1. That of the Apostle in Romans 2. 2. Where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound. Psalm. 130. 4. There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be
feared. Romans 6. 1. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace
may abound? ver. 2, God forbid. This were indeed to turn the grace of God into
wantonness, as the Spider turns the sweet juice into poison.

2. That of the Apostle to the Church of the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4. 20. But you
have not so learned Christ. verse 21. if so be that you have heard him, and
have been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus.

3. Though the Covenant does last twixt God and his people for ever, yet there
are weighty Reasons for them to take heed of sinning against their God.

1. They do exceedingly dishonor their God by their sinning, and cause his
Name to be blasphemed, as Nathan charged it on David, 2 Samuel 12. 14.

2. They make an unkind return to their most kind God: Do you thus requite the
Lord, O foolish people and unwise: does this answer his love and goodness to
you, to choose you for his people before other people?

3. They do exceedingly grieve their God and Father. This, that the people of
his grace should deal thus with him, is a grief unto him, as he was grieved
with that generation forty years.

4. Though the Lord will not cast off his people when they do transgress, yet
he will visit their sins with stripes, Psalm. 89. 32. And those stripes may be
very sharp and heavy, as David found them; and though David did not break his
neck by his fall, yet David brake his bones, and a wounded Spirit who can bear?
Prove. 18. 14.

5. Though the union continue twixt God and his people, yet (upon their great
transgressions) the comfortable communion will be interrupted and darkened, they
shall lose the joy of their salvation, Psalm. 51. 12.

6. Though God will raise his people again, yet it will cost them dear for the
cure of their wounds and bruises, and to put their bones in joint again. They
shall know that it is an evil and bitter thing thus to sin against a God in
Covenant, etc. It may cost them many tears, and fears, and prayers, and
conflicts, and waitings, etc.

use all the means to continue the Use all means to continue in the Covenant.
Covenant in an everlastingnesse on their part: God works our lastingness in
the Covenant by means: You find in Scripture that Spiritual means are
subordinate to Spiritual ends, and that certainty of issues does take in a
necessity of means. The Covenant is everlasting; and that it may be so,
therefore does God put his people upon several ways and duties to perpetuate
the Covenant, and to assure themselves it shall be so.

There are ten things which if you carefully heed, you may be confident of the
everlastingness of the Covenant.

1. Keep up an humble fear; I will put my fear into their hearts, Jer. 32. 40.
Blessed is the man that fears always, Prove. 28. 14. Work out your salvation
with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. Fear your wants, crave supply, and grow
in faith.

2. Be adding of grace to grace, and give all diligence to make your Calling
and Election sure; for if you do these things you shall never fall, 2 Peter 1.
5, 10.

3. Strive after and keep up an exceeding love of your God, a superlative love;
This will keep you fast: Saw you him whom my soul loves? I found him whom my
soul loves, I held him fast, and would not let him go, Cant. 3. 3.

4. Keep your hearts with all diligence: Look to them, watch them still, be
mending of them, and minding of them; unite or join my heart unto thee said
David. Let them be much in meditating of the goodness of your God; love of your
God, kindness of your God. Take delight in God alone, and in his ways, as the
Wife in the Husband.

5. Be conscientiously diligent in attending upon the public Ordinances. 1
These. 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit, verse 20. Despise not Prophesying. Acts 20.
32. I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build
you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified: The
Ordinances are your strength. They 1. Give you a sight of Gods will and ways.
2. Keep up tenderness in conscience. 3. Open more fully the love of God unto
you. 4. Quicken your hearts. 5. Increase your faith. 6. Heal your corruptions.
7. Convey help from Christ. 8. Direct and establish your goings.

6. Be much in prayer, that you may be kept and held fast by God unto the end,
Psalm. 119. 8. I will keep thy Precepts, O forsake me not utterly. Verse 33.
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep them unto the end.
verse 116. Uphold me according to thy Word that I may live. verse 117. Hold
thou me up, and I shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy statutes
continually.

7. Remember Jesus Christ his love to you, his promise to you, and live by
faith upon him: Take hold of his strength, and then you shall walk up and down
and not faint. Remember that he is the Author and finisher of your faith.

8. If you offend never so little, return speedily to your God, and judge your
selves, and sue out for more grace, for more strength, for more sufficiency
from Christ; let not any enmity live, humble your souls and make peace.

9. Beware of Seducing and Erroneous Dectrines, do not affect to hear them:
Cease my son, (Prove. 19. 27.) to hear the instruction that causes to err from
the words of knowledge! Beware lest you also being led away with the error of
the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 17.

10. Get much experience of the exceeding love of God to you in Christ: Every
day get a sight of his gracious favor, and be often in the consideration, 1.
Of what he has done for you. 2. What he is to you. 3. What he will bestow on
you.

SECT. X.
10. A Tenth property of this Covenant is this, It is the best Covenant: Better
10. It is the best Covenant.
than any other Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. Jesus was made a surety of a better
Covenant. 8. 6. He is the Mediator of a better Covenant which was established
upon better promises. There is (you know) the first Covenant (the Covenant of
Works) and there is the second Covenant (the Covenant of Grace) which is
divided into the Old Covenant, and into the New Covenant: Now here I shall
briefly open two things unto you.

1. That the Covenant of grace which is the second Covenant, is a better
Covenant than the Covenant of Works which was the first Covenant.

2. That the New Covenant (under which we live) is a better Covenant then the
Old Covenant under which the Fathers did live.

1. The Covenant of grace is a better Covenant then the Covenant of Works: This
will appear if you do consider ten particulars. The Covenant of grace is a
better Covenant then that of works. It has a better foundation.


1. The Covenant of Grace has a better foundation than the Covenant of Works:
The foundation of the Covenant of works was that power of will and
righteousness wherewith Adam was created: he stood upon his own bottom, and was
left unto his own sufficiency, like the Prodigal child, Luke 15. he had all his
goods in his own hand. But the foundation of the Covenant of Grace is Jesus
Christ: he is the sure foundation-stone laid in this building, Isa. 28. 16. and
our salvation is laid upon one that is might, upon one who is able to keep, and
to save to the utmost: Not our strength, but Christ's strength; not our
undertaking, but Christ's undertaking; not our will, but Christ's Mediatorship
and Suretyship is the foundation of the Covenant of grace.

2. The Covenant of grace has better terms; All the Articles of it are
promises: nothing is there required of us, which is not promised unto us by
God: yea that It has better terms.
which was required in the first Covenant as a condition, is in this Covenant
turned into a promise, viz. Obedience to Gods Commandments, Heb. 8. 10. I will
put my Law into their minds, and write them in their hearts, And I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a people: And that which is required in
this Covenant as a condition, it is likewise promised, Joh. 6. 45. They shall
be all taught of God; every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of
the Father, comes unto me.

3. The Covenant of Grace has better admissions (I speak in respect of us) thn
It has better admissions.
the Covenant of Works. The Covenant of works would not admit any person
unless he were righteous and inherently righteous, and perfectly righeous:
(The Covenant of works was never made with the sinner, but with the righteous)
it condemns and casts out the sinner, but never does accept of him or let him
in. But the Covenant of grace does admit sinners: if any sinner be rightly
sensible of his sins, and of h^s wants, and imperfections, God calls out unto
him, Hearken It has more favorable proceedings with the parties brought into
Covenant
unto me and your souls shall live: And he that has no money, come buy and eat,
Isa. 55. 1, 3.

4. The Covenant of grace has more favorable proceedings with the parties
brought into Covenant, than the Covenant of Works: The Covenant of work is very
sharp and quick, the least transgression (therein) does undo the party (whether
of Omission or of Commission) Cursed is every one that does not continue in
every thing that is written in the law to do it, Gal. 3. 10. That one sin of
the Angels has undone them for ever. That one sin of Adam brought him under
the sentence of death.

The Covenant of Works had no mercy to show, it proceeded only in a way of
justice. But the Covenant of grace is not so strict and quick: it is a very
favorable Covenant: I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, says God,
Heb. 8. 12. And if any man sin; we have ^n Advocate with the Father, even Jesus
Christ the Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2.
If my people which are called by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray,
and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, Then I will hear from
heaven and forgive their sin, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.

5. The Covenant of grace has better promises; the Covenant of works (so far
as yet I do understand it) had but one grand promise annexed unto it, and that
It has the better promises.
promise also was but conditional, viz. A promise of life upon the condition of
fixed Obedience: life should be continued as long as obedience was continued.
(Do this and live) But the Covenant of grace contains better promises, and more
promises; it does contain a promise of life upon better conditions than that of
working: Life is promised upon believing (Believe and thou shall be saved) and
besides that, it contains promises of all the things that shall bring us unto
that life; promises of holiness, promises of strength, promises of
perseverance in grace: And promises against all the things which might break us
off from the Covenant, and from the fruition of promised life and salvation.

6. The Covenant of grace is more indulgent than the Covenant of works: Those
services which will not be accepted in a Covenant of works, will yet It is more
indulgent.
be accepted in a Covenant of Grace: The Covenant of works does so insist upon
works, that the least mixture of diminution, or imperfection, renders the work
incapable and distastful: the work must be in every regard perfect, for matter,
and manner, and measure, or else (as to that Covenant) it was faulty, and
rejected. But this is not in the Covenant of Grace: weakness in working, and
imperfection of service shall not be rejected. The day of small things is not
despised: The bruised Reed shall not be broken, The smoking flax shall not be
quenched: I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him,
says God in Mal. 3. 17. If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.
12. Unto this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
spirit, and trembles at my word. I have seen thy tears, said God of Hezekiah,
Isa. 38. 5. Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from
thee, Psalm. 38. 9.

7. The Covenant of grace affords better pleas than the Covenant of works. If a
person offend against the Covenant of works, his mouth is stopped, and he can It
affords better pleas.
plead nothing on his own behalf, nothing at all to stay the hand of justice
against him.

But if one sins against the Covenant of Grace, he has yet something to plead
for himself, why God should not reject and destroy him: There are four things
which he can plead.

One is his Relation, yet thou art our Father, and we are thy people.

A second is, the merciful nature of God, ready to show mercy, and to multiply
pardon.

A third is, the death of Christ, he shed his blood to make our peace, and to
slay all enmity.

A fourth is, the very Covenant it self, wherein God has promised that he will
not cast away, and that he will heal and forgive the backslidings of his
people, and though he will chastise them, yet he will not forsake them.

8. The Covenant of grace gives a better estate then the Covenant of works: It
gives a better estate.
we have a better estate by this, then we had, or could have by that.

It Is true, That Adam in innocence enjoyed a larger measure of knowledge, and
righteousness, and had also free communion with God, without fear, and had
dominion over the creatures. But yet he had not knowledge of God in Christ: nor
any communion with God through Christ, nor had he any manifestations of the
glories of the Gospel by the Spirit of Christ; and besides all this, whatsoever
enjoyments Adam had which might make up a happy estate unto him, yet all that
enjoyment was mutable and contingent: But now in and by the Covenant of Grace,
our enjoyments are higher, and they are also surer.

1. They are higher, for now we enjoy God, not only as a Creator, but as a
Father: Our enjoyments are higher.
we enjoy him a merciful, and gracious, and abundant in goodness and truth:
and we enjoy Jesus Christ in a way of union with his person (being bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5. 30.) and in a
way of communion in his death, and life, and victories, and purchases: and we
enjoy the very Spirit of Christ, as to all his graces, and comforts, and
assurances.

2. They are surer; he enjoyed God, so as yet he lost his God: he enjoyed
righteousness, Surer.
so as yet he lost his righteousness; and dominion, so as he lost that
dominion; and had it not been for Christ (who was immediately promised after
the fall) he had never found his God again, nor a righteousness again, nor any
right of dominion again: but in the Covenant of grace all is sure, and stable,
and permanent: God is our God for ever, and we continue his people for ever:
Christ is our Head, and we are his Members for ever: we enjoy the Spirit, and
he abides in us for ever. The Covenant of grace is a better Covenant then that
of works, It is better in the way and cause of Remuneration.
as to the way and cause of Remuneration.

In a Covenant of works you must earn your wages before you must be paid your
wages: your own doing is the price of your receiving, and your reward is as
your work is; nothing is there expected as a bounty, and gift, but all runs
there as debt and wages: Adam could never pray under this Covenant, Lord
receive me graciously, do me good freely for thy mercies sake: But it is not
thus in the Covenant of grace, where he that deserves nothing, may yet receive
all: and the unworthy sinner does yet attain to the most excellent mercies
(upon the sole account of the riches of Gods grace in Christ) In the Covenant
of grace God does not reward us according to our ill deeds, nor does he reward
us for our good deeds. But he freely pardons the ill works of his people, and
does them all good, not for their goodness, but for his own goodnesse-sake.

In the Covenant of works you come to God, saying, Lord! This I have done,
therefore bless me:

In the Covenant of grace, you come to God, saying, Lord! This I need, and this
thou have promised, O give it me, not for my sake, but for thy truths sake, and
for thy Christ's sake: freely love me, freely accept of me, freely own, and
bless me; I can show no deserts of mine, but I can show unto thee thine own
promises: I can find enough in my self why thou should abhor and curse me,
and yet I find enough in thy self and Covenant why thou may embrace and
help me.

10. The Covenant of grace is a better Covenant than that of works in respect
of a double efficacy. 1. Of helping recovery. 2. Of saving virtue. It is better
in respect of a double efficacy. Of helping recovery.


1. The Covenant of works never did afford help to recover any one sinner: As
that Commander spoke of the Watchman whom he found asleep (and therefore ran
him through with his sword) I found him dead and left him dead: That we may say
of the Covenant of works, It finds us dead in sins and in trespasses, and it
leaves us dead in our sins and trespasses: there is no balm for our wounds in
that Covenant: But the Covenant of Grace, this does help and restore sinners;
it is the ministry of Life and Grace, and Peace: But God (says the Apostle in
Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.) who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved
us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ: And
1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God. And Romans 5. 8. God commends his love toward us, in that whiles we were
yet sinners, Christ died for us. verse 9. Much more then being now justified by
his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.

2. The Covenant of works did never save any righteous person. What saving Of
saving virtue.
power might be found from it upon a supposition of Adams standing, I dispute
not; but this I say, There never was any one person saved actually by the
Covenant of works: But yet the Covenant of Grace does save all Believers. Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Whosoever believes
in him, shall not perish but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 15. We believe that
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved even as they.
Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace ye are saved through faith. 1 Pet. 1. 9. Receiving the
end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. Thus you see that the
Covenant of grace is the best Covenant, in comparison of the Covenant of works.

How great then is their sin who refuse this Covenant, Then how great is their
sin who refuse this Covenant!
and to come into this Covenant? The greater that any mercy is, our sin is
therefore the greater to refuse that mercy. O beloved! whence is it that many
of your hearts are still hardened? whence is it that you love darkness rather
then light? why do you not hearken to this Covenant? whence is it that for
lying vanities, you forsake your own mercies!

1. Are you not sinners?

2. Do not sinners need mercy?

3. Can mercy be found anywhere but in this Covenant of mercy? or peace
anywhere, but in the Covenant of peace? or life anywhere but in the Covenant of
life?

4. And does not this Covenant hold out mercy unto you? yea the best mercy! and
upon the best terms! The other Covenant affords you no mercy, it easts you off,
it condemns you to death and wrath. And this Covenant yet offers you mercy, and
life, and salvation; and no Covenant but this does so. What, and yet to refuse
to come into it? surely either you know not that you are sinners, and what will
befall you for your sins, or else you are desperately wicked to slight and
refuse the mercy and grace of God in this Covenant. Ezekiel. 24. 13. Because I
would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from
thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. So may
the Lord say unto some of us, Because I would have showed you mercy, but you
would not accept of mercy, therefore you shall never have mercy. And because I
would have taken you into Covenant, and you would not come into my Covenant of
grace, and life, and peace, I will never be a merciful God to you, nor a
gracious God to you: but you shall dye in your sins and perish for ever, Heb.
2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? (Heb. 12. 25. See
that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not who refused him
that spoke on earth; Then how injurious are many brokenhearted sinners to God
and themselves!
much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from
heaven.)

Is the Covenant of Grace the best Covenant? (better then any other Covenant
which God made with man?) Then how injurious are many brokenhearted sinners,
both unto themselves and unto God! who lay the Covenant of grace so low, and
impose such opinions upon it, as if there were no difference twixt a Covenant
of grace and a Covenant of works. Surely it is either temptation which lies
upon them, or ignorance, or unbelief, that they thus stand off, and fear, and
dispute, and except, and question, and many times conclude against all
encouragements to be taken into this Covenant, and there to find mercy, and
rest for their souls: truly they do many times turn the Covenant of Grace
into a very Covenant of Works.

O but there is no mercy to be had!

O but not for such great sins!

O but for me! O but I can deserve nothing! and bring nothing! O but the
sentence is past against me! O but I have nothing to make my peace! And thus
they make the Covenant of Grace, a very Covenant of Works; no better then so; a
Covenant without mercy, without grace, without a Mediator, without a tender
compassionate God and Father; no City of refuge at all, nor help to the poor
sinner at all: And when they are convinced of mercy in it, and possible
reception into it, yet they think that God will not come off to this but upon
very hard and difficult terms, usually annexing the Legal condition to the
promises of the Covenant of Grace.

Why sirs! what do you mean thus to wrong God, and his Covenant, and your
distressed souls?

Either there is a Covenant of Grace, or there is not; either that Covenant of
Grace is a better Covenant than the Covenant of works, or it is not. If it be a
better Covenant, then the fallen and undone sinner may find relief there, and
help there, which he could not find in the Covenant of Works; for if the
sinner can be no more relieved by this than by that Covenant; it is then no
better Covenant. And now see what a slurre you cast upon the wisdom of God,
and upon the goodness of God, and upon Jesus Christ, and upon all the promises
of God: O distressed sinner! If the merciful God, if the gracious God, if the
giving God, if the forgiving God, if the freely loving God; if the Lord Jesus
as Mediator and Surety, if all the promises of God in Christ, if all the
offers of grace, if all the calls of the Gospel may suffice to convince thee
that this Covenant is the best Covenant that ever was or can be made for
sinners, with all suitableness and tenderness to the sinners condition: Then
dispute no more, but pray for faith to give God the glory of his exceeding
grace in this Covenant, etc.

What a comfort is this to all believers who are effectually brought into this
Covenant? Is it no comfort to be Comfort to all Believers.
brought into such a good estate as better cannot be found or enjoyed? If the
Covenant of Grace be the best Covenant (better then any other Covenant) Then
all in that Covenant, are in the best condition of all other men. It was a
special kindness in Joseph to give his Father and his Brethren a p^ssession in
the land of Ramesis: what kindness then is that in God to make you to be his
people, and to become your God, and to settle such a portion, such a possession
upon your souls, as in heaven and earth a better Covenant cannot be! how
should you hearts rejoice, and bless God for the Covenant of Grace, and for
bringing of you into that Covenant of grace? where

A Redeemer is only to be found, and you have an interest in that Redeemer; A
reconciled God is only to be found, and you have a propriety in that reconciled
God; pardoning mercy is only to be found, and you have your shares in that
pardoning mercy; Renewing grace is only to be found, and you have your portion
in that renewing grace! Salvation is only to be found, and you have your
possession of that salvation.

Others perhaps cry out, O that we might have mercy, and O that we might have
Christ! and O that God would be pacified toward us, and reconciled to us, and
O that our sins might be forgiven, and our souls accepted into life! why you
have all this, and more than this! Have you not cause to rejoice who are
brought into such a Covenant where you have a propriety in God, and Christ, and
the Spirit, and mercy, and grace, and glory? yea into such a Covenant where you
may find relief and support for every want, and against every fear, and
against every sin, and against every temptation? where all the sorts of
mercies, and helps and comforts are yours? Yea unto such a Covenant where there
is not only mercy, but fullness; and not only fullness; but freeness, and with
all these a certainty and unchangeablenesse? Here is as much mercy, and
goodness, and happiness as you need, and you shall surely have it, and it
shall continue unto you for ever. Adam and God parted; but you and your God
shall never part; you and Christ shall never part; you and mercy, and grace,
and salvation shall never part.

2. The second thing which I would show unto you about the comparison of the
This Covenant is a better Covenant than that old Covenant under which the
Fathers lived.
Covenant is this, That the new Covenant of grace under which we do live, is a
better Covenant then that old Covenant of grace under which the Fathers lived,
and the people of God of old time.

For the managing of this mighty and intricate Point, I shall deliver unto you
three particulars.

1. That none of the people of God in any age of the world (since the fall of
Adam) had a Covenant of works given unto them by God (for life) but the
Covenant which God made with them (for life) was a Covenant of Grace.

2. Wherein that Covenant of Grace, under which the people of God of old lived,
consents or agrees with the Covenant of Grace, under which we do now live.

3. The pre-eminency or betternesse of this New Covenant, in a comparison with
that old Covenant.

1. That none of the people of God in any age of the world (since the fall) had
a Covenant None of the people of God since the fall had a Covenant of works
given them for life, but a Covenant of Grace, as
of works given unto them by God for life, but they had all of them a Covenant
of Grace given unto them for life:

Let us (if you please) calculate the several Ages or times of the Church of
God, and then you shall clearly see the truth of what I speak.

1. As soon as Adam fell, God was pleased to set up the Covenant of Grace in
the form of a promise, for he made a promise of Christ as a Savior and
deliverer, Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed: It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise
his heel. Here is an express Immediately upon Adams fall.
promise of Christ, who is called the seed of the woman, because he was to take
our nature upon him: And the work or Office of Christ is to bruise the head of
the Serpent, (that is) Jesus Christ was to conquer and destroy him: and surely
the conquest and destruction of of Satan imports our full deliverance from him,
and restoration of us into the estate of freedom, and grace, and happiness:
The which Christ does by having his heel bruised (that is) by dying and
suffering for us, and hereby procuring life and salvation. The Apostle calls it
His putting to death, concerning the flesh, 1 Pet 3. 18. And in this respect
Christ is called the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13. 8.
because the death of Christ (by which our deliverance and salvation is wrought)
was published and promised from the beginning of the world: Now there is no
Covenant wherein Christ comes in on the behalf of sinners, but that Covenant is
a Covenant of Grace.

2. Again, pursue this from Adam to Abel, and from Abel to Enoch, and from From
Adam to Noah.
Enoch to Noah, it is evident they were not under a Covenant of works, but of
grace: And I will give you one reason for it, or rather the Apostle will do it
for me, who speaking of Abel and Enoch, he does commend the one for his more
excellent sacrifice, Heb. 11. 4. and the other for his pleasing of God, verse
5. and both of them (and Noah also) for faith (for he adds in verse 6. But
without faith it is impossible to please God) whence I argue thus, That those
persons who enjoyed such a faith by which their persons and services were
pleasing unto God, and graciously accepted of him, those were not in a Covenant
of works, but in a Covenant of Grace.

Nay look on the words once more, verse 4. By faith Abel offered a more
excellent sacrifice then Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was
righteous. And verse 7. Noah became heir of the righteousness which is by
faith: verily a righteousness by faith is no righteousness in a Covenant of
works, but of grace: It is that righteousness through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. 9.

3. Let us advance one step further from Noah to Abraham where we shall hear
From Noah to Abraham.
of the Covenant again, Genesis 17. 2. I will make my Covenant between me and
thee; and verse 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee in their generation for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God
unto thee, and to thy seed after thee: Here is a Covenant expressly made twixt
God and Abraham; but what Covenant was it? Surely not a Covenant of works, but
a Covenant of grace. And that I shall clear unto you by four particulars which
I pray you well to consider and observe.

1. In this Covenant you have Jesus Christ promised unto Abraham; so the
Apostle in Gal. 3. 16. To Abraham and his seed was the promise made; he says
not to thy seeds, as speaking of many, but of one who is Christ.

2. Abraham (In relation to this Covenant) is styled a believer, yea the Father
of all them that believe, Romans 4. 11. And the Gospel was the means of his
faith, which was a justifying faith, Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that
God would justify the Heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed.

3. He received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of
faith, Romans 4. 11.

4. Moreover it is said of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that they are in the
kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 8. 11. And of all the Elders with Abraham, that they
did desire a better Country, that is an heavenly, Heb. 11. 16. And this also
proves that neither he, or they were under a Covenant of works (which never
brought any to Heaven) but under a Covenant of Grace; for by grace ye are
saved, Ephesians. 2. 5.

5. Let us go forward from Abraham to Moses, and there let us consider whether
the Church were under a Covenant of works, or of grace. That From Abraham to
Moses.
God set up a Covenant in Moses time, the Scripture does clearly teach us,
Exodus 19. 5. If ye will obey my voice, and keep my Covenant, Then ye shall be a
peculiar treasure unto me above all people. verse 6. And ye shall be un to me a
kingdom of Priests, and an holy nation. Exodus 34. 27. After the tenor of these
words, I have made a Covenant with thee, and with Israel, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. He
declared unto you his Covenant which he commanded you to perform, even ten
Commandments, and he wrote them upon two tables of stone?

Quest. Whether the Law given upon Mount Sinai were a Covenant of works. Some
things premised.
But here it is earnestly objected, What, was not the Law which was given upon
Mont Sinai, a Covenant of works? what was it else but a plain and clear
manifestation of the Law written in the heart of man at the first, and now
revived and set on foot by God himself.

Sol. This is (I confess) somewhat a knotty question, and therefore I would
speak warily unto it.

1. The Law given by Moses (Ministerially) was partly Moral in the Ten
Precepts, and partly Ceremonial in the Levitical Types and Ceremonies, and
partly Judicial in the civil Rules appertaining to the Jews, as such a Nation
in civil society; but the debate will principally fall upon the Moral Law.

2. Which may be considered two ways, viz. 1. As to the matter of it, as to
which I grant that therein is the Covenant of works to be found. 2ly As to the
form or Sanction of it, as given (at this time) to the people of Israel; thus I
deny it to be a Covenant of works; Although much which was in the Covenant of
works, be in this Covenant, yet this Law or Covenant was not given for this end
to the people of Israel, to be a Covenant of works unto them (that is) such a
Covenant upon, or from which they must expect life upon their doing.

3. You must distinguish twixt 1. The intention of God in giving the Law, and
2ly The abuse or perverting of that Law. I do grant that many of the Jews did
set up a Legal Righteousness for their justifications and rested upon the works
of the Law, as if life came by them (against which the Apostle Paul does
notably argue in his Epistle to the Romans, and to the Galathians) But this was
not the intention of God in the Sanction of the Law: They never could find a
justifying righteousness by the Law, or works of the Law (under the notion of a
Covenant of works) Nor did God ever propound it for that end: and because I
meet with this choice question, I will briefly deliver my own judgment
concerning it in The question answered in three particulars.
three particulars.

1. That God never did, not will set up for sinners a Covenant of Works. 2.
That he did not in giving the Law to the Israelites, set it up. 3. That this
Covenant on Mount Sinai was a Covenant of Grace, at least subserviently and
respectively.
1. That God never did (since the fall) set up a Covenant of Works: and I will
God did never since the fall setup a Covenant of works, Demonstra^ed
give you arguments to demonstrate it.

1. He did set up immediately after the fall a Covenant of Grace (this the
Scripture clearly shows us) but a Covenant of works is inconsistent with a
Covenant of Grace; and a Covenant of grace is inconsistent with a Covenant of
works, They are mutually destructive one to the other. If of works, then no
more of grace, says the Apostle, Romans 11. 6. So that you must either deny that
God did set up a Covenant of grace for sinners (which the Scriptures affirm) or
you must grant that a Covenant of grace is inconsistent with a Covenant of
works (which the Scriptures deny) or you must confess that there is no Covenant
of works (since the fall) set up by God for sinners.

2. If God did set up a Covenant of grace for sinners, and after that a
Covenant of works for sinners, Then he did set up a possibility for sinners to
be saved, and an impossibility also for sinners to be saved: The reason whereof
is this. There is a possibility for a sinners salvation, as to a Covenant of
grace where mercy may be found; and there is an impossibility of a sinners
salvation, as to a Covenant of works, where no mercy is to be found for a
sinner: But for God to make salvation both possible and impossible for the same
sinners, were most inglorious and absurd.

3. To put sinners upon contradictions, is no way suitable with the wisdom and
goodness of God. But if God should have set up a Covenant of works for
sinners, after he has set up a Covenant of Grace, he should have put the
sinner upon contradictions: you must believe, and you must not believe; you
must be justified and live by works, and you must not do so. The Covenant of
grace says you must believe; the Covenant of works says you must not believe.
That says, believe and you shall be saved; this says, do this and live: what
is this but to build up, and pull down; to offer mercy, and to deny mercy; to
give life, and to take way life?

4. To make the Covenant of grace to be changable and void, is quite contrary
to the intention and purpose of God who has made that Covenant to he
everlasting, and never to be altered, no more then the Priesthood of Christ is
changeable, of which God has said, Thou art a Priest for ever. But if God
should set up a Covenant of works after a Covenant of Grace, this would void
and frustrate the Covenant of grace. It would throw down Christ as a Mediator,
and the Righteousness of Christ, and all the Fabric of a Sinners salvation by
a Christ. God did not make a Covenant of works with the Israelites,


2. As God never did (after the fall) make a Covenant of works with sinners, so
in particular he did not make such a Covenant with the Israelites when he gave
the Law unto them from Mount Sinai, he did not give that Law for to be a
Covenant of works, which I shall endeavor to prove thus.

What Covenant God made with Abraham, that Covenant he made with the seed of
Abraham (Genesis 17. 7. I will stablish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee, to be a God unto thee, and thy seed after thee) But that
Covenant with Abraham was the Covenant of grace, and the seed of Abraham were
those Israelites: And if those who are the seed of Abraham were under that
Covenant of grace with Abraham, they could not be put off to another Covenant
of Works, in which Abraham was not, unless you will say that God did act in
different Covenants with Abraham and his seed.

2. The Apostle says the Law is not against the promises of God: Is the Law
then against the promises of God? God forbid, Gal. 3. 21. And do we then make
void the Law through faith? God forbid, yea we establish the Law, Romans 3. 31.
Mark! the Law is not against the promises, nor does faith make void the Law;
both these can very well agree together; but so they could not, if the Law had
been given as a Covenant of works; for now the Law would be expressly against
the Promises, and faith would certainly make void the Law. The promises of God
are contrary to a Covenant of works, and faith is destructive to a Covenant of
works. If therefore the promises, and faith, and the Law can consist, Then the
Law cannot be set up as a Covenant of works.

3. That Covenant which God made with Moses, and under which Moses stood, was
no Covenant of works; but Moses and the people of Israel were both under the
same Covenant, Exodus 34. 27. I have made a Covenant with thee, and with Israel:
If any doubt under what Covenant Moses did stand, whether (of works or grace)
let him peruse Heb. 11. 26. what a description he shall there find of Moses:
He shall there find him to be a Choice and eminent believer in Christ,
Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt,
and having respect to the recompense of reward, etc. Now certainly such a
choice believer in Christ was not under a Covenant of work.

4. That Covenant which was confirmed by blood, and sprinkling (which typified
the blood of Christ confirming and ratifying the Covenant) was no Covenant of
works: But the Covenant which God then made with the Israelites was confirmed
by blood, Exodus 24. 7. Moses took the book of the Covenant, and read in the
audience of the people, and they said, All that the Lord has said will we do,
and be obedient. verse 8. And Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the
people, and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made
with you concerning all these words: Now this very place is quoted by the
Apostle in Heb. 9. 19. He sprinkled both the book and the people, verse 20.
saying. This is the blood of the Testament which God has enjoined unto you;
and expressly interprets it, and applies it to the blood of Christ, verse 14.
and ve^se 23. And therefore that Covenant with that people was not a Covenant
of works which never was, nor shall be confirmed by the blood of Christ.

5. That Covenant which did so convince of sin, that it did also show the way
of expiation of sin, and of forgiveness, could not be a Covenant of works (for
that Covenant convinces and condemns) But this Covenant at Mount Sinai showed
sin, and the way of forgiveness; for it taught men to look for forgiveness in
the blood of Christ specified in the sacrifices.

6. If the Law had been given to the Israelites for a Covenant of Works, Then
upon the breaking of that Covenant, all the Israelites had been cut off from
all hope of salvation. My Reason is this, Because a Covenant of Works once
broken presently condemns, and (as to it) Salvation therefore becomes
impossible, it not at all admitting of repentance, or of mercy, or of a
righteousness and satisfact on by another. But there was no such Covenant made
with the Israelites as the sinning against which did make their salvation thus
desperate, but that upon repentance they might be received to mercy. And for
this see Deuteronomy. 4. 29. But if from thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou
shall find him, if thou seek him with all thine heart, and with all thy soul;
verse 30. When thou a^t in tribulation, and all these things are come upon
thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shall be
obedient to his voice; verse 31. For the Lord thy God is a merciful God; he
will not destroy thee, nor forsake thee, nor forget the Covenant of thy Fathers
which he swear unto them. Lo! here is a way prescribed for repentance in case
of transgressions: And here is mercy, and acceptance in case of repentance, and
all this in reference to the Covenant made with their Fathers, and with them.
And are any of these to be found in a Covenant of works, or upon the
transgression of it?

7. It had been strange kindness in God to help the Children of Israel out of
Egypt by an outstretched arm, and after this to make such a Covenant with
them, that they should never have found mercy, nor salvation, as in a Covenant
of works there is not.

3. The Covenant made with the people of Israel at Mount Sinai, was at least
subserviently the Covenant of Grace: and given for gracious ends and purposes.
The Covenant at Mount Sinai was at l^ast subserviently the Covenant of grace.
I say a Covenant of Grace for the substance of it, though propounded in a more
dark way, and in a manner fitting for the state of that people, and that
present time and condition of the Church, namely so as to convince them of sin,
and of their own impotency, and of the great need of Christ, and to fly for
mercy to God revealed in Christ, and to be a Rule of life for a people in
Covenant with God, that so they might inherit the promises of mercy, Gal. 3.
19. The Law was added because of transgressions; verse 24. The Law was our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified through faith.

This assertion I shall endeavor to make out unto you from the Word As appears
by
of God.

1. The Praeludium unto the Law makes much for this. Read it in Exodus 19. 5.
The Praeludium of the Law
If you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant. Then ye shall be a
peculiar treasure unto me above all people. verse 6. And ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of Priests* and an holy Nation. And the Apostle makes use of these
expressions, and applies them to those who are in the Covenant of grace, in 1
Pet. 2. 9. But ye are a chosen Geneeration, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation,
a peculiar people, etc. And verse 10. Which in times past were not a people,
but are now the people of God; which had not obtained mercy, but now have
obtained mercy.

Now I beseech you mark me! Is there any Covenant (unless that of grace)
wherein the Lord does thus own, and thus exalt a people? Is it not merely of
the grace of God in Christ by whom we are made Kings and Priests to God? Is it
imaginable that any people should be (as it were) Gods own proper goods, which
he loves, which he sets his heart upon, which he keeps in store for himself,
for his own special use, which he will not part withal, which God accounts as
his rare and exquisite, and precious treasure (as all this the word Segulah
does signify) and yet this people are not in a Covenant of grace? The
immediate Introduction to the giving of the Law.


2. The immediate Introd^ction unto the giving of the Law, Exodus 20. 2. I am
the Lord thy God which have, etc. why there is the very Covenant of grace; here
is God as our God (and blessed are the people who have the Lord to be their
God) and here is Jesus Christ the Mediator of the Covenant implied; for in
Christ does God become our God; and there is our redemption from sin and Satan
intimated by their deliverance out of Egypt, and presently there is the worship
of God instituted and appointed, which if acceptable to God, must be performed
with faith (for without faith it is impossible to please God) God would not
command his people so to worship him, as to displease him, Lev. 26. 12. I will
set my Tabernacle amongst you, and my soul shall not abhor you, and I will walk
among you, and will be your God, and you shall be my people; and in the very
Covenant, Exodus 20. 6. showing mercy to thousands of them that love me. The
Preface made before the renewing of the Law, upon the breaking of the Tables.


3. Upon the breaking of the Tables of that Covenant before they were written
again, there is such a preface made by God, as can no way fit any Covenant but
that of Grace; as you may see in Exodus 34. 7. The Lord, the Lord gracious and
merciful, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiveing iniquity, transgression and sin.

4. The Ceremonies were Appendices of the Moral Law, especially of the first
and second Commandments, as given to the Israelites; and what did those The
Ceremonies were Apendices of the moral Law.
ceremonies shadow out? even Jesus Christ and Redemption, and Reconciliation,
and Remission, and Salvation by him, etc. Moses is said therefore to write of
Christ, Joh. 5. 46.

5. Many other Arguments might be brought, as that if those people were not
Many of them under that Covenant were saved.
in a Covenant of Grace, then none of them could be saved; for a sinners
salvation is in no Covenant but that of Grace; and yet many of them under the
Covenant which God made with them were saved. Acts 15. 11. We believe that
through grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they, etc.

I now proceed to the Second Particular.

2. Quest. Wherein that Covenant of Grace under which the Fathers lived Wherein
these Covenants agree.
does consent or agree with the Covenant of Grace, under which we now do live?

Sol. They do consent and agree in three Particulars.

1. In the Parties, God was one party, and fallen sinners were the other party
in the Old, and so they are in the New Covenant. Before the coming of Christ,
In the Parties.
which respects the Old Covenant, none but sinner^ were looked on and brought
into Covenant, and after the coming of Christ, which respects the New Covenant,
none but sinners, which work not, but be^ieve in him that justifies the
ungodly, are taken into Covenant. The Grace of God is manifested toward
sinners in the one, and toward sinners in the other Covenant.

2. Both these Covenants had a Mediator who stood between the parties at a In
the Mediator.
distance, and reconciled them, even Jesus Christ, who is said to be the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever: You have him promised to Adam and made
known to Abraham, who saw the day of Christ and rejoiced, Joh. 8. 56. and
prophesied by of Moses, Act. 3. 22. Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto
me, him shall you hear, etc. he was promised to the Fathers, and expected o^
them, Luke 1. 69. He has raised up an born of salvation for us, in the house
of his Servant David. Verse. 70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets,
which have been si^ce the world began. And verse 72. To perform the mercy
promise to our Fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant. Verse. 73. The oath
which he swear unto our Father Abraham, etc.

3. They do agree in the main Promises; the spiritual promises of good things,
In the main Promises.
Romans 15. 8. Jesus Christ was a Minister of the circumcision for the truth of
God, to confirm the Promises made unto the Fathers: Some think that the Fathers
under the old Covenant were fed only with temporal Promises. Indeed they had
many temporal Promises, and some were of special Blessings and Gifts, as the
land of Canaan etc. Nevertheless they had the same spiritual Promises, which we
have under the New Testament.

Forgiveness of sins; besides that place formerly mentioned, in Deuteronomy. 4. 29,
30, etc. you read of frequent Promises of forgiving of sins upon their
Sacrifices, in Levit. 9 and 2 Chro. 7. 14. If my people shall humble themselves
etc. I will hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin.

Eternal life, both promised and enjoyed; Many shall come from the East and
West and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of God, Matthew.
8. 11. They embraced the promises of a better Country, even an heavenly, verse.
11, 13, 16. Prepared for them a City, We hope to be saved even as they, Acts
15. 11, etc.

3 Quest. Wherein they differ, and wherein the betterness of the New Covenant
Wherein they differ.
of Grace does consist.

Sol. Although both these Covenants do agree in substance and end, yet they
differ very much as to the particular from of administration or dispensation; I
will touch only on Five differences.

1 In Obscurity and Perspicuity. 2 In Burdens and Liberty, 3 In Weakness and
Efficacy. 4 In Restraints and Extent. 5 In Time and Duration.
1. The New Covenant is a better Covenant than the Old, because there is a In
Obscurity and Perspic^ity
greater Perspicuity in the new Covenant, and a greater Obscurity in the old
Covenant. Hence it is that the Gospel is called The revelation of the mystery
which was kept secret since the world began, But now is made manifest, Romans 16.
25, 26. He does not mean that it was kept secret, or hid, or covered absolutely
from the beginning of the world to that time; but he speaks comparatively (that
i^ Now Jesus Christ and the way of salvation by faith in him appears most
clearly; the Sun is risen and shines without any cloud; Behold the Lamb of God;
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners; God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself; He that believes shall be saved; We are saved by grace,
etc. I am the way, the truth, and the life: There was not (comparatively) such
clearness in expression in the Old Testament; Hence it is, that the Apostle
speaking of both these Testaments in 2 Cor. 3. he tells us of a vail on the one
Testament, verse. 14. and of an openness in the other Testament, verse. 18. We
with open face behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, etc.

Let me give you a few Instances that you may the better understand this.

1. Consider Jesus Christ; it is true that he was revealed in the Old and in
the New Covenant; but yet with a mavelous inequality of light; he is called
the Seed of the woman, and the Root of Jess, and the Ointment, and the Mighty
God, and the Child to be born: But the clear expression of him is in the New
Covenant, Luke 2, 11. This day unto you is bern in the City of David, a
Saviou^, which is Christ the Lord. Joh. 1, 14. The Word was made flesh and
dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten
of the Father, Acts 11. 38. God has anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy
Ghost and with power. Verse. 42. It was he which was ordained of God, etc. Verse.
43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins.

2. Consider him likewise in his Offices; these were more darkly revealed in
the Old Testament or Covenant in types and figures: His Mediatorship was
typified in Moses, who stood between God and the People; his Priestly Office
was shadowed in Melchisedec, his Prophetical Office in Moses, who revealed the
mind of God to the people; his Kingly Office in David; God shall give him the
Kingdom of his Father David: But in the New Testament, these are clearly
affirmed of Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one Mediator between God and man, the
Man Christ Jesus; He is expressly called our High Priest, Heb. 4. 15. and chap.
5. 5, 6. And expressly called a Prophet, Acts 3. 22. And a King, Joh. 18. 37. A
King of Kings, Rev. 19. 16.

3. Consider Christ in the business of Redemption; in the Old Testament this
was shadowed in the deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt by Moses, and
the bringing of them into Canaan by Joshua: And in the Brazen Serpent, upon
which they who were stung with the fiery Serpent and looked, were healed. But
in the New Testament he is expressly called our Redeemer, and our Redemption; 1
Cor. 1, 30. Heb. 9. 15.

4. Consider likewise the Benefits which we have by Christ in the Old
Testament; our Justification was shadowed in the Passover, in the Blood of the
Lamb, and in the many Sacrifices of that time, and in sprinkling the blood of
the Sacrifice: But in the New Testament this is clearly opened, 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. And Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sin. So our Adoption was
figured in the first born; and our Sanctification, in those Legal washings from
pollution and uncleanness: But now in the New Testament we have it expressly,
Christ is made unto us of God, Wisdom, and Righteousness and Sactification, 1
Cor. 1. 30. And that in him we receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4. 5. And to
as many as received him he gave this dignity, to be the Sons of God, Joh. 1.
12. In Burdens and Liberty.


2. The Old Testament had more of Burden in it, and the New Testament has more
of Liberty in it. Hence it is that the Old Covenant is called a Yoke, Acts 15.
10. and a Burden, Col. 2. 20. and a Bondage, Gal. 4. 3. and an Handwriting of
Ordinances against sinners, Col. 2. 14. What a number of Ordinances and daily
Sacrifices? O what a variety, and sometimes costliness of extraordinary
Sacrifices for several contingencies of lega^ pollutions, besides the
obligation of them to the observation of days, and months, and years, and
ceremonial Sabbaths; again, the restriction of the people to worship at
Jerusalem, where Thrice every year all the males were to come and appear before
God, Deuteronomy. 16. 16. Moreover a great restraint of their liberty in the use of
several Creatures, the eating of which was denied unto them; But now
understand the New Testament or Covenant, all these Bonds, and Yokes, and
Restraint are broken; Christ has set us at liberty from the yoke of bondage,
Gal. 5. 1. and has blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against
us, Col. 2. 14. and any of the creatures is allowed unto us being sanctified by
the word and prayer: The Church heretofore was as an infant, but now it is a
child come to ripe years, and enjoys a freedom by Christ.

3. They differ as to Weakness and Power; The Old Testament had but a very In
Weakness and Power.
weak operation in respect of the New; the Spirit was not so plentifully poured
out as it is under the New Covenant, and therefore the old ministration of the
Covenant is called a Letter, 2 Cor. 3. 6. and the new, the Spirit: he speaks
comparatively of the one with the other; That the old Testament did but as it
were declare, but the new does work powerfully and effectually in our hearts.

Not that the old Covenant had no spiritual influence and operations; for we
read of many living under it who were choice and rare in grace; Abraham for
Faith, and Moses for Meekness, and Job for Patience, and Josiah for Tenderness,
and Hezekiah for Vprightness, etc. But that the more plentiful effusion of the
Spirit was reserved until Christ's Resurrection from the dead, and ascension
into Heaven; at which time the New Covenant began to appear in its glory and
efficacy; gifts were abundantly given unto men, and Three thousand, and Five
thousand at once converted, etc.

4. In Limitation and Extent; the Old Testament or Covenant was confirmed to In
Limitation and Extent.
the people of the Jews, and such Proselytes as came in amongst them, Psalm.
147. 19. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgemenns unto
Israel. Verse 20. He has not dealt so with any Nation. To them were committed
the oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. To them pertained the Covenants and the
Promises, Romans 9. 4. And therefore said Christ to the woman of Samaria,
Salvation is of the Jews, Joh. 4. 22. But the New Covenant is a more large and
open door; it takes in the Jews and the Gentiles, yea some of all the Nations
in the world; there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.
28. The Gospel publishes Christ and the Covenant to Jews and Gentiles, and it
is powerful unto both, etc. God is become the God of the Gentiles also, and not
of the Jews only, Romans 3. 29. The great separation between the Jews and the
Gentiles began upon the coming out of the children of Israel from Egypt, and
especially when the Ceremonial Law was set up as a partition wall; And this
Separation wall was broken down by the death of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 14, etc. and
proclaimed immediately after his Ascension.

5. They do differ in Time and Duration, The Old Covenant was but temporary, I
mean as a Covenant with such and such ceremonies: therefore it is called In
Time and in Duration.
weak and vanishing, Heb. 8. 13 What should the shadows do when the body it
self is come? But the New Covenant abides for ever; It is the everlasting
Gospel. And it is an everlasting Ministration both for the matter and manner of
it.

There might be many more differences between them produced, but I shall spare
to mention them.

Thus have you heard the betterness of the New Covenant and therewith a
discourse of the several dispensations of the Covenant; I will make a few
useful Applications from what I have delivered, and then I shall go on to
another general Head of the Covenant.

Use 1. See of what antiquity the Grace of God is! and of what a length it is!
See the antiquity of the Grace of God.
it has been acting and putting forth it self from the beginning of the world,
it is of ancient days, and running along through all ages unto our age, and so
shall it hold on until the end of the World. God has had some (ever since the
fall) whom he has owned in special a manner for his people; There is no age
but his Covenant (in some measure) has been afoot, and some have been tasting
of his Grace and Mercy; We in our generation are not the only vessels of them,
thousands and thousands before us have been restored by Grace, and saved by
Grace.

Use 2. How should this bow in our hearts to come into that Covenant of Grace
This should move us to come into this Covenant.
which has in so many Generations been found so full of mercy and life? and to
trust upon that God who is good, and always keeps Covenant; there is not any
thing spoken of in any one Dispensation of the Covenant, but it has been still
performed: Surely that Covenant which has held out so many years to so many
Believers, it will be sufficient and effectual for us all our days.

Use 3. Then it is a gross error of the Anabaptists, who put the Fathers under
a carnal It discovers the er^or of the Anabaptists.
Covenant, and that God fed them only (with husks) with Temporal Promises, with
earthly blessings; as if they had no interest in God himself, nor Christ, nor
Grace, nor Glory; whereas the Old Covenant (under which they lived) made up the
same relation 'twixt God and them, as between us and God; and they had the same
Christ revealed unto them, as we have; and their Faith looked on him as
promised and to come, as our faith looks on him as come and exhibited; and they
and we are the same children of God by faith, and heirs of the same glory by
Christ.

Use 4. Then it is also a gross error to lay any other foundation than what is
laid, And their error who set up a Cove^an^ of Works ^or life.
my meaning is, To set up a Covenant of Works for life and justification, to
build our confidences and hopes for life and salvation upon our own works; for
God (as you have heard) has from age to age, and from generation to generation
set up a Covenant of Grace (though in several ways of dispensation) for his
people, and in these latter times (as the Apostle styles them) has settled,
fixed an invincible Covenant of grace to the worlds end. And the Covenant of
grace lays Jesus Christ alone for the sinners foundation, and gives faith to
lay the soul upon him, not upon our own righteousness, but upon his
righteousness. You do for lying vanities forsake your own mercies, when you
leave Jesus Christ, and expect life from a Covenant of works.

Use 5. If they who had the Covenant of grace more dimly and darkly revealed,
were brought in as a people unto God; what shall we say for our selves, who
have the Covenant of grace most clearly revealed in the Gospel, and who have
How unexcusable are sinners under this Covenant.
Christ, and all the work of Redemption by Christ? and all the way of salvation
by Christ written (as it were) with the beams of the Sun? what shall we say for
our selves, if yet

1. We remain ignorant of mercy, and life, and Christ, and salvation.

2. We remain obstinate, and refuse to hearken unto the way of life, and unto
the terms of grace propounded unto us in the Gospel.

3. We still receive the grace of God in vain, and are no way wrought on by the
ministration of the New Covenant; but it is still a dead Letter unto us, not a
quick^ing Spirit, etc. O how inexcusable are our souls? and how unanswerable
shall we for all this grace of God? and how heavy will the condemnation be for
despising the grace of God shining amongst us with such glorious light in the
face of Christ, and in the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ? If our Gospel be
hid, it is hid unto them that are lost. 2 Cor. 4. in whom the god of this world
has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ (who is the image of God) should shine unto them,
verse 5.

O what manner of persons should the people of God be in these times, who live
under the new Covenant, the best of all Covenants! Better than the Covenant of
works, better What manner of persons should we be! For knowledge
than the Old Covenant of Grace for perspicuity, for efficacy, for liberty, etc.

1. What manner of men should we be in knowledge of Christ, and of the grace of
God in Christ!

2. What manner of men should we be for soundness of judgment in the truths
For soundness of judgment.
of the Covenant, having so much light of the Gospel revealing the Covenant.

3. What manner of men should we be in the estimation of Christ, in affections
In estimatio^s of Christ, and in affection to him.
unto Christ, in love to Christ, in faith in Christ? to whom Christ is so
fully, and so evidently made manifested by the Gospel in his Person, in his
Offices, in his Love, in his Redemption, in his Salvation.

4. How rich in grace, how abounding in every grace! to whom the New Covenant
of grace is preached, which is of more power and efficacy than any other How
rich in grace!
Covenant which has a more abundant presence and influence of the Spirit. As
to whom much is forgiven, of them shall much be required; So they who have
received much, from them does God expect more.

5. How should you serve your God. and live up to Christ in all intention of
mind, How should such serve their God!
and fervency of Spirit, and freedom of heart, and cheerfulness of soul, and
readiness of obedience, who are brought into that Covenant which sets you at
liberty from a world of Ceremonies, and Sacrifices, and restraints, and
besides, from sin and Satan!

6. How chiefly should your hearts be raised to the better promises in Christ
fully How should our hearts be raised to the better promises
manifested now in the Gospel! In the Old Testament you find more mention
indeed of temporal blessings, and the spiritual were (many times) veiled in
them: But in the New Testament you find the greatest mention of Spiritual
blessings, and temporal blessings be annexed unto them. And why is this, but
because your hearts should be more taken up with, and more set upon the great
things of salvation and heaven, than the mean things of earth, and of this
life? O that you had hearts suitable and answerable to the choicest and
chiefest manifestations of the Covenant of grace, and of the blessings more
fully revealed and promised in the Covenant!

should we Gentiles bless the Lord whom he has reserved for the times of the
New Covenant, which excels the other! It is to me a very considerable Mystery
that the Jews who were (if I may so express my self) the Original people of
God, the first fruits of the creature, That they should have the largest time
How should we Gentiles bless the Lord who are reserved for the times of the
new Covenant!
under the Old Covenant: And we who are Gentiles that came in (as it were) at
second hand, should have all our time under the New Covenant. That they by
unbelief were so quickly broken off, and the Gentiles have been for so many
hundred years graffed in: whatsoever the mystery of this dispensation may be,
certainly we who are sinners of the Gentiles, have wonderful cause to bless
our God who has given us so long a day in the day of his grace; and have
singular cause to improve such a mercy with fear and trembling! As we may see
the greatness of the freeness of Gods grace, and the exceeding riches thereof
to us, so should we both lay hold on the grace revealed, and walk with more
faith and humility: not be high-minded, but fear: for we stand by faith;
Remember says Paul to the Ephesians, (Chap. 2. 12.) That at that time ye were
without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world?
But verse 13.) now in Christ Jesus ye who were sometimes afar off, are made
nigh by the blood of Christ.

CHAP. VI.
Isaiah 55. 3. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David.
I Have now discoursed of the Covenant of Grace as it stands in The condition
of the Covenant.
opposition to the Covenant of Works: and I have discoursed of the Covenant of
Grace as to the vital nature of it, what it was: and I have discoursed of the
Covenant of Grace, as to the Properties and Adjuncts of it.

Now I shall proceed unto a fourth General consideration of this Covenant of
Grace: and that is the condition of it. The Covenant of Grace (herein) agrees
with all other Covenants, that it is a mutual obligation; God binds himself,
and his people bind themselves; there is something which he will do, and there
is something which we must do: I will bring you into the bond of the Covenant,
Ezekiel. 20. 37. and surely the^e is a condition in that Bond. God has his part
in the Bond, and we have our part in the Bond; If you trace the Covenant from
Abraham even unto Christ (successively) you shall all along find a condition
expressed, and annexed unto the Covenant.

Abraham he believed, Genesis 15. 6. And he was to walk uprightly, Genesis 17. 1. and
the many Rites in Moses time took in a condition of faith and obedience; and so
it did in David's time: and the like with the people of Israel, in and after the
Babylonish Captivity: and so in Christ's, and the Apostles time.

SECT. I.
Object. I Know there is a great dispute How any condition can be allowed in a
Covenant of Grace: And some are very eager against it: and think that if any
condition be admitted, then presently we are Legalists, and are setting up a
Covenant How any condition can be allowed in the Covenant of Grace.
of works instead of a Covenant of Grace.

Sol. But I humbly conceive that there is no need of such heat, nor fear of
such an inconveniency in this Point, if parties would but patiently hear one
another, and calmly consider the matter.

Therefore first I think it necessary to distinguish of that word (condition)
which may be taken in a threefold sense. Distinguish of the word condition. No
such condition as to work any one grace in our own hearts.


1. For such an Act which we may, or may not perform, according to the power
and pleasure of our own free will, without the preventing, or determining grace
of God: And truly in this sense, I know no godly Christian, who does, or dare
to thrust in a condition to the Covenant of Grace, as if there were something
to be done by us (that is) by the sole power of our free wills, upon the
drawing out of which, a Covenant is made up, and accomplished twixt God and us.

2. For the doing of some work which has in it a meritorious reason on our
part, either for the acceptance of our persons with God, or for the performance
of No such condition as merit and self-worthiness.
his promises unto us, so as wages are due to a workman; no such condition as
merit and self-worthiness. Neither in this sense dare we admit of a condition
in the Covenant of Grace; for the thirsty drink of the water of life freely,
and the poor buy without money, and without price: Both our graces, and our
rewards are only of the grace of God in Christ.

3. For some qualifications in the sinner, not wrought in him by his own power,
but by the sole power of Gods grace: without which he cannot stand in an actual
relation But a qualification wrought by God, without which we cannot stand in
Relation to God.
unto God as his God, nor can apply the promises of pardon and salvation by
Christ unto himself: In this sense we do hold a condition in the Covenant of
Grace, namely, That something there is required of us, which yet God does
promise to work in us (and which he does work effectually in the hearts of all
the Elect in time) therefore Faith is called the operation of God, Col. 2. 12.
and the work of his power, 1 Cor. 2. 5. without which they cannot look on God
as their God, nor can apply the Promises of forgiveness and eternal life, and
which (when they do find wrought in themselves by the power of Gods grace)
they can, and may apply both unto themselves. In this sense there is a
condition.


Look as to make up a conjugal Relation, there is something required on either
party; The woman must be willing to take and receive the man for her husband,
as well as the man is willing to take the woman for his wife: So it is in the
making up of the Spiritual marriage (which is the Covenant) twixt God and us;
as he is willing to be our God, so must we be willing to be his people. And as
be (therein) takes us to be his people, so do we (therein) take him to be our
God; Only with this difference, That in the civil Covenant of marriage, our own
will leads us to that; but in the Spiritual, God does by his Such a condition
as it is simply necessary, so it is expressly dete^mined in Scripture.
Spirit work in us that will, which is a condition necessary to make the
Covenant between himself and us.

2. A condition (as thus interpreted) as it is simply necessary to the Covenant
of Grace (being a mutual compact, and not a mere promise) so it is expressly
determined in Scripture. Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life: ye shall not perish if you do believe: and ye shall have
everlasting life if ye do believe. Mark 16. 16. He that believes shall be
saved; and he that believes not shall be damned. Isa. 55. 3. Incline your ear
and come unto me; hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting Covenant. Exodus 24. 7. He took the book of the Covenant, and read
in the audience of the people; and they said, All that the Lord has said will
we do, and be obedient. verse 8. and Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on
the people, and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made
with you concerning all these words. Acts 2. 38. Repent and be baptized every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins. Chap. 3. 19.
Repent and be converted that your sins may be blotted out, etc. Chap. 13. 18.
Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. verse 39. And by
him all that believe are justified, etc 2 Cor. 6. 17. Come out from among them,
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you. Verse 8. and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

3. Every condition annexed unto a Covenant, does not make that Covenant to be
a Every condition does nor make the Covenant to be a Covenant of Works except
it be the same condition. The Covenant of grace
Covenant of Works, unless you do put the self same condition into that other
Covenant which is placed in the Covenant of works: But thus it is not in the
Covenant of grace; which

1. Puts not the same condition, but another condition of a quite different
nature from that condition in the Covenant of work: There it is, Do this and
live, Here it is, Believe and you shall be saved.

2. Puts such a condition which is compatible with the grace of God: Indeed
works (that is) a self perfect, and absolute obedience is incompatible, and
inconsistent with salvation by grace; but a saving by faith is not inconsistent
with Requires another condition. And a condition compatible with the grace of
God.
grace: Of which if any does doubt, let him but read the Apostle in Ephesians. 2.
5. By grace are ye saved. verse 8. By grace are ye saved through faith, and
that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of
faith that it might be by grace. What can be can spoken more expressly to show
the consistence twixt grace and faith? grace saves, and yet faith saves; ye are
saved by grace through faith.

Now from all which has been discovered, it does appear that the Covenant of
grace can admit of a condition, namely such a condition which is graciously
given, and such a condition which will in the nature and use of it exalt all
the grace of God. And truly this condition is Faith, and no other thing; for
This condition is faith.
Faith

1. Is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. and Phil. 1. 29. It does not (at all) flow
from our selves. Therefore believers are said (Joh. 1. 13.) to be born not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

2. And it is such a gift of God as is completely adopted to the Covenant of
Grace: (To no Covenant but that, and to that it is) For that Covenant on Gods
part is all in offers, and promises, and givings; and faith is all in
receiving, and is depending, and acknowledging, and magnifying the grace of God.

And that Faith is the condition annexed to this Covenant, I shall present unto
Demonstrations of it.
you a few Arguments (besides the Scriptures above mentioned) to demonstrate it.

1. That without which God is not our God, nor are we his people: And upon
Without faith God is not our God, nor we his people.
which God is our God, and we do become his people and children; This is a
condition of the Covenant; But faith is that without which God is not our God,
nor are we his people, and upon faith God is our God, and we are his people and
children: See it in the particulars.

1. Without Faith there is no Relation (by way of Covenant) twixt God and us;

1. For God and unbelievers are not in Covenant.

2. Refusers of the Covenant, are not in Covenant.

3. Persons under wrath and condemnation are not in Covenant. He that believes
not, is condemned, and he shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him, Joh. 3. 18. Ephesians. 2. 11. Remember that ye being in times past Gentiles in
the flesh, etc. verse 12. That at that time, ye were without Christ, being
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers from the Covenant of
promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. This was their condition
before they were quickened from the dead, and had obtained faith, 1 Pet. 2. 10.
Which in times past were not a people, but are now the people of God; which had
not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.

2. Upon faith, God becomes our God in Covenant, and we become his people and
children. He upon believing becomes our God in Covenant, Isa. 55. 3. Incline
your ear, and come unto me: Hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you. And Romans 8. 15. Ye have received the Spirit of
Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father: And that spirit of Adoption presupposes
faith: None are sons but by faith: And we upon believing do become his people
and children. Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ
Jesus.

2. That which gives you an interest in Christ, the same thing gives you an
interest in Faith gives an interest in Christ.
the Covenant of Grace. (For this is a sure truth, that according to your
interest in Christ, so is your interest in God, and in the Covenant. Out of
Christ you shall find no God to be your God) But Faith is necessary to give
you an interest in Christ, forasmuch as Christ becomes ours by faith: By faith
we are planted into Christ, and built upon Christ, and married unto Christ, he
is ours, and we are his.

3. If all the good of the Covenant comes unto us upon believing: Then Faith is
All the good of the Covenant comes to us upon believing
the condition annexed unto the Covenant (you can have none of the good of it
but upon believing; unbelief cuts you off from all title, and all fruition) but
all the good of the Covenant comes to be settled upon you by believing. If you
believe, you shall be saved: If you believe, you shall be justified and
pardoned: you have the righteousness of Christ by faith, and you have the
pardon of your sins by faith, you are heirs of all by faith: He that believes
on the S^n has everlasting life, Joh. 3. 26. The promise that he should be the
heir of the World was not to Abraham, or to his seed through the Law, but
through the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 13.

4. All the dealings with God as a God in Covenant, is by Faith; you can have
no communion with him at all without faith; you cannot acknowledge him, All our
dealings with God is by Faith.
nor love him, nor desire him, nor delight in him, nor call upon him, nor trust
him, nor take any thing from him, nor make any use of him or of his promises
but by faith. Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and
that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, James 1. 6. But let him
ask in faith, etc.

SECT. II.
Quest 1. BUt now come three Questions, what Faith that is which is necessary,
and which must be put forth to bring us into the Covenant, and without which we
neither are, nor can be in Covenant with God.

2. Whether Faith only be the condition? What faith it is that is the condition.


3. Why Faith is the condition?

1. What Faith it is that is the condition?

Sol. There are several distinctions of Faith considered in the kinds of it,
of which I shall not speak; and there are several conditions of the same Faith
in respect of the particular acts issuing or following from it.

1. That Faith which brings us into the Covenant, is a Faith which respects A
faith which respects Christ
Christ, or which is conversant about Christ. No other Faith but this Faith;
and of this Faith there are diverse acts. 1. One is an uniting act. 2. And there
is a justifying act. 3. A third is a drawing act.

The faith which brings us into the Covenant, is that faith which does unite us
unto A faith that does unite us to Christ.
Christ, which makes us one with him: And we being thus united to Christ, we
are thereupon, and therefore in the Covenant: Faith considered as justifying,
does not bring us into the Covenant; for our justifying follows our being in
the Covenant; we must first be in the Covenant before we can have
Righteousness and forgiveness of sins. Neither does faith as drawing any
grace from Christ bring us into the Covenant: Forasmuch as all the fruits of
communion are consequents unto us being first in the Covenant. But it is faith
considered only as uniting us unto Christ which brings us into the Covenant.

For the opening of this Point (which is as difficult and weighty as any that I
meet with) give me favor to enlarge my self a little in showing unto you

1. That there is an union twixt Christ and us. 2. That faith is the means or
instrument of that union. 3. That our interest in the Covenant necessarily
flows from this union with Christ.
1. That there is an union twixt Christ and us, not an imaginary union, an
union There is a union betwixt Christ and us.
only in the apprehension of the mind (as an object apprehended is conveyed
and united to the intellect) but a very real union: Hence it is that the Church
is called the Body, and Christ is called the Head, Ephesians. 5. 23. Christ is the
Head of the Church, and he is the Savior of the body. And verse 30 Ye are
members of his body, and of his flesh, and of his bon^s. Now there is a real
union 'twixt the body and the head, and between every member of the body and of
the head; they are all joined to the head by the Nerves and Ligatures from
whence they receive their sensation and strength. In like manner there is an
union between us and Christ, we are joined to the Lord, (1 Cor. 6. 17.) and he
is ^oyned unto us, etc.

The Church is called a building, and house, and Christ is called the
foundation and cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20. We are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Cornerstone, 1 Pet.
2. 4. To whom coming as unto a living stone, verse 5 ye also as lively stones
are built up a spiritual house, etc. There is an union twixt the building and
the foundation, the building depends upon the foundation, and the foundation
bears up the building.

The Church is the Branches, and Christ is the Vine, Joh. 15. 5. I am the Vine,
and ye are the branches: The living branches have their union with the roots,
there they grow, and there they live, and are nourished.

The Church is called the Spouse and Wife of Christ, and Christ the Husband: I
will marry thee to my self, Hosea 2. 19. I have espoused you unto one husband,
says Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 2. And twixt them the union is so near, that they are
called one flesh, Genesis 2. 24. so likewise are Christ and they who are united to
Christ called one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17.

2. That faith is the means and instrument of our union with Christ: By which
we Faith is the instrument of our union.
are near to him, enjoy him, are joined unto him, possess him as ours. And
this the Scripture holds forth unto us abundantly in the several expressions of
faith: Our believing is sometimes styled a coming to Christ; Come unto me; and
No man comes to me except, etc. A receiving of Christ, Joh. 1. 12. To as many
as received him, etc. A livingly Christ, and a living in Christ. Because I
live, ye shall live also, Joh. 14. 19. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son
of God, Gal. 2. 20. and a joining to Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 17. A being in Christ:
Ye are in Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and that is by faith. A partaking of
Christ, a planting of us into Christ, and Christ is said to dwell in us by
faith, and so do we dwell in him by faith, and abide in him by faith. A eating
and drinking of Christ, Joh. 6. 56.

When the Spirit of God works faith in our hearts, our hearts are now brought
in to Christ; they are subdued and captivated: We embrace Christ, and we come
in to Christ; and Christ is ours, and we are his, and the whole heart ir settled
upon Christ, and knit unto Christ, and becomes one with Christ.

3. Our interest in the Covenant necessarily follows from this union with
Christ. Our interest in the Covenant (...) from (...). The ^^^ena^t was (...)
^ade with Christ, and (...) us in relation to Christ.
Being brought by faith into Christ, you are now in the Covenant: And that I
shall clear unto you thus.

1. The Covenant of God was made first with Christ as the head of the Church,
and with us in relation unto Christ, and with Christ in relation to us, Tit. 1.
2. In hope of eternal life which God promised before the world began: To whom
did he promise that eternal life for us, but unto Christ? with whom he did
Covenant for us, and in whom with us, Isa. 42. 6. I will give thee for a
Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles. The same you read in Isa.
49. 8. Jesus Christ is not only the Messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. nor
only the surety of the Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. nor only the Mediator of the
Covenant, as standing twixt God and us, Heb. 12. 24. but he is the principal
confederate in the Covenant. Christ stands as a public person in the Covenant;
and when God made a Covenant with him, he made it with him for himself and all
his, with all that should be brought in unto him. As Adam stood in the Covenant
of works, not as a private person, but as a public person, and that Covenant
was made with him, and with all his posterity; so the Covenant which God made
with Christ, it was made with Christ as a public person, as the Head of all
the Church with him and all his: And therefore as soon as you are brought in by
faith to Christ, you are immediately brought into the Covenant.

2. In Christ, and by Christ God is our God, and our Father; and therefore if
by faith you are brought into Christ, you are brought into the Covenant: Let
God In and by Christ God is our God.
look on us as out of Christ, he must look on us as enemies, and not as
children; and if we look on God out of Christ, we must behold him as our Judge,
but not as our Father. But consider us as brought into Christ, now we are
reconciled to God; and now in what relation God stands to Christ, in the same
he stands to us; and in what relation Christ stands to God, in the same do we
stand to God. And what privilege Christ enjoyes, the same do we enjoy by
Christ; he is a God to Christ, and a Father to Christ, Psalm. 89. 26. He shall
cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God, etc. And thus we being in Christ, he
is to us. Joh. 20. 17. I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and
your God; and Christ is the Son of God, and so are we the sons of God, 1 John
3. 1. Christ is the Heir of God, and so are we heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ, Romans 8. 17.

3. When you are by faith brought into union with Christ (so that you are his)
Being by faith united to Christ we enjoy all blessings
you now enjoy life, and promises, and all blessings, 1 John 5. 12. He that
has the Son, has life. 1 Cor. 3. 22. All are yours: verse 23. and you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding
great and precious promises, and you may plead them all, for they are yea, and
in Christ Amen. Ephesians 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord jesus
Christ who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ.

4. This union with Christ directly stands in opposition to a sinners being cut
off Our union with Christ brings us into a state of favor.
from God, and brings him again into a state of favor. The soul can no more
receive ought from God, till it be one with him by Christ, than Christ could
merit any thing for us till the Deity and the flesh were fully united: and no
more than the soul can impart any thing to the body till they be one.

Thus have you heard what faith that is, which is the condition of the
Covenant; viz. A faith of union, a faith which brings us into Christ, and
unites us with Christ: I now proceed unto the second question.

SECT. II.
2. Quest. WHether Faith only be the Condition of the Covenant? Is Whether
faith only be the condition of the Covenant.
not Holiness required? Is not Repentance? Is not new obedience?

Sol. For answer unto this, we must distinguish

1. Between the Covenant, and persons in the Covenant: If you speak of persons
Distinguish betwixt the Covenant, and the persons in the Covenant.
in the Covenant, certainly holiness is required of them (ye shall be holy, for
I the Lord your God am holy; and be ye holy, for I am holy) and holiness is
promised to all the people in Covenant: And holiness is wrought in all the
people of the Covenant: All the people of God are a holy people; but though
holiness be in the Covenanted, yet it is not in the condition of the Covenant:
God does not say, If you be holy, then I will be your God and accept of you,
but if you believe; when you are brought into the Covenant, then you are made
holy; but that which brings you into the Covenant, that which God insists with
you for so as to be your God, is faith. Receive my Christ, believe on him, and
I will be your God.

2. Though Faith be the only condition as to entrance in the Cvenant, yet this
faith will Though faith be the only condition, yet it brings us to holiness.
bring you to holiness as a fruit of the Covenant. For this faith brings you to
Christ, to union with him, and communion with him in holiness: As soon as faith
brings you into union with Christ, Christ makes you partakers of that unction
of holiness wherewith he himself is anointed.

3. There is a difference 'twixt the persons to whom promises are made, and the
There is a difference betwixt the persons to whom the promises are made, and
the condition upon which they are performed. New obedience is a consequent
effect, and not an antecedent condition.
condition upon which those promises are performed. Indeed you read of many
promises made to brokenhearted and penitent persons, but the application of
them all is only by Faith: The forgiveness of sin cannot be applied by any hand
but that of faith which seed the promise of it, and seeks the performance of it
by and for Christ.

4. For newness of obedience, this is a consequent effect, and not an
Autecedent condition; for it is impossible to see fruits till you find life:
And besides this, that faith which lets you into Covenant, is a very fruitful
Faith, it graffs you into such a root which can enable you (and will do so) for
fruits of life, as the first Adam does his Branches for fruits of death: So
then it is faith, and faith only which is the condition of the Covenant, yet it
is such a faith, which though it takes no graces or works with it as
competitors in the nature of a condition with it, yet it does infer and draw
after it all these Graces, and all good works, as Austin said, Bona opera
sequuntur justificatum, licet non praecedunt justificandum, etc.

SECT. III.
3. Quest. Why is Faith singled out to be the condition of the Covenant Why
faith is the only condition.
of Grace?

There is nothing whatsoever which does so fit and answer a Covenant of Grace
as Faith does; for in this Covenant God deals in promises, and by a Mediator:
Faith best answers the Covenant of grace
And the promises are objects proper to faith: As precepts are to obedience,
and threatenings to fear, so are promises to faith: And for Jesus Christ the
Mediator, deal with him you cannot but by faith.

Object. Indeed love deals with Christ as well as faith (Christ is the object
of our love, and of our faith) But then here

1. That love deals with Christ in the strength of faith; first faith deals,
and then love deals with Christ. 2. Though love deals with Christ, yet it is
another way than faith: Love is bringing into Christ, but Faiths work is
receiving all from Christ, and resting on Christ, etc.
2. There is nothing but Faith which will, or can acknowledge a free Covenant:
And all as freely given unto us: Set up any thing but faith, and that will set
up us, Nothing but faith will acknowledge a free Covenant.
and pull down grace: Any thing but faith must be something in our selves; and
something in our selves will deprive grace of the glory, yea it will deny
grace; but faith will do none of this, because faith is a mere gift of grace,
and faith receives all as free gift, finds nothing in us at all, but rece^ves
all, and lives wholly on the grace of God in Christ.

3. It is of faith, that the promises might be sure; so the Apostle, Romans 4.
16. It is of faith that the promise might be sure.
Adam had a Covenant as well as we (and therefore some observe that he had one
sacrament of death, and another of life, to assure him of death in case he
sinned, as well as to assure him of life in case he obeyed) because it was made
upon condition of works: And truly if Adam who was so every w^y furnished,
could not hold up a Covenant upon a Condition of works, much less should we do
it, being now utterly broken by him: But now the promise of ^ife being made to
us upon condition of faith, it is therefore made sure; for ^aith builds upon a
sure foundation, and faith has a sure word of promise.

4. The Covenant of grace excludes all boastings in our selves, Romans 3. 27. and
Faith excludes all boasting in our selves.
therefore faith is necessary for us; for boasting is excluded, not by the Law
of works, but by the Law of Faith, Ibid. If you should put in works for the
condition, then the sinner would be ready to boast, All this I have kept from
my youth. This have I done, and that have I done, and I never offended thy
will; the wages is due debt to me: O but this must never be, etc.

5. There are such things undertaken in the Covenant, as nothing but faith can
tell Nothing but faith can tell what to make of the things undertaken in the
Covenant.
what to make of them. I will forgive your iniquities, and will give you a new
heart, and I will heal your backslidings, and I will love them freely, and I
will forgive your sins for mine own sake. These are absolute Mysteries without
faith.

Before I proceed any further in this Point, I would make some useful
Application of what I have delivered already. Is Faith the condition of the
Conant?

SECT. IV.
1. Use THen how are men mistaken! How have they deluded themselves! how To
discover the presumption of many who plead their interest in the promises
without the performance of the condition.
must they return ashamed, who have nursed up their fancies and presumptions
about the mercy of God, and the many promises of God about salvation, and other
blessings, yea and about God himself, what a good, and gracious, and merciful
God he is, and so will be to them?

O but sirs! There is a condition in the Bond. God makes many sweet and
comfortable promises, O but there is a condition; And God says he will be such
a gracious and merciful God, etc. O but there is a condition; and he says that
he will save, and give eternal life; O but there is a condition, a condition
that you think not of, a condition that you never attained unto: Faith is the
condition of the Covenant: You must be believers in Christ, and then and so you
must claim the promises, you must have an interest in Christ, or else you can
never have an interest in the privileges of the Covenant: you have owned the
promised mercy, and the promised salvation in the Covenant; O but you have not
all this while owned Christ by says, and therefore you have all this while
deluded your souls.

The Apostle faith all men have not faith; and the Prophet says, Who has
believed our report? and Christ himself says, He that believes shall be
saved; and he that believes not shall be damned. Why brethren! If Faith be the
condition of the Covenant, If faith be necessary to bring us into the Covenant;
Then no unbeliever is yet in the Covenat, for no unbeliever has faith: No, no,
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living; and mercy is not the portion
of unbelievers, but of believers, and salvation by Christ is interessed only on
them who believe on Christ: And thou art (to this day) an unbeliever, thou art
utterly destitu^e of faith. And there are six things which show that thou^ art
so.

1. One is the unsensiblenesse of thy sinful and wretched condition, and of thy
need which thy soul has of Christ* 2. A second is, the exceeding ignorance in
thy heart of Christ, as the Mediator of the Covenant. 3. A third is, the
exceeding pride, and confidence on thi^^ own righteousness, and on thine own
works. 4. A fourth is, the continual neglects and disesteeme of the Gospel of
Christ. 5. A fifth is, the fruitless reception of the many offers of Christ. 6.
A sixth is, the incomplyance of thy heart with the Lord Jesus, and averseness,
and refusing of subjection unto Christ. Thou will not have him to reign over
thee. Ah poor creature! How have thou befooled thy self! and deluded thy soul
with a vain presumption of interest in the Covenant, whilst as yet thou have
not faith to interest thy soul in Christ.
2. Use. Is says of union the condition of the Covenant! Then as you have Look
to your faith that it be a faith of union.
reason to look to your selves, because all men have not ^aith; so you have
reason to look to your faith, for you may have a faith, which yet is not a
faith of union: That is a considerable passage of Christ in Joh. 15. 2. Every
branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away. verse 6. If a man abides
not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them
and cast them into the fire and they are burned: A branch may be in a tree two
ways: One is by a mere corporeal adherence by cleaving and sticking to the
body of the tree: and so every dead branch is in the tree, as well as those
that live; such branches have no union, they are dead and cut off, and cast
away into the fire. Another is by a real participation of the life, sap, and
influence of the root: That which makes us to be in Christ any kind of way, is
Faith: and according to the differences of faith are those differences of being
in Christ. You may read in Scripture of a dead faith, James 2. 26. This dead
faith takes in an external profession of Christ, and a self aiming dependence
on Christ to keep us from Hell, and get us to Heaven. But for all this there is
no real union with Christ. And we read too of a lively and unfeigned faith, of
a faith which joins us and Christ in one Spirit, which graffs us indeed into
Christ and makes us partakers of the life and grace of Christ. O where is this
faith? this living faith? this ingraffing faith? this uniting faith is the only
precious faith, and the only faith which brings us into the Covenant, and the
only faith which can look on God as our God, and promising mercy and salvation
unto us? If you have not this faith, you have no interest in Christ; and if you
have no interest in Christ, you have no interest in God, nor in the Covenant of
God: You cannot own God for yours, nor can you own the promises of God as
yours, as made unto you.

But here now occur two serious questions.

1. One is, How we may know whether our faith be a faith of union which unites
Two serious Questions.
us to Christ. 2. The second is, How we may attain unto the faith of union,
which only brings us into the Covenant.
SECT. V.
1. Quest. HOw we may know whether our Faith be a Faith of real union with How
we may know whether our faith be a faith of union.
Christ? a faith which unites us to Christ indeed?

Sol. This is a most pertinent question, because our real interest in the
Covenant of grace depends upon it, all depends upon it; out of Christ, and out
of Covenant; in Christ, and in Covenant. And if your faith be an uniting faith,
then Christ is yours, and God is yours, and all the good of the Covenant is
yours.

Now there are five things which are to be considered about the faith of union,
(or the faith which indeed unites us to Christ.) Five things about the faith of
union.


1. The manner (...) it is wrought in the heart. 2. The peculiar operations of
it upon the soul in relation to this union. 3. The very act, or acts by which,
and upon which the soul is indeed brought into union. 4. The qualities of this
union by faith. 5. The choice influences or effects which do always attend
that union with Christ by faith.
1. If your faith be a faith which unites you to Christ, Then it is the work
and The manner how it is wrought in the heart. It is the work of the Spirit of
Christ.
fruit of the spirit, and it is wrought by the Spirit in an uniting way.

1. It is the work of the Spirit of Christ: None does or can raise and produce
this faith, but the very Spirit of God, Col. 2. 12. Ye are risen with him
through the faith of the operation of God who has raised him from the dead:
His mighty power is put forth to produce it, Ephesians. 1. 19. 1 Cor. 2. 5. Your
faith stands not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. 2 Cor. 4. 13.
We having the same Spirit of Faith. In all these places the Apostle speaks of
that faith which interests your persons in Christ: This faith he calls the
Demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. 2. 4. and the power of God,
and the operation of God, and the Spirit of Faith; and in Isa. 53. 1. The
revealing of the Arm of God.

Consider this Faith in all the parts and degrees of it, you shall find that
every one of them comes from the Spirit of God.

Faith is sometimes styled knowledge, and believing knowing; why! the right
knowledge of Christ is a fruit or work of the Spirit of God, Matthew. 11. 25.
Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto Babes.

Faith is sometimes styled acknowledgment, (Col. 2. 2. The acknowledgement of
the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.) And no man can say that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3.

Faith, or believing is sometimes styled a coming unto Christ; and says Christ
himself, No man can come to me except the Father draw him, Joh. 6. 44. It is
called a receiving of Christ, Joh. 1. 12. which ability to receive Christ
depends only on the will of God, verse 13. Well then, uniting faith is the sole
work of the Spirit of God, if any man be brought into Christ, and joined unto
Christ, this work is wrought by the Spirit of Christ.

2. The spirit works this uniting Faith in an uniting way or manner; how is
that The Spirit works this in a uniting way.
will you say? Thus it is, when the Spirit does work this faith in us, he does
it in a Gospel manner, the Gospel way is the uniting way, accompanying it all
along, 1. By Evangelical light. 2. By Evangelical offers. 3. By Evangelical
promises. 4. By Evangelical efficacy.

1. He lets in such a Gospel Light into the soul of a broken and troubled
sinner, that The Spirit lets in a Gospel light into the soul.
be is now able to see, and to discern the wonderful grace of God in Christ;
even the glories of Christ, the sealing, and anointing o^ him to be the
Mediator, and Redeemer, and Savior of sinners, and the life of the world, the
Prince of peace, the only help and hope of them that are lost, Joh. 3. 16. The
Gospel says so, and the Spirit makes him to see it so. The people that walked
in darkness have seen great l^ght, Isa. 9 2. Beholding as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

2. When he has let in such a light that the sinner is convinced of the
infinite Enables the soul to apprehend the singular kindness of God in the
offers of Christ
mercy and grace of God in Christ; Then he further enables the sinner to
apprehend the singular kindn^ss of God in the offers of this Christ unto him
(unto you is the word of this salvation sent, Acts 13. 26. and verse 38. Be it
known unto you, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins) And the spirit accompanies the Gospel in this offer. As the Gospel
outwardly offers Christ to sinners, so does the Spirit inwardly offer Christ to
the heart, and secretl^ ^alls there, Come unto Christ, you are poor, and you
are thirsty, and you are br^^^h, and bruised in heart. And such sinners as
these does Christ call to come unto him and live for ever. He was anointed for
you, and is sent to you.

3. The Spirit backs these offers and calls with express promises: for though
the He backs these offers with Promises
sinner be exceeding glad to find out Christ the Savior: yet he is exceeding
doubtful whether he may close with Christ thus offering himself unto him:
therefore herein (likewise) does the Spirit appear toward the working of
faith, viz. he does clear up the promises of the Gospel, so that the poor
sinner may be convinced and satisfied that Jesus Christ is contented and
willing to be his, and that he may come, and be kindly and graciously accepted
of Christ: Those passages, Him that comes to me I will in no wise reject, Joh.
6. 27. And let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take of
the water of life freely, Rev. 22 17. And a bruised reed will he not break,
Matthew. 12. 20. Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest, Matthew. 11 28. All these and other promises and encouragements. are set
home by the Spirit upon the heart of the poor sinner, so that he deemes that he
hears Jesus Christ himself speaking alluring comforts unto his soul.

4. The Spirit rests not here, but proceeds further: For notwithstanding all
this, The Spirit carries on the work further.
yet the poor sinner finds himself without all strength, and says he* I am
not able to believe though I see this Christ, and his goodness, and his love,
and his kindness, and his graciousnesse, yet I cannot believe, yet I cannot
come to him, etc.

Now upon this there are two things more wrought by the Spirit in the heart of
the poor sinner 1. One is Earn^st desires for faith. O Lord give me faith, He
works earnest desires for faith.
persuade my heart bring in my heart, draw it to Christ, for Christ his sake.
2. The other is, The very gift or work of faith: The Spirit by his mighty power
gives an ability unto the heart of the sinner to come to him to receive him and
thu^ uniting faith is wr^ught, namely by the Spirit of Christ accompanying and
blessing the Gospel (as you have heard) unto the soul of a sinner: Therefore
look well to your selves in this; If your faith be not a faith which the Spirit
of God works by the Gospel, it is a false faith; it is a faith of delusion, and
not of union; it is a presumption of your own making, a mere imagination of
your own: No faith will bring you to Christ, but that faith which comes from
the Spirit of Christ. He works says it self.


2. That Faith which unites to Christ, has always some particular operations
upon the soul in relation to that union with Christ: For the faith (which is
The peculiar operations of faith about this union.
wrought by the Spirit of Christ) is no base quality, nor is it any dead
quality; but it is Noble, High, and Active: Now there are three things which
this faith does work in every one that has it. 1. An exceeding appreciation or
esteem of Christ. 2. A fervent desire to enjoy Christ. 3. A separation of the
heart It works
from every thing that would hinder it from union with Christ.

1. If your faith be this says of union, then it has raised your hearts to
exceeding An exceeding esteem of Christ.
high estimation of Christ; other people have no high, nor great thoughts of
Christ. What is thy beloved more than another beloved, said they to the Church,
Cant. 5. 9. There is no beauty in him that we should desire him, said they,
Isa. 57. 2. Not this man, but Barabbas, said the Jews, Joh. 18. 40. The Farm
and the Oxen are preferred before him, Luke 14. 18, 19. But unto you who
believe he is precious, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Precious faith makes us
to look on Christ as precious. How did the Church look on Christ in that Cant.
5? why, As the chiefest of ten thousand. verse 10. As altogether lovely, verse
16. How did those Believers look on Christ in Joh. 1. 14? We beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of Grace and Truth:
How did Paul look on Christ? Phil. 3. 8. I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: Beloved! Never was there
unbeliever ^^o had high thoughts of Christ; and never was there sound believer
but he h^^ precious thoughts of Christ; the Apostle tells us as much, 1 Cor. 1.
23. We preach Christ crucified unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the
Greeks foolishness. verse 24. But unto them which are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God: O sirs! The
excellencies of Christ are hidden excellencies from the men of the world, and
no eye can see them but the eye of faith; there must be a light shining in the
heart to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. When faith is wrought, then a light is wrought to see the
beauties of Christ, the beauty of his Person, the beauty of his Offices, the
beauty of his Love, of his Death, of his Righteousness, of his Holiness, of his
Peace, etc. the veil is removed, and we do with open face as in a glass behold
the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. etc. So that none like Christ, he is the
Pearl of great price; and nothing like Christ, no love like his, no enjoyment
like the enjoyment of him, etc.

2. If your faith be this Faith of union, Then it has raised in your hearts
Exceeding desires to enjoy Christ.
exceeding desires to enjoy Christ: I must have this Christ, I cannot live
without this Christ: O Lord give me Christ, I have nothing if I have not
Christ. There is nothing in heaven or earth that I desire in comparison of
Christ. I desire to be found in him, says Paul: He is the desire of all
Nations, Hag. 2 7. You never had such desires toward Christ, until faith was
wrought in you; such high desires, such longings, such hungrings, such
thirstings; nor such busy and stirring desires; saw you him whom my soul
loves! and I sought him whom my soul loves, and I will seek him whom my
soul loves: Nor such unsatisfied desires. Nothing satisfies you, or puts an
end to your desires, but Christ desired by you.

3. If your faith be this faith of union: Then it did work in your hearts a A
separation from all things which hinder union.
separation from all things which otherwise would have hindered y^u from union
with Christ. You know that whatsoever keeps things at a distance (so that they
cannot close) that same hinders union. Now there are four things which keep the
soul and Christ at a distance, Christ and we cannot close whiles they
continue, and faith breaks them all down.

1. A proud conceit of our own fullness, Righteousness, sufficiency: I came not
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, said Christ And the wh^le
need From a proud conceit of our own fullness.
no physician, but the sick. And the Son of man is come to seek and to save
that which was lost. Now faith that unites to Christ, breaks this partition
wall, and levels this mountain: it empties the sinner of himself, it takes away
all confidence in himself, and will (by no means) suffer him to rest upon, or
to be found in his own righteousness, Phil. 3. 3. We rejoice in Christ Jesus,
and have no confidence in the flesh. verse 9. And be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ.

2. A love of sin: This is likewise an absolute hindrance of union with Christ:
From a love of sin.
That heart cannot close with Christ which closes with sin; and Christ will
not close with that heart which is joined to sin. Ephraim is joined to Idols,
let him alone, Hosea 4. 17. (as if he should say) his heart loves Idols, and
therefore I will have nothing to do with him: So Joh. 3. 19. This is the
condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather
than light. Christ is that light, and he presented and offered himself to
sinners, but they loved their sins, and would not part with them to join with
Christ. Now faith which brings a soul to Christ, has parted that soul and
sin; it has given a bill of divorce unto sin; it takes off the heart from sin;
what, shall I prefer hell before heaven? shall I prefer damnation before
salvation? shall I for this sinful lusts-sake deny Christ? my heart refuse to
marry him who is the Son of God, the Lord of glory, the Prince of Peace, the
Savior of sinners? What have I to do any more with Idols! said Ephraim, Hosea
14. 8. Get thee hence, said they in Isa. 30. 22. How shall we that are dead to
sin, live any longer therein, Romans 6. 2.

3. A love of the world: He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not
From a love of the world.
worthy of me? and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy
of me, Matthew 10. 37. If a man says I will have my ease, and I will have my
liberty, and I will have my pleasures, and I will have my profits, and I will
have my friends, and I will have my honors, and I will not have Christ with
any loss or cross; this man loves the world, and this hinders union with
Christ: The young man lost Christ upon this very account, Luke 18. 22, 23. But
if Faith indeed be wrought in the heart, all this language is removed out of
the way: Faith overcomes the world, 1 John 5. 4. The Merchants sold all for to
buy the pearl of great price; and Moses in Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. We have
forsaken all and followed thee, said the Disciples. When a man has faith, he
can be content to be Fatherless and Motherlesse, to be friendlesse and
landlesse, to part with all rather than he will be Christlesse; Faith sees
enough in Christ, though he should enjoy no more but Christ. Faith will enable
us to trample upon the world, so that we may enjoy Christ, it will enable us to
break off with all, and to break down all to possess him who is better than
all.

4. Unbelief. This locks and shuts up the heart that it cannot move at all to
From unbelief.
Christ, cannot see Christ, nor hear Christ, nor desire Christ, nor give
consent to Christ: But faith breaks down unbelief, breaks open the prison, and
breaks asunder all the shackles and fetters of unbelief; answers all
exceptions, reasonings, cavils, delays, fears, doubts, and sets the soul at
liberty, and works in the whole soul to Christ.

O beloved, try your hearts by what I have spoken in this particular; you think
that you have this uniting faith: But what has that faith wrought upon you,
and within you, to bring you and Christ together? It is not so easy a work to
match Christ and the soul together; nothing can do that but faith, and no
faith can do that, but such a faith which presents Christ in that height of
goodness, and beauty, and excellency, that the soul is drawn out with that
strength and vehemence of desire after Christ, as to part with all to enjoy
Christ, etc. And who has found it thus? Is there not yet something or other
which stand between Christ and our hearts? etc.

3. Thirdly, you may know whether your faith be indeed a faith of union, by The
acts by which the soul is brought into union.
those acts or workings in the soul immediately and necessarily to make up an
union between a soul and Christ; unto which when the soul attains, then
Christ is ours, and we are Christ's: For as there are some acts which are
immediate to constitute a conjugal union twixt person and person, without which
there is no conjugal relation between them, and upon which the relation is
immediately made; so there are some acts of the soul immediate to the being of
the Spiritual union twixt a person and Christ, without which there is no
relation, and upon which there is an immediate relation twixt him and Christ.

There are two acts upon the soul when the union is made between Christ and us.

1. One is, an act or work of the Spirit on the behalf of Christ, testifying
unto our An act of the Spirit testifying that Christ is willing to be ours.
hearts, and persuading our hearts that Jesus Christ is contented, is very
willing to become ours; to be an Husband to us, to be our Head, to be our
Savior. Jesus Christ does outwardly express his consent in the Gospel, but he
inwardly delivers it unto us by his Spirit. As by the spirit he becomes ours
(If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. 9.) So by
the Spirit he testifies his willingness and consent to be ours, yea and that he
is ours: Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us, 1 John 3. 24.

2. The other is, the act or effect of faith on our behalf: For the Spirit in
testifying unto us the willingness and consent of Christ to be ours, does at
the same An act of faith in a Reciprocal c^nsent from us to Christ.
time work faith in our hearts, which draws out a reciprocal consent from us to
Christ. And therefore as Christ is said to abide in us by his Spirit, so he is
said to dwell in us by faith. These two acts make up our union: I take you,
says Christ; and I take, you says the Believer; I consent says Christ, and I
consent says the Believer: This mutual consent makes the match or union.

Ob. But will some say, Is this all? and is there no more (on our part) to be
put forth to declare that our Faith is a Faith of union?

Sol. I answer, If you speak as to the very uniting work, this is all that
faith is to do, to enable our wills or hearts to give a right consent to
Christ, to accept of him, to receive him.

Ob. And who then has not this faith? for every sinner will give his consent
to take Christ, and receive Christ, and to be his.

Sol. 1. That is not so; for many sinners refuse Christ, and reject Christ, and
will not consent unto him, as you may read in Luke 14. 18. They all with one
consent began to make excuse; and in Matthew. 22. 5. They made light of it and
went their way, etc.

2. Every consent (even) toward Christ, to have him to be ours, and for us to
be his, is not the consent of faith: There is a fourfold consent toward Christ
which A fourfold consent which is not the consent of faith. A consent for the
future.
is not a consent flowing from Faith, and therefore never unites to Christ.

1. Consensus de futuro, as this, I do con^ent hereafter to yield up my heart
to Christ that he shall be mine, and I will be his; but for the present. I
cannot, or I do not close with him: This kind of consent is no other but a
present dissent, in which no conjugal union does consist; for it is only the
present consent and acceptance of the person which makes up that union, and
which gives propriety and interest. And thus is it in the matter twixt us and
Christ; not a future purpose to have Christ, but a present acceptance of Christ
makes the match between us and him: When I come to be old, and to be sick, and
to dye, then I will be Christ's, and then I will own and embrace him! well, but
whose are you for the present? your union is where your present choice is, and
where your present acceptance is.

2. Consensus involuntarius, an involuntary consent: Properly every consent is
An involuntary consent.
voluntary, but I call it involuntary, because if the will might use its own
liberty with our safety, it would not consent though at present it does. An
involuntary consent I call that which a person would not yield, were he in an
estate of liberty and safety; but being in a distress out of which he cannot
be helped, unless he now yields, therefore he does consent or yield: Such a
consent does many a sinner give to take Christ, and to become his, namely in
some grievous strait of conscience and fear of the wrath of God, and he knows
that there is no easing of the one, nor escaping of the other but by Christ;
and therefore he does (de praesenti) come in to Christ and professes that he
is content to close with him, only out of a self respect, as one in a storm
comes under a tree. It is true indeed, that the consent of Faith is a present
consent, but withal it is a very free and voluntary consent; the heart is
never forced, but persuaded and graciously allured and inclined to Christ (not
out of mere exigency, but pure excellency, and that from the beauty and
goodness in Christ) when faith makes it to consent unto Christ.

3. Consensus distinguens: There is you know the Person of Christ, and there A
distinguishing consent.
are the Benefits or Portion by Christ. Though a man has not that Faith (of
which we are discoursing) yet he may voluntarily consent to take Christ with a
respect to his Portion (that is) to the Benefits by Christ; with all his heart
he may be willing to have the Righteousness of Christ to justify him, and the
Blood of Christ to get him the pardon of all his sins, and the Merits of Christ
to procure salvation for him; and yet this person cannot, and will not consent
to take the Person of Christ, and to take Christ as his Head, and to be his
Lord, nor to become a member of Christ, and a servant unto Christ, and Spouse
to Christ: This is a consenting unto the things of Christ, but not unto Christ
himself. As if one should think to marry himself unto an estate only: But the
consent arising from faith is otherwise, for this consent is immediately given
to the Person of Christ, and therefore it is called a receiving of Christ, Joh.
1. 12. And a marrying to himself, Hosea 2. 19. Indeed when you have consented
to take Christ, then does Christ (according to his promises) settle upon you
all his saving benefits; but that which faith immediately looks on is the very
Person of Christ, to unite our persons to his own Person: To take him as our
Head, and as our Husband, etc.

4. Consensus-exceptionis: I call that a consent of exception wherein a person
A consent of exception.
yelds to another, yet with a reservation, and with a provision upon such and
such conditions, and not otherwise; as thus, I am content and do yield to take
Christ to be mine, and my self to be his, even in respect of his Person, but
yet so, that with him I may enjoy my sins, or so, that I may not hazard my
estate by the match and so that I may not suffer with him. O no! Christ will
never be yours, and you can never be his with those reserves and provisions: If
any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and
follow me: As if a woman should think any man would marry her upon this
condition As long as you are rich, and at liberty, and in health you shall be
my husband, and so that I may be an adultress: The consent which indeed arises
from faith (which makes union 'twixt us and Christ) is a consent freely taking
Christ, and fully taking Christ, and immediately taking Christ, and sincerely
taking Christ; Christ and none but Christ, Christ and all Christ, Christ and
all that may befall us with Christ; Christ at his best, and Christ at his
worst, Christ in Heaven as triumphing, and Christ on earth as suffering: A
consent to live with Christ and to die for Christ, a Christ upon any condition
that Christ will make: And a Christ upon no condition that my vain heart would
make.

4. You may know whether you have this faith of union, by the qualities of the
The qualities of this union by faith.
union made between us and Christ. The opening of this union is (I do
ingeniously confess) one of the difficultest works that ever I have perused;
Not without cause does the Apostle call it a Mystery, and a great mystery,
Ephesians. 5. 32. There are three unions which are high, and not easy to be
opened. 1. The union of the three Persons in one Nature. 2. The union of the
two Natures in one Person. 3. The union of the Church with Christ, or of every
Believing person with the person of Christ. But (with Gods assistance) I shall
endeavor to say something toward it.

The union which is made with us and Christ by faith has these seven
properties or qualities.

1. It is real, and not imaginary: There is a work which is only in the
imagination It is real and not imaginary
and apprehension of the mind, wherein though the species and forms and
Idea's of objects are in our minds, yet the objects themselves are not with
us, but are far enough from us; such union as this faith does not work. But the
union which Faith makes is a real union, even such a union wherein we are
indeed rooted or joined unto Christ: Therefore the Apostle speaking of this
union twixt us and Christ, he expesseth it by that union which is between a man
and his wife, saying, They two shall be one flesh, Ephesians. 5. 31. (The man shall
be joined to his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh:) And Christ himself
expresses this union twixt himself and us, by the union of the Branches with
the Vine, Joh. 15. 5. I am the Vine, and ye are the Branches: The Branches are
really united to the Vine, and so are we to Christ; our union with Christ is so
real, that our bodies are called the Members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15. and we
are said to be one Spirit with him, verse 17.

2. It is substantial, and not vertual only; it does not consist only in the
reception Substantial, and not vertual only.
or participation of the graces and gifts of Christ; as if all our union with
Christ were like our participation with fire: only in the heat of it, and not
in the substance of it. No! But our union with Christ is substantial, our
substance is united to the substance of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 30. We are members of
his body, of his flesh, and of his bone. And Joh. 6. 56. He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Upon which words
Cyril says, that Christ by the communication of his flesh dwells in us, and we
are his members, even by a natural participation: which expression must be
understood de re quae participatur, for we are united to the very flesh and
substance of Christ; but not de modo participandi, for that is only by faith,
and not per contactum; we are united to Christ not as wax to wax by a corporal
contact, but by says: His substance and our substance, yet by faith.

3. It is total, and not partial. Not the soul only of a Believer is united to
the soul Total, and not partial.
of Christ; nor the flesh only of a Believer is united to the flesh of Christ;
but the whole believing person is united by faith with the whole person of
Christ: as in the conjugal union twixt Adam and Evah, that union was twixt
person and person, so is the spiritual union twixt Christ and us, of which that
was a Type and Mystery: Jesus Christ is (in Scripture) styled our Head, and our
Savior, not of one part of us only, but of the whole he is the Savior; not of
our bodies only, or of our souls only, but of soul and body, of our whole
man; but then of salvation by him we partake not without union; and therefore
our whole man partakes of salvation by him; then of necessity our whole man
must have union with him: Moreover as our whole man is united to Christ, so our
whole man is united to whole Christ considered as Head and Savior of his
Church, not to his Divine Nature only, nor to his humane Natture only, but unto
the person of Christ consisting both of the Divine and of the Humane Nature:
and the reason of this is, because we are united to Christ as our Head, and as
our Savior, which Jesus Christ is not according to his humane Nature only as
man, nor according to his Divine Nature only as God, but according to both as
God and man: Hence is it that Christ and we are called one flesh, ^ph. 5. 31.
so are we called also one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. One flesh in respect of union
with his humane Nature, and one Spirit in respect of union with his Divine
Nature; And as he is said to be partaker of our flesh and blood, Hebr. 2. 14.
so are we said to be pa^takers of his Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. And truly
such a union as this with the Person of Christ in respect of his Humane and of
his Divine Nature, must necessarily be acknowledged, unless we will deny a
union with Christ as our Mediator and Savior. But now here are three
Questions which may be moved.

Whether this total union be not the same with the Hypostatical union.
1. Quest. One is whether this total union of our persons with the person of
Christ be not the same with the Hypostatical union of the two Natures in Christ.

Answ. I answer, it is not. For it is one thing for the Divine and humane
Nature to be united to the person of Christ; and it is another thing for us to
be united unto those natures in Christ: Again, the Hypostatical union, is in
the union of those Natures in the second person of the Trinity, who is the Son
of God by eternal generation. But our union is not so; we are not such sons of
God by eternal generation as Christ was, but by grace, which he was not.
Moreover our union with those natures, is by faith on our part; but the
Hypostatical union of those two Natures in Christ, is not an union by faith,
but by assumption of the humane Nature into an unity with the Divine Nature in
his Person.

Whether upon this union we do not become so many Mediators.
2. Quest. Whether, if we be united thus to the person of Christ in both his
Natures, we do not hereupon become so many Mediators, and Saviors, and Heads
of the Church, because in respect of the union of both these Natures Jesus
Christ is Head and Mediator.

Sol. I answer, this will by no means follow. For

1. As the personal union of the Wife with the person of her Husband, does not
at all make herto be an husband; so our personal union with Christ, does not at
all make us to be Christ, or to be Saviors, or Heads of the Church: we are
indeed united unto his Person, but not placed into his Office: And not so as to
be that Person.

2. There is a great difference twixt union of reception and participation, and
a union of denomination. We are united to Christ so that thereby we have
interest in, and benefit by Christ as a Mediator and Head; but not so as to be
denominated Mediators: only the union of the Divine and humane Natures in
Christ, denominates him to be Head and Mediator: For to make Christ to be a
Mediator, it was not only necessary that there should be such a union, but
also that the person in whom that union is to be found should be God; he that
is a Mediator betwixt God and Man, as he must be man, so also he must be God;
but though we be united to the Divine Nature in Christ, as well as to his
Humane Nature, yet we are not God.

Whether we are united to the Divine or Humane Nature first.
3. Quest. Whether by faith we be first united unto, and joined with the Divine
Nature, or humane Nature of Christ with himself (first) considered as man, or
with him first considered as God?

Sol. This Question although I find it argued in the writings of very godly
and learned men, yet truly (unto me) it does seem to savor of too much
curiosity, and for mine own part (so far as I do yet apprehend) I do think it
but a Scholastical nicity; for although you do find Jesus Christ revealed and
manifested in the Gospel, sometimes as man, and many acts ascribed unto his
Humane Nature in reference to our redemption; and somemes as God, and several
acts of his Divine Nature; yet (with submission to better Judgments) I do
conceive that our union does not begin first with one nature, and after that
with the other nature of Christ; but our union is with the Person of Christ (as
consisting of both Natures) at once. And my reason is this, because our union
is with Christ as Mediator (with whole Christ) at once: I beseech you consider.

When the Gospel offers Christ to a poor and distressed sinner, it does not
offer Christ in one Nature first, and in his other Nature next; but the Gospel
offers whole Christ at once; it offers (at once) Christ the Savior, and Christ
the Head, Christ the Redeemer (that is) the Person of Christ consisting of both
Natures: And when the Spirit of Christ comes into the heart to join Christ to
us, and when faith is formed in the heart to join us to Christ; why! the Spirit
at once applies the whole Christ unto you; and faith at once looks on Christ as
Head and Mediator, and (as so) unites you unto Christ: Faith looks on Christ
not in one Nature only, or in the other Nature only; but as a Mediator, as a
Head, as a Savior, and under that notion unites you to Christ: It is true that
the great works of Redemption, and satisfaction, and reconciliation appeared in
the humane Nature of Christ, and are frequently ascribed to his blood; and it
is as true, that the Divine Nature of Christ enabled the humane Nature of
Christ unto those works, and gave (as it were) life, and vigor, and efficacy
unto them, without which they could never have been done, nor have been such
effectual works: And it is as true that not any of those works were done in
respect of any of the Natures alone which did redeem and satisfy, etc. But it
was the person of Christ (consisting of them both) who did redeem, and
satisfy, and reconcile, and save, and under this notion Christ offers himself;
and we by faith do receive him. A near union.


4. The union between us and Christ by faith is a near union. And if I may so
express my self, an immediate union: It is (in Scripture) set forth by the
nearest of all unions here below. There are three unions here below, which are
most remakable for their nearness.

1. One is Artificial, as is that of a Building with the foundation: Our union
with Christ is expressed by this, in 1 Pet. 2. where Christ is called a lively
stone, verse 4. and a chief cornerstone, verse 6. (and our foundation, 1 Cor.
3. 11. and we are called a spiritual house built upon him, verse 5.

2. A second is Political, as is that of the Wife with the Husband by marriage:
And our union with Christ is often expressed by this also: In the Canticles,
and in Hosea 2. 19. and in Ephesians. 5. 31, 32.

3. A third is Physical, or Natural, as is that of the Head with the Body, and
of the Vine with the Branches; under these expressions also is our union with
Christ expressed, Ephesians. 5. 23. Christ is the Head of the Church, Joh. 15. 5. I
am the Vine, ye are the Branches: The union is so near 'twixt the Church and
Christ, that Christ compares it with the union of himself with the Father, Joh.
17. 21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that
they also may be one with us. verse 22. That they may be one, even as we are
one. Not that there is absolutely and in all respects that very self same union
of us with Christ, as of Christ with the Father; but that there is such a union
according to proportion, and to note also the mavelous neernesse of our union
with Christ: Which in this differs even from the natural union, where every
part of the body has not an immediate contiguity with the Head. And yet there
is not the meanest member of Christ, nor yet the choysest, but they do all of
them stand in the same equal nearness of union with Christ: Now that which I
aim at in the nearness of our union with Christ by faith is this; That where
faith makes the union, the heart of a person does so immediately an entirely
close with Christ, that there is nothing whatsoever which stands between it and
Christ; no love of sin, no love of the world, etc.

5. The union 'twixt us and Christ which is made by faith, it is a full and
complete A full and a complete union.
union. The whole man is joined to Christ, and so joined to Christ, that it is
joined to no other but Christ: Faith does so unite us to Christ, that
henceforth we are no more our own, but his; all that Christ has is ours, and
all that we have is his; our souls are his, and our bodies are his: Faith
brings in our whole man to Christ* when it unites us to Christ: It does not
keep back any part of us from Christ: It does not bestow one part of us upon
Christ, and another part of us upon the world, and another part of us upon sin;
no, Christ has all when faith unites us to Christ: he has all our minds, and
all our affections, he is our desire, and our love, and he is our delight, and
he is our hope.

6. The union 'twixt us and Christ which is made by faith, it is a satisfying A
satisfying union.
union: When a poor soul comes by faith to be one with Christ, so that it can
say, Christ is mine, and I am Christ's, now it is satisfied, it has enough, it
is replenished: As this union in the kind of it is most excellent, so in the
sense of it, it is most sweet: Faith uniting us to Christ finds all suitabe
good in Christ, and all happiness, life, love, mercy, grace, joy, peace,
salvation in him.

7. This union 'twixt us and Christ by faith, it is a firm and inseparable
union: A firm and inseparable union
An union that can never be b^oken asunder: and herein it goes beyond all other
unions which are used to illustrate this union; every one of them is soluble,
it may be broken off; the Head and the body may be severed; the Foundation and
the House may be separated: The Branches may be cut off from the Vine: The
Husband may be taken away from the Wife, and the Wife from the Husband; Yea the
soul and body may be disunited by death: But the union 'twixt us and Christ
remains for ever. There is not only a continuation of it all our life, but
also in death itself; your very bodies sleeping in the the dust are (even then)
in union with Christ.

I grant that the sense and apprehension of this union may (in this life) be
much interrupted, and many times be wholly darkened; but the substance of the
union still remains: and I grant that the substance or nature of this union
may be exceedingly assaulted by Satan, yet nevertheless it continues and
abides for ever: For Christ will never part with the believer, and the believer
will never part with Christ: And moreover as no power in the world is
sufficient to overpower the Spirit of Christ, which on Christ's part makes
union, so no power whatsoever shall be able to conquer faith, which on our part
also makes the union. This faith of union as it is produced by no less power
than that of God, so it is preserved and upheld by the same power to the end.
Neither God, nor Christ, nor the Holy Ghost, nor the heart of a believer will
break this union; and neither Satan, nor the world, nor sin can do it.

5. If your faith be indeed the faith of union, this will appear by these
influences, The influences and effects which do attend this union.
and effects which do always attend that union which faith works between us
and Christ.

When we are by faith united to Christ, then upon this union there follows a
communion betwixt Christ and us, in which Christ communicates or imparts
somethings of his unto us: And we likewise do communicate and impart some thing
in us unto him.

Upon this union there follows such a communion twixt Christ and us, as that we
do partake of, and have fellowship in the most excellent things of We have
fellowship with Christ.
Christ.

We have fellowship with him

1. In the same Spirit, Romans 8. 9, 11. and 1 Cor. 6. 17. And by the same Spirit
are we reconciled and sanctified (though not in the fullness and measure as In
the same Spirit.
Christ himself was) and changed by him into the same image of Christ, 2 Cor.
3. 18.

2. In the same life: As he that has the Son has life, 1 John 5. 10. so he
that In the same Li^e.
has the Son has the same life which the Son has: I live, yet not ^, but
Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. The Head and the body, the Tree and the
branches partake of the same life.

3. In the same Righteousness. His Righteousness is our righteousness; He is
the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. and we are made the righteousness of
God In the same Righteousness.
in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

4. In the same Relation: So that as he was the Son of God by eternal
Generation, In the same Relation.
in like manner are we the sons of God by adoption; so that he is not ashamed
to call us brethren, Heb. 2. 11, 12.

5 In his victories: In all these things we are more than conquerors through In
his victories
Christ that loved us, Romans 8. 37.

6. In his glory: The glory which thou gave me I have given them, that they
In his glory.
may be one even as we are one.

All these things are most certainly imparted unto every believer upon his
union with Christ Jesus; Christ communicates unto him his own Spirit, his own
Holiness, his own Righteousness, etc. And hence it is apparent, that they
never were united by faith unto Christ, in whom nothing of communion with
Christ can be found, Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is
none of his, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature, etc.

2. Upon this union with Christ there is yet another part of communion in
respect of us, and there are two things especially which we do impart to
Christ; one We impart to Christ
is love, the other is subjection: for by ^aith we are united to Christ, as the
Wife to the Husband, which is an union of love; and also to Christ as members
of the body to the head, which takes in an union of subjection.

1. If says has united us to Christ, then do we love Christ; every Believer
Love.
loves Christ: Saw ye him whom my soul l^veth? so the Church, Cant. 3. 1. 2,
3. Lord, Thou know all things, Thou know that I love thee. So Peter, Joh.
21. 17. Whom having not seen, ye love; so the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

And how does the true believer (who is united to Christ) love Christ? How the
believer loves Christ.


1. He loves his Christ with the Love of friendship, he loves Christ for Christ
himself. 2. He loves his Christ with a love of complacency, O how sweet and
lovely is this Christ? 3. He loves his Christ with a love of satisfaction,
Christ is enough, he is my center in whom I rest. 4. He loves his Christ with a
love of sincerity, Christ and nothing that is contrary to Christ. 5. He loves
his Christ with a love of excellency, nothing so much, nothing so well as
Christ. 6. He loves Christ with a love of extremity, he is sick of love for
Christ; he so loves Christ, that he thinks he never loves Christ as Christ
deserves to be loved. 7. He loves Christ with a love of fidelity, so as nothing
can quench that love, nor break off that love. 8. He loves his Christ with a
love of benevolence, O how much prosperity does he wish to Christ! 9. He loves
his Christ with a love of beneficency, what would not he do for Christ? what
would he not suffer for Christ? 10. He loves his Christ with a love of
sympathy, what Christ does love, he does love; and what does please Christ,
that does please him; and what does grieve and trouble Christ, that does grieve
and trouble him.
O Sirs! uniting faith sees so much in Christ, and finds so much from Christ,
it makes us partakers of such a Christ, and of such a love from Christ, that it
is impossible but that soul must love Christ, which by Faith is united to
Christ.

2. If your faith be the faith of union with Christ, then it will certainly
cause in Sujection unto Christ.
you a subjection unto Christ (as the Wife is subject unto the Husband) and an
obedience unto Christ (as the members are obedient to the Head.)

Quest. And what subjection and obedience is that?

Sol. You know that it is voluntary, and it is full, and it is cheerful, and it
is ingenuous, and it is accurate, and it is durable, as long as the union and
relation What that subjection is.
does last: The Wife willingly obeyes, and obeyes every lawful and good
command, and does it with all her heart, and is very well pleased if her
husband be pleased, etc. Why! after this manner will faith fashion your hearts
to Christ, if it has united you to Christ, or rather thus will Christ (upon
your union with him) fashion and enable your hearts: Your hearts will look on
Christ as one that has authority and right to command them, and give laws to
them: And your hearts will look on all his commands as good, and holy, and
just, and they will not be grievous unto you, but you will be a willing people
in the day of his power. And thus by these chracters you may know whether you
have this faith of union which indeed joins you to Christ, and is the
condition of this Covenant.

SECT. VI.
2. Quest. NOw I proceed unto the second Question; what is to be done to What
is to be done to obtain this faith.
obtain this faith (this faith of union) which only brings us into the Covenant.

Sol. To help you in this (seeing all our souls hopes and enjoyments depend
upon it) I would commend this course or practice unto you.

1. Consider the Author of this faith, to whom it does really appertain to give
this faith which unites to Christ. 2. Consider what means he does use for the
giving and working of it in the hearts of sinners. 3. Consider what concerns
your selves in reference unto God, and those means by which he does work the
faith which does unite to Christ.
1. Consider the Author of this faith, who it is that can give this faith which
Consider the Author of this faith.
unites us to Christ: very much lies in this, for if we mistake the cause, it
is very probable we shall miss of the effect; if we go with our vessels to
Cisterns that hold no water, we shall return empty and ashamed; therefore
remember

1. That no man whosoever is, or can be the author of this faith unto himself;
by No man can be the author of it to himself.
his natural power he cannot. 1. Come to Historical Faith, Matthew. 16. 17. Flesh
and blood has not revealed it unto thee. 2ly See his need of Christ: the
Spirit is sent to convince of sin. 3ly Omnipotency is necessary. Ephesians. 1. 19,
20. 1 Cor. 1. 21. The World by wisdom knew not God; and verse 23. Christ to
the Jews a stumbling block, foolishness to the Greeks. If any man had such a
power to believe in Christ, surely it would appear either in the gifted sinner
who has great parts of knowledge, and understanding, and wisdom; or in the
troubled and distressed sinner who longs for ease and rest to his poor soul,
and would put out all the power he has to enjoy it: But no such power is to be
found in them (as from themselves) to enable their hearts to believe in Christ:
The knowing and understanding sinners in other matters, may yet be grossly
ignorant of Christ, and averse to Christ, and the things of Christ. And the
more spiritual knowledge any man has of Christ, or of himself, the more
inability shall he discern in himself to believe on Christ: And the troubled
and distressed sinner cannot of himself believe, or lay hold on Christ, though
Christ be revealed to him, and offered to him, and all arguments used to
persuade him, yet he is concluded under unbelief, except the Lord himself
persuades and draws his heart. No persons can, though they have Eloquence,
Piety, Pity, Art, Diligence, Wishing, and Desires.

2. That no Ordinances and means whatsoevever can (of themselves) be the
author of this uniting faith. If the Apostles of Christ did live amongst you,
and No means and Ordinances of themsel^e^ can be the Author of it.
did preach every day of the week unto you the Gospel of Christ; neither they,
nor yet the Gospel which they preached could (by their own power) make any one
sinner to believe on Christ, Matthew. 11. 17. We have piped unto you, and ye have
not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented. It Is true, that
these are means and instruments of faith (as you shall presently hear) but the
Axe (which is an instrument) cuts not of itself; and the lord (which is a
means) draws not of itself. Neither the convincing Paul, nor eloquent Apollos,
nor the affectionate John can prevail.

3. That no duties whatsoever are the authors of the faith which unites to No
duties are the authors of faith.
Christ: You may pray, and should pray; but Prayer (as a work done by you) is
not the cause of faith; and you may hear, and read, and meditate, but none of
these (as your works) can be the author of this faith: All these may be done,
and yet your hearts remain still faithless. Romans 10. 18. Have they not heard?
verse 16 But they have not all obeyed.

4. God, and God only is the Author of the faith which unites us to Christ. No
God and God only is the Author of faith.
man (says Christ himself, Joh. 6. 44.) can come to me, except the Father draw
him. and verse 45. They shall be all taught of God; every man therefore that
has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me. God himself must
teach the heart: And therefore Christ says in verse 29. This is the work of
God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace ye are
saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Until
the Lord himself gives you faith you cannot believe: until the Lord say, Come,
you cannot come; until the Almighty God say to your hearts, Be willing, and be
able to take Christ, to receive him, to give consent to be his, you will never
be able, and never be willing to close with him, etc. Therefore remember this,
every one of you who desire this faith of union, I say, remember. That it is
God only, none but God who can give you Christ, and none but God can give you
faith which unites you to Christ, it is his work, and his alone: Never look for
it from any power in your selves, or in any other creature, but look only to
God for it.

2. Consider what means God does use for the giving and working of faith:
Though Consider the means of working this faith.
the means of themselves give not faith, yet God does give faith by the
means; although the Conduit (of itself) gives not water, yet the fountain
sends it unto your houses by the Conduit.

Now that means is the Gospel; this is clear in Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom you also
trusted after, that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation.
So Romans The Gospel is the means of faith.
10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. The Gospel is
therefore called the door of Faith, Acts 14. 27. and the word of faith, Romans
10. 8. and the power of God, Romans 1. 16. and the word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor.
5. 19.

The Gospel is the means of faith in three respects.

1. In that it is set apart and ordained by God himself for that end and
purpose, to call sinners to Christ. It is set apart for that end. As it is
blessed of God with the presence of his Spirit.


2. In that it is blessed of God with the presence of his Spirit to work and
implant faith: There God reveals his arm and puts forth his power: Some men do
fancy ways of their own to get faith; And why not another way, as well as by
the Gospel? I will tell you why? Because God has not ordained and sanctified
any other way but this: When the Lord commanded the brazen Serpent to be set up
for the healing of the people, and that they should look on it and be healed,
they might as well demand, and why a Brazen Serpent? and why not another brazen
Serpent, as well as this to heal us? No, none but this, for this only was
ordained of God, and sanctified for that purpose: So the Gospel, that, and that
only is the means ordained and sanctified by God, and which has his promise of
presence and blessing to go along with it, to beget faith in our hearts.

3. In that it is the most apt of all ministrations whatsoever, to raise and
persuade It is the most apt of all ministrations for this end.
the heart to believe. For there only is the relation of the grace of God, and
love of God, and kindness of God, and of the mercy of God in Christ: and
therein is Christ made known, and the righteousness of Christ, and a sinners
salvation in and by Christ: and therein are held forth all the encouragements
to win the heart to Christ; and all the answers and resolves to whatsoever
may breed fears, and doubts, and discouragements in the heart from coming to
Christ, and all promises by which this faith is raised.

3. Consider what concerns your selves in reference unto God who only gives
faith, C^nsider what concerns us in re^erence to God and the Gospel.
and in reference to the Gospel which is the only means by which this faith is
wrought: Supposing only three things (already) formed in you. viz. 1. An
apprehension that you are lost, and separated from God by sin. 2. A conviction
that you stand in extreme need of Christ. 3. An earnest desire at least to
enjoy Christ; I would propound four things for you to do, that so at length you
may Four things to be done.
attain unto this uniting faith.

1. Diligent application of your selves to the hearing of the Gospel; joining
Diligent application of our selves to the hearing of the Gospel for this end.
thereunto a serious and reverent attention; come and hear, and come and hear
for this very end, if peradventure God will give you this faith, if
peradventure his Spirit will accompany the Gospel with power unto your hearts,
that so you may be able to believe. Come as the impotent man came to the poole
to be healed: Lydia took this course, and her heart was opened to believe, Acts
16. 14. So did they in Acts 2. 37. 41. Act. 13. 48. When the Gentiles heard
this, they glorified the word of the Lord: And as many as were ordained to
eternal life believed.

2. Serious meditation upon, first the relation of the Gospel. 2ly. The offers
Serious meditation.
of the Gospel. 3ly. The terms of the Gospel. 4ly. The promises of the Gospel.
5ly. The instances or examples in the Gospel.

1. The Gospel Revelations of Jesus Christ; given, sent, sealed, set forth by
God Of the revelations of the Gospel.
to be a Redeemer, a Savior, a Mediator, a Peace, a Propitiation, a
Reconciliation, a life for sinners: Now seriously meditate on all this you
whose hearts are broken with the sense of your sins: The Gospel in the Word of
truth, what it reveals and declares unto us, that same is certain and
infallib^e and the Gospel is the Word of Salvation; whatsoever concerns our
salvation, that same is manifested unto us by the Gospel; And this Gospel does
reveal and declare unto us the exceeding love of God the Father, in that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish
but have everlasting life: It does also declare unto us hi^ Son Jesus Christ
who was God, and in time was made man, that so he might reconcile and unite man
to God. And it does declare him in the union of his Natures, and excellencies
of his Person, and in the glories of his Offices, and in the accomplishment of
all the work of Redemption and salvation for sinners, and willingness to save
them: So that from the very Gospel-revelation of Jesus Christ, a distressed
sinner may gain thus much. 1. As not to despair. 2. As to have some hope. 3.
As to have some desires: O here is a Christ for sinners! A Christ given by God
the Father to save sinne^s! why should I then despair? and here is a Christ,
such a Christ, of such infinite worth and merit, given to make satisfaction,
and peace, and why should not I hope? Am I excluded? At least his Person, and
Offices, and Works may serve thus far to beget hope, and to work a desire that
I may enjoy him, in whom alone salvation is to be found, and who came into the
world to save sinners.

2. The Gospel offers this Christ to distressed and poor sinners, Acts 13. 26.
Unto Of the offers of the Gospel.
you is the Word of this Salvation sent. verse 38. Through this man is preached
unto you the forgiveness of your sins.

This Evangelical offer of Christ, it is The Evangelical offer is A good offer.


1. A good Offer: It is an offer of a Savior, of Mercy, Peace, Life, and of
Salvation itself: This day is Salvation come to thy house.

2. It is a serious Offer, Heb 12. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speak
th. A se^^ous offer.
2 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation! Hearken unto me,
and your souls shall live, Isa. 55. 3. Believe and thou shall be saved, Acts
16. 31. These are serious offers and commands.

3. It is a personal Offer; the Lord Jesus means you in particular: You I say A
personal offer.
who are heavy-laden, you who are poor, you who hunger and thirst, unto you is
the word of this salvation offered and sent.

4. It is a very tender Offer. 2 Cor. 5. 20. As though God did beseech you by
us: A tender offer.
We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God: why? If a sinner did
seriously meditate on this offer of Christ by the Gospel, me thinks it might
much conduce toward a bringing in of his heart to Christ by faith.

5. It is an Offer worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15. As to the making of
a match, when you report unto the party, there is such a person every way
desirable An offer worthy of all acceptance.
and lovely, there is no exceptions to be taken: He is perfectly beautiful,
singularly wise, affectionately loving, exceedingly rich, every way suitable,
and you cannot live unless you have him. And besides all this, he d^res and
offers himself to match with you! Surely all this conduces much to the making
of a match! So when a poor sinner hears of Christ, and of so much good in and
by Christ, and withal finds Christ offering himself unto him; I am willing to
be yours, I am content to take you as I find you; I know your sins, and wants,
and unworthiness; I know what it must cost me to adorn you, etc. yet I offer
my self to be yours, and I charge you that you do not neglect and refuse my
offer! Truly this conduces very much to persuade the heart, and to draw the
heart to close by faith with Christ, etc.

3. The Gospel offers Jesus Christ upon very gracious and reasonable terms: In
^f the terms of the Gospel.
the Gospel you shall find Jesus Christ propounded unto sinners under several
notions and expressions, and in all of them you may discern the admirable
condescentions of Christ; he cannot fall in with you upon lower and easier
terms, so as to become yours, than he does propound: Sometimes he is propounded
as a Gift, and all the terms that he stands for that you may be possessed of
him as a Gift, is that you receive him; giving and receiving are correlatives:
Sometimes he is propounded as a Match, as a Husband, and all that he stands for
to make him yours, is only that you be willing, that you give your consent to
be his. Sometimes he is propounded as a Bargain to be bought, and all that he
imposes on you is this, that you buy without money and without price.
Sometimes he is propounded as a Guest, and a friend who would come into your
house and sup with you, and all that he insists with you for, is only this,
that you open the door and let him in.

4. As the Gospel reveals Christ unto you, and offers Christ unto you, and The
promises of the Gospel.
offers him unto you upon most gracious terms; so likewise it holds out unto
you abundance of promises which are as so many Adamants to draw your hearts to
Christ's, and are as so many cords of Love: There are promises which respect you
and Christ: If you will come and be his, he will certainly be yours, he will
not reject you. And there are promises which respect you and your good estate
by Christ: As that he will marry you to himself in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in lovingkindness, and in mercies, Hosea 2. 19. And that he will
be Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption unto you, 1
Cor. 1. 30. And that there shall be no condemnation to you, Romans 8. ^. And that
whosoever believes shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16. And
that whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, Acts 10. 43.

5. Besides all this the Gospel gives you instances of the performance of all
these promises, The instances and examples i^ the Gospel.
and likewise of the gracious reception of as great and unworthy sinners as
your self, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. It shows how that
when sinners have by faith come to Christ, he has accepted of them, has
rece^ved them graciously, has bestowed himself upon them, has given
righteousness, and remission of sins: and his Spirit, and his Peace, and
everlasting life unto them: Every true believer who came to Christ did enjoy
Christ, and all saving good with and by Christ: Mary Magdalen, Paul, the
Corinthians, Ephesians, and all others are witnesses of it etc. they became
Christ's, and Christ became theirs, and he was their Atonement, Redemption,
Reconciliation, Righteousness, Life, etc. why? A serious and solid
consideration of all these Evangelical passages, they cannot but work on the
hearts of broken sinners to look toward this Christ, at least to pant in
humble and earnest desires of him, and for faith that they may be united unto
him.

3. The third means which I would present unto you for the obtaining of this
uniting faith, is earnest supplication or prayer: As Christ spoke unto the
woman of Samaria, if thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says
unto thee, Earnest supplication.
give me drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee
living water, Joh. 4. 10. So say^, if you did but know the excellency of this
faith of union with Christ, and what Christ is, and what union with Christ is,
and how far it interests you in the Covenant of grace; surely you would
earnestly be enlarged in your supplications and requests unto God for it, and
you would not be denied this request, Ephesians. 3. 14. For this cause I bow my
knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, verse 17. That Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith; draw me, and I will run after thee. Well, pray the
Lord to give this faith unto you which will unite you to Christ, I say, pray
the Lord to give it you; For*

1. You cannot give it to your own hearts, it is not in your power to make your
hearts to believe.

2. None can give it but God, no created power is sufficient for this work.

3. God is able to make your hearts to believe: to break all the chains of
unbelief: To set out Christ as most desirable, and to work faith, that so you
shall come to Christ; He is able to enlighten your minds, and to convince your
judgments, and to overcome your wills, and to persuade your hearts.

4. He has promised to give this faith: He has promised that the dead shall
hear the voice of his Son, Joh. 5. 25. He has promised that they shall be all
taught of God, and he that hears, and learneth of the Father, shall come to
Christ, Joh. 6. 45. He has promised to allure us unto Christ, Hosea 2. 14. And
to persuade Japhet, Genesis 9. 27. and to make us a willing people in the day of
his power, Psalm. 110. 2. and to send the rod of his strength out of Zion, verse
3.

Object. We do hear, and we do pray, and yet we are not able to believe?

Sol. 1. O but pray that God would make the Gospel which you do hear, to be the
savor of life unto you, and that his Spirit may accompany the Gospel which you
do hear. To open the Gospel. 2. Thy ear. 3. Thy heart; for it is by his Spirit
that the Gospel proves to be unto you the word of Faith: Our Gospel came in
power, and in the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 1. 5. If the Spirit of God did but
reveal his Arm, if he would but breath through the Gospel, it would certainly
be the power of God for faith in you.

2. Again, you must pray with all importunity, and diligence, and watchfulness,
and observation what God answers, and spiritual violence, and resolution, and
never cease wrestling with God. I tell you it is one of the greatest requests
that you can make to God; O Lord unite me to Christ; give me that faith by
which I may be Christ's, and Christ may be mine And take this for thine
encouragement, That if the Lord has given such a spiritual and steadfast frame
of spirit as to pray, he Patiently wait upon God in the use of means.
will at length give thee this faith.

4. Patiently wait upon God in the use of Evangelical means, until he does
come in with his Spirit upon your Spirits to enable you by faith to close with
Christ, lie at the Pool, do not limit God to this Sermon, or to that Prayer;
and do not wrangle and murmr against God; regard what concerns your self to
do, and trust God with his work, and with his time; never did any soul seek
him or wait on him in vain, nor return ashamed; there is not one Prayer that
you make, nor any one Evangelical Sermon that ye hear, but it is making way in
your hearts for this uniting faith: Some more light gets in to discover Christ's
fullness, and our want: Some more hope is raised of a possibility at length to
enjoy Christ: Some more power is given against the powers, and workings, and
reasonings, and fears, and doubts of unbelief; they have not that despairing
dominion: Some more bewailings of thy Christlesse condition and strong unbelief
with a resistance of it: Sometimes more renewed resolutions and courage; well,
whatsoever comes of it, I will not yet give over my suite, I will venture a few
prayers more; something more is getting in, and winning upon the heart toward
Christ; But

Why may I not believe on Christ? what if I should venture on him upon his
offers, upon his entreaties, upon his commands, upon his promises? do I not sin
against Christ, and offend him, thus to fear, thus to dispute, thus to
question, thus to stand off? well! I will come and believe on him. O I cannot!
Lord help me: Lord work in me both to will and to do: when Lord? how long? yet
will I wait on thee till thou show this mercy to me.

SECT. VII.
3. Use IS faith the condition of the Covenant of grace? And is that faith an
uniting Comfort and encouragement
Faith? a faith which unities us unto Christ. The next Use then shall be for
Comfort and Encouragement; 1. To sinners in general. 2ly. To believers in
particular; to such as yet find themselves out of Covenant, and to such as
find themselves partakers of this uniting faith.

1. That faith is the condition of the Covenant of Grace, this is a comfort and
To sinners in general.
encouragement to poor sinners, who as yet find themselves out of Covenant. If
God had put any other condition upon that Covenant, every sinner had been
utterly hopeless; suppose he had annexed and imposed the condition of actual,
and perfect, and personal righteousness (bring that, and perform that, and
then I will be your God, I will accept of you, I will own you, I will love you,
I will pardon you, I will save you) why! no sinner could (upon this terms)
have found an entrance or admission into the Covenant, because the performance
of If faith be the condition;
this Covenant is impossible to a sinner; as such a condition is inconsistent
with the grace of God, so such a condition is impossible with the state of sin,
which is a state of impotency and of death: But now faith being the condition
of the Covenant, as there is a door open for grace to manifest it self, so
there is hope for a sinner to partake of that grace; for if God will capitulate
with us upon believing There is hope; for
in Christ, Then

1. Our former sinnings do not absolutely exclude us. One sin did break the
Covenant Our former sinnings does not exclude us.
of works; but our many sins hinder not our reception into the Covenant of
grace, if yet we believe on Christ.

2. A want of personal and perfect righteousness does not exclude us; for faith
is not to look at our own righteous^ess, but at the righteousness of Christ.
Nor want of personal and perfect righteousness. Nor self unrighteousness.


3. Our self-unworthinesse is no prejudice; Faith looks for love, and mercy,
and glory through Christ for the sinner who is (in himself) unworthy of love,
and mercy, and glory.

4. Our union with God is possible; for though an immediate union there cannot
Our union with God is possible.
be between God and a sinner, yet a mediate union there may be, viz. A union by
Christ the Mediator, unto whom faith brings and unites the soul; so that
there is yet hope for the sinner to be brought into Covenant with God, though
not upon his own account, yet upon the account of Christ, unto whom faith joins
the sinner.

Object. But it may be objected, it is true that faith is the condition of the
Covenant And that faith is that condition, it is therefore hopeful for sinners.
But yet this faith is as impossible to the sinner, as the condition of perfect
obedience; for But this faith is as impossible to the sinner as perfect
righteousness.
the sinner is no more able to make his heart to believe on Christ, than he is
perfectly to obey the will of God; And then where is the comfort and hope that
you speak of? In the notion it is true, that faith is a condition which
advantageth a sinner: But in practice it is such a condition unto which it is
impossible for any sinner by his own strength to attain.

Sol. 1. I grant, that as to the ^eer consideration of the sinners self natural
power, the condition of Faith (...) ^mpossible as the condition of perfect
obedience is; he has no more power ^or propensity to believe in Christ, than
he has to obey and fulfill the Law, and his heart is as full of unbelief as it
is of disobedience.

2. Nevertheless though there be a self impossibility, yet there is not an
absolute Faith is possible and probable. It is not imposed on us in our own
strength.
impossibility; nay faith is such a condition, as is not only possible for a
sinner, but very probable for him to attain it.

1. Though it be the Condition of the Covenant, yet it is not such a condition
which God does impose upon the sinner (by his own strength or power) to form it
in himself: Indeed God does require faith in Christ; but God does not require
of the sinner to create this faith in his own heart.

2. Though faith be the condition of the Covenant, yet it is such a condition
God himself does promise to give it.
which God himself does promise to give unto the sinner: As it is a condition
on our part so it is a gift on Gods part: we are to have it, but God is to give
it according to his promise: and undertakes to work it in us according to his
power.

3. Though faith be the condition, yet it is such a condition that God affords
all And affords means for the working of it.
the means for the working and deriving of it unto the sinner; There is no
sinner in all the world upon whom God calls for faith in Christ, but unto that
sinner God affords the Gospel, which is the means (as you have heard) designed
by God to work faith.

4. As God affords the means unto sinners by which faith is wrought, so his And
his Spirit does assi^^ those me^^^^
Spirit (upon whose operation faith depends) does ordinarily accompany, and
assist, and bless those means, to make them to be the power of God to the
production of faith in the hearts of sinners; so that the Gospel is never sent
unto any people, but there are some of them effectually called, so as to
believe through grace.

5. And fifthly, as there is no sinner unto whom the Gospel of Faith is sent,
who can No sinner to whom the Gospel is preached, can conclude that God never
intended to give him faith; nay every sinner is some time or other invited.
properly conclude, that God never intends to give him this faith; so every
sinner may and does (some time or other) find that the Spirit does by the
Gospel earnestly deal with his heart to believe and receive Christ. The Spirit
by the Gospel does let in so much light of conviction, and does so far act upon
his heart by motions and arguments, and persuasions to receive Christ, that if
yet he continue unbelieving, this fault cannot be charged on God (who does work
so wonderfully with him to believe) but only on himself who slights those
means, and quenches those motions of the Spirit, and wilfully opposes and
resists the Spirit in this working.

Hence it is that you never read of an impossibility on Gods part (for with him
all things are possible) nor yet of an impotency on the sinners part why he
believes not (though that be true that the sinner in himself considered is
insufficient) but still the charge lies against the sinner for his wilfulness
and unwillingnesse; ye would not, and ye will not come unto me that ye might
have life; and we will not have this man to reign over us; Because God puts
forth so much of power by his Spirit in the Gospel as may satisfy us that
believing is a p^ssible work, and that our unbelief sticks unto us not only
from a want of power, but only from the presence and redundancy of
perverseness in our wills.

6. Let me add one conclusion more, That this faith which is the condition
admitting God will never deny faith to them that cordially ask it
into the Covenant, is such a condition as God never did, nor will deny t^ any
sinner seriously and cordially asking it of him: even in this it holds true
also, ask and it shall be given unto you. If God sometimes gives this faith to
them that do not ask, will he deny it unto them to whom he gives an heart to
ask? Especially seeing that he therefore gives us an heart to ask, because it
is his purpose to give us this faith which we do ask: See now you have the
comfort in the general from this, that faith is the condition of the Covenant
of grace, namely that then a sinner is capable and hopeful of being brought
into the Covenant, notwithstanding all his former sinfulness, and present
unrigh^eousnesse, and unworthiness, none of which do hinder faith from
inte^esting of us in Christ: And this Faith also is such a condition as God
himself does promise to give, and set apart peculiar means to work it in us,
a^ upon our serious asking of him will give unto us.

2. I shall now speak of the particular comforts which do belong unto Believers
Comforts to believers.
who stand possessed of this faith which unites to Christ, and is the condition
of the Covenant of Grace.

I grant that distinction of weak believers and of strong believers, and that
by reason of this gradual diversity there is therefore a different apprehension
and perception of your comforts: But if your faith be such as indeed brings you
into union with Christ (be that faith weak or strong) then I confidently assure
you, that your condition is very comfortable and blessed.

Quest. But what are those comforts? and what is that blessedness for all who
What those comforts are.
are by faith united with Christ?

Sol. I will mention some of them unto you: If you be by faith united to
Christ, so that he is yours, and you are his, Then

1. Unquestionably God is your God; for union with Christ infallibly takes in
union Unquestionably God is your God.
with God; if Christ be yours, then God is yours: Ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 23. Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his S^nne Jesus
Christ, 1 John 1. 3.

Beloved, this is a truth, that you can never have union with one Person of the
Trinity alone: as the union of those persons is common and mutual between
themselves (the Father has union with the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and the Son
has union with the Father and the Holy Ghost; and the Holy Ghost has union
with them both) so is our union with them; If we be united to Christ, we are
united to God the Father of Christ, and to the Holy Ghost the Spirit of Christ:
If Christ be yours, then God the Father is yours, and if Christ be yours, then
God the Holy Ghost is yours: As Christ is in you of a truth, so God is in you
of a truth, and the Spirit of Christ is in you also: And as you are in the Son,
so are you in the Father, and so are you in the Spirit: And as the Son is in
you so the Father is in you, and the Holy Ghost is in you: And because this one
thing is the Caput, the sum, and height, and depth of all our comfort and
blessedness, I shall therefore crave the favor to speak some few words unto
it.

1. First then, our union with Christ draws in with it our union with God, so
that Our union with Christ draws in with it our union with God.
we and God himself are no longer enemies by way of difference, nor strangers
by way of distance, but we are made nigh b^ Christ, not only nigh in a way of
pacification, by removal of enmity (God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself) But which is more, we are by Christ made nigh to God in a way of
relation, so that he is now become our God: As by reason of this union Christ
is not ashamed to call us brethren, Heb. 2. 11. So God is not ashamed to be
called our God, Heb. 11. 16. Yea and as the Apostle tells us, that Christ is
ours, Ephesians. 1. 3. Our Lord Jesus Christ, so Christ himself tells us that God
is ours, I ascend to my God and to your God: And (by the way) observe it, that
Christ does not say only or first I ascend to your God (yet this had been a
special comfort to the Disciples that God was their God) but he says, I ascend
to my God, and to your God; and why to my God, and next to your God? But to
inform us that God becomes our God by virtue of our union with Christ? what
Christ calls mine, that you may call yours; My God, and your God, and because
my God, therefore your God: So then our union with Christ infers with it our
union with God; our relation to Christ infers with it our relation to God; and
our propriety in Christ, our propriety also in God; and our fruition of Christ
to be ours, a fruition of God himself to be ours; than which a more high and
blessed fruition no creature is capable of.

2. Secondly our union with Christ takes in with it our union with the Father
(the Our union with the Father.
first Person in the Trinity) that as God is the Father of Christ, and Christ
is the Son of God; so now in Christ God is also our Father, and we are his
children, Joh. 20. 17. My Father, and your Father; Ephesians. 1. 3. God the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. These. 2. 16. and God even our Father? Here you see
that God is Father to Christ, and he is also a Father to all them that are
Christ's: And as Christ is the Son of God, so are we the sons of God; and how
come we to be the sons of God? see Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus: and Joh. 1. 12. As many as received him, to them gave
he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name; why!
As this is an unspeakable dignity for us to be raised unto (1 John 3. 1. Behold
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the sons of God?) So it is a most comfortable relation, none the like: It
concludes within it all the love of God, and goodness, and mercy, and care,
and help, and compassion, and tenderness, and blessings of God as a Father.

3. Thirdly our union with Christ takes in with it also our union with the Holy
Our union with the Holy Ghost.
Ghost, in which respect, he that is joined to the Lord, is said to be one
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. and the Spirit of Christ is said to be given us, 1. Joh.
3. 24. and he is in us, and dwells in us, Romans 8. 9. and has communion with
us, (2 Cor. 13. 14. The communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all) and we
have fellowship with the Spirit, Phil. 2. 1. in the participation of his 1.
Graces. 2. Help. 3. Comforts.

O Christians! These are glorious things indeed: who would not strive after
union with Christ, which brings such an union with it? and who cannot but
rejoice and triumph in Christ by union with whom he is thus united to the whole
Trinity*

2. If you be by faith united unto Christ, here is yet another comfort for you:
Our union with Christ confers upon us an interest in every good of the
Covenant. We are Sons. Heirs.
That as this union infers with it a relation to every Person in the Trinity,
so it does assuredly confer upon you an interest in every good of the Covenant:
for by virtue of this union we are made both Sons and Heirs. Sons, Gal. 3.
26. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: Heirs, Gal. 3. 29.
And if ye be Christ's, then are you Abraham's Seed and Heirs according to the
promise. Some read it, if ye be one with Christ, Si unus estis in Christo, vid.
Beza. Here you do expressly find our Heirship to flow from our union with
Christ: for certainly our heirship thence arises from whence our sonship does
arise, and that is from union, with Christ: Well then! Believers are Christ's,
and being Christ's they are Children; and if Children, then Heirs, and Heirs
according to promise.

Quest. Heirs? whose Heirs? and of what estate? Whose Heirs.


Sol. An Heir (strictly) is the child (either Natural or adopted) who upon the
death of the Father succeeds into his possessions: In this strict acceptance,
neither Christ (who is the Natural Son and Heir) nor Believers (who are sons
and heirs by grace) are Gods Heirs; for God never dies, and we do not take
any possession of his estate upon such a vacancy and cessation.

But Theologically he is an heir who is accepted and admitted into the
possession promised and set forth, and given by God, who yet lives for ever to
be our God and Father; and indeed our inheritance and inheriting is
nevertheless because our Father lives; but it is therefore our settled and
blessed inheritance, because our God and Father lives for ever.

Now that of which we are Heirs (by virtue of union with Christ) Heirs of what.
is,

1. God himself, Romans 8. 17. If children, then heirs, heirs of God: As your
children Of God.
are your heirs, so Gods chidren are his heirs; he has never a child but he
is an heir, and an heir of God. There is an estate of inheritance set out for
him: what God possesses, of that (according to his capacity and proportion)
shall he be possessed of holiness, glory, happiness.

2. All the inheritance which Christ has purchased, and God has intailed, or
settled, or passed over unto you in his Covenant, of no less then all this are
believers Of all the inheritance which Christ has purchased
heirs: This is the inheritance, and the estate of which you are heirs; namely
all the good set out for you in the Covenant by God the Father, and confirmed
and sealed unto you by the blood of Christ the Mediator of that Covenant:
Therefore Believers are (in Scripture) styled Heirs of the promise, Heb. 6. 12.
of the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. 7. of the righteousness which is by faith,
Heb. 11. 7. of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. of the kingdom promised to them that love
him, Jam. 2. 5. All the good in it for them, of all things, Revel. 21. 7. He
that overcomes shall inherit all things.

There is Haereditas gratiae, which contains all the blessings designed for
enjoyment in this life.

And there is Haereditas gloriae, which contains all the blessedness reserved
for enjoyment in that other life: Of all in the one, and in the other, are
believers heirs; you are heirs to mercy, and grace, and righteousness, and
comforts, and salvation. I think therefore that the belivers condition (by
virtue of his union with Christ) is very comfortable and blessed.

3. If you be by faith united unto Christ, there remains one comfort more
Christ will accomplish and perform all that good unto us.
for you which is this, That as you are thereby heirs of all the good
mentioned, and promised in the Covenant, so, all that good will Christ see
accomplished and performed unto you; for all the promises of God in him are
yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. They are sure and certain, are surely, and
certainly made good: As God spoke unto Jacob, Genesis 28. 15. I will not leave
thee until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of: So Jesus Christ
(unto whom you are united) he will not cease until you be actually possessed
of all that good which his father promised unto him from all eternity, and has
promised also unto you in time (in his Covenant) to bestow upon you.

And there are four things which may assure you of this, viz.

1. The suretiship of Christ, which implies not only his undertaking for us to
God, but likewise the same for God to us, that God shall really make good to
us, all which he has promised unto us.

2. The Intercession of Christ, which is his everlasting work of applying all
the good which he has purchased.

3. The Donation of his Spirit upon us for the communicating of all good unto
us.

4. The intention of his Merit and Purchase which he laid out in our names, and
for our good: He merited no less for us than all that good in the Covenant: No
less than all outward benediction, than all heavenly blessings, than
Justification, Reconciliation, Sanctification, Consolation, Perseverance, and
eternal Glory.

His Merit and purchase amounted to all this, and not to less than this; and
as God is bound to give him what he has purchased, so he has bound himself to
bestow all this upon believers, who are united to him. Whosoever believes shall
not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 13.

5. The habitude 'twixt Christ as Head, and believers as his Body and Members;
he is not perfect until they be perfected.

And now I pray you that are believers, be you your selves judges, whether your
union with Christ puts you not into a most comfortable and blessed condition,
seeing it brings you into union with God, and every Person of the Trinity, and
makes you heirs of all the good in the Covenant, all which God and Jesus Christ
will see actually bestowed upon you.

I fear I was never united to Christ.
Object. True, will some say; here is comfort enough; for here is all that
souls can wish or enjoy. But truly the more you speak of this comfort from
union with Christ, the more sad and uncomfortable is my heart! Because at least
I fear that I never yet in truth attained unto this union of Faith: why so?

1. I was driven to look after Christ out of fear, and out of the sense of
wrath. 2. Union with Christ supposes separation from all that is contrary unto
Christ: Alas I find the contrary, a body of sin still present with me! 3.
Union with Christ depends upon some mighty and powerful workings of the
Spirit, which I never observed, nor discerned in my soul. 4. Union with Christ
certainly includes the presence of the Spirit, and the communion of the Spirit;
whether I have that, I know not. 5. I still live under weaknesses, and wants;
but union with Christ would have let in more supply, etc.
Sol. I will briefly speak unto these fears, if possibly they may be removed.
For as it is my desire that you may by faith be brought to Christ, so it shall
be my endeavor, that every soul united unto Christ may taste of those
comforts which do belong to him in Christ.

I was driven to look after Christ out of fear:
1. Object. You fear that you are not rightly united to Christ, because you
were driven to look after Christ out of fear, and sense of wrath; whereas the
union by faith is free and voluntary.

Yet our union may be right.
Sol. Though this be true, yet is it possible that your union with Christ may
be right: They in Acts 2. 37. were indeed by Faith united to Christ, although
the first work appearing in them was the sense of their sins, and of Gods wrath
for that sin; and so was the Jailer in Act 16. 30. effectually brought in to
Christ, although trembling of heart first seized on him; and so was Paul in
Act. 9. 6. Therefore distinguish thus of this matter.

1. There is a difference 'twixt an occasion of looking after Christ, and
'twixt a Distinguish 'twixt an occasion and a principle of union.
principle which unites to Christ. The sense of sin, and the fear of the wrath
of God, these are the occasion of your looking after Christ; and had you not
met with these, it is most probable that you never had minded Christ: And yet
it was not this fear, but faith (which followed upon it) that did unite you to
Christ; I say faith which saw the exceeding goodness, and kindness, and
graciousnesse in Christ represented, and offered, and promised in the Gospel,
and thereupon drew your hearts to the prizing, and desiring, and receiving
Christ, with a most cheerful and ready consent and will: So that though at the
first, and occasionally some legal operations and impressions awakened your
hearts to look after a Christ for deliverance, yet it was the Gospel by the
Spirit working faith in your troubled Distinguish 'twixt sense of sin and
wrath, considered alone and concomitantly.
hearts, which brought and joined you to Christ.

2. Again, you must distinguish 'twixt the sense of sin and wrath considered
alone, and considered concomitantly: If the sense of sin and wrath alone did
put you upon Christ, and never any thing else, this indeed were sad: For when
these alone put us upon Christ, then we desire Christ no farther than a present
help, and ease against those evils which do distress us; but thus it is not
with you, though perhaps (at the first) your thoughts were fixed upon Christ
only, to deliver you from the wrathful impressions in conscience; yet upon the
farther light and working of Gods Spirit, your hearts are carried beyond these;
for you must now have a fruition of Christ; you have now coveted an union with
Christ, and satisfied you cannot be without that near union; and truly this is
the effect of faith graciously given unto you from God.

2. Object. But union with Christ supposes a separation from all that is
contrary to Christ: Is not sin contrary to Christ, and this I find still:
Ergo,

Sol. I answer. 1 but I find no separation from sin:


It is one thing for sin to be separated from me, and another thing for me to
be separated from sin.
1. It is one thing for sin to be separated from me, and it is another thing
for me to be separated from sin.

For sin to be separated from me, is wholly to be rid of it; so that sin no
more remains in me: For me to be separated from sin, is not to love and serve
it, but cordially to hate it, and oppose it; he is separated from sin, who
hates sin.

Now it is not the presence of sin simply and absolutely, which is
effectually contrary to union with Christ (for then no sinner should ever be in
Christ) but it is the love and service of sin which is contrary to a union with
Christ; a man cannot love sin, and yet love Christ; neither can he serve
sin and serve Christ.

But thus it is not with you; for though sin be in you, yet you love it not;
and though sin assaults, and tempts, and perhaps sometimes prevails, yet you
serve it not: And remember as long as sin is your burden, your grief, your
enemy which you resist which you would destroy, with which you will not make
peace, certainly you love it not, nor are you the servant of it. Paul (who was
in Christ) found the presence of sin, but yet he hated it, and the powerful
working of sin, but yet he refused it; and sometimes the captivity of sin, but
yet he bewailed it, and sought to Christ for more deliverance and victory.

2. There is a twofold separation from sin. There is a twofold separation from
sin. Radical. Gradual.


One is Radical, when by the infusion of grace, the heart is changed and
alienated from sin.

The other is Gradual, when by the further influence of the Spirit of Christ,
the powerful presence of sin is more and more mortified and subdued. This
latter you shall attain unto by virtue of your union with Christ: But if you
find the former, certainly you are united to Christ: If there be but so much
grace infused into the heart to alienate it from sin, to change the bent and
frame of the soul; why! this cannot be without a union with Christ; for this
is a new spiritual change wrought in you by the Spirit of Christ; and the
newness of our hearts depends upon that union with Christ, which is made by
faith, and is the lively testimony of it: If any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5, 17.

But I never found the powerful workings of the Spirit:
Object. O but union with Christ depends upon some mighty and powerful workings
of the Spirit upon the soul, which I never observed, nor discerned in my soul!

Though such a powerful work may not be discerned for the time, yet it may
appear by the eff^cts.
Sol. It is a truth that it does so: The Gospel comes not in word only, but in
power, and in the Holy Ghost, when it inables a soul to believe in Christ; and
without the mighty working of the Spirit it is impossible to make the heart to
believe: And although in the present darkness of the Spirit you discern not,
nor remember such a mighty working, yet perhaps by the effects which may be
found in you, you shall acknowledge the same: for the time was

1. When blackness of darkness covered your minds, so that you were ignorant
of God and Christ, and your own condition, and of the way of salvation. But now
there is a light set up in your mind, by which you know the true God, and him
whom he has sent, even Jesus Christ, and the salvation by him purchased for
sinners who believe in him.

2. When carnal security possessed your heart, so that you could rest quiet in
your natural condition; but now that spirit of slumber and security is shaken
off, and your soul is become anxious and sollicitous, What shall I do to be
saved?

3. When your heart was full of your own righteousness, you were rich and
increased, you were whole and needed not the Physician; but now you see your
self p^ore, and wretched, and naked, and miserable, and utterly undone, unless
you may have Christ and be found in him.

4. When you were confident and presumptuous of your own power, and
self-sufficiency; O it was easy to repent, and no great matter to believe on
Christ; but now you find your self without all strength; and unless you be
enabled by the strength and grace of Christ, it is not only difficult, but also
impossible for your heart to close with him by faith.

5. When you found your proud spirit slighting the offers of Christ, and
opposing the word of Christ, and resisting, and quenching the motions of the
Spirit of Christ; but now your hearts tremble at these abominations, and you
lie down at the feet of Christ, and your heart is set on Christ, O Lord give me
Christ; O Lord give me an heart to embrace this precious Christ, and never to
slight thy great love in Christ, nor that great salvation any more.

6. When you felt the power of unbelief in your hearts working up daily
exceptions, and hourly fears, and strong despaires for ever enjoying Christ for
your Christ! O now! this sin, and that sin, this slighting, and that
neglecting! and your unworthiness, and Christ's unwillingnesse; and your
inability, and Christ's command; and your dullness and Christ's silence; and your
desires, and Christ's delays! so that no hopes many times lodged within you,
your hearts were sinking, and failing, and giving up all: But now your hearts
are answered and set at liberty, and power is found within you to break down
this mighty partition wall of unbelief; and against all the oppositions which
unbelief and Satan can make, yet to venture upon Christ, and to justify the
invitations and promises of Christ, and wholly to come up to all the terms and
articles of Christ, upon which he is contented to be yours.

O Christian! call'st thou these no workings of the Spirit? Or no mighty
workings of the Spirit? I tell thee that to work and effect these things, no
less power is put forth than the Almighty power of God upon thy soul! A
greater power than to bring Israel out of Egypt; as great a power is put forth
as to raise the dead: I grant, that when the Spirit works with the Law to
convince and distress the conscience, there his workings are more vehement and
strong to our apprehensions: And when the same Spirit works through the Gospel,
his workings (many times) are not discerned in their time of working, in that
sensible and remarkable efficacy; but yet when you review the whole work, and
working of the Spirit (as to the production of faith) why! you will fall down
and admire how ever your poor souls could (against so many oppositions,
insufficiencies, reasonings, conclusions, fears, doubts, despaires) be
prevailed upon, and enabled to come to Christ.

Ob. O but union with Christ indeed by faith ever takes along with it the
presence and communion of the Spirit: He that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit; and he has received the Spirit, the Spirit of Christ who is in Christ:
But I have I; but I have not the Spirit.
not that Spirit, I find him not, I feel him not.

S^l. This also is a truth, that the communion of the Spirit is inseparably,
annexed to union with Christ: And if any man have not the Spirit of Christ. he
is none of Christ's.

But then know,

1. You must consider in what posture a Christian must be who may judge of the
presence In what posture a Christian must be, who may judge of the presence or
absence of the Spirit.
or absence of the Spirit of Christ in him. 1. He must be out of melancholy. 2.
Out of violent temptation. 3. Out of Desertion: He must be himself, see himself
that he is able and fit to judge Spiritual works, and to compare things
together, and to weigh all that may be said in the balance of the Sanctuary.
If thou be in this free posture, and upon diligent search, and serious
consideration can find not any one effect of communion with Christ, the case
is very heavy: But I believe the contrary touching thee, O weak Christian! when
those above mentioned impediments are off, so that thou art able to use the
light of grace, and of a renewed conscience, much of Christ and from Christ
will be found in thee, a love of thy Christ, a delight in thy Christ, a heart
ready and willing to hear, and to obey thy Christ. Distinguish of vital and
vivifical acts.


2. Distinguish of vital acts, and of vivifical acts, (that is) effects of a
real union, and effects of a comfortable union: The estate of a comfortable
union and communion, thou do not (perhaps) espy at present, viz. Not actual
joy, not actual cheerfulness, not actual assurances: O but though you do not
find the child smiling, yet if you find it living, there is union: There are
yet the effects and characters of life, and of vital union and communion with
Christ, though not of a comfortable communion; there is yet a breathing after
Christ, a hunting after Christ, an heart renewed and changed, an image of
Christ unto which thou art changed and conformed, a will agreeing with the will
of Christ, an end agreeing with the end of Christ, etc. And yet thou can
serve thy Christ in tears, though thou can not serve him in joys; and though
the Spirit of Christ be not seen so as to comfort thee, yet he is found so as
to lead and uphold thee.

3. There is a communion by way of influence, and a communion by way of
eminency, and a communion by way of evidence, and all these depend upon union
with Christ. There is communion by way of influence, and of eminency, and of
evidence.


1. Communion by way of influence, when we partake of the Nature and Life of
Christ; ye are made partakers of the Divine Nature, says Peter: Christ lives
in me, says Paul.

2. A communion by way of eminency, when Christ appears mighty in the soul, in
the large, and high, and strong degrees of acting of particular graces, of
faith, of love, of patience, of self-denial, of zeal, of wisdom, of humility.

3. A communion by way of evidence, as when Christ kisseth the soul with the
kisses of his lips. That is, when he sheds abroad his love into our hearts by
the Spirit which he has given us, and makes us to know that he loves us* and
says by his Spirit unto our hearts, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine:
Perhaps you have not attained to this last communion with Christ, to this
Osculumoris: and perhaps you have not attained to the second of these, which
(as Bernard speaks) is Osculum manus: well! But yet you have attained to the
first of these, which is Osculum pedis: perhaps you have not the sensible
manifestations, and impressions, and seals of his favor by his spirit; but yet
you are young men in Christ, and strong in the might of his Spirit: perhaps you
are not come to the strength of the Spirit; but yet you are babes in Christ,
yet the li^e of Christ is in you; you have that Spirit of Christ (in way of
influence) which brings you into fellowship with Christ in his death, and in
his resurrection; ye are dead to sin, and you are alive unto righteousness, and
Christ is setting up himself in your hearts more and more; Be not discouraged;
this shows true union with Christ for ever. This is the communion of the Spirit
of Christ, when our hears are fashioning and conforming to Christ, and have any
part of his image stamped upon us: If you can find any one grace depending
upon, and flowing from union with Christ, that is enough to satisfy you about
the communion of the Spirit, and that you have the faith which has indeed
united you unto Christ.

I, but I am under much weakness of grace and many wants.
Ob. But if I had indeed this faith which unites to Christ, I should not all
this while have lived with so much weakness of grace, and under so many
spiritual wants; certainly I should have found more of the strength, and of the
fullness of Christ, who fills all in all:

Sol. I grant it for a truth, that the right union is an imparting, and
strengthening, and supplying union: Whosoever is united to Christ indeed by
faith, to him is Christ a supplying Fountain, a feeding Root, and an helping
Head, and he will never leave the communicating of his Spirit unto him, until
he has filled him with all that fullness whereof a lively member of Christ is
capable: but then remember,

1. Comparatively the original and first receptions from Christ are weak and
little, The first Receptions from Christ are weak.
as the seed that is cast into the earth, or as the light which breaks forth in
the morning: compare the first works of grace, with the flowing growth of
grace, it is but as the babe to the strong man, but as the Lamb to the sheep;
I believe, Lord, help my unbelief, this is that most of Faith at first: Thou
know that I love thee, this is the highest of your love at first: whom I
serve with, or in my spirit, this is the greatest of our obedience at the first.

2. The Communications of Christ unto the soul united by faith unto him, are
The communications of Christ are partly for justification, and partly in
sanctification. Justification is perfect.
partly for justification, and partly in Sanctification.

His communications in Justification are at once and full, and perfect: as soon
as you are by faith united unto Christ, you are perfectly reconciled to God,
you are perfectly clothed with the righeousness of Christ, you are perfectly
pardoned all your sins; your peace is so perfectly made with God, that you
cannot be more fully reconciled: you have the righteousness of Christ so
perfectly imputed to you, that you cannot be more righteous; you have your sins
so perfectly forgiven, that they cannot (as to Gods work of absolution) be more
exactly forgiven; they are so forgiven that none can lay any thing to your
charge; so forgiven that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus.

His communications in Sanctification are not thus perfect, and at once; but
His communications in sanctification imperfect.
they are successive and by degrees, and by measures: as the members of the
body united to the Head, or as the branches united to the Root, have their
strength and enlargements derived unto them in a succession of time, and in a
proportion; so the Members of Christ and the Branches in him (true Believers)
they do receive from him grace upon grace, one degree and measure after
another, like a vessel in the Sea which is not filled according to the present
fullness of the Sea, but according to the present capacity of the vessel, drop
after drop, it is filled by continued way of filling: or like a Child that is
nourished by a daily addition and reception of food, and so creeps up into more
strength in time: Beloved, you must not expect (though you be united to Christ)
such an immediate and complete supply of the Spirit of grace from Christ as at
once to make you strong Christians, and full Christians without any weaknesses,
and without any wants: Indeed Christ has promised to perfect his work which he
has begun, and to strengthen what he has wrought; and he will do so, but then
it is in his own way, and in his own time, by degrees he will so follow the
work of grace, that you shall grow and increase more and more with the
increasings of God: he will water the Plants, and bless the Buds; aand at
length will bring forth Judgment into victory; he will not communicate his
Spirit unto any of us in this life so perfectly as to be be without combat in
our selves, nor without dependence upon himself.

3. But lastly, do you indeed find weaknesses and wants still abiding with If
you be full of weakness, why do you not look out to Christ's fullness.
you? And why then did you complain and sit still? why do you not rather look
out to Christ's fullness, than thus discourage your hears at your own
emptiness? Indeed it is the first work of faith to unite you to Christ, to
make you and Christ one, to give you an interest in himself; but then it is the
next work of faith to live upon your Christ, to depend upon Christ, to draw out
of his fullness, to go to him, and to trust on him for all the good which yet
your souls do want, to get further fellowship with him; will he deny you help
who has not denied you himself? And is not he therefore your Christ, that he
may be your head and help, and supply? etc.

SECT. VIII.
4. Use IS uniting Faith the condition of the Covenant of Grace, so that all
Believers Instructions.
in Christ are really in Covenant with God, and God with them? Then you who are
believers (who are by faith united unto Christ) learn from hence the duties
which do especially concern you as Believers interested in Christ, and in the
Covenant: The duties which do much concern you are these. 1. Improve your faith
to a dependence on your God. 2. Improve your faith to an observance or keeping
Covenant with your God. 3. Remember that it is Jesus Christ upon whose account
you and God are in Covenant.

1. Being united by faith unto Christ, and so brought into Covenant, now
improve Improve your faith to a dependence upon God.
your faith to a dependence upon your God, who is your God in Covenant: Come
unto him in the name of Christ as unto your God, and rely on him, and expect to
receive from him, all the good for which he has engaged himself unto you in
Covenant: For the better mannaging of this instruction, I will briefly show unto
you

1. That it is an express and peremptory duty incumbent on you (who are by
Faith brought into Covenant) to depend by faith on your God in Covenant.

2. How far you may by virtue of your union with Christ by faith depend upon
your God.

3. What encouragements there are for all who are by Faith united unto Christ
to depend and rely on their God for whatsoever good themselves do need, and God
in his Covenant has promised unto them: I beseech you who are Believers,
diligently to regard and remember these things.

1. It is an express and peremptory duty incumbent on you being brought This
is a peremptory duty.
(by faith on Christ) into the Covenant, to depend by Faith on God, who is your
God in Covenant, Isa. 8. 19. Should not a people seek unto their God? Psalm. 20.
7. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will remember the Name of
the Lord our God. Psalm. 115. 9. O Israel! trust thou in the Lord, Psalm. 91. 2.
I will say of the Lord, He is my Refuge and my Fortress, my God, in him will I
trust, Isa. 50. 10. Who is he that sits in darkness and sees no light? Let him
trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Isa. 26. 4. Trust ye in
the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. See Psalm.
62. 8. Zeph. 3. 12. Isa. 12. 2. Isa. 14. 32. 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3 5.

Beloved! This is the end of your union with Christ, that you might have
communion with God, that you might have access unto him, Ephesians. 2. 18. and
that you might come boldly to the throne of Grace, that you may obtain mercy
and grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16. And this is the end for which
this faith is given unto you, not only for admission into the Covenant, but for
participation of all the good of the Covenant: It is given unto you to make you
children, and it is given to you to make you heirs; it is given unto you in a
passive sense that you might be received into the Covenant; and it is given
unto you in an active sense, that you may receive the good out of the Covenant;
It is given unto you to take off your hearts from all confidence, but upon your
God alone, and to set all your hopes on him, and expectations from him; and it
is given unto you that you might give glory to all the truths of God; and what
glory do you give to his p^omises, if you think him a God not to be trusted?
etc.

2. How far (by virtue of union with Christ) Believers may depend upon their
How far Believers may depend on God in Covenant. So far as Christ is made over
to you by God.
God in Covenant. I will describe those Bounds unto you in six Propositions.

1. So far as Jesus Christ is made over unto you by God, your dependence on
God, may, and should extend. Isa. 9. 6. Unto us a Son is given, and the
government shall be upon his shoulders; his Name shall be called wonderful,
Counsell^r, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; He is
by God set forth to be a propitiation, Romans 3. ^5. And he is made of God unto
us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. ^0
And God has made him to be sin for us, that we may be made the Righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. And he is given to be a Redeemer, a Savior, a
Light, a Salvation: As to all these respects you may confidently depend upon
your God, that Jesus Christ shall be unto you a Redeemer.

2. So far as Christ has purchased for his Members, as far as his purchase
extends, so far your dependence on your God may extend; whatsoever good or As
far as his purchase extends.
blessing he has laid down a price for, and bought by his blood and death for
all that believe on him, for all that may you by faith depend upon your God (in
time) to settle upon you; whether it be remission of sin, or reconciliation
with God, or grace, or peace in conscience, or acceptance, or assistance, or
joys of the Holy Ghost, or perseverance, or eternal glory, for all of it are
you to depend upon your God, to settle upon you in their order and measure.

3. So far as the promises of God do extend, so far may, and should your
dependence So far as the promises extend.
on your God extend: whatsoever he undertakes to give you in his Covenant, for
all that may, and should you depend upon him for according to his Covenant: His
Covenant is full of promises, and those promises are full of good for soul,
for body, for both, for this life, for the next life, for grace, for glory;
why! All these promises are the childrens bread, and the believers portion: and
as where God has a mouth to speak to us in the way of Precepts, there we
should have an ear to hear him in the way of obedience; so where God is
pleased to abound in promises unto us, we are bound to enlarge our Faith in a
dependence upon him for all that promised good: unbelief displeases and
dishonors God in his promis^s, as disobedience does dishonor and displease
him in respect of his commands.

4. So far as the real exigences of our souls and bodies do extend, so far
may, and should our faith of dependence extend upon our God: Though the child
has no So far as the real exigences of our souls and bodies do extend.
reason to depend upon his father to supply him of his vanities; yet he has
warrant enough to rely upon him to relieve all his necessities. If the child
wants bread, and raiment, or Physic, the child may come, and the Father will
help: and this holds 'twixt God our Father, and his children. How much more
shall your heavenly Father give good things to them that ask him? Matthew. 7. 11.
If it be a want indeed, an exigence indeed, a strait indeed, you may go to your
God and trust on him, and he will not fail you. Psalm 84. 11. No good thing
will he withold. Psalm. 34. 10. They that seek the Lord, shall not want any
good thing. Isai. 41. 17. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is
none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear, I the God of
Israel will will not forsake them.

Let your want or exigence be temporal, or spiritual, if it be indeed an
exigence by reason of temptation from Satan, or from the insolent op^rations of
sinful corruptions, or from the greatness of afflictions, or heav^nesse of
misery, or distress of poverty, or any other pressure, I say, if it be a real
exigence that you know not what to do, in every such case your eyes should be
upon your God, you should trust on him, and stay upon his Name.

5. So far as your prayers may extend for your selves, so far may, and should
So far as our Prayers may extend.
your dependence on your God extend: I do not say every man's asking and faith
of dependence are co-extensive: Nor do I say that every good man's asking and
faith of dependence are to be paralleld: But this I say, that so far as you may
pray, so far you may and ought to believe, to depend on your God, 1 John 5. 14.
This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us. Joh. 14. 13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name,
that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son: you may pray for
whatsoever God has commanded you to pray, and you may pray for whatsoever God
has encouraged his people to pray; you may pray for whatsoever God has
promised to hear and and answer Prayer; and for whatsoever Christ may be looked
upon as an Intercessor: And for all these may you depend upon your God. Nay you
should do so; for as your God would have you thus to pray unto him, so he would
have you to pray in faith, to ask in Faith, believing that he is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

6. Lastly, Match but conditions and circumstances, whatsoever good, and in So
far as any child of God has extended his faith in like condition.
whatsoever like case any Child of God, or servant of Christ has extended his
faith of dependence upon his God, for all that good may you (being now in the
same relation and condition) exercise your faith of dependence upon your God:
If you be in the same strait that Jehoshaphat was, or in the same distress
that Hezekiah was, or in the same calamity that Job was, or in the same
dejection and desertion that David was, or in the same spiritual conflicts, and
temptation that Paul was, or in the same trouble and terror of conscience that
Heman was, etc. whatsoever mercy, or grace, help, or comfort, or goodness, they
might look up unto God for as their God in Covenant, for the very same may you
look up to God, and depend upon God for as your God. Whatsoever any one has
pleaded for with God, and trusted upon God for, because he was their God, upon
the same account, in the same condition may every Child of God plead with him,
and depend upon him for, because God is also his God: Parallel but conditions
and circumstances, and then the same Covenant will unquestionably afford unto
you the same ground for confidence and dependence.

3. These things being so, let us advance now into the third place, viz. What
Encouragements to depend upon God.
encouragements there are for all who are by faith united unto Christ,
cheerfully and confidently to depend upon their God for whatsoever good he has
stated out for them in his Coenvant.

Sol. If any people in the world have grounds of encouragement to depend on God
for the good of his Covenant, then certainly you have who are by faith united
unto Christ; and you have these three choice encouragements; viz. 1. Relation.
2. Promises. 3. The Name and Office of Christ.

1. There is a very near relation between God and you; so near that there is a
mutual propriety between you, Zech. 1^. 9. I will say It is my people, and they
shall There is a near relation 'twixt God and you.
say The Lord is my God, 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Isa. 54. 5. Thy Maker
is thy Husband (the Lord of Hosts is his Name) and thy Redeemer, etc. Can there
be any Relation greater or nearer than these Relations? My God, and my people;
our Father, and my Sons and Daughters; my Husband, and my Wife. Surely these
are the nearest Relations for union, and they are the tenderest Relations for
affection, and they are the strongest Relations for obligation: The Father
himself loves you, said Christ to his Disciples; I will marry thee to my self
in loving kindness, said God to his Church. Love will do much, especially love
set in a near relation. Why are our hands so open to our Wives, and Children,
and Friends, but because our hearts are enlarged in love toward them? And why
do any of these repair unto us (and not to others) for help, but because of
their near relation unto us? they are our Children, and we are their Fathers,
they are our Wives, and we are their Husbands? There is near relation, and
there is love, and there is readiness, and there is special obligation, and
therefore they come to us, and depend upon us, and we do help them. Do you
find encouragement to depend upon your friend, because he is your friend and
loves you? and have you not a greater encouragement to depend upon your God,
because he is your God and loves you? Can the Child find encouragements
enough (by virtue of his relation) to go to his Father and rely on him? and
cannot you (who are by faith the children of God) discern greater
encouragements to go to your Father, and depend on him? your Relation is
higher, and your love is infinitely purer and stronger!

2. If the nearness of Relation be not satisfactory, then remember there is
also You have the Bond of the Promises.
the bound of promises: To you are the promises made and given, which are the
very bonds of God, and your names are in those bonds; God will not be at
liberty, he knows how incredulous we are, we must have his Word to tell us how
he stands affected toward us; nay, and we must have his word of promise,
binding and engaging his honor (as God) to do us good, and not to fail us:
Nay, perhaps his word of promise will not suffice us, but besides that we must
have his Oath (which yet we never put any man on earth unto, and unto whom we
come for help) but God comes off with all this to encourage us to come unto
him, and to depend on him. He is ours in Affection, he becomes ours in
Relation, and he tells us how good a God he intends to be unto us, and then
engages himself in promises for all that good; and moreover he takes his Oath,
swears by himself that he will not fail us nor forsake us, and that in
blessing he will bless us. Beloved! what would you have more to encourage, to
assure you, to give you confidence that you may draw near to your God, and
depend, and trust upon him; says God, you have my Word, and you have my Oath,
and I am yours, I have no greater security to make unto you.

3. Well, and besides this you have another encouragement to come and You have
the name and Office of Christ to encourage you.
depend upon your God, and that is the Name of Christ, and the Office of Christ.

Object. True, will you say, we can desire no more on Gods part; but something
makes us to fear, and doubt on our part; He is good, but we are unworthy; and
he is willing to do us good: but how shall we plead with him?

Sol. I answer, Jesus Christ is yours, and in his name you may go to the
Father, and as you may plead with the Father in his Name, so does he plead for
you with the Father in his own Name: Joh 16. 23. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name he will give it you. As if
he should say, I grant that you (of your selves) are unworthy, and you cannot
prevail upon your own account of worthiness; this will not carry it with the
Father; therefore when you come unto him use my Name, plead my worthinss,
entreat him to do you good for my sake, and I assure you that will prevail
with him, Heb. 9. 24. Christ is entered into heaven itself, now to appear in the
presence of God for us. Heb. 7. 25. He is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him: Seeing he ever lives to make
intercession. You see in these places that Jesus Christ appears in the presence
of God for you; when you appear before God in prayer, Christ also appears in
the presence of God for you, and makes intercession for you; he owns your
persons, and he owns your petititions, you plead and Christ pleads, you make
requests, and Christ makes intercession. Father! These are they whom thou have
given to me; Thine they were, and they are mine; for them I dyed, and for them
I purchas^d all the good which thou did promise unto me, that they should
have, if I would lay down my life for them: Now therefore let them enjoy what
thou have promised, and what I have purchased for them. Thus have you the first
duty belonging unto them who are by faith united to Christ, and brought thereby
into Covenant with God: Now follows the second.

2. Being united by Faith unto Christ, and so let into the Covenant, Improve
your Faith to an observance or keeping Covenant with your God: And indeed Faith
is Improve your faith to a keeping Covenant with God.
given unto you also for this end, that you may be able to keep and hold fast
the Covenant made between you and your God, that you may obey his will, walk in
his Statutes and ways, be sincere and upright, and remain faithful and
steadfast with him to the end.

Quest. But can faith do this? Is it in the power of our faith thus to enable
us? How does faith enable us to keep Covenant with God.
How can, or does faith enable us to keep Covenant with our God?

Sol. This is an excellent question, and I would resolve it thus: Faith does
enable us to keep our Covenant with God six ways.

1. By pleading the Covenant; by enabling us to go unto, and rest upon our God
in Covenant, to let out that strength and sufficiency of that grace which By
pleading the Covenant.
he has promised unto all his people in Covenant with him; the strength to
keep the Covenant lies in the Covenant, and by faith you get it.

Thou said that thou would do me good, said Jacob, Genesis 32. 12. So Lord
thou said that thou would give me thy Spirit to cause me to walk in thy
statutes and to do them, Ezekiel. 36. 27. Thou said thou would write thy Law
in my heart; Now Lord! according to thy word and Covenant help, strengthen,
keep, direct, establish my heart, subdue mine iniquities, suffer me not to be
tempted above what I am able, let thy grace be sufficient for me, make thy
power manifest in weakness, etc.

2. By keeping up communion with Christ, and drawing virtue and influence from
By keeping up communion with Christ.
him: without me ye can do nothing, said Christ; I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me, said Paul: Why! It is in and by Christ, that we are
what we are, that we do what we do, that we are strengthened with all might,
that we stand, that we walk, that we work, that we run our race, that we finish
our course, that we continue in well-doing to the end: Now faith keeps up our
hearts, and keeps up communion with Christ our Head, our Root, our Life, our
Fountain, our Strength, and our Sufficiency, and receives out of his fullness,
and makes us partakers of his life, and of his death, and of his victories over
sin, and Satan, and the world, and of his strength for active and passive
obedience.

3. By taking us off from all our own self-sufficiencies, and self-confidences
(which By taking us off from our own self sufficiency.
breed nothing but pride and presumption, and hypocrisy, and apostasy, and
carelessness) and exciting our hears to pray, and to fear, and to watch, and
diligently to attend the Ordinances of Christ; all which are means to
strengthen and preserve us in well-doing, etc

4. By observing the continual mercies of God to us in the things of this life,
and By observing the continual mercies of God to us.
the gracious performance of his promises unto us, both which are as so many
cords to bind us faster unto God, and are of great force with a believing heart
to engage it more unto God, and to walk the more closely, and faithfully, and
exactly, and fruitfully before him: to be the more ashamed to sin against him,
to be barren and uneven with so blessing and encouraging a God!

5. By letting in the love of God in Christ (the goodness and sweetness of his
favor) By letting in the love of God in Christ into our hearts.
into our Consciences. It is faith which has the sight of all the kindness of
God, and conveyes unto us the tastes of all the mercy of God, how God stands
affected to us, how accepted we are with him, what grace our poor souls have
found in his eyes, what his thoughts are of us, and how dear we are to his
soul: And verily if Faith be the glass (as it were) for us to see the face of
our loving God, O how will this inflame and knit our hearts in love to God
again! and how will that love continue us to the choicest, to the fullest, to
the chearfullest, to the faithfullest service of obedience!

5. By holding out before us, both the honor of God, and the reward of God: By
holding out before us the honor of God
Our faithful walking with him is an honor to him, and a delight to him,
These are my people, these live like a people of God, they glorify him: and
that is the great Argument which faith uses to make the people of God and the
rewards of God.
to be faithful and steadfast, Herein is my Father glorified, Joh. 15. 8. And
besides that, it holds out the crown of life, the great recompense of reward,
that Well done good and faithful servant! enter thou into the joy of thy Lord:
Hold fast that which thou ha^^, that no man take thy (...). He that continues,
to the end shall be saved. And faith he (...) w^a^ God has done for us, and
what God ^s still to us, and what an immortal inheritance, and exceedingly
exceeding weight of Glory he has prepared and reserved for us, does thereupon
quicken, encourage, support, draw out our hearts to be industrious, obedient,
diligent and faithful.

3. The third and last duty from this, that you are by Faith united to Christ,
Remember Jesus Christ,
and brought into the Covenant, is this, Remember your Jesus Christ, remember
that it is Christ only upon whose account you and God are in Covenant: he is
the door of your hope, he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; in him are ye
found, and in him have you found life, and love, and mercy, and grace, and
peace, and salvation. You could never have seen the reconciled, loving,
gracious God as your God, but in and by him: He has made you near, and
accepted, and beloved, and blessed; He alone! Therefore.

1. Never magnify your selves, but Christ; never ascribe any thing to your To
magnify him.
worthiness, but ascribe all to Christ: O Christ, I had never seen, nor tasted,
nor enjoyed this, nor that, nor any thing but for thy sake.

2. Love Jesus Christ exceedingly for himself, and for all the treasures of To
love him.
the Covenant opened for you, and laid out upon you, etc.

3. Go still in his Name unto the Father: By him you come into Covenant, Go
unto the Father in his Name.
and by him you obtain successively every good (...) Co^enant, etc.

Jesus the Mediator of the Covenant.
Hebrews 12. 24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the
blood of sprinkling that speaks better things than that of Abel.
THE Apostle in the 14. verse of this Chapter exhorts the believing Hebrews
(unto whom he wrote this Epistle) to the serious study and practice of peace
and holiness: And in the 15. verse he dehorts them from all bitterness of
spirit, and profaneness of life. This latter he does enforce by an argument ab
exemplo: in verse 16. from Esau that loose and profane person (who for one
morsel of bread sold his birthright) preferring the satisfaction of his sensual
appe^ite, before the fruition of so a great blessing and dignity, the which he
therefore forfeited, and could never obtain, although he sought it carefully
with tears, verse 17.

The former duty of holiness he urges upon them from the consideration of
their evangelical estate (that is) of the excellencies, blessings, and
privileges which they had obtained by the Gospel of Grace: To illustrate this
the more, he makes a comparison between the Law and the Gospel; and the
condition under the one, with the condition under the other, from verse 18. to
verse 25. wherein he does represent unto them their admirable advantages by the
Gospel, and therefore their stronger obligation to embrace it, and to live
answerable unto it in holiness of conversation.

The condition in which sinners lie whiles under the Law and the curse thereof,
and without Christ, is set forth in the 18, 19, 20, 21. verses. I will give you
the The Words opened.
sum of it.

They have to do with God as a terrible Judge, sitting on the Throne of his
Justice, This is represented by Mount Sinai that burned with fire, and where
the^e was blackness, and darkness, and tempest, verse 18. All which show unto
us that dreadful and burning wrath of God against sinners; and when he
manifests himself unto them as their offended Judge, then they are filled with
confusion, and perplexity, and horror. They can neither fly from this God, nor
yet abide his dreadful presence; this is set out in verse 19. 20. as if nothing
but death were to be expected and present destruction: And truly the
manifestations of God were (then) so terrible, that Moses himself said, I
exceedingly fear and quake, ver. 21. No not the most righteous person is able
to stand before God as a judge.

But now let us consider the other estate unto which Believers in Christ are
brought by the Gospel. This is set forth in verse 22, 23, 24. But ye are come
unto Mount Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem, instead of Mount Sinai which was the
seat of wrath; ye are come to Mount Sion which is the throne of Grace: And unto
the City of the living God; ye are not now in a wilderness condition, but
brought into a resting place, into the heavenly Jerusalem (which is the vision
of peace) where (being reconciled by Christ) you do abide, and enjoy the living
God for your God.

And to Myriades, or innumerable company of Angels; even the Angels are
fellow-Citizens with you in the heavenly Jerusalem, and in this life your
fellowservants and Ministers.

To the general assembly and Church of the firstborn which are written in
heaven. Through Christ ye are made members of the true Catholic Church, of the
Elect and of all Believers, whose names are enrolled in heaven, written in the
book of life, predestined unto grace and glory.

And unto God the judge of all, who will condemn and punish his adversaries;
and absolve, comfort, and reward, and save his people, according to his
faithful promises.

And to the Spirits of just men made perfect. To the Church triumphant in
heaven, which is freed from all sin and misery, and partakes of perfect
holiness and happiness; to which you have now a present right, and of which
(are long) you shall by Christ have a sure enjoyment with them that are already
entered into that Possession.

And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant. Ye are under a Covenant of
grace which proclaims remission of sin, and of which Christ himself is
Mediator and Surety; by whom God is satisfied and reconciled.

And to the blood of sprinkling; to the partaking of this blood which was shed
for the remission of sins, and to cleanse us from sin; so that you are now
justified and sanctified by him; which speaks better things than that of
Abel. The blood of Abel spoke and cried out against Cain for curse and
vengeance; but the blood of Jesus Christ speaks to God for mercy and pardon of
sin, and peace, and life, and is effectual for these.

Thus you see into what a surpassing condition the Gospel brings believers in
Christ, and of what efficacy the Apostles exhortation of them to holiness
should therefore be.

CHAP. VII. The Covenant of Grace considered in relation to Christ the
Mediator.
THIS last verse I have purposely chosen to carry on farher the discourse of
the Covenant of Grace in relation to Christ Jesus as Mediator The Covenant of
Grace considered ^n relation to Christ as Mediator.
thereof: And let me tell you that herein lies the strongest hopes, and the
sweetest comforts, and the surest grounds that we sinners have; that as there
is a New Covenant (a Covenant of Grace) so that Jesus Christ is the Mediator
thereof: For set Jesus Christ aside as Mediator in this Covenant, there would
be no admission of sinners into it, nor any participation of the good things in
it, nor any ability of our standing or abiding in it.

I find in Scripture a sevenfold relation that Jesus Christ has to the
Covenant. Christ has a sevenfold relation to the Covenant. He is the
substance of the Covenant. The principal confederate party.


1. He is the substance of the Covenant, even the Covenant itself, Isa. 42. 6.
I will give thee for a Covenant of the people, Isa. 49. 8. He is our very
peace, and our very life, and our very salvation; and (if I may not be
mistaken) he it is that fulfils, and makes the Covenant good on both sides.

2. He is the principal confederate party: As Adam was in that Covenant of
works standing for himself and all his posterity; so Jesus Christ in this
Covenant of Grace for himself and all that believe on him, Heb. 1. 5. I will be
to him a Father, and be shall be to me a Son, 1 John 20. 17. I ascend to my
Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.

3. He is the Messenger of the Covenant, (Mal. 3. 1. The Messenger of the
Covenant The Messenger of the Covenant.
whom ye delight in) He it is who opens and reports unto us the good will of
his Father, and the gracious love of the Father, and what has past and has
been agreed on 'twixt the Father and him touching our salvation; he reveals
this Covenant, and treats with sinners about it, and shows them the way how to
come in, and prevails with them by his Spirit.

4. He is the Witness of the Covenant, Isa. 55. 4. Behold I have given him The
Witness of the Covenant.
for a Witness to the people. Rev. 1. 5. From Jesus Christ the faithful
witness, etc. He testifies to the Covenant, by word, and deed, and oath, and
his testimony is true, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying and worthy all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ is come into the world to save sinners: He is
the Yea and Amen to every word of promise and grace that God has spoken
concerning us, that it is good and true, that God has said it, and that he
will perform it.

5. He is the Surety of the Covenant. Heb. 7. 22. Jesus was made a Surety of
The Surety of the Covenant.
a better Testament and Covenant: As God is (in some respect) a Surety for
Christ, Isa. 52 13. Behold my servant shall deal prudently; so Christ is a
Surety for God, undertaking that his Father shall perform what he has
promised, Joh. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out, verse 38. For I came down from
heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. verse 39.
And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.
And a Surety for us; He did enter into Bond for us to pay our ransom; To
become sin for us, that we may be made the righteousness of God in him.

6. He is the Testator of the Covenant, and he died to confirm the Covenant:
The Testator of t^^ Covenant.
His death sealed it, so that we may challenge and plead the good of the
Covenant as children do their Estates left unto them in a Testament sealed,
Heb. 9. 16, 17. Where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death
of the Testator: For a Testament is of force after men are dead.

7. He is the Mediator of the Covenant: Thus is he styled in the Text, the The
Mediator of the Covenant.
Mediator of the New Covenant. Thus in Heb. 8. 6. The Mediator of a better
Covenant. Thus in Heb. 9. 15. The Mediator of the New Testament. He is that
dayes-man 'twixt God and us, that lays his hand upon us both, such a one as
Job wished for, Job 9. 33. He takes up all differences, answered all demands,
paid the ransom, and reconciled us.

There is,

1. Internuncius, A Messenger between two parties. 2. Arbiter, An Umpire, an
indifferent man chosen to judge between two. A litigantibus eligitur, and habet
totius rei potestatem. 3. Intercessor, who uses entreaty for another. 4.
Advocatus, who defends or soliciteth another man's cause. 5. Mediator ut
supra; and there is a Mediator per modum Annuntiationis, or Revelationis, as
M^ses who stood between God and the people, Indicans illis verbum Dei, Deuteronomy. 5.
5. I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to show unto you the Word of
the Lord, per modum reconciliationis: So Jesus Christ who by his death or
sacrifice appeased God, and reconciled us unto God, 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one
God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Jesus Christ. verse 6. Who
gave himself a ransom for all.
But what is a Mediator? He is

1. Qui medius est inter duos parum inter se congruentes, aut etiam sibi
invicem What is a Mediator.
hosts; he is a middle Person (a third Person) between two who are either
jarring and quarrelling, or else who plainly fall^ out and becomes enemies; he
is one who steps in 'twixt the offending, and offended person.

2. Qui mediat inter parts: He is one who mediates between those parties,
(that is) who undertakes to take up their differences, and to atone and
reconcile them, and make them one in love and friendship again, and for that
purpose engages himself to give such a satisfaction to the offended party,
whereby all grounds of injury and displeasure being removed, he, and the
offending party comes to stand in the terms of affection, peace, and amity, as
if no difference ever had been between them.

3. Qui promovet, he is one who does so attend and personate the reconciling of
parties, that he gives not over that work or enterprise, until he has
accorded them, and drawn them into a state of love and reconcilement, until he
has indeed made them friends.

4. Qui utriusque nomine: He is one who transacts this work between the parties
in the name of the both parties dealing with the offending party in the name of
the offended; and with the offended party, in the name of the offeding party;
so to satisfy the one, and so to relieve and help the other.

In all these respects is Christ a Mediator 'twixt God and us sinners. Christ
is such a Mediator.


1. God the Father he is that one party, and the sinner is the other party;
betwixt both of them Jesus Christ the Son of God comes in as a middle or third
party.

2. And mediates, takes it upon him to set them at one again, who by reason of
sin ^e are at variance and enmity; and this he does by undertaking to give
satisfaction to God offended and provoked by sin.

3. And so prosecutes this work that he refuses not any thing required and
insisted upon by the offended God, necessary to make him reconciled, but
willingly yields to do and suffer all (and did so) to make up a peace twixt him
and sinners.

4. In the transacting of all this, He acted in the name of them both, with the
one, and with the other.

For the opening of this excellent and useful Point, I shall touch briefly upon
seven particulars.

1 The necessity of a Mediator between God and us sinners. 2. That Jesus
Christ is the Mediator, and he only. 3. How Jesus Christ is to be considered,
as standing under the Name and Office of a Mediator. 4. According to what
Nature in Christ he is our Mediator, whether according to his Divine nature
only, or Humane Nature only, or both. 5. What did concern Christ to do or
suffer for us as Mediator. 6. What the merits, efficacies, virtues and
benefits are depending on him as Mediator, and flowing from his mediation. 7.
What Christ still does in the behalf of the people in Covenant, for whom he is
a Mediator.
SECT. I.
THat there is a necessity of a Mediator between God and us: Man may be There
is a necessity of a Mediator betwixt God and us.
considered two ways,

Either as a righteous Creature so made by God, in which respect there is no
necessity of a Mediator for him; for as so he was in an estate of friendship
with his God, and no difference nor provocation therefore requiring a Mediator.

Or as a sinning, offending and guilty Creature. By reason whereof friendship
is broken off 'twixt him and God: God is infinitely offended and provoked, and
sinful man lies under his heavy wrath and curse for sinning voluntarily against
him; all which was threatened in case of sinful transgression and disobedience;
For,
And thus he stands in need of a Mediator; For

1. God is righteous, and must establish his Law against sin, by the punishing
of God is righteous.
sin; he will certainly be repaired either in the sinners eternal destruction,
or in a Mediators perfect satisfaction. He will be satisfied, or else never
reconciled.

2. There is an absolute impotency in the sinner to make his own peace with
God, either to satisfy the offended God, or to repair his lost self; he has
nothing There is an absolute impotency in the sinner to satisfy.
either proportionable or available that way. So then, if God cannot in honor
suffer sin to pass unpunished; and man cannot in any kind of obedience make a
compensation and satisfaction unto God; of necessity a Mediator must be found
who must step in between both these parties, on whom the curse due to sin may
be laid, and God (by his obedience) may be satisfied, he undertaking and laying
down the same for the offendingand sinning party, unto the offended and
prowoked party.

3. It had utterly been in vain (be it spoken with reverence) for God to have
There cannot be a New Covenant without a Mediator.
set up a Covenant (a New Covenant) if he had not set forth a Mediator for
that Covenant. Because neither can a sinner come into a New Covenant without a
Mediator (the sinners access to God and union with him requires one) Nor can
there be any acceptance of the person or of the services of any sinner without
a Mediator, who must bear his name before God, and take away the iniquity of
his holy offerings. Nor can he continue in that Covenant without the presence
and help of a Mediator; For if Adam who had a perfect righteousness (suitable
to his created condition) could not make good the Covenant with him, much less
can the sinner by his own strength either perform the duties, or persevere in
the performance of them against so many inward oppositions of his own sinful
nature, and so many outward temptations of Satan, without the power and
sufficiency of a Mediator.

SECT. II.
2. THat Jesus Christ is the Mediator, and he only: There are two Branches
Jesus Christ, and he only is the Mediator. Jesus Christ is the Mediator,
proved by the (...) God,
in this Assertion.

1. One that Jesus Christ is the Mediator, which will appear to be a truth,
whether you consider (six things.)

1. The counsel and purpose of God to save sinners by Christ as Mediator. Ye
were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish,
and without spot, who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the
world, 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20. Whose names are written in the book of Life of the
Lamb slain before the foundation of the world. Rev. 13. 8. Him being delivered
by the determinate counsel and for eknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by
wicked hands have crucified and slain, Acts 2. 23.

2. The voluntary consent and compact between God the Father and Christ. The
The voluntary consent and compact betwixt God and Christ.
Father was willing to give Christ his Son to be the Head, and to be the
Ransom of the Elect; and Christ the Son of God presented himself most willing
to procure that salvation for them: The Father agreed with him for an obedience
even to the death to bring this about, and promised him a Spiritual Kingdom and
seed upon the performance; And the Son came up to this, Then said I, Lo I
come, in the volume of thy Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will O
my God, yea thy Law is within my heart.

3. The promise of this unto Adam. Genesis 3. 15. It shall bruise thy head, and
thou The promise of this to Adam.
shall bruise his heel: This is directly meant of Christ, who as our Mediator
should suffer death for us, etc. And unto Abraham in Genesis 18. 18. In thy seed
shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed.

4. The Legal figures and shadows in Sacrifices and Offerings, all which
Typified The Legal figures and shadows of it.
Jesus Christ the Mediator who offered himself, shed his blood, took away
sin, and made peace, as in the Hebrews is a bundantly expressed.

5. The actual exhibition and presentation of Christ unto the world, and for
this The actual exhibition of Christ.
purpose to be a Mediator, Gal. 4. 4. When the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law. verse 5. To redeem them
that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

6. The real executing of that Office of Mediator, in fulfilling all
Righteousness, The real execution of that Office.
and in giving himself for a Ramsome, and by his blood reconciling and making
Peace.

2. And as Christ is that Mediator, so he only is that Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Christ only is that Mediator.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus,
but one God, and but one Mediator. Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in
any other; for there is no other Name under heaven given amongst men whereby we
must be saved. None was ever called to that Office but Christ; and none was
ever fitted for that Office but Christ; and none were ever able to discharge
that Office but Christ. Him the Father sent, and gave, and sealed; and on him
was laid our iniquities, etc. Read you of Man or Angel called by God to be a
Mediator 'twixt him and sinners? Was ever any so fitted for that work but
Christ?

He who is a Mediator, at least three conditions must lie upon him.

1. He must not be of the number of those who are to be reconciled: Therefore
Three conditions in a Mediator, agree only to Christ.
no simple man can be a Mediator.

2. He must partake of the nature of them who are to be redeemed and
reconciled; He must be of the same seed with them, Heb. 2. 16. and therefore no
Angel can be a Mediator.

3. He must be more than a mere Creature; For a mere creature cannot
satisfy, nor can his righteousness be imputed to any but himself; and he must
be able to overcome sin, and death, and raise himself, which no creature can
do; therefore neither men, nor Angels can be Mediators.

SECT. III.
3. NOw let me speak unto the third particular, viz. How Jesus Christ is to How
Christ is to be considered as being-Mediatour. As God Man.
be considered, or looked upon as being a Mediator.

I answer, not as God only; not as the second Person in the Trinity only; not
as man only; but as Theanthropos, as God-Man: As God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. As the Word made flesh which dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his
glory as the only begotten of the Father, Joh. 1. 14. As the second Person of
the Trinity incarnated, as Immanuel God with us: A Virgin shall conceive and
bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his Name Immanuel, Isa. 7. 14. with
Matthew. 1. 23. and so the Angel to Mary in Luke 1. 31. Behold thou shall
conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his Name Jesus,
verse 32. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, verse 33. And
he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall
be no end: So Gal. 4. 4. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his
Son made of a woman, etc. to redeem them that were under the Law: (And Christ
is said to bear our sins in his own body, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And to make his soul
an offering for sin, Isa. 53. And by his death and blood to reconcile us, Romans
5. 9. Col. 2. 22.) As Christ was God from all eternity; so in time he was made
Man: True God he was. Joh. 1. 1. The Word was God: and true Man also be was.
Heb. 2. 14. He did partake of flesh and blood; and verse 17. In all things made
like unto his brethren: and Acts 20. 28. of him it is said, that God purchased
his Church with his own blood (that is) the Son of God being made man, did so
purchase his Church.

So then, Jesus Christ is our Mediator considered as God and Man: And the
Reasons of it.
Reasons are these.

1. A Mediator must be a middle Person 'twixt differing parties, equally
distant from both, and equally drawing nigh to both parties betiwxt whom he
does A Mediator must be a middle Person 'twixt differing parties.
mediate. Now Christ who was God, by becoming man, is therefore a middle Person
betwixt God and Man; for upon this account he partakes of the Nature of them
both; and as he is near to the Father as God, in like manner he is as near to
us as he is man.

2. A Mediator must be indifferent, and faithful in the behalf of both
parties, He must be indifferent and faithful in behalf of both parties.
not leaning too much unto the one, nor inclining too much unto the others; not
pressing on the one side, nor prejudicing on the other side, but dealing
righteously between both, and evenly: And thus did Christ our Mediator, being
God and Man: He was (as it were) therefore so equally interested and balanced
on the behalf of both, that man could not have chosen a better; nor God have
appointed a fitter; and neither a surer Mediator than Christ. For as be
himself was God, it concerned him to salve his honor, and to give him
satisfaction: And as he himself was also Man (and under obligation for him) it
concerned him as much to lay out himself for the good and interest of man in
procuring reconciliation and salvation for him. So that partaking of both their
Natures as a Mediator, he was thereby not only entrusted by both parties, but
also a like engaged in the behalf of them both: And truly therefore was the
Divine and humane Nature united in his Person, that so God and Man might be
united and reconciled by his mediation.

3. Besides, those opera (...) necessarily must be the opera (...) The works of
Christ's mediation were such as no Person could effect except he were both God
and Man.
the works of Christ's Mediation which did rest upon him to perform and
dispatch, (by his Fathers will and his own consent and susception) were such as
no person could effect, unless he were both God and Man; for he was both to
die, and to overcome death; dye he could not unless he had been Man; and
overcome death he could not unless he had been God. He was to be under the Law,
that he might redeem us from the Law: He must therefore be Man, that so he
might be under the Law; and he must therefore be God also, else he could not
have Redeemed us from the Law: He was to suffer, and by suffering to satisfy
and merit. If he had been God only, he could not have suffered; if he had been
Man only, he could not have satisfied, and merited. He was to lay down his
life, and to take it up again; he could not have done the former, had he not
been Man; nor could he have done the latter, had he not been God.

Object. Now whereas some denying the true Humanity of Christ (as others have
denied his Divinity) do object, That Christ took upon him the form of a
servant, Phil. 2. 7. and that he was sent in the likeness of sinful flesh,
Romans 8. 3. and therefore he was not made Man indeed, and therefore not to be
considered as God and Man in his Mediatourship.

Sol. I answer.

1. To the first (the form of a servant) does not prove that he was not really
The form of a servant opened.
a servant, no more than in verse 6. his being in the form of God does prove
that he is not really God: But he was so in the form of God, that yet he was
true God; In like manner he was so in the form of a Servant, that he was also a
true Servant: Nevertheless know, to be in the form of a thing may be taken two
ways.

1. Sometimes for a mere show or appearance, without the truth of that
substance whereof it is a form or appearance: Thus the Apostle speaks of some
who had the form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. (that is) a mere outward
appearance without the presence, power, or substance thereof.

2. Sometimes for the evidence of a real being: for the word (...), is also
such a form as grows upon, and manifests the truth of an Essence or Being; as
the form of a Seal left in the wax, is an evidence that a true seal has made
that impression. So the external way of Christ in his humiliation and
sufferings, his humbling of himself to the death, etc. did (like a form) show
indeed that he was a true and perfect man, and were the evidences of the truth
of his Humanity.

2. To the second also I answer, That there is a difference between flesh and
sinful What is meant by sinful flesh.
flesh: A sinful Humane Nature is one thing, and an Humane Nature is another
thing: Christ was not made sinful flesh (his conception by the Holy Ghost freed
him from that contagion; and truly he could never have been made a Mediator
for sinners, had he himself been a sinner) yet was he made flesh, or true man:
He was flesh in truth, though sinful flesh only in similitude, because of his
reproaches, and abasements, and sufferings; He was in the opinion of the world
numbered amongst transgressors, and accounted by men to be smitten of God, for
his own sins; yet this in truth was not so: For he was made like unto us in all
things, sin only excepted.

Thus have I opened unto you what a Mediator is: The necessity of a Mediator;
that Christ is the Mediator, and he only; that he is so as God made man.
Before I pass to the other particulars, I will make some useful Applications
from those truths already delivered.



1. Of the Atrocity or heinousness of s^n. It was a good expression of
Bernard, Agnosce, O homo, quam gravia sunt vulnera, pro quibus necesse est Dei
Filium Information. Of the hainousness of sin.
vulnerari! O sirs! we make light of sin, it is but a pastime to a fool to
commit iniquity; we commit sin, and we forget our sins; By our sins we make a
breach, a difference 'twixt God and our souls. And we think it an easy matter
to close up the differences thus raised by our sins; As that King after his
swearing and wicked doing would kiss his Crucifix, and thought that was enough
to make his peace; so we. O but we are exceedingly mistaken; though it be easy
to fall out with God, yet it is not easy to fall in with God; though it be
easy to offend and provoke him, yet it is not easy to be reconciled to him:
When man has sinned against God, none can make his peace with God, but the Son
of God, and he must do it as a Mediator: He must come down from heaven to make
our peace in heaven. And he must be made man to reconcile sinful man; and he
must be made under the Law, to deliver from the curse of the Law; and he must
be put to death to deliver us from death: Sin makes such a difference that no
Angel, no Man, no Creature can take it off, but Jesus Christ the Mediator.

2. Of the wonderful goodness of God to us sinners, and to us enemies; that he
Of the wonderful goodness of God to sinners.
gave and sent his own Son to be a Mediator for us, 1 John 4. 10. Herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins: He began in love to us, who began the breach and
enmity with him; and sent his Son (the Son of his love to the abusers of his
love) to be a propitiation for our sins, whereas he might have sent down wrath
and damnation upon us sinners, Romans 5. 8. God commends his love toward us,
in that whiles we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. O what love is this,
not to spare his Son, and yet to spare his enemies! Christ who had no sin of
his own must dye, that sinners who had no righteousness of their own mighr
live. Quod meretur malus, patitur bonus; man sins and deserves the curse;
and he that was God and Man suffers to take away this curse, and to make our
peace.

3. Of the exceeding love of Christ unto us; who saw our sinful fall and
pitied Of the exceeding love of Christ.
us, and when no Redeemer, no Mediator could be found, he became a Mediator,
he voluntarily consented to take upon him the Mediatorship for sinners, we made
our selves necessary debtors, and he made himself a free Mediator.

And what think you was the Son of God to be, and to do, and to suffer, when he
consented to be a Mediator? Truly he became Man as we are, and a servant, and
a sufferer, and must deal with the wrath of God and curse of the Law, and the
fulfiller of all righteousness for us, and the satisfying of the justice of
God, and make peace, and deliver us from all our enemies, and perfectly redeem
and save our souls! Even his love (if it be lawful to draw out such a
comparison) exceeded the love of all the Trinity besides: ^f that of Aquinas be
true, that it was greater love to give Christ to die for sinners, than freely
to have forgiven sinners; why may it not then (in some respect) be a greater
love in Christ to give himself and dye to make our peace, than only to give
himself so to suffer? a suffering love is accounted greater than a bestowing
love. Of the great obligations which lie upon us to look after Christ.


4. Of the great obligations which lie upon us to look after Christ, and by
faith to own him as our Mediator; There being no other Name given but his, by
which we can be saved. O Christians, why is Christ no more prized, no more
sought, no more seriously and earnestly attended and attained? Is he not a
Mediator? and is there another? Every sinner (and so is every one of us) needs
a Mediator 'twixt God and him (O that we did indeed see the necessity of a
Mediator) to make peace, to restore him into the favor of God, to purge away
his sins! And God (to show his willingness for reconciliation with you) gives
his own Son, and he gave himself; why then can you not see the way of your own
mercies? why do you not enter into this door of hope? A Mediator only saves a
sinner; but the Mediator saves not, if you do not receive him, and believe on
him.

for Comfort to us sinners; and the comfort is this, That there is a Mediator,
and Christ Jesus is that Mediator, and that as so For Comfort.
he is God and Man: why, where lies the comfort?

1. This Mediator undertakes all things between God and us; all things in our
This Mediator undertakes all things betwixt God and us.
name to God, and all things in the Name of God to us: He deals for us with
God, and for God with us to make up a perfect reconciliation: No less lies
upon him as Mediator, then fully and perfectly to restore us again: He is our
peace, and makes peace: and this he took upon him being Mediatiour.

2. He will certainly stand unto the Covenant of Mediatorship, agreed upon
between He will stand to the Covenant of Mediatorship.
God the Father and himself for us; Nay, let me speak a bold truth, Jesus
Christ must stand unto it: though it was a free act of his to engage himself to
be our Mediator and Surety; yet being engaged, he is not free to perform that
Office or no.

Quest. It is a question started and asserted by some, whether Filius Dei
potuit sponsioni susceptae renunciare and se subducere: The Remonstrants (If I
mistake not) say that he might have done it if he had pleased Abdicare, and
negligere praemium in compacto promissum.

Sol. These men would not only hold out a possibility for us to fall from
grace, but they bid fair for it in Christ himself.

But this Opinion is false. For

1. When Christ engaged himself as Mediator, his obedience of Righteousness
was a Debt which he was bound to pay; he became thereby our Surety and Debtor
to the Father.

2. He then also was made under the Law, and under that he was not if the Law
did not bind and challenge him to perform that obedience; nor yet could he
satisfy the Law; for no obedience satisfies the Law, but that which the Law
can challenge as due unto it.

3. He did not come (as Mediator) to gratify a friend, but to do the will of
him that sent him: and this was the will of his Father, that he should lose
none of them that were given unto him.

4. Why was Peter so sharply reproved and silenced by Christ, when he wished
him to pity himself? and in his agony he submitted, Not my will, but thy will
be done.

3. He has gone through all the works of a Mediator, he has born our sins,
He has gon^ through all the wurks of a Mediator. He must needs be willing to
do us good.
satisfied justice, blotted out the handwriting which was against us, slain
enmity, made peace, brought in everlasting righteousness, so that now he is
Immanuel, even God with us.

4. It cannot be but he must be most willing to do us good, to pity us, to help
us, to save us: for as a Mediator, he is married to us, he is nearly linkt
unto us, assuming our very nature into the unity of his Person, Heb. 2. 17. In
all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren; that he might be a
merciful, and faithful High P^iest to God, to make reconciliation for the
sins of the people.

3. Then in your daily failings (for which you are humbled) you have a
Mediator to go unto, 1 John 2. 1.

4. Then for the Assecution of any good, you need go with confidence to God,
for you have a Mediator, Heb. 4. 15, 16.

SECT. IV.
4. I Now proceed to the fourth particular, viz. according to which Nature in
Acco^d^ng to which Nature in Christ he is a Mediator.
Christ he is a Mediator; whether according to his Divine Nature only, or
according to his Humane Nature only, or according to both?

For the resolving of this question, I desire to lay down a few conclusions.

1. That there are in Christ (our Mediator) two distinct Natures, viz. The
There a^e in Christ two distinct Natures.
Humane Nature, in respect of which he is Man; and the Divine Nature, in
respect of which he is God: And I the rather deliver this, because some have
endeavored to bereave Christ of his Humane, and others of his Divine Nature:
and both of them expressly contrary to the Scriptures, Joh. 3. 13. No man has
ascended up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of
man, who is in heaven: Certainly, he who spoke this, who said that he was the
Son of Man, and was seen to be so, was indeed so; and at that time was not in
heaven, but on earth, and yet at that time he says that he is in heaven; Why
then of necessity he must have another Nature besides his humane Nature, even a
Divine Nature by which he is in heaven, as well as an humane Nature by which he
was then on earth, Joh. 10. 30. I and my Father are one, and Joh. 5. 18. He
made himself equal with God. but Joh. 14. 28. My Father is greater than I: Now
it cannot possibly be that Christ should be one, and equal with the Father, and
yet be lesser than the Father according to one and the same Nature, Joh. 20.
27, 28. Thomas when he had seen Christ and (probably) touched Christ, he said,
my Lord, and my God: He whom he saw and touched was Man, and the same whom he
confessed was also God; and therefore that Christ whom he saw and confessed was
both God and Man, Romans 1. 3. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which
was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, verse 4. And declared to
be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness by the
resurrection from the dead.

2. That those two Natures united in the Person of Christ, do still retain
their distinct essence, and proprieties, and opperations, so that there is no
transmutation of The two Natures united in the Person of Christ do st^ll retain
their dist^nct Essence, Properties, and Operations.
the one into the other, nor mixture or confusion of them, but as the Divine
Nature (notwithstanding the personal union) still remains God, and is Eternal,
Omnipotent, Invisible, Infinite, Immortal, Impassible, so the Humane Nature
assumed into the unity of the Person of Christ does still remain a Creature,
finite, visible, mortal, and capable of suffering, and obnoxious unto death:
And although the Person of Christ (in whom the Divine and Humane Nature are
united) is capable of the affirmation of either Nature (as you may truly say
that Christ is God, and Christ is Man, and Christ is eternal, and Christ is in
time, that Christ is immortal and infinite, and Christ is mortal and finite;
for what may be affirmed of either Nature, all that may be affirmed of Christ
in concreto) yet this cannot be affirmed of the Natures in Christ reciprocally:
you cannot say that the Divine Nature of Christ did dye or suffer, but this is
affirmable only of the Humane Nature of Christ: And you cannot say of the
Humane Nature of Christ that it is Eternal, and infinite, and everywhere, yet
this you may safely affirm of his Divine Nature by reason of that union which
they call Hypostatical: The Person of Christ has two distinct Natures, and the
properties of both; And yet the Natures themselves retain their properties
incommunicable one unto the other.

3. By virtue of the Personal union (that is) of the Divine and Humane Nature
By verue of the Personal union the Humane Nature is advanced by the Divine.
in Christ the second Person in Trinity, although it be impossible for the
Humane Nature thereby to become the Divine Nature; Nevertheless hereby the
Humane nature is exceedingly exalted and enriched by the Divine nature, so that
no other Creature did or could attain unto that perfection of holiness, and
righteousness, and dignity, which the humane Nature of Christ did enjoy by
virtue of union with the Divine nature in the person of Christ.

4. Those two Natares thus united in the Person of Christ were (if I may so
express The two Natures united in the Person of Christ were the Principles of
all the actions and works of Mediatorship.
my self) the Principles of all the Actions, and Passions, or Works of
Mediatorship and Redemption: For unto them did both the Natures of Christ
concur by way of communion, yet still reserving their own properties, and
proper way of working, the Divine Nature doing what was proper unto it, and the
Humane Nature what was proper unto it. Some of the works of Christ our
Mediator, were the works of his Humane Nature in respect of the thing done;
but they had their efficacy, dignity, and value from his Divine Nature, in that
they were the works of him who had the Godhead dwelling bodily in him; And
some of the works were the work of the Divine Nature, but yet they were done by
the instrumental concurring of his Humane Nature: Wherefore as the Divine and
Humane Nature did concur to make one Christ, so the acts of those Natures
(distinct in their operation and virtue) did concur and contribute to make up
the same work of Mediator.

5. As the Divine and humane Nature are united into the Person of Christ, and
Christ according to both these Natures is Mediator.
had their concurrences in his works of Mediation, so Jesus Christ according to
both these Natures is our Mediator.

The Papists do hold the contary: Though they do say that Christ who is
Mediator is both God and Man, yet they do deny that he is a Mediator as God
and Man, and that he is a Mediator only according to his humane Nature as man.

Object. 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one Mediatatour between God and Man, the Man 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Christ Jesus.

Sol. But this place will not prove what they do desire; indeed it does prove
that Christ is Man, who is the Mediator: but it does not say that he is
Mediator only as Man; yea and the next verse may satisfy us, that he must be
considered as God as well as Man being Mediator. For it follows in verse 6.
who gave himsel a Ramsome for all, etc. Now Christ giving himself a Ransom was
was not Man only, but God also; therefore the same Apostle says, that God was
in Christ reconciling the World to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. and that by his own
blood he purchased the Church, Acts 20.

Ob. But it is there said, The Man Christ Jesus, and why is it said the Man,
but to show that only as Man he is Mediator? So Bellarmine.

Sol. 1. By the same reason we may argue, that Christ only as Man, does forgive
sins, Because it is said in Matthew. 9. 6. The Son of Man has power to forgive
sins.

2. But the reason why he says the Man Christ Jesus, is not that as so only he
was Mediator, but that he might teach Believers not to despair o^ any sorts
of men for whom he (before) wills them to pray; Because Christ was made Man,
and sustained the person of all sorts of men.

3. As it is there said the Man, so it is said the Man Christ Jesus: That Man
is the Mediator who is Christ (the Anointed of God) and Jesus who is so
called, because he saves his people from their sins. But as mere man he cannot
do so, it is no mere Man, but God who is the God of salvation: And although
Christ might die merely as man, yet as a Med^atour he must also conquer death,
which he could not do but as he was God.

Object. But the Apostle distinguishes the Mediator there from God, saying,
one God, and one Mediator; thus Bellarmine argues.

Sol. And so the Apostle in another place distinguishes Christ from man, (Gal.
1. 1. Paul an Apostle not of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ) yet hence it
will not follow that Christ only according to his Divine Nature did call Paul
to be an Apostle; no more does it here, because he distinguishes God and the
Mediator, that therefore the Mediator is not God.

But now to return to the proof of the Assertion* that Christ is a Mediator in
respect of both his Natures, as he was God, and Man; not as God only, nor as
Man only, but as God Man; many Arguments there are to evidence it. Arguments to
prove it. Christ laid down his life and raised it again according to both
Natures. He is our Priest, Prophet and King, according to both Natures.


1. According to what Nature Christ did lay down his life, and raised it again,
according to that Nature is Christ a Mediator (this cannot be denied, because
Christ as Mediator died, and rose again. for us) but to lay down his life and
raise it again, was an act of his Divine Nature, as well as of his Humane.
Ergo. for he died as man, and raised himself as God.

2. If Christ in respect of both his Natures be our Priest, and Prophet, and
King: Then according to both his Natures he is a Mediator. But, etc Ergo.

1. He is a Priest as to both his Natures; This will appear if you consider
Psalm. 110. 4. Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck. Heb.
7. 2. This Melchizedeck was King of Righteousness, and King of Peace; and verse
3. Without Father, and without Mother, without descent, having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life, but was like the Son of God, and abides a
Priest for ever. Why, here is a clear Type of the Person of Christ as out
Priest and Mediator, unto which Christ does perfectly answer; and if as thus
considered he answer to Melchizedek, then he must be (as Melchizdeck was)
without Father, and without Mother: And indeed so Christ was in a different
respect to both his Natures; For as to his Humane Nature he was without Father,
and as to his Divine Nature he was without Mother: And moreover as such a
Priest, he must be without beginning of days, and end of life, which cannot be
affirmed of him but as God.

Again, Melchizedeck as Priest is said to be like the Son of God: if so, then
Christ as the Son of God is a Priest, but as the Son of God he is God; Ergo. as
God he is our Mediator: Jesus Christ as a Priest must have not only a
Sacrifice to offer, but an altar on which that sacrifice must be offered: The
Sacrifice was himself in respect of his Humane Nature; the Altar to sanctify
that Sacrifice was his Divine Nature, and himself offering and sacrificing was
the Priest consisting of both those Natures.

2. He is a Prophet in respect of both Natures; for in both his Natures he
reveals the will of his Father unto us: In respect of his Humane Nature he
does so, Heb. 1. 2. God in these last days has spoken unto us by his Son; and
in respect of his Divine Nature, it is said, Joh. 1. 9. That was the true light
that enlightneth every man that comes into the world; and certainly to open
the heart and mind as Christ did (Acts 16. 14 Luke 24. 32, 45.) is the work
only of God.

3. He is also a King in respect of both his Natures: nor can his Divine Nature
be secluded in this; for to call out a people to himself, and to renew their
hearts, and to subdue their sins, and to rule in their hearts by his Spirit,
belongs to Christ as King; but these cannot be erected by Christ but as God.
Ergo,

SECT. V.
5. I Now proceed unto the fifth particular. viz. What did concern Christ to do
and What did concern Christ to do and suffer for us as a Mediator. Whatsoever
we were bound to do and suffer, that did Christ do and suffer for us.
suffer for us as our Mediator.

The answer is this, That whatsoever we are bound to do, or to suffer by the
Law of God, all that did Christ do and suffer for us as being our Surety and
Mediator. Now the Law of God has a double challenge or demand upon us; One is
of Active Obedience in fulfilling what it requires; The other is of passive
obedience in suffering that punishment which lies upon us for the transgression
of it, in doing what it forbids: For as we were created by God, we did owe unto
him all obedience which he required; and as we sinned against God, we did owe
unto him a suffering of all that punishment which he threatened: And we being
fallen by transgression, can neither pay the one debt, nor yet the other: We
cannot do all that the Law requires (nay of our selves) we can do nothing,
neither can we so suffer as to satisfy God in his Justice wronged by us, or to
recover our selves into life and favor again: And therefore Jesus Christ (who
was God made Man) did become our Surety, and stood in our stead or room, and he
did perform what we should, but could not perform: And he did bear our sins and
our sorrows; he did suffer and bear for us, what we our selves should have born
and suffered, whereby he did fully satisfy the Justice of God, and made our
peace, and purchased life for us.

I will speak something unto both these particulars.

1. Jesus Christ did perform that active obedience unto the Law of God, which
we should (but by reason of sin) could not perform: In which respect, he is
said, Gal. 4. 4. Christ did perform that active obedience to the Law of God,
which we should, but could not perform.
to be made under the Law, that he might redeem them that were under the Law.
So far was Christ under the Law, as to redeem them that were under the Law. But
redeem them that were under the Law, he could not, unless by discharging the
Bonds of the Law in force upon us; and all those bonds could not be, and were
not discharged, unless a perfect righteousness had been presented (on our
behalf who were under the Law) to fulfill the Law.

Now there is a twofold Righteousness necessary to the actual fulfilling of
the Law; One is an internal Righteousness of the Nature of man; The other is
an external Righteousness of the life or works of man; both of these does the
Law require: The former, Thou shall love the Lo^d thy God with all thy heart,
etc. which is the sum of the first Table; And thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self, which is the sum of the second Table. The latter, Do this and live,
Levit. 18. 5. He that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them, is cursed, Gal. 3. 10. and both these
Righteousnesses were found in Christ.

The Internal, Heb. 7. 26. He was holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from
sinners, 9. 14. And offered himself without spot to God. 2 Cor. 5. 21. He knew
no sin.

The External, 1 Pet. 2. 22. He did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth. Joh. 17. 4. I have finished the works which thou gave me to do. Matthew.
3. 15. He must fulfill all righteousness. Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the
Law for Righteousness to every one that believes.

2. As Jesus Christ did for us perform all that active obedience which the Law
And he did suffer the punishments we had deserved.
of God required; So he did also sustain or suffer all those punishments which
we had deserved by the transgression of the Law of God, in which respect he is
said, 2 Cor. 2. 22. To be made sin for us. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Himself to bear our
sins in his own body on the tree 1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has once
suffered for sin, the Just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. Phil.
2. 8. To humble himself, and to become obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross. Gal. 3. 13. To be made a curse, an execration for us. Ephesians, 5. 3.
To give himself for us, an Offering and Sacrifice unto God. Heb. 9. 15. And for
this cause is he the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death for
the Redemption of the transg essions that were under the first Testament, they
which were called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

Now concerning the Passive obedience or suffering of Christ, I would present
unto you these Conclusions. Conclusions concerning the passive obedience of
Christ. Christ's sufferings we^e voluntary and not constrained.


1. Jesus Christ his sufferings were voluntary, and not constrained or forced.
Saint Austin says that Christ did suffer Quia voluit, and quando voluit, and
quomodo voluit. Joh. 10. 17. I lay down my life, verse 18. No man takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again. Gal. 2. 20 Who gave himself for me: His sufferings did
rise out of obedience to his Father, (Joh. 10. 18 This Commandment have I
received of my Father, and Joh. 18. 11. The cup which my Father has given me,
shall I not drink it?) and out of love to us, Ephesians. 5. 25. As Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it: Had his sufferings been involuntary, they
never could have been a part of his obedience, much less could they have
mounted to any thing of merit for us.

Object. Nor does that earnest Prayer of his (Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me, Matthew. 26 30) denote absolutely his unwillingness, but
rather set out the greatness of his willi^gness.

Sol. For although Christ as Man was of the same Natural affections with us,
and desires; and abhorrencies of what was destructive to nature, and therefore
did fear and deprecate that bitter cup which he was now ready to drink; yet as
our Mediator and Surety, and knowing it would be a cup of salvation to us,
(though of exceeding bitterness to himself) he did yield and lay aside his
natural reluctancies as Man, and willingly obeyed his Fathers will to drink it
as our loving Mediator, as if he should say, O Father, whatsoever become of
me, of my natural fear or desire, I am content to submit to the drinking of
this cup; thy will be done.

2. Whatsoever punishments Christ did sustain for us, you must refer them only
Whatsoever punishments Christ did susta^n for us, must be referred only to the
substance and not to the circumstances of them.
to the substance, and not unto the circumstances of punishment. And the reason
is, because though the enduring of the punishments, as to the substance of
them, could and did agree with him as a surety, yet the circumstances of those
punishments could not have befallen him, unless he had been a sinner: And
therefore every inordination in suffering was far from Christ, and a perpetual
duration of suffering could not befall him; For the first of these had been
contrary to the holiness and dignity of his Person, and the other had made void
the end of his Suretiship and Mediatorship, which was so to suffer, as yet to
conquer and to deliver: and therefore though he did suffer death for us (in the
substance of it) yet he neither did, nor could suffer death in the circumstance
of it, so as for ever to be held by death: For then in suffering death he
should not have conquered death nor delivered us from death.

3. The punishments which Christ did suffer for our sins, these were in their
The punishments which he suffered were in their kinds, parts, and degrees, the
same which were due to us.
kinds, and parts, and degrees, and propertion, all those punishments which
were due unto us by reason of ou^ sins, and which we our selves should
otherwise have suffered: Whatsoever we should have suffered as sinners, all
that did Christ suffer as our Surety and Mediator, always excepting those
punishments which could not be endured without a pollution and guilt of sin:
The chastisement of our peace was upon him; and including the punishments
common to the nature of man, not the personal arising out of imperfection, and
defect, and distemper.

The punishments due to us for sin, were Corporal and Spi^itual; and again,
they were the punishments of loss, and of sense, and all these did Christ
suffer for us: Shall I touch at these?

1. That he suffered Corporal punishments, the Scriptures clearly report unto
us Christ suffered corporal punishments.
you read of the injuries to his Person; of the crown of thorns on his Head, of
the smit^ing of his Cheeks, of spitting on his Face, of the scourgings of his
Body, of the Cross on his Back, of the vinegar in his Mouth, of the Nails in
his Hands and Feet, of the Spear in his side, and of his crucifying and dying
on the Cross. 1 Pet. 2. 24 Who himself in his own body on the Tree bare our
sins. 1 Cor. 15. 2. Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures. Rev.
1. 5. and washed us from our sins in his own blood.

2. That he suffered likewise in his soul; The Scriptures likewise are express
He suffered in his soul.
for it. Matthew. 26. 38. My soul is exceeding sor^owful, even unto death. Isa.
53. 10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his
seed, etc. Joh. 12. 27. Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father
save me from this hour. But for this cause came I unto this hour. The Papists
say that Christ did not truly and properly, and immediately suffer in his
soul, but only by way of sympathy and compassion with his Body to the Mystical
Body, and that his bare bodily sufferings were sufficient for man's redemption.

But these are unsound Assertions: For

1. Christ bare our sorrows, Isa. 53. 4. what sorrows we should bear, but the
sorrows due unto us for our sins were not corporal only, but Spiritual also;
and those did Christ bear in his soul.

2. What Christ took of ours, that he in suffering offered up for us (for his
assuming of our nature was for this end, to suffer for us in our Nature) but he
took our nature in Body and in Soul; Suscepit animam meam, suscepit corpus
meum, says Ambrose. And he delivered our souls as well as our bodies; and the
sins of our souls did need his sacrifice as well as the sins of our bodies
(and our souls were crucificed with Christ as well as our bodies; Men's mea in
Christo Crucifixa est, says Ambrose; and incipio in Christo vincere, unde in
Adam vinctus sum, l. 4. in loco) Si totus homo periit, totus beneficio
salvatoris indiguit, if our whole man was lost, then our whole man did need the
benefit and help of a whole Savior; and if Christ had assumed only our flesh,
our body, then our souls adjudged to punishment, had remained under
transgression without hope of pardon.

3. Again, that punishment which was pronounced against the first Adam (our
first Surety) and in him against us, that same did Christ the Second Adam (our
next and best Surety bear for us, or else it must still lie upon us to suffer
it.) But the punishment threatened and denounced against Adam for transgression
was not only corporal, respecting our bodies, but Spiritual also, respecting
our souls. There was a Spiritual malediction due unto our souls, as well as a
corporal, etc.

4. That fear which fell on Christ, and his agony, was a real fear and agony;
and it was in his soul, and did not arise from the mere contemplation of
bodily torments only. The very Martyrs in the encountering of them have feared
little. Certainly there was some great matter that lay upon the very soul of
Christ which made him so heavy and sorrowful, and so afraid, and in such an
agony.

5. He shall see of the travel of his soul, Isa. 53. Here the soul is taken
properly; and the travel of Christ's soul is his sufferings; for it follows,
and he shall bear their iniquities.

6. Christ gave himself, etc. But the body only is not himself. Christ's
sufferings in soul were exceedingly high and great.


3. That the suffering of Christ in his soul was exceedingly high, and great,
and wonderful, both as to the punishment of loss, and as to the punishment of
sense; all which I shall express in four particulars.

1. Jesus Christ did suffer dereliction for a time. 2. Jesus Christ did feel
and suffer the wrath of God. 3. Jesus Christ did feel and suffer the torments
of hell. 4. Jesus Christ was verily made a curse for us, and did in his soul
and body bear that curse of the Law, which by reason of transgression was due
unto us.
1. That Jesus Christ did suffer dereliction of God really: He was indeed
deserted Christ did suffer dereliction for a time.
and forsaken of God. Matthew. 27. 46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
yet well understand me in this, I do not mean that there was any such desertion
of Christ by God as did dissolve the union of the Natures in the Person of
Christ (for Christ in all his sufferings still remained God and Man) nor do I
mean an absolute desertion in respect of the presence of God (for God was still
present with Christ in all his sufferings, and the God head did support his
Humanity in and under his sufferings, but that which I mean is this; That as to
the sensible and comforting manifestations of Gods presence; thus he was for a
time left and forsaken of God; as David (who in this particular was a Type of
Christ suffering) cried out, Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my God, Why have thou
forsaken me? Why art thou so far from my help? He was indeed really forsaken of
God; God did indeed leave him in respect of his sense and feeling; so was
Christ: Though God did still continue a God to David, yet in David's
apprehension and feeling he was forsaken of God. Though God was still a God to
Christ, yet as to his feeling he was left of God to wrestle with God, and to
bear the wrath of God due unto us. Relinquit Deus dum non parcit, says
Tertullian. That was truly a dereliction, Vbi nulla fuit in tanta necessitate
virtutis exhibitio, nulla ostensio Majestatis. So Bernard. Quoniam delicta
aliena suscepi, etiam delictorum alienorum verbera suscepi, etc. So Ambrose.
And as he says, flagellata his ipse est ne nos flagellaremur, Christ was
scourged that we might not be scourged; so Christ was forsaken that we might
not be forsaken.

2. That Jesus Christ did feel and suffer the wrath of God, which was due
Christ did feel and suffer the wrath of God due to us.
unto us for our sins: The Prophet, Isa. 53. 4. says that he was plagued and
smitten of God; and verse 5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him. To be
plagued and smitten of God, is to feel and suffer the strokes of his wrath. And
so to be chastised of God as to make peace with God, or to appease him, is so
to suffer the wrath of God as to satisfy God and to remove it: And truly how
Christ should possibly escape the feeling of the wrath of God incensed against
our sins, he standing as a Surety for us, with our sins laid upon him, and for
them fully to satisfy the justice of God, is not Christianly or rationally
imaginable.

Object. And whereas some do object that Christ was always the beloved of God,
and therefore could never be the object of Gods wrath.

Sol. I answer, by distinguishing of the Person of Christ whom his Father
always loved, and as sustaining our sins, and in our room stand^ng to satisfy
the justice of God, and as so, the wrath of God fell upon him, and he bore it,
and so satisfied the justice of God, that we thereby are now delivered from
wrath through him; so the Apostle, Romans 5, 9. Much more being justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him.

3. That Jesus Christ did feel and suffer the very torments of hell, though
not after a hellish manner. Indeed Jesus Christ did not go down into Hell to
suffer Christ did feel and suffer the torments of hell.
there amongst the damned in hell; nor did he suffer hellish darkness, nor the
flames of hell, nor the worm that never dies, nor final despair, nor guilt of
conscience, nor gnashing of teeth, nor impatient indignation, nor eternal
separation from God.

These were absolutely inconsonant with the purity and with the dignity of his
Person, and with the Office of a Mediator and Redeemer: But yet we say that
Christ in his soul did suffer for our sins, such horror, agony, and
consternation as amounted unto Cruciatus Infernales, and are in Scripture
called the sorrows of hell (Psalm. 18. 5. The sorrows of Hell did compass me
about) It was a great expression of a very learned man, that setting iniquity
and eternity of punishment aside (which Christ might not sustain) Christ did
more vehemently and sharply feel the wrath of God, than ever any man did or
shall; no not any person reprobate and damned excepted.

And verily I think the reason annexed to prove this expression is very
weighty, because all the wrath that was due for all the sins of the Elect (all
whose sins were laid on Christ, Isa. 53. 6.) was greater than the wrath which
belonged to any one sinner, though damned for his personal sinning: And besides
this, if you do seriously consider those sufferings of Christ in his agony, in
the Garden, you may (by them) conjecture what hellish torments Christ did
suffer for us. Not yet to speak of the cursed death which he also suffered; In
that agony of his, he was afraid and amazed, and fell flat on the ground
(Matthew. 14. 33. He began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy, verse 34. and
says unto them, my soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death) and his sweat was
at it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground, Luke 22. 44. He did
sweat clotted blood in such abundance, that it streamed through his apparel,
and did wet the ground; which dreadful agony of Christ, how it could arise from
any other cause than the sense of the wrath of God, parallel to that in hell, I
do not know.

4. I will add but one thing more about these sufferings of Christ, viz. That
Christ was indeed made a curse for us.
Jesus Christ was indeed made a curse for us, and did in his soul and body
bear that curse of the Law, which by reason of transgression was due unto us,
Gal 3. 53. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on Tree.

Cur erubescam fateri quod Apostolus non ernbuit alta voce profiteri? said
Ambrose: Such a curse or execration was Christ made for us, as was that from
which he redeemed us; and that curse from which he redeemed us, was no other
than the curse of the Law; and that curse of the Law included all the
pun^shment which sinners were to bear or suffer for transgression of the Law,
of which his hanging on the Cross was a sign and symbol, and this curse was
Christ made for us (that is) he did bear and suffer it to redeem us from it;
Qui Benedictus in sua justitia maledictus ob delicta nostra, said Austin.

Whether it were not against justices that an innocent person should suffer for
the nocent,
Quest. Now before I make Application of this unto our selves, there is one
question concerning all these sufferings of Christ, whether it were not against
the justice of God, that Christ who was in himself innocent (without all sin, a
Lamb without spot) should bear and endure all these punishments for us who were
the offending, and guilty, and obnoxious persons only.

Sol. The Socinians are very eager in this, who cannot see any satisfaction
performed by Christ for us to God, nor yet any just proceeding in God, that
Christ so innocent in himself should thus bear our punishments.

But truly setting aside the foolish Tragedy of their exclamations, the
matter in question will be but this, Whether God were not unjust to give his
Son Jesus Christ to be our Surety, and Mediator, and Redeemer, and Savior?
For as much as Christ could not be any one of these, for and unto us, but by a
willing susception of our sins, upon himself, to be for them responsible unto
the justice of God, in suffering those punishments which were due for our sins.

Object. And whereas they do object that God might have freely pardoned all our
offenses and punishments without any of these sufferings of Christ; I answer,
This is no more but to quarrel with the love and wisdom of God in giving Christ
to be a Mediator for us; and to teach God a better way to save sinners, than
he himself has devised and declared, who will so save sinners by his Son as
Mediator, that both in his justice against our sins, and in his mercy unto our
souls, his own glory may be admired and magnified.

But now to speak a few words unto the main question, I say it is not always
and in all cases unjust, but it is sometimes, and in some cases very just to
punish one who is in himself innocent, for him, or those who are the nocent and
guilty: The innocent may be punished for the nocent.
Grotius in his Book de satisfactione gives diverse instances, but I shall
insist only on two; as

1. In case of conjunction, where the innocent party, and the nocent party do
become legally one party: and therefore if a man marries a woman indebted, he
In case of conjunction.
thereupon becomes obnoxious to pay her debts, although absolutely considered
he was not obnoxious thereunto.

2. In case of vadimony or Suretiship, where a person knowing the weak and
insufficient condition of another, does yet voluntarily put forth himself, and
will In case of Suretiship.
be bound to the Creditor for him as his surety to answer for him; by reason of
which suretiship the Creditor may come upon him, and deal with him as he might
have dealt with the principal Debt or himself: And this course we do ordinarily
take with Sureties for the recovery of our right without any violation of
justice: Now both these are exactly appliable to the business in hand; for
Jesus Christ was pleased to marry our nature unto himself; he did partake of
our flesh and blood, and became Man and one with us: And besides that, he did
both by the will of his Father, and his own free consent become our Surety, and
was content to stand in our stead or room, so as to be made sin and curse for
us (that is) to have all our debts and sorrows, all our sins and punishments
laid upon him, and did engage himself to satisfy God by bearing and suffering
what we should have born and suffered: And therefore although Jesus Christ
(absolutely considered in himself) was innocent, and had no sin inherent in
himself, which therefore might make him liable to death, and wrath, and curse,
yet by becoming one with us, and sustaining the Office of our Surety, our sins
were laid on him, and our sins being laid upon him, he made himself (therefore)
obnoxious (and that justly) to all those punishments which he did suffer for
our sins. I do confess that had Christ been unwilling, and forced into this
Suretiship, or had any detriment or prejudice risen to any party concerned in
this transaction, then some complaint might have been made concerning the
justice of God. But,

1. There was a willingness on all sides for the passive work of Christ: His
Father There was willingness on all sides for this Passive work of Christ.
(who was the offended party) he was willing, which Christ assures us of, when
he said (thy will be done) and we sinners (who are the offending party) are
willing, we accept of this gracious and wonderful Redemption, and bless God who
loved us, and gave his Son for us! and Jesus Christ was willing to suffer for
us: Behold I am come, said Christ: And shall I not drink of the cup which my
Father has given me? I have a Baptism to be baptized with: and how am I
straightened till it be accomplished!

2. No parties whatsoever were prejudiced or lost by it: We lost nothing by it,
for we are saved by his death, and reconciled by his death: And Christ lost No
parties were prejudiced or lost by it.
nothing by it. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and enter into
his glory? Luke 24. 26. And God the Father lost nothing by it, for he is
glorified by it; I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do, Joh. 17. 4. Yea he is fully satisfied and repaired again
in all the honor which he lost by our sinning; I say he is now fully repaired
again by the sufferings of Christ, in which he found a price sufficient, and a
ransom, and enough to make peace.

I will now make some useful Application of all this unto our selves.

could he not have made Peace, unless he had thus suffered? Then

Behold the justice of God provoked by our sins, how sure it is, and how
dreadful Behold the justice of God.
it is!

1. It is sure. God is righteous, and God has revealed his wrath from heaven
How sure it is.
against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, Romans 1. 18. He said unto
Ad^m, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2. 17.
and he has said, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. Now whatsoever
death, or wrath, or curse God has threatened against sin, God will certainly
inflict it one time or other, he will do so: Although for a time he may forbear
the sinner, yet in his appointed time he will be avenged on the sinner: His
threatened wrath will be poured forth, his justice will never put up the
dishonor, and the provocations, and the injuries which we by our sins have
offered unto it: Our sins must and shall be punished (and we shall not escape)
either in our own persons must we suffer for them, or else they must be
sustained in the Person of a Mediator; death, and wrath, and curse are so
necessarily entailed on sin, that God will as soon cease to be a just God, as
he will alter the inflictings of them; hence it was that Jesus Christ was made
Man, and did suffer; for justice would not be satisfied without either our own
suffering of an eternal duration, or Christ's sufferings which were of an
eternal worth for satisfaction.

2. It is dreadful; the very glancings of it, or shadows into which the godly
How dreadful it is.
sometimes fall, do extremely astonish them; and the vials of it poured on the
consciences of the ungodly, do infinitely distract and sink them: but above all
the effectual influence which we find of it on Christ himself, that is a plain
demonstration of the dreadfulness of the wrath of God: Questionless the weight
of it is unexpressibly heavy, which made the very Son of God (though supported
with his Deity) to fall flat on the earth, to sweat drops of blood, to be
amazed, to be in an agony, and to fear, and to cry out, My God, my God, etc.

When we Ministers preach against your sins, and tell you of the severity of
Gods justice and wrath which will befall you for them, you make light of them,
but you will find (one day) that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God, and that God is a consuming fire, and that none is able to
dwell with everlasting burnings. Why! If the wrath of his justice, if the
drinking of that cup were so amasing and sinking unto Christ himself; what will
it be to sinners themselves who are utterly deserving of the utmost of that
wrath, and who are utterly destitute of such a power to sustain them, and
deliver them as Christ had!

2. Behold your sins, what they will bring upon you, if you get not your part
Behold your sins, what they will bring upon you without a part in Christ.
in Christ. We weep sometimes with a natural kind of sorrow when we read or
hear of the grievous passions of Christ, and I am persuaded that some of us
Admire at what this day we have heard of the several sorts of the sufferings of
Christ. Well! but then let me tell you, what Christ did suffer, you should have
suffered! and what Christ did suffer, all that you shall suffer if you believe
not on him. Christ was amazed, and so shall you; and Christ was afraid, and so
shall you; and Christ was in an agony, and so shall you; and Christ did drink
the cup of his Fathers wrath, so shall you; and Christ was made a curse, and so
shall you.

Indeed, a repenting and believing person may look upon the sufferings of
Christ with joy and hope; but an impenitent and unbelieving person must look
upon them with confusion and horror: The more he sees of Christ sorrows, and
the sharper he finds Christ's sorrows, the more perplexed may his soul be: For
what punishments Christ did suffer for sin, as to the substance, that same must
the impenitent and unbelieving person suffer, as to the substance, yea and as
to the circumstance of punishment. Christ suffered death, and thou shall suffer
eternal death; Christ suffered shame, and thou shall suffer eternal shame;
Christ suffered wrath for a time, but thou shall suffer wrath for ever, and
fear for ever, and separation from God for ever, and the torments of hell for
ever.

3. Behold your Christ! Pilate said, Behold the man, when Christ was brought in
with his Crown of Thorns. But I say, behold your Christ, look on him who
Behold your Christ.
was crucified for you, and look on him who was crucified by you.

There is a fourfold sight of Christ.

1. One in Carne, when he came into the world. 2. A second in Cruce, when he
was leaving the world. 3. A third in Caelo, when he shall receive us unto
himself out of the world. 4. A fourth in Judicio, when he shall tome to judge
the world: But the sight which I would desire you to behold, is Christ on the
Cross, Christ suffering and dying for you. O look on this Christ awhile as
despised of men, as forsaken of God, as sorrowful to the death, as wounded for
our trasgressions, as drinking the cup of his Fathers wrath, as crying out, as
dying the cursed death of the Cross, as made a curse for us: I say, behold your
Christ in these sufferings, so long, until
1. You see his infinite love to your souls: thus suffering in your stead,
thus suffering what you should have suffered; and thus suffering that you might
not suffer.

2. Your hearts be melted into tears for your sins, which were the cause of all
those sufferings by Christ: Look on him whom you have pierced, and mourn. Let
your eyes weep for your making Christ to weep; let your hearts be wounded for
wounding Christ; let your souls be humbled for making Christ to pour out his
soul.

3. Your hearts can love this Christ who loved you, and gave himself for you,
and washed you from your sins, in his own blood.

4. Your hearts can hate your sins, which made Christ a curse or execration;
and until you forsake your sins which made Christ to be forsaken (for a time)
of God; until you crucify those sins which did crucify your Christ.

Beloved! The more that Christ has suffered for us, the dearer should Christ
be unto us; his love should be unto us therefore the more sweet, by how much
the more bitter his sufferings were for us: And our sins should therefore be
the more odious unto our hearts, because they were so grievous unto Christ: The
Apostle tells us in 1 Pet. 4. That because Christ has suffered in the flesh,
we should therefore cease from sin; and Chap. 2. 24. That he bare our sins in
his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto
righteousness. And therefore we should purge the old leaven (that is) our
sinful lusts, because Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7.

comfort, what support may this be for all distressed, penitent, and believing
Comfort for distressed, penitent, and believing persons.
persons!

Luther professes that this is that Ineffabilis and infinita misericordia Dei,
that Abyssus profundissima, and zelus ardentissimus divinae misericordiae
toward us: That the Omnipotent God Creator of all things, should be so good
and solicitous for me a lost sinner, a child of wrath, and eternal death, as
not to spare his own Son, but give him up to a most ignominious death, that he
should be made for me (a cursed sinner) sin and curse, etc. and therefore he
urges us not to rest satisfied with believing only that Christ is purissima
Persona (though he be so) and then know that he is God and Man; yet stay not
there; for yet thou have not Christ; but then vere habes cum credis hanc
purissimam personam tibi donatam a patre, ut esset pontifex and salvator, imo
Servus Tuus, who took on him thy sinful person, and bare thy sin, and death,
and Cross, and was made a Sacrifice and curse for thee.

Object. But you will say, Where lies the stay and comfort of Christ's
sufferings for us?

Sol. In this it lies; Then you are freed, then you shall never suffer in a way
of Then you are freed from suffering in satisfaction to Divine justice.
satisfaction to Divine Justice; you shall never bear wrath, nor curse for your
sins! And the reason is, because Christ has suffered already those things due
unto you for your sins.

Object. O but did Christ suffer that which was due for all my sins!

Sol. Yes, He suffered all, even to the worst and utmost for all that the Law
threatened was a curse, and Christ was made a curse for us.

Object. But did he not owe something for himself, and suffered for that!

Sol. Surely no, for he knew no sin (of his own) but was made sin for us.

Object. O but what if he suffered all, may I not yet be made to suffer!

Sol. No; for what Christ suffered, he suffered as our Surety in our stead; and
therefore what he suffered for us, is as if we had suffered all that our selves.

Object. But did he verily intend our good in all these sufferings?

Sol. Ask the Apostle in 2 Cor. 5. 22. He was made sin for us, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. And Gal. 3. 13. He was made a curse for
us to redeem us from the curse of the Law.

Object. But did God appoint him thus to suffer?

Sol. He did so, Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, and 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is of God made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

Object. But did his sufferings appease God, and satisfy him, and reconcile
him?

Sol. It did so; For God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor.
5. 19. not imputing their trespasses unto them: And Ephesians. 2. 16. He has
reconciled both (Jews and Gentiles) unto God in one body on the Cross, having
slain enmity thereby.

Why! what a sum of comfor^s are here? Jesus Christ took upon him all our
sins, they were all of them laid upon him: And he bare or suffered all the
wrath and punishment due for them. And he suffered all as our Surety in our
stead, and for our good; and his Father designed him for all this, and accepted
of it, as sufficient and effectual on our behalf.

Remember the sufferings of Christ, and cleave to the sufferings Remember the
sufferings of Christ in all fears and conflicts.
of Christ, and plead the sufferings of Christ, and by faith offer up unto God
all the sufferings of Christ for their souls: This is Luthers direction,
Discamus in omni tentatione, peccatum, mortem, maledictionem and omnia mala
quae premunt nos, a nobis transfer in Christum: Let us learn in every
tentation which presses us, (whether it be sin, or death, or curse, or any
other evil) to translate it from our selves to Christ: And all the good in
Christ let us learn to translate it from Christ unto our selves: Do your sins
terrify you? then remember Christ bare your sins in his body for you: Does
death appear deadly unto you? then remember that Christ dyed for you, and his
death did swallow up death in victory: Does the curse threatened in the Law kill
you? then remember that Christ Redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us! Does the wrath of God amaze you? then remember that Christ
suffered that wrath, that he might save and deliver us from wrath? Do
desertions lie upon you? then remember that Christ was forsaken that we might
not be forsaken in judgment. ^om. 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that dyed? Do the fears of hell and damnation lie upon you? remember the
sufferings of Christ, who in them did deliver us from the power of darkness, so
that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. This is your sure and
only way under all temptations, and fears, and conflicts, and doubts, and
disputes by faith to remember Christ, and the sufferings of Christ as your
Mediator and Surety! Tu Christ! and peccatum and maledictum meum, or rather
Ego sum peccatum tuum, maledictum tuum, mors tua, ira Dei Tua, infernus tuus!
And thou, O Christ! Tu es justitia, benedictio, vita, gratia Dei, caelum meum.
O Christ! Thou art my sin, in being made sin for me! and thou art my curse, in
being made a curse for me! Or rather, I am thy sin, and thou art my
Righteousness; I am thy curse, and thou art my Blessing; I am thy death, and
thou art my Life; I am the wrath of God to thee, and thou art the love of God
to me; I am thy hell, and thou art my Heaven!

Why sirs! Let me tell you, that your hearts will sink into despair, if you
think of God, and of your sins, without thinking on Christ: If you think of
your sins, and of Gods wrath, if you think of your guiltiness, and of Gods
justice, your hearts will fail you; for you can never bear that wrath of God,
and you can never satisfy that justice of God: you do not only take Christ's
Office of Mediatourship out of his hand, nor only deny and renounce him for
your Surety; but now you draw your selves from all helps, and hope, in exposing
your poor souls to stand at the Bar and Tribunal of Gods Justice alone, and
you take all your sins upon your selves, and all the punishment of your sins
upon your selves, and so you your selves must be either a sacrifice for them,
which is impossible, or you must be damned for them, which is certain, but yet
intolerable: Therefore come off from your selves, and look up by faith unto
that Mediator whom God has appointed for you, and who has done and suffered
all for you, and in his Name, and upon his Account plead with God to pardon
your sins, to excuse you from wrath and curse, because Jesus Christ has
suffered these for you! This you may plead because Christ is yours, and you are
his; and what he did he did for you, and what he suffered he suffered for you.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the
Righteous; who is the propitiation for our sins, and he was made sin for us,
and he did shed his blood for the Remission of our sins, etc.

SECT. VI.
6. HAving discoursed of the Obedience of Christ (both Active and Passive) as
our Mediator: It now remains to speak a few things of the Virtues, and
Benefits and Efficacies depending upon, and flowing from the Actions and
Passions of Christ our Mediator. He did perform an Active obedience, which we
The virtues and benefits depending on, and flowing from Christ as Mediator.
did owe unto the Law, and he did suffer the punishments due unto us for the
transgression of the Law, which (otherwise) we our selves should have suffered,
and from these there did ensue five most excellent and precious benefits. 1.
Satisfaction. 2. Remission. 3. Reconciliation. 4. Redemption. 5. Acquisition,
or purchase. 6. The confirmation of the Covenant.

1. They were a satisfaction unto the justice of God for us: The Socinians (who
utterly deny the satisfaction of Christ) do say that Christ did indeed suffer
Satisfaction.
and dye for our good, but not in our stead, only for our good, that we might
the sooner be induced and persuaded to embrace that Doctrine and way of
Salvation which he brought down from Heaven, and Revealed unto us by his Word,
and by the good example of his life, and confirmed the same by his death, and
so merited for himself an exaltation and dominion over all men, and to give
eternal life to all that will imitate him: But that Christ did dye for our sins
to expiate them or in our stead, or to satisfy God for us, or to pay our
debts: or that God ever imposed this on him, or expected it from him, or that
ever Christ did undertake such a work on himself, they do absolutely deny; as
also they do deny any placation of the wrath of God by Christ, or
reconciliation made by Christ; or remission of sins upon the account of
Ch^ists death and blood! This is the sum of their Doctrine, against which I
shall oppose several Conclusions drawn from the Scriptures: And truly sirs! as
I never did, so I trust I never shall decline the opposing of any corrupt
Doctrine (falling in my way) much less these corrupt Opinions of the
Socinians, which (if I mistake not exceedingly) do plainly subvert the faith of
Christians.

But now to the Point in hand concerning the satisfaction made for us by
Christ, Conclusions about the satisfaction of Christ.
I would lay down these Conclusions.

1. That God (Salvo jure) could not pass over sin, so as absolutely to let it
go unpunished. 2. That God was resolved never to let it so escape. 3. That
though a satisfaction for sin were necessary, yet there was some kind of
Relaxation in exacting of that satisfaction. 4. That Jesus Christ did really
make a satisfaction. 5. That his satisfaction was not only for our good, but
also in our stead, and therefore it was in our stead, that it might be for our
good.
1. That God could not (Salvo jure) pass over the sin of man, so as absolutely
God could not let sin go unpunished.
to let it go unpunished; It being against his Justice, and against his Truth.
Every sinner is worthy of death (They which commit such things are worthy of
death, Rom 1. 32.) Now God is just and Righteous (It is a righteous thing wi^h
God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, 2 These. 1. 6.) yea and
God did therefore set forth Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, Romans 3. 25. To declare his Righteousness that he might be just, verse
26. If God be a Just and Righteous God, then sin cannot absolutely escape
unpunished; for it is just with God to punish the sinner who is worthy of
punishment. And truly God must deny himself, if he will not be just; But God
cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. And besides this, as God cannot but be just
(and therefore sin cannot escape unpunished) so God cannot but be true; and
if he cannot but be true, then what he has threatened against sin, that must be
performed: But he has threatened punishment for sin, In the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shall die the death, and the soul which sins shall die.

Object. And whereas some do object, That it is lawful for any man de jure suo
remittere quantum velit. To abate of his right as much as he pleases, and
therefore God may do so.

Sol. I answer.

1. That is not a true Rule absolutely amongst men: A Magistrate cannot
dispense with any so that the Laws may be violated, and Justice be overthrown.
Nor a father with the wickedness of his Children, so that they shall go wholly
unpunished. David did so indeed about Absalom, and Eli about his sons, but they
paid dear for it.

Only it holds in some cases which are not in fraudem tertij, or salvo jure
tertij.

2. And as for God, it holds not; for although God may be pleased so far cedere
de jure, as to admit of a Surety, yet he cannot so far yield as to abrogate his
own Law, and quietly to sit down with injury and loss to his own justice,
himself having established a Law, etc.

2. That God will not let sin go unpunished, Exodus 34. 7. He will by no means
God will not let sin go unpunished.
clear the guilty. He is unchangable. Ezekiel. 18. 20. The soul that sins, it
shall die. And the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Romans 2. 6. He
will render to every man according to his deeds; Look on sin in any Creature
whatsoever, God would not let it pass unpunished.

1. In the Angels that fell, Jude verse 6. The Angels that kept not their first
estate, but lost their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains
of d^rknesse, unto the judgment of the great day.

2. In Men, whether Reprobate or Elect. If Reprobate and unbelievers, then they
must bear their own punishment of sin for ever: If Elect and Believers, yet
Christ must bear their punishment; for God will not suffer sin to pass
unpunished; he does perfectly hate and abhor it, his wrath is sealed against
it, he will give no encouragement for any to sin, but would utterly deter men
from it, and his Righteous Law must and shall be maintained.

3. That though a satisfaction for sin be necessary, yet there is some kind of
Relaxation Though a satisfaction was necessary, yet there was a relaxation in
exacting that satisfaction.
and mitigation in the exacting of that satisfaction; for although God as just,
must and will punish sin, yet it is not against Justice for to exact the
punishment, or that the satisfaction of it may be joined with some mitigation;
therefore we distinguish of Justitia Rigida and Temperata. Indeed in Justitia
vindicante per modum rigoris, (which we call summum jus) there is no mitigation
at all, neither of the substance of punishment, nor of the circumstances of it;
but in Justitia temperara, where there is a mitigation of levying the
punishment, this is not contrary to justice: And with this kind of justice did
God prosecu^e the sins of his Elect, for which though he would be satisfied,
yet it was with a moderation, which I call a mitigation of justice: For whereas
in Rigor of Justice God might

1. Have insisted strictly with sinners, as to their own person, to have
suffered for their sins, yet he did not so, but allowed of a Surety (on their
behalf) to bear their sins, and to suffer for them.

2. Might have refused what another offered for them (although in it self
sufficient to satisfy his Justice) yet he did accept thereof.

3. Might have challenged an eternal duration of punishment which he had
threatened, and the nature of sin did deserve; yet he did repute the dignity of
the person (who did suffer and die for their sins) as Aequivalent unto an
eternal duration of suffering and dying; and the suffering of such a Person, it
did vertually amount thereunto: and in all these respects there was a
temperature or moderation of Justice in the exacting of satisfaction for the
sins of the Elect.

4. That Jesus Christ (by his death and sufferings) did really and truly make
satisfaction: For whether you take satisfaction for punishment endured Christ
by his death and sufferings did really make satisfaction.
equal to the fault committed, or for so much done and suffered, and ipso facto
as de jure did solvere debitum, discharge the debt to be paid, so that God in
justice cannot Renew the suite against us, but ought to acquit us, having
Received a full Payment; In both these respects did Christ make satisfaction.

1. Jesus Christ did endure punishment equal to the fault: What our sins He
endured punishment equal to the fault.
did deserve, and what justice might lay upon us for those sins, all that did
Christ suffer or bear, and therefore certainly Christ did make satisfaction. If
you will admit of any satisfaction at all in criminal cases for sins and
offenses, it must of necessity lie in the commensuration of the punishment with
the fault, when so much punishent is sustained for sin, as justice requires for
the guilt of that sin: Now Jesus Christ did so suffer for our sins, as that
his sufferings were fully answerable unto the demerit of our sins; And I
think I may safely deliver it; That God in justice (for the satisfying of it)
could not (in genere poenarum) require any more, or lay on any one more
punishment than Jesus Christ did suffer for our sins: And my Reason is this,
because Christ bare all our sins, and all our sorrows, and was obedient unto
the death, and was made a curse for us; and more than this, the Law of God
could not require: And if Christ did suffer all that the Law of God required,
then certainly he suffered so much as did satisfy the justice of God, viz. as
much punishment a^ was commensurated with sin.

2. But secondly, Christ did lay down and suffer so much as fully paid all our
Christ suffered so much as fully discharged our debt.
debts; which if he did, then questionless he did satisfy Gods Justice; and
that Jesus Christ did so, the Scripture clearly and abundantly testifies it,
Colos. 2. 14. He blotted out the hand-wri^ing of Ordinances that was against
us, which was contrary unto us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his
Cross. It is indeed differently conjectured what this Chriographum or Syngrapha
was: In the general it was something God had against us, to show, and convince,
or prove that we had sinned against him, and were his debtors (some think that
this Chriographum was the Covenant of God with Adam; others think it the
Ceremonial Law, others the Moral) But I suppose taht this handwriting was
principally the Moral law, obliging us unto perfect obedience, condemning us
for the defect of the same, and likewise those Ceremonial Rites which (as Beza
observes) were a kind of public confession of our debts. Now these were
against us, and contrary unto us, inasmuch as they did argue us guilty of sin
and condemnation which the Moral Law threatened and sentenced, etc. But says
the Apostle, Christ has blotted out the handwriting, and has taken it out of
the way, and nailed it to his Cross; (that is) Jesus Christ has not only
abrogated the Ceremonial Law, but also the Damnatory power of the Moral Law (as
our Surety) by performing an act of obedience which the Law did require, and by
undergoing the punishment which the Law did exact from the transgressors of it:
And so Christ by doing and suffering what we were bound to do and to suffer, he
did thereby blot out the handwriting, and cancelled? it: And is not the
Creditor fully satisfied when he gives in his Bond to be cancelled. Matthew. 20.
28. The Son of man came to give his life a ransom for many; Lutron, precium
redemptionis. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all; Antilutron, the
word signifies a price, a valuable price for an other. Heb. 9. 15. For this
cause is he the Mediator of the New Covenant, that by means of death, for the
redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament (Morte
intercedente ad redemptionem earum praevaricationum) Here the death of Christ
is called a Redemption for sins: And such an Apolutrosis is nothing else but a
compensation or satisfaction made for them Intercedente Lutro, by laying down a
price considerable, as was the death of Christ, by which we are Redeemed or
freed. And truly the word Lutrosis, and Apolutrosis signifies such a kind of
deliverance which is not by force (as was deliverance from Pharaoh) nor yet
which is by favor (as was that from Babylon) but that which is obtained Justo
precio soluto, by paying a full price, by which one becomes satisfied, and
another thereupon delivered. Heb. 9. 26. He has appeared to put away sin by
the Sacrifice of himself. And this full price is in Scripture sometimes called
the life of Christ, Matthew. 20. 28. And sometimes the precious blood of Christ,
1 Pet. 1. 19. and sometimes Christ himself, 1 Timothy 2. 6.

5. That this satisfactory price was laid down for us, both for our good, and
in our This satisfactory price was laid down for us for our good and in our
stead.
stead, or room. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Christ also has once suffered for sin, the Just
for the unjust, that he might bring us to God: What the unjust sinner should
have suffered, that did the just Christ suffer for him. 2 Cor. 5. 21. He was
made sin for us (that is) an Offering, a Sacrifice* in our stead) for the
expiation of our sins. Isa. 53. He was wounded (or tormented) for our
transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our
peace was upon him. verse 6. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned
every one to his own way; and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.
Romans 4. 25. He was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification, 1 Cor. 15. 3. Christ died for our sins, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has
Redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us.

Before I pass to the other Benefits redounding unto us from the sufferings of
Christ, I would make a little Application of this first Benefit, namely that
Christ's Sufferings were Satisfactory to the Justice of God, and that for us.

If Christ's sufferings were a satisfaction unto Gods Justice for us; Then

The sufferings of Christ were more than mere sufferings; there was
Information. The sufferings of Christ were more than mere sufferings.
something of infinite value and dignity connexed with them, and going along
with them: Not without cause does the Apostle Peter say, That we were redeemed
with the precious blood of Christ; It was precious blood indeed which was able
to make such a compensation to the Justice of God, to proclaim unto all the
world, I have found a Ransom, I have received enough, I neither do, nor can
require any more payment. If you do consider any one sin in the natural and
proper demerits of it, who is able to fathom the eternal depth of guilt in that
one sin? or the eternal height of wrath unto which that one sin does expose
the sinner? what infinite measure of wrath then may the infinite justice of God
inflict upon us for innumerable transgressions? yet Jesus Christ has satisfied
Divine Justice for them all. And his satisfaction must have not only a
proportion, but also an equal correspondency with the guilt of all those Sins.
There must be as much in Christ's Recompense, as in the sinners offense; as much
for payment by Christ as there was of debt by the sinner; as much every jot to
satisfy God, as there was in sin to wrong God; and therefore his sufferings
must needs be of infinite value; for had they not been so, they could not have
been satisfactory; and my Reason is, because then the payment had been less
than the debt; and if short of the debt, then short of the satisfaction.

2. Then all the Grounds of despair are utterly broken down, and taken out of
the Then all the grounds of despair are utterly taken away.
way: There is no poor brokenhearted sinner in the world that has just cause
to despair; why? Because Jesus Christ has suffered, and has satisfied the
justice of God for him.

Despair arises upon these three grounds.

1. The accent of the guilt of sin, that it is so high and exceeding, that
nothing can be found to answer Divine Justice for it. 2. That though something
may be found able to satisfy Divine Justice, yet Divine justice is not
satisfied; the payment is not brought in for that great debt. 3. Though a
payment sufficient and satisfactory be brought in, yet it is not laid down for
my sins? perhaps for others, but not for my soul.
Now the satisfactory sufferings of Christ come in to relieve the distressed
sinner against all these grounds of despair. For

1. There is as much to be found in Christ, as is to be found in our sins: For,
There is as full and as high a Righteousness in Christ, as there is
unrighteousness There is as much to be found in Christ, as is to be found in
our sins.
in you: And there is as infinite a price in the death of Christ, as there is
of demerit in your sins: And Christ has as much to pay to the Justice of God,
as you (for all your sins) do owe to the justice of God; Nay, where sin
abounded, there did grace much more abound: The sufferings of Christ are in
every respect as able to recompense and satisfy God, as your sins were to
wrong God, and to expose your souls for wronging of him.

2. Christ's sufferings did indeed satisfy Gods justice for your sins: His
blood Christ's sufferings did indeed satisfy Gods justice for your sins.
was the satisfying payment: He did give his life a Ransom, or Redemption, a
Price that Redeemed you by satisfaction: He was made sin, and he was made a
curse, and he did bear our iniquities and sorrows, and did appear to take away
sin.

3. And lastly, Those sufferings of Christ which were thus satisfactory to the
justice of of God, were on your behalf. He bare our sins, said Peter; and died
for our His sufferings were on your behalf.
sins, and was made a curse for us, said Paul: So then Divine Justice may be
satisfied, and it is satisfied, and for us, and for our sins; and therefore no
penitent or brokenhearted sinner has any just cause to despair.

3. Then rest in the satisfaction of Christ, and never take upon your selves
Then rest in the satisfaction of Christ
that work; why? because to make satisfaction to the Justice of God, is the
work of a Mediator which belongs to him, and which he by his Active and
Passive obedience has performed, and no mere man can do it.

The Papists divide this great work 'twixt Christ and sinners: As they do about
Mediatorship, they hold that Christ only is the Mediator of Redemption, but
then they make many Mediators of Intercession; so do they deal in the work of
satisfaction. They grant the satisfaction of Christ as to eternal punishments;
but then they set up our satisfactions to Gods Justice for temporal
punishments: Christ must suffer and satisfy for them; but we must satisfy and
suffer for these; and hereupon they erect works of Penance, and Pilgrimage,
and endurance of the flames of Purgatory, etc. as satisfactions to Gods justice
for their sins, and verily believe (by them) to compound the matter 'twixt
God and their sinning souls.

But against this proud and vain glorious Opinion, we thus reply. Popish
satisfactions confuted


1. Jesus Christ did bear all our sins (they were all laid upon him) as he did
bear all our sorrows, and he did Redeem us from all iniquity; And he gave
himself Antilutron, a Ransom and a sufficient Price for them: If so, then
there remains nothing for us to satisfy for: Either Christ took on him to pay
all our debt, or he did not; and did pay it, or did not; if he took upon him
the whole debt, and paid it, then there is no room for our satisfactions; if he
did not, how was he then our Surety, and how can his death be called a
sufficient price?

2. If Jesus Christ did so fully satisfy God that all our sins be forgiven;
Then there can be no place admitted for man's satisfaction; for where sins are
discharged, there the sinner is loosed in point of any further satisfaction)
And besides that, all satisfactory punishment falls off upon the remission of
sins, (forasmuch as omnis paena fundatur in reatu. Punishments cannot justly
be inflicted, but where the guilt of sin remains unsatisfied; a guiltless
person may not be punished, why should he? for sin committed? but that is
pardoned; for nothing? that were unjust.) But in and by Christ's satisfaction
all our sins are forgiven. Col. 2. 13. Having forgiven you all trespasses. To
have all sins forgiven, what is it but to have all forgiven which all our sins
did deserve? and truly this will reach unto all punishments both temporal and
eternal.

3. Christ did endure temporal punishments; either they must be for his own
sins (but he had none) or for our sins; but his enduring was his satisfying.

4. There is no ground at all in Scripture for our own satisfactions: And for
the Doctrine of the Papists concerning them, where do we find any such
distribution and portioning of punishments (in that manner) to be satisfied
for, as the eternal by Christ, and the temporal for us? or where read we that
Christ did satisfy for us by procuring grace that we might satisfy? or where
do we find in Scripture that the endurance of temporal punishment by any
sinner, is styled a satisfaction, though not in strict justice, yet in Gods
favorable acceptance, as the Papists do distinguish, and yet but weakly? for
how is that to be reputed a satisfaction to justice, which indeed is not so?

5. But allow them a little to dream, and to dishonor Jesus Christ in his
satisfactions by setting up their own also with his for temporal punishments,
are they ever able to resolve us?

1. Whether God lays temporal punishments upon every sinner, and expects from
him a satisfaction?

Or 2ly. How much, and how long any sinner must endure temporal punishments
before God will be satisfied? has God set down the days or years of endurance
in Purgatory?

Or 3ly. How they come to know the qualities and heights of the punishments in
purgatory, for the enduring of which God is satisfied*

Or 4ly. That if there were such punishments in Purgatory; How can any be
certain, and assured that God will accept of the endurance, of them as a
satis^^ction to his justice?

Or 5ly. How a sinners, suffering of deserved punishment can rationally be a
satisfaction to Justice, to deliver him from suffering of punishment?

Or 6ly. Whether any Papist knowing what horrid punishments are to be endured
in Purgatory (for they teach that they are the very same that the d^mned suffer
in hell, and diffe^ only from them ^n eternity) is willing to suffe^ t^em
before he comes thither; and when he is there, that he does willingly and
patiently bear them, and what grounds for this? for if the endurance of them be
involuntary, and impatient, then it is sinful still, and a sinful endurance
cannot be satisfactory?

Or 7ly. If the the sinners suffering of these punishments be a satisfaction to
Gods Justice, and is necessary; therefore whether it be not dangerous and
preju^icial to press others for money to help souls out of Purgatory, where
they are so well employed as to be satisfying of Gods Justice?

Or is it not needless so to do, seeing the endurance of those pains will
alone satisfy the Justice of God? or if they must be helped by the pecuniary
charit^ of the living, whither there be not an insufficiency and invalidity in
the endurance of those pains to make a satisfaction? But I leave these to
their foolish inventions, and self satisfaction: Let us (for our parts) labor
to know and acknowledge Jesus Christ crucified, and him alone, as undertaking
and satisfying the Justice of God for us; and to have no confidence in any but
in Jesus Christ, and to rejoice only in the Cross of Christ.

What satisfaction, and comfort, and support may this afford to all Believers?
Paul triumphs in this; Romans What support may this afford to all believers.
8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect! It is God that
justifies, verse 34. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died. And
Romans 5. 11. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
received the atonement.

O sirs! I cannot express the treasures of comfort in this, That God is
satisfied, that Jesus Christ has satisfied the justice of God for us! Had
Christ suffered all, yet if thereby God had not been satisfied, we had been
still in our sins, and still under the wrath of God, and still under the
terrors of his justice, and still under the horror of conscience! and still
under the power of accusations, and condemnations; and still under fear of a
fiery indignation, and everlasting destruction; But because Jesus Christ has
suffered for our sins, and has for them fully satisfied the justice of God on
our behalf, our souls may return unto their rest; we may now look upon an
appeased God, and stand no longer as Prisoners at the Bar before a severe
Judge; but as reconciled children before a pacified and reconciled Father:
Beloved, that Gods justice is really and fully satisfied That Gods justice is
satisfied.
by Christ for us;

1. This answers all accusations. O says Satan, what, is the wrath of God This
answers all accusations.
revealed against all your sins? it is very great; but Christ has satisfied! O
but says Conscience your sins are many, and God is just! True; But Christ has
satisf^ed the just God for all my sins. O but God will remember your sins, and
judge you for them! He will not, for he is satisfied by Christ and therefore he
will never reckon with me, nor judge and condemn me. O but the wrath of God is
dreadful! It is so, and christ felt it so, and has satisfied Gods wrath by
enduring of his wrath, and thereby has delivered my soul from wrath.

2. This quiets all. Quiets This quiets all.


1. Conscience as to gu^lt; when satisfaction is made, when God has as much as
he requires, why should not this quiet the heart of a man? will nothing
content thee unless thou thy self art able to pay God the utmost farthing?

2. Impatience as to sufferings: we meet with many afflictions in this life,
and with many crosses which are bitter unto us: Well, but yet the justice of
God is satisfied by Christ; and therefore though your afflictions be crosses;
yet they are not curses; though there be bitterness in them, yet there is not
revenging wrath in them; though they be sent for our correction, yet they are
not sent for any satisfaction: They never come from a revenging God, but only
from a loving Father.

3. This assures all: There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, This assures all.
Romans 8. 1. You shall never perish; your sins should be your sorrows, but they
shall never be your Hell, or damnation; why so? because the justice of God is
satisfied; and if his justice be satisfied, then eternal punishment is taken
off; and if eternal punishment be taken off, then your souls shall never be
separated from God, nor be damned of God, etc.

2. The second benefit or fruit of the sufferings of Christ for us, Is the
remission, Forgiveness of sins.
or forgiveness of our sins.

The Socinians flatly deny that remission of sins has any foundation on the
sufferings or satisfaction of Christ; but that it depends upon and flows only
from the mercy and grace of God without any respect unto Christ. It is strange
how these men are set against Jesus Christ, and will by no means be beholding
unto him for any satisfaction, or justification, or mercy: But let us search
the Scriptures, and be led by them, and we shall find that the forgiveness of
our sins has a dependence both on the free mercy of God, and on the sufferings
of Christ. Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Luke 7. 42. When they had
nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. In these places you see that
forgiveness of sins depends on the free mercy and grace of God; but then
peruse some other Scriptures. 1 John 2. 12. I write unto you little Children,
because your sins are forgiven you for his Namesake (that is) for Christ's
sake. Matthew. 26. 28. This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for
many, for the remission of sins: In these places you see that forgiveness of
sins depends upon the blood and sufferings of Christ. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom you
have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the
riches of his grace: And in this place you see that forgiveness of our sins
has a dependence on both, on the blood of Christ, and on the rich grace of God.

A free remission is contrary to satisfaction.
Object. But how can this be? For a free Remission of sins is directly opposite
to satisfaction: A free pardon is without the making of any satisfaction, and a
satisfaction for sin is contrary to a free Remission.

Sol. I answer, Consider these as to the same subject they are so. The sinner
himself cannot satisfy, and yet be freely pardoned; and he cannot be freely
pardoned, and yet make satisfaction: His satisfaction for his own sins, and
Gods free forgiveness of his sins, are indeed inconsistent: Nevertheless both
these may very well agree in diverse subjects or parties, viz. As to Christ, and
as to us.

In respect of Christ, Remission of sins is not the effect of mercy, but of
justice; it did cost him dear, for he suffered and satisfied for our sins, paid
our debts; and therefore it is just with God for Christ's sake to forgive our
sins.

But in respect of us (who paid no Debt nor Ransom for our selves, it did cost
us nothing) the Remission of sins is mere mercy, and free grace: God did not
express his full justice and mercy on Christ together, nor did he express his
full mercy and justice together on us: But he expressed his justice on Christ
who fully satisfied it, and he expressed his mercy on us, yet for the
satisfaction made by the blood of Christ; Amongst many places which might be
brought to prove that the remission of our sins does depend on the blood or
sufferings of Christ, I will mention only one more; It is in Heb. 9. 22.
Without shedding of blood there is no remission. verse 26. But now has he
(speaking of Christ) once in the end of the world appeared to put away sin by
tht sacrifice of himself. verse 28. So was Christ once offered to bear the sins
of many: what can be more clear? There is no remission of sins without the
shedding of blood, and therefore Christ appeared to put away our sins by the
shedding of his blood (per immolationem sui ipsius) by the Sacrifice of
himself: As when the Sacrifices (called expiatory) were offered, sins were
taken away and pardoned; so when Christ offered up himself by death a Sacrifice
to God, this was of real virtue to expiate our sins.

comfort is this, that Jesus Christ (as our Mediator) did shed his blood for
the remission of our sins! Comfort that Christ shed his blood for our
remission. It loses our Bonds, and discharges our Debts.


1. Our sins in Scripture are sometimes called Bonds (and indeed they are the
heaviest and dreadfullest Bonds of all others, lying heavy upon the conscience,
and binding us over to Gods Tribunal to answer) but these are loosened and
released through the blood of Christ.

And sometimes they are called Debts (for the payment of which we do owe unto
the justice of God, the endurance of everlasting pain in soul and in body) but
these debts are forgiven us for Christ's sake.

In every sin there are two things considerable; One is, the Offense done to
God, by reason whereof he is displeased; The other is, the Obligation of that
person so offending God unto everlasting wrath and condemnation: And both these
are removed in the remission or forgiveness of sins; the offense or fault is
removed; God is not now offended or displeased with the offending sinner any
more; and the obligation unto eternal wrath and condemnation is so far
cancelled, that it shall never redound unto the person: Although guilt and
obligation be natural unto, and inseparable from sin, yet this obligation shall
never be put in suit; nor shall that wrath and condemnation (deserved by sin)
be ever inflicted on the sinner, because there is a forgiveness of sin wrought
by Jesus Christ: And therefore the Apostle says, That God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2
Cor. 5. 19. (that is) not laying of them to their charge, not suing of them,
not reckoning with them, but forgiving them.

2. Secondly the comfort from this will appear yet to be more, if you do
consider This remission does extend to all our sins.
that this remission of sin by Christ, as it takes off the guilt of sin (which
is the Arrow in the Side, the gnawing Worm in the Conscience, the Thorn in the
Foot, and the breaking of our Bones) so it does extend to all our sins: We do
diversifie our sins by the times of them, some are past, some are present, and
some are future: And by the quantity of them, some are small, and some are
great: And by the quality and circumstances of them, some are of ignorance, and
some are of knowledge, some are voluntary, and some are involuntary, etc. Now
whatsoever our sins are (always supposing us to be Elect, believing and
penitent persons) they are all of them forgiven through the blood of Christ.
Colos. 2. 13. Having forgiven you all trespasses, Jer. 33. 8. I will pardon all
their iniquities wherey they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed
against me.

Object. What all? every one!

Sol. Yes. And there are five Arguments to satisfy us concerning this.

1. Jesus Christ (as our Surety) took upon him the whole state of our sinful
debts: He did not undertake this or that particular sin only, but the whole
debt, the whole reckoning, all the sins of which we might be conceived guilty,
and of all of them gave himself a Sacrifice to put away sin.

2. He did so satisfy Gods justice for our sins, as that there is now no
condemnation to them that are in him; and verily, if all condemnation be
removed, then all sin is pardoned: If any one sin remained unpardoned, then
condemnation would still be in force upon us for that one sin.

3. His death was a price Aequivalent unto the merits of all our sins, and
preponderating them; and God having accepted thereof, it would be unjust in him
not to remit all.

4. All enmity is slain by the blood of Christ between God and us. He has
reconciled us by his Cross, having slain enmity thereby. But if any sin was
not forgiven, all hostility is not slain.

5. The great end of Christ's death was to save us, to make us blessed, to bring
us to the enjoyment of eternal life, which end could never be attained, unless
God did (upon the account of Christ) give unto us a plenary and total remission
of sins: Because of any one sin unpardoned the wages is death, which the
Apostle delivers in opposition to eternal life, Rom, 6. 23.

3. Nor does our comfort from the remission of our sins by Christ end in This
Remission is stable and irrevocable.
this; it goes one step yet further, and that is this, as the Remission is
total and perfect, so it is stable and irrevocable. Hence those expressions in
Micah 7. 19. Thou will cast all our sins into the depths of the Sea (as if our
sins lay drowned and buried for ever, never to rise up against us any more)
Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted out (as a thick cloud) thy transgressions, and as a
cloud thy sins. When a Bond or Writing is blotted out, there the writing
against us can be read no more: Or when a Cloud is blotted out, it is so
scattered and dispersed that it appears no more. Jer. 33. 34. I will forgive
their iniquity, and I will remember their sins no more. Jer. 50. 20. The
iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins
of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will pardon them whom I reserve:
Why! what comfort is this! That there is Remission of sins procured for us, and
of all sins, and that by Christ, and that God has forgiven them; and as long
as God is God, and Christ is Christ, they remain forgiven; God alters not, and
Christ afters not, and forgiveness of sins alters not.

Then you see whether to go under the sense of the guilt of your sins, and See
whether to go under the sense of sin, and what to trust to.
what to trust unto: when the Law of God sets upon you, and Satan gives in
against you, and your own wounded consciences charge on you the guilt of great
and many sins; O it is a dreadful time indeed with you; what shall I do? and
what will become of me? whether shall I fly? who can give me ease? I cannot
satisfy justice, and I cannot escape justice, and I cannot bear the strokes of
justice! I would do any thing, I would suffer any thing for a time. But O
distressed sinner? these will not, and these cannot help thee: Why then my
condition is desperate! So it is for ought that thou can do; but is there not
a God in Israel? so say I to thee, is there not a Mediator? has not he
suffered? has not he died? has not he shed his blood for the Remission of
sins! In him we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins:
And If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins: And herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation
for our sins. And therefore in your agonies of Conscience, in the troubles of
your souls, under the guilt of your sins, look up to Jesus Christ whose blood
was shed for the Remission of sins, and offer him up, and h^s blood up to God;
See, O Lord! this is thy Christ, who appeared once to put away sin by the
Sacrifice of himself, and who was once offered to bear the sins of many! Here
is my satisfaction, and here is the price laid down for my sins, and here is
the blood, without shedding of which there is no remission: O Lord pardon, O
Lord forgive my sins, all my sins for his Name sake, etc.

3. I now proceed unto the third Effect or Benefit flowing from, and depending
upon the sufferings of Christ our Mediator, and that is Reconciliation. 2 Cor.
5. 19. Reconciliation
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. Whereas formerly we lay
under the wrath of God deserved by sin; we are now by Christ delivered from
that wrath; God is appeased, and we are received into favor and friendship
with him. Romans 5. 10. When we were sinners, we were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son. Ephesians. 2. 14. He is our Peace. Isa. 53. 5. The chastisement
of our peace was upon him.

The Socinians deny all this; they deny that God was ever angry or displeased
with us, or that any of us did lie under his wrath, or that ever Christ did
appease, pacify, remove the wrath of God, or wrought Reconciliation 'twixt God
and us.

Against which Opinion of theirs, I shall lay down these Conclusions.
Conclusions laid down against the Socinians. There was a real breach betwixt
God and Man by sin.


1. That there was a real breach, or difference, or enmity made between God and
Man by reason of sin, and we were under his wrath for it. The Scripture is
clear for this, calling sin an enmity. Ephesians. 2. 16. Having slain the enmity
thereby. Romans 8. 7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God: It is not
subject to the Law of God, etc. Sinners enemies (It when we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10.) Those whom he
calls Sinners, verse 8. he calls Enemies, verse 10. Col. 1. 21. You that were
sometimes alienated and enemies in your minds by wicked works, yet now he has
reconciled: Here you see that by reason of sin we are alienated, and we are
enemies; Alienated in respect of the near union and conjunction which (once) we
had with God; and enemies in respect of that hostility which did arise 'twixt
us and God by reason of sin; Sinners do hate God as their enemy, and God does
hate them as his enemies; and their ways are an abomination unto him, Prove.
15. 9.

And truly because sin is in its own nature the greatest dissimilitude with,
and repugnancy unto the nature of God, as it therefore breaks up all
friendship, so it likewise raises up the strongest alienation and hostility:
But besides this, the Scripture does as clearly hold out the wrath of God under
which men lie by reason of sin, Joh. 3. 36. He that believes not the Son, the
wrath of God abides on him: He says not Non veniet super eum, sed manet:
Jamdudum enim involvit omnes Adami filios, and illis supe incumbet donec
removeatur per Christum Mediatorem, says Austin: Romans 1. 18. The wrath of God
is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men,
who hold the truth in unrighteousness: Does God reveal, and threaten, and
inflict wrath upon sinners, and yet is he not wrath with sin or with sinners?
Ephesians. 2 3. And were by nature the children of wrath as well as others. How often
do we read of the provocation of God by sin, and of Gods abhorring of people
for sin, and of casting them out of his sight, and of the separation which sin
makes, and of his forsaking, and punishing, and damning of sinners? certainly
then sin makes a real breach and enmity 'twixt God and us.

2. That Jesus Christ (as our Mediator) did step in between God and us, and
Jesus Christ did step in betwixt God and us to make up the breach. He did
appease the wrath of God.
made up the breach, and slew the enmity, and reconciled us again; Now here
observe two things.

1. Jesus Christ did appease the wrath of God against us; He did pacify him,
and took off all provocation on our part, and displeasure therefore on Gods
part. All the peace offerings in the Old Testament (upon which his wrath fell
off and ceased) were but Types of Christ, who was the real and true
Peace Offering, by whom God is appeased and pacified with us: Hence is that of
the Prophet, Isa. 53. 5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him. It was
Christ who made peace for us; and as Christ is called our Peace, and
Peacemaker, so he is called our Appeasor, or Appeasement, Romans 3. 25. whom God
has set forth to be a Propitiatory, (...), 1 John 2. 2. And he is the
Propitiation for our sins, (...) placamen, not placationis testimonium; but
placamen effectivum.

Now (...) is placare, to appease a person, and so to appease him, that wrath
and displeasure in him is removed, or taken off: God be merciful to me a
sinner, said the Publican, Luke 18. 13. Be merciful to me; the word signifies,
Be propitious, be appeased, be pacified: And truly upon the account of this
part of Reconciliation by Christ, we are said to be delivered, or saved from
the wrath of God by him. Romans 5. 9. We shall be saved from wrath by him; and to
have all enmity slain, Ephesians. 2. 16.

2. Jesus Christ did not only take off wrath, and discord, and variance by He
did also restore us to favor.
appeasing God, but he did moreover restore us again into his favor, and
friendship, and drew up a state of concord, or perfect agreement between God
and us. Romans 5. 11. We also joy (or glory) in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement.

And if I be not much mistaken, the propitiatory which resembled Christ, does
plainly inform us in what a state of grace or favor we now do stand with God
by Jesus Christ: So that now we are no longer enemies, and strangers, and
Forreiners, but friends, and favorites, and children of God, and he is well
pleased with us, and delights in us, and is pleased to hold communion with us.

3. That Jesus Christ did reconcile God and us by his blood or death. The He
did reconcile God and u^ by his blood
Scripture is so full and clear in this, that it is an amazement unto me to see
with what face any man can deny and oppose it. Romans 5. 10. When we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. 3. 25. Whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. Ephesians. 2. 13.
We are made nigh by the blood of Christ. verse 14. For he is our Peace. verse
16. That he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross. Col. 1.
21. You that were sometime alienated, and enemies, etc. yet now has he
reconciled. verse 22. In the body of his flesh through death. Before I make
some useful Application unto our selves, there are a few Doubts and Objections
to be removed.

Christ is God, and then how can he be a Mediator of Reconciliation to himself?
How can Christ as Mediator Reconcile us to God, because he himself is God? 1.
Doubt.
and none can be a Mediator of Reconciliation unto himself, but between
different persons.

Sol. 1. Though that of the Apostle may satisfy us in this, 2 Cor. 5 19. That
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself.

2. Yet we thus distinguish of Christ the Son of God, that there is a twofold
consideration of him.

1. One is as to his Divine Nature or Essence absolutely, in which respect he
is God equal with the Father, the self same one God; and so is he the offended
party.

2. Another is, as to that condition or estate which he did voluntarily
undertake; Namely to be God Incarnated or to be made Man, according unto which
he became Mediator: And as thus considered, he is a middle Person 'twixt God
and us. Now though Christ absolutely as God, was the offended party, and
received a Sacrifice by which he was appeased; yet as God incarnated (as
God-Man) he offered up that Sacrifice of Reconciliation: By the merit and
virtue whereof he made our peace with God: For thus considered, he was a middle
party 'twixt God and us, and as so, did not Reconcile us to himself, but to God.

God does love his people with an everlasting love; he loved us before he 2.
Doubt.
sent Christ into the world for us; For God so loved the world, that he gave
his only I, but God does love his people with an everlasting love.
begotten Son. Now if God loved us with an everlasting love, what need is there
of Reconciliation by Christ? Reconciliation needs not amongst friends, but
between enemies.

Sol. To those that make this Objection against the need of our Reconciliation
by Christ, because of Gods eternal love; I would entreat them to consider that
place in 1 John 4. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that God
loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins: Mark the
place; though God did love us, yet he sends his Son to be the Propitiation for
our sins; whence it is most evident that a Propitiation or Reconciliation by
Christ is necessary, notwithstanding the love of God toward us. Nevertheless
I will not thus quit the Objection and difficulty, unto which diverse answers
are given by learned men.

1. One faith that God did in a wonderful way love us, when yet he did hate
us, and was dispeased with us; he did love us in respect of what himself had
made, and yet he did hate us, and was displeased with what we our selves did
make (that is) he loved our nature which himself made, but hated the sin which
our nature contracted: And therefore though he loved our natures which himself
made, yet there was a need of Reconciliation to be made, to remove that hatred
and wrath which we contracted by our sins; and as Aquinas adds, to take away
the cause and ground of all hatred and displeasure in God, namely by taking
away of sin by the death of Christ, which was the cause of it.

2. But with your favor; I shall (I suppose) satisfy the doubt by a
distinction of a twofold love of God.

1. There is Amor benevolentiae, which is that love in God by which he wishes,
and intends good unto us: For although God was angry and displeased with us
by reason of sin, yet that anger was not such as did shut up thoughts of love
and mercy toward us: For notwithstanding that exceeding displeasure with us
for sin, yet his love did intend, and did issue forth a way of Reconciliation
and Pacification by the blood of Christ: And with this love, the wrath of God
is confistent, and with this wrath of God his love is consistent; he was wroth
with us for our sins, yet he did so far love us, as to give Jesus Christ for
the pacification of that wrath, according to that forementioned place in 1 John
4. 10.

2. There is Amor amicitiae, which consists in laying aside all wrath, and
accepting of us into a league of favor and kindness: With this love (I grant)
that wrath cannot consist: And this love was procured unto us by the death of
Christ: So then although God did love his people with an eternal love of
benevolence, out of his mere mercy and grace; yet there is a love of
friendship, with which he did not love us, until his wrath against us for our
sins were removed by the death of his Son Jesus Christ.

Object. And whereas it was objected, that there needs no Reconciliation to be
made 'twixt friends.

Sol. I grant it: But God and we were not made friends but by the blood of
Christ, which did pacify his wrath against us: notwithstanding his love of
benevolence, we were in a condition of wrath; and that love of benevolence did
not take away wrath, although it did make a way thereto by sending Jesus Christ
to be a Propitiation for our sins.

The Scripture does not say God is reconciled to us.
There is no mention in all the Scripture, That God is reconciled to us, though
3. Doubt.
indeed frequently we are said by Christ to be Reconciled unto God.

Sol. 1. If we do find that we are reconciled to God, this is enough to
evidence that God is reconciled unto us; As if we know such a woman is married
unto such a man, we need not be solicitous to prove that such a man is married
unto such a woman: Or supposing Paul and Barnabas have been at difference; if
Barnabas be reconciled to Paul, we may well conclude that Paul is reconciled to
Barnabas: Reconciliation 'twixt different parties is in the very nature of it,
a conciliation or accord of both parties; if either of the parties stand off,
and will not yield, it cannot be called a Reconciliation of them, or between
them.

2. But secondly, the Scripture will give in testimony enough for Gods being
reconciled unto us. Ezekiel. 16. 36. That thou may remember and be confounded,
and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame when I am pacified
toward thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord: Here God himself is
said to be pacified toward them; and what is it for God to be pacified, but to
be reconciled? Exodus 30. 10. Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of
the Altar once in a year with the blood of the sin-offering; what does this
Typifie, but the Reconciliation made by the blood of Christ for our sins; and
with whom is this atonement made? with God who is displeased with us because
of our sins, etc. Isa. 54. 9. I have sworn that I will not be wrath with thee,
nor rebuke thee. Isa. 57. 16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be
always wrath.

Information. How efficacious is the blood of Christ.


1. How powerful and efficacious the blood of Christ is! It has done that
which all the righteous men on earth, and which all the Angels in heaven could
never do. If all the righteous men on earth should have come forth and offered
their lives, their souls and bodies unto God, and have said, Lord, take all
these at our hands, so that thou will be reconciled and at peace with such a
sinner; they could not have made his peace: Yea if all the angels in heaven had
offered themselves to God, and said, Lord, we are content to be put out of
Heaven, so that this may satisfy thy justice, and so that this may make peace
for sinners, neither would this have took up the difference and made peace:
There cannot be found in any creature sufficiency enough to be a Peacemaker,
to be a Days man between God and sinners, to take off the wrath of God due to a
sinner: No, no, it is not our tears, nor our confessions, nor our repentance,
which can make reconciliation; it is Jesus Christ only: He was only able to
open the book, and he only is able to shut the book: None but Christ, and
nothing but the blood of Christ is able to satisfy and to pacify God: His
blood was the blood of atonement or reconciliation, and the chastisement of
our peace was upon him: The debt was so great, and the provocation by sin was
so high, and the wrath of God against sin was so infinite, that nothing could
discharge that debt and pacify that wrath, but the blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

2. How much are we beholding to Jesus Christ who by his blood reconciled God
to us How much are we beholden to Jesus Christ.
and us to God, and has made peace! O said Luther concerning the 118. Psalm; I
am more beholding to this Psalm than to all the Potentates of the world: This
Psalm has done more for me in my distness, than all the world could do for me:
we may much more say that of Jesus Christ, we are more bound to Christ than to
all the world besides; for Christ has done more for us; why? because he has
reconciled us to God; we had lain under the wrath of God for ever, had it not
been for Christ: and we should never have seen the face of God, had it not been
for Christ: He has pacified his wrath, and brought us into favor and
friendship again: O sirs, ponder it well what I am about to speak unto you,
that you may know how much you are beholding to Christ. What a miserable
unhappy creature is the sinner who is separated from God, and at variance with
him, and whiles he is separated from God! God only is happiness, and nothing
can be our happiness but the enjoyment of him; and therefore the falling away
from God, and the separation from him is an infinite loss, and misery and
infelicity: Cain thought it a peculiar curse, I shall be hid from thy face! And
the Church cries out, he bides his face from us: why I cannot express the
darkness, the loss, the curse, the death, the hell of this, that the sinner is
fallen out with God, he has forsaken God, and God has forsaken him; he is
none of Gods, and God is none of his, he is an enemy to God and opposes him,
and God is an enemy to the sinner, and does abhor, and will curse him: but
besides this, consider also how terrible the wrath of God is, and how dreadful
it is for a poor sinner to be a child of wrath, and to live under the wrath of
God. On the wrath of God it is a consuming fire; and who can stand before his
wrath! If his wrath be kindled but a little, says David. How does the
conscience tormented with the apprehension and sense of Gods wrath make men cry
out and roar, and tremble and quake, and be restless, and easeless, and
hopeless! But now Jesus Christ by his blood has reconciled us and God; he has
quenched this devouring flame of fire, he has slain enmity, he has saved us
from wrath, from that wrath which is so infinitely dreadful, and which
otherwise would have burned and consumed us for ever, and ever, and ever; And
besides that he has made us nigh, and has made us one again; we may now with
the Prodigal come back again unto our Fathers house and be kindly accepted and
received, Well! If you know the Scriptures, and if you know what a just and
wrathful God is, and if you know what a sinning creature is, or what sin is!
Then bless God for Christ, and bless Christ for himself, and for his love, and
for his blood, and for his death, who has taken up the greatest controversy
that ever was; as he took up the nature of the different parties into his own
Person so he took off the differences twixt them by his own blood. Father, said
Christ. I will die, I will shed my blood, so that thou will be friends again
with these poor sinners and enemies, so that thou will pardon them, and be
pacified toward them, and take them into favor again, and own them; and
Christ did this, and God accepted of this: O love this reconciling Christ!

3. By all means strive to get into Jesus Christ, to receive him, to make him
yours, Get into Jesus Christ.
and to become his: why so? Because if he be not your Christ, he cannot be your
peace; and if he be your Christ, assuredly he is your Peacemaker. Is there any
thing in the world which can concern you more than this? what! To have the
justice of God satisfied, to have all your sins pardoned, to have God
reconciled! If a great man and you fell out, and were at deadly variance, as he
has you in his power, and might every moment of the day seize on you, and take
away your life, and cut you in pieces, would you be quiet and contented?
especially when you your self were the just cause of all the difference and
danger, would you not seek peace? would you not be glad to be reconciled,
especially if he should offer it? why, you and the great God are fallen out,
and you are the cause of it; you sinned against him, and did that which his
soul did hate, and did him wrong, and provoked him to wrath, and his wrath is
revealed against you, and he can (when he will) at any time, in any place lay
hold on you by the hand of his power, and execute his righteous judgments on
you, and destroy and damn you for ever! And yet will you neglect to make peace
with him? will you dally in this case, especially seeing he is thus far
indulgent as to show you the way how to take hold of him, and make peace with
him! There is no way in the world for this, but by coming in to Christ, and
receiving of him by faith; and therefore if you would indeed escape the wrath
of God, if you would indeed enjoy God as appeasedand pacified, and reconciled,
then lay hold on Christ by faith; I say on Christ, who only is our peace, and
who only can make our peace: In whom the Father is well pleased, and by whom he
is well pleased with us.

Ob. Now whereas some profane spirit may reply, But Christ has shed his blood
already, and made peace and reconciliation already; and what he has done in
that kind shall stand, and never be reversed: And therefore I will not look
after Christ, nor trouble my self.

Sol. Beloved, pardon me if I be mistaken; but in my conscience this is the
general opinion of ungodly men: They hear that Christ Jesus died to take away
sin, and to make peace for sinners, and therefore they will take no thought
after Christ, but will live basely, and boldly in their sinful ways! But as
Jehu said to the mess^^gers of Jehoram, What have thou to do with peace? So
would I say to such ^anting Atheists, what talk you of peace made by Christ?
There is no peace sait^ God ^^ the wicked, Isa. 57. 21. and to them that do not
obey the truth, God will render ^^^gnation and wrath, Rev. 2. 8. and
tribulation and anguish, verse 9. And what b^^gh Jesus Christ did make
reconciliation for some! must this be presently for such as you, who will not
know the day of your peace, and who slight and refuse the Prince of peace, and
all the terms of peace! by your favor Sir, Christ never yet made such a
reconciliation, that all sin^ whatsoever though they live in unbelief, and in
impenitency, shall share in it, but only penitent sinners, and believing
sinners.

comfort is this unto all Believers? Comfort to all Believers.
Unspeakable comfort, God is reconciled, all is peace, all is well again: We joy
in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
Atonement, Romans 5. 11.

Reconciliation, one distinguishes of three moments of it.

1. Ante mortem Christi; as it was in the purpose of God by Christ, To have all
his wrath pacified.

2. In morte Christi; as it was in the suffering and offering of Christ, where
God set to his seal, to lay aside all wrath, and to be friends.

3. Post mortem Christi; as it is an Application and fruition, and this is when
a sinner becomes a believer, when he believes on Jesus Christ, and by Christ is
presented to God the Father who now owns him, and claspes him with peace and
favor. Beloved, whatsoever the disputes of men are about the latitude, or
narrowness of Reconciliation by Christ: and of what strength or weakness that
Arminian distinction may be of Deus placabilis, and Deus placatus: This is
agreed on all sides, that Reconciliation is obtained for, and actually applied
to all Believers: Every Believer is in Christ, and every one in Christ has his
peace made by Christ: Being justified by faith we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.

Though others will but dispute for a share, yet you are sure for your part;
and though others doubt, yet you may be confident that Christ is your peace,
and has reconciled you to God.

Object. But where lies the comfort of this, that God and Believers are
reconciled Ten comforts.
by Christ?

Sol. I will tell you briefly If God be; reconciled unto you, then

1. There is your answer to all that Satan can say; But God is satisfied, and
reconciled, my peace is made.

2. There is an end of all differences and disputes; but God is reconciled: The
Egyptians are all drowned, etc.

3. There is sure rest for the Conscience, that is now at shore and quiet; for
God is reconciled; nothing can quiet and pacify Conscience till God be
pacified.

4. You shall never hear from God in wrath any more for ever; for all is taken
off, and for ever upon reconciliation by Christ.

5. You may look upon God, and approach his Throne of grace, and confidently
treat with him, and sue unto him; for he is reconciled unto you; he is
appeased, he is your friend, your Father.

6. You and he shall never be enemies more; for Reconciliation by Christ looks
not only to the time past (in taking off all old and former differences) but
also it looks to the time future, in preventing all succeeding breaches of
separation; It is the everlasting Bond of Peace: As Christ's Righteousness is
everlasting Righteousness, so Christ's Peace is everlasting Peace, a perpetual
Incense.

7. You may enjoy your selves, and all your comforts with exceeding comfort;
for God has accepted of you, and is Reconciled unto you; his Candle shines
upon your Tabernacle: A wicked man cannot enjoy any thing with comfort and
peace, because God and his conscience are not at peace.

8. In all the troubles and differences of the world, you may yet clear your
selves; for in Christ you have peace; and though men vex, and wrangle with you,
yet God is reconciled to you.

9. Are they not happy who have the Lord to be their God? what will not a
reconciled God do for you? His love and friendship is as fruitful of mercies
and blessings, as his Justice and wrath is of punishments and miseries.

10. Can any thing hinder you from being saved? If when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life.

let trembling, broken, humbled, even sinking hearts under the weight of their
sins, and Let trembling hearts make in to Christ, and trust on him to make
their peace.
bitterness of Gods wrath and displeasure, I say let them in this condition
make in to Christ, and look up to Christ, and trust on Christ to make their
peace: Ah poor creature! why do thou take this work upon thy self? I confess
we must use means to find peace, but we have not power to make peace; we must
pray, and confess, and repent, etc. but these are not our peace.

Object. Will not these do it?

Sol. No, but Christ only, 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our
sins. And therefore if ever you would have the wrath of God removed; if you
would see all partition walls broken down, if you would have God to be
pacified, to be friends with you again, to be at peace with you; then go to
Christ, and make him your friend.

Oject. Do not lose time by impertinent disputes and reasonings, But may we
come to Christ! and can he, and will he make peace for us, and take up our
differences!

Sol. Let me tell you,

1. Dispute what you will, you shall never find peace with God but by Christ;
No peace with God but by Christ.
his Name only is Prince of Peace, he only is the Mediator of Peace, he only
reconciles God and sinners.

2. It is his Office to reconcile God and sinners, and make peace; that is his
work It is his Office to make peace.
unto which he was called, and for which he was set apart: He is that Merciful
and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation
for the sins of the people, Heb. 2. 17. Mark the place, the Office of Christ is
to be a Priest, etc. One chief work of that Office is to make Reconciliation
for the sins of the people; and he is one that is very good in his Office;
you need not be afraid to go to him for the work of his Office; for says the
Text, He is a merciful High Priest; very tender, very affectionate, very
compassionate, easily wrought on by any distressed sinner that comes to him,
and calls on him, Lord Jesus, my soul is afraid, and oppressed with the fear
of Gods wrath, and sense of his displeasure; I am grieved for offending and
displeasing of him: O that thou would undertake for me! I beseech thee step
into the breach, make my peace, reconcile my soul, get thy Father to be
friends with me, etc. He is a faithful High Priest: O he will not fail you, he
will not put you off, he will not thrust you aside, he will surely undertake
your condition, he will make Reconciliation for our sins.

3. It was the work of Christ from first to last; in life and in death. Heb. 9.
It was the work of Christ from first to last.
26. He appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself; yea and it is his
work now in heaven; He appears in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9, 24. and
he ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25.

4. You of all other have special grounds of hope and trust, that Christ will
be You of all others have grounds of hope.
your Atonement and Reconciliation; Not only because the Reconciling Christ
calls you (thus burdened) to come unto him, and he will give you ease, Matthew.
11. 28. but also because that the day when the peoples souls were to be
afflicted for their sins, on that day was the Priest to make an Atonement for
their souls, Levit. 16. 29, 30.

4. The fourth great benefit which we have by the sufferings of Christ our
mediator, Redemption.
is Redemption or deliverance.

Alas sirs! In what a miserable condition were we by reason of sin? Methinks
the more virtues and blessed fruits that I read acc^^^ing by Christ un^o us,
^^e more do I still discern of our deep and involved misery by reason of sin:
Sin was such a debt as none but Christ could satisfy for: Sin was such an
offense as nothing but the blood of Christ could expiate, or get the pardon of
it. Sin was such a breach, and such an enmity, as nothing but the death of
Christ could take up and reconcile: And sin was such a bondage and thr^^dom, as
nothing but the blood of Christ could redeem us from: In him (says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 7.) we have Redemption; but then he adds, through his blood;
So Pet. 1. 18, 19. Ye were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ. In this
Redemption by Christ, there are two things considerable. 1. The parts of it. 2.
The degrees of it.

1. The parts of it are two; one is Privative, and respects that from which we
are The parts of it.
redeemed or freed; the other is Positive, and respects that state unto which
we are translated; or if I may so express it, of which we are made free.

1. The Privative part of Redemption is that from which we are freed by Christ,
and that is from all the chains of Spiritual bondage. Now there are six
chains The Privative part, from what we are freed. From the power of sin.
of bondage with which every sinner is bound, and from them all there is
Redemption by Christ.

1. With the chains of bondage under the power of sin, 2 Pet. 2. 19. Of whom a
man is overcome, of the same he is brought in bondage; Every servant of sin is
a Bond-slave to his Lusts; and so many sinful lusts as he has, so many Tyrants
does he serve as a slave. And there is no slavery or bondage like unto that of
sin; for sin never gives rest nor wages, but is infinite in its commands, and
damns us at last for a requital of all our services: But from this bondage does
Christ redeem or deliver us: For this purpose was the Son of God manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. Those works of the
Devil were our sins, as the same verse expounds them. Romans 6. 6. Our Old Man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin.

Two things in sin, from which Christ delivers us.

1. Jesus Christ has by his Redemption delivered us from the dominion of sin.
Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are under grace; by
his Spirit which sanctifies: 2. And from the damnation for sin. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. by his blood which
justifies.

2. With the chains of bondage under the power of Gods Justice: By reason From
the power of Gods justice.
of sin we fall into the hands of a just God who has threatened sin, and
revealed his wrath against it: So that wheresoever the sinner lives, he lives
under this cloud of Gods wrath (which at any times) may break and fall down
upon him, and utterly and eternally overwhelme him. This is a very dreadful
bondage, worse than his who sat eating with a great sharp sword hanging over
his head with a little weak small thread: And worse than his who hung by a
rotten bough, which if it brake, he had immediately fallen down, and had been
dashed in pieces upon the Rocks. But Jesus Christ has redeemed us out of the
hands of Gods justice, by satisfying and appeasing the same, and so has
delivered us from wrath. 1 These. 1. 10. Even Jesus who has delivered us from
the wrath to come, we are saved from wrath through him. Romans 5. 9

3. With the chains of bondage under the power of the Law of God. The From the
power of the Law.
Law of God speaks death and curse unto every sinner, and under that is the
sinner concluded: The soul that sins shall die; and cursed is every one who
continues not in every thing that is written in the Law to do it: What a heavy
bondage is this for a sinner to carry about with him many Inditements and
accusations in his own heart, and to read as many curses pronounced against him
in the Law of God: For this sin thou art cursed, and for that, and for every
one, etc. so that the sinner is condemned, and cursed, and dead in Law: Which
curses (if the Law be not satisfied) will as surely befall him, as God is God:
But from this bondage also has Christ redeemed us. Gal. 3. 13. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. From the 1.
Execution of the Law by his active obedience. 2. Condemnation of the Law by his
passive obedience.

4. With the chains of bondage under a guilty, accusing, and condemning
conscience: For out of every sin there does arise a particular guilt, which
guilt From an accusing and condemning conscience.
binds over the sinner to the Judgment Seat of God to answer for it, and to
receive that condemnation threatened against it, and this lies heavy on his
Conscience. Terret me conscientia mea, ubicunque vadit mecum, Testis, Judex.
And truly this chain of bondage is such an iron yoke, and such a fiery
furnace, and such a restless Sea, and such an amazing wound that none can bear
it, who yet must bear it; It is the very spirit of bondage, the very terror of
the Almighty, the very hell on earth: Yet also from this bondage does Christ
deliver us by making peace in his blood, and by speaking peace through his
Spirit unto our spirits; and by preaching and sealing the forgiveness of our
sins. Matthew. 9. 2. Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are for given thee: And now
Conscience is quiet, cease to accuse and condemn, and excuses and comfort.

5. With the chains of bondage under the power of Satan who is the From the
power of Satan.
Prince of the power of the Air: the Spirit that works in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. who takes us captives at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. and
whose lusts and will we do (naturally) serve, Joh. 8. 44. Power of his 1.
Dominion. 2. Operation and temptation. But Jesus Christ has redeemed us from
this bondage also: He has bruised the head of this Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. And by
his Cross has spoiled Principalities, and Powers, and triumphed over them,
Col. 2. 15. and overcome that danger, Rev. 12. 8, 9. And has destroyed him
that has the power of death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. And has delivered
us even from this power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. He has bound the strong man
(so is Satan called, Matthew. 12. 29.) who bound us, and ruled over us, and now
we may by Faith quench all his fiery darts in the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 6. 16.

6. With the chains of bondage under the fear of death and hell: A perpetual
From the fear of death.
fear of which lies upon the conscience of the sinner, who although in the
presence of his mad and wild companions, and in the midst of his cups and
delights, seems to be either unmindful or slighting; yet when he is alone, and
more serious, his heart does tremble at the thoughts of death and judgment; I
would not die, I am afraid to die! But from this bondage also, all that believe
in Christ are redeemed or delivered: Who, Heb. 2. 15. did deliver them who
through the fear of death were all their lifetime subject unto bondage: And
so, 1 Cor. 15. 56, 57. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is
the Law; but thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ: And thus you have the Privative part of our Redemption by Christ,
viz. The evil from which by him we have deliverance.

2. Now follows the Positive part of our Redemption by Christ: For his
Redemption The Positive part what we are free to.
is not a mere deliverance, as if one should only be freed out of prison, or
only be kept from drowning, or only be reserved from condemnation: But besides
the evil estate from which we are delivered by Christ, there is also a good
estate unto which we are brought by the Redemption of Christ: As when the
Israelites were Redeemed, they were not only delivered out of Egyptian bondage,
but they were also brought into that goodly Land of Canaan: And truly so it is
with our Redemption by Christ: As it is an outlet from all evil and misery, so
is it an inlet to all blessings and mercies. The reason whereof is this,
because this Redemption was not only a sufficient price to satisfy, but it was
also a superabounding price to purchase: There was not only enough in it to get
off all evil, but more yet remaining to merit and pu^chace all the good which
our souls did need. Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. For that now
we are 1. Under another Lord. 2. Under other Laws and commands. 3. Under the
best Liberties and Privileges. Rev. 5. 9. Thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood. verse 10. and have made us unto our God Kings and
Priests, and we shall reign on the earth. Here you see what an excellent estate
the Redeemed by the blood of Christ are brought into: They are redeemed unto
God, so as to become his in a peculiar way of relation and possession; and so
as to be made Kings and Priests unto him. Highest Dignities and Employments,
which if I mistake not is expounded in 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation,
a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people: By all which is meant
that high and heavenly estate with all those excellent Enjoyments, and Graces,
and Dignities, and Privileges, and Communion derived unto us by the Redemption
of Christ: In one word, that estate purchased for us by the blood of Christ our
Redeemer, is Grace and Glory, eternal happiness, and all that brings us
thereunto: A new Relation, a new Spirit, Mercy Peace, Joy, Calling, Justifying,
and Glorifying: And whiles we live on earth, all the good things thereof which
are necessary for us: But of these (perhaps) I shall speak more ere long.

2. The degrees of Redemption by Christ.

I call them so, not simply as to the work and purchase of Christ (who at once
The degrees of this Redemption.
fulfilled the same in the once offering of himself, and laying down the price
of his blood) but respectively unto us in respect of our manner and order of
participating of that his Redemption, in respect whereof Redemption is partly
imperfect, and partly perfect and complete: In this life our participation of
it is in some respects imperfect, but at the last day it shall be consummate
and perfect, when we shall enjoy all and all fully, which the Redemption of
Christ comes unto: It is true, that in this life we have such a Redemption by
Christ as that thereby we are ransomed, and delivered from the servage or
slavery of sin, and Satan, and death; sin shall not reign in us, and Satan
shall not hold us captive, and act, and command us at his pleasure: And we are
freed from the wrath of God and damnation. Nevertheless there still cleave unto
us many sinful corruptions, and we are beset with many temptations, and are
straightened with many corporal miseries, from which we are not, and shall not
actually be delivered, until our Redeemer comes with his last and perfect
Remdep^ion; therefore Christ said, Luke 21. 28. Lift up your heads, for your
Redemption draws nigh.

viz. Redemption, without making some Use of it unto our selves.

1. Value your souls, set a higher rate on them; the Redemption of which did
Set a high rate upon your souls.
cost Christ so dear: Many men do despise their souls, and make light of them,
and cast them away for every base lust: They swear away their souls, and whore
away their souls, and drink away their souls, and play away their souls, and
idle away their souls! Every sin is a venturing of your soul, it is the
pawning of the precious soul, which cannot be redeemed but by the blood of
Jesus Christ: Our souls deserve more regard from us, they are of more worth
than we are aware of: We were redeemed (says the Apostle) not with corruptible
things, as silver and gold: But with the precious blood of Christ. Therefore
value your souls more, and be not so prodigal of them, to throw them away for
every base lust.

2. Look after your souls in what condition they are, whether in bondage
still, Look after your souls in what condition they are.
or under Redemption. Naturally every man, and every soul is in bondage!
whatsoever ye do, do not suffer your souls to lie and rot in prison.

O that we did all see in what a Spiritual bondage our souls do lie? and under
the sense of it could cry out (as Paul once) O wretched men that we are! who
shall deliver us? If thou had a child taken by the Turk, and made a
Gally-slave, and tormented with cruelty every day in the Goal, thy heart would
yerne for him, and request would be seriously made, and followed to ransom
that poor imbondaged child; why then! be as merciful and pitiful to thy
captivated soul, as thou art to thy captivated child. Thy soul (naturally) is
in the worst, and heaviest, and saddest of all bondages; it is under the wrath
of God, and under the power of sin, and Satan, and under the curse of the Law:
Do not, do not let it rest thus, but make in by faith unto Christ, and beseech
him to redeem thy soul; O Lord, says David, Deliver my soul! So do thou; O
Lord Jesus, redeem my soul, deliver me out of the hands of all mine enemies.

Alas! why are we satisfied with other things, with this friend, and with that
honor, with this profit, and with that pleasure! what of all these, if our
precious and immortal souls have yet no portion in Christ, nor in the
Redemption by Christ? As long as we are in the hands of Gods justice, and in
the hands of Satan's commands, and in the hands of our reigning sins, and in the
hands of our raging Consciences, and in the hands of a sentencing, condemning,
cursing Law! Is this a condition to rest in? you rest in it, because you are
not sensible of it: were you indeed sensible of it, you would make out to
Christ who is a Redeemer of our souls, and you would not be satisfied until
Christ were made of God unto you Redemption.

3. Value the Lord Jesus Christ more then ever you have done, even for this
reason, because he did shed his most precious blood to redeem you. When you had
Value the Lord Jesus Christ more.
brought your selves into such a miserable bondage, as nothing was price enough
to pay your ransom, and to purchase your liberty; then did the Lord Jesus
Christ come down on earth to break all the bonds of your distresses: He took
your sins upon himself, to deliver you from your sins, and he was made under
the Law to redeem you from the Law, and he was made a curse to redeem you from
the curse, and he bare wrath to deliver you from wrath, and he suffered death
to deliver you from death; and he conflicted with Satan, to deliver you from
the power of Satan; and he fell into the hands of Justice to ransom you out of
the hands of Justice: And he laid down his soul, that he might ransom and
redeem your soul: Methinks such a Friend, and such a Christ, and such a
Redeemer, should be more esteemed, and be more loved, and be more entertained,
and more thanked: If it should cost one many thousand pounds to ransom you out
of prison, or out of bondage, and after this, when he comes to your house, you
would shut the doors against him, and not give him the least entertainment;
what a barbarous ingratitude were this? It is much worse, and more base, that
after it has cost the Lord Jesus Christ so much as his precious blood to
redeem us, yet we will not give him any entertainment in our hearts and
affections.

4. By all means accept of the Redemption by Christ: Be not like that foolish
Hebrew servant, who when the year of Jubilee was come, and he might have Accept
of the Redemption by Christ.
gone free, yet he chose rather to be a servant: So when Christ has wrought
Redemption for us, and offers that plenteous redemption unto us, now to refuse
it, and not accept of it; But to say, I had rather serve my sins still, and I
like my bondage better; why! If you will not be persuaded to accept of
deliverance and redemption by Christ, but your Spiritual slavery and captivity
does better please you, then remain as you are; But woe unto you if you do so,
for within a few years, or weeks, or days, when God and Conscience, and Death,
and Hell fall upon for your sins, you would give ten thousand worlds (if you
could command them) that you had accepted of of your Redemption by Christ: but
then it is too late.

5. Then you who take your selves to be Christ's, and to be the Redeemed of
Carry your selves like Redeemed ones.
the Lord; Carry your selves like redeemed Persons, and walk worthy of the
Redemption which you have by Christ.

1. Give way unto your Redeemer; suffer him to rule you^ hearts, and to order
Let your Redeemer rule you.
your ways; for you are his by a right of Redemption: As the men of Israel
spoke to Gideon (Judge. 8. 22.) Rule thou over us, for thou have delivered us
from the hand of Midean. So say you to Christ, Lord Jesus Rule thou over us,
for thou have redeemed us from the hands of all our enemies: Thou have bought
us with a price, and we are not our own, but thine.

2. Give not way to any works of bondage; retu^n not to Egypt again, but walk
Give no w^y to any works of bondage.
on strait in the way to Heaven, and abound in all good works. Tit. 2. 14. Who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works.

3. Spend not your days in vanity; neither fashion your selves unto the
present Spend not your days in in vanity.
course of the world; why so will you say? because Christ has redeemed you!
Why is this contrary to our redemption by Christ? it is so, whatsoever you you
may think. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. You were redeemed from your vain conversations
with the precious blood of Christ. Not only iniquities, but vanities fall under
our Redemption by Christ. Gal. 1, 4. Who gave himself for our sins, that he
might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God.

6. Long for the day of your full and perfect Redemption by Christ: Be not so
Long for the day of your full Redemption.
afraid of death, nor of the coming of Christ to judgment: Death will nothing
disadvantage you, nor will the coming of Christ to judgment any thing
prejudice you: No, no; that is the day of perfect Redemption, both in point of
deliverance, and in point of possession: Then shall your bodies also be wholly
ransomed from the grave, and in soul and body shall you be glorified for ever
with the Lord your Redeemer. Be thankful.


7. Be ^xceeding thankful; if you be brought into Christ, and do partake of
Redemption by him. O sirs! what mercy is this Redemption? think a little of it.
what a mercy it is, that your sins shall never damn you; that the curse of the
Law shall never fall on you; that the wrath of God is taken off; that your
sinful lusts which you formerly served, and which ruled you, are broken down,
and you will serve them no more, nor shall Satan command you as heretofore etc.
that you are brought into a state of Spiritual liberty. He that lies in bondage
and would be Redeemed, let him by faith look up to Jesus Christ.


8. If any poor soul lying in bondage, and groaning for deliverance, would be
redeemed, then let him by faith look up to Jesus Christ, for he only is the
Redeemer. Do so, For

1. Whatsoever your bondage may be, Jesus Christ is a suitable Redemption:
Perhaps your bondage is under sin; pehaps it is under Satan's temptation,
perhaps it is under slavish fear of wrath and death! but Christ is perfect
Redemption, and full, and plenteous Redemption.

2. He is made of us unto God Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. God has set him up,
and raised him up to be your Deliverer.

5. A fifth singular benefit depending upon the sufferings of Christ as our
Mediator is, his Meritorious purchase, or Acquisition. His Meritorious
purchase.


The sufferings of Christ had a double aspect.

1. One unto the Evils under which we lay, and to which we were obnoxious: In
which respect his sufferings were a satisfaction.

2. Another unto the good which we did need, and would enjoy, and in this
respect his sufferings were a purchase: Jesus Christ did suffer not only to
deliver us from an evil and miserable condition, but also did restore us into
a good and happy condition: And his sufferings were not only a price of payment
to get off our debts, but they were also a price of purchase to procure (and
that Meritoriously) all blessedness for us. Where sin abounded, Grace did
abound much more, Romans 5. Ephesians. 1. 11. In whom we have obtained an inheritance.

There are six things which Jesus Christ our Mediator has purchased Christ
has purchased
by his death.

1. All the Elect; They are his by way of Donation (Thine they were, and thou
All the Elect.
gave them me, Joh. 17. 6.) And they are his by way of purchase: The Church
of God which he has purchased with his own blood, Acts 20. 28.

2. Everlasting life, which is called the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 14.
And Everlasting life.
the gift of God through Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 23. The blood of whom is worth
Heaven it self. We have no right unto the heavenly and glorious inheritance.
nor any hope thereof, but by Jesus Christ. Grace reigns through Righteousness
unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5. 22.

3. Nearness of Relation: Adoption of Sons; we who were in bondage, Nearness
of Relation.
who were strangers, who were enemies, are now made nigh by the blood of
Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13. and do by him receive the adoption of Sons. Gal. 4. 5. To
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons.

4. The Holy Ghost: In his graces, assistances, and comforts. Not one grace,
nor The Holy Ghost.
comfort, nor answer which you have, but it is the fruit of Christ's purchase.
Jesus Christ has purchased and obtained this. Joh. 14. 16. I will pray the
Father and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever. verse 26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my Name; he is made unto us sanctification, 1 Cor. 30.

5. The forgiveness of our sins: Your sins are forgiven you for his Namesake,
1 John 2. 12. In him ye have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, The forgiveness of sins.
Ephesians. 1. 7.

6. What shall I say more? He has purchased all for us; all is ours; because
Christ is ours, God himself becomes our God by Christ, and his Love, and Mercy,
All for us,
and Promises, and Peace, and Joy, and Hope, Heaven it self, and all that
brings to heaven. Christ in you the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27.

is wonderful comfort unto us, that the sufferings of Christ were a purchase:
That there was such a dignity in them as paid all our debts, and such a Comfort
to us from this purchase.
value in them that amounted (moreover) unto a purchase of all blessings and
blessedness. They were not a mere Legael Debitum, but also a Superlegale
Meritum.

There are three choice comforts in this purchase by Christ.

1. You are begotten again to a lively hope: There is now good hope through You
are begotten again to a lively hope.
Christ, that a poor sinner may see the face of God again, and that his poor
soul may at last be found in Heaven, and that in the mean time he may partake
of Grace, of the Divine nature, and of all that will bring to salvation, why
so? Because Jesus Christ's blood and sufferings were a purchase, and a purchase
of all You have a right to the things purchased.
these.

2. You have now a right to all these things, and a sufficient plea: Indeed you
have no right or title of your own, you cannot say, Lord, I expect and
challenge Heaven upon mine own obedience, upon mine own righteousness; this I
am, and this I have done, and this I have suffered; therefore thou owe me
heaven, and therefore mercy is due to me. No, no, if God should give you no
more than what you deserve, you should have nothing but wrath and damnation:
But though you have no right or title of your own, yet you have a right and
title in and by the purchase of Christ. As a stranger has no title of his own,
yet if he be adopted to be a Son, upon this adoption there falls in a right or
title: Or as if a poor Beggar should have an estate of Inheritance bought for
him by another, and settled upon him by another; he may now expect and plead for
that Inheritance, It was purchased and bought for me. So may we now go to God,
and press him humbly and believingly, Lord, show me mercy, forgive me all my
sins, give me thy Spirit, give me eternal life; why says God, who are you? and
what right and title have you? and what have you to show for such heavenly
lands and possessions! Lord, I have nothing of my own to show, but yet I have
the blood of Christ to show; he bought me, and he bought all these at thy hands
for me, it cost him dear, even his precious blood, therefore give me these
things for his Names sake.

3. You shall assuredly possess all that good which Christ has purchased for
You shall assuredly possess them.
you. The Lord is faithful and just, he will not deal injuriously with his
Christ, nor with us: It was expressly concluded in the Agreement 'twixt him and
Christ, That if he would make his soul an offering for sin, he should then see
his seed and of the travel of his soul, that he should be the Head of the
Church; and that all that come in to him should have mercy, and grace, and
glory: Now the Lord by no means will deal deceitfully with Christ, he will not
put him to sorrows, and deliver him to death, and after all his bitter agonies
and sufferings deny him what he has so dearly bought: No, there is no
possession more sure and safe, than that which depends upon the purchase of
Christ: And if that reason of Gods inviolable compact with Christ will not
convince you of it; Then let this also help to strengthen your weak faith, viz.
That Jesus Christ who has purchased and merited all for you. He himself is God
equal with the Father; and as God, will himself bestow and settle what as
mediator he has bought and purchased. Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me, that where I am, they may behold my
glory.

Are the sufferings of Christ a Meritorious purchase? Then strive for two
things.

To believe them to be so: This is not an easy work, but this is a necessary
work: Though we do not perhaps at present so fully weigh it, yet ere long
Strive to believe the sufferings of Christ to be a purchase
we shall see great reason to think on it, when we come to dye, when we come to
the parting way, when we come to our last, and behold an eternal hell before
our eyes, which we do deserve, and an eternal heaven before our eyes, which we
deserve not; and when our title and right comes to be scanned, two things (at
that time) will be extremely necessary.

One is to believe that Jesus Christ has made a purchase of glory and
happiness.

Another is, to believe that Jesus Christ has made this purchase for our
souls.

Object. But you will say, We do believe both the one and the other!

Sol. I am afraid that many do not so, although they say they do so: and I Many
do not believe it.
will give you four reasons for what I say.

1. If you do indeed believe that heaven depends upon the purchase of Christ,
and forgiveness of sins depends upon the purchase of Christ; Why then Why
else do they depend so much upon themselves?
do you depend so much upon your selves? upon your own righteousness? why are
not your hopes only fixed upon Christ? but you hope to be saved for your good
meanings, and for your devout servings of God, and for your alms, and good
works! Do you believe that salvation is to be had only upon the account of
Christ's purchase, when in the mean time you do set up your own righteousness,
and deny the righteousness of Christ, and place confidence in your selves, and
not only in Christ?

2. If you do indeed believe that salvation, and all saving good, properly
depends Why do you slight Christ so much?
on the sole purchase of Christ; Why then do you slight Christ so much, and
mind him so little! If you do indeed believe that there is salvation in no
other Name, and mercy in no other Name, and peace in no other Name; whence is
it that your souls are all this while destitute of Christ himself? and that he
cannot persuade you to hearken unto him, so as to come in and obey him, that
your souls may live? Tell me plainly, Is not this your fancy, that you may have
the portion without the Person? the blessings which Christ has purchased,
though you never give up your hearts unto Christ who makes the purchase? But
you are mistaken (and shall one day find it so) for as our persons are the
first things which Christ has purchased; and blessings and blessedness for
them, the next: so it is Christ himself unto whom we must be first united
before we can have any portion or communion in the good things purchased by
him: If you did indeed believe that all your right and title to mercy and glory
lay in the purchase of Christ, you would never be at rest until Christ himself
were yours, etc. Col. 1. 27. Christ in you the hope of glory, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of
him are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made unto us of God etc.

3. If you do indeed believe that all your saving good depends upon the Why do
you not go to Christ and get from him all that good?
purchase of Christ, Why do you not go to Christ, and get from him some of that
go^d, yea all that good which he has purchased for us in this life?

Beloved, the purchase of Christ

1. Contains much good for this life: All that Christ has purchased, is not a
reversion of heaven hereafter; there is exceeding much good to be had in
present possession: There is for this present life, an holy nature, a discharge
of all sins, a power of new obedience, the presence of the Spirit, communion
with our God.

2. There is nothing which Christ has purchased for us, but it is very
precious and very necessary: Christ did not dye for small things; all that
Christ has purchased, he did purchase the same with his precious blood; and if
all that he purchased is worth his blood, then surely it is worth our care and
our reception.

But why, is it not thus? you look on Christ's purchase only in the reversion,
as if heavenly glory were the whole sum: It is not so, there are many
precious things of a present possession which he has purchased: And why are
you so careless about them! If you do indeed believe them that they are
precious and necessary; why take you no more pains to enjoy God as your
reconciled God? why do you not seek his favor and love which Christ has
purchased? and why are you so negligent to make peace with God, and to sue out
that peace which Christ has made? and why do you not seriously beg for
holiness, and for all the graces of the Spirit of Christ? for these has Christ
purchased as well as glory: verily many men do not belive that Christ has
purchased any thing; and many believe only that he has purchased heaven; but
for all other things; they fall neither within their faith, nor within their
care.

4. If you believe the meritorious purchase of Christ, why do you keep off and
Why do you stagger in your expectations and hopes? Improve the sufferings of
Christ as a purchase.
stagger in your expectations and hopes, and confidences for glory and mercy,
for any good, and doubt your enjoyments? is it not because you doubt either of
Christ's title, or of your own right.

2. Mind and improve the sufferings of Christ as a meritorious purchase: do not
rest in the sufferings of Christ as a satisfaction only, nor as a deliverance
only; but go on further, and consider them as a purchase, and accordingly
improve them.

Beloved, ponder well what I say.

1. Your estate is not full without the purchase of Christ, and the good things
purchased Your estate is not full without the purchase of Christ
by his blood: Suppose you have Gods justice satisfied for the sins which you
have committed, and suppose that Christ has delivered you from wrath and
condemnation: yet this is not enough that all a man's debts be paid; is this
enough, unless you set him up with a good stock again? As deliverance from sin,
and death, and wrath is necessary; so a right unto, and a possession of grace
and glory is necessary: As you must show your aquittance from misery, so you
must show your title to blessedness, and this lies in the blood of Christ as a
purchase: the estate is not full, it is not repaired, unless you come to
possession again.

2. As the estate is not full, so it is not safe without the enjoyment of what
Nor safe without it.
Christ has purchased, nor without his title for the same. Rev. 22. 14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the
Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the City. Heb. 12. 14
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Romans 8. 30. Whom he predestined,
them he also called, and whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. Heb. 10. 39. We are of them that believe to
the saving of the soul. Acts 11. 18. Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life! Lo, here are things purchased by Christ In ordine
ad finem, holiness, repentance, justification, faith, and obedience; and
without these there is no entering into life, etc. And therefore by all means
look after the purchase of Christ, this is your salvation and Rock to build
upon.

3. Your conscience will never be satisfied else; it will break down your
Consciences Your Conscience will never be satisfied without it.
from heaven if you have not Christ as your purchase; your rejoicing must be in
Christ Jesus, and your hopes in Christ Jesus: And you must be found in him, not
having your own righteousness, but the righteousness which is of God by faith,
etc.

Quest. But here some may demand, When should we improve the meritorious When
should we improve this purchase?
purchase of Christ?

Sol. I answer, you should improve the meritorious purchase of Christ

1. All the days of your life; when at any time you find a need of any good
that All the days of our life.
concerns your souls, and desire to enjoy the same, now remember what Christ
has purchased and bought for you, and now go in his Name to God the Father for
it. Joh. 14. 14. If you ask any thing in my Name, he will do it. Chap. 16. 23.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name,
he will give it you.

Object. O the matters are so high, and so great, I shall never attain them!

Sol. Do you find them within Christ's purchase? If so, then they are within
your faith, and you may take them into your Prayer, and you shall certainly
speed.

2. At the time of death; when all your hopes to all eternity depend on At the
time of death.
Christ; and when the great business and estate of immortality and life comes
to the issue; and when all for ever is reduced to the merit and power of
Christ's death and purchase; when if Christ fails, all fails; and if his merit
holds, heaven is sure, and you souls are sure! This is the great time, the last
time to improve the meritorious purchase of Christ: Now lay hold on him, and
fast hold on him, on his death, on his blood; O blessed Jesus! thy Person have
I accepted, thy blood have I relied on (on that precious and purchasing blood)
I have relied hitherto on it, and it has brought grace into my heart, and
peace into my conscience, and joy into my soul, and forgiveness of sins, and
the taste of much mercy and goodness; I read, and I do believe the future
inheritance purchased by thy blood, and reserved in heaven for me: I die in the
faith of it, I believe also to enjoy the Crown of Righteousness, the Kingdom of
glory, that eternal life which is the gift of God through Jesus Christ my Lord.

6. I will super-add one great benefit more which results from Christ's
Suffering The suffering of Christ is the confirmation of the Covenant.
as our Mediator, which shall be the close of all the rest, and that is this,
The sufferings, or death, or blood of Christ is the confirmation of the
Covenant; you read of a twofold confirmation of the Covenant.

1. God confirmed the Covenant, and he confirmed it by an Oath, Heb. 6. 17. and
Psalm. 89 35. Once have I sworn by my holiness, etc.

2 Jesus Christ confirmed the Covenant, Gal. 3. 17. The Covenant that was
confirmed before of God in Christ; and Jesus Christ confirmed it by his Oath,
therefore his blood is called the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. And the
blood of the New Testament, Matthew. 26. 28. In a twofold respect. His death
gives force unto it.


Now Christ confirms the Covenant in a twofold respect.

1. In that his death gives force unto it: To this agrees that of the Apostle,
in Heb. 9. 16 Where a Testament is, there must also of necessary be the death
of the Testator. verse 17. For a Testament is of force after men are dead: In
this place the Covenant is called a Testament, or a last Will, wherein Estates,
and Legacies are bequeathed, and which cannot be challenged until the Testator
dies; but upon his death the Testament is of force (that is) all concerned in
the Will and Testament may come, and demand, and take out the Legacies
bequeathed unto them.

Object. And whereas you may object, that the Saints before the death of Christ
obtained all blessings.

Sol. It is answered, that Jesus Christ was a Lumb slain from the beginning of
the world, Rev. 13. 8. Jesus Christ was reckoned both with God, and with his
Church of old as dead, and the promise of laying down his life for his people,
accepted in their time, as if it had been performed; and his very death
appeared unto them in the Sacrifices of the Law, and accordingly the Testament
was of force unto them.

2. In that his death seals the Covenant, as firm, and stable, and unalterable,
His death seals the Covenant.
says the Apostle, Gal. 3. 15. Though it be but a man's Covenant, yet if it be
confirmed, no man disanulleth or adds thereto: There is now no question to be
made of the intentions of God, or of his promises in the Covenant, for they are
all of them Yea, and Amen in Christ, they are sure and stable; the blood of
Christ has confirmed and ratified all; there cannot possibly be an higher
confirmation of the Covenant than this; If a man offers you his Oath to assure
you, this is high; but if a man will lay down his life upon it, if he will take
his death upon it, he cannot give an Higher Testimony or Confirmation unto a
Truth.

Now to take ^ff all doubtings on our part, and fully to settle our persuasions
concerning the Covenant, as God gives us his Oath, swearing by himself. Heb. 6.
13. (And God could go no higher than to swear by himself) So the Son of God
gives us his life, he takes his death upon it, that all shall be performed, and
further he cannot go.

Object. But will some say, What if Christ did die? why must there be thereupon
a confirmation of the Covenant? must all the Covenant be sure for performance,
because Christ died? what was there in his death for such a purchase?

Sol. I answer; The death of Christ was the death of a Surety; and of one who
was therefore to die, that the Covenant might be established: There are three
things considerable in the death of Christ: One is Satisfaction to Gods
Justice: The other is Merit of all the good which we do need and God will
bestow: And there is also Efficacy; Jesus Christ will see all made good; and
in these respects his death comes to be a confirmation of the Covenant; but I
will not stand any longer on this Point; only I will make a little Use of it,
and so pass on.

Why do you that are in Covenant doubt?
of all the good which God has therein promised? Then you who are brought in
to Christ, who are the people of God in Covenant (you whose treasures are laid
up in the Covenant, and whose whole portion is settled there) why do you doubt,
and why are ye afraid? and why are your hearts troubled? you cannot possibly
have a better, or fuller portion than God has already settled upon you in this
Covenant; and you cannot possibly have a better or stronger assurance to
confirm you in the expectation of all that good of the Covenant then the Oath
of God, and the death or blood of Christ: You have the Promise of God, and the
Oath of God, and the blood of Christ to assure you; what would you have more,
and what can you have more? It was a sharp aggravation of the infidelity of the
Jews, in John 12. 37. But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet
they believed not on him. And verily it is a just exprobation of our unbelief,
that though we have the promise of God to perform his Covenant, and though we
have the Oath of God to perfo^m his Covenant, and though we have the Blood of
Christ to confirm the Covenant unto us, yet in every occasion, and in every
strait we are calling all into question; we doubt, and fear, and suspect, and
question whether the Covenant of God with us be a faithful word, as if God who
cannot lie, would deceive and fail us, as if the God of Truth would forswear
himself; as if the Lord Jesus Christ having sealed the Covenant with his own
blood, might be found a deceiver, and a false witness! The Lord humble us for
this unbelief, and cause us to fear, and to abhor this sin of unbelief, as that
which is most dishonorable to God, and as most prejudicial and dangerous unto
our own souls.

make Make out to your God for all your souls do need.
out to your God for all the mercy, and for all the good, and for all the
blessings which your souls do need. Heb. 4. 16. Come boldly unto the throne of
grace, that ye may obtain mercy and grace to help in time of need: God has put
his seal to the Covenant that it is sure, and Christ has put his seal to the
Covenant that it is sure; Now do you put your seal to the Covenant that it is
faithful and sure; your believing is your sealing: He that has received his
Testimony, has set to his seal that God is true, Joh. 3. 33.

There are four Arguments which do testify that we have set our seal to the
Covenant, that we do indeed believe that it is surely established, and surely
confirmed by Christ, so that it will not fail to be of force and efficacy unto
us.

1. If we be much in drawing near to God, entreating him to remember his word
of Covenant. It is good for me to draw near to God: He has not said, seek ye
me in vain.

2. If we be much in rejoicing in the word of the Covenant, and in the death of
Christ confirming it to us; If the blood of Christ will hold, I shall not fail;
and yet I have bond and seal sure enough.

3. If we still patiently wait on God, expecting the performance of his sealed,
sworn, and confirmed Covenant: I will wait for the God of my salvation, I will
look for him, my God will hear me!

4. If we oppose and strive to silence all unbelieving suggestions against the
fidelity of the Covenant. Psalm. 42. 11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul* and
why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him
who is the help of my countenance, and my God. Psalm. 73. ^6. My flesh and my
heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
Tit. 1. 2. God who cannot lie has promised.

keep up thy Faith, and draw out thy faith, and exceedingly rejoice Keep up thy
faith and draw it out.
in Christ; for thy estate is sure, and thy soul is sure, and thy salvation is
sure, all is sure, because all is surely confirmed by the death of Christ: The
death of Christ was a ratification to the whole Testament, to the whole
Covenant, and to every part and title of it: and as sure as Christ has died,
so sure art thou to enjoy all that God has Covenanted with thee for there
shall not fail one word of all the good he which has promised.

Object Not one word? not one good thing?

Sol. N. o, not any one; why then Mercy shall be thine, and Grace shall be
thine, and Peace shall be thine, and Joy shall be thine, and Glory, and
Salvation shall be thine, for all these, and more than these are promised by
God in his Covenant, and are sealed by his death.

Quest. It is a poor dispute of Popish and low spirits against the certainty of
a Christian. How can you possibly attain unto assurance? and how can any man be
sure of Gods love, and of Gods mercy, and of his salvation?

Sol. Indeed upon the grounds that they go upon, no man can be sure; for

1. They lay a foundation of their own works, and of their own righteousness,
and of their own free will, upon which assurance can never be built.

2. But as the Apostle spoke in another case, we have a most sure word of
Prophecy, so the Christian has very sure ground for grace, mercy, and glory:
He has the sure Covenant of God, he has the sure Oath of God, and he has the
sure blood of Jesus Christ; God has brought him into Covenant, and he will
surely perform all his Covenant; you have the Oath of God for it, and you have
the blood of Christ for it, that all shall be surely and certainly
accomplished: And therefore O Christian, rejoice in believing, for God will
surely bless thee, will surely keep thee, will strengthen thee, and will surely
save thee.

SECT. VII.
Quest. 7. THere is one Question more which I mentioned in the beginning, What
Christ still does for his people as Mediator.
viz. What Jesus Christ still does f^r his people in Covenant, unto whom he is
a Mediator.

Sol. For answer unto this, be pleased to consider that the works of Christ our
Mediator are distingushed into five sorts.

1s Those of his Life on Earth. 2. Those of his Death. 3. Those of his
Resurrection. 4. Those of his Ascension. 5. Those of his Session, at the right
hand of God the Father in heaven: Of these last I shall only speak at this
time.
The works of Christ as Mediator are considerable under a threefold notion.

1. As to the susception of, and engagement for them. (Heb. 10. 7. 9. Then said
he, Lo I come to do thy will O God; in the volume of the book it is written of
me) In this respect Christ applied himself to the work of a Mediator before he
came into the world, and assumed our Nature by way of condescension and compact.

2. As to the performance and execution of them: Thus he acted them being on
earth, in becoming man, or God Incarnated, and fulfilling all righteousness in
respect of his Active and Passive obedience, which were both satisfactory and
meritorious.

3. As to the application of all (in time) unto us; and this is the great work
of Christ now in heaven for us as our Mediator; this is a very choice Point,
and I would speak unto it.

First in general, That Jesus Christ does act or work for his people, as now
exalted and sitting at the right hand of God in heaven.

Secondly, in opening the special work, that eminent work of Christ in heaven,
for his people on earth.

1. That Jesus Christ does think on his servants, and does act or work for
them, Jesus Christ does act for his people at the right hand of his Father.
he being now in heaven, the Scriptures plainly affirm. Heb. 9. 24. Christ is
not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figure of the
true; but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us (as
an Attorney appears for his Client) 1 John 2. 1. If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous (the Advocate pleads,
etc.) verse 2. And Arguments to demonstrate ^t.
he is the Propitiation for our sins. Besides these Scriptures, there are
several Arguments to demonstrate it.

1. His Office drth still continue, although he be now in heaven. Heb. 4. 14.
His Office does still continue.
We have a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of
God. Heb. 7. 16. He is a Priest made not after the Law of a carnal
Commandment, but after the power of an endless life. verse 17. For he
testifies, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck; whence
I thus argue, That if the Priestly Office of Christ still continues in Heaven,
then there is some work which Christ still does in Heaven: Because an Office is
therefore given, and therefore continues in regard of some work that is to be
done, and to be continued by him who is invested with such an Office: It were
absurd and ridiculous to imagine that Jesus Christ should still enjoy an Office
of Priesthood to no use or purpose, there being nothing for him to do in that
Office.

2. He is very sensible of our conditions here on earth, both in a way of
apprehension, He is very s^nsible of our condition^ here on earth.
and in a way of compassion. In a way of apprehension; Rev. 2. 8. I know thy
works and tribulation and poverty. Acts 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? In a way of compassion; Heb. 4. 15. He is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities: and Chap. 5. 2. He has compassion on the ignorant, and on them
that are out of the way. To what end were these, if Christ could or would not,
or might not do any thing for his servants, because he is in heaven, and they
on earth?

3. His love remains as strong unto them now he is in heaven, as it was unto
them His love remai^^^ strong as ever.
whiles he was on earth, Rev. 3. 9. I will make them to know that I have loved
thee: And love is active in the behalf of them who are beloved.

4. His Relation is as near as it was; the same union, and the same relation
still: He is the Head, and we the Members; he is the Root, and we the Branches;
he is the His relation is as near as it was.
Husband, and we are his Spouse still; if the same near relation continues
still, surely works of kindness continue still.

5. You have his Promise to act for you, though he be now in heaven. Joh. 14.
There is a promise for it.
13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do. verse 16. And I will
pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with
you for ever. Our faith else would be at a loss.


6. Our Faith would be at a loss in all our accesses and approaches, if Jesus
Christ should give over all working for us; nor, it is not sufficient that we
Our says else would be at a loss.
represent his sufferings and merits, unless he himself does the same on our
behalf.

2. But now let us inquire what is that eminent and great work which Christ
What is that eminent work that Christ does in heaven for us.
does in heaven for us; it is Christ's Intercession for us. Romans 8. 34. It is
Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand
of God, who also makes intercession for us. Hebr. 7. 25. He ever lives to
make intercession for them.

I will open two things concerning the Intercession of Christ our Mediator;
The Intercession of Christ.
viz. 1. the nature of it. 2. The virtue or benefit of it.

1. The Nature of it. The Nature of it.

You read in Scripture of a threefold Intercession. A threefold Intercession
in Scripture. Our intercession one for another.


1: Our intercession one for another. 1 Timothy 2. 1. I exhort therefore that
Supplications, Prayers, Intercession, and giving of thanks be made for all men.
Moses interceded for the people of Israel when they fell into that great sin of
Idolatry, which did so much provoke God to wrath. And David made intercession
for the life of his child, and Paul for Epaphroditus and Onesimus. All the
people of God on earth do pray one for another; but this is not in their own
name, but in the Name of Christ.

2. The Spirits Intercession. Romans 8. 26. The Spirit it self makes
Intercession The Spirits Intercession.
for us, etc. verse 27. He makes Intercession for the Saints acco^ding to the
will of God. And his Intercession is not a formal and meritorious intercession
as Christ's is, but only a causal or virtual intercession by teaching us what to
pray for, and by giving us hearts and abilities and affections for to pray.

3. Christ's Intercession; which was partly done whiles he was on earth. Joh.
17. 9. Christ's Intercession.
I pray not for the world, but for all them that thou have given me: and Luke
22. 31, 32. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to winnow you as wheat, but I have
prayed for thee! And partly done whiles he is now in heaven: And it may be thus
described.

This Intercession of Christ is a glorious and authoritative work of Christ our
High A description of it.
Priest and Mediator, wherein he takes upon him the cause and condition of all
and every Believer, and wills the effectual application of all and every good
which he has merited and purchased for them, which will, or request of Christ,
the Father hears, and always grants.

There are many things observable in this description.

1. The Intercession ^f christ is a glorious work. There were works of Christ's
It is a glorious work.
Humiliation, as to be born, and die; and there are works of Christ's
Exaltation, amongst which Intercession is one: He does this work now being in
his glory, and he does it after a glorious manner; not by prostrating himself
as once he did in the Garden, or by falling down on his knees as he did on
earth; but b^ presenting of his Person and sufferings, and merits unto his
Father on our behalf in heaven, as the reason of the good which we desire to
enjoy.

2. And therefore I add, that it is an Authoritative work. There is a praying
(as An authoritative work.
one distinguishes) out of humility, which is a desire or request for things
unmerited: And there is a praying out of Authority, wherein one does not merely
present his request to be granted, but also his right that it ought to be
granted: Such is the Intercession of Christ which is grounded not absolutely In
promisso, on Gods gracious promise, but principally In precio, in his own
satisfaction and merit, upon which he may justly demand and challenge audience
and performance.

3. Christ's Intercession in heaven, respects not himself, but his Church, and
every It respects not himself but his Church.
Member thereof on earth: When he was on earth he many times prayed for his,
and for himself; but being now in heaven, and glorified, he prays not for
himself, but only for his on earth. For as their Intercessor he takes upon him
their persons and their cause, and their condition; as Paul entreated for
Onesimus, and Judah for Benjamin unto his Father: You read of the High Priest,
that when he went into the Sanctuary, he went in with the names of the twelve
Tribes upon his breast. So Jesus Christ when he went up to heaven, he did as,
it were carry up with him every Believers name, and every one of their wants
and necessities, and for every one of them makes requests unto his Father.

4. Christ's Intercession in Heaven is the presenting of his will unto his
Father He presents his will unto his Father.
for the application of the good which he has purchased on the behalf of his
servants. Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me,
be with me where I am, etc. When you pray for mercy, for grace, for strength,
for deliverance, for any good, then Jesus Christ appears for you, Father he is
one for whom I undertook, for whom I died, and satisfied, whom I have
reconciled unto thee, on whose behalf I purchased and merited all this; now for
my sake, and upon my account hear him, and answer him; This is the Intercession
of Christ, when his blood speaks good things for us, Heb. 12. 24. and obtains
the application of all which he has merited for us.

5. The Intercession of Christ is powerfully and effectually prevailing, and it
is always It is powerfully and effectually prevailing.
so. God the Father is well-pleased with him, and with us in and for him: and
accepts of our persons, and grants our Petitions for his sake. Joh. 11. 42. I
know that thou hear me always. Rev. 8. 3. There was another Angel that came
and stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer, and there was given unto him
much Incense that he should offer it, with the prayers of all Saints upon the
golden Altar which was before the Throne. verse 4. And the smoke of the
incense which came with the Prayers of the Saints ascended up before God out of
the Angels hand.

6. This work of Intercession is a fixed, permanent, continued work: My meaning
It is a fixed and permanent work.
is, that as long as there remains any one Elect person, any one Believer on
earth, until every one of them be gathered up into heaven; so long does
Christ's Intercession continue: even until Jesus Christ has brought them all
and every one into his Fathers house, and settled on every one of them eternal
glory, and says, Now you do perfectly enjoy as much, and all that I have
suffered for, and purchased on your behalf.

2. Now follows the Virtues and Benefits, of and from the Intercession of
Christ. The benefits of Christ's Intercession. Access unto the Father.

1. Access unto the Father, with whom we may freely hold communion, and unto
whom we may put up all our requests with confidence. Heb. 10. 19. Having
therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus. verse 20.
By a new and living way which he has consecrated for us through the veil,
that is to say, his flesh: verse 21. And having an high Priest over the house
of God. verse 22. let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
Faith. In this Scripture the Apostle exhorts the faithful to seek and to hold
up communion with God in heaven: And for this end propounds several Arguments.

1. Their Liberty by Christ. Christ has opened Heaven for us by his blood, so
that by this blood we may enter into the Holiest, unto the presence of the most
holy God by faith in him: And we may freely speak all our minds unto him in
Prayer (so the word boldness signifies, a freedom of speech) telling God all
our mind, all our griefs, all our fears, all our desires.

2. The Ground of this Liberty: In the price and purchase of it, even the blood
of Jesus.

3. The extent of this Liberty: All that are brethren, enjoy it; all that are
the Children of God, and Members of Christ are Brethren; and though some are
strong, and others are weak, yet they are admitted to come and enter into
heaven freely to pour out their prayers.

4. There is way made for them, a new way (that is) of grace, and upon the
account of Christ, and a living way; Christ ever lives to make intercession for
them, and to help them, and it is consecrated for us, set apart on purpose for
us.

5. They have Christ still for their Priest, who once offered Sacrifice for
Believers, and reconciled them, and does still intercede for the reconciled:
And he is a Priest over the house of God; he has authority to bring whom he
pleases, and to speed and help them: And therefore he presses them to draw
near with a true heart (sinners though weak) and with full assurance of Faith,
being settled and fully confident to be accepted through Jesus Christ, and find
favor and audience, and dispatch by his blood and intercession.

2. Encouragement against all the shortness, imperfections, and mixtures of
our holy Encouragement against our imperfections.
services, and performances: Our best services are very weak and imperfect
(more is to be done than what we do) and much sinfulness mingles with our very
prayers: there is the Candle and the Snuff; the Fire and the Smoke; the Gold
and the Dross; the Wheat and the Chafe; enough in our best doings to undo
them and us, to move the holy God to hide his eyes, and stop his ears at our
Prayers: But Jesus Christ our Intercessor covers those imperfections, and takes
away the dross in our sacrifices, and by his Merits makes them to be an
acceptable offering unto the Lord, and a sweet savor unto him. Exodus 28. 36.
Thou shall make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it Holiness unto the
Lord. ver. 38. and it shall be upon Aarons forehead, that Aaron may bear the
iniquity of the holy things which the children of Israel shall hallow in all
their holy gifts; and it shall always be upon his forehead, that they may be
accepted before the Lord. So Jesus Christ, etc. Rev. 8. 3. He is that Angel
having the golden Censer, and much Incense to offer it wit^ the Prayers of all
Saints upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne: Though in respect of
our selves, and our own services as performed by us, we cannot expect
acceptance, nor answer; yet in respect of Christ our Intercessor, that promise
shall be made good, Isa. 56. 7. Even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and
make them joyful in my house of prayer; their burnt-offerings and their
Sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar.

3. A security against all charges, objections, and accusations, and
condemnations, Security against all accusations.
Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God
that justifies. ver. 34. who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died; or
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes Intercession for us. This sin, and that failing may be objected against
us, but Jesus Christ makes Intercession; Father, for my sake forgive it, and
pass it by, Heb. 9. 29. Christ is entered into heaven itself, now to appear in
the presence of God for us; and who can appear against us, if Jesus Christ
appear for us? he can answer all, and silence all.

4. A Restoration in case of sinning, and falling, and offending; that yet the
Restoration in case of offending.
breach may be made up: 1 John 2. 1. My little children, these things I write
unto you, that you sin not; and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. ver. 2. And he is the Propitiation for our
sins. As if he should say (You that have fellowship with the Father and with
the Son) take heed of sinning! O but do what we can we many times do sin, and
this is a sore grief and fear unto our souls! but yet do not despair says the
Apostle, this breach may be made up again; for, if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, etc. He can plead your pardon, and put
away your sins, and make your peace again: As Jesus Christ made our peace by
being our Redeemer, so he keeps the peace by being our Intercessor: the
purchasing of our peace belongs to his blood, and the conserving of our peace
belongs to his Intercession.

5. A pledge of sufficient help, and of all good, be it never so great, never
so A pledge of sufficient help.
much, it will come, it shall be had, because Jesus Christ makes Intercession.
Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost (perfectly)
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them:
Christ's Intercession is grounded on his Merits which have bought and purchased
all for us: and Christ's Intercession is the Application of his Merits, for the
giving out of all the goodness he purchased; it is able to carry any suit for
you.

6. A certainty of perseverance and duration in the state of grace; Why will
you Ce^tainty and perseverance.
say? Because Christ makes Intercession for that in particular, and Christ's
Intercession is always effectual. It cannot be denied, if God will hear us,
and grant us what we do ask in the Name of Christ (as he says he will) surely
then he will never deny the Petition of Christ himself: But Jesus Christ did
make particular Intercession for the perseverance of his people unto the end.
Joh. 14. 16. I will pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever. Joh. 17. 11. Holy Father, keep through thy
Name those that thou have given me. ver. 15. I pray not that thou should
take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them from the evil.
Luke 22. 32. I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not.

7. Assurance of salvation. Joh. 17. 24. I will that they also whom thou have
Assurance of s^lvation.
given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold the glory which thou
have given me. As he is gone to Heaven to prepare a place for them, so his
Intercession will set them in that place.

8. A clear certainty of enjoyment: What shall I say more? as Christ makes
Certainty of enjoyment.
Intercession for us, so he has an Authority to confer and bestow upon us
whatsoever he prays for, etc. One says well, Praestat cum patre quod postulat
a patre, quia Mediator est, and Creator. Mediator est ut poscat, Creator est ut
tribuat; whatsoever Christ prays to his Father for to give you, that same he
himself also can with the Father give unto you.



First, it discovers unto us the Erroneous Doctrine of the Papists, who set up
The Popish Doctrine of other Intercessors confuted.
other Intercessors with Christ in Heaven. Although they seem to hold but one
Mediator of Redemption, yet they do expressly maintain many Mediators of
Intercession; and though Bellarmine confesses one only Mediator of
Intercession which is Christ, yet he extremely contends for many mediate
Mediators of Intercession, as are the Saints now in Heaven, who though they do
not implere, grant what we do pray for; yet they do impetrare by their Merits
for us, and accordingly we may pray unto them to pray for us unto God.

But this Popish Opinion is

1. Most injurious to Christ, who alone is designed by God, and has that
Priestly Office for Redemption and Intercession; who is the Angel that offers
up the It is most injurious to Christ.
Prayers of the Saints; our Advocate with the Father, and ever lives to make
Intercession for us: And for us to assign Mediators whom God never assigned;
and to join them in Commission with Christ for our help to God, whom God never
joined; as this is a most daring presumption, so is it a plain derogation to
Jesus Christ, as if he were either insufficient alone unto that work, or else
unwilling and backward to hear and help us.

2. It is impious, or at least superstitious; for we have not one word of
Command in It is Impious.
all the Bible to look up to glorified Saints as Intercessors, nor any one Word
of Promise that God will hear them for us, or us using their names.

3. It is needless; for Christ says, Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name,
It is needless.
I will do it, Joh. 14. 13.

4. It is an Opinion (among themselves) of wonderful uncertainty; for they
cannot assure us, that if we do pray unto them that they do hear our Prayers;
and in Themselves are very uncertain.
this they do extremely puzzle themselves, especially about Mental Prayers
which are only cognoscible of God himself; some of them say that those
glorified souls, Mira quadam celeritate quodammodo ubique, and per se audiunt
preces supplicantium, a most silly unrational fancy.

Others that they know Ex Relatione Angelorum, every man having his Angel
Guardian, who go away to Heaven with our Prayers: But what then of the Prayers
in the mean time made? and what Scripture have they for this? Others, that In
Deo vident omnia a principio suae Beatitudinis qua adipsos pertinent, and ideo
Orationes. Others deny that, and say, that our Prayers are then revealed unto
them by God when we are making of them; but how know they that? It must be so
or no way.

Object. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; so prays Moses. Ergo.

Sol. 1. To whom prayed he so? 2ly The Covenant he means that God made with
them; not their present prayers in heaven. 3ly For according to their Opinion,
Not at that time in Heaven.

Object. Unto which of the Saints will thou turn thee? said he in J^b.

Sol. 1. Means he of them in heaven? 2ly Not unto any one.

Object. Dives in hell prayed to Abraham.

Sol. But who on earth? Is it safe to imitate the damned? Quando Pater a filio,
Quando Deus a Christo.

5. It is Ridiculous to whistle thus to Saints; for they must thereupon apply
It is ridiculous.
themselves to Christ, and then they must back again with Christ's Merits! and
why not without any more ado to Christ at first?

Quest. But before I pass on, I would speak a word unto a more material
Scruple; viz. Whether Christ's Intercession in heaven, be not a probable
Argument of the imperfection of Christ's Merits at his death? If his death were
sufficient to purchase all good for us, what need then of his Intercession?

Sol. I answer, the death of Christ was sufficient Ad promerendum; but the
Intercession of Christ is required only Ad applicandum. There was no
imperfection at all in his death, for it was a plenary satisfaction and merit;
nor does the Intercession of Christ argue any imperfection in his merit,
because his Intercession is not a new meriting, but only a continual
application of that which he has already merited by his death.

How sad then is their condition who have no part in Christ? who have not him
for their Advocate with the Father; not appearing for them; not interceding on
their behalf? How sad is their condition who have no part in Christ's
Intercession!


You that will not be persuaded to hearken, to receive Christ, but resist his
Spirit, and slight his Gospel, and reject him, what will you do in the days of
your distress and death?

1. All saving mercy comes unto us upon the Intercession of Christ; his
Intercession is the application, and the donation of Righteousness,
Reconciliation, Forgiveness, and Salvation unto us.

2. And can you have faith on him to be your Advocate and Intercesser, wh^
would not receive him to be your Lord and head? O stand out no more against the
Offers of Christ least you; shut out your selves from the Intercession of
Christ. One day you will find a need of Christ to help you; you will pray for
mercy, and you will pray for salvation, and these Prayers will not prevail
without Christ's Intercession: If you do indeed desire to be heard in what you
pray, then hear Christ in what he speaks to you, and prays you to hearken to
him; hear his voice, receive himself by faith, obey his will, hearken unto him,
that he may hearken unto you.

You that are Believers, perhaps as yet are but weak, and are apt to be shaken,
and afraid of your selves, and of your requests, how they will speed, and
whether Weak Believers must remember they have an Advocate with the Father.
they will speed, and many times are ready to be silent in Prayer! O do not so,
but Remember that you have an Advocate with the Father: Remember that Jesus
Christ ever lives to make Intercession for you: Remember that what is purchased
by his death, that will he apply unto you by his Intercession. In all your
addresses, and prayers, look off from your selves, and look more on your
Intercessor: Believingly consider

1. Who he is; even Jesus Christ the Righteous, your Lord, your Christ, your
Mediator, your Priest, and Intercessor.

2. What his Intercession is; on what it is grounded; not on your merits, but
on his own. The end of that Intercession, viz. To give out to you what he has
purchased for you.

3. The qualifications of his Intercession.

1. It is Mighty and Powerful; It never fails, it is never denied, nor can be.
2. It is Pitiful; he is full of compassion toward you, is very sensible of
your infirmities, presently hears you, and is ready to help you. 3. It is
Universal; First, As to every one of you. Secondly, As to every one of your
Requests; for Mercy, for Favor, for Grace, and strength, etc. 4. It is
sufficient; Though all the Members on Earth pray at one time from all the
Quarters of the Earth, he hears you all, will plead for you all, will speed you
all. 5. It is Absolute; his Intercession carries it against your unworthiness,
for his Own sake. 6. It is Perpetual; every day you pray, and every day, every
hour, yea for ever he lives to make Intercession for you.
Object. Why then are we not presently heard?

Sol. You are so, but not supplied always presently, because as it belongs to
the Fidelity of his Intercession to speed you, so it belongs to the Wisdom of
the Intercessor when to deliver out unto you that help.

Jesus the Mediator of the Covenant.
Heb. 12. 24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood
of Sprinkling that speaks better things than that of Abel.
I Have discoursed of Jesus Christ our Mediator in Relation unto his Person,
and to the Natures united in his Person, and unto his Obedience both Active and
Passive; and likewise unto the Virtues or Benefits by him as our Mediator,
viz. Satisfaction, and Remission, and Reconciliation, and Redemption, and
Purchase: And then of the great Work which Jesus Christ does still for us in
Heaven as our Mediator, viz. his Intercession.

I shall now close up this Discourse with the Resolution of three notable
Questi^^ which shall be in stead of the general Uses for the whole matter.

1. Whether Jesus Christ as Mediator did die for all and every man; and those
forementioned Benefits of his death were intended and extended unto all? 2.
Whether any Person can certainly know the particular intention of Christ's death
in the Benefits of it unto himself? 3. How a person may evidently know that
Jesus Christ died for him, and satisfied Gods justice for him.
SECT. VIII.
1. Quest. WHether Jesus Christ as Mediator died for all, and every man?
Redeemed all? Reconciled all? Purchased Salvation Whether Christ died for ^very
man.
for all?

Sol. Concerning this Question there are several Opinions of men.

1. Some have held that Jesus Christ died for all things (that is) for all
^^veral opini^^^ about it.
creatures whatsoever, because the Apostle says that Christ by his blood
Reconciled all things; and therefore they conclude that the Sun and the Moon,
and the Stars, and all the Elements, yea and the very Devils were Reconciled by
Christ: a vild Opinion; As if Jesus Christ who appeared to put away sin, by the
Sacrifice of himself, and to Reconcile God unto us, and is the Mediator
betwixt God and men, should be a Mediator also for damned Devils, who are
eternally judged for their transgression, or should satisfy Gods justice for
the Heavens and Earth, and such like Creatures which were never capable of
offending or sinning against God! But by all things which the Apostle says
Christ has Reconciled, he means the universal Church, which is now partly in
Heaven, and partly in earth.

2. Some have held that Jesus Christ has died for all mankind, without any
difference of sins or sinners; that he took upon him all the sins of all men,
and did by his death expiate all their sins, and Ipso facto reconciled them to
God without any respect to believing or not believing: Nay let them speak out
their own Opinion, Christ (say they) did suffer, was crucified, and died, and
satisfied no less for them that are now damned, and that hereafter shall be
damned, then for the sins of Peter and Paul, and all the Saints, and all that
shall be saved: This was the Opinion of Jacobus Andreas in the conference of
Montpelgart, and one Haberus followed it fully: Jesus Christ (says he) died
not for some men only, but for all the posterity of Adam, not one man of
universal mankind excepted (no not Judas himself) whether they do by faith
challenge that salvation, and remain in it, or whether they do by infidelity
refuse that salvation, and thereupon perish eternally: Methinks it is great
pity that any were in Hell before Christ died, and that Jesus Christ should
suffer so exceedingly for men's salvation who are already damned.

3. Others are of opinion that the death of Christ was universal for all men,
thus far, That Jesus Christ as to this work, wrought Redemption for all, not
only in a way of sufficiency (which respects the dignity of his Person) but in
a way of sufficiency as to God (that is) he satisfied Divine Justice for all,
and purchased deliverance and salvation for all, and if any miss of that
salvation and Redemption the fault is not in Christ who paid the Ransom for
all, nor in God who accepted it for all; but only in particular men's Unbelief
who refuse Christ, and that universal salvation by him: So that according to
this opinion the Redemption of Christ is universal on Christ's part; and as to
his work though it prove to be but particular as to the unbelievers part, all
men are in a salvable condition, and shall be saved, if they themselves will
not refuse it.

4. Others are of Opinion that the Redemption of Christ has a double
consideration; One as to the dignity of the price which he laid down, which was
sufficient in itself for all! Another as to the intended scope and efficacy of
his death, which they make commensurable with the will and purpose of God, and
the compact 'twixt God and Christ in the behalf of all the Elect of God. Now in
this Opinion they hold Redemption by Christ in some respect to be universal,
namely as to all the Elect of God; but yet so, that in respect of the whole
world, it is only particular.

This distinction is the same in sense with that of Reconciliation.

1. General, made on the Cross, which as to the value of the Sacrifice, was not
only universal, but infinite.

2. Particular, which is the application of that Reconciliation (which in it
self has power to reconcile all) unto the hearts and Consciences of men by
faith.

But leaving the variety of speeches. 1. I will show in what sense Christ's
death and and redemption may be said to be for all.

2. What my own thoughts be concerning the question proposed.

In five senses the Redemption or Death of Christ may be styled General or In
what respects Christ may be said to die for all.
universal.

1. As to the valor, sufficiency, or dignity of him that died.

2. As to the efficacy of it for all the Elect, and all that believe in Christ;
and therefore the Author of the Book De vocatione gentium (whether it were
Ambrose or Prosper) spoke well, Populus Dei habet suam plenitudinem. In Electis
est quaedam specialis universitas, and de toto mundo totus mundus liberatus;
and de omni^bus hominibus omnes homines videantur assumpti, etc. And so
likewise it is universally effectual for all that believe in Christ: For as the
sin of Adam has an universal efficacy on all that come from him; so the
Redemption by Christ, (who is the second Adam) has also an universal efficacy
on all who are by faith brought in unto him.

3. In this sense also, the Death and Redemption, and salvation by Christ may
be said to be universal, or to be for all; namely That all who are Redeemed and
saved, they are Redeemed and saved by Christ. As a Schoolmaster in a town is
said to teach all the Children in that town, not because every Child in that
town is taught by him, but because every Child that is taught, he is taught by
him; so says Austin, Christ Redeems and saves all, not that every particular
man is Redeemed and saved by Christ: but that all who are redeemed and saved,
are redeemed and saved by him, there being no other Name but his by which we
must be saved.

4. In this sense also you may hold it general as to the Gospel Annuntiation
(as Musculus speaks) or offer as we speak; although the grace and virtue of
Christ's Redemption reaches not unto all, yet the offer and invitation of it by
the Gospel is unto all; and therefore Christ in his Commission unto the
Apostles, says, Matthew. 28. 19. Go and teath all Nations. Mark 16. 15. Go ye
into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature; yet with this
condition annexed, He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not
shall be damned, verse 16.

5. In one sense more, Christ may be said to die for all, and to redeem all,
namely as unto Genera singulorum, the kinds of all men, though not to singula
generum, every Individual of those kinds, Revel. 5. 9. Thou have Redeemed us
unto God by thy blood out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation.
Christ died for some of all Sexes, of all Relations, of all States and
Conditions; for Kings as well as for Subjects, for the Poor as well as for the
Rich, for Servants as well as Masters, for Wives as well as Husbands, for
Children as well as Parents, for all sorts of men; but yet not for every man
under that sort or kind; not for every Parent, not for every Child, nor for
every Master, not for every Servant.

These things being thus premised, I desire to give mine own judgment
concerning the Question proposed, in these three conclusions.

1. That Jesus Christ did effectually die for all the Elect, and every one of
them, whether Jews or Gentiles; and all the benefits of his death do reach unto
every one of them, when they come to believe on him.

2. That there was such a sufficiency of price and redemption by Christ, that
if any sinner whatsoever comes by faith unto Christ, he shall receive all the
benefits and fruits of redemption by the death of Christ.

3. That the death of Christ was never actually effectual for the Redemption,
Reconciliation, Expiation, and salvation of all the sons of Adam, and for every
particular sinner in the world. Jesus Christ did effectually dye for all the
Elect.


1. That Jesus Christ did effectually die for all the Elect, and Believers: My
meaning is, that he did by his death satisfy Gods justice for them, expiated
their sins, made their peace, and purchased salvation for them; and of all
these, every Elect and Believing person shall partake. The Scriptures are
expressly clear for this assertion; and I do not know any modest and
understanding Writer who does gainsay it. Matthew. 1. 21. Thou shall call his
Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins: His people are all
the Elect given unto him, and all Believers who receive him. Ephesians. 5. 23.
Christ is the Head of the Church, and the Savior of the body. To whom he is a
Head, of them he is a Savior; but he is the Head of the Church (and they are
Believers) Ergo. verse 25. Husbands, love your Wives, as Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it. Matthew. 26. 28. This is my blood of the New
Testament which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. It was shed for
many, which is the same with Which was given for you, for you that believe on
me; for (as Luther says well) Fides facit haeredes, it is faith which makes us
heirs of all the good in Christ's Testament. Joh. 17. 19 For their sakes I
sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified through the truth. Joh. 10
15. I lay down my life for the sheep: The sheep are believers. verse 26. Ye
believe not, because ye are not of my sheep. verse 27. My sheep hear my voice,
and they follow me. verse 28. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish. Joh. 15. 13, 14. Greater love has no man than this, that be lay
down his life for his friend. Ye are my friends, etc. Besides these general
testimonies for the death of Christ in relation to the Elect and Believers, you
shall find a particular application of the virtues of the death of Christ unto
all believers. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made unto us
of God, Wisdom, Righte^usnesse, Sanctification, and Redemption. Romans 13. 22.
The Righteousness of God (is manifestea) which is by faith of Jesus Christ
unto all, and upon all them that believe. This Justitia qua Justi censemur, ad
universos per fidem pervenit, and fide Allata Justi omnes redduntur Ju^aei
simul and Craeci. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his
Theophilact. in loc.
blood, the forgiveness of our sins. Romans 4. 25. Who was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our justification. Acts 1^. 39. By him all
that believe are justified. Col. 1. 13. who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. Romans 5. 1.
We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement. Ephesians 2. 14. He is our peace. 1 John 2. 1. We have an Advocate with
the Father. Heb. 5. 9. And being made perfect, he became the Author of
salvation unto all that obey him. Joh. 3. 36. He that believes on the Son,
has everlasting life. 1 Timothy 4. 10 Who is the Savior of all men, especially of
them that believe. Other men enjoy a common salvation, but Believers an eternal
salvation by him: Here are most of the chief benefits resulting from the death
of Christ, and all of them settled upon, and enjoyed by all Believers: And
verily this must needs be so, whether you consider

1. The intention of Gods love in giving of Christ, which was this, That
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.
16.

2. The intention of Christ in his suretiship and dea^^, for whom he became
bound, and for what end, viz. that he might see a (...), and the travel of his
soul, and that they who were called, might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance, Heb. 9 15.

3. The joint application of all the good by Christ unto persons upon union
with Christ; for when persons are united unto Christ (which certainly they are
when they do believe) then does God apply all the benefits of Christ unto them,
justifies them, imputes the righteousness of Christ unto them, forgives their
sins, gives his Spirit to sanctify them, etc. and then believers apply and lay
hold on all the promises of God unto them in Christ.

4. Jesus Christ is the mediator of the New Covenant, and therefore
unquestionably all who are interested in that Covenant, do, and shall partake
of the benefits inserted the^ein by promise, and sealed therein by the blood of
Christ, and There is such a sufficiency in the death of Christ, that if any
will come ^n to Christ, be shall partake of redemption by him.
such are all believers.

2. That there is such a sufficiency, and dignity, and fullness in the death of
Christ, that if any sinner will come in unto him, he shall partake of
Redemption, and salvation by him effectually.

I do purposely lay down these Conclusions for two Reasons. One is to stop the
clamours of evil-minded men, who give out, that if Redemption by Christ be not
universal, then we shut the door against sinners, and discourage them from
coming unto Christ. Another is to encourage the hearts of all brokenhearted
sinners to draw near to Christ, though all men are not effectually redeemed by
him.

I would concerning this Point clear unto you these two positions.

1. That though effectual Redemption by Christ be not universal, but
particular; yet this is not in the nature of it, a Doctrine to discourage any
sinner from coming unto Christ. We have familiar Similies to illustrate this;
as that of a Race, wherein though but one shall certainly enjoy the prize or
Laurel, yet this does not discourage any one from running the Race. And as if
any place be void in a Society, though only a few can be chosen and possessed
of those places, yet this does not discourage many from standing for those
places: So although effectual Redemption by the death of Christ be particular,
yet this discourageth none from looking after Christ, or coming by faith unto
him: For

1. No sinner knows any particular exclusion of himself: No sinner (at least
unto whom the Gospel comes) can say, I am sure that Christ never died for me,
and I am sure that though I should cometo Christ, I shall never receive any
good by him. Though the effectual Redemption be particular, yet no sinner
knows that he is in particular excluded from the benefit of it.

2. The Gospel gives encouragement unto every particular sinner to come to
Christ: Come, for all things are ready, Luke 14. It calls upon him, Come and
hearken, and your soul shall live, Isa. 55. 2. And says, that whosoever
believes shall be saved, Mar. 16. 16. And him that comes to me, I will in no
wise reject, Joh 6 37. 1. The Gospel puts no conditions of Ante-grace: 2. Or
worthiness, but offers freely. 3. All former things passed by. 4. Complains
of unbelief.

The way which the Gospel uses to bring men in to Christ is proper to work on
any sinner, though the benefit be peculiar to some: though the Gospel does not
say that all shall be saved by Christ, yet the Gospel says that all who
believe shall be saved; and all who believe not shall be damned; Ergo. It
discourageth none from coming to Christ.

3. The Gospel holds out enough for any particular sinner to lay hold on: It
holds out a sufficiency in Christ for any, and offers Christ indefinitely. A
willingness in Christ to receive any that come unto him.

4. It offers Jesus Christ to any sinner; yea to the vilest and most wretched:
To the persecuting Paul, to the adulterous Magdalen, to the Sodomitical
Corinthians, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 13. 1 Cor. 6. 19.

5. Any sinner may accept the offer without any sin; for it is worthy of all
acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

2. Let any sinner whatsoever come in by faith unto Christ, and he shall
effectually partake of Redemption and salvation by Christ. Rev. 3. 20. Behold,
I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I
will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Rev. 22. 17. Let
him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely. John 7. 23. If any man thirst, let him come to m^ and drink. Joh. 3.
16. Whosoever believes in him shall not perish: You see here many promises to
assure any sinner of an effectual interest in the benefits of Christ, if that
he does hearken, and believe, and come in by faith unto Christ.

1. Do but consider, as faith is the condition required on our part, so it is
the only condition; there is no more, no other thing required to bring you in
to Christ, nor to bring you into communion, or fellowship, or participation of
himself, nor of the benefits of his death, but faith: If you do believe Christ
is you^s, and if you do believe you are justified and if you do believe you
shall be saved and if you do believe you have an immediate, certain, and full
interest in Christ and his merits.

2. Again, where the Gospel is revealed unto a people; the reason why any of
them miss of salvation, and are damned, is because they believe not, Joh. 3. 8.
He that believes on him is not condemned, but he that believes not is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the Name of the only
begotten Son of God. ver. 36. He that believes not the Son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Now if this be so, that unbelief
cuts the sinner off, that it hinders him of life by Christ, that it is his
condemnation, that it seals the wrath of God on him; then certainly faith in
Christ (in any man whatsoever) will bring him to life, to all good in and by
Jesus Christ.

3. That the death of Christ as Mediator was not effectual for all; it was not
an The death of Christ was not effectual for all
universal effectual Redemption, Expiation, Reconciliation and Salvation for
all sinners, and for every particular sinner.

There are three things which I would offer unto you about this Conclusion.

1. Proofs from Scripture, as to the Assertion in general.

2. Proofs in particular, that the Death and Redemption, and Reconciliation,
etc. by Christ, was not universally effectual either 1. In God the Fathers
intention, nor in Christ's intention: 2. In the real Impetration of Christ. 3.
In the Application of it in time unto all the sons of Adam.

3. Answers to some of the chief and speclous Arguments which are insisted on
to the contrary.

1. I shall endeavor in the general to prove this Negative truth, that the
death In the general Proofs from Scripture.
of Christ as Mediator was not effectual for all and every man, for Reprobates
as well as Elect, for unbelievers as well as believers, for the damned as well
as the saved. Joh. 10. 15. I lay down my life for the sheep: Those for whom
Christ did dye, were his sheep: But all and every man are not his sheep; Ergo,
he did not die for every As from John 10 15.
man: The first Proposition Jesus Christ delivers in this Scripture (I lay down
my life for the sheep) The second Proposition Christ himself also delivers in
verse 26. (But ye believed not, because ye are not of my sheep.)

Quest. If the question be put, But who are Christ's sheep?

Sol. Why! Christ also resolves that Question, and so resolves it, that he
plainly demonstrates all are not his sheep. See verse 27. My sheep hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me. verse 28. And I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish. The sheep are described by their own
property, and by Christ's bounty and care. They are Christ's sheep, who do hear
Christ's voice, and so hear his voice that they follow him,: But all and every
man does not the one nor the other: again, Christ says, I give unto my sheep
eternal life, and they shall never perish. Does Christ give unto every one in
the world eternal life? and shall not any one in all the worldperish! why then
does the Scripture say, He that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16. 16. And
we are not of them that draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to
the saving of the soul; Heb. 10. 39. Now what can be replied unto this! Christ
died for his sheep; E^go, all and every man are not his sheep.

There are two shifts which are made instead of answers unto this Scripture.

1. One is that of Haberus, That all men are sheep; he must mean the sheep of
Christ, or else he answers nothing: But this Christ himself as ^e have heard of
from verse 26.) expressly opposes, saying to the unbelieving Pharisees and
Jews, ye are not my sheep.

There are but two respects upon which men may be called the sheep of God, or
of Christ.

One is in respect of v^cation, whether external only, or internal also: The
other is in respect of Predestination, because God has Chosen them, and
designed them for Christ; and in neither of these respects can all and every
man be called the sheep of Christ; Neither in respect of Predestination, for
few are chosen; Nor in respect of Vocation; for though many be called, yet not
all called, no not with an External Vocation, which yet is the more general.

2. Another is that of the Remonstrants, who said that Christ did lay down his
life for the sheep, but it is not said for the sheep only, for them alone: Paul
says, Christ gave himself for me; It will not hence follow that Christ gave
himself for Paul only, and for none else, nay, we read that Christ died fur the
ungodly, Romans 5. 6. and therefore not for his sheep only.

Sol. This is a shift much like that of the Papists, who when we press the
Scripture for justification only by faith, they say the word [only by faith] is
not expressed; unto whom we reply, that vertually it is; for the Scripture
opposes Justification by faith, unto justification by works; and denying it
unto works, therefore it ascribes justification only to Faith: And verily thus
it holds as to the present dispute; Christ died for his sheep; if for none but
his sheep, than for them only: when Christ said, I pray not for the world, but
for them whom thou have given me, Joh. 17. 9. This is as much as if he had
said, I pray only for them whom thou have given me. So when Christ says, I lay
down my life for my sheep, and afterward so describes his sheep, that all
unbelievers are none of the sheep for whom he died: now it will follow that he
died only for his sheep: And indeed I would fain know for whom Christ should
die for besides his sheep? should he die for them who were never given unto
him? of whom he never took care? to whom he never was a Shepherd? for them that
were never a part of his flock, and charge? Is this the commendations of of a
good Shepherd, to lay down his life for such as have no Relation at all unto
him, nor he unto them?

Object. But it is said that Christ died for the ungodly, Romans 5. 6.

Sol. It Is true, yet not for all the ungodly; for those who are made his sheep
by grace, were indeed in themselves ungodly sinners; th^se ungodly spoken of
there by the Apostle for whom Christ died, verse 6. and 8. in verse 9. are said
to be Justified by his blood, and that they shall be saved from wrath through
him, and verse 10. are reconciled by his death, and therefore much more (being
reconciled) shall be saved by his life: And truly, such ungodly as these, who
in themselves were so, and sinners, and enemies, but by the death of Christ
were justified and reconciled, and should undoudtedly be saved by him, were no
other then those whom he here calls his sheep; not that his do continue
ungodly; but that the estate from which he justifies and saves them, was so.

Object. And for that conclusion from Paul, saying, Christ gave himself for me;
Hence it cannot be inferred, therefore for none else but Paul.

I answer; that speech is not alike with this, I lay down my lif^ for my sheep:
Here is the full number: For as in a Testament where common Legacies or Estates
are bequeathed unto all the Children, and Kindred, and Friends; though this
Child, or Kinsman, or Friend cannot say, this is given to me; Ergo there is
nothing given to any other besides me; yet all, and every one of them can say,
This Estate is given unto us mentioned in the Will, therefore it is not given
to any other but our selves, who only are mentioned therein. So though no
particular Believer can appropriate the death and virtues of the death of
Christ unto himself in exclusion of any other Believer (who are all mentioned
in the Will and Testament of Christ) yet all Believers (who are the sheep of
Christ) can say that Christ has died for us, and has purchased, and left the
inheritance to us only, none other being mentioned in his Testament, nay, all
unbl^evers being expressly left out.

But I proceed unto another proof, Acts 20. 28. Feed the Church of God which
From Acts 20. 28. Ephesians. 5. 23, 26, 27.
he has purchased with his own blood, Christ is the Head of the Church and the
Savior of the body. Ephesians. 5. 23 25. Husbands, love your Wives, as Christ also
loved his Church, and gave himself for it. verse 26. That he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word. verse 27. That he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, but that
it should be holy, and without blemish.

In these places you see plainly five particulars.

1. That the Church of God was purchased by the blood of Christ; his blood was
shed to Redeem and purchase it. 2. That the love of Christ was to his Church,
and that from his love to his Church, did flow the giving of himself for it. 3.
That the end why he gave himself for his Church, was to make it holy and
glorious. 4. That of that Church (for which he gave himself) He is the Head. 5.
That the same Church is the body of Christ; and that of that body, he is the
Savior.
Whence I thus Argue;

Those whom Christ purchased by his blood, were the Church of God; those whom
he loved, were his Church; those for whom Christ gave himself, were his Church;
those to whom Christ is Head, are the Church; and those of whom he is a
Savior, are his body the Church. But all men whatsoever, and every man
whosoever, are not the Church of God, nor are Members of the Church of Christ,
nor is he the Head of them; therefore he did not die, or give himself for all
and every man; nor is he a Savior to them: The Major. Proposition, is the
express Letter of these Scriptures; the Minor Proposition is also most
certain: viz. that all and every man is not the Church of God, nor are they
Members of the Church of Christ. Consider the Church in any
Scripture-acceptation, this cannot be denied. The Church is either

1. Invisibilis, which is Coetus fidelium. Or, 2. Visibilis, which is Coetus
profitentium.
All and every man comes not within either of these; they are neither believers
on Christ, nor professors of Christ.

Again, There is a Catholic Church of Christ; viz. Believers in any time, or
part of the world; and there is a particular Church of Christ, which is a
number of professing Believers joined in the worship of Christ, in this or that
particular place; Under neither of these Considerations, are all and every Man
Members of the Church of Christ.

Again, there is the Militant Church here on earth suffering for Christ; and
there is the Triumphing Church reigning in Heaven, and glorified with Christ;
all and every man cannot fall in with either of these. If all and every man
cannot be found within the compass of the Church of Christ; if this never was,
and is not, and never will be, then Christ did not die, nor give himself for
all and every man.

Object. It Is true that Christ gave himself for his Church; but it is not said
only for his Church; and that he is the Savior of the body, but not only of
the body.

Sol. 1. If one should thus argue from the precedent part of the Verse, (Verse
25.) Husbands love your Wives, as Christ loved the Church, that they may love
others besides their Wives, because it is not said, Love your own Wives only;
we should look on such a Gloss as somewhat Atheistical, and Scoffing, and
Scurrilous; so when we read that Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for
it, etc. Or Hosea 2. 19. I will Marry thee to my self, it is not said Only; yet
Marriage is a particular and exclusive contract; but let us review the place
again, and try whether it will not yield us as much as Only for the Church.

Those for whom Christ (here) gave himself, of them he is said to be the Head;
but he is the Head only of his Church.

2. Those for whom Christ gave himself, of those he is the Savior; but he is
the Savior of the Church, which is his Body.

3. Those for whom Christ here gave himself, He is said to sanctify and wash,
that he might present it unto himself a glorious Church without spot or
wrinckle; and those are only his Church; none but his Church are sanctified and
fitted for a glorious Church. Ergo, etc.

3. A Third Scripture which I would make use of against the Universal efficacy
of Christ's death, for all and every man, shall be that in Romans 8. 32, 33, 34.
Verse 33. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him also give us all things? Verse 33. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies; Verse 34. Who is
he that condemns? it is Christ that died; yea, rather that is risen again,
who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us.
Verse 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?

This place affords unto us many considerable passages.

1. A delivering up of Christ to death for all the Elect and Called of God (Pro
Nobis omnibus) not simply for all, but for us all.

2. A certainty of enjoyment of all things; of all the good things which God
the Father has promised, and God the Son has purchased for all them for whose
sake Jesus Christ was delivered up (How shall he not with him also give us all
things?) As if he had said, God having given his Christ for you, will certainly
give you all other things with Christ; if he gives the greater, he will not
stand with you for the less; whatsoever good you need, you shall assuredly
possess and enjoy it.

3. That the death of Christ is effectual for the absolution of all those for
whom Christ was delivered up. It is effectual against any thing that can be
brought in against them (who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?
it is God that justifies) And it is effectual against all condemnation; there
is none to condemn them! if any one, it must be God; but he has justified
them; if for any thing, it must be for sin. But says the Apostle, It is
Christ that died, who by his Death has satisfied the justice of God, and has
put away sin (Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that Died.)

4. There is a Connection 'twixt the Death of Christ, and the Resurrection of
Christ, and the Session of Christ at the right hand of God, and the
Intercession of Christ; those for whom Christ did Dye, for them he did rise;
and those for whom he died, and rose, for them (that is) for their good, He now
sits at the right hand of God, for them also he makes Intercession. And one
thing more; from the love of Christ shall none of those be separated, for whom
he dyed, and rose again, and ascended, and makes Intercession: Now how all this
can be affirmed of all and every man in the world, that ever was, is, or shall
be, is a conceit beyond any solid reason of man, or faith of a Christian to
reach.

1. Can all and every man be assured, or assure himself, because Christ was
delivered to death, therefore God will unquestionably deliver, or give him all
things?

2. Is there no condemnation to any man in the world, notwithstanding Christ
has died? Nay, says John, He that believes not, is condemned already; and
th^s is the condemnation, That light is come into the world, but men love
darkness rather than light.

3. Is every man justified by God, so that nothing can henceforth be laid to
his charge, seeing that God is the justifier only of all them that believe; and
they only that believe, do receive the Remission of their sins? If ye believe
not that I am He, you shall dye in your Sins, said Christ.

4. That Jesus who died here on earth, and rose, and ascended to heaven, and
there presents himself before his Father, and makes Intercession; that all this
should be for all and every man, the Arminians themselves are afraid, and dare
not to affirm; for though they say, that Mortuus est Christus Adaequate pro
pec^atoribus; yet they say also, that Resurrexit and intercedit cum salvandi
intention adaequate pro fidelibus: But you see, first that the Apostle knits
and joins all these together, the Death, and Resurrection, and Intercession of
Christ. And secondly, how miserably they delude poor ignorant people, with the
flash of an universal Redemption by the Death of Christ; when yet
notwithstanding this death, and universal Redemption, there is not any one
saving good that ever shall befall them, unless they do believe in Christ;
which will amount to no more than what we do maintain, that Christ died not
effectually for all and every one, but only for all and every Believer.

2. Thus have I in the General, brought some places of Scripture against the
Opinion of Universal Redemption by the death of Christ. I shall now discourse
of it in a more particular way.

Where I shall endeavor to clear,

1. That God the Father never did intend or purpose such an effectually
Universal In particular.
Redemption of all and every one by Christ. 2. That Jesus Christ the Son of
God, did never intend it. 3. That Jesus Christ never obtained, or impetrated
the same; no, not in the sense of the Universal^sts themselves. 4. That an
Universal Application of this, as it never shall be In Rerum natura, so never
was it In Dei aut Christi proposito. God the Father did never intend this
latitude of Redemption, when he sent Christ into the world. Proved.

1. That God the Father did never intend this latitude of Redemption, and
Reconciliation, and Salvation, when he gave Christ, and sent him into the
world. It Is true that he had the Salvation of sinners, and their Redemption,
and Reconciliation, in his design of giving of Christ. But I say, this was not
his design for all and every man whatsoever: which I shall demonstrate in four
Arguments.

1. What God intended, that he Willed and Decreed (this I think no rational
Christian will or can deny) but God never willed a General Redemption, and
Reconciliation, and Salvation, by the death of Christ; which I prove thus; If
he did will and decree it, then that Decree was either absolute or conditional;
if it were an absolute Decree or Will, then it is effecual; for no man has
resisted that Will, which is an infallible cause of all which it does will; and
then all and every man shall actually partake of Salvation by Christ; which
assertion as the Scriptures do manifestly contradict, so the Arminians and
their followers professedly deny. If it be a Conditional Will in God (as they
say it is, in case of believing on Christ) then it is but particular, of some
men, and not universal, of all men; for all men have not Faith; nay,
(comparatively) very few have Faith. Who has believed our report? unto whom is
the arm of the Lord Revealed? Isa. 53. 1.

2. If God did really intend the Redemption and Salvation of all and every man
effectually by Christ, then he did intend, and in time did bestow all the means
which might effectually bring all and every man to the participation of that
salvation by Christ (for every Agent who really and seriously intends an end,
he does likewise as really intend the means effectually conducing unto that
end. And as it does not beseem the Wisdom of God to intend an end without
means; so neither does it suit with the goodness and love of God, to pretend a
common salvation for all, when yet he intends not to give means unto all,
effectual to bring them unto that salvation. But God does not give means
effectual unto all and every man, to bring them to salvation by Christ, which I
thus demonstate; The means necessary to an effectual participation of salvation
by Christ, are

1. Outwardly; the preaching of the Gospel, which is therefore called the Power
of God unto salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1. 16. for therein is
revealed the righteousness of God from Faith to Faith, Verse 17.

2. Inwardly; the Grace of Faith by which we are brought in to Christ, and made
one with him, and so partaking of him, we come to partake of life and salvation
by him. Ephesians. 2. 8. By Grace are ye saved through Faith. And Mark 16. 16. He
that believes, shall be saved; And 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son, has
life. But now God does not give unto all and every man either of these means.

1. The Gospel (which is the means of Faith) is not given unto all. Psa. 147.
19. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto
Israel. Verse 20. He has not dealt so with every Nation, and as for his
judgments they have not known them. Act. 14. 16. Who in times past, suffered
all Nations to walk in their own ways. And we know it by experience, that the
Gospel has not been, and is not Preached unto all. And if it be not Preached
unto all and every one, how can we rationally fancy an intention in God to save
all by Christ? Suppose a Physician should give out, that he had a medicine to
cure all diseases, and that he would impart it unto all, that so all and every
one may be cured by it; nevertheless he does indeed make it known but unto a
few, that he has provided that remedy or medicine; you would certainly
conclude that he never intended that every one should be the better for it,
seeing he will not communicate the knowledge of it unto them; If he will not
give them the knowledge of it, does he intend to give them the benefit of it?
Or suppose a potent Prince should say, He had provided a Mass of money to
Redeem all Captives and Slaves, and that it is his serious intention (by that
provided Treasure) to Redeem and Free them all and every one; yet nevertheless
he never gives notice of his intention and kindness, unto all of them by
himself, or any Messenger from himself; questionless he does not intend it: For
men to Print, and Preach, and Dispute, that God intends to save all by Christ,
and that he gave Christ to be an Universal Redemption, to set all men free,
etc. And yet we find both in Scripture, and in Experience, that God does not
give the Gospel unto all (which is the Messenger bringing glad tidings and
reports of Christ's death, and Gods Intention touching the Salvation of sinners)
but suffer them to live in darkness and silence; not any one Messenger being
dispatched to report to them, and to their children, any one Word of Christ, or
Salvation by him; This cannot stand with such a serious intention in God, to
Redeem and Save all men by Christ.

Objection, O but the Gospel was revealed to Adam, and so continued in the
posterity of Noah, and so down to Christ and his Apostles, and by them
promulgated to all the world, to all Nations, to every creature.

Sol. We grant the knowledge of Salvation by Christ in Adam, and his family; in
Noah and his family, in Abraham and his family, in the Israelites that came
from him: But what is this to all the rest of the world, whom God left to
themselves, and did not make the Gospel of Salvation by Christ known?

And as for the Apostles, their Commission was general, and they did in their
times make the sound of the Gospel to be heard in most part of the world; but
what is this to the succeeding generations of men in all the world who never
heard of Adam, nor Noah, nor Christ, nor his Apostle, nor Gospel of Christ?

If God did intend to save all men in all generations by Christ, surely he
would have revealed the Gospel to all men in all generations; If his intention
were so rich in goodness unto them all, his care and Providence would have
been manifested unto them all.

Object. But perhaps the reason why the Gospel did not descend in an universal
manifestation of Salvation by Christ unto all succeeding generations, might be
the ingratitude and unbelief of those to whom it was first revealed.

Sol. Perhaps many of them were unthankful and unbelieving; but if the
knowledge and notice of salvation by Christ must presently fail the posterities
of men, because of the unthankfulness and unbelief of Parents and
Predecessors, then it seems that the latitude of the Gospels publication
depends on the will of man, and not on the will and goodness of God, whose
intention to publish this universal Redemption and salvation unto all is stayed
and altered upon the neglect and refusal of Christ, and so for their sakes
there must not be now a notice given to succeeding generations who never heard,
and therefore never refused the Gospel.

2. As the Gospel is not universally given to all, so neither is Faith
universally given unto all; for faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God, Romans 10. 17. If therefore the hearing be not universal, then
unquestioanably faith cannot be universal; and if faith be not universal, then
there cannot be an universal participation of Redemption and Salvation by the
death of Christ.

Object. But it may be replied; though faith be not universal as to every man's
possession, yet it is universal as to Gods intention; he intended for his part,
and as much as concerns him to give faith to all and every man.

Sol. I answer, thy, is not true:

For if God intends to give faith unto all and every sinner as will put forth
so much toward it as concerns him, then every sinner shall undoubtedly have
faith given unto him, because as Christ says, Joh. 6. 45. Every man that has
heard and learned of the Father comes unto me; and the Apostle says that
Faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8 If God will give a man faith, he shall
have it; for there is no gift which God will give, but he has power to make it
his to whom he will give it.

Object. But men will not receive it, though God will give it.

Sol. God does not give faith upon that condition, if man will have it; this is
an offer, not a gift. But God (says the Apostle, Phil. 2. 13.) works in us
both to will and to do of his good pleasure. To give us a will to believe and
come to Christ, this is Gods work; and therefore if God will work (toward
faith) as much as concerns him, he must remove our unwillingness and make us
willing.

2. The giving of faith is commensurable with the election of God (so says the
Apostle, Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed) and
indeed it is the fruit and effect thereof, and therefore it is called the faith
of Gods Elect, Tit. 1. 1. and stands as a necessary means in the way of
participation of all our saving good unto which we are elected, and which was
purchased for us by Christ.

3. A third Argument that God did not intend such an universal Redemption and
Salvation by Christ, is this; If God had intended such an universal work and
benefit for all men by Christ; Then he would have given all men to Christ for
such an end and purpose as their Redemption and salvation by him (for if God
would never give them to Christ, we may well suspect that he never intended to
save them by Christ; if they must not belong to the Savior and Redeemer, then
Redemption and salvation shall never belong to them. But God did not give all
and every nan to Christ; neither ex part tituli, so that he should acknowledge
them as given unto him by the Father, nor ex part debiti, nor ex part Rei,
that he should stand charged and bound fot their Redemption and Salvation: Ergo.

That all were not discriminatim given by God the Father unto Christ ratione
tituli is manifest in Joh. 17. 6. I have manifested thy Name unto the men which
thou gave me out of the world; thine they were, and thou gave them me, and
they have kept thy word. And verse 10. All mine are thine, and thine are mine,
and I am glorified in them. Nor ex part Rei. Joh. 6. 37. All that the Father
gives me, shall come unto me.

Here you see,

1. That those who were given unto Christ, they were given out of the world,
not all the world, but some out of it.

2. That they who were given unto Christ, God the Father had first a particular
interest in them (thine they were, and thou gave them me) but all men
whatsoever never had such a particular Relation to God, nor God to them, as
that it can be said, Thine they were.

3. Those that were given to Christ, he says of them, they have kept thy word,
verse 6. and have received thy words, verse 8. and they have believed that thou
did send me; Can this be said of all and every man? Nor does Christ
acknowledge or own all men whatsoever as given to him. verse 9. I pray for
them, I pray not for the world, but for them whom thou have given me, for they
are thine: and verse 10. All mine are thine, and mine are thine. Neither were
all given to Christ ratione debiti, that he should stand charged and bound for
their Redemption and salvation. Joh. 17. 2. Thou have given him power over all
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. Here
is the extent of his Commission and Charge which he is bound to make good, and
that is to give eternal life to as many as thou have given him (i.) effectually
to save all them, etc.

4. I will add but one Argument more to prove that God intended not an
universal Redemption and Salvation by the death of Christ; and that shall be
taken out of Romans 9. 13. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. ver. 15. I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I
will have compassion. verse 22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to
make his power known, endured with long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted
to destruction! verse 23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory
on the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory. The Apostle in
this place does purposely handle the doctrine of Election and Preterition; that
election he proves to be particular, and not universal; this he does by
instance, and by Reason: The instance is given in Jacob and Esau, God loved
Jacob, but he hated Esau; ver. 13. The reason of this speciality of love in
Election he presents in verse 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy;
and verse 18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will, he
hardneth. That God should love one, and hate another; choose one, and pass by
another; show mercy to some, and leave others to be hardened; the reason of this
is, his own will; he will love whom he we will love, and elect whom he will
elect, and show mercy to whom he will show mercy.

Object. Now whereas some murmuringly reply against God for such a particular
love, and election, and purpose of mercy, as if God dealt not fairly in it,
thus differently to deal with his Creatures, verse 19. etc.

Sol. The Apostle defends this proceeding of God in the authority which he has
for it, ver. 21. Has not the Potter power over the clay of the same lump to
make one vessel of wrath fitted for destruction, verse 22. and to magnify the
riches of his glory of his grace on the vessels of mercy before prepared unto
glory? verse 23. By all which it manifestly appears that there are some whom
God never loved, but hated; whom he never elected, but passed by; whom he
intended not to show mercy unto, but to leave them to be hardened; that he would
not make them vessels to honor, but to dishonor; that were vessels not of
mercy aforehand prepared to glory, but vessels of wrath fitted to destruction;
which if it be so (and so the Apostle says it is) then undoubtedly God did
never intend an universal Redemption, and universal purchase of peace and mercy
and salvation by Christ, for all and every man: For by Paul's Doctrine he does
not intend to show mercy to the vessels of wrath; and yet by the Arminian
Doctrine, he does intend to show mercy to all.

2. I now proceed to the second Conclusion; As God the Father never intended
Christ did not intend such a latitude for all by his death.
an universal Redemption and Jubilee by the death of Christ: So neither did
Jesus Christ the Son of God (who did die to save sinners) intend such a
latitude for all and every man. The intention and mind of Christ in this, I
Proved.
humbly conceive cannot be better discerned than by

1. The entering into his Office of Mediatorship as a Surety. 2. The opening of
his last Will and Testament, when he was near death to seal it. 3. The
prosecuting of all their interests who were concerned in him, and his death. 4.
The disowning of some, as such as he never had respect unto.
1. When Christ entered into, or took on himself the office of a Mediator, he
then declared himself also a Surety or Sponsor. Therefore as he is styled, Heb.
12. 24. The Mediator of the New Covenant; so is he said to be made the Surety
of a better Testament, Heb. 7. 22.

The Argument runs thus; Jesus Christ is a Surety for all those to whom he is a
Mediator, Redeemer, and Savior. But he never was a Surety for all, and every
man. Ergo.

The first of these Propositions cannot be denied; for the Scripture calls
Christ our Mediator, and Redeemer, our Surety, and says expressly, that Christ
once suffered for sinners, the Just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18. (i.) in their
stead, and for their good, and that he bare our diseases, and carried our
soroows, and the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and our iniquities
were laid upon him, Isa. 53. 4, 5.

But then for the second Proposition that he never was a Surety for all and
every man. Will the Arminians speak plainly to this? was he, or was he not? If
he were not, then every sinful man's debts are not paid by Christ, and then
every man is not redeemed, and then God is not reconciled to every man; for if
that debt be not paid, and God satisfied, then Redemption is not wrought, etc.
If he was a Surety for all and every man, then Jesus Christ put himself in the
room and stead of every sinner of the world, as a surety does for every one to
whom he is a Surety, and bound himse^f as responsible to Divine Justice to
satisfy all that could be charged against any sinner, as the surety does for
every one he stands bound for: I will be surety for him, said Judah to Jacob
about Benjamin, Genesis 43. 9. Of my hand shall thou require him; if I bring him
not unto thee, and set him before thee, let me bear the blame for ever. So
Jesus Christ as Surety to God, did actually satisfy the Justice of God the
Father for us, and pay, and discharge all the debt; so that wrath, and curse,
and damnation are utterly removed, and can never befall the sinner, because
Christ as a Surety has perfectly satisfied for all, and cleared all; Sed ira
Dei manet infidelibus, Joh. 3. 36. Nay as a Surety he did not only satisfy to
the discharging of all sin and punishment, but merited also and purchased mercy
life, grace, and glory; and God is bound to give in all this; So that if Christ
be a Surety for all and every man, and as a Surety died for them all, then is
Gods Justice fully satisfied, God has no more to say against any sinner; he
cannot damn any (because all sin is satisfied for, and discharged) and every
man shall certainly be saved, because Christ as a Surety has purchased this,
and must, and will see it performed and enjoyed.

But this no Arminian that ever I read or heard of, will maintain, etc.

2. Secondly, we may find out the very mind of Christ concerning the latitude
of Redemption and salvation by his death, if we peruse his last will and
Testament, where his mind is plainly opened unto us, and which he sealed and
confirmed by his death; there you read for whom he died, Matthew. 26. 28. This is
my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many, for the remission of
sins. Mar. 14. 24. This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for
many. Luke 22. 20. This cup is the New Testament in my blood which is shed for
you. Heb. 9. 15. For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Tetament, that
by means of death for the Redemption of the transgressors that were under the
first Testament, they which a^^ called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. verse 28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many.
Matthew. 20. 28. The Son of man came to give his life a ransom for many: Here
you see all along in the Testament of Christ, no mention made for all men, but
only for many, for many, and for many; and so God speaking of his Christ, My
righteous servant shall justify many, for he shall bear their sins, Isa. 55.
11. And he bare the sins of many, verse 12.

3. Thirdly, Jesus Christ did not prosecute an universal interest of all the
world, but a particular interest of some. Ergo. He did not intend an universal
Redemption and Salvation. Joh. 17. 9. I pray for them; I pay not for the world,
but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine. Doubtless, if
Christ did intend to redeem and save all, he would have done so much as to have
paid for all: It is strange that he should lay down his life for all, and yet
would not lay out a prayer for all; that he would die to save them, and yet not
pray to save them; if Christ would not do so much as to prosecute their
salvation by a Prayer, I verily believe he never intended their salvation by
his death.

Ob. The Arminians to decline the edge of this Argument, tell us of a double
interceding or praying of Christ.

One is particular, and this indeed is only for Believers.

Another is universal, and this is for the whole world.

Sol. A handsome evasion I confess; methinks they should also distinguish of a
twofold death, and Redemption, and salvation by Christ; one particular for all
believers; and another universal for all the world; that effectual and doing
good; this ineffectual, and profiting none.

Object. But may we know any Scriptures for Christ's universal Praying, and
intercession? yes, they quote Luke 23. 34. Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do.

Sol. True, here is Christ's Prayer indeed, but yet here is not the universal
prayer for the whole world: here is his prayer for them that Crucified him out
of ignorance; and we hear of the fruit of this prayer in Acts 3. 17. compared
with Acts 4. 4. these men who through ignorance crucified Christ, and for whom
Christ prayed, Pater Remitte, they were not the whole world; this place
therefore will not make out an universal interceding or praying for the whole
world.

Object. Therefore they bring another Scripture, Isa. 53. 12. He made
intercession for trannsgressors.

Sol. It Is true, he made intercession for transgressors; but where is that
intercession which he made for all transgressors? where is the universal
intercession? the transgressors for whom he made intercession in this 12.
verse, are those sinners which he calls many, and justified them in the 11.
verse.

4. Fourthly, Jesus Christ does professedly disown some, as being such that he
never had any affection or respect unto; did he ever intend to dye for these,
and to do as much for their salvation, as for the salvation of others? Matthew.
7. 22. Many shall say in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy
Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful
works? verse 23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart
from me ye workers of iniquity.

Many shall say, and yet Christ will say to those many, I never knew. He does
not say, I do not now know, or own you, or I did once know you: but I never
knew you: Christ is said to know his sheep, Joh. 10. 14. for whom he laid down
his life, verse 15. But there are many to whom Christ will say, I never knew
you, never acknowledged you, never loved you, never liked you; no not when they
Prophesied, and wrought miracles in his Name. Christ will not then know them,
because they rejected him, and were wicked workers, yet I never knew you.

There you see that this universal redemption cannot find foundation either in
the intention of God the Father, or in the intention of God the Son (and as
Christ) who wrought Redemption for sinners.

3. I shall now advance to a third Conclusion, that there was not an universal
impetration of reconciliation, and remission of sins, and of eternal life by
the death of Christ.

This is that thing upon which the Controversy about the universality of the
death of Christ does principally depend; concerning which the Arminians
unanimously deliver themselves thus; Christus ex patris and sua intention
omnibus and singulis hominibus indiscriminati^^, ^^m pere^^tibus quam
servandis, impetravit Reconciliationem cum do ^ Remissionem peccatorum and
vitam ateriam. Christ according to the intention of his Father and his own, did
obtain for all men, and for every man, indifferently (as well for them that
shall perish, as for them that shall be saved) Reconciliation with God,
Remission of sins, and life eternal.

Before I present you some Arguments against this Opinion, I shall crave your
favor that I may spread the whole sum and frame of it, as it is by the
Arminians themselves set forth in their writings; they teach

I. That upon the fall of mankind, in Adam, there was a gracious affection in
God, by which he was yet mercifully affected to love all and every man (alike)
so as seriously to desire the salvation of all men, and of every particular
man, Vt nullus omnino homo sit, cujus salutem non velit; so that there was not
any one man, whose salvation God did not will.

II. That for the extending of this favor unto all and every man, Jesus Christ
was sent into the word to dye, that by his death, God justice might be
satisfied for all the sins of all men, and that thereupon God^ might (without
any prejudice to his justice) Plenario voluntatis proposito velle salvare, with
a full purpose will salvation.

III. That Jesus Christ did come into the world, and by his death did satisfy
the justice of God; and so opened a door of grace for a possible salvation for
all and every sinner: Mercy now being set at liberty, which before was bowed up.

IV. That all and every sinner has a liberty of freedom to enter into that
door of grace, and besides that, there is so much sufficiency of help afforded
unto them, that if their free will be pleased to make use of it, they may
accept of it if they will; and if they will not, it is their own fault.

V. That nevertheless you must distinguish of the death of Christ according to
a twofold decree of God, as they say there is

One Decree which is according to his affection or will desiring to save all
and in respect of this, the death of Christ was an universal impetration (i.
e.) it did work so far in relation to God, that he might without any injury to
himself, will an universal salvation to all men, and accordingly he did will
and decree it, Christ having impetrated it.

Another Decree of God by which he intended the actual bestowing, giving, and
communicating of this salvation universally purchased by the death of Christ
(which they and we do call the Application of the death of Christ) and this
they say is Solis fidelibus, only to Believers, who by faith do receive Christ.

So that if you demand of the Patrons of universal Redemption, Did God indeed
desire and will the salvation of all lost sinners? they answer, he did: But did
God seriously will this? yes, he did: And was Christ sent for this end? he was:
And did Christ by his death procure and obtain this for all? yes he did: But
did God ever decree, or will that all and every man should have benefit by
this? No verily, but only Believers, only such as suffer themselves to believe,
and repent; these actually are reconciled, pardoned, and saved.

Nevertheless, Jesus Christ did by his death obtain this for all; Universal
Reconciliation, universal Remission, universal Salvation are purchased by the
blood of Christ, although some only shall partake of it: All have a right in
the salvation purchased, though only Believers have the benefit; nay, though no
man should ever believe, yet there was an universal salvation purchased by
Christ for all men.

Though that Assertion, that all Believers, and they only partake of actual
Reconciliation, and Remission, and Salvation by Christ, be a truth, which we
all agree in; yet that there is such an universal Reconciliation, Remission,
and Salvation purchased by the death of Christ for all men whatsoever, is an
opinion unto which we cannot subscribe, but must reject as opposite unto
Scripture, and religious Reasons.

I shall let pass some Arguments which some make use of against this Opinion,
Arguments against this Opinion.
verse 9.

1. Some were in Hell when Jesus Christ died; Did Christ obtain Reconciliation,
and Remission of sins, and Eternal life for them? If not for them, how then for
all and every man? But did God ever intend it for them, or accepted of the
death of Christ for them? those for whom Christ laid down his life, he says of
them that they shall never perish, Joh. 10. 15, 28. Do not they perish who are
in hell?

2. How comes it to pass that many miss of heaven, who yet never refused or
rejected Christ? If Christ obtained salvation for all, and theirs it is if they
refuse it not; how come they to miss of that obtained salvation? Miss they
shall not (lay the Arminians) unless, and until they refuse; but refuse (say
we) they cannot unless it be offered; and offered it is not but by the Gospel;
and the Gospel offers it not where it comes not; but in all tim^s and ages of
men, it comes not to all and every man; yea, that there were any inhabitants in
America, was for many Ages utterly unknown to the Christian world, etc.

3. There are some whom God never elected, but passed them by, he would not
show mercy unto them; he intended to manifest his justice and wrath on those
vessels of wrath; did Christ obtain for these also, Reconciliation, Remission,
and eternal life! He knew that his Father would never have mercy on them, and
his death was according to the Counsel of his Father; and did his Father
Counsel and Decree and appoint him to purchase and procure mercy for those of
whom he said, he would never show mercy to them? why? this were strange indeed,
that God should put the soul of Christ to grief, and make him to bear wrath
and sorrow for them, unto whom he never intended mercy.

4. Should not all men in the world be born in a state of grace and favor? For
Christ has obtained Reconciliation for them all, and that Reconciliation is
not forfeited until they reject it by unbelief, and that cannot be as soon as
they be born? How then can we all be said by nature to be the children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. seeing wrath is off and ceased when God is reconciled?

This Inference cannot possibly be avoided, unless we will fancy that the
Reconciliation purchased by Christ, is kept by God (as it were) in Banco, as a
Treasure which discharges nothing for a while, until hereafter it be brought
forth to help a person upon occasion; so that the Reconciliation and Remission
purchased by Christ, must he as a dead stock in heaven so long, until men come
to years, and then God makes experiments whether sinners will make use of it or
no, etc.

But to these I shall add other Arguments.

1. The Impetration of universal Reconciliation, either it was an actual
Reconciliation and Remission, or only Potential, a Reconcileableness, or
Remissableness. If it were an actual Reconciliation and Remission, then are God
and all sinners enemies no longer, but friends; and then every sinner shall
certainly be saved. And is a blessed man, for if we be reconciled by the death
of Christ, much more shall we be saved by his life, Romans 5. 10* And Romans 4.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
verse 8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin: But this I
suppose none will presume to maintain, Ergo. no Actual Reconciliation and
Remission for all. If the Reconciliation and Remission be only Potential, and
not Actual; then

1. Why does the Scripture take no notice of this at all: But where it speaks
of the death of Christ, and Reconciliation, and Remission thereby, it
perpetually delivers the one and the other as Actual. Ephesians. 2. 13. Ye are made
nigh by the blood of Christ. verse 14. He is our peace. ver. 15. Making peace.
ver. 16. Having slain the enmity thereby. Col. 1. 20. Having made peace through
the blood of his Cross. ver. 21. you has he reconciled. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom
we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them: was all this (here ascribed unto the death of Christ)
only a power accruing unto God that he might (if he would) make an offer of an
universal reconciliation, and Remission?

2. But again, Jesus Christ did make an actual offering of himself, and he did
actually satisfy the Justice of God for all (according to the Opinion of the
Arminians) Now if the Justice of God be actually satisfied, surely there is
more than a mere power and liberty acquired that God may be reconciled to us if
he will, and pardon us if he will, and save us if he will: Because the
satisfaction of Christ can and does Oblige God to this; God having Covenanted
with him, if that he would lay down his life for sinners, that then his
Righteousness should justify and reconcile them.

3. What we are to believe, that is true, but we are to believe that God is
actually reconciled by the blood of Christ, and has actually forgiven us?

2. This Grand universal Impetration, either God intends the real actual
application of it, or he does never intend to apply it to all.

It were most strange that the Son of God should come down from heaven, be made
man, be made obedient to the death, even to the death of the Cross; yea and be
made a curse for us, and by his blood purchase (as they say) Reconciliation,
and Remission, and life Eternal for all and every one, if God intended not
actually to bestow these.

But I demand, Did he intend and will the actual collation of these purchased
benefits on all and every one; or did he not?

The Arminians to this, expressly answer two things. Grevencovius Cortivus.


1. Deum nec voluisse, nec noluisse; God did neither will and intend it;
neither did he nill, or not intend it:

Why then there is a Christ given to death, given for a Sacrifice to be a
Propitiation for sinners, to be a Redemption for all and every sinner, to save
all, and yet after all this, God is not peremptorily resolved (either way) of
the benefit of this to any one sinner whatsoever: And so the death of Christ
may be in vain, in respect of benefit, to all the sinners in the world.

For although his death did satisfy Gods Justice, and thereby God gained so
much as that he might universally tender Redemption to all; yet if there were
no actual purpose, or real intention in God to bestow this on any, who can say
that he shall be the better for that which God really intends not to bestow on
him?

2. Again, they say that though God did not peremptorily intend to confer and
bestow this upon all, yet conditionally he did, if so be that all will believe
on Christ: unto which I would reply two things:

First, God did know that all men would not believe on Christ; and therefore as
to the prescience of God, this condition was not universal but particular; if
Gods intention to impart the benefits of the death of Christ had a respect
unto, and foundation in a condition which he certainly foresaw to be particular
only; Hence it will necessarily follow, That God never intended a Redemption
and salvation for all: From the Argument either to God, or unto men, it shall
bind the Adversary.

If to God in respect of his intention, then thus I frame it: God intended
salvation by Christ, only for all who will believe in Christ; but God did
certainly know that all men would not believe in Christ. Ergo. he did not
intend it for all.

If to men in respect of the event, then thus: Salvation is obtained for all
who will believe on Christ; but all men will not believe in Christ. Ergo.
Salvation is not obtained for all.

Secondly, I reply to that Assertion, viz. That God did intend to confer or
apply all saving benefits purchased by Christ, upon the condition that all men
would believe. Either God did really intend to give this condition to all (i.
e.) to work so effectually upon all, that they might believe through his grace;
or he did not so intend to work on them: If he did not intend effectually to
give faith unto all men, then questionless he never did intend that all men
either should or could partake of that universal redemption by Christ; for no
man either does, or can partake thereof without faith; and of that faith no man
neither does, or can partake thereof, unless God be pleased to give it unto
him; Faith being the gift of God. If he did intend effectually to give faith
unto all men, then all men have been, are, or shall be Believers; for what God
will effectually give, of that shall we partake, etc.

Object. God intends to give faith to all men; but it is in his own congruous
way, unto which all men submit not.

Sol. But this comes not home to the Argument; for I do not argue of the
congruity and fitness of ways to work faith, and whether men may resist these
ways or not; or whether God will give says upon another condition, if they
will have faith. This I insist upon, that if God intends effectually to give
faith unto all, then all shall eventually have that faith: To give says
effectually is not a mere command to believe; nor is it to present unto
sinners media sufficientia only, but it is by the Almighty operation of the
Spirit of God to create and work in, or infuse the grace of faith into the
heart of a sinner.

3. If there were such an universal Impetration of Reconciliation,
andremission, and salvation for all and every man by the death of Christ; then
the love of God, and the love of Christ are of equal respect to all alike: All
are alike in the love and intention of God who gave Christ; and all are alike
in the love and death of Christ; who upon one and the same account died alike
for all, whether believers, or unbelievers, whether those that shall be saved,
or those that shall be damned; there was no difference, and no inequality of
love toward sinners; God did not look more on one than on another; neither did
Christ regard one more than another in his death. But that any one speeds
better than another, this depends on himself, because he will believe, the
other will not, but all are alike objects of the same degree of love with God
and Christ.

The Arminians blush not to say that thus it is* Gods love in the giving of
Christ, and Christ's love in giving himself (Antecedently) was alike to all, (no
more to Peter than to Judas, and as much to Pharaoh as to Moses) though the
consequent love indeed (after men do believe) is not alike: But for the
Antecedent love, that was alike to all: and the death of Christ was the effect
of that his great and equal love unto all Antecedently.

Sol. But this is a grand mistake and Error, and that I shall briefly
demonstrate by Scripture and Reasons. The Antecedent love not alike to all,
appears by The Antecedent love not alike to all; Proved. By Scripture.
these Scriptures.

1. Matthew. 11. 25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth; because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto babes; verse 26. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

The matter of which Christ there discourses, was the Mystery of Redemption
and Doctrine of salvation; this same, Christ says that his Father did hide
from the wise and prudent, and so he did, because it seemed good unto him so to
do: And for this differential pleasure and work of God, Christ gives thanks
unto his Father: Now if God did love all alike, so as to will all their
salvation alike, why would he have hid the Doctrine and way of salvation from
any? and had the love of Christ been alike to all in the desire and purpose of
their salvation, would he have thanked and blessed his Father, for hiding and
not revealing of that universal salvation?

Can any man reasonably make Christ thus to express himself? Father, thou
did seriously will the salvation of all alike, and so did I my self, and
nothing is wanting on thy part, nor yet on mine, that all sinners might enjoy
the same: Nevertheless I thank thee who did thus love all alike, and intend
the salvation of all alike, that thou have hid the Doctrine and knowledge of
this universal Salvation from the wise and prudent. Do you call this an equal
love to all!

Object. Nor will the corrupt gloss of Corvinus the Arminian help him at all,
who would make Christ to give thanks to his Father, q. Those things which were
hidden to the wise, he had revealed to babes.

Sol. The Text voides that shuffle plainly; for it says, because thou have hid
these things from the wise; not They had hid them from themselves, but Thou
have hid them; Not So it seemed good unto them; But it seemed good in thy sight:

II. I will give you another place against this equal love of God to all, which
I believe is unanswerable; Romans 9. 11. The children being not yet born, neither
having done good or evil, that the purpose of God according to Election might
stand, not of works, but of him that calls; verse 12. it was said unto her,
The elder shall serve the younger. verse 13. As it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated.

Let Esau and Jacob be Examples or Types, it matters not much to the Point in
hand; here it is said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. Is this a
love alike to both? Nor will that distinction of a consequent love of God,
which they make to be after faith and repentance, and to be unlike to men; or
of an Antecedent love of God which is before faith and repentance, and is alike
to all; I say this distinction fails them here.

Sol. For the Apostle speaks of that Antecedent love, which yet is not alike to
all (The children being not yet born, neither having done good or evil, yet
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.)

III. If the love of God and Christ were Antecedently alike to all men in this
business of universal salvation; Then when Christ died for all sinners, he
loved them all with such a love as greater could not be. Joh. 15. 13. Greater
love has no man than that he lay down his life for his friend: If one be an
enemy, you cannot show greater love than to lay down your life for him, or if
he be a friend, greater love cannot be shown than this, to lay down your life
for him.

Now did Christ love all men with so great a love, as greater cannot be shown
to any? If so, why is it that the effects of this love never reach many men so
greatestly loved, and yet they reach others, even because they were so greatly
loved? etc.

IV. This universal Impetration only by the death of Christ cannot be admitted
for those absurd consequences which depend upon it, verse 9.

1. It lames Jesus Christ in his Pr^^^^ly Office, which did as necessarily take
in the Intercession of Christ, as it did the Sacrifice and Oblation of Christ:
for when he was Anointed and Consecrated to be a Priest, he was at the same
time consecrated both to die, and offer, and purchase: And likewise to apply
the offering of himself and the purchase unto those for whom he died; Oblation
was not put on him, and application upon another, but both on himself; he was
to die and purchase as a Redeemer, and he himself was to apply what he had
purchased as an Intercessor; but by the Arminian Doctrine, these are severed,
and application denied to his Intercession.

2. It frustrates the end of Christ's Impetration; for when Christ died and
purchased, his end therein was application of the purchase: He did purchase a
deliverance that sinners might be delivered, not that they might, or might not
be delivered.

3. Nor can I yet see how this general empty Impetration can stand with the
honor of Gods Attributes: Not with his Omnipotency that he would have a
benefit procured, which he is hindered from the applying of it by the
perverseness of man's will: Nor with his Wisdom to intend that which he shall
never accomplish or obtain: Nor with his Justice, to receive from the hands of
Christ so full and absolute a satisfaction, and yet after that never to admit
many men into grace or favor, nor to pardon them nor save them, though
satisfaction were made by Christ for those very ends: Nor yet with the Lov^ of
Christ, who laid down his precious blood, and yet this should never take effect
in many, for whose sake it was so largely and seriously shed: And that he
should suffer the merit of his death, and the efficacy thereof to be so
continually perverted by the free and proud will of sinners.

4. It does absolutely overthrow the Doctrine of Election delivered in
Scripture, and the limited subordination of redemption by Christ according to
Election, and the certain communication of all grace and glory to such who are
Elected and Redeemed.

5. So likewise does it the Doctrine of the New Covenant of Grace which is
particular.

6. And leaves God after the great love and cost in giving of Christ, yet to an
uncertainty, what the issue and fruit of all this will be; perhaps men will
accept of it, perhaps not; perhaps they that accept of it will persevere,
perhaps not; perhaps I have lost all my love and charges, etc.

4. I should now discourse of a fourth Conclusion, viz. that as there never
was, or shall be an universal application of the death of Christ; so neither
God, nor Christ ever intended the same.

But here the Arminians will save us of this labor; for they confess the same;
the application, fruit, or benefit of the death of Christ is only for
believers: And for any other death of Christ which is without any fruit or
benefit to us, let themselves (if they like it) take it, only give us that
which is fruitful and saving.

3. There remains nothing more about this question, but the answering of some
Scriptures, and some Arguments which the Arminians make use of to prove
Objections answered.
their universal effectual redemption, or that Christ died for all men, and
every particular man, not only Sufficienter, but also Efficaciter.

1. Object. Their first Batalio of Scripture for their Opinion rests upon From
the word (world)
the word (the world) Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Joh. 6. 51. The bread that I will give is my flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself. 1 John 2. 2. He is the Propitiation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world: to which
they may add also, Joh. 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin
of the world. Joh. 12. 47. I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

Before we give a particular answer to these Scriptures, it is necessary to
premise a word or two.

1. The word [world] is diversely used in the Scripture, sometimes it The word
world diversely used.
signifies

1. The whole frame of Creation, Heaven and Earth, and all the Creatures in
them. 2. The promiscuous and universal multitude of mankind. 3. Only the wicked
and unbelieving part of the world; I pray not for the world, Joh. 17. 9. 4.
Only the Elect and believers, Romans 11. 12. If the fall of them be the riches of
the world. verse 15. If the casting away of them be the reconciling of the
world, etc.
2. That expression (all the world, and the whole world) does not always
import It does not always import every man in the world.
in Scripture, every man in the world, Luke 2. 1. There went out a Decree from
Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed. This cannot be meant of
every particular man in the world, nor yet of many Nations of the world, for
they were not all (singly) under the Roman power, Joh. 1. 10. The world knew
him not: this cannot be understood of every one in the world; for some in the
world did know him, Joh. 12. 19. Behold the world is gone after him! is it
meant that every man in the world did so? 1 John 5. 19. The whole world lies
in wickedness; can this be understood of every particular man in the world?
Rev. 18. 8. All the world wondered after the beast: Neither can this be
expounded of every particular man in the world.

I purposely bring these places, because the Arminians impose on weak and
ignorant men, as if by the name (world) is always meant all the men in the
world, and every particular man in the world: you see that the Scriptures do
not always so intend it, no not when they speak of all the world, and of the
whole world.

But now let us look on the Scripture alleged distinctly. The Scriptures
answered.


Object. John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Joh. 3. 16.
Son, etc.

Sol. 1. Are the Arminians in good earnest in bringing this place for Gods
intention of salvation for all by Christ?

1. Do they not affirm that God neither would, nor could, velle salutem
hominum, before Christ had satisfied his Justice? and yet this place shows a
special love and will in God of man's salvation before he gave Christ.

2. They deny the love of God in the Text, to be any act of his will at all,
unless incomplicitly; but here it is made the immediate and prime cause of the
giving of his Son. So that according to their Opinion, they must expound the
place thus; God so loved all mankind with such a love, whereby he neither
would, nor could will the salvation of any man, (that he sent his Son to save
all men, before he did intend to save any man) that whosoever believes should
be saved: This is the great love which they make in God to save all men by
Christ.

2. Again, Seeing that word [world] is ambiguous, sometimes being taken for
those men of whom Christ is the Head, 2 Cor. 5. 19. sometimes for those men of
whom Satan is the Prince, Joh. 12. 31. (The Prince of this world) it had been
fit for them to have made out unto us, that both of these worlds were so loved
by God, that he gave his Son for the Salvation of them both.

Thirdly, the sense of the place stands evident of itself thus; God so loved
the world, etc. (i. e.) he was so mercifully affected toward mankind in their
lost condition, that he would not suffer all of them to perish, but sent his
Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life.

Whence it evidently appears, that Gods intention in the sending of his Son,
was for salvation, not of every particular man, but of every one that believes.

And indeed there the restriction of Gods purpose for salvation does lie (In
quisquis credit, whosoever believes) not that God would save every particular
man in the world, but only every one that should believe.

And questionless this was great love shown to the world of mankind
universally lost, That Jesus Christ was sent for the recovery and salvation of
every one of those in the world that should believe on him.

Nor will any Arminian dare to affirm more than this, unless he will maintain
that there was yet a larger love in God, and a larger intention in him
effectually to save all the world by Christ distributively, and collectively,
whether they believe, or do not believe: The Scripture plainly rejects this,
and so do they themselves.

Object. Again, they object that Scripture of John 6. 51. The bread which I
will give you is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

Sol. That Christ gave himself for the life of the world, is granted; and that
he is the bread which gives life to the world, verse 33. is also granted; but
the Point to be proved is, that Christ did give himself effectually for the
life of every man in the world. But this can never be made out any farther than
for Believers in the world. verse 35. I am the bread of life; he that comes to
me shall never hunger; and he that believes on me shall never thirst. And
verse 5^. Except ye eat of the flesh of the Son of man, and drink of his blood,
ye have no life in you.

Object. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing their trespasses unto them.

Sol. 1. Here is the same term again; but the question is whether (world) in
this place signifies any other but fideles in mundo; for the Apostle speaks of
an actual Reconciliation, and of an actual forgiveness predicated of this
world, which are proper to believers.

2. If you would have the word world, in this place to be understood of every
particular man in the world; then it must follow that God is by the death of
Christ actually reconciled to every one, and every one to God (which the
Arminians themselves deny) and that sin is not, and shall not be imputed to any
man whatsoever, which is a notorious falsehood.

1 John 2. 2.
Object. But another place there is unto which they much trust upon, viz. 1 John 2. 2. He is the propitiation not only for our sins, but also for the
sins of the whole world.

Sol. But this place (which at first sight seems one of the strongest for them)
will not help them at all; for

1. The Apostle speaks of a Propitiation conjoined with the intercession of
Christ, verse 1. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the Righteous. verse 2. and he is the propitiation, etc. Now the
Arminians deny the Intercession of Christ to be for all the world; for so say
they, there should be an actual application of the death of Christ unto all and
every man, which may not be admitted.

2. Again, such a Propitiation as Christ is here said to be (for our sins) the
same is here said to be for the sins (of the whole world) (otherwise the
comfort here given were of small force, if Christ should be a propitiation for
us; and for the world, in a different sense; for our sins effectually, but for
the sins of the whole world ineffectually.)

But he is a Propitiation for our sins, (i. e.) who believe effectually,
therefore he must also be a propitiation for the sins of the whole world also
effectually: So that if by the whole world in this place, all and every man in
the world be understood; Then Christ must be, and is an effectual Propitiation
for the sins of every one (i. e.) he has so satisfied and pacified God, that
he is no longer displeased with any one sinner; but this the Arminians will not
maintain.

3. The scope and purpose of the Apostle in this place, is to comfort and
support the hearts of believers in case of falling or sinning, that they should
not despair, and for this he presents two Reasons:

1. One is, that Christ is our Intercessor, or Advocate with the Father.

2. The other is, that Christ is the Propitiation for the sins of all the
faithful, whether Jews or Gentiles, by which he means here the whole world; not
only for our sins who are Jews, but for the sins of the Gentiles: So that by
the whole world, is meant all believers whether Jews or Gentiles (for his
Epistle is Catholic and respects them both.)

Nor is it an universal expression when the Jews and the Gentiles are spoken of
in way of distinction and opposition, then to call the Gentiles the world. See
at your leisure, Romans 11. 12, 15.

Object. But the consolation given here is not so full and rising, unless by a
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, he understood every man in the
world!

Sol 1. I answer; To me the Consolation rises very full and high; for the case
is of some particular Christians or Believers sinnings (if any man sin) in this
case he supports them not to despair, but to hope for pardon and peace, and
that from Christ intercession and Propitiation; he is the Advocate, and he is
the Propitiation for their sins, and not only for their sins, but for the sins
also of all Believers, that either do, or shall live in the whole world,
whether Jews or Gentiles; all Believers shall find him so, Ergo, you shall.

2. Yet suppose, that by a Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, were
meant (as the Arminians contend for) for the sins of every man in the world:
This (according to their sense) would not make the Consolation higher, but
weaker: For as much as that Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, by
the death of Christ (according to them) is of no special respect to any
particular sinner living, nor of any efficacy for any one more than for
another, nor more for the living than for the damned; neither was there any
different intention for the Collation and Application of it until men did
believe: And what more high and special comfort can arise to a troubled soul
from this, I am not able to conceive.

2. Oject. Their next phalanx of Scriptures for Christ dying universally pro
omnibus and singulis, is mustered up from the word (all) 1 Timothy 2. 4. who would
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. verse 6. Who
gave himself a Ransom for all; Chap. 4. 10. Who is the Savior of all men,
especially of all those that believe: Heb. 2. 9. That he by the grace of God
should taste death for every man, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Tit. 2. 11. Before I speak
to these places, I would premise a few words.

1. As the word (many) in Scripture is sometimes use^ for (all) (as Dan. 12. 2.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt) So the word (all)
is sometimes put for many, as Romans 5. 18. So by the Righteousness of one, the
free gift came upon all to justification of life. ver. 19. So by the obedience
of one, shall many be made Righteous. So that it is not safe nor true
wheresoever we read the word all, there continually to expound it for every man
distributively,

2. To dye for all, and to be given for all, must in some places respect the
sufficiency of the dignity in the death of Christ, but not always the efficacy
of his death in the virtual extent of it, which none that I have read will
maintain in this Point of Christ's dying for all.

Now let us look on the particular places mentioned for Christ dying for all,
and every man.

1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, etc.

By all men (in this place) the Apostle means not every man individually, but
all sorts or kinds of men; for in the precedent verses, he exhorts that Prayer
be made for all men, and amongst them, for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority; and he subjoynes this Reason, Ergo, God will have all men to be
saved; he excludes no sort of men from salvation, but invites all sorts and
kinds of them. And therefore seeing the Gospel is to be preached to all men,
and there are some of all sorts that God will save to whom the Gospel is
preached, therefore we should pray for all men: Neither is it unusual in
Scripture to understand by all, not every particular, but all the sorts or
kinds, Joel 2. 28. I will pour my Spirit upon all flesh; by all flesh is not
meant every man in the world, but all sorts of persons, your sons and your
daughters, your old men, and your young men, as there he expounds it; and upon
Jews and Gentiles, as Peter expounds it, Acts 2. So Luke 3. 6. All flesh shall
see the salvation of God: Not every particular man in the world, but all kind
of Nations, and people, and Men.

Nay Vorstius himself confesses that All in this place is as much, and the
same with all sorts or kinds, so that by all sorts or kinds you do not
restrain In exam. lib. Piscat. de Praedest. p. 73. In Enchirid. c. 103.
it only to the Elect.

Nor is this any new interpretation of this place. St. Austin delivered the
same above a thousand years ago in his Euchiridion to Laurentius. Vult omnes
homines salvos fieri (i. e.) omne genus hominum per quascunque differentias
distributum, Reges, Privatos, Nobiles, sublimes, doctos, humiles, indoctos,
divites, pauperes, Mares, Foeminas, and i^ Aetatibus omnibus, in professionibus
omnibus, and si quid aliud differentiarum est in hominibus.

Quos Deus vult servari, pro eorum salute Ecclesia debet precari, ut Deus omnes
(i. e.) quosvis vult servari, sublato gentis, sexus, aetatis, ordinis atque
dignitatis discrimine.

And in another place he expounds it thus; Deus vult omnes salvos fieri, ut De
Corrept. and Gratia. c. 14.
intelligantur omnes Praedestinatos, quia omne genus hominum in eis est. So the
Apostle here does not speak de singulis hominum personis sed de omnibus hominum
ordinibus; non de singulis generum, sed de generibus singulorum.

Others do distinguish of the will of God: One is Volunt as propositi, by which
vult homines salvos facere; the other is, voluntas signi, by which vult homines
salvos fieri: In this he puts men at what they should look at, viz salvation,
and by what means they should compass that salvation, viz. by coming to the
knowledge of the truth, etc.

1. Tim. 2. 6.
Object. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who gave himself a Ransom for all; Ergo, all men are
redeemed by Christ.

Sol. 1. Mean they Actually, so that God is now satisfied, and they are indeed
freed and delivered by the death of Christ? what shameful dawbing is this, to
stickle so for all men's Redemption or Ransom by the death of Christ, when yet
verily they deny any actual Redemption for any one by the death of Christ?

2. For all, a Ransom for all? for all for whom he is a Mediator? verse 5.
But a Mediator he is for all them who belong to the Covenant of grace. And
that is not for all absolutely, and singularly, but for all Elect and
Believers, who have God to be their God.

3. The same answer for all of all sorts, may be given to this as to the
former; for his speech runs unto the same all, etc.

4. Yet if they would force to all singularly, then the Ransom is for all
quatenus ad dignitatem and sufficientiam; not to all quatenus ad efficientiam.

Object. Heb. 2. 9. That he ^^y the grace of God should taste death for Heb. 2.
9.
every man.

Sol. Let the Apostle expound himself What he means there.

By every man, verse 10. he calls them many Sons (in bringing many sons to
glory) ver. 11. Them that are sanctified, and made one with Christ (He that
sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, for which cause he is
not ashamed to call them brethren) And ver. 13. The Children which God did give
him, etc. So that here by every man, is not meant every particular individual
man, whether believer or unbeliever; but every Son of God, every one that is
sanctified, all that are brethren with Christ, all the Children given by God
unto him; for every one of these did Christ taste death; not one of them could
have been saved but by his death; and what is this to every man whatsoever in
the world? are all and every man, sanctified, children, brethren, etc?

1 Timothy 1. 10.
Object. 1 Timothy 1. 10. Who is the Savior of all men, especially of them that
believe!

Sol. 1. Speaks the Apostle here of Christ's dying for the salvation of all and
every man? of Gods Spiritually saving of unbelievers, and of believers, that he
will eternally save unbelievers as well as believers. If the Arminians will
needs have this place so understood, how come they to admit and swallow down
that word (especially, especially of them that believe) whereas they hold that
Gods will to save by the death of Christ is equal and alike to all? either they
must understand this place of Gods Antecedent will of salvation; but then
(especially) stands in their way; or they must understand it of his Consequent
will, and then (all) stands in their way; for God (as they teach) will not save
any according, to his Consequent will but only Believers.

2. But the Apostle here speaks, not of salvation by the death of Christ, but
of a saving or safety depending on the Providence of God, which respects all
men in the world, but believers in a more special manner, who have the promise
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, v. 8. And therefore the
Apostle in his sufferings and labors excites himself to trust on God, to take
care and provide for him, which he does upon this ground, q. God is the Savior
of all men, but especially of them that believe; q. d. If Gods Providence will
help all men, even the world, much more them that believe on him.

Object. But that word Savior, and saving, must needs mean some higher matter
than this of Providence.

Sol. In this place it does not, nor in many other places, Psalm. 36. 6. Hominem
and Bestiam servas Jehovah: Matthew. 8. 25. Lord save us, we perish.

Romans 14. 15. 1 Cor. 8. 11.
Object. Romans 14. 15. Destroy not him by thy meat for whom Christ died. 1 Cor.
8. 11. Through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish for whom Christ
died.

Sol. The Question in dispute is, whether Christ did by his death obtain for
all and every man Reconciliation with God, Remission of sins, and Eternal life?
do these places come up to the proof thereof?

1. The Apostle speaks unto Christians in both these places; he writes unto
believers, (are believers all and every man?) nay he writes to the believers of
particular Churches in Rome, and in Corinth; are particular believers all and
every man in the world?

2. To these he writes of a particular case, respecting their Christian liberty
about the use of Herbs and Meats, so to moderate themselves as not to
scandalize or offend their weak brethren, and to perplex and ensnare their
consciences: that those Christians who were strong in faith (i. e.) were fully
persuade and satisfied that all meats were lawful, should not so act their
liberty thereupon as to give offense to their weak brethren (unto weak
believers) who yet were not so clearly convinced of that liberty: He speaks of
believers on both sides, strong and weak, and of none other but believers
concerned in the present fear and scandal; and what is this to Christ dying for
every man?

3. And why would he not have the strong believers (by the abuse of their
liberty about meats, and drinks, and herbs) to offend the Consciences of their
weak brethren? he gives the Reason (destroy not him by thy meat for whom Christ
died; and shall thy weak brother perish for whom Christ died? The reason lies
in the danger of that offense, q. d. thus to offend them was, as much as in
them lay, to destroy them, and cause them to perish; For offense or scandal (of
themselves, and in their own natural aptitude) do tend to the ruin and
destruction of those to whom they are objected, and weak Christians are
likewise apt to be shaken, and wounded, and waver by them. Assuredly this is
and should be reason sufficient with any believers therefore not to give
scandal in any thing, much less in the use of meats and drinks, to other
Believers who are weak; neither does the Apostle say He is destroyed by thy
meat for whom Christ died, but Destroy not him, etc. He speaks not of a work
eventually done and effected, but of a work which he cautions them to beware or
take heed of, as tending thereunto.

And so in the later place he does not absolutely affirm that the weak brother
does perish, but interrogatively propounds, shall thy weak brother perish for
whom Christ died? q. d. should you, or any of you be an occasion (as much as in
you lies) of the ruining of any for whom Christ died? therefore have a care, be
wary that ye give not any offense unto them.

Fifthly, If the Apostle had said that any weak brother had indeed been
destroyed, and had indeed perished, yet this would not prove that Christ died
for all and every man: All that it could infer would be only this, that some
Believers might be destroyed and perish for whom Christ died; which yet
appertains to another controversy of falling from grace, and there neither
will it serve the turn.

Object. 2 Pet. 2. 1. There were false Prophets also amongst the people, even
as 2 Pet. 2. 1.
there shall be false Teachers among you, who shall privily bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction.

Lo, say the Arminians, here are some which bring upon themselves swift
destruction, and deny the Lord that bought them; and therefore as well they
that perish, as they that shall be saved, are redeemed by Christ, etc.

Sol. For answer to this place diverse things may be said.

speaks of Jesus Christ at all, because the word here rendered (Lord) is not
that word (Lord) by which Christ is usually set forth: there is a difference
observed by learned men

1. Inter (...), Herum, and (...), Dominum; which we find in Jude, ver. 4.
denying the Lord God (...), and our Lord (...): But I know not whether we may
with safety rest on this curiosity.

2. I shall rather make use of that distinction of being bought by Christ;
persons may be said to be bought by the Lord Christ

1. (...), according to truth, so only the Church is bought or purchased by the
blood and death of Christ. Acts 2. 28. Feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood.

2. (...), In respect of Opinion, and so those are said to be bought, who seem
to be bought, who bear such expressions of Christians for a while, that both
themselves and others (in a judgment of charity) look on them as bought and
redeemed persons; although afterward the contrary does appear; as all those
who have but a temporary faith, and make a temporary profession; these seem to
us to be bought, and perhaps unto themselves, yet really they are not. And
truly such kind of persons were these, who are said in this place to deny the
Lord that bought them: they were so far wrought on, that they got the knowledge
of the true way of righteousness: verse 12. And escaped the pollutions of the
world through the knowledge of Christ, ver. 20. and probably were numbered (in
respect of profession) with the people of God: so that they seemed to be bought
in respect of their temporary faith, profession, and conversation, yet really
they were not so, for they turned Apostates, ver. 22. and damnable Heretics,
ver. 1. denying the Lord (either in his Person, or in his Office) who bought
them, as others and as themselves did think.

Thirdly, Others do yet suggest one more answer unto this place; who say that
these Heretics (and so other wicked men) were bought by Christ, though not as
to the effect and state of salvation (for so only the Elect and true Believers
are bought by Christ as their Redeemer and Savior) yet in respect of some
common fruits and benefits for those, upon that account, their service and
fidelity are duly and properly belonging unto Christ, and their sin is the
greater for denying him who is their Lord also by a right of Redemption as to
Common mercies: And some do conjecture, had it not been for the Promise of
Christ as Redeemer, and Gods looking on him as so, all the world had been
presently destroyed upon the fall of Adam, but Christ interposing himself, he
stayed that destruction, and at least procured the cause of all those outward
blessings which ungodly men do enjoy in this life, for which reason he may be
said to buy even the ungodly (in that he delivers them from present ruin) and
their sin is therefore the greater to deny him; but I adhere to the second
answer as most proper to the place.

But having now many other Scriptures alleged by them to the same purpose
aforementioned, let us consider what Reasons and Arguments the Arminians
produce to prove that Christ died for all and every man, and by his death
Arguments of the Arminians.
purchased Reconciliation with God, Remission of sins, and eternal life for
them.

I shall briefly mention four or five of the chiefest which they bring,

which every man is bound to believe, is true; but every man is bound to
believe that Christ died for him. Ergo, it is true that Christ died for every
man.

Sol. To this Sophistical Argument, two answers are given by the Learned.

(viz. That which every man is bound to believe, is true) a thing may be said
to be true in a threefold respect; Either quia promittitur, because it is
promised; Or secondly, quia narratur, because it is related or declared; Or
thirdly, quia praedicitur, because it is foretold; so that whatsoever a man is
bound to believe, that same is true, either as promised, or as declared or
done, or as foretold; Not always true in one and the same respect, or in every
respect; but either as promised, or declared or reported, or as foretold. To
apply this to the Argument in hand, that Christ died effectually for every man;
If it be a truth, then it must be so, because God has promised it, or declared
it, or foretold it; if it be a truth, because promised, then it is with
condition of faith; for though the very promise be true in it self, yet it is
not performed unto us, without believing; the same promise still requiring
faith for the performance of it, and then this will not prove that it is true
that Christ died for all and every man absolutely, but only for Believers, or
for all men only under the condition of faith: If it be a truth because only
declared, or foretold, then whether a man believes, or believes not, this is
true that Christ died for him; the reason is, all things which are true by way
of Narration or Prediction, they are true upon their own account, they are true
before we believe them (our faith makes them not to be so) and if we believe
them not, yet are they true; our unbelief cannot make the truth of God a lie:
But I suppose that no Arminian will say that Christ dyed effectually for every
man, whether he does believe, or does not believe.

A second answer shall be unto the Minor Proposition (But every man is bound to
believe that Christ dyed for him) to this I would say three things.

First, It is a material disputable Point, Whether those to whom the Gospel is
not revealed, are bound to believe that Christ died for them? because the
Precept of believing is a Gospel Precept only, and the punishment for unbelief
is threatened, and inflicted in relation to the Gospel, for slighting and
refusing that Christ who is revealed and offered by the Gospel unto sinners,
who also are therein commanded to believe on Christ: and if this be so, then
certainly every man is not bound to believe that Christ died for him.

Secondly, When the Gospel does come, it does not absolutely command that every
one should believe that Christ dyed for him indeed; it does command every one
to believe on Christ (i. e.) to receive him, and trust on him alone for life.
But it does not command him to believe (without any more ado, without any
condition whatsoever) that Christ died for him (i. e.) has by his death made
his peace, procured his pardon and eternal life. For the Gospel does not
reveal or command any such thing: It does reveal a Christ who died for
sinners, and it does offer this Christ to sinners; but with all it says,
Whosoever believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned.
Does the Gospel command every man absolutely to believe that Christ dyed for
him (which takes in the Application of all the fruits and benefits of the death
of Christ which a soul can enjoy) whether a man obey the voice of the Gospel
or not, receive Christ or not! q. d. you are bound to believe that Christ died
for you, though you never by faith close with the offer of Christ, though your
heart never prize him, or never are brought in unto him! and though you still
love your sins and persevere in them. Tell me in good sadness, did Jesus Christ
ever sign such a Commission as this, Go preach the Gospel, and tell people that
whether they receive me, or will not receive me; whether they become believers,
or continue unbelievers; whether they repent, or continue impenitent; they are
bound every man of them to believe that I dyed for them, and reconciled them,
and have procured salvation for them! Certainly if every man were bound to
believe this, he were bound to believe a falsehood; for verily Christ did not
die for those who remain unbelievers and impenitent: and the Gospel is so far
from promising life by the death of Christ to impenitent and unbelieving
persons, that it threatens and seals death, and wrath, and condemnation on
them: Joh. 8. 24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins.
Joh. 3. 36. He that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him. ver. 18. He that believes not is condemned already,
because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God.

3. The immediate Object of that faith which God at first requires, is not this
Proposition, Christ dyed for me; But Christ who dyed: And the first command of
Faith in the Gospel, is to accept Christ, and rest on Christ, and then follows
a fiduciary persuasion that Christ died for me: And indeed no man can come to
that degree of Faith to be persuaded or confident that Christ died for him,
until he first by faith receive Christ offered unto him.

Unbelievers are damned for rejecting the grace of Christ offered unto them by
the Gospel; shall they be so punished if that grace were never purchased for
them, and never did belong unto them?

Sol. To this I answer.

First, That Christ with his grace of Redemption is (Indefinitely offered unto
sinners by the Gospel) and that all who do by their infidelity refuse that
grace, are deservedly damned, not because they reject the grace offered
belonging to them as unbelievers and impenitent; but because they neglect and
despise that condition upon which grace was offered unto them; Christ and his
grace were offered unto them upon this condition, If they would believe and
receive him and it; But they will not believe (You will not come unto me that
you might have life, Joh. 5. 40.) And though light be come into the world, yet
they will not receive it.

Secondly, Unbelievers who do reject Christ with his grace offered unto them,
do not reject him, and that grace, because they know that neither Christ nor
his grace do belong to them; this neither is, nor can be the reason a priore,
of their rejection, because no particular sinner (unto whom the Gospel comes)
can know that Christ has simply excluded him, and tends no good to him: and he
sees that to others in the same condition and depth of sin and unworthiness
with himself, Christ and his grace offered by the Gospel are effectual. But
therefore they do reject Christ, because they love him not, (they love darkness
rather than light,) Joh. 3. 19. and are led by their perverse will, so as
utterly to refuse communion with Christ and subjection to him: for which they
are deservedly punished.

Then every man must remain in a doubtful suspense, whether he be concerned to
believe in Christ or not.

Sol. 1. And why so, I pray you? Is this to be set up as the only ground why we
must believe in Christ, because Christ has died for all and every man! when
yet themselves do say, though Christ has so died for all and every man, yet no
man is the better for this until, and unless he believe. Or does the Gospel
when it calls upon sinners to believe on Christ, propound this as the
inducement unto the soul, Christ died for all men, and for every man; therefore
you should believe on Christ: and until you be sure that Christ did thus dye
and obtain Reconciliation for all and every man, and Remission of sins, and
eternal life for all, you may not, and must not believe. When Peter called upon
those Jews to believe, Acts 2. and Paul upon the Jailer (believe and you shall
be saved, Chap. 16.) did they usher this duty in with imposing this Precedent
certainty to them, that they must subscribe firist unto that Point, That Christ
dyed for all and every man; therefore you should believe?

Secondly, But there is no cause of this suspense or doubting at all, whether a
person should believe on Christ, though Christ did not die for all men; because
the Gospel (without that error) affords Grounds or Reasons enough for any man
to (whom it is preached) to believe on Christ.

1. It reveals Christ as the Savior of sinners. 2. It offers this Savior
freely unto sinners. 3. It commands him particularly to believe on Christ. 4.
It promises him life upon believing. Is here now any reason to doubt whether I
ought to believe? 5. It assures him that Christ will in no wise reject him. 6.
But will accept, and that it is so far from being a sin in him to believe in
Christ, that it is his great sin if he does not believe on Christ who then
graciously offers himself, and Commands him to believe, and assures him of
Reconciliation and pardoning mercy and eternal life upon believing.
Absurdities must necessarily follow, either that those for whom Christ dyed
not, are free of Adams sins (as the Angels in Heaven are) and so have not need
of Christ to be their Reconciliation, or else they are in the same condition
with the Devils, and so must despair of all hope of Salvation.

Sol. I answer, neither so, nor so; neither the one nor the other absurdity
will arise necessarily out of that Doctrine, that Christ dyed not for all, that
some of Adams Posterity are no sinners, and so need no Reconciliation by
Christ, or that else they must despair, being in the same condition with the
Devils themselves.

1. For first, most certain it is, that in Adam all sinned, Romans 5. 12. And by
reason of sin all do stand in need of Reconciliation by Christ; but hence it
will not follow, because that all men (are sinners) and do stand in need of
such a Reconciliation by Christ, therefore God must and does give Christ as a
Reconciliation for them all: No more then this will follow, because that so
many Malefactors are in peril of their life, therefore the Prince against whom
they have offended, must either pardon or offer pardon to every one of them;
for though there be a common necessity of pardon as unto all of them, because
of their guilt, yet the giving of pardon is an act of mere grace; and therefore
the Prince offended may bestow it on some of them only, and not on all of them:
Thus stands the case 'twixt God and us, we have all sinned against him, and
therefore come short of the glory of God, and stand in need of mercy, and
Reconciliation by Christ; and God says, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy; some of these sinners I will save by Christ, namely all them that
believe, Joh. 3. 36. others of these I will not save, namely those that believe
not: though there be a need of Reconciliation in respect of all men, yet it is
the pleasure of God not effectually to bestow salvation on them all: Nor is God
(as to the event and issue of this) at all unjust, seeing that he leaves them
only to wrath and condemnation, who do continue unbelieving and impenitent.

2. But secondly, Neither will that follow, that the condition of some men (i.
e.) unbelievers, must be the same with that of the Devils (without any hope of
salvation) if Christ not dye for all. For

First, The Devils had no Mediator at all given unto them in respect of their
kind, for one or other; but so mankind had, forasmuch as Christ took part of
the nature of mankind, Heb. 2. 14.

Secondly, The Devils (all of them) are in an estate of actual damnation, they
are every one of them actually damned; but so is not every man, no nor yet
every one that believes not in Christ.

3. The Devils have their damnation so sealed upon them, that every one of them
does know there is no hope of salvation at all for them; but thus it is not
with any particular unbeliever living; for though the unbelieving person does
deserve eternal damnation, yet he has the means offered to escape that
damnation; yea he does know that if he continues unbelieving, he shall not
escape the wrath of God; yet he does not know whether God may not give him
grace to change his unbelieving heart, after a long time of unbelief. Neither
can we say of any unbeliever, nor can any unbeliever say of himself, God will
never give him grace that he may be converted and believe; and therefore it is
not true that the unbeliever is in the same hopeless condition with the Devils.

Thirdly, This Assertion that Christ did not effectually dye for all men, is no
more apt in the nature of it to cause any to despair than these expressions of
Christ, Matthew. 20. 16. There are but few which are chosen: And Matthew. 7. 14.
Narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it.
Would, or may you argue from these expressions of Christ, that these who do not
belong to the number of those few, must now despair, and they are in the same
condition with the Devils? why then will you reason thus from Christ not dying
for all and every man?

And yet fourthly, we may add this to all the rest, That those sinners who
continue (who live and dye) impenitent and unbelieving, these do (in the event)
cut off themselves from all hope of salvation; As Paul spoke of the Gentiles
lying in their natural condition, That at the same time they were without
Christ, and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.
12. that we may safely say of all obstinate, impenitent, and unbelieving
persons (living and dying so) they are without Christ, and without hope, and
shall go into that hell which is prepared for the Devil and his angels; in the
event their condition will not be different.

Then no man can certainly conclude that Christ died for him, and that he shall
be saved by Christ: For such a conclusion must be raised either upon some
particular word (Christ died for thee) or upon some general word (Christ died
for all) but you have no particular word that Christ died for you personally;
And if you deny a general word, that he died for all; then you have no word
certainly to conclude that Christ died for you; and so you are left without any
certainty and comfort of salvation by Christ.

Sol. It is well that the Arminians are so tender for the certain knowledge of
any man's salvation by Christ: they leave God to an uncertainty of any man's
particular salvation, notwithstanding the death of Christ for all men, and yet
they will say This death of Christ for all men, as a ground of certainty unto
us: wherein yet they deal;

1. Very fraudulently with us; for though they say that Christ dyed for all,
yet they expressly teach that the application of Christ's death for actual
salvation, is only for them that believe.

2. Very falsely; for according to this Doctrine no man can ever be certain of
his salvation, until the very last gasp of his persevrance in grace, and that
many perish eternally for whom Christ died.

Secondly, but let us see whether according to their Doctrine of Christ's dying
for all men, one may certainly conclude (to the satisfaction, and peace, and
comfort of his conscience) that Christ died for him. Let the ground for
certainty be drawn up thus; Christ died for all men; but I am a man; therefore
certainly Christ died to save me: Or, Christ died to save all sinners; but I am
a sinner; Ergo, Christ died to save me. I think any understanding Christian
would find miserable ground of satisfaction and certainty from this in the time
of a perplexed conscience. But we have another way, and far surer from the
Scripture to conclude our certainty of Christ's dying for us, and to save us.
Jesus Christ dyed for all Believers effectually to save them, (this the
Scripture expressly affirms) but I do truly believe in Christ, and therefore I
certainly conclude that Christ did die for me to save me. And thus I have gone
through this great Controversy about the latitude of Christ's death, where I
find thus much, that it is necessary for every man to get faith, who will
indeed be the better for the death of Christ; it shall therefore be our wisdom
to leave disputing, and humbly to beg of God to give us Faith, that so we may
believe on Christ to the salvation of our souls.

SECT. IX.
2. Quest. I Shall now proceed to a second Question, viz. Whether any man can
Whether any man can know that his particular salvation was intended in the
death of Christ;
attain to the knowledge or certainty of the particular intentions of Christ's
death in the benefits of it unto himself? (i. e.) whether any man can certainly
know that God intended his particular salvation in the giving of Christ, and
that Christ died for him, and made peace for him, and purchased remission of
his sins, and eternal salvation for his soul?

Sol. For the resolving of this Scruple, be pleased to consider a few places.

1. There is a difference 'twixt a general assent, and 'twixt a particular
knowledge and Application: It is one thing to know and acknowledge this general
Truth (that Christ came into the world to save sinners, and that whosoever
believes shall besaved, and that whosoever repents shall have his sins
pardoned) and it is another thing by faith to know that Christ died for me,
that his blood was shed for the remission of my sins, that I am reconciled by
his death, and that I shall be saved by his life; to say of Christ, as Paul
once did, he loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20.

The question is not propounded about that general knowledge and assent of
faith, whether a person may certainly know that truth that Christ died for
sinners, and will save all that believe; but about a particular knowledge of
that truth, as in relation and application unto this or that person, etc.

2. There is a certainty as the Papists do distinguish, and with whom we
principally contend in this Controversy, of hope which depends upon probable
grounds; and there is a certainty of faith which depends upon sure and
undeceiving grounds.

The question is not whether a person may attain only unto some good hope and
probable conjecture that Christ died for him, that his sins are pardoned, that
he shall be saved; in which conjecture he may yet be deceived; but whether he
may attain unto a certainty of faith upon grounds proper to believers, and to
them who shall be saved.

3. We must distinguish 'twixt seeming believers who rest in common Notions of
Christ, and in a visible profession only: and 'twixt real and sound Believers,
whose hearts and souls God has touched, and persuaded, and drawn to Christ,
and they are effectually brought into union and communion with Christ.

I speak not of the former, who yet are very apt to deceive themselves with an
extreme (but ungrounded) confidence that Christ died for them; but only of real
and sound believers who are indeed married unto Christ, and are branches of A
believer may know by a certainty of faith that Christ died for him.
the Vine, and members of the Body.

So that now the sum of the Answer is this, That a truly believing person
may know with a certainty of Faith, not only that Christ died for sinners, but
also for him, and for his sins, and for his salvation; though he does not as
yet certainly know this, yet he may know this; though he does not always, at
all times (under temptations and falls, and conflicts, and desertions) know
this, yet he may attain unto this certain knowledge, which I suppose will be
made out by Scripture and good Arguments.

1 John 5. 10 He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in
himself. ver. Proved by Scripture.
11. And this is the Record that God has given us eternal life, and this life
is in his Son: ver. 12. He that has the Son, has life: ver. 13. These things
have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may
kn^w that ye have eternal life. Romans 4. 23. Now it was not written for his sake
alone, that it was imputed to him: ver. 24. But for us also to whom it shall be
imputed if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead: ver.
25. who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised for our justification.
Gal. 2. 20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me. 1 John 2. 1. We have an
Adv^cate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, ver. 2. And he is the
Propitiation for our sins. ver. 12. Your sins are forgiven you for his Name
sake. Rev. 1. 5. Unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his own blood. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Cant. 6. 3. I
am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine.

Besides these Scriptures, let us consider of some Arguments depending upon
Scripture, which do prove that a person may certainly know that God intended
Arguments from Scripture.
Christ for him, and that Christ dyed for him, etc.

1. If a particular person may certainly know that he does truly believe in
Christ, then he may certainly know that Christ died to save him (for the
Scripture says, Joh. 3. 16. Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but
have everlasting life. And Joh. 10. 27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me: and (ver. 28.) ^ give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.) But a
particular person may certainly know that he does truly believe in Christ;
Ergo. Heb. 10. 39. We are not of them that draw back unto perdition, but of
them that believe to the saving of the soul. 2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same
Spirit of Faith according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I
spoken, we also believe, and therefore speak. 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have
believed. Job 19. 25. I know that my Redeemer lives.

It is to me a strange thing that any should think it impossible for a man that
has faith, to know that he has it; why should we think it impossible for
Lazarus being raised to life, now to know that he has life? or for the blind
to whom Christ gave sight, confidently to say as he in Joh. 9. 25. One thing I
know, that whereas I was blind, I now see. So for a man who was formerly dead
in sins, but now is raised by the Faith of the operation of God; (Col. 2, 12.)
to say with Paul, I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. and who
was formerly ignorant of the beauties of Christ, so that no comelin^ss appeared
in him; but now his eyes are opened, and he looks on Christ as the chiefest of
ten thousand, and as altogether lovely and desirable; May not this man say, I
know I do believe; when the Apostle has said unto you that believe he is
precious? 1 Pet. 2. 7.

Again, the Apostle says in Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace
with God: Can faith let in this peace into our hearts, and yet we be uncertain
whether we have that faith? And the same Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have
received the Spirit which is of God* that we might know the things which are
freely given us of God: Surely faith is one of the chiefest things that are
freely given unto us of God: It is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29.
etc.

2. The proper and real end of self Examination, is (at least) a possibil^ty of
knowledge; Nay, the proper scope of it is certain knowledge: For because as we
are doubtful, therefore we examine and try; so we therefore examine, try, and
prove, that thereupon we may come to acknowledge a certainty. Nay says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith, prove
your own selves; know you not your own selves that Christ is you, except you be
reprobates?

Object. The Apostle does only put them upon a trial, whether Christ be in them
yea or no.

Sol. It Is true, that is the work which he puts them upon. But

1. I demand, Is that work feasible or not? is it possible for them to come
unto that knowledge of Christ's being in them (upon that rryal) or is it not? if
it be not possible, then he earnestly presses them to a fruitless duty, and
successless labor; If it be possible, that they might upon the trial come to
know that Christ is in them, then the thing is granted.

2. I thus argue, They who may come (upon trial) to know that Christ is in
them, may certainly know that Christ died for them, to save them: My reason is
this, That Jesus Christ is in none but in them for whom he died, and whom he
will save; Col. 1. 27. Christ is in you the hope of glory. 1 John 5. 12. He
that has the Son, has life: and he that has not the Son, has not life. If
therefore one may know that Christ is in him of a truth, then he may know that
Christ died for him in particular for his salvation.

Thirdly, If Believers may attain to joy and rejoicing in the death of Christ,
yea unto a triumphing in it, then they may certainly know that Christ died for
them, and has purchased Reconciliation, Remission, and salvation for them: The
consequence I prove thus, There are three things necessarily concurring to
cause Spiritual joy and rejoicing, viz. 1 A delightful rejoicing Object. 2. An
application of that Object to the desire of the soul. 1. A knowledge of that
application: Gerson. Park. 2. Comp. de Dilectatione. p. 161.
and indeed without that knowledge that such an Object is ours, or is for us,
there never will be actual rejoicing, but if it be impossible, then despair;
and if it be doubtful, then fear, etc. But believers may attain to joy and
rejoicing in Christ, Phil. 3. 3. and that upon the account of his beneficial
dying for them, Romans 5. 11. And not only so, but we also joy in God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the Atonement.

Fourthly, I will add but one other Argument, and that is is this, We are bound
to love Jesus Christ who died for us and abundantly to thank and bless God for
our Redemption, and Reconciliation, and Remission, and Salvation by Christ;
this I suppose no man will deny; but we can neither do the one nor the other,
if we cannot attain unto a certainty that Christ died for us.

1. Love of Christ depends upon the knowledge of his love to us; It is not with
this spiritual love, as it is with natural love, where you may love a person
although you know not his love unto you; but our spiritual love necessarily
arises from the application and knowledge of a precedent love unto us; we love
him, q. because he loved us first, 1 John 4. 19 you must be able to see and
know the love of Christ to you, before you can be able to raise or return love
to him; and therefore do we love Christ, because his love is manifested unto
us. Now if this love of Christ to us (which he showed in dying for us; Greater
love has no man than this, that he lay down his life for his friend, Joh. 15.
13.) be perpetually hid from us, that we can never attain the certain knowledge
thereof (but must only guess at it, perhaps Christ loved us to dye for us,
perhaps he did not) how can our hearts possibly be raised to a solid fixed
intensive reciprocal love of him!

2. In like manner, how can our thankfulness be indeed rightly returned unto
God for giving of Christ for us to reconcile and save us? for according to your
knowledge in this case, will be your thankfulness; can you ever thank, and
bless and praise God for Christ and his death, and the benefits thereof to you,
whiles you know not that they belong to you? O Lord! I bless thee for that
exceeding love of thine in giving Christ to redeem my soul, to make my peace,
to discharge my sins, to save my soul, etc. But truly I know not whether this
be so or no, I am utterly uncertain whether Christ dyed for me, or whether
himself, or any benefit by him and his death, does indeed concern me or belong
unto me, etc.

SECT. X.
3. Quest. NOw follows the third and last Question to be spoken unto, how a How
a person may certainly know that Christ did dye effectually for him;
person may certainly know that Jesus Christ did die effectually for him?
Satisfied Gods Justice for him? purchased remission of sins for him? and
eternal life for him?

Sol. This is a pertinent Question indeed, said a dying person (whom some of us
knew in this place) But did Christ dye for my sins? but did Christ dye for my
soul? but did he dye for me? How shall I know that Christ died for me, for my
sins, to save my soul? This is a question which many of us first or last will
make question of; when trouble of conscience arises, or when death appoacheth,
O then how may I know that Christ is my Christ, and that he died for me! This
is the highest of all questions, Did Christ dye for me? and a most necessary
question; what though Christ did dye for others, and they partake of the
benefits of his death, if he did not die for me, and if I be not saved by his
death! and if the conscience can once upon sure grounds be satisfied in this
question, so that a person knows that Christ died for him; now there is peace,
and joy, and thanksgiving, and a lively hope of salvation: all is sure, if once
we can get to be sure that Christ is ours, and did die for us.

For answer therefore unto the question propounded, be pleased to remember (in
the general) that there are three sorts of persons in the world; namely

First, Some who (in the present estate under which they lie) cannot know that
Christ dyed for them, and will save them; I say, in the present estate wherein
they are; For though there may be a possibility of the change of that estate,
and so a capacity may come in for that particular knowledge and certainty, yet
as to their present estate (absolulely considered) there is an incapacity of
immediate knowledge that Christ died for them. These persons are all
unbelieving and impenitent persons who (as so, and remaining so) cannot know
that Christ died to save them, because

1. The way to know that Christ died for us, must arise either from some In the
general. Some cannot know.
word of promise, that a person in such a condition, having interest in Christ,
shall be saved by him; but there is no such promise to any unbelieving and
impenitent person, as such a person; or from some words of Narration which
declare and affirm that Christ and the benefits of his death do belong unto
unbelieving and impenitent persons as so: But there is no such Narrative word
which affirms it, that Christ belongs unto the unbeliever, and that he has
indeed obtained pardon of sins and life for him; or from faith wrought in the
heart: But this is not in the unbelieving and impenitent person; if it were,
then he were not unbelieving or from some internal testimony of the Spirit of
Christ, witnessing and sealing the application of the death of Christ in the
benefits of it unto the unbelieving and impenitent person: But such a testimony
the Spirit of Christ never gives to any person remaining unbelieving and
impenitent; his witnessing and sealing being only to the children of God. (Romans
8. 16. The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirits that we are the
children of God) and follows on believing. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after ye
believed ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise. Ver. 14. who is the
earnest of our inheritance.

So that there is no way for any unbeliever and impenitent person to know that
Christ dyed for his sins, and to make his peace, and to save his soul; and
unless his unbelief and impenitency be changed, he can never know it.

2. As the Gospel fixes the death of Christ in the benefits of it only upon
Believers; (he that believes shall be saved, Mark 16. 16) And whosoever
believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16. So
it threatens unbelievers with the loss of all benefit by Christ. Mark 16. 16.
He that believes, shall not be damned. And John 3. 36. He that believes not
on the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.



One is, that all such persons who do continue to slight and refuse Christ, and
will go on in their sinful ways, they have certainly deceived themselves, and
do still deceive themselves in their presumptuous confidence that Christ has
dyed for them, and shed his blood for the remission of their sins, and that
they shall be saved as well as the best. These rude confidences are but lying
vanities, and ungrounded presumptions, refuges and delusions of their own
making; and who so trusts unto them, will in the end perish; for the Scripture
is so far from offering Christ in the benefits of his death to unbelieving and
impenitent persons continuing in that estate, that it assures them of the quite
contrary, that they shall not see life, that they shall not be saved, that they
shall dye in their sins and perish.

A second is, that we would every one of us look seriously into our conditions,
and if we do find them to be unbelieving and impenitent, then (as we love our
lives, and tender our salvation by Christ) humbly and earnestly to importune
the Lord to deliver our souls from unbelief and impenitency, they being the
sins which else will hinder us not only of the benefits by the death of Christ,
but also of Christ himself, without an interest in whom we cannot have any
interest in the benefits purchased by his death.

Secondly, Some there are who (perhaps) are in Christ, and yet they do not Some
may be in Christ, but do not know it.
know that they are in Christ, and Christ in the benefits of his death belongs
unto them; at least they do not certainly know this; and the reason of that
inevidency may be,

1. Their own negligence and carelessnesse; the Apostle says, We must give all
diligence to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. The assurance of
our interest in Christ, and in the benefits of Christ, is a most sweet and
refreshing knowledge; but it cannot be so easily attained: A diligence on our
part is required to attain the same; much searching and praying, and
conference, and comparing of our hearts with the Word of precept, and with the
Word of promise, are necessary for such an evidence; and our failing in these
may be a reason why we fail in that.

2. The imbecility of faith, which is but newly ^ormed, and hardly perceptible
by reason of many clouds and doubts, and fears; weak faith cannot so easily
manifest it self unto us, nor yet our title to Christ and interest in his
purchase.

3. The power of temptations, and of melancholy, which do distract the soul,
and disturb the apprehension, and the acts of it; and da^ken and misperswade,
and delude us, so that we cannot see our selves aright, nor Christ aright, nor
our grounds of Application, nor yet the testimonies or evidences of our union
with Christ.

Thirdly, Some there are who lie in a trembling condition, and are not
determinately Some would know, but do not.
resolved either way; they cannot peremptorily conclude Christ did not dye for
them, nor yet can they confidently affirm Christ did dye for them; only this
is to be found in them, that their hearts do mourn after Christ, and they do
love him, and do exceedingly strive after the knowledge of his love, and the
intentions of his death for their souls; the inevidence of it is their great
perplexity, and the certainty of it is their great desire and pains: And now
for a clear and distinct answer unto the question; One may certainly know that
Christ died effectually to satisfy Gods justice for him, to take away his
sins, to make reconciliation for him, and to save him:

1. By the description of those for whom (without all question) Christ did
intentionally and effectually dye. 2. By the qualities of those persons who (in
Scripture) have been able to say upon sure grounds that Christ dyed for them,
and unto whom in particular the benefits of his death have been applied and
appropriated. 3. By the interest in that condition of faith, upon which Christ
becomes ours in his person and in his benefits. 4. By the combination of the
benefits of the death of Christ, and the real participation of every one of
them. 5. By the ends of the death of Christ, and the appearance of them upon
his heart and life. 6. By the ground and order of that certainty of knowledge
or persuasion which a person has that Christ dyed for him. 7. By the
concomitant presence of some choice affections in all who do attain unto that
certain evidence that Christ dyed for them. 8. By the consequent effects and
fruits which do flow from that sound knowledge of Christ in his death and
benefits for us in particular. One may certainly know that Christ dyed for him.
By the description of those for whom Christ intentionally dyed.

1. One may certainly know that Christ effectually dyed for him, By the
description of those for whom (without all question) Jesus Christ did
intentionally and effectually dye. If one can find himself within the number
of them for whom Christ himself has said he came to dye, and came to save, and
laid down his life, and says he is the Savior of them, this man may be
confidently persuaded and assured that Christ dyed for him. Now you find some
expressly described in Scripture for whom he (unquestionably) dyed, Matthew. 1.
21. He shall save his people from their sins. Joh. 10. 15. I lay down my life
for the sheep. Joh. 15. 13. Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay
down his life for his friends. If therefore any man can clear out unto himself
that he is one of the people of Christ, or one of the sheep, or one of the
friends of Christ, or one of the body of Christ, or one of the Church of
Christ, he may thereupon certainly conclude that he is one for whom Christ
dyed, and really intended to save by his death.

Object. You will say Here lies all the difficulty, to evidence to our selves
that we are within the number of these.

Sol. I confess it does, yet this must be evidenced if you would certainly
know that Christ effectually dyed for you; and upon diligent inquiry it may be
evidenced; forasmuch as Christ's people and sheep, and friends, and body, and
Church, have such signal characters and differences stamped upon them, by which
they may be known to be his indeed; I will give some instances to help you in
this. They are the people of Christ (his people) who are given unto him of the
Father, and His people.
bought by him with a price, and rescued by his power unto himself, and brought
into Covenant by him with the Father, and do stand in a near and choice
relation unto himself as their Head and Lord of these people; it is said in
Scripture, that they are

1. A willing people, in the day of his power, Psalm. 110. 3. (i. e.) when the
Gospel is preached unto them, there goes with that Gospel such a power from
Christ upon their hearts, that they are overcome and persuaded, and willingly
leave their former station and relation to sin, and to the world, and to Satan,
and as willingly become Christ's, hearkening unto his call, and falling into
relation with him.

2. A peculiar people (Ti^^s 2. 14. That he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people) His people are a pecul^ar people in
a twofold respect. One, because they are purged from those sins and iniquities
under which other people do lie, and with which they are defiled: Another,
because they are beautified and adorned with those excellencies of grace which
other people do want and attain not unto; and therefore in 1 Pet. 29. An holy
Nation, and a peculiar people, are joined together.

These things being thus opened, it will not now be so difficult for any man's
conscience to say, whether he be any one of the people of Christ yea or no; for
two things will plainly testify it: One is the willingness of his heart to
become Christ's; and the other is the choicenesse or excellency of his nature;
both these are in all the people of Christ, and in none but the people of
Christ; and if you find these upon your hearts, then are you the people of
Christ; and if you be his people, then assuredly he dyed to save you from your
sins.

They are the sheep of Christ (his sheep for whom he did lay down his life) His
Sheep.
who do hear his voice and follow him; thus does Christ himself describe his
sheep, John 10 27. My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me. And Ver. 28. I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish: Well then, hence a
man Hence a man may conclude, Negatively.
may conclude both Negatively and Affirmatively:

I do not hear the voice of Christ, ^or do I follow him; I disregard his voice,
and disobey his voice; therefore as yet I am none of his sheep, and
consequently I cannot assure my self that Christ did lay down his life for me.

And on the contrary, one can say I do hear the voice of Christ, and I do
follow Affirmatively.
him. His voice says Come unto me, Matthew. 11. 28. and I come unto him; his
voice says, Open the door, Revel. 3. 20. and receive me; and my heart is open
unto him, and I do receive him; his voice says, Be converted that your sins
may be blotted out, Acts 2. 19. and I do repent and am converted; his voice
says, Hearken unto me and your souls shall live, Isa. 55. 2. and I do obey
this voice of Christ, I hearken unto him and yield up my self to the service
and obedience of his will. Why hence I can conclude, I am therefore one of the
sheep of Christ; and being so. I am sure that Christ did lay down his life for
me.

Again, Jesus Christ says that he lays down his life for his friends: And in
His friends.
that very place he gives two Characters of such who are indeed his friends.

One on their parts: Joh. 15. 14. Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I
command you.

The other on his part: Ver. 15. I have called you friends, for all things that
I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you. The meaning is, As
betwixt friends there is a reciprocal love, so there is between Christ and his
friends; Christ loves them, and they love Christ. That they love Christ as
friends, (indeed) appears by their readiness to do whatsoever Christ shall be
pleased to command; they are ready to take up his will, and are cheerfully at
his command: That Christ loves them as his friends, appears by the
manifestation and communicating unto them the secrets of his Father; he tells
unto them the love and mind of his Father in the great concernments of
salvation, which he does not effectually make known to every man. So now this
stands as a firm and unmovable ttuth, that Christ did effectually lay down
his life for his friends: And secondly, that they are the very friends of
Christ, who (first) are at the command of Christ; And (secondly) unto whom
Christ does in a more special and familiar way make known the mind of his
Father in the matters of salvation. Therefore if you do experimentally find an
heart readily and cheerfully affected to all the will and command of Christ,
What will thou have me to do? his commands are not grievous, I delight to do
thy will; then are you sure that you are one of the friends of Christ; and if
so, then are you sure that Christ laid down his life for you. And if you do
experimentally find such impartings of Christ to you from the Father (which
the men of the world know not) in the sense of his love, and taste of his
mercy, and fruits of his grace, and efficacies of h^s Spirit, thence you may
certainly conclude that you are his friends; (for Christ effectually makes
these known only to his friends) and if you be his friends, then undoubtedly
Christ dyed for you, he laid down his life to save you.

To this purpose might I go over the other instances of the body, and of the
Church of Christ; but I have said enough unto this choice distinction.

2. Secondly, One may know that Christ dyed for him in particular, by the
quality of those persons who in Scripture have been able to say upon sure
grounds that Christ dyed for them, and redeemed them; and unto whom the
benefits of his death have been applied in particular. It is a true rule,
Parium est par Ratio and par Affirmatio; Put seve^al men into the same and like
condition, and into the same and like relation, and into the same and like
capacity, then what interest and privileges one has, the same interest and
privileges the other has; and upon what ground the one can plead and
conclude, upon the same may the other plead and conclude. I shall make use of
this to the present purpose: You read in Scriptu^e of some who have been able
to say Christ loved me, and gave himself for me; (Paul said so, Gal. 2. 20.) By
the quality of the persons who have been able to say upon sure grounds that
Christ dyed for them.
And I know my Redeemer lives; (Job said so, chap. 19. 15) And this is my
beloved, and this is my friend; and I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine;
(the Church said so, Cant. 5. 16. and Cant. 6. 3.)

And of some to whom the ben^fits of the death of Christ have been particularly
applied and attributed. Luke 7. 48. He said unto her Thy sins are forgiven.
Matthew. 9. 2. Jesus says unto the sick of the Palsy, Son be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee. 1 John 2. 12. I write unto you little children, because
your sins are forgiven you for his Names sake. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. Revel. 5. 8. Thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood. Now consider what was the quality and disposition of
these persons who were able confidently and upon sure grounds thus to speak,
and of whom these things were thus affirmed; and if you find the same
spiritual disposition in your selves, you may then certainly conclude Christ
gave himself for you, and he is your Redeemer, and your sins are forgiven you,
etc.

Quest. Why, what kind of persons were they?

Sol. They were effectually called persons; as Paul, who says in Gal. 1. 15.
That it pleased God to call him by his grace: And so were the Corinthians
called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2. And called unto the fellowship of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, Ver. 9. And they were upright persons, fearing God, and
eschewing evil; such an one was Job, chap. 1. 8. And they were mourning and
repenting persons; such an one was the woman, Luke 7. 37, 38. And longing after
Christ; such an one was that person in Matthew. 9. 2. And united unto Christ by
Faith and Love, filled with high thoughts, desires and delights; so was the
Church mentioned in the ^anticles, and the rest spoken of in the other places.
Why then, if any man can say upon good grounds God has called me by his grace
unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ, he may certainly conclude, Christ
dyed for me, and gave himself for me; I was thus and thus sinful; but God has
converted me: I was a blasphemer, and a persecuto^ etc. And if any man can say,
My heart thirsts and longs for Christ, and my soul is matched with Christ, he
is the beloved of my soul. Why, I say unto that man, Christ loved thee, and
gave himself for thee. And if any man finds himself a mourning and repenting
sinner, I can say to him, Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. And if
any man finds his heart upright with God and with Christ, that man may surely
conclude with By his interest in the cond^tion of faith.
Job, I know that my Redeemer lives.

3. Thirdly, One may know that Christ dyed for him in particular, by his
interest in that condition of faith upon which Christ certainly becomes ours in
his person and benefits. If any one of ^s do indeed believe on Christ,
assuredly God the Father intended his salvation, in the giving of Christ; and
Jesus Christ intended and wrought the remission of his sins, and the salvation
of his soul by his death. Hearken what the Word of God speaks in several
places to this purpose: John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Acts 10. 43. Whosoever believes on him, shall receive
remission of sins. Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Mark 16. 16. He that believes, shall be saved.
1 Cor 1. 30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctifica^ion and redemption. In those places it is most
evident that whosoever believes on Christ, he is certainly interested in
Christ, and in all the benefits depending on Christ's death; he is delivered
from perishing; he shall have everlasting life; he shall receive the remission
of sins; his peace is made with God; Christ is wisdom and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, and salvation unto him.

Object. You will say this is true and unquestionable, that whosoever believes
on Christ, he is certainly interested in the death of Christ, and in all the
benefits of his death; but here lies the scruple* I doubt whether my faith be
that very faith which does indeed interest a person in Christ, whether it be
faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And faith that is precious, 2 Pet. 1. 1. And faith
that is justifying, Romans 5. 1. And faith that is saving, Ephesians. 2. 8.

Sol. I will not expatiate in the answer of this, because I have upon several
occasions How I may know my faith does interest me in Christ.
spoken already much of the nature and properties of true faith; what I would
say to the present scruple (whether my faith be the very faith which does
interest me in Christ, and in the benefits of his death) is this. That faith is
true, and truly interesting in Christ and in his benefits, which

First, is seated in an heart broken with the sense of sin, and deeply
apprehensive of the need of a dying Christ; such was theirs in Acts 2. 37. etc.
and his in Acts 16. 29, 30, 31.

Secondly, Is raised and created by the exceeding greatness of the power of
God, and according to the working of his mighty power, Ephesians. 1. 10.

Thirdly, Is let in by the Ministry of the Gospel, and upon Gospel-offers, and
calls, and promises, and assurances. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye also trusted,
after that ye heard the Word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation, Matthew. 11.
28. Joh. 6. 36, 37. Rev. 3. 20.

Fourthly, Raises the heart to high and precious thoughts of Christ; (unto you
that believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7.) all is nothing without Christ; And
if I have but Christ, I have enough; he is life, and best of all.

Fifthly, Draws out earnest and unsatiable desires, never resting without the
enjoyment of Christ, and parting with all which stands in opposition to that
enjoyment.

Sixthly, Makes the heart to receive Christ, Joh. 1. 12. yea, gladly to receive
Christ, Acts 2. 41. yea, whole Christ, the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 16. ^0.
there to dwell, Ephesians. 3. 17. and there to rule and reign.

Seventhly, And to depend on Christ, placing all our confidence on him, and in
none, and on nothing but him: Phil. 3. 3. We rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have
no confidence in the flesh. Ver. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness which is of the Law; but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.

Eighthly, And to love Christ (faith which works by love, Gal. 5. 6.) who
shows so much love, as to give himself to death to save me.

I will go no farther; Find me but such a faith as this, and I assure you, I
assure you; nay, the Gospel of Christ assures you, that this is true faith;
th^s is the Faith which makes Christ yours, in his Person, and in all the
Benefits of his Death.

And one thing more observe by the way, that though this faith be but weak,
though it be but as the smoking flax, though it be but as a grain of
Mustardseed; though it be much assaulted with Satan's temptations, though it be
ofttimes shaken with fears and doubtings: Yet if it be but of so much life and
power to match thy heart to Christ, to bring it in to Christ, to set him up as
thy Lord, and as thy Savior; and to roll, and rest, and cast thy soul and
confidence on him, it is true Faith, and Christ is thine, and thou may
safely conclude that Christ dyed for thee, and made peace for thee, etc.

Fourthly, One may know that Christ did effectually dye for him by the
Combination By the combination of benefits purchased by the death of Christ.
of the Benefits purchased by the death of Christ, and by the conjoined
participation of them in respect of himself. Beloved, the benefits purchased by
the death of Christ are many (as Remission of sins, and Reconciliation with
God, and Eternal life, and Redemption, and Sanctification, etc.) And these
purchased Benefits, they were all of them purchased at once and together, and
all of them with respect to every Believer, and in time every one of them is
applied to every Believer. Christ did not purchase Remission of sins for one
believer only, and Reconciliation only for another believer, and Grace only for
another, and Glory only for another; neither does Christ apply these partly to
one, and partly to another, but he purchased them for every one that shall
believe, and he applies them to every one that does believe. 1 Cor. 6. 11. But
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the
Lord, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. 1 John 5. 6. This is he that
came by Water and Blood, even Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, Unto which let me add the fifth character by which one may know By
the ends of the death of Christ.
that Christ died for him, viz. by the ends of the death of Christ in respect
of us, and the appearance of them upon our hearts and lives. 2 Cor. 5. 15. He
died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him who died for them, and rose again. Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself
for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works: 1 Pet. 2. 24. who his own self bare our
sins in his own body upon the Cross, that we being dead to sin, should live
unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed.

In these places you see five ends of the death of Christ for us:

1. That he might redeem us from all iniquity (i. e.) set us at liberty from
bondage unto our sinful lusts, that henceforth we should not serve sin, Romans
6. 6.

2. That we should be dead to sin (i. e.) our hearts and affections should be
mortified and crucified unto them; not love them, not desire them, not delight
in them, not hearken to them, not be led by them any more.

3. That henceforth we should not live unto our selves (i. e.) intend and set
up our own ends and interests, our own praise and glory, our own profit and
benefit, our own pleasure and contentments.

4. That we should be a peculiar people, be his, be for him unto himself,
purified by his spirit, and joined by the same Spirit unto himself, and led and
drawn forth in his strength unto all good works, affectionately and fervently.

5. That we should live unto him who died for us, and live unto righteousness,
(i. e.) exalt the will, and ways, and honor of Christ count nothing too dear
for him, spend, and be spent for him; take his directions, obey his commands,
serve his ends, act entirely, and thoroughly, and willingly, and cheerfully, and
fully, and constantly in all conditions, and in all trials for Christ's
interest, and the magnifying of Christ. O Beloved, let us seriously try our
interest in the death of Christ by these Ends of the death of Christ which are
certainly accomplished (in due time) in all for whom Christ died.

There are two sorts of the virtues of the death of Christ.

1. Some are for us; he died for to satifie for us, and to make peace for us,
and to purchase Remission of sins for us, and to obtain salvation for us. 2.
Some are in us, as to redeem us from all iniquity, to crucify our sins, to
purify us unto himself a peculiar people, etc.
Christ died for our sins, and he died that we might dye unto our sins (Our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin, Romans 6. 6. The blood of Christ was a
pacifying blood, (having made peace through the blood of his Cross, Col. 1.
20.) And the blood of Christ is a purifying blood, it purges the conscience
from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. He died as our Surety and
Priest, and to this end also did Christ die and rise again, that he might be
Lord both of the dead and the living, Romans 14. 9 Therefore if you be yet in
your sins, if you be not dead unto them; if you love them, if you serve them,
you cannot assure your selves (as yet) that Christ dyed for you: But on the
contrary, if you can truly say (as the Apostle, Romans 6. 17, 18.) We were the
servants of sin, but we are made free from sin, and are become the servants of
righteousness; we are healed by the stripes of Christ, and we are made
conformable unto his death, we find the similitude of his Death and
Resurrection in us; we are not our own but Christ's; his we are, and none but
his; our hearts are his, and our lives are his; why then be confident that
Christ is yours, and his death is yours, and all the benefits of his death are
yours.

Sixthly, One may know that Christ died for him, by the Grounds, By the grounds
and causes, and order of attaining that certainty.
and Causes, and Order of attaining unto that certainty of knowledge, and
persuasion that Christ died for him.

For your help in this, take notice of three Particulars.

1. A right and undeceiving assurance that Christ died for us, has two sure
Grounds: One is, the Testimony of the Word; the other is, the Testimony of
Conscience renewed. The Word says, Whosoever believes, shall not perish, but
have everlasting life: Renewed conscience says, but thou believe, yea thou
believe aright; thy faith work by love; Ergo.

2. A right and undeceiving knowledge, it has very choice causes; it arises
from Faith, and it arises from the Spirit of Christ: no man can give himself
this assurance or certain knowledge that Christ died for him: As no man can say
that Christ is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; So no man can say Christ is my
Lord, and my Savior, but by the Holy Ghost.

3. A right and undeceiving assurance that Christ died for me, is attained in
an orderly way: It is not the first work to be found in us, but it follows many
precedent works in the soul, as the sealing follows the writing; viz. it
follows

1. Deep sense of sin and misery. 2. A Spiritual Conviction of our own
impotency, and insufficiency, and absolute need of Christ. 3. Earnest desires
after Christ, and for faith to lay hold on Christ. 4. Many conflicts 'twixt
weak faith, and doubtings and fears. 5. Peculiar supplications for the
evidencing of the love of Christ, and for particular persuasions of our
interest in him, and in the benefits of his death. 6. Attendance upon God in
the Ordinances of Christ, etc.
Seventhly, You may know that Christ died for your sins, by the concomitant
presence of some choice qualities in every person rightly assured of Christ's
dying By the concomitant presence of some chief qualities.
for him. v. g.

1. A tender mournfulness of heart. Zech. 12. 10. They shall look on him whom
they have pierced, and shall mourn as a man mourns for his only child Never did
the child mourn more, etc. There is a twofold mourning, and both necessary:
one from sense of sin as grieving God; the other from the sense of love in
pardoning sin.

2. An exceeding joy: Romans 5. 11. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom we have received the Atonement.

3. An inflamed love. Luke 7. 47. Her sins which are many are forgiven, for she
loved much. (For) is not Causal but Illative, q. d. therefore she loved much.
None so loved as this loving Christ.

4. A sweet Peace and Tranquillity: Romans 5. 1. Being justified by Faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; when we know that our peace
is made by Christ, presently peace arises in the conscience, the storm is
over, and we are at land: Now conscience excuses, comforts, supports, answers,
etc. all is well, the Sword is sheathed.

8. Lastly, you may know that Christ died for you, by the fruits and effects By
the fruits and eff^cts which flow from it.
which do flow from that certain knowledge, and that particular assurance. v.
g.

1. Singular loathings of sin: Romans 6. 1, 2. Shall we continue in sin that
grace may abound! God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein!

2. Utmost service for Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constrains
us, acts us, fills us, carries us on as men possessed, or as a ship with the
wind: Act. 21. 13. I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at
Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

3. Special delight in Christ, and in the word of Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 3. As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: If so
be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious; as if he had said, the man
that knows that the Lord is gracious, and gracious to him, and has tasted of
the sweetness of his love to his soul, must needs delight in, and long after
the Word, as the Babe does after the milk of the breast.

4. Yet more desires to partake of more from Christ: Phil. 3. 10. That I may
know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable to his death. verse 12. Not as though I had
already attained, or were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I may
apprehend that for which I also am apprehended of Christ Jesus.

5. Watchful fear, by no means to offend or displease Christ, so loving a
Christ, so kind, so good a Christ; so unwilling, and so afraid is the assured
person to sin against Christ any more, that he could be content presently to
d^e, and to be with Christ, where there is no more a possibility to offend him,
etc.

6. Answerable returns unto Christ who suffered and died for me, v. g. He loved
me, and I therefore love him; He abased himself for me, and I abase my self for
him; He gave himself for me, and I give my self to him; He obeyed his Fathers
will for me, and I obey his will; He suffered for me, and I am willing to
suffer for him, in my name, in my body, in my life. He rose for me, and I live
to him; He justified me, and I justify him; He pleades for me in Heaven, and I
plead for him on Earth; He has purchased glory for me, and I give glory to
him, etc.

Thus have you heard the Decision of this great Practical Question how a person
may know that Christ died for him. Now be^^re I shut up this Discourse, I will
propound and give answer unto some Cases of Conscience in relation to this
Point in which I am ^iscoursing.

1. How one may know that he is deluded in his Conscience that Christ dyed for
him. 2. What one should do, who (as yet) cannot certainly affirm that Christ
died for him? 3. Whether every one for whom Christ effectually dyed, does
(sometime or other) in this life attain unto the certain evidence thereof? 4.
Whether a person having attained to the certain knowledge of Christ's dying for
him, may ever after that doubt and question the same again? and whether new
doubtings overthrow a certainty of knowledge? 5. What advantage any Christian
has by the certain knowledge that Christ died for him as his Mediator?
Case 1. How one may know that he is deluded in his Confidence that Christ How
one may know he is deluded in his confidence of Christ's d^ing for him. A
twofold confidence.
dyed for him?

There is (I confess) a twofold confidence about the Application of the Death
of Christ; One arising from Faith and the Spirit of God, who bears witness
with our spirits that we are the Children of God; The other arises from
presumption, and the spirit of Delusion, wherein a person dreams that he eats,
but he is empty; and dreams that he possesses, and he is poor; and dreams that
Christ is his, and died for his sins, and made his peace, but he is deceived,
there is no such matter at all.

Now there are four things which do manifestly declare that the confidence
That confidence is but a delusion, Which is contrary to the Word.
which some men have that Christ dyed for them, is but a delusion.

1. When that confidence is contrary to the Word: Every true and sound
persuasion of our interest in Christ, and in the benefits of his death, is
conformable to the testimony of the Word; and every false persuasion or
confidence is contrary to the Word; as it has no word of God to bottom upon,
so it has the Word of God to unbottom and contradict it.

You are confident that Christ dyed to save you, and to purchase the pardon of
sins, etc. And yet you remain an ignorant, and impenitent, a disobedient, and
unbelieving sinner; you still love your sins, and will not forsake them; your
heart is hardened in sin, and you mourn not for sin, you despise the Gospel of
Christ, and truth of Christ, and calls of Christ, and paths of Christ, and
subjection to Christ, and communion with Christ! And yet you are confident that
Christ died effectually (...) for your salvation! And what warrant have you
thus to lay claim to him, and to his benefits? The Word says, Whosoever
believes on him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16, 36.
And he that believes not shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him: And you believe not on him; where is now your confidence? the Word says,
be converted, and repent, that your sins may be blotted out, Acts 3. 19. And
Christ says, that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
Name, Luke 24. 47. But you repent not, you do not, you will not forsake your
sins. The Word says, that Christ is the Author of salvation to all that obey
him, Hebr. 5. 9. But you will not obey him; he calls you off from your sins,
and he calls you off from the world, and he calls you to fellowship with
himself, and he calls you unto holiness; but you will not obey him in any of
these calls; therefore your confidence in the benefits of his death, is a mere
presumption and delusion, it is not warranted by the Word; nay, the Word is
expressly contrary unto it.

2. When that confidence is but natural, and easily believed: The right
confidence Which is but natural, and easily believed.
that Christ dyed for us, it is supernatural and difficult; we cannot give it
to our selves, it is a persuasion given unto us, and it costs us many prayings,
and many tears, and many bearings, and many waitings upon God before we can
attain unto it: But a deluding confidence that is natural and easy, the person
never gets it by prayer; never wrestled with God for it, never attended the
Word for it, never conflicted with doubts and fears, was never at any cost for
it, but was confident all his days; no antecedent conflict, no present
conflict; presumption is a work of our own, a mere fancy of our own, and a mere
delusion of our own.

Thirdly, When that confidence is fruitless and loose, it produces no love
Which is fruitless.
at all to Christ, nor fear to offend Christ, nor care to please Christ; nay,
instead of these, there is a boldness to sin the more, and to continue
impenitent, because Christ dyed for sinners, and his death is sufficient to
expiate the greatest transgressions; whereas a right confidence of the benefits
of the death of Christ makes men more holy and obedient. 1 John 2. 3. We know
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
Ver. 3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as he
is pure.

Fourthly, When that confidence or assurance is easily swept away in time of
Which is easily swept away in time of trial.
trial, either by conscience or by afflictions, or by sickness or by the
approachings of death; His confidence shall be rooted out of his Tabernacle,
and shall bring him to the King of terrors, said Bildad in Job 18. 14. A
deluding confidence usually ends in a despairing diffidence; but so does not a
right and wellgrounded confidence, it will hold out in all afflictions and
trials whatsoever. Romans 8. 38, 39. I am persuaded that neither death nor life,
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Yea, it will hold
out in death it self, when all the hopes of the hypocrite shall perish. 2 Timothy
4. 6. I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.
Ver. 7. I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith. Ver. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day.

From all this let us learn carefully to try our very confidences of our
interest in Christ, and in the benefits of his death; remember but three things.

1. Your interest is never the more for all your confidence; confidence gives
no propriety, though sometimes it follows it.

2. Your interest is the less if your confidence be false. A troubled and
doubting Christian may be brought in to Christ, and partake of him, and of his
benefits, when the bold, confident, presumptuous sinner keeps off, and hides
himself, even because he is boistrously confident.

3. You will certainly be lost if you rest in this confident delusion; it is a
broken bottom, and a dream which will destroy you.

Case 2. What a person should do who (as yet) cannot certainly affirm What a
person should do who as yet cannot certainly affirm that Christ dyed for him.
that Christ dyed for him, and that he has any interest in the benefits of his
death?

Sol. This is the case of many troubled souls, and their exceeding burden and
fear, unto whom I would commend, 1. A few Cautions. 2. A few Directions.

1. Cautions. Cautions to such. Do not cashiere your title.


1. Do not cashiere your title. Though (all this while) you cannot clear your
interest, although you cannot conclude for it, yet do not conclude against it,
nor yet despair; for

1. This dark condition is incident to most (if not all) weak believers, who
are baptized in a cloud, though they drink of the rock; (i. e.) Christ indeed
is theirs, although they do not see him to be theirs; and the blood of Christ
was shed for them, although the assurance thereof be not shed abroad in their
hearts; yea and pardon of their sins is sealed, although as yet it be not
revealed to them; they do not find this in a sensible experience, but yet they
may find all this in Gods promise.

2. Thy estate may be sure, when as yet you are not assured. It may be day,
though the Sun does not gloriously appear; I confess that faith of evidence
makes our condition joyful; but yet the faith of adherence can make it sure and
blessed; for that is it which interests us into Christ, and Christ is he who
interests us into pardon and freedom; you shall be saved because you are
Christ's, not because you know that you are so.

3. Nay, great fear and troubles (because of unassurances) may and do usually
end in sweetest and fullest assurance, especially when those fears and troubles
raise many prayers, much tenderness in conscience, and serious diligence, and
humble and upright walking.

Secondly, Though you have not your wages, yet do not give up your works;
Though you have not your wages, do not give over your work.
Do not say I will pray no more, and hear no more, and wait no longer;
whatsoever you may imagine, yet I assure you of this, it is nothing else but
proud unbelief, when God shall hear no longer from us, because it is long
before we hear from God, and we therefore lessen duty, because God is pleased
to withold comforts. Give all diligence to make your calling and election
sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. So say I, Be diligent still in praying, and be diligent
still in hearing, and be diligent still in holy and upright walking; though
these be not assurances, yet these are the way unto assurance; if you cannot be
joyful friends, yet be faithful servants; if you cannot rejoice to do his will,
it will not be long ere you shall rejoice in knowing his love. Esaias 64. 5. Thou
meetest him, (...) rejoyce^^, and works righteousness, those that remember
thee in thy ways.

Thirdly, If you would have the light, do not then shut up the window, and If
you would have the light, do not shut up the window.
draw the curtain; Do not hinder what you desire: You would be assured that
Christ is yours, and dyed for you, then do you not hinder the dawning of this
day star in your own hearts. A person hinders his assurance many ways; viz.

1. By great transgressions; these are the thick and dark clouds which will
make the Sun to set at Noonday, and will not suffer it to rise until after
great humiliations: David found it so, Psalm. 51. Exodus 25. 21. Thou shall put
the mercyseat above upon the Ark, and in the Ark thou shall put the testimony
that I shall give thee. Ver. 22. And there I will meet with thee, and I will
commune with thee from above the mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubims
which are upon the Ark of the testimony: And you shall never meet with the
mercy-seat, if you slight the Ark of the testimony; you cannot venture on any
sin (be it never so secret) but you shall thereby dishonor your God, break
your peace, lame your prayers, set back your confidence, and either strike off,
or else delay your assurance.

2. By careless neglects; when a man will not take pains to recover lost
assurance; it was the case of those in Cant. 5. 3. I have put off my Coat, how
shall I put it on?

3. By cherishing unbelief and jealousies; in misinterpreting, and misapplying
all that God speaks or does. If he threatens wrath, why I am the man! If mercy
be at any time distinguished from any sorts of sinners, alas, then mercy
belongs not to me! If the hypocrite be described, then I fear such a one am I!
If the presumptuous person, then am not I he! If promises be unfolded, I fear
they are not my portion! If the love of Christ, I doubt it as to me! If
relations and titles to Christ, sure they are not in me in truth! If Arguments
to satisfy and settle the heart, O but I may not join with them! When a
troubled sinner is apt to join with all that will trouble, and to take part
with all that will weaken his faith, and that will strengthen his unbelief, and
his great work lies in excepting, and in questioning, and in disputing away his
helps and encouragements to believe, this will hinder his assurance; that which
hinders faith, will hinder assurance.

Directions.

If you would come to this assurance that Christ dyed for you:

First, Be humbly mournful; Christ said to Mary when she w^^ weeping, Be humbly
mournful.
her sins are forgiven her, Luke 7. 47. Christ was sent to bind up the
brokenhearted, and to give the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61. 1, 3. A broken heart is near unto
joy; Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Matthew. 5. 4. And
so is the humble heart, which judges it self less than the least of mercies,
and unworthy to be called a son, and trusts not to any thing in it self, and is
made up altogether of the grace of God in Christ; this heart is near to peace,
and to the Spirit of consolation. Isa. 57. 15. I dwell in the high and holy
place, with him also who is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Isa. 66. 2.
To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my Word.

Secondiy, Be earnest in prayer, Pray without ceasing, pray and faint not; pray
to know the love of Christ, pray especially for the love of Christ, for the Be
earnest in prayer.
light of that Spirit, and for the testimony of that Spirit, because it is his
work and office to seal and assure us; and pray for those assuring promises of
pardon; Rev. 2. 17. Isa. 60. 16.

There are two choice works of the Spirit.

1. One is to draw and persuade the sinner to come to Christ, to believe on
him, to receive him.

2. The other is to assure the believer of his relation to Christ, and of
Christ's relation to him; that he is Christ's, and that Christ is his; that he
loved him, and gave himself for him: O pray, and continue this prayer, that the
Spirit of Christ may be given unto you, to open and reveal all that is given to
you, etc.

Thirdly, Attend the Ordinances of Christ; the Word and Sacraments, and the
communion of Saints. Attend the Ordinances of Christ.


The Word of the Gospel, it is the Word of peace as well as of grace; as it is
the means of faith, so it is the means of assurance; it does bring us to
Christ, and it can (Ministerially) evidence our interest in the things of
Christ. 1 John 5. 13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the
Name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life. How many
doubts do you (who are weak believers) find answered in the Ministry of the
Gospel? how often has your weak faith been raised by it, and your hearts
encouraged to trust; and many times refreshed and revived with confidences and
persuasions that indeed Christ is you^s, and shed his blood for the remission
of your sins?

And for the Sacrament, you know that it is the seal of righteousness which is
by faith, Romans 4. 11. As a seal assures and confirms the matter contained and
conveyed in a Deed, so does the Sacrament confirm and assure weak believers of
all the good of the Covenant, and of all the benefits purchased by the blood of
Christ; that Ordinance is appointed only for believers; and it is appointed for
this very end, to strengthen their faith, and to breed assurance in them of
their union and communion with Christ.

And as for the communion of Saints, I would to God that we knew it more; the
helps are very great therein; we may freely open our hearts, and the spiritual
condition of them one to another; and meet with such experiences, and such
directions, resolves and satisfactions, and such supports and encouragements,
and comforts, and succors of prayers, as would much conduce toward our
assurance, etc.

Fourthly, Look well to your faith; strengthen that, and manage that well, for
Look to your faith.
that gets the first sight, and has the first news of pardon and salvation;
let me commend unto you three things about this.

1. Take some pains to clear it out that you have faith in truth; my reason for
this advice is, first; If that were evidenced, you may then certainly conclude
your particular interest. Secondly, till it be evidenced, your doubts and fears
about a personal application will be still in force; yea, if I were sure that I
had faith in truth, then indeed I may conclude that Christ is mine, and dyed
for me; but I am not su^e of that.

2. Act your faith on Christ; glorify him so far, as to venture on him alone
for your pardon, for your peace, for your salvation; you know what he is, and
what he has done and suffered; and you know that your hearts are given up unto
him, and have chosen him to be your Lord Jesus Christ: well (now) rely on him
as yours, and on his blood as shed for the remission of your sins. Trust him
upon his Word which he has spoken of all that believe on him, that they shall
not perish, but have everlasting life; why, this is a faithful saying, I will
cast my self upon him whom I have believed, I will trust that in his Name, and
by his blood God has forgiven my sins, and is reconciled to me, etc. You would
not imagine how much this would conduce to assurance.

3. Live by faith; although you cannot read your pardon or peace in experience,
yet you may read it in the promises; (he that believes shall be saved;
whosoever believes on him, shall receive remission of sins, etc.) Now live
awhile upon these promises, give glory to them; if you can live upon the truth
of them, you shall ere long taste the goodness of them.

Fifthly, Patiently wait upon God; do not quarrel with him, nor limit him to
this prayer, nor to this time; but keep on in his ways by upright walking, and
Patiently wait upon God.
humbly expect the answer and issue. Psalm. 81. 8. I will hearken (says David)
what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his Saints. Cant. 3.
1. By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves. Ver. 2. I will rise and
go about the City, in the streets, and in the broad ways I will seek him whom
my soul loves. Ver. 3. I said unto the watchmen, Saw ye him whom my soul
loves? Ver. 4. It was but a little that I passed from him, but I found him
whom my soul loves.

Whether every one who is indeed ^^deemed ^y Christ, may know some time or
other that Christ dyed for him?
Case 3. Whether every one who is indeed redeemed by Christ, does certainly
know (some time or other) that Christ dyed for him in particular? Or whether
every one for whom Christ effectually dyed, does (some time or other) attain
unto a certain evidence thereof in this life?

Sol. This is a very nice question, and I would warily speak unto it; six
things will be granted by us.

First, That every believing person may attain unto this certain evidence;
there are causes and means sufficient to produce it; promises, faith, spirit,
conscience, etc.

Secondly, That every believing person should attain it; it is pressed upon him
in the Word, to strive to make it sure, and to come to the assurance of faith.

Thirdly, That God has promised such a knowledge unto all that are his in
Covenant. Hosea 2. 23. I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy:
and I will say unto them that were not my people, Thou art my people; and they
shall say Thou art my God.

Fourthly, The Church of Christ, and Believers both in the Old and in the New
Testament (generally) have obtained unto this evidence; Doubtless thou art our
Father. Isa. 63. 16. And O Lord thou art our Father; see we beseech thee, we
are all thy people. Isa. 64. 8, 9. Abraham, Job, David, the Church in the
Canticles, my beloved is mine, and I am his; Paul, and those Believers in
Corinth, they were sealed, and had given unto them the earnest of the spirit in
their hearts: 2 Cor. 1. 12. The believing Ephesians had the like. In whom after
ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the
earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians 1. 13. and of the Thessalonians, the Apostle
says, that the Gospel came not in word only, but also in power, and in the
holy Ghost, and in much assurance, 1 These. 1. 5.

Fifthly, There are many Believers among our selves who can say, as Paul of
Christ, he loved me, and gave himself for me.

Sixthly, There are many weak Believers who as yet cannot certainly say thus
much, although they may safely say so much; for the weakest faith gives an
interest in Christ, and therefore in his benefits.

Now for a direct answer to the case, I conceive that every true Believer
effectually Every believer does some time or other attain unto it.
brought in by the Gospel to Christ, does some time or other attain unto a
certain evidence that christ is his, and dyed for him; only let me distingnish
concerning this Assertion, and then I will give you my reasons why I think so.

You must distinguish of Assurance or Evidence thus; it is either Some
distinctions about it.


1. Real; which is so much light, as indeed declares the truth of interest or
relation; it over-tops actual doubtings in their prevalency; it turns the
scale; it makes a soul to know thy faith is right, and Christ belongs to thee,
and dyed therefore for thee.

2. Gradual; which is like the Sun at Noonday; there is such an i^lustrious
evidence of our relation unto, and propriety in Christ, that there is not only
no fear or doubts, but also an abundant assurance and satisfaction that Christ
is ours. Now I dare not affirm this latter of every one for whom Christ dyed;
a triumphant assurance ordinarily is the portion of those who have been
extraordinarily humbled, and who are picked out for great se^vices, or who are
sufferers for Christ; yet the former (some time or other) is the portion of
every Believer. Again, there is an assurance,

1. More fixed and permanent, which abides and dwells with the soul for a long
space of time.

2. More quick and transient, which I would call a saluting assurance; Jesus
Christ does give an hint by the Spirit of his love, and of his relation
sometimes in our mournings, sometimes in our praying, sometimes in our
meditations, sometimes in our hearings, Be of good comfort, Thy sins are
forgiven thee. And this revives the soul, but it does not last long upon the
soul. Though every Believer (for whom Christ dyed) perhaps attains not unto the
permanent assurance; yet, I humbly conceive, that some time or other he does to
the transient assurance. Once more, there is an assurance,

1. Mediate by way of Argument, which is a conclusion from unquestionable
premises; as thus, He that believes, shall be saved; and he that repents, shall
be pardoned. Now a person thoroughly searching and weighing his condition by the
Word and conscience, finds full grounds that he believes, and that he repents;
and therefore by an Argumentative faith and conscience concludes certainly that
his sins are pardoned, and that his soul shall be saved.

2. Immediate, by way of Illumination, when the Spirit of Christ lets in such a
brightness of light, that we do plainly see all his workmanship of faith and
grace in our hearts, and all our titles and relations to Christ;

reasons inducing me to this opinion, are these; viz.

First, Some assurance is necessary, though not to the absolute being of a
Christian, yet unto his comfortable being, and unto the honor of the believing
condition; the soul would faint and fail if it should walk under perpetual
silence and darkness; but God will not suffer that; therefore some time or
other he comforts the soul; and that comfort lies in this assurance of inte^est
in Christ, and in the benefits of his death.

Secondly, The earnest groans of the Spirit, and requests causally made by it
are not in vain; for he makes requests according to the will of God, Romans 8.
27. 1 John 5. 14. which request does certainly speed first or last; but every
Believer earnestly prays for assurance; yea, Christ himself says, John 16. 23.
Whatsoever you shall ask, the Father in my Name he will give it you: ver. 24.
Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full: Whence I infer, If the
Father will give whatsoever we ask in the Name of Christ, then he will give us
assurance. If we shall upon asking receive such an answer, that our joy shall
be full, then (some time or other) we shall receive this assurance; for upon
this depends our joy and fullness of joy.

Thirdly, Some time or other, in this life every believer attains unto true
peace of conscience; (for 1. That is one portion bought for us by the blood of
Christ to be enjoyed in this life. 2. That is expressly and often promised
unto the people of God, he will speak peace unto them, and will create the
fruits of the lips, peace unto them. 3. Otherwise the renewed conscience would
be of as little comfort as the evil conscience; but that peace of conscience
flows from some evidence that God is satisfied and reconciled unto us in
Christ, and has pardoned our sins, and will save us; for if these things be
not done, and if we in some measure know them not to be done, conscience cannot
speak peace unto us.

Fourthly, God will not be wanting to any of his people in any means which may
serve to draw out their love and praises: That God who expects our praises, and
delights in our love, certainly will present unto us the best means for our
love and praises. Now of all means whatsoever, for the quickening and drawing
forth of these, none is comparable unto the assurance or certain knowledge that
Christ is ours, and God is reconciled unto us in Christ, and has for his sake
forgiven us our sins.

Fifthly, The sealing Ordinance of the Lords Supper is purposely instituted for
to bring the believer in Christ to an assurance of his interest in the benefits
of the death of Christ; and shall this never take effect in the believer for
whose sake it is instituted, and who is told in particular, This is my body
which was broken for you? 1 Cor. 11. 24. and given for you; Luke 22. 19. and
This cup is the New Testament in my blood which is shed for you, ver. 20.

Sixthly, Nay, it would be very strange that any Believer should be interested
in such a choice love of God and Christ, and be brought into so near an union
with Christ, as to be married unto him. Hosea 2. 19. and yet Christ should
never tell or assure him that he loves him; it is the nature of love to
manifest it self; and also into so gracious a communion with the Father and the
Son, as to have fellowship with them, 1 John 1. 3. every day to converse with
them, and yet never know their love unto him. Moreover, that God the Father,
and Christ his Son should come unto him, and make their abode with him, Joh.
14. 23. and that Christ should promise, He that loves me, shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto him, ver. 21. and yet
that this believing person should never in all his life have any knowledge of
this, especially Christ assuring, all that I have known of the Father, I have
made known unto you! Joh. 15. 15.

Seventhly, Let me add one thing more, that a Believer should have all the
helps and causes apt and able to give him an assurance; (v. g.) all the
promises, faith, a renewed conscience, and the very Spirit of Christ, and yet
all these should lie dormant all his life long, and not give one word of
assurance that he is Christ's, or that Christ is his, and that God is reconciled
to him; surely this does not seem to be probable, especially seeing the
Believer is particularly concerned in all the transactions of Christ, and all
those transactions have a peculiar respect unto him. Nor do I know any solid
objection to the contrary; for though many believers yet complain, and yet
doubt, and yet seek for this assurance: Yet some of these may have had
assurance, and pursue only an higher degree; or if they never yet had, yet they
shall at length find it; and their longing and seeking after it, are the means
to attain to it.

Case 4. Whether the assurance or certain knowledge that Christ is ours,
Whether assurance be of any spiritual advantage to him that has it.
and dyed for our sins, and made our peace, and purchased our salvation, be a
matter of any special advantage unto him that has it?

Sol. I am willing to speak something to this case, because it may serve much
to excite the hearts of believing persons to strive after this assurance, when
they shall hear the singular advantages and benefits thereby.

There are nine admirable advantages and benefits by it.

First, This assurance silenceth all the trouble of the soul, all the doubts
and Nine advantages by it. It silenceth all trouble.
fears, and terrors, and sad suspicions, and apprehensions in the soul; you are
presently off the Sea, and off the Rack, when this assurance comes; in the very
nature of it, and in the inseparable effects of it, it is a present cure and
discharge unto all the anxiety and perplexity of the soul. Fears and doubts,
and troubles of mind, may consist with faith, but they cannot consist with
assurance; if I be once assured that Christ is mine, that he dyed for me, that
my sins are pardoned in his blood, my heart is presently at ease, my conscience
cease to accuse, God appears not as a Judge, but as a Father; all enmity is
slain; what is there to fear or to trouble me? Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies. Who is he that condemns? it
is Christ that dyed. Romans 8. 33, 34.

Secondly, This assurance, as it silenceth all troubles, so it supplies the
heart It supplies the heart with all comforts.
with all comforts; David speaking of the light of Gods countenance, says,
that it put exceeding gladness into his heart, Psalm. 4. 7. and made him to lie
down in peace, ver. 8. Such comfortable operations come from this assurance of
our interest in Christ, and in the benefits of his death; it makes us to
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious; and it produces a peace that
passes all understanding!

And the reason of these comfortable effects, is this, because the certain
knowledge of a man's happiness, and of his propriety in it, necessarily fills
the soul with joy and peace. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom we have received the atonement, Romans 5. 11.

Thirdly, This assurance does quicken all our graces; it is their springtime,
It quickens all our graces.
they act highly upon it, as Solomon's garden of spices did when the South wind
blew upon it, Cant. 4. 16. There is not one grace in the soul but is revived
and enlarged by it: Godly sorrow now fills the Pools with water; see Zach. 12.
10. They shall mourn as a man mourns for his only son, etc. love is enflamed
by it; To whom much is forgiven, the same will love much, Luke 7. 47. All the
motions of love are in assurance, here is love and mercy, and kindness, and
goodness, and bounty to me, and all known by me. And faith rises by it in
stronger confidence and dependence upon God, whom I now know to love me, to be
mine, to be reconciled unto me, etc.

Fourthly, This assurance sets on all our duties and services with such life,
It sets on all our duties with life.
with such affections, with such alacrity; oh how full is the soul with
praising of God, admiring him in Christ, blessing him and his Christ! Bless,
bless, bless the Lord O my soul, who forgiveth all thy iniquities, Psalm. 103.
1, 2, 3. O how quick is the heart become in prayer! it makes haste, it takes
delight to draw near to God, it is enlarged in confidences and desires.

Fifthly, This assurance is a strong preservative against sin, and all
temptations It is a strong preservative against sin and temptation.
thereto: How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? O I have
seen the face of God, the love of Christ, the sweetness of mercy! Should such
a man as I flee! said Nehemiah. So should such a man as I sin! says the
assured Believer. Should I so requite the Lord? Should I make such a return
unto my loving Christ, etc?

Sixthly, This assurance sweetens all our other blessings; it is the Sugar in
the It sweetens all other blessings.
Wine; This land is mine, this house is mine, and this husband, and this wife,
and these riches, this plenty, etc. yea, and Christ is mine, and God is mine,
and peace with God is mine, and forgiveness of sins, and salvation, and I know
that they are mine! Although a man enjoys all these outward blessings, yet if
his conscience tells him Thou have no part in Christ, nor portion in his death,
all thy sins are unpardoned, and Gods justice is unsatisfied, etc. O what a
sinking is this unto him under all his abundance! or if a man be still doubtful
whether he has a part in Christ, this imbitters all his possessions, I know
not what will become of me at the last.

Seventhly, This assurance sweetens all losses and crosses. Job. 9. 2. O that
It sweetens all losses and crosses.
I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me! Ver. 3. when
his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through
darkness; here the light of Gods favor made him walk even in darkness. Romans
8. 55. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation? or
distress? or persecution? or famine? or nakedness? or peril? or sword? Ver.
37. Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerors through him that loved
us. Romans 5. 3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations, etc. 2 Cor. 4.
17. Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know that if the
earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building with God,
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. What may not a man bear, and what
loss is he at who knows Christ to be his, and a reconciled God to be his? etc.

Eighthly, This assurance will ease all our worldly burdens; it will take off
It will ease all our worldly burdens.
our hearts, and it will take off our vexations, cares and thoughts; if we know
that God gave Christ for us, we cannot but know that he will with him freely
give us all things, Romans 8. 32. And besides that, the more assurance we have of
our interest in Christ, etc. the more our hearts will mind Christ, and the
benefits by Christ, and will be the less after other things: I have a goodly
heritage, thou art my portion, Psalm. 16. 5. I have enough, nay, let him take
all, etc.

Ninthly, This assurance breeds confidence and comfort in death; Why are even
It breeds confidence in death.
good people sometimes afraid to dye, but because they are not yet assured?
they cannot say with Paul, Christ loved me, and gave himself for me: But if
assurance be on their hearts, then death is welcome. Now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, said Simeon,
Luke 2. 29, 30. And I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, said Paul:
What is death to the assured Believer, but a short passage, a speedy inlet and
conveyance unto that glorious and eternal blessedness which he knows that
Christ has purchased for him, and God reserves for him in heaven?

Case 5. Whether a person having attained a certain knowledge that Christ dyed
for him, may ever after that doubt again, and question that point again.
Whether after this assurance he may ever doubt again. He may doubt again.


Sol. I answer plainly he may; sensible assurance is very comfortable, but yet
it is mutable; Paul's vision (in Acts 10. 11.) was drawn up into heaven again;
yea, and his choice revelation was quickly attended with a violent temptation.
2 Cor. 12. 7.

Reasons whereof may be these.

First, The Divine pleasure; the date of your comforts, and the Patent of
Reasons of it. The Divine pleasure.
them is, ad placitum: God gives you this assurance, that you may taste his
kindness and goodness; and he takes it off again, that you may acknowledge
his authority.

Secondly, The Divine wisdom; God would rather have us live by faith than The
Divine wisdom.
sense; indeed the life of our assurance is more for our comfort, but the life
of faith is more for his glory.

Thirdly, Our own foolishness; not improving aright such gracious
manifestations, Our own foolishness.
but abusing them to pride and high-mindednesse, and sometimes blurring the
fair copy of our evidence with foul transgressions.

Fourthly, Subtilty and prevalency of temptations; which we did not so watch
The subtilty of temptations.
and fear, because of our assurance, as if that were security enough, etc.

Object. But what comfort and support, if this assurance may fail?

Sol. Much for all that; for

1. Though assurance fails, yet faith (by which we are saved) fails not. 2.
Though assurance fails, yet the interest and estate assured shall never fail.
Christ is still thine, and the reconciled God is still thine, and
reconciliation and remission; the estate is sure, though particular and
contingent effects be not so. 3. The Spirit has more work then only to
comfort; if he still strengthen thee and supply thee, that is comfort to thee.
4. Though assurance go away, yet it may return again; it is as possible to
receive it, as to lose it. 5. In your new fear remember your old assurance; I
tell thee that assurance once had upon good grounds, may serve to support,
though against many doubts in aftertimes.
THE GIFTS OF THE Covenant.
The second Part.
CHAP. I.
Ezekiel. 36. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean; from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.
I Have heretofore opened unto you diverse things about the Covenant of Grace;
viz. the Nature and Adjuncts of it; the difference 'twixt it, and the Covenant
of Works; the condition, and the Mediator of the Covenant.

I now proceed to handle one thing more concerning the Covenant, and that is
the gifts of the Covenant; the gifts which God does promise to bestow upon
those people The gifts of the Covenant.
which are in Covenant with him.

This verse which I have read unto you, and the subsequent verses do report
unto us diverse of those gifts which may be considered

First, As to their order; and thus you have the promise, first, of spiritual
gifts or blessings, from ver. 25. to ver. 28. and then you have the promise of
temporal mercies, from ver. 28. to ver. 37.

Secondly, As to their kinds; the spiritual gifts or blessings (for I shall
insist awhile only upon them) do respect

1. Our Justification, expressed in ver. 25. (Then will I sprinkle clean water
upon you, etc.

2. Our Sanctification.

First, in the habitual part of it, (in ver. 26. a new heart, etc.)

Secondly, in the actual part of it; (in ver. 27. And I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, etc.)

The Text (which respects our Justification) contains in it a prom^se.

1. Of the pardon of sins; (I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall
be clean.) 2. Of the pardon of the greatest sins; (from your filthiness, and
from your Id^ls will I cleanse you. 3. Of the pardon of all their sins; (from
all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will ^ cleanse you)
Before I handle the particular points, I would touch upon some things in the
general; viz.

1. That God does promise unto his people (yea unto his people in Covenant with
him) spiritual gifts or blessings as well as temporal. 2. That the first
prom^ses are the best, or of the best things; first the spiritual, and then the
temporal blessings. 3. That whatsoever blessings which may or do concern the
people of God in Covenant, God himself does undertake to give them unto his
people. 4. That those gifts which God does promise to give unto his people in
Covenant, he gives them not for any worthiness in them, but upon the account
of his own graciousnesse.
SECT. I.
THat God does expressly promise to give unto all his people in Covenant with
him, spiritual blessings as well as temporal. I hardly know any one place of
Scripture where the Covenant of grace is insisted upon, but God gives his
people in Covenant spiritual blessings as well as temporal.
there you shall find express promises of some one spiritual blessing or
other. Jer. 31. 33. This shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house
of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be
my people. Ver. 34. And they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the
greatest of them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and
remember their sin no more. Jerem. 32. 39. I will give them one heart and one
way, that they may fear me for ever for the good of them, and their children
after them. Ver. 40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will give them one
heart, and I will put a New Spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart
out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh. Ver. 20. That they
may walk in my Statutes, and keep my Ordinances, and do them, and they shall be
my people, and I will be their God. Hosea 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto me
for ever, and I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment,
and in loving-kindnesse, and in mercies. Ver. 20. I will betroth thee unto me
in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. Hebr. 8. 10. This is the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, I will put my Laws into
their minds, and write them in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a people, etc.

Quest But why is God pleased to promise to give unto his people in Covenant,
Why God gives spiritual blessings as well as ^emporal. His people have souls as
well as bodies.
spiritual blessings as well as temporal?

Sol. The Reasons are these:

First, Because his people have souls as well as bodies; and their souls do
stand in as much need of spiritual blessings, as their bodies do of temporal
blessings: Every man's soul (since the fall of Adum) is in a fourfold miserable
necessity, which cannot be relieved but by spiritual blessings.

1. In an estate of spiritual death, out of which it cannot be relieved but by
the donation of spiritual life; a quickening by the Spirit of Christ, is
necessary for a soul dead in trespasses and sins.

2. In an estate of spiritual enmity; and that enmity cannot be slain but by
the death of Christ; nor any atonement, peace or reconciliation enjoyed but by
his blood.

3. In an estate of offense and guilt, which expose the soul unto wrath and
punishment, by reason of which the soul needs exceeding riches of grace and
mercy to forgive and acquit the sinner.

4. In an estate of pollution and bondage, being held under the power of sinful
lusts, in which regard the soul needs the Lord Jesus to be redemption and
liberty unto it, and the soul can never be freed nor free, but by Christ and
his Spirit. John 8. 36. If the Son shall make you free, you shall be free
indeed. Romans 8. 2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me
free from the Law of sin and death. If a man had all the blessings of the
world, (riches, honor, friends, health, pleasures, etc.) they could be of no
help or relief unto his soul at all; notwithstanding all these, the soul still
remains sinful and miserable; Give the soul Christ, and grace, and mercy, or
else you give it nothing; it must perish for ever without them: And therefore
does God give unto his people spiritual blessings, because the soul needs them,
and they are suitable to the spiritual necessities of the soul.

Secondly, His people are people of another life, they have the promise of
eternal His people are for another life.
life. 1 John 2. 25. This is the promise that he has promised us, even eternal
life. Titus 1. 2. Inhope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised
before the world began. 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens. But what of this, will you say? why, hence it
follows that therefore God will give unto them spiritual blessings; and why
spiritual blessings? because spiritual blessings are necessary for them in
relation unto that eternal life. Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any
other; for there is none other Name given under heaven, given among men whereby
we must be saved. Lo here is a necessity of Jesus Christ for our salvation.
John 3. 36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life; and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him:
Lo here is a necessity of faith for salvation. Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for they shall see God. Hebr. 12. 13. Follow holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord. Joh. 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; Lo here is a necessity of holiness and
regeneration for salvation, and they are congruous, and fitting us for
salvation or eternal life. Colos. 1 12. Giving thanks unto the Father which
has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. It
is meet to enjoy grace, before we come to enjoy glory; it is meet to have a
conformity to Christ on his Cross, before we come to have a conformity to
Christ in his Crown, etc.

Thirdly, His people are designed and set apart for special duties and
services, His people a^e set apart for special duties.
the which they can never perform without spiritual gifts and blessings!

They are to glorify their God. Isa. 43. 6. Bring my sons from far, and my
daughters from the ends of the earth. Ver. 7. Even every one that is called by
my Name, for I have created him for my glory. Ver. 21. This people have I
formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise.

They are to deny themselves, and to take up the Cross of Christ, and to
follow him; they are to crucify the lusts with the affections thereof; they
are to suffer losses and reproaches, and persecutions, and perhaps death it
self; they are to fight the good fight of faith, to resist temptation, to
quench the fiery darts of Satan, to overcome the world; they are to live by
faith, against hope to believe in hope, to walk in all well-pleasing before the
Lord.

They are to have daily communion with God, and their hearts are to be set on
him, and on things above: Can any of these duties and services be performed by
them without spiritual strength? or can they partake of spiritual strength,
unless and until God does give unto them spiritual gifts or graces.

Fourthly, All the people in Covenant with God, they have his image restored
They have Gods image restored to them.
unto them, they behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into
the same image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. They are made partakers of
the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. They are in Christ, and new creatures, 2 Cor.
5. 17. They are a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a
Peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2. 9. A peculiar treasure unto him, Exodus 19. 5. A
people from whom he will withold no good thing, Psalm. 84. 11. Therefore
unquestionably he will bestow upon them spiritual gifts and blessings, and does
so, or else none of these things could be affirmed of them.

Fifthly, God will do more for his people in Covenant, then he will for any out
of God will do more for his people in Covenant, than for any.
Covenant; (else what is the advantage of being in Covenant? or where is the
strength of Argument to persuade any man to disanul all other inconsistent
Covenants, and to submit unto the Covenant of God, if he cannot better himself
by being in this Covenant?) Now God does give other things (temporal things,
the things of, and for this life) many times to wicked men, to men out of
Covenant; Thou fillest their bellies with thy hid treasure. And if his children
(if the people of his Covenant who stand in near relation unto him) should not
have spiritual blessings and mercies given unto them, if they should have
(after all) but a common portion, gain little more then what the worst of men
(wicked men his enemies) have; what advantage should they have? yea, thus it
should be all one with them, who love and fear God, and with them that hate
him, and fear him not.

Sixthly, Whatsoever Jesus Christ has purchased for the people of Gods
Covenant, What Christ has purchased for them, God will give them.
that will God give unto them; (the purchases of Christ, and the promises, and
performances of Gods Covenant are parallel) but Jesus Christ has by his death
purchased all spiritual blessings; you cannot think of any one of them which
Christ has not purchased; they partake of Christ, and with and by him partake
of all spiritual blessings, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings, in heavenly places in Christ.

Seventhly, His people are to differ from all other people in the world, in
their His people are to differ from all other people.
present disposition and frame of heart; as Joshua and Caleb had another spirit
different from them who brought a false report upon the Land of Canaan; but
unless the Lord did give unto his people spiritual blessings, there would be
no intrinsecal difference (as to the frame of heart) 'twixt his people who are
in Covenant, and other people who are not in Covenant; for without the
reception or participation of these blessings, their hearts would still remain
wicked and unconverted; and they would lie in the same state of condemnation
with others; for only spiritual blessings do make the difference. Now this
would be exceedingly absurd that the people of God in Covenant with him, should
remain in the same state of wickedness and curse, as people out of Covenant;
this would be

1. A dishonor to God, that he should be a God in Covenant with ungodly and
wicked persons, and so continuing.

2. A dishonor to his Covenant, which is a Covenant of love and mercy, and
peace, and life, that God should in a singular manner love the wicked, and
assure mercy to them, and make peace with them, and give assurance of life and
blessedness unto them.

comfort and encouragement unto any of the Comfort to the people of God in
Covenant.
people of God, being sensible of their spiritual wants, and oft-times fearing,
and doubting, and questioning spiritual helps and supplies. O say we, if they
were lesser matters, and ordinary mercies, then we should not fear to go to
God, and rely on him, and expect from him; but our greatest wants are of the
greatest mercies, a Christ, forgiveness, holiness, heaven it self; and what
shall we do in this case?

But I beseech you hearken, and consider four things.

First, Spiritual blessings are promised as well as temporal; that God who
Spiritual blessings are promised as well as temporal.
promises health, does likewise promise grace; that God who promises food
convenient, does likewise promise Christ; and that God who promises
deliverance from trouble, does likewise promise deliverance from hell and
wra^^; and that God who promises outward peace, does likewise promise
forgiveness of sins, and peace in conscience; and that God who promises to
subdue enemies, does likewise promise to subdue iniquities; and that God who
promises to give earth, does likewise promise to give heaven. Is it nothing
unto you that the great blessings which your souls do need, are laid up, and
are to be found in Gods promises? if you had more faith, those spiritual
blessings which you find in Gods promises, you might quickly feel in your own
hearts.

Secondly, All spiritual blessings are promised; there is not any one spiritual
blessing All spiritual blessings are promised.
which any of the people of God do need, or may need, but God has promised the
same. Consider spiritual blessings as in the end and means, and causes, God
has promised all of them: He has promised glory, and he has promised grace,
and he has promised himself, the cause of all: He has promised all that
belongs to faith, to Christ, to Justification; and he has promised all that
belongs to Conversion, to Sanctification, to Obedience, and to Comfort, and to
Rest.

Thirdly, God himself has promised them; If Men or Angels had promised God
himself has promised them.
them, it were nothing; for none of them are able to give any one spiritual
blessing; the collating of the least drop of grace and mercy, and inward peace
is above the power of any creature; but this is the comfort, that God himself
has promised to give all spiritual blessings unto his people, I say God
himself.

1. Who is able to perform and make good whatsoever he has promised; Is any
thing too hard for him? is not his power more then commensurate with his Word?
is he not sufficient to do what he speaks? he is mercifulness it self, and
holiness it self, and life it self, and blessedness it self; is not the God
of all grace able to give you grace? is not the God of all power able to subdue
your iniquities? is not the God of all mercy able to forgive? is not the God of
all comfortable to comfort you? is not the God of peace able to speak peace?

2. Who is willing to do good in his promises: I beseech you, what are Gods
promises, but the expressions of his gracious will concerning us, in all the
good which he purposes to confer upon us? I will bless, I will heal, I will
show mercy, I will save, I will pardon, I will give grace and glory, I will
hear and help, I will do you good, these are the very ingredients of his
promises; the promises are nothing else but the good will and purpose of God
transcribed and copied out for us.

3. Who is faithful, Hebr. 11. 11. Sarah judged him faithful who had promised;
and what is it for God to be faithful in his promises, but in his own good time
to do what he speaks, and to give what he promises to give! Faithful is he who
has called you, who will also do it; says the Apostle, 1 These. 5. 24. Mark to
do what he promises; this was to be faithful.

4. God has promised all of them to all his people in Covenant; to all that
are God h^th promised all of them to all his people.
brought into Christ, to all who have chosen him for their God, and give up
their hearts and lives unto him; to all who can call him Father, and are become
his children; as the blessings promised are distributed into greater and
lesser, some are spiritual, some are corporal; so the heirs of blessings, some
of them are stronger, some are weaker; but this makes no difference as to the
claim and title; the weakest Believer in Christ, the weakest child of God is
an heir of all the spiritual blessings which God has promised.

Mark what concerns you Mark what conce^ns you under the sense of your wants.
under the sense of any spiritual wants; Do not complain any longer; and do not
charge God foolishly; and do not give up your conditions as desperate; do not
say there is no help nor hope; and do not hearken to what Satan says, nor to
what your perplexed hearts do say; but regard and mark what God says in his
promises: He says that he will give grace and glory, and he will give all the
matters of Justification, and of Sanctification; and therefore do you take that
course for the enjoyment of them which God directs you unto, and likewise
encourages you unto.

Quest. What course is that? What course we should take for this enjoyment of
s^i^itual b^essi^^. Pray for spiritual blessings.


Sol. It is this.

First, You must humbly pray unto him to give unto you all those spiritual
blessings which you do need, and which he has promised.

Object. Pray unto him will you say? if he has promised to give them, what
need we to pray for them?

Sol. Yes, promises on Gods part, and prayers on our part are not
contradistinct, but subordinate: therefore remember

1. Though God promises to give all these spiritual blessings, yet he expressly
calls for prayer from us unto himself, to bestow them on us. Ezekiel. 36. 37. Thus
says the Lord God, I will yet be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it
for them. Jer. 29. 11. I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the
Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end. Ver. 12.
Then shall you call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you. Ver. 13. And ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall
search for me with all your hearts.

2. As he calls for prayer, so he adds a new engagement of promise to give
(even spiritnal blessings) upon prayer. Luke 11. 13. Your heavenly Father will
give the holy Spirit to them that ask him.

Secondly, You must act faith; you must believe on his Word, and trust on Act
faith.
him as a faithful God to perform, etc. Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in him at all times
ye people, pour out your hearts before him, God is a refuge for us, Selab.
Isa. 26. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength. Isa. 57. 2. I will cry unto God, most High, unto God
which performs all things for me. Hebr. 11. 6. He that comes to God must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
Jam. 1. 6. But let him ask in faith. O Sirs, this is one of the greatest
reasons, why notwithstanding your many tears and prayers, you have so small
portion in spiritual blessings, because you do not trust on God for them; you
do not believe that he will deal with you according to his Word; you do not
give him the glory of an all-sufficient and faithful God; still you are
questioning him, and reasoning against him, But will he make good his Word of
promise? and can he do this or that? the Lord humble our hearts for this; we
think not of it as a sin, or else but a small sin; but indeed it is an
exceedingly provoking sin and an eternal dishonor to the God of truth and
mercy, thus by our unbelief to charge a lie, or a doubtfulnesse upon him.

Object. But have we not reason to doubt what he will do, when we are so
unworthy?

Sol. No, our unworthiness is no sufficient reason to question the goodness
and faithfulness of Gods promise, because

1. He never indents with us upon terms of our worthiness. 2. He professes
that he does us good, not for our sakes, but for his own sake.
Thirdly, If need be, you must wait upon God for the performance of those
spiritual Wait upon God for performance.
blessings promised unto you. Isa. 36. 18. Therefore will the Lord wait that he
may be gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have
mercy upon you, for the Lord is a God of judgment, (he knows what, and when is
best) blessed are all they that wait for him.

Three things (...) to enable you to wait, etc.

1. Any spiritual blessing is worth a waiting; for the least of them being of
more worth, and more consequence to the soul than a whole world. 2. God will
often times try your hearts, whether indeed you would be thus blessed, or can be
satisfied and give over without enjoyment. 3. The promise of them is very sure;
God who cannot lie has promised, Tit. 1. 2. He will not fail you in these
spiritual blessings, though many times he does deny you some temporal desires.
in what a case then are all obstinate and perverse sinners? who will The sad
condition of Impenitent ^^nners.
hold fast their sins, and walk in their own ways, and hate to be reformed, and
will not be brought into the bond of the Covenant with God; if there were no
other misery for them but this, that they shall not partake of spiritual,
blessings, this were misery sufficient. You read of those (in Luke. 14.) who
excused themselves, and refused to come to the Supper prepared, Christ saih of
them, (ver. 24.) None of those men shall taste of my Supper; truly this was
judgment and punishment enough, never to partake of any benefit or good by
Christ. In like manner this is punishment enuogh for all those who refuse to
enter into Covenant with God, that they shall never partake of any spiritual
blessing and mercy which God has promis^d: There is the forgiveness of sins
promised, but their sins shall never be forgiven; and there is renewing grace
promised, but their hearts shall never be renewed and sanctified; and there is
eternal glory promised, but their souls shall never be saved. They shall be
left unto their own sinful guilt, and unto their own sinful co^ruptions and
unto their own sinful deserts, and all the wrath of God threatened against them
shall fall upon them. Therefore I beseech you who hear of Christ, and who hear
of the Covenant of Grace, take heed to your selves that you resist not the
grace which is offered unto you in Christ, and the terms of reconciliation
propounded unto you, least you cast your selves out of the Covenant, and from
all spiritual blessings which God has therein promised; lest you never have
grace and never have mercy, and never have blessedness.

acceptance of God to be our God, and to resign up our selves to be his people
in Covenant, Accept of God to be your God.
and to walk with him, and before him in all uprightness; why so? because now
the promises of spiritual blessings are to you, and by this you become heirs of
all those blessings. O that we did know what the love of God was! and what the
enjoyment of Christ was! and what the forgiveness of sins was! and what the
excellency of grace was! and what the eternity of glory was! how miserable we
are, and must continue so for ever without them; and how happy we shall
continue for ever with them; then our hearts would be persuaded to disannual
our Covenant with sins, and condescend to become the people of God, etc.

SECT. II.
THat in the Covenant spiritual blessings are first promised, and after them
temporal blessings; God promises both of them unto his In the Covenant
spiritual blessings are first promised.
people, but first the spiritual. Ezekiel. 36. 25. I will sprinkle clean water
upon you, and you shall be clean. Ver. 26. A new heart also will I give you,
etc. And then follow the promises of temporal blessings, in ver. 28. And ye
shall dwell in the Land which I gave unto your fathers. Ver. 29. And I will
call for the corn, and will increase it. Ver. 30. And I will multiply the fruit
of the Tree, and the increase of the Field. Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord will give
grace and glory, (there are spirituals) no good thing will he withold from
them that walk uprightly; (here are temporals) Hosea 2. 19. I will betroth thee
unto me for ever, yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in loving-kindnesse, and in mercies. Ver. 20. I will betroth
thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord; (here are the
spiritual blessings) Ver. 21. And it shall come to pass in that day, I will
hear says the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth.
Ver. 22. And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and
they shall both hear Jezreel; (here are the temporal blessings.)

Quest. Why is God thus pleased to order his promise for blessings? as first
the Reasons of it.
spiritual, and then the temporal.

Sol. Reasons thereof may be these.

1. He suiteth his blessings with the desires and necessities of his Saints;
they To suit blessings to the desires of Saints. To give advantage to faith to
seek them first.
need these most, and shall have them first.

2. Hereby is some advantage given unto faith; first, to believe spirituals,
and then to believe temporals; for if God will give the greater, will he deny
the less? Romans 8. 32. Faith to believe them as the choicest blessings; for not
only spiritual blessings are promised, but also that they are the first in
promise; and thence faith concludes, the first appearing of Gods love and
gracious will and purpose toward us, are the choice blessings; should we
question the donation of them, when we find them to be the first of the
Legacies sealed with the blood of Christ?

3. Hereby the Lord sets out both the goodness and greatness of his love. To
set forth the goodness and greatness of his love.


1. The goodness of his love in securing of our souls, and regarding of them;
for only spiritual blessings do serve them; q. d. the first thing that I will
do for you is this, that I will take care to save your poor souls; I will
bestow such things on them as shall for ever make them happy.

2. The greatness of his love; for God to give us ordinary things, this comes
from his love; but for God to give us the spiritual blessings, this comes from
his great love. Ephesians. 2. 4. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love
wherewith he has loved us, Ver. 5. even when we were dead in sins, has
quickened us together with Christ, by grace ye are saved. Titus 3. 4. After that
the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared. Ver. 5.
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing and regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost. Romans 5. 8. But God commends his love toward us,
in that whiles we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us.

4. Spiritual blessings are far before and above temporal blessings; therefore
They are far before, and above temporal blessings.
no marvail that God makes promise first of them; they are before and above
them; the shekel of the Sanctuary was double to the ordinary shekel; they are
the best

1. In nature; they are the pearl of great price, the one thing necessary; (as
In Nature.
the Sun amongst the Stars) the better part; we set such a value upon our
natural life, that all the world is inferior unto it; (all that a man has
will he give for his life) yet one spiritual blessing surmounts it. Psalm. 63.
3. Thy favor is better than life. It is a good speech of Gregory Nazianzen,
Aequius est ut vincat quod me lius est; which is the greater or better, the
gold, or the Altar that sanctifies the gold?

2. In influence and virtue; Can earthly things alter the frame of the heart?
In influence.
or deliver from death? or avail in the day of wrath? or make our peace with
God? or relieve a distressed conscience? or put you in possession of Christ? or
give you hope of heaven? or help your soul at all? but spiritual blessings can
do all these; renewing grace does change the heart; Jesus Christ delivers from
death and wrath; his blood pacifies; Gods assurance of forgiveness quiets the
conscience, rejoices the heart; all these will give you more than hope of
heave for your souls at last.

3. In consequence; no earthly blessings are of that consequence unto us as In
consequence.
heavenly blessings are; they are but the meat which perishes; we shall perish
if we have only the things which perish; mortal treasures are not of an
immortal consequence; things of this life are but for this life; life will
quickly have an end, and then all these things will be at an end; but spiritual
blessings are of an immortal, and of an eternal consequence; no good like unto
that, which is either eternal blessedness, or for eternal blessedness: As
Gregory Nazianzen spoke, (...); Vna vita est ad vitam respicere; spiritual
blessings are life, and they are for life, they are the meat which endures for
ever; the good part which shall never be taken away, they make for your
eternity.

4. In their necessity; Is not the life more than meat? and the body than In
necessity.
raiment? says Christ. Matthew. 6. 25. So say I, is not heaven more than earth?
and spiritual blessings more necessary than temporal? You may live awhile
without spiritual blessings; but can you live for ever without them? you may be
merry with temporal blessings, but can you be happy without them? what Bernard
spoke of Christ, Where can it be well without him? and where can it be ill with
him? That may be said of spiritual blessings, they are so necessary, and so
immediate unto your souls condition, that your souls are, and must be miserable
without them, and cannot but be blessed in the enjoyment of them.

5. God does promise the spiritual blessings first, that he might learn us what
to seek first, and upon what to set our hearts most. Matthew. 6. 33. But seek ye
God promises spiritual blessings first.
first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. Col. 3. 2. Set your
affections on things above, not on things on earth.

they are much to be blamed, They are to be blamed who look not after spiritual
blessings.


1. Who look not after spiritual blessings at all, but altogether and only
after temporal blessings. Psalm. 4. 6. There be many will say, Who will show us
any good? Phil. 2. 21. All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ's. If we did take strict survey of the mindings and studies, and desires,
and labors of the sons of men, we should find them all like so many heavy
bodies, inclining and moving downward to the center of earthly things. One is
for earthly pleasure, another for earthly profits, another for earthly
vanities! One cries out for health, another for strength, another for friends,
another for preferment, another for quiet, another for riches; God is not in
all their thoughts, said David: Spiritual blessings are not in their minds and
hearts say I. Surely these men do not believe a future blessedness, or do not
know the present necessities of their souls; or do not understand the worth and
preciousnesse of spiritual blessings. It is a great judgment and curse upon
men, when they make their sins their delight, and the world to be their portion.

Secondly, Who look not after them first of all: You have some men who Who look
(...) ^^^st of a^l.


1. Intend after that they have compassed such a measure of temporal blessings
(as they imagine will serve for them and their children) then to mind Spiritual
blessings for their souls.

But two things befall these men. 1. Either they die in the time of their
Earthly projects and designs: ^. Or their hearts grow full with new desires of
a further measure of those earthly gettings. They are justly left by God to an
endless covetousness, and are not renewed by his grace to any
heavenly-mindedness all their days.

2. Who think only of Spiritual blessings, when they must part with all their
temporal blessings, and that is when they come to die; O then a Christ, and
then peace with God and then mercies to pardon their sins, and then grace to
believe and repent; and thus they put off looking after Spiritual blessings,
until they have no time to get them; or else God will not give these Spiritual
blessings in the time which they now do set, because they slighted and
neglected them in the time when God was pleased to offer them.

Now what shall I say to these men? Is it probable or possible to awaken them
to receive instruction! I will make bold to tell you three things.

1. As yet they are not in Covenant with God: For every one actually and
sincerely Covenanting with God, his heart is set on God as his firstand as his
best, and his full, and his only portion: Thou art my portion O Lord. Psalm.
119. 57. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee, Psalm. 73. 25, etc.

2. They are persons of vain and foolish hearts; what a vanity and folly it is
to pitch on vain things on Earth, when God offers first the great things of
Heaven! 2 Cor. 4. 18. Suppose a goodly Inheritance (worth 1000. l. per annum)
were offered, and a few Counters were also offered, or only 10. l. per annum
for life, were he not a vain and foolish man, who would fix his choice on the
last offer? So when God offers all Spiritual blessings first, and next the
temporal, which are only for term of life; then like the Prodigal for the
present time to have a little Earthly portion in our hands, etc. or like Esau
to prefer a Mess of Pottage before the birthright, how vain is this!

3. If you do not infallibly undo your souls, yet you do extremely hazard them,
you do expose them to a most dangerous contingency: For suppose you do intend
hereafter to mind and get Spiritual blessings, yet what if God should cut you
off in the midst of your days! what if in the depth of your labor for Earth,
he should command you to return to the Earth, and perhaps suddenly and in a
moment, what now would become of your poor souls! Thou fool, this night shall
thy soul be taken from thee; then whose shall all these things be? Luke 12.
20. And what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, if he shall lose
his soul! Matthew. 16. 26.

first to mind them, and first to get them. Arguments First mind Spiritual
blessings. Arguments to persuade it. They are portions indeed, and for
Christians, and the best portions.
to induce you to hearken unto this advice, are these.

First, These are Covenant-testimonies; indeed this shows that God is your God,
and you are his, and that he loves you.

Secondly, Spiritual blessings, these are portions indeed for Christians, and
they are the best portions.

1. Portions indeed; you have nothing of your own but sin and vanity.

Yea 2ly. These are portions for Christians, as Themistocles said, Give those
bracelets to slaves; or as Basil (when he was offered temporary glory, and
wealth, etc) answered, Give me glory which abides for ever; and give me riches
which will endure for ever. Matthew. 6. 31, 32. Take no thought what ye shall
eat; for after all these things do the Gentiles seek. Earthly things are a
common stock, only Spiritual blessings are the Childrens inheritance: As God
spoke of the Levites, that they shall have no inheritance among their brethren,
I will be their portion, said the Lord; so may we say of temporal and Spiritual
blessings, God will not have his people to sit down with so low and poor a
portion as temporal things, but their portion shall be himself, his Christ, his
Spirit, his Grace, his Peace, his Joy, his Glory, his Blessedness.

3. And those are the best portions: These do make up our estate indeed: now
you may sit down and rejoice, for you have possession good enough, and safe
enough: and a better possession than God himself, and all Spiritual blesings no
soul is capable of.

Thirdly, They are possible: I beseech you observe with me a few things. They
are possible.


1. Nothing is impossible which lies in Gods promise, because God who
promises, is able also to perform, and give whatsoever he is pleased to
promise; and the donation or accomplishment depends not on us, but on God
alone, on his power and fidelity.

2. None ever cordially sought them, but did enjoy them, If ye seek for them as
silver, and hid treasures, you shall have them, Prove. 23. 4, 5. You shall seek
me, and find me when you shall search for me with all your heart, Jer. 29. 13.
Nay I dare to say, did you seek, and pray for these Spiritual blessings, as you
do for temporal blessings, with the same thought, and earnestness, and
diligence, and importunity, and constancy, you might long since have possessed
them, both plentifully and comfortably.

Fourthly, They are more certain (upon right seeking) than the temporal They
are more certain.
blessings; you may observe concerning these two sorts of blessings;

1. That God never gives all the particulars of temporal blessings to any one
man, but distributes them by parcels, some to one, and some to another; but he
gives every Spiritual blessing (for the substance) unto every one in Covenant.

2. That God does put some Provisoes and Exceptions, and Reserves upon temporal
blessings (so far as consistent with the (...), and as is fitting and behoving
in such a condition and relation, etc.) bu^ (...) Spiritual blessings (which
substantially concern his people) he is peremptory, he will give them, he will
not deny them, although for a while he may delay them; as in the point of
Revocation, he often times takes off these outward blessings, and yet still
continues the Spiritual, he will never recall them, his loving kindness shall
continue still with them: Donation, though he many times denies particular
outward things, yet he will not deny the Spiritual: The Father will not deny
food to the Child, though he does deny an apple.

Fifthly, If you could but get the Spiritual blessings, they would soon hasten
in They will bring in temporal blessings.
and speed you with such temporal blessings which you need: Temporal, they
often go alone, they bring not the Spiritual; but the Spiritual brings in the
temporal. Matthew. 6. 33. Seek first the kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof, and all these things shall be added unto you; (tanquam Appendices
Cumulo) you should have the spiritual blessings which you first of all desire;
and the temporal which you least of all desire; you shall have them in the
purchase, and over and above the bargain.

Sixthly, And you shall have them with more comfort, peace, and blessing; for
And bring them in with more comfort and peace.
Spiritual blessings do draw off that curse with which our sins have involved
our temporal blessings; and besides they give them a sweeter relish, because we
now possess them with the favor and love of God in Christ.

Let Gods people learn To bless God, who first blesses them with spiritual
blessings.


First, To bless your God, who in the first place blesses you with all
Spiritual blessings; your estate differs from that of other men, in two
particulars.

1 In the Entrance, that at the first you possess the choysest mercies.

2. In the End, that at the last you shall possess the highest glory. Psalm.
103. 1. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy
Name. Ver. 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.
Ver. 3. Who forgave thee all thine iniquities, and heals all thy diseases.
Thus David for forgiveness and health; much more then should the people of God
bless him, who at the very first blesses them with all Spiritual blessings;
with his favor, with his Christ, with Righteousness, with Holiness, with
forgiveness, with Peace, etc.

Secondly, To be contented, although perhaps you have a lesser portion in
temporal blessings: Am I not better to thee than ten sons, said Elkanah to To
be contented with a less portion in temporal blessings.
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 8. So, why do you yet complain and take on? are not
Spiritual blessings better than all temporal blessings? I beseech you by what
interest do you judge men bappy? by temporal or by spiritual? If by temporal,
why did you so much desire Spiritual? if by Spiritual, why then are you not
contented who have already all Spiritual blessings for your portion? especially
considering that for asking the daughters of Zelophehad had the nether spring
as well as the upper; and you but for asking shall have enough for Earth as
well as for Heaven.

I now proceed to a third General Observation, viz.

SECT. III.
3. Doct. THat whatsoever the blessings are which may, or do concern the people
Whatsoever blessings are dispensed, God is the giver of them.
of God in Covenant, God himself does undertake to give them unto his people:
Consider the Cov^^^nt Donatives mentioned in this Chapter, and elsewhere; you
shall expressly (...), that none but God himself undertakes the Donation of
them. I will sprinkle clean water upon the^* and I will give them a new heart;
and I will put my Spirit within you, and I will call for the corn, etc. v. 25,
26, 29, 30. So Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will give you one heart. Jer. 31. 33. I will put
my Law in their inward parts. 32. 40. I will put my fear in their hearts. Deuteronomy.
30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed to
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou
may live. Hos. 14. 4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them
freely. Zac. 12. 10. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and of supplication, etc.

Here only two Questions for the illustration of this Point.

1. Why God himself undertakes to give the Covenant-blessings unto his people?
2. After what manner he undertakes to bestow them upon his people?
Quest. 1. Why God himself undertakes the Donative of all the blessings in
Reasons of it.
the Covenant unto his people?

Sol. Reasons thereof are,

First, No creature whatsoever can give them; therefore it belongs to God
alone: Two things (at the least) are required for the giving of blessings. No
Creature can give them.


1. One is Authority; there must be a right in them as ours; for what has any
one to do to give that which is none of his?

2. The other is Sufficiency, or ability to pass them over unto another, and to
make the blessings to be his: Now no creature has Authority to give any
blessings; why so! because God only is the Lord of all blessings whatsoever,
they are his, and of right belong unto him only: Consider, all sorts of
blessings they are his, he is the Lord of them. Spiritual blessings are his,
mercy is his, he is the God of mercy; and grace is his, he is the God of all
grace; and comfort is his, he is the God of all consolation; and peace is his;
he is the very God of peace; and love is his, God is love; the Spirit is his,
and Christ is his Anointed; and glory is his, he is the God of glory. And so
for temporal blessings, though they be ours many times for possession and use,
yet they are his for Right and Donation. The earth is the Lords and the
fullness thereof, says David, Psalm. 24. 1. Thine (O Lord) is the greatness,
and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the Majesty; for all that is
in the heaven, and in the earth, is thine, 1 Chro. 29. 11. Both riches and
honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and
might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all,
ver. 12. And no Creature has Sufficiency or Ability to convey or pass over
blessings; for Spiritual blessings, can any man give them unto himself, or unto
another? Can any man give faith unto himself? It is the work of God, says
Christ; it is the gift of God, says Paul: Can any man give Repentance unto
himself, no, it was God that gave repentance unto the Gentiles; and the Church
prayed, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned: Can any man make his own heart
holy? no, it is God himself which sanctifies us: can any man forgive his own
sins? no, who can forgive sins but God only? And for temporal blessings,
can we give rain, or plenty, or safety, or health, or life, or ease; or
quietness? can we make the Clouds to drop down, or the sword to be at rest, or
the sick to be at rest? No Creature can do any thing of itself; and therefore
God himself undertakes to give all the blessings in the Covenant unto his
people; otherwise they could never have them.

Secondly, God will have the glory of whatsoever blessing we do receive from
him: God will have the glory of all our blessings.
He allows unto us the benefit of them, and the comfort of them; but he
reserves all the glory of them unto himself alone: Thine is the glory, says
Christ; Matthew. 6. 13.

Now upon a double account does the glory of all appertain to God, viz.

1. In that he is the End of all his works, and gifts, and blessings; all that
God manifests about the salvation of sinners, is to the praise and glory of his
grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. He himself is the ultimate End of all his works, and of
himself.

2. In that he is the Efficient Cause of all good and blessings; the Apostle
joins these two together, in Romans 11. 16. For of him, and through him, and to
him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen. Mark the place, let glory
be given to God for ever, and unto him alone; why so! because, 1. All things
are of him, and through him, he is the Efficient Cause; 2ly. All things are to
him, he is the Final Cause for which they are: You have another place to this
purpose, in 1 Cor. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. ver. 31.
That according as it is written, he that glories, let him glory in the Lord.
If any man could be of himself, the cause unto himself of any good, then he
might glory in himself, and bless himself and say, This has mine own hand
wrough^ for me, I gave life unto my self, and grace to my heart, and peace to
mine own conscience, and I wrought mine own Redemption. No, says the Apostle,
you can do nothing, it is of God that ye are in Christ, and it is of God that
Christ is made unto you wisdom, etc. therefore you may not glory in your
selves, but only in the Lord. If I be made high only by the favor of another,
and if I be made rich only by the bounty of another, should I give the glory of
these unto my self? well then, God has a right unto all glory, therefore he
himself will give all grace.

Thirdly, God himself undertakes to give unto his people all
Covenant-blessings, God would have the hearts of his people f^x't on him alone.
because the hearts of his people should be fixed and fastened on him alone:
There are two things which God cannot endure, especially in his own people.

1. One is a distrust of himself; Why say thou O Jacob, and speak O
Israel, My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my
God! Isa. 40. 27.

2. The other is, a trusting upon the creature; and now What have thou to do in
the way of Egypt, to drink the water of Siber! Or what have thou to do with the
way of Assyria, to drink the water of the River! Jer. 2. 18. Cursed be the man
that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from
the Lord, Jer. 17. 5. No, but this is it that the Lord does require of his
people; viz. to take off their hearts (their hopes and expectations, and
dependances) from all other besides himself, and to settle and fix them only
upon himself. Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me all ye ends of the earth, and be saved;
for I am God, and there is none else. Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in him at all times ye
people, pour out the heart before him; God is a refuge, Selah. In the Covenant
God engages his heart to us; and one reason thereof, is, to engage our hearts
to him; in the Covenant he engages his power and goodness, and
all sufficiency, and fidelity unto us; and this he does to engage our love to
him, our fear to him, our hope and confidence unto him; this is enough, God
himself undertakes for all.

Fourthly, That faith might have a sure foundation; this I take for
unquestionable; That faith may have a sure foundation.


1. True faith cannot be raised but by a Divine power.

2. True faith cannot rest upon any mutable or insufficient power; you may as
soon fix an Anchor in the Air, as to make faith fasten upon impotent and weak
causes; if we do certainly know that such an Object or Agent cannot help, or
will not help, that it fails in sufficiency of power, or kindness of will, or
steadfastness of being faith cannot draw out the heart to trust and say, Here
you are sure to find mercy, and sure to find love, and sure to find help, and
sure still to find supply; faith must have a sure Anchor to trust unto, or else
it can never quiet the heart; and else it can never persuade the heart to rest,
or to expect, or wait; but now because God himself undertakes to give unto his
people all good which concerns them, faith has foundation sure enough to build
upon; for there cannot be greater security than God himself, binding and
engaging himself unto us. God is an all-sufficient goodness, wisdom,
kindness, omnipotency, immutability, faithfulness, and all this is in a way
of Covenant unto you; faith cannot desire stronger, or greater, or surer
grounds to draw out the heart to trust, than these; these are sufficient to
answer all fears and doubts, and temptations, and contrary suggestions
whatsoever.

Fifthly, lastly, To whom ought we to pray for all the good which we do need?
God does confine our prayers to himself alone.
even to God alone; he calls upon us to call only upon him; Call upon me, and
ask of me; and I will be enquired of to do this for them; and pour out your
heart before him: Certainly then God himself does undertake to give all, if he
alone will be sought unto for all; if there were any thing which he could not
do, or would not do, or that others also besides himself were to do for us,
then he would not have restrained our prayers to himself alone; but because he
does bound and confine all our prayers at all times unto himself alone,
therefore unquestionably it is he himself alone who undertakes to give all the
blessings of the Covenant unto us. Psalm. 57. 2. I will cry unto God most high,
unto God that performs all things for me. Ver. 3. He shall send from heaven
and save me, etc. God shall send forth his mercy and truth.

And thus you see the reasons why God himself undertakes to give all blessings
to his people. After what manner God dispenses his blessings. He undertakes
for all the good they do or shall need.


Quest. 2. Now follows the second question; viz. After what manner God
undertakes to give all the blessings of the Covenant unto his people?

Sol. For answer unto this question, remember these conclusions.

1. That God undertakes in his Coventnt to give unto his people all the good
which they do or shall need; not all good simply, not all good whatsoever that
can be desired, but all good which is proper for them, and needful for them; so
far as the Covenant goes or extends to any person, so far does Gods undertaking
to give extend: Now his Covenant is for all that is good for you, No good thing
will he withold, Psalm* 84. 11.

God gives all needful good assuredly.
2. That whatsoever good is needful, that God does undertake to give you
assuredly; for you have his bond of promise, and his oath likewise; he does so
undertake to give it, that you shall not miss of it, but shall certainly enjoy
it; not only the substantially spiritual blessings, (which make up the esse of
an heavenly condition) but also those spiritual blessings circumstantially
considered in the comfortable part of it, (as spiritual joy and peace, and
assurance) when your souls come into such an exigence that these are necessary
for you, you shall not miss of them; when your child is weak and sinking, the
father will give him the cordial; as when he is hungry, he will give him the
food; Nay, not only spiritual blessings, but temporals also; there is a
certainty of them, when there is a necessity of them: When the poor and needy
seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord
will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them, Isa. 41. 17.

3. That when it is affirmed that God undertakes to give all blessings unto his
God will give all in his own time.
people in Covenant, this must be understood in his own time; there are our
times, and Gods times; Gods time is called the time appointed, Habakkuk 2. 3.
and the acceptable time, 2 Cor. 6. 2. and the time of the promise, Acts 7. 17.
Now though God will give all necessary good unto his people, yet he will do
this, not at our time, but at his own time; for 1. He is a gracio^^ debtor and
donor; he does voluntarily, and upon the score of his own grace undertake our
mercies: And therefore has a liberty to set what date of time for payment or
collation, seems best unto himself: And secondly, He is a most wise God, unto
whom the peculiar seasons of communicating any mercies are best known;
therefore although you do not presently enjoy the mercies which he does
promise, and you do ask, you should neither grow hereupon distrustful in
questioning him, nor impatient in waiting upon him, nor negligent in seeking of
him; for in due time we shall reap, if we faint not, as the Apostle speaks in
another case; and he is the God of judgment, able to discern our need of
mercies, and the best time of bestowing of them.

4. That God will give all those blessings which himself undertakes, in that
order which is proper for the reception of them. There are (you know) spiritual
blessings God will give them in that order that is proper for the reception of
them.
and temporal blessings; now Gods order in the collation of these, is to give
the spiritual first, and then the temporal; first, to bestow that which secures
the soul, and then that which concerns the body; therefore he would have us
first to seek the Kingdom of God.

Again, spiritual blessings, some of them are of a vital consequence, which
make the soul alive, and the condition of it truly good; all these God gives
together at one time; he gives faith and Christ, and Justification, and
Sanctification all at once; as soon as the person believes he is united to
Christ, and hereupon justified and sanctified. And others of them are of a
comfortable consequence, as assurance, joy, peace, etc. God does not give these
blessings first of all; but after he has given the former. Ephesians. 1. 13. In
whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise; (mark,
the sealing follows the believing) 1 Pet. 1. 8. In whom believing ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; (here rejoicing follows believing)
Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God; (peace with God
follows justification) and therefore is it a preposterous course for any
troubled souls, to press God, or to expect from God the comforts and joys, and
assurances promised, before they have faith, and are in Christ; for though God
does promise these things, yet he promises to give them in an orderly way; the
graces first, and then the comforts of grace; faith and union with Christ
first, and then the joys and peace depending upon that union.

5. When God undertakes to give all blessings unto his people in Covenant, this
He gives according to the proportions and measures he knows best for us in our
places and conditions.
must be understood according to the proportion and measure which he knows best
for us in our places and conditions.

There is a measure of apprehension of Christ, and of our justification by
Christ, and of our salvation by Christ; God gives a greater and clearer, and
more fixed measure of the apprehension or reflexive knowledge of these to some
of his people then he does to others of them. And there is a measure of
holiness; some have higher, and some have weaker degrees of grace; now in Gods
undertaking to give all spiritual blessings, you must not think that God
intends to give every measure or degree of grace at once, nor yet the like
degree of grace unto every one, nor yet the like measure of comfortable
evidences, or apprehensions of interest in Christ, and remission, and salvation
by him; no, but God will give all Covenant-blessings unto all his people in
such a proportion and measure, in this life, as may conduce most to his glory,
and may most fit them in their private and public conditions for his better
service.

believe and acknowledge this truth, that God himself does undertake to give
all the blessings of the Covenant which do concern his Believe and acknowledge
this truth.
people.

Object. Why will you say, no man doubts it or scruples it, but it belongs to
God, and to him alone to give all, etc.

Sol. I wish that ^^me were true; but if indeed this were so, then,

1. Why do not we in all our wants and necessities make our prime applications
unto God? Why do we think least of him, and last of him? we run to this
creature, and to that creature; set up one friend, and look upon another; try
all the powers and abilities here below, as if God were least of all concerned
in the donation of our mercies and blessings; if we did indeed believe that God
himself undertakes all blessings for us, then our first addresses would be unto
him, our first work and our great work would be with himself alone to do us
good.

2. Why do our hearts go and come, rise and fall, according to the presence and
absence of visible means and helps? in the prevalence of them our hearts are
raised up with hopes, and in the absence of them they are distracted, and cast
down with fears: Would it be thus with us, if we did indeed believe that God
himself undertook to give us all our blessings? certainly we place our hopes
and expectations below and besides God himself, when inferior causes have such
a command, and such an influence upon our hearts. If we did believe that God
himself, that he alone were sufficient and faithful, it would be all one to us,
whether the creatures smile or frown; incline toward us, or fall from us.

3. Why do we (not only for temporal supplies, but also for spiritual mercies)
undertake for our selves, and as it were discharge God from undertaking for us?
How often do we undertake the spiritual charge of our hearts? and to make our
own hearts to repent, and to believe, and to subdue our own sins, and to do
such and such commands of God by our own free will, and by our own strength; if
we did believe that God himself undertakes for all these, and that it belongs
unto him alone to give them would we presume upon our selves thus? would we
take his work out of his hands?

4. Why dare we not in our exigency commit all unto him, and quietly rest on
him, but when our helps and hopes are reduced only unto him, so that unless he
himself appears, we can cast Anchor nowhere else? and although in such cases he
does plainly appear in his Covenant, graciously undertaking, and faithfully
promising to help and bless us; yet this is nothing to us; it does no way
affect or support us; assuredly, either we do not know this God aright, or else
we do not believe that he himself does undertake for us; or else that he will
perform and Not to believe and acknowledge this truth is a great sin. Wherein
the sinfulness of it lies.
make good what himself has undertaken. Beloved! Consider what I say; this is
a very great sin, thus to fall short in the belief and acknowledgement of this
truth; for

1. You deny God to be God in the Covenant; you do (as it were) shut him out
from being a party there, and concerned there; though indeed he be the
confederating party, and we are the confederated party, yet you include him,
and deny him to be so, when that you believe not that it belongs to him to be
the suscipient party, and your selves to be the recipient party only; for I
beseech you what will you make of Gods covenanting with you, more than a
cipher, if you do not grant and acknowledge him (therein) as engaging himself
to give us all the good which we do need? What other work is there which can or
does concern him!

2. And you do hereby deny all homage unto him; for how can you (...) unto him
for any one good that you want, or trust on him for any one ^^^cy, if you do
not acknowledge this truth, that he himself undertakes to give all blessings
and mercies unto you? and where will you put your mite of thankfulness for all
your receipts of blessings? if God himself did not undertake to give you the
blessings, what ground have you to undertake to give him the praise of them?
Therefore earnestly strive by faith to assent unto this truth which I have
delivered; it is of more consequence than you are aware of; it is that which
gives life unto you in all your dealings with God, and which may support and
encourage you against all the temptations of Satan, and fears of your own
spirits; God himself is your God, and God himself (for whom nothing is too
hard, and who is faithful in Covenant) he it is who undertakes to find out, and
give out unto you every mercy (for soul and body) which you do or shall need.

also make use of it; (i. e.) in the sense of all your wants, whether spiritual
or temporal, Go unto God with boldness unto Make use of this truth.
his Throne of grace, that ye may find grace and mercy to help in time of
need: Remember that of the Apostle in Phil. 4. 6. Be careful in nothing, but in
every thing by prayer and supplication, (with thanksgiving) let your request be
made known to God.

Do not vainly perplex your selves, O it is impossible ever to get this sinful
heart changed, and this hard heart broken, and those sins pardoned; but
^^nsider seriously,

1. What is that which you find promised in the Covenant: Do you not expressly
find the renewing of the heart promised there? and the taking away of the hard
heart promised there? and the forgiveness of all sins promised there?

2. Who is it that undertakes to give these things promised? Is it not God
himself who can do it, because he is Almighty; and will do it, because he is
faithful? it is not what strength and power you have for these things, but what
the sufficiency and fidelity of God is who undertakes to give them.

Object. But he expects great matters from us, before he will give them unto us?

Sol. 1. I will tell you what he expects from you; he expects three things from
you. 1. That you acknowledge your own unworthiness, and his graciousnesse. 2.
That you come and pray unto him, and entreat him to do these things for you. 3.
That you trust upon him as able and willing to help you according to his Word.

2. And this which he expects from you, (if he hitherto has not given, them
unto you, yet) he promises to give them unto you; for praying, Zach. 12. 10. I
will pour upon them the Spirit of supplication; for trusting, Zephany 3. 12. I
will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall
trust in the Name of the Lord.

Object. But we must bring something or other, and undertake something, else
God will not do all for us.

Sol. 1. What would ye bring to a Covenant of Grace? or what should you bring
but your hearts to receive what is promised in the Covenant of Grace to be
given?

2. All the finding and giving work belongs to God; that is it which himself
undertakes, forgiveness, righteousness, holiness, love, joy and peace; and
these himself undertakes to give unto us. The fountain is full, and runs
freely, take your care only for a Vessel to receive, and take in the waters
which flow out of it.

What a comfort is this unto all his people! this God himself is your God,
Comfort to the people of God.
and your Father, and he loves you above all the people in the world, and binds
himself by promise and oath unto you, that in blessing he will bless you. If
you were to make your choice of one to undertake your good, in whose hands you
would have your all to lie, you would pitch on one, 1. Who loves you as a
friend, as a father, and as a near relation. 2. Who is sufficient and able. 3.
Who is mindful and faithful. 4. Who is knowing and wise. 5. Who is like to live
long:

Now

First, Does not God love his people? I have loved thee with an everlasting
love, God loves his people.
Jer. 31. 3. I am a Father to Israel, and Israel is my first born, Ver. 9. Is
Ephraim my dear son? I remember him still; my bowels are troubled for him; I
will surely have mercy on him, Ver. 20. Can a woman forget her sucking child,
that she should not have compassion on the Son of her womb? yea, they may
forget, yet will I not forget thee, Isa. 49. 15.

Secondly, Is he not able to do you good? he is the All-sufficient and Almighty
God is able to do you good.
God, nothing is too hard for him; he is able to do above all that we are able
to ask or think, and can do whatsoever he pleases in heaven and in earth; is
it not be who stretches out the heavens, and laid the foundations of the
earth? Abraham was fully persuaded that what God had promised, he was able to
perform, Romans 4. 21.

Thirdly, He knows all your distresses and wants; your groans are not hid from
He knows all your distresses.
him, and all your tears are in his bottle, he is mindful of his people; (Psalm.
115. 12. The Lord has been mindful of us, he will bless us:) he is mindful of
(...) Covenant. Psalm. 111. 5. He has given meat to them that fear him, he will
be mindful of his Covenant. Psalm. 105. 8. He has remembered his Covenant for
ever.

Fourthly, He is the faithful God; Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Know that the Lord thy God He is
the faithful God.
he is God, the faithful God which keeps Covenant, and mercy with them that
love him, and keep his Covenant to thousands of generations. Heb. 10. 23. He is
faithful that promised.

Fifthly, He is the wise God: God only wise, Romans 16. 27. Wise in heart, Job He
is the wise God.
9. 4. And therefore will proportion and season out proper and peculiar mercies
unto his servants.

Sixthly, He is the unchangeable God; there is not so much as the shadow of
Change in him, Jam. 1. 17. The living God, Jer. 10. 10. The Lord is the true He
is the unchangeable God.
God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King, Dan. 12. 7. lives for
ever.

(...), If I do understand this Assertion aright, it may suffice to take off
all your fears; and to draw on all your hearts to come unto your God with
confidence, who himself undertakes to give unto you all the good of his
Covevant: Can more be desired, or can any thing else conduce further or better
to your salvation!

Object. We confess that here is enough in respect of God, but that which makes
us to fear, is something in respect o ourselves, our unworthiness against which
God may take exception, and for which he may deny to give unto us the good
things which he has promised.

Sol. This is the greatest doubt which still sticks with us, and it is the
strongest exception of our unbelieving hearts; and unto which I shall endeavor
to give a full resolution, in the last General Proposition which now comes to
be handled, viz.

SECT. IV.
Doct. 4. THat all these blessings which God does promise to give unto his
people All the blessings which God promises to his people in Covenant, he
gives them only upon account of his graciousnesse.
in Covenant, he will, and does give them, not for any worthiness in them, but
only upon the account of his own graciousnesse. In this Chapter you have God
undertaking all sorts of mercies for his people; and it is observable that both
Antecedently and Consequently, he disclaims all worthiness of them, on his
peoples part. Ezekiel. 36. 22. Thus says the Lord God, I do not this for your
sakes; O house of Israel, but for mine holy Name sake. ver. 32. Not for your
sakes do I this says the Lord God, be it known unto you. Deuteronomy. 7. 7. The Lord
did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number
than any people (for ye were the fewest of all people) ver. 8. but because the
Lord loved you; and because he would keep the Oath which he had sworn unto your
Fathers, has the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out
of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh King of Egypt. Consider all
the blessings of the Covenant, for soul or body, for this life, or for the
next, life Spiritual or temporal; the reason of them lies not in our
worthiness, but only, and altogether in Gods graciousness; not in the
receivers, but only in the giver: See it in these particulars.

First, That God loves us, and makes a Covenant with us, this comes to pass not
God loves us from his own graciousnesse.
for our worthiness, but from his own graciousnesse. Ezekiel. 16. 6. When I passed
by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy blood, Live; yea I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood,
Live. ver. 8. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time
was a time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness, yea I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, says
the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.

Secondly, That God gives his Son Jesus Christ, this respects no worthiness in
God gives Christ of his o^n graciousness.
us, but his own graciousnesse. Romans 6. 5. For when we were yet without
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. ver. 8. God commends his
love toward us, that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Joh. 3.
16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.

Thirdly, That any man is effectually called unto Christ, this does not arise
from Effectual calling is from Gods graciousness.
any dignity in us, but only from Gods graciousnesse, 2 Timothy 1. 9. who has
called us with an holy calling, not according to our own works, but according
to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the
world began.

Fourthly, That any man is Sanctified, and renewed by the Spirit of Grace, this
So is Sanctification.
comes not from the account of any thing in us, but only from the account of
Gods graciousnesse. Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior.

5. That any man is Justified, there is no reason for this in our works, but in
And Justification.
his grace. Romans 3. 23. For all men have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God. ver. 24. Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that
is in Jesus Christ. Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his
grace.

Sixthly, That any man is Saved, and comes to the enjoyment of eternal life,
this depends not upon our worthiness, but on Gods graciousnesse. Ephesians. 2. 5.
By And salvation.
grace ye are saved. ver. 8. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not
of your selves, it is the gift of God. ver. 9. Not of works, least any man
should boast. Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Seventhly* Nay all our temporal blessings do flow, not from our worthiness,
but from his graciousnesse. Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered And all temporal blessings.
him up for us all, how shall he not also freely give us all things? 2 Samuel 7.
21. For thy Word sake, and according to thine own heart have thou done all
these great things to make thy servant know them.

For the further discussing of this Point, I will show unto you

1. That God does not enjoin on his people, nor expect from them any worthiness
God does not enjoin nor expect any worthiness as a reason of his blessings.
Three Demonstrations of it.
as a reason of his blessings. 2. Why all his blessings are given unto us, upon
the account of his own graciousness.
First, That God does not enjoin on his people, nor does he expect from them
any worthiness as a reason of any of his blessings. Indeed he does command his
people to ^eek unto him, and to trust upon him for all that good which he
promises to give unto them: But for any personal worthiness as a reason of his
goodness and bounty unto us, this he neither requires, nor expects: For

First, A personal worthiness of the blessings of the Covenant is impossible
on our part; we are in an absolute incapacity of meriting any good from the
hands of A personal worthiness on our part is impossible.
God. Dan. 9. 7. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
confusion of face, as at this day; O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face,
etc. Isa. 64. 6. We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags. Consider either our best doings, or our greatest
sufferings, no merit or worthiness is to be found in either of them. For our
doings, when we have done all that we can, Christ says that we must say (and
confess) that we are but unprofitable servants. Luke 17. 10. For our
sufferings, the Apostle says (Romans 8. 18.) I reckon that the sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared with the which glory shall be
revealed in us.

But let me now punctually demonstrate this Assertion, that there can be no
worthiness or meriting, from us for any good thing.

1. No gift of God can really merit for us any good from God; but all the good
that we have is the gift of God. Ergo.

The first Proposition is clear, because in receiving what is only given, an
Obligation rests only upon us, but none upon the giver, and therefore we merit
nothing,

The second Proposition is as clear, That all the good we have, or can do, is
from God; Every good and perfect gift comes from him, Jam. 1. 17. What have
tho^ that thou did not receive? 1 Cor. 4. 7. We are not sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2
Cor. 3. 5. By the grace of God I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10. It is God which
works in you to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. Unto you it
is given to believe, Phil. 2. 29. If God will give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2.
25.

2. No debt which we owe to God, has merit or worthiness in it; (Does any man
merit ought at any hand by paying unto me, what he ows unto me?) But all the
good we have, or can do, is a debt which we owe to God: Ergo, cannot merit any
thing from him: Does not our believing fall under a Divine Precept? This is his
Commandment, that we believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 23.
Does not our repenting fall also under a Divine Precept? But now God commands
all men everywhere to repent, Act. 17. 30. Does not praying likewise fall under
a Divine Precept! Call upon me, Psalm. 50. Pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17.
Do we any thing but what we ought to do when we believe, or repent, or pray, or
walk in newness of obedience! and if no more be done by us, than what ought to
be done by us, where is our merit or worthiness?

3. If we fall short in the best and most that we do, then we cannot merit by
any thing that we do: but we do fall short in the best and most that we do (the
line which we write, may be written fairer, the good that we do, may, and
should be done better: Domine (said one) lava lachrymas me as: yea so short,
that we need mercy for our best performances, and Christ's Mediation and
Intercession for them: Aaron was to bear the iniquities of the holy Offerings,
Exodus 28. 38. And the prayers of the Saints were to go up with the Incense of
the Altar, Rev. 8. 3. Nehem. 13. 22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this
also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy!

Secondly, A personal worthiness for any good from God, is inconsistent with a
A personal worthiness is inconsistent with the Covenant of grace.
Covenant of Grace, and likewise with the Office of Christ, the only Mediator
of that Covenant: It is inconsistent with the Covenant of Grace; for according
to that Covenant, all is given, and all is freely given (in that we are freely
loved, and freely justified, and freely blessed, and saved) yea the worthiness
of our works and the riches of Gods grace, do one destroy and remove the other:
Romans 11 16. If by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no
more grace; but if it be of works, then it is no more of grace; otherwise work
is no more work.

And with the Mediatorship of Christ, who alone is the merit and purchase And
with the Mediatorship of Christ.
of all grace and glory, of all blessings and blessedness: Has Christ merited
all, or has he not? If his Alsufficiency has not, can our insufficiency do
any thing? or where do you find any one word in Scripture, that Jesus Christ
has left any thing for us to merit? or that any of our works gain so much of
his Prerogative as to merit by his merits? the merits of Christ do make our
good works accepted with God; but they do not make our works to merit; for he
himself had not merited, had he not been both God and Man.

^hirdly, There is in us an indignity or unworthiness of any mercy, and God
The^e is in us an unworthiness of any mercy.
would have us to acknowledge so in our Requests for, and Receipts of his
blessings.

First, An unworthiness of any mercy: Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least
of all these mercies, and all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
servant. Luke 15. 19. I am no more worthy to be called thy Son.

Secondly, And God will have us to acknowledge our selves unworthy. Deuteronomy. And
God will have us acknowledge our selves unworthy.
26. 3. Thou shall go unto the Priest that shall be in those days, and say
unto him, I profess this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am come unto the
Country which the Lord swear unto our Fathers for to give us. Ver. 4. And the
Priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set it down before the
Altar of the Lord thy God. Ver. 5. And thou shall speak and say before the Lord
thy God, A Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and he went down into Egypt,
and sojourned there with a few, and became there a Nation, great, mighty, and
populous, etc. Deuteronomy. 8. 10. When thou have eaten and art full, then thou shall
bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he has given thee. Ver. 17.
Beware least thou say in thine heart, My power, and the might of mine hand has
gotten me this wealth. Deuteronomy. 9. 4. Speak not thou in thine heart, after that
the Lord thy God has cast them out from before thee, saying, For my
Righteousness the Lord has brought me in to possess this land: Ver. 5. Not
for thy Righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart, etc. Ver. 6.
Understand therefore that the Lord thy God gives thee not this good land to
possess it for thy righteousness, for thou art a stiff-necked people.

Thirdly, And rejects us pleading of our own worthiness; looks on it as pride
And rejects us pleading our own worthiness.
and vainglory, as the Pharisee who insisted on his own worthiness; And thus
you see that our worthiness is not admitted as any Reason or Cause of Divine
blessings; whence it must necessarily follow, that God then gives them unto us
upon the sole account of his own graciousness.

Quest. 2. And what the Reasons thereof are, is the second particular to be
spoken unto, viz. Why all blessings are given unto us upon the account of
Reasons of it.
Gods graciousness.

Sol. The Reasons briefly are these.

First, This way of giving suits best with a Covenant of grace; In which the
reasons of our mercies, as well as the mercies themselves are to be found; nay
the This way of giving suits best with a Covenant of grace.
reasons of our mercies do most of all illustrate this Covenant of grace, and
do principally constitute it; for (with reverence be it spoken) this Covenant
would lose the nature of being a Covenant of grace, if the mercies or blessings
promised were not given unto us upon the reason or account of Gods graciousness
alone: Gratia est nullo modo quae non est gratuita omni modo.

Secondly, This way of giving suits best with God who is the Donor or Giver of
all: It suits best with God the Donor of all.
It does suit best

1. With his will and pleasure, Who in this Covenant will appear and be known
to be the Lord, the Lord merciful and gracious, abundant in goodness and
truth, Exodus 34. 6.

2. With his glory and praise, which questionably devolves on himself alone;
seeing all our blessings come only out of his Treasury, and from no reason or
merit of ours, but only from his own graciousness, free gifrs redound unto the
pra^se of the giver only.

Thirdly, This way of gracious giving sui^es best with us the receivers of
blessings It suits best with us the receivers.
from God: For consider us either

1, As mere sinners: We have no hope or plea from any thing in our selves; we
are a company of lost people, who have undone our selves, and are both
insufficient to help our selves, and also unworthy that God should help us

2. As made believers; Faith can find no ground to plead with God, to
challenge him, to rely on him* to expect anything from him, but his promise to
give, and to give graciously: A believer neither may, nor can rest on any work
or worth of his own (all is but dross and dung) he trades only with a gracious
God in Christ.

3. As Petitioners; thus also it suites best with us: Gods graciousness is the
best ground for us to ask upon; O save me for thy mercies sake, Psalm. 6. 4.
Answer me in thy truth the surest ground to speed: Let us come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need, Heb. 4. 16. The most fixed and invariable ground: God is for ever the
Lord merciful and gracious: you will quickly find a want of worthiness in your
selves, but you shall never find a want of goodness and graciousness in God.

A threefold error censu^ed.
Then behold a threefold error worthy to be censured and shunne^.

First, Of the Papists, who boast so impudently of their meritorious good Of
the Papists.
works, merita de Congruo, before men are in the state of grace and merita de
condigno, being in the state of grace, They can take up all sorts of merits for
soul and b^dy, nay heaven itself, and eternal glory upon the account of their
own merits. Hear what Bellarmine says, opera nostra proprie merentur
faelicitatem de Lib. 5. de (...). cap. 16. and 17.
congruo: Hear what Vashquiz says, opera nostra n^n habent dignitatem a
persona Christi, sed a persona a qua procedunt. Hear the Anathema of the
Council of Trent against all who deny that the works of justified persons do
vere mereri vitam In 1. 2. Tom. 2. Disp. 214. c. ^. N. 44.
Aeternam: but against this we may oppose the Scripture; Not by the works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us,
says Paul Tit. 3. 5. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall no flesh living be justified, says David, Psalm. 143. 2. How holy a
man was Job? and how abundant in good works, see Chap. 31. 16, 17. and yet
says Job, Chap. 9. 15. Though I were righteous, I would not answer him, but I
would make my supplication to my Judge! and ver. 20. If I justify my self,
mine own mouth shall condemn me; If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse. Paul, how strict was he! and as touching the righteousness which is
in the Law, how blameless! And yet he will be found in Christ, Not having his
own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. 9.

Secondly, Of the ordinary sort of Protestants, who set out something of their
Of the ordinary sort of Protestants.
own as reasons why God should bless them, and save them; they mean no body any
harm, and they serve God devoutly, and keep their Church, and pay every one
their due, and say their Prayers, and their Belelief, and their ten
Commandments, and cry God mercy when they sin, and will not all this deserve
heaven, and a few blessings on earth!

Thirdly, But most of all to be blamed (and that with pity) are poor
brokenhearted Of poor brokenhearted sinners.
sinners, who discern so much sinfulness and unworthiness in themselves, and
yet are so difficult to place their hopes in the graciousness of God and are
hearking extremely after something of worth in themselves, something in
themselves for which God would hear and help them, if once they could reach
unto it. It is a great work to break a hard heart. It is a greater work to make
a broken heart to look up and trust for mercy. It is the greatest work to make
such an heart to believe for itself, that all mercies and blessings are to be
had upon the sole account of Gods graciousness: Whether this may arise from our
exceeding Guilt which fills us with exceeding^ ^^ slavish fear, or from the
pride of our hearts which would be something; or from the greatness of Gods
kindness which is so unusual with man; or from the particular genius of
unbelief which is gone, and has nothing to say more when once we come to
acknowledge Gods graciousness for the sole reason of all our blessings and
possessions; or from all these conjunctively, I will not now dispute; but sure
I am that the brokenhearted sinner is hardly brought off from boasting on
himself, and is hardly brought on to commit or venture all his hopes and
confidences on the graciuosness of God, as the entire cause why God should
pardon, accept, bless, and save him: And this is a principal cause why his
soul dwells so long with fears, and tears, and sadnesses.

Does God dispense all the blessings of the Covenant unto his people, not upon
the account of their worthiness, but only of his own graciousness? Then under
the Under the sense ^f unworthiness let us go to God and trust on him.
sense of all our want, yea and of all our unworthiness, let us go to God and
pray to him, and trust upon him to do us good for his own Name sake. Here is
water, said the Eunuch to Philip, what does hinder me to be baptized? So say I,
God promises to give all blessings unto his people, and he promises to give
them graciously; now what should hinder you from going to God, and beseeching,
and trusting of him to perform his good Word unto you? You are grieved for your
sins, what should hinder ^ou to believe the free forgiveness of them? You would
fain have your hearts sanctified; what should hinder you from going to God, and
trusting on him freely to make them holy? You would have Christ, and why do you
not go to God freely to give you Christ? What can you say or object when God
promises to give you all, and to give you all upon gracious terms? how would
you have God to frame and form his Covenant better, or otherwise to encourage
your hearts to come unto him and rely upon him? (...) you be wholly beholding
to God, or would you not? are you contented that God should have all the glory
of mercies, or are you not? Is it any disadvantage to the working of your
faith, that God will pass by all your sins and unworthiness, and will love you
freely, and justify you freely, and save you freely? Is there any more reason
to distrust God, when he says he will do you good for his own sake, then when
he says, I will be merciful to your transgressions, and will freely bless you!
Had you rather be under a Covneant of works than of grace? would it please you
better to come by your mercies upon harder terms? You find that you have
nothing of worthiness, and yet you are not content to receive all from Gods
graciousness; why do you pray that God would do you good for his own sake, and
yet you will not believe that that is reason enough to prevail and enjoy!

I will say no more but this;

1. The blessings of the Covenant are worth our enjoying. 2. God does promise
to give them. 3. His own graciousness is the price or reason of it. 4. Upon
better or other terms it is impossible to attain them. 5. It is for want of
faith that we do not justify this unspeakable loving kindness of God toward
us; O beg for faith to believe a God Covenanting to give all good; and all
good, though not for our sake, yet for his own Name sake.
Ezekiel. 36. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be
clean; from all your filthiness and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.
HAving finished those four general Conclusions, I shall now handle the Gifts
of the Covenant in particular, mentioned in this verse, and in the subsequent
verses: In this verse there is promised unto the people of God the Remission of
their sins; concerning which you may observe

1. The Efficient (I will, etc.) 2. The Matter (clean water) 3. The Form or
Manner (I will sprinkle upon you) 4. The Power and Efficacy (And ye shall be
clean) 5. The Quantity or Extent (from all your filthiness, and from all your
Idols will I cleanse you.)
From these parts, there are these four Points which do offer themselves to our
consideration.

1. That forgiveness of sins is promised, and one of the first mercies promised
by himself unto all his people in Covenant with him. 2. Gods promise of
forgiveness of sins does extend to all the sins of all his people. 3. Though
the sins of people have been exceeding great, yet when they become Gods people
in Covenant, even those sins also are forgiven. 4. The blood of Christ is the
cause, and the only cause for which many and great sins are pardoned. 5. That
God will make unto the Conscience of his people a particular application of
forgiveness by the blood of Christ.
CHAP. II.
THat forgiveness of sins is promised (and it is one of the first promised
mercies) by God himself unto all his people in covenant with him. (I will
sprinkle, etc.) This is a very comprehensive Assertion, Forgiveness of sins one
of the first mercies promised by God to all his people in Covenant.
consisting of many Particular Branches: For the opening of it I shall show
unto you,

1. What forgiveness of sins is; wherein it does consist. 2. That God himself
does make promise of it unto his people. 3. That it is promised unto all and
every one of his people. 4. That it is one of the first mercies promised by God
unto his people.
SECT. I.
Quest. 1. What is forgiveness of sins? and wherein does it consist?
Forgiveness of sins described.
Sol. It is a gracious act or work of God for Christ's sake, discharging and
absolving believing and repenting persons, from the guilt and punishment of
their sins, so that God is no longer displeased with them: nor will he ever
remember them any more, nor call them to an account, and condemn them for their
sins, but will look on them, and will deal with them as if they had never
offended him.

Here we must pause awhile, and consider six things.

First, That forgiveness of sins is a gracious act of God; there be some
acts It is a gracious act of God.
of God which have a special reference unto his power, as the Creation of the
world, and the resurrection of the dead. There be other acts of God which have
a special reference unto his Justice; as the condemnation and destruction of
unbelieving and impenitent sinners. And there are some acts of God which have a
special reference unto his mere goodness, and graciousness, there being no
Reason or Cause of them on our parts; such an act is his Remission or
forgiveness of our sins. Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my Name sake. Ephesians. 1. 7. The forgiveness of sins according
to the riches of his grace. Psalm. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according
to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot
out my transgressions. Romans 3. 25. Being justified freely by his grace.

Not that Repentance is not required in the sinner who is to be pardoned: For
the Scripture speaks expressly of a turning from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan to God, that we may receive forgiveness of sins, Acts 26.
18. Not that Believing is not required in the sinner to be forgiven; for the
Apostle Peter says also expressly, Whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins, Acts 10. 43. but because these are not Reasons or
meritorious causes for whose sake God does forgive any man his sins; they
declare the effect who are pardoned, not the cause why they are pardoned.

Secondly, The forgiveness of sins has foundation in Christ (and in him
only) It has foundation in Christ as the Mediator.
as the meritorious cause thereof. Hebr. 9. 22. Without shedding of blood is no
remission. Matthew. 26. 28. This is my blood which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins. Ephesians. 1. 7. In his blood we have redemption, even the
forgiveness of sins. 1 John 2. 12. I write unto you little children, because
your sins are forgiven you for his Names sake.

Forgiveness of sins has a double respect:

One unto our selves; so it comes unto us freely from the grace of God as a
free gift.

Another unto Christ; so it comes by way of purchase and merit; it does cost us
nothing; but it did cost Jesus Christ his precious blood to obtain the
remission of our sins, and to make peace for us.

Now Christ comes in as the cause of forgiveness, upon a twofold account.

One in respect of God, whose justice must be satisfieds, that so his mercy (if
I may so phrase it) may be set at liberty to flow out unto sinners.

Another in respect of us, that we may come with the more boldness and
confidence to obtain forgiving mercy in the name of Christ, it being the very
mercy which he by his blood purchased for us at the hands of God.

Thirdly, Forgiveness of sins is limited to repenting and believing persons; It
is limited to repenting and believing persons.
these and these only are the subjects of that precious mercy unto whom it does
belong

There are three sorts of creatures and persons in the world:

1. Some of whom you read, that they shall never be forgiven; the Devils shall
never have their sins forgiven, but are held and reserved in everlasting chains
under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day, Jude, ver. 6. And they
who sin the sin against the Holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven. Matthew. 12. 31.
All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. Ver. 32. And whosoever
speaks a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him, but whosoever
speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in this
world, nor in the world to come.

2. Some to whom forgiveness is conditionally offered, but they do refuse it
upon that condition; such are all impenitent and unbelieving persons, who
living under the Gospel, are called upon to leave their sins, and are assured
if they do so, that they shall find mercy to pardon their sins; but for lying
vanities they forsake their mercies; and because they love their sins,
therefore they do lose the forgiveness of their sins.

3. Some who penitentially come off from their sins, and believingly come unto
Christ; they put off their sins by repentance, and put on Christ by faith;
these are they who find mercy, to whom it may be said, Be of good comfort, your
sins are forgiven. Prove. 28. 13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins, shall
find mercy. Acts 13. 39. By him all that believe are justified; but as for the
impenitent, they treasure up wrath unto themselves, Romans 2. 5. The unbelievers,
they are condemned already, John 3. 18. and the wrath of God abides on them,
Ver. 36.

Fourthly, Forgiveness of sins consists in the discharging or absolving of a
It consists in discharging of a sinner from guilt and punishment.
person from his sins in respect of guilt and punishment.

It is the discharging, absolving, remitting, freeing, dismitting, sparing of a
sinner; the phrases in Scripture (for the forgiving of sins) are very
significant, both in the Old Testament, and in the New. In the Old Testament
there are words used for the forgiveness of sins, which import what I affirm.

1. Salach, as Exodus 34. 9. Pardon our iniquities and our sins; the word Vide
Downh. de Justifi. lib. 2. cap. 7. p. 84.
there is Salach, which signifies parcere, remittere, ignoscere, condonare,
propitium esse. 2. Kasah, which signifies to hide, to spare, to forgive; as
Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is he whose transgressions is forgiven, whose sin is
covered. 3. Habar, to pass by an offense; as Micah 7. 18. Who is a God like
unto thee, that pardons iniquities, and passes by the transgressions of the
remnant of his heritage? 4. Hekebir, which signifies to cause to pass. 2 Samuel
12. 13. The Lord has put away thy sin; (has caused it to pass) The same word
is used in Zach. 3. 4. I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee. 5.
Machah, which signifies to wipe or blot out of remembrance the sins of men.
Psalm. 51. 9. Blot out all mine iniquities. 6. Hesir, which signifies to remove.
Isa. 27. 9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the
fruit to take away sin; (to remove sin.) 7. Lochashab, not to impute; as Psalm.
32. 2. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity.
In the New Testament there are also several words used for the forgiving of
sins, which import discharge or absolution.

First, (...), which signifies as much as to dismiss or send away, to let
alone, because when God forgives a sinner, he lets his sin alone, and meddles
no more with it; but commonly this word is used for the absolving of those who
are accused as guilty; and in Scripture it is used for loosing out of bonds for
debts.

2. (...), Colos. 2. 13. Having forgiven you all trespasses, which word denotes
both the fountain of forgiveness, namely, the grace of God, and the
acceptableness of it to the party forgiven, it being graciously welcome as glad
tidings unto him.

3. (...), Romans 4. 8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.
2 Cor. 5. 19. Not imputing their trespasses unto them, which imports that the
Lord (when he forgives sins) will not put them upon the score or account, by
all which it appears that forgiveness of sins is an absolving or discharging of
the sinner from his sins.

Now there are three things considerable in our sins; there is

1. Macula, the stain or pollution of it; for sin does pollute and defile the
soul, therefore it is frequently styled a pollution, a defilement, uncleanness,
filthiness, a plague, a leprosy, etc.

2. Reatus, the guilt by it; for as soon as any man does sin, there is a guilt
upon him, by which he is bound over to the wrath and curse of God; and this
guilt or obligation is inseparable from sin; the sin does deserve no less than
everlasting condemnation.

3. Pana, the punishment of it, which consists in the inflicting of all the
curses that sin does deserve, and which God has threatened for transgressing
his holy and righteous will. What it is in sin the forgiveness of sin does
respect.


Quest. The question is, unto which of these forgiveness of sins does extend?
of from which of these the sinner is discharged upon forgiveness?

Sol. I answer:

1. Forgiveness of sins does not respect the stain or pollution of sin, it does
Not the stain or pollution of it.
not remove that; it is an idle opinion of the Papists and others, that
remission of sins consists in the extinction of sins, or utter abolition of
them; Reasons of it.
for

First, This is to confound Justification with Sanctification; it being proper
to Sanctification to remove and take a way the stain and pollution of sin in
the soul; that is the Fullers soap and refining fire.

Secondly, The utter deletion of sin is not granted in this life; (for during
this life, sin remaineh in the best of men. Romans 7. 17, 20. and 1 John 1. 8. If
we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us;)
but in this life we have the remission of our sins; Ergo.

Thirdly, Remission of sin makes (formally) no change in the person forgiven.
for it is a work without him; indeed there is a relative change upon
forgiveness; (the person forgiven is in a state of life, and not of death) but
there is no inherent change of qualities in the person by it; (no more than
there is in a Malefactor pardoned, or a Debtor forgiven; both of them may be
diseased notwithstanding their pardon) but this could not be, if remission of
sin consisted in the extinction or deletion of the stain of sin. It is true,
that when God forgives the sin, he does likewise change the heart of the
sinner; nevertheless the forgiving of sin is one thing, and the giving of a new
heart is another thing, etc.

Fourthly, If remission of sin consist in the outward deletion of sin, Then the
troubled conscience could never come to rest and peace in the assurance of
pardon of sin; why? because in this life the person shall never find in himself
such an utter deletion of sin, and consequently no remission of sins; and if no
remission of sin, then no rest, nor peace; because from the knowledge and
assurance of that does the rest and peace of conscience come and flow.

2. Forgiveness of sins has a peculiar respect to the guilt of sin, and
removal It has a peculiar respect to the guilt of sin.
of that; when the Lord forgives a man, he does discharge him of that
obligation by which he was bound over to wrath and condemnation. Romans 8. 1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Ver. 33. Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies. Ver. 34.
Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed. Beloved, the Lord is a holy
and just God, and he reveals his wrath from heaven against all
unrighteousness, and there is a curse threatened to every transgression of the
Law; and when any man sins, he is obnoxious unto the curse, and God may
inflict the same upon him; but when God forgives sins, he therein does
interpose (as it were) between the sin and the curse, and between the
obligation and the condemnation, q. d. by reason of your sinning you are now
fallen into my hands of justice, and for your sinning I may according to my
righteous Law condemn and curse you for ever; (for by your sinning you are
worthy of death, Romans 1. 32.) but such is my mercy to you in Christ, that for
his sake I will spare you; and that curse and condemnation which you have
deserved, it shall never light upon you; I will deliver and free your souls
from going down into the pit.

Object. But may some say, Is not guilt inseparable from sin? can sin be
without guilt? and can guilt be without the desert of wrath and condemnation?

Sol. I answer, there is a twofold guilt; there is reatus simplex, and reatus
efficax; absolute guilt has in it a worthiness or desert of condemnation, and
this can never be separated from sin; (for though sin be pardoned, and
condemnation removed from the sinner, yet his sin is worthy of condemnation)
but when God pardons sin, he does it not by making the sin not to be worthy of
condemnation; but this is it which God does, he does remove that condemnation
that it shall never effectually or actually fall upon the sinner, although he
for his sinning be worthy thereof; e. g. When a thief or murderer is pardoned
amongst us, this pardon does not make the theft or murder no sin, or in
themselves not worthy of death by the Law; but it relieves the pardoned persons
thus far, that the death deserved by these sins is taken off, and shall never
be inflicted on the offenders.

3. Forgiveness of sin takes off all punishments properly so called; for sin,
there It takes off all punishment properly so called.
belongs unto us temporal punishment, and eternal punishment; you do not
consider what a depth of merit there is in sin, what plagues and curses it can
pull down in this life, and what an hell hereafter; but when God forgives sins,
you are then released, and for ever acquitted from any after-reckonings with
the justice of God; Divine justice has no more to say or do against you; for
remissa culpa, remittitur poena; if the fault be forgiven then also is the
punishment forgiven; nay, let me speak with an humble reverence, God cannot in
his justice punish when he has pardoned. Why will you say?

First, He forgives upon a satisfaction made to his justice already by Christ,
so that he cannot in justice punish us again for satisfaction.

Secondly, When he forgives, he releases the guilt and the fault, and the sin
in now (by this act of his merciful grace) as if it had never been committed;
so that the proper cause and reason of punishing being utterly removed, there
can no punishment issue out from Divine justice against you.

Object. But will some say, are not justified and pardoned persons many times
punished in this life? Was not David punished for his sin? were not the
Corinthians punished for their unworthy receiving of the Lords Supper?

Sol. I answer, that word Punishment may be taken, either

1. Largely, for any affliction or chastisement which does befall us from God
as a Father; in this sense I grant punishment incident to justified or pardoned
persons; for Hebr. 12. 6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges
every son whom he receives. And, Ver. 7. If you endure chastisement, God
deals with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the Father chastneth not?

2. Strictly, for those miserable evils issuing out from the Court of justice,
and falling upon us from God as a wrathful Judge, and as yet unsatisfied and
unreconciled; these kinds of punishing are wholly and utterly removed from
justified or pardoned persons by the blood of Christ, and Gods gracious
forgiveness.

5. A fifth thing considered in the description of forgiveness of sins, is
this, It is Gods act of oblivion.
that forgiveness of sins is (if I may so express it) Gods act of oblivion; and
as it were, an eternal cancelling of all our sinful bonds and debts, so that
there is now a full end of all controversies between God and us.

Object. We many times are possessed with fears, like Joseph's Brethren, that
notwithstanding the peace and assurance which he gave them of passing by their
injurious dealing with him, yet at length they feared that he would remember
them, and be avenged of them; such thoughts have we of God also; sometimes we
do perceive his great love and rich mercy toward us in the forgiveness of our
sins; yet at other times we have fears lest God will call us unto account for
all our sinful offenses, and question us, and judge us, as if the granting of
pardoning mercy might be revoked and called back by the Writ of Error, and the
old suit be prosecuted again by Divine justice, which seems to be taken off
and silenced by Divine mercy.

Sol. But Beloved, there is no such matter, and no such dealing of God with us;
the sinner may provocare, he may appeal from the Court of justice, unto the
Throne of Gods mercy; and of this he may rest assured, that the definitive
sentence in the Court of mercy about the forgiveness of sins, is like the Laws
of the Medes and Persians, which stood fast for ever, and remains unchangeable:
And as Isaac spoke of his blessing of Jacob, I have blessed him, and he shall
be blessed; that may we affirm of Gods forgiving any sinner, he has forgiven
him, and he shall for ever continue forgiven; and the Scriptures give full
testimony unto this which I now deliver unto you. Jer. 50. 20. The iniquity of
Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and
they shall not be sound; for I will pardon them whom I reserve. Ezekiel. 18. 22.
All his transgressions which he has committed, they shall not be mentioned
unto him; q. d. I will never speak of them any more. Jer. 31. 34. I will
forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more.

And besides these places, there are three other which (though metaphorically,
yet) do notably express the eternal passing over sin in Gods forgiveness of it,
viz. Isa. 43. 25. I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own
sake. Here our sins are compared to debts written in a book; and Gods forgiving
of them is compared to the blotting of them out of the book; if a debt-book be
crossed, this would much satisfy us; (for that supposes a discharge) but if
the debt be blotted out, now it can never be read against us any more, it is
utterly defaced, and nothing of a debt can be made to appear. Micah 7. 19. Thou will cast all their sins into the depth of the Sea: If a man be cast upon the
Sea, or into the Sea, yet he may recover again; but if he be cast into the
depths of the Sea, into the very profundum of it, he is drowned and gone; the
meaning of the place is, that when God forgives the sins of his people, they
shall never rise up and appear before him again; you have a phrase (for the
effect of this) concerning Babylon, Rev. 18. 21. A mighty Angel took up a
stone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, thus with violence shall that great
City Babylon be thrown down, and shall never be found no more at all. And in
this respect often God is said to cast our sins into the depths of the Sea; his
meaning is, they shall be like men that lie drowned and buried in the bottom
of the Sea; and Ephesians. 2. 16. Having slain the enmity thereby; the enmity here
(principally meant) is sin, but this by the blood of Christ is slain: Mark, he
does not say it is imprisoned, nor it is wounded, but it is slain, killed out,
right; thus when God in the blood of Christ forgives our sins, they are (as it
were) slain, they dye, and cease to be, and can never raise a quarrel or
variance more between God and us.

6. What shall I say more, when God forgives any man his sins, all displeasure
Upon forgiveness all displeasure cease.
cease; the forgiven party is now looked upon, and received with that love
and favor, as if he had never offended God, and as if God had never been
offended by him.

Object. You will say this is incredible?

Sol. It is a very truth, and worthy to be believed and received with all
thankful acceptance. Hosea 14. 4. I will love them freely, for mine anger is
turned away from him; in ver. 2. Israel prays for the forgiveness of sin; (take
away iniquity, and receive us graciously) this petition God heard and granted;
and now observe in what a posture God appears toward them, not of displeasure
or anger, (mine anger is turned away from him) but of kindness and favor, and
tender love; (I will love him freely) Isa. 54. 8. In a little wrath I hid my
face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy
on thee, says the Lord, thy Redeemer. Ver. 9. For this is as the water of Noah
unto me; for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the
earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wrath with thee, nor rebuke thee.
Luk 15. 21. And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven,
and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. Ver. 22. But the
Father said unto his servants, bring forth the best robe, and put it on him,
and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet. Ver. 23. And bring hither
the fatted Calf, and kill, and let us eat, and be merry. Here the sins of the
Prodigal are pardoned, and his father receives him with such expressions of
love and bounty, and familiarity, as if he had never sinned against him: Hence
it is that you read of such sweet, kind, tender, loving, comforting expressions
of God toward those whose sins he has pardoned. Jer. 31. 16. Refrain thy
voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears. Ver. 20. Is Ephraim my dear son?
is he a pleasant child? Matthew. 9. 2. Son, Be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee.

Thus you see what forgiveness of sins is which God promises unto his people
Some scruples arising from this description removed.
in Covenant; and before I proceed any further, I judge it convenient to remove
some scruples which may arise upon this description of the forgiveness of sins
now delivered unto you.

Four Quaeries.

1. If our sins be thus removed, covered, blotted out, and made to pass away in
forgiveness of them, whether then that assertion be not true, God sees not sin
in the justified?

2. If God upon the forgiveness of sins be not longer displeased, and will
proceed against them no more; how is it that we read of his anger and
displeasure with his people, and sharp correcting of them?

3. If sins be thus blotted out, and the parties forgiven be received into
special love and favor with God, whether then have pardoned persons any reason
to mourn for their sins, and repent of them?

4. Whether persons justified may charge sin on themselves?

Whether God sees no sin in justified persons?
Quest. 1. Whether the removing and covering, and blotting out of sins in
forgiveness, does not strongly hold out that assertion, that God sees no sin at
all in persons justified?

Sin does remain in them. Proved.
Sol. For answer unto this Quaery, I shall lay down these conclusions, viz.

First, That sin does remain even in justified and forgiven persons; and four
things do infallibly demonstrate it so to be.

1. By Scripture. 1 John 1. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. 1 Kings 8. 46. There is no man that sins
not. Eccles. 7. 20. There is not a just man upon earth that does good, and
sins not. Prove. 20. ^9. Who can say I have made my heart pure, I am clean
from sin? James 3. 2. In many things we offend all.

2. By the spiritual conflict 'twixt grace and sin in justified persons. Romans 7
23. I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin which is in my members. Ver. 24. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Gal.
5. 17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit agninst the flesh,
and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things
that ye would. There is threefold state of man: 1. Corrupted, wherein is
nothing but sin; and yet all is quiet. 2. Glorified, wherein is nothing but
holiness, as in heaven. 3. Regenerate, where there is flesh and spirit, sin and
grace.

3. By the duties incumbent on justified persons, as

1. Prayer to be kept from sin. Psalm. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant also from
presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me. Psalm. 119. 113. Order my
steps in thy Word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me; and prayer
for the pardon of sins committed. Psalm. 25. 11. For thy Name sake O Lord,
pardon mine iniquity, for it is great, etc. Ver. 18. Forgive all my sins.

2. Further mortifying of sin. Colos. 3. 4. When Christ who is our life shall
appear, then shall we also appear in glory; but in the mean time, Ver. 5.
Mortify your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, etc. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises, Dearly
Beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

4. By the examples of the best men, sinning Noah, Lot, Abraham, Jacob, Moses,
David, Jehoshaphat, Peter, and all these when they were in a justified
condition.

5. Experience; What one child of God has there been, or is there in the
world, who does not find much sin dwelling in him, although he be delivered
from the condemnation of sin! Romans 8. 11. and from the dominion of sin. Romans 6.
14. Yet he is not perfectly in this life delivered from the inhabitation of
sin, and motions, and conflicts, and actions of sin. If any of us (who indeed
are in Christ, and justified by him) have ever surveyed the clearest and
fairest day of our life, (when our hearts have been most enlarged, and our feet
most upheld) we shall with all our good find a great mixture of evil, so that
we daily see as much cause to mourn for our own filthiness, as to bless God
for his goodness.

2. As sin does still remain in persons justified, so God does see that
remaining God sees that remaining sin.
sin in them; he that made the eye, shall not he see? all things are naked and
open before him; Gods seeing is diversely taken in Scripture.

First, Sometimes for his approving: Genesis 1. 31. And God saw every thing that
he had made, and behold it was very good. Jonah. 3. 10. And God saw their works
that they turned from their evil way: He saw this with an eye of approbation.
Now in this sense God does not see sin in any man, neither good nor bad,
neither justified nor unjustified; for he is of purer eyes than to behold evil,
Hab. 1. 13. and cannot look upon iniquity (i. e.) with approbation or liking.

Secondly, For his wrathful observing and intention to condemn and destroy:
Jer. 7. 11. Is this house which is called by my Name, become a Den of Robbers
in your eyes! behold, even I have seen it, says the Lord, ver. 12. But go now
unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see
what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel. Hos. 6. 10. I have
seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel, there is the whoredom of
Ephraim, Israel is defiled, etc. Genesis 6. God saw the wickedness of man that it
was great upon the earth. If you understand Gods seeing of sin for such an
apprehension of sin, as for it in wrath to judge and condemn, and eternally to
destroy the sinner, in this sense God does not see sin in any that he pardons
or justifies.

Thirdly, Sometimes for his knowing and taking notice of a thing, and that with
dislike; although not so far as finally to condemn: Now in this sense God does
see the sins of justified persons: The eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15. 3. Job. 10. 14. If I sin, thou
markest me. Psalm. 90. 8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret
sins in the light of thy Countenance. Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee, thee only have
I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. 2 Samuel 12. 9. Why have thou (said
Nathan to David) despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do this evil in his
sight? This was that which did so aggravate David's sin, and so much break
David's heart.

Object. But these are places for Believers in the Old Testament, whereas they
who deny Gods seeing of sin, mean it of Believers under the New Testament.

Sol. The Believers under the Old Testament were justified by Christ; their
sins were laid upon Christ, and taken away by Christ as well as believers under
the New Testament.

2. Why do they bring most of their proofs for this Opinion out of the Old
Testament? As, God sees no iniquity in Jacob; And, thou art all fair my love;
and they shall be as white as snow; and blotted out, etc.

3. But see for the New Testament, Luke 15. 21. where you have the confession
of a penitent child; I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, or in thy
sight. Rev. 2. 4. I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love.

Thirdly, As God sees the sins in justified persons, so likewise is he offended
God is offended with their sins.
with those sins: But of this I shall speak more fully in answer to the next
Question.

Fourthly, Gods covering or hiding of sin in Justification, is not Exclusive
of, or inconsistent with Gods seeing of sin in his people, being rightly
understood; for Gods covering of sin is not exclusive of his seeing of sin.
there is a twofold covering of sin.

1. From condemnation; Thus when God forgives sins, he covers sins so that they
shall never appear and rise up to condemn the person.

2. From apprehension and dislike: Thus though the person be forgiven and
justified, yet if he full into sin, God sees it and dislikes it, yea hates it,
though for Christ's sake be does forgive the Person.

Object. But how can this be, that God should see any sin in believers, who
have the Righteousness of Jesus Christ which is perfect and without all sin!

Sol. I answer,

First, If the Righteousness of Christ were inherently and subjectively in us,
as it is in Christ; then indeed no sin were to be seen in us: But that
Righteousness is ours only Relatively and not formally, it is imputed only to
us, and notwithstanding that imputation there is sin in us.

Secondly, It is one thing to be considered in our selves, and another as
clothed with Christ's Righteousness: In the former respect our sins appear,
and in the latter respect they are covered.

How Gods displeasure and anger against his people is consistent with his
discharging of their sins,
Quest. 2. How can it be affirmed that by forgiveness of sins, any person is
discharged and freed, so that God remains no more offended, and displeased, and
will not proceed against him, seeing that we read of his displeasure, and
anger, and proceedings against his people for sinning against him?

Sol. For answer unto this, I shall briefly show you three things.

1. That God is displeased with the sins of his own people. 2. That his anger
for their sinnings has broken out very sharply upon them. 3. Notwithstanding
all this, they have a singular discharge from special wrath, and Gods judicial
proceeding against them, which is all that is required in forgiveness of their
sins.
First, God is displeased with the sins of his own people: See this in David, 2 Samuel God is displeased with the sins of his own people.
11. 27. But, the thing that David had done displeased the Lord. In Solomon, 1
King 11. 9. The Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned away
from the Lord God of Israel, who had appeared unto him twice. Ver. 10. And had
commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods,
but he kept not that which the Lord commanded. In Jehoshapbat, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.
Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is
wrath upon thee from the Lord.

Secondly, His anger has broken out very sharply upon them because of their
sinnings. His anger has been sharp against them because of their sins.
Deuteronomy. 3. 25. O Lord God, (said Moses) I pray thee let me go over and see the
good land that is beyond Jordan, etc. Ver. 26. But the Lord was wroth with me
for your sakes, and would not hear me, etc. 2 Samuel 12. 9. Wherefore have thou
despised the Covenant of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? Thou have killed
Vriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to be thy wife, etc.
Ver. 10. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house. Ver. 11. I
will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, etc. 1 Samuel 2. 22. For
Elies remisness toward his wicked children, how heavy was the hand of God upon
him, in his sons and family! 1 Pet 4. 17. Judgment must begin at the house of
God. 1 Cor. 11. 30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep. Nay his anger has gone higher than external losses; it has come upon
them also in a Spiritual way (which is of all other the most heavy) and that
both Privatively in taking away the sense of his favor, and joy of his spirit;
and Positively in breaking of his bones, as you read in David, Psalm. 51.

Thirdly, But notwithstanding all this, Gods judicial wrath or dspleasure is
removed, Gods judicial wrath is removed.
All hostile anger cease upon Remission of sins, no displeasure of God (as
hating) remains, and no fruit of displeasure which is a part of the curse,
either does or shall befall them; Christ has removed that; although a
Pathetical anger be on them; yet no Judicial anger is toward them: Though
corrections befall them, yet destruction shall not: though sharp affliction,
yet no malediction; and under all their corrections (which still God sanctifies
unto them for their good* Isa. 27. 9. by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin: And which is a
testimony of his Fatherly love) they still remain sons of mercy, and heirs of
glory. Psalm. 89. 31. If his children break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commands; Ver. 32. then I will visit their transgressions with the rod, and
their iniquities with stripes. Ver. 33. Nevertheless my loving-kindnesse will I
not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

Whether there be any reason to repent of our sins that are forgiven,
Quest. 3. If God does graciously forgive our sins, whether now there be any
reason for us to repent of them?

Nothing that we do can untye the bond of sin.
Sol. This is I confess an excellent Quere; how our duty to repent does
consist with Gods free grace in forgiving; concerning which, give me favor to
say a few things.

First, Nothing that we do (no mourning for sin, no repenting for sin) does, or
can untie the bond of sin, release, and acquit, and discharge, or absolve from
guilt: Although God does not discharge us from repenting, yet our repenting
does not discharge us from our guilt and condemnation; that is the work of Gods
grace in Christ, if any press repentance upon that ground, as if forgiveness
of sin were the natural effect of repentance, that had a merit to deliver us
from condemnation, he erres exceedingly, because

1. Forgiveness of sins is an act only of God, repealing the sentence of
condemnation against us; it is only the Creditors act to discharge the debt.

2. There is not any sufficient causality in our work of repentance, for such
an effect as forgiveness of sin, For

1. Our repentance is imperfect, and stands in need of the blood of Christ.
Bonum meum neque pure bonum est, neque meum est.

2. Suppose it were perfect, yet that could not take away the guilt of sin
committed, because sin is an infinite offense and dishonor to God; and our
repentance can never bear that proportion in satisfying, which sin has in
offending: It must be clearly acknowledged, that to set up repentance as a
cause meriting forgiveness of sins, cannot consist with Gods free forgiveness
of them.

Secondly, Although forgiveness of sin be not the effect of man's repentance,
Yet repentance is required to the obtaining of forgiveness.
(for then we should forgive our selves.) Yet repentance is required to the
obtaining of forgiveness: Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, etc. and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and unto our
God, for he will abundantly pardon. Ezekiel. 18. 21. If the wicked will turn from
all his sins that he has committed, etc. ver. 22. all his transgressions which
he has committed shall not be mentioned unto him. Luke 24. 47. That repentance
and remission of sins should be purchased in his Name. Acts 3. 19. Repent ye
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out.

Thirdly, Although repentance be not a cause of forgiveness, yet it is the
means Though repentance be not a cause, yet it is a means of pardon.
which God has ordained for us to enjoy the forgiveness of sin, of the which
his grace only is the efficient cause, and the blood of Christ only is the
meritorious cause: Though God does freely forgive, yet he enjoins repentance on
us; for besides the many reasons on our part, there is reason for this, in
repect of Gods own grace, which did it express itself in a free forgiveness
of wicked and impenitent persons, it would be exceedingly undervalued and
despised as an unjust act, and besides that, it would be improved to all
licenciousness and profaneness?

Whether justified persons may charge themselves with sin;
Fourthly, Whether justified persons may charge themselves with sin, seeing God
has graciously discharged them of sin?

How far justified persons have charged themselves with sin.
Sol. I will speak something unto this Case also, wherein I shall show unto you
two things.

First, How far the children of God have charged sin upon themselves: we read
in Scripture that they have charged themselves

1. With the matter of sin; that they have been guilty of Original sin: Psalm.
51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me.
Romans 7. 20. Sin that dwells in me. And with Actual sin; as David, I have
sinned: 2 Samuel 12. 13. I have sinned against thee, said Job, Chap. 7. 20. and
so David, Ezra, Nehemiah, etc.

2. With the manner of sinning, as to the Circumstances of it, against mercies,
warnings, judgments on others, Dan. 9. Neh. 9.

3. With the merit of sin; that if the Lord should deal with them according to
their sins, there were no abiding: If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O
Lord, who shall stand! Psalm. 130. 3. Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into judgment,
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Job. 9. 2. How should a man
be just with God? Ver. 3. If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one
of a thousand. Dan. 9. 8. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face.

4. So far forth as to acknowlegde no hope nor help of discharge, but in Jesus
Christ, and in Gods free grace. O save me for thy mercies sake.

5. So far forth as to quicken all penitental works; they have remembered their
sins: Lam. 3. 20. My soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled
within me: They have considered their sins: Psalm. 119. 59. I considered my
ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies. Mark 14. 72. Peter thought on the
words of Christ, and went out and wept bitterly. They have mourned for their
sins: Zach. 12. 10. They shall look upon him, etc. and shall mourn: we read of
David's tears, and Peter's tears, and Mary Magdalens tears, etc. They have
reformed their sins: Hose. 14. 8. What have I any more to do with Idols! They
have been earnest with God for the pardon and for the assurance of the
forgiveness of their sins: Psalm. 51. 1, etc. and Dan. 9. O Lord hear, O Lord
forgive! and Hose. 14. 2. Take away my iniquity.

Secondly, How far forth they may not charge sin upon themselves: I answer
Wherein they may not charge sin upon themselves.
briefly, they may not charge sin on themselves,

First, As to conclude that God will damn them for their sins. For there is no
condemnation to them, etc. Romans 8. 1. And he that believes shall not perish,
but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16. Though they must acknowledge that by
reason of sin they are worthy of condemnation, yet they are to believe that
Christ has dyed for them, and they shall not be condemned.

Secondly, As to undertake any self-satisfaction to God for their sins; you
read of their confessions and tears, and prayers, but not of their
satisfaction; All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Isa. 64. 6.
Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord? shall I come before him with
burnt-offerings? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten
thousands of Rivers of Oil? etc. Mich. 6. 6, 7. If I justify my self, mine
own mouth will condemn me; if I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse, Job 9. 20.

Thirdly, As to disanull their relation to God of Sonship, etc. Isa. 64. 8. But
now O Lord thou art our Father! Ver. 9. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither
remember iniquity for ever: behold, see we beseech thee, we are all thy people!

Having thus opened and cleared the nature of the forgiveness of sins, I
proceed to the other part of the description of it.

SECT. II.
THE second thing in the Proposition of forgiveness of sins is this, viz. That
God himself undertakes this work, and he undertakes it by promise.

First, God undertakes to forgive sins. Luke 5. 21. Who can forgive sins but
God alone? Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake. Exo. 34. 6. The Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious,
long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. Ver. 7. Keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgressions and sin. Dan. 9. 9. To thee, O
Lord God, belongs mercy, and forgiveness.

Forgiveness of sin is indeed one of his Royal Prerogatives; therefore you find
his people making their addresses unto him for forgiveness of their sins: Exodus
32. 32. Oh this people have sinned a great sin; yet now if thou will forgive
their sin, etc. Psalm. 25. 18. Forgive all my sins. Dan. 9. 19. O Lord hear, O
Lord forgive. Hose. 14. 2. Take away all iniquity. Act. 8. 22. Pray God if
perhaps the thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven thee. There is a forgiveness

1. By way of charity, wherein we forgive the offense and trespass against us:
If thy brother repent, forgive him, Luke 17. 3. And forgive one another, as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4 32.

2. By way of Ministry; thus the Apostles, as Christ delivers it in Joh. 20.
23. Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted.

3. By way of immediate and absolute authority; thus it belongs to God, and to
him alone; God in Scripture is styled a Judge: Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right? Genesis 18. 25. And to the Supreme Judge it belongs to condemn or
to acquit. A Creditor; there was a certain Creditor which had two debtors, Luke
7. 41. who can forgive the debt but the Creditor? A Lawgiver: There is one
Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy, Jam. 4 12. who can forgive the
transgressions of the Law but the Lawgiver? Now God himself undertakes to
forgive sins, and none but he must do so. Reasons of it. God himself undertakes
this work.


First, Because all sins are offenses against him, and deviations from his
righteous will, and injuries to his glory; even those sins which are wrongs
unto men, are injuries also unto God; for his Will is slighted, and his Law is
violated in them; therefore the remission of them is proper to him.

Secondly, Because unto whom the power of death and condemnation
authoritatively belongs, unto him also the power of life and absolution does
belong; but the power of condemnation belongs only to God. Ergo. These are acts
seated in the same power.

Thirdly, Because the forgiveness of sin takes off the infinite desert of sin,
reaching even unto eternity of punishment (eternal punishment is deserved by
sin) and who can relieve us from that but God alone?

Fourthly, Because our consciences might have a resting place; which they could
never have, if God himself did not forgive sins. What if all the men in the
world did forgive you, if God did not clear you, but still held you guilty!
What though all the lower Courts absolve a Malefactor, as long as the Supreme
Court condemns him! what though the Malefactor forgive himself, if the Judge do
not forgive him?

Secondly, As forgiveness of sins solely appertains to God, so God undertakes
the same by way of promise, which shows that he is willing to forgive sins, and
God undertakes it by promise.
that he engages himself to forgive sins, and that he will certainly forgive
sins. Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sin
no more. Pro. 28. 13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins shall find
mercy. 2 Chro. 7. 14. If my people shall turn from their wicked ways, then
will I forgive their sins. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and turn
unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and abundantly pardon. 1 John
1. 9. If we confess our sins; he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins.

Quest. Now if any should demand why God contents not himself with a
Declaration Reasons of it.
only that he is a God who forgives sin; but also he makes a promise that he
will forgive sins.

Sol. I suppose these Reasons may be given of it.

First. Because this is a greater relief to the troubled conscience: A promise
of forgiveness is a more hopeful foundation to work upon, than a mere
Declaration that God has power to forgive, and it serves to answer our fears
and doubts more fully. You would not imagine how powerful and dreadful the
guilt of sin is, and how strongly working when a conscience is awakened, and
wounded with the sense of it! How great is the apprehension of Gods wrath! how
amazing is the curse threatened! how hard is it to look toward the Mercy seat
through all the threatenings, and through all the terrors! how difficult is it
to settle it with any apprehensions of mercy! And therefore the Lord is
pleased, not only to declare that he is a God forgiving sins, but also he makes
promise that he will forgive sins for Christ's sake; this is apt to preserve
troubled sinners from despair, and to breed some hopes in them, that perhaps
they may find mercy; for who can tell but that a merciful God, and a God who
promises mercy to poor sinners, may at length show mercy to them, and forgive
their sins!

Secondly, Because this is a stronger Obligation and Argument to prevail with
sinners to repent of their sins, and to turn unto the Lord. Beloved, I beseech
you mark what I say:

1. The greater inevidence and improbability there is of forgiveness of sins,
the more indisposition and averseness there is unto repentance: If a person
apprehends mercy as impossible, he then looks upon repentance as unuseful;
either he grows despairing, or desperate; For says he, to what end should I
repent, and come into God who (I am sure) will show me no mercy?

2. Again, the greater hopes that a sensible sinner has of mercy, the more
easily and kindly is his heart wrought upon to Repent, to come off from his
sins to God. Hos* 14. 2. When taking away of sin is hinted, then ver. 3. Ashur
shall not save us, neither will we say to the works of our hands Ye are our
gods; for in thee the fatherless finds mercy; so Jer. 3. 12. Return thou
backsliding Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am
merciful, says the Lord. Ver. 22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will
heal your backslidings; behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
God. Mark, how this insinuation of mercy bowed in their hearts. Psalm. 103. 4.
There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

Now when a sinner sees forgiveness of sins in a promise, this appears with
more evidence of hope for him; I may yet have mercy, so great is Gods goodness,
and why should I stand out any longer? and why should I for lying vanities
forsake my own mercies? I will home to my Fathers house, for there is bread
enough, and to spare, etc.

Thirdly, Because this is the surest ground for faith; you know this is the
great scruple, But may I find mercy? and what ground have I to expect mercy?
Suppose I do repent, what assurance have I that God will forgive my sits? Why,
having Gods promise for the forgiveness of your sins, in this case you may be
confident that if you come to him, and rely upon him, he will unquestionably be
as good as his word, he will show mercy to you. Jer. 31. 18. I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself. Ver. 20. I will surely have mercy upon him,
says the Lord. Ezekiel. 18. 21. If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he
has committed, etc. he shall surely live, and not dye. Ver. 22. All his
transgressions which he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him.

SECT. III.
3. I Now come to the third part of the Proposition of forgiveness of sins;
viz. God promises the same to all his people.
That God promises the same unto all his people, all his people in Covenant.
Psalm. 85. 2. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people. Isa. 33. 34. The
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. Micah 7. 18. Who is
a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression
of the remnant of his heritage?

Paul spoke of Andronicus and Junia, Romans 16. 7. who were in Christ before me;
that may we say of people, some are in Covenant before others; but as soon as
any of them are brought into Covenant, they are pardoned immediately, their sins
are forgiven unto them.

Again, of the people of God some have been greater sinners, and some have been
lesser sinners; but as soon as they have been made the people of Gods Covenant,
their sins have been forgiven; Mary Magdalen had her sins forgiven, and Paul
had his sins forgiven, etc.

Again, of the people of God some are weaker, and some are stronger, and both
of them have their sins forgiven. Acts 10. 43. Whosoever believes in him shall
receive remission of sins. 1 John 2. 12. I write unto you little children,
because your sins are forgiven you for his Names sake.

Once more, of the people of God, some have clear and fuller apprehensions of
pardoning mercy, others have more dark and doubtful disputes about it; the
strong believer who has assurance, and the weak believer who is troubled with
doubts, both of them are forgiven; all of them may say with Paul, Romans 8. 33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies.
Arguments to demonstrate it.
Ver. 34. Who is be that condemns? it is Christ that dyed. And there are four
Arguments which demonst^ate this truth unto us.

First, All who are in Christ, have their sins forgiven them; but all the
people who are in Covenant with God are in Christ; (my reason for that is this,
because only in and by Christ God becomes our God, there our relation rises)
Ergo. For the first Proposition, that is a clear truth; viz. That all who are
in Christ have their sins forgiven them; for Christ himself says, This is my
blood which is shed for many, for remission of sins, Matthew. 26. 28. and Matthew.
1. 21. He shall save his people from their sins; and the Apostle says, there
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. And he has
delivered us from wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10. And that we joy in God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement, Romans 5. 11.

Now mark, if Christ saves his people from their sins, and if he shed his blood
for the remission of their sins; if by Christ they are freed from condemnation,
and from wrath, and God is reconciled unto them, and through him they have good
reason to joy in God, then unquestionably all who are in Christ have their sins
forgiven them; (for else how could they joy in God? etc.) this is one Argument
to demonstrate that God forgives all his people in Covenant

Secondly, All penitent and believing persons have the forgiveness of sins; but
all the people whom God brings into Covenant with himself, are penitent and
believing persons: Ergo. The first of these Propositions is so clear and open
in many places of Scripture, that it is needless to quote any pl^ce; you may at
leisure peruse all those promises of forgiveness unto repenting and believing
persons mentioned before. And the second Proposition is as clear; for
repentance and faith are Covenant gifts, and given unto such whom God owns for
his people, and to none but such; for God owns none for his people (in a
Covenant way) who are impenitent and unbelieving.

Thirdly, There are no enemies in the Covenant of Grace; none who hate God, and
none whom God hates; none who set themselves against him, and none against whom
he sets himself; but the Covenant of Grace is a Covenant of life, and of love,
and of peace, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Hos. 14. 4. Cant. 2. 3. Isa. 62. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 18.
Romans 5. 1. Ezekiel. 16. 61. All in this Covenant love God, and God loves them;
they delight in God, and God delights in them; they walk with God, and God is
said to dwell in them, and to walk in them, they have peace with God, and God
is at peace with them; he is their Father, and they are his sons and daughters;
if this be so, (and so it is, if we do believe the Scriptures which say so
expressly) then assuredly all who are in Covenant, have their sins pardoned; for
such mutual love, and such mutual delight, and such mutual dwelling, and such
mutual peace, and such mutual relation, there cannot possibly be, unless sins
were forgiven, and all enmity slain.

Fourthly, There is no damnation that ever was yet to be found in the Covenant
of Grace; salvation you find there, but damnation was never read of there: He
that believes shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 15, 16.
there is damnation for refusing, not for entering; sinners, who before they were
in Covenant, were obnoxious to damnation for their sins; are now delivered from
it, by coming into the Covenant; never was, or shall any person be damned who
is in Covenant, and has God for his God; for they are blessed who have the
Lord to be their God: But if their sins were not forgiven, they were not
blessed; for blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, Rom 4 7. Neither
should they be saved, but must perish for ever, and dye in their sins.

And thus you see this part of the Proposition of forgiveness of sins cleared
also; viz. That it is promised to all the people of God in Covenant.

SECT. IV.
4. NOW follows the fourth and the last part of the Proposition, namely, It is
first promised by God unto his people.
That forgiveness of sins is one of the mercies first promised by God unto his
people; as here in this place, it has the heart-guard of the Covenant gifts,
it takes the right hand, and the first place of the spiritual mercies promised.
In this Scripture there is mention of three spiritual gifts, which are like
David's three Worthies; but this of Justification (this of remission of sins) is
the first of them. Beloved, you must distinguish between the Covenant it self,
and the gifts thereof; the Covenant it self lies in this; I will be your God,
and you shall be my people; this closure, and this relation makes the Covenant;
and when we are thus closed with God in Covenant, then come out the gifts of
the Covenant which God deals and gives forth unto his people, and amongst
these, first we have a promise mentioned to forgive sins.

Some may think the reason of this priority to be this, because Justification
goes before Sanctification. I confess that these are distinct works; but yet I
doubt whether there be a priority of time between them, so that a person is
first justified, and after that he is sanctified: For (under favor) it cannot
well be made out that there falls any space or pause of time between those; and
my reason is this, because

1. When a man is once in Christ, Christ is at the same time made of God unto
him Sanctification as well as righteousness; therefore the same Apostle says,
If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

2. It cannot well be admitted that there should be a true union with Christ
consisting with a partial communion in benefits absolutely necessary to
constitute a Christian; and such a one is Sanctification.

3. There is such an immediate influence of life and grace upon believing, as
raises a consimilitude and conformity.

But to omit all needless disputes, I humbly conceive that there may be three
reasons why forgiveness of sins is one of the first mercies mentioned in the
promise. Three reasons of it. It does most of all set forth the glory of God.


First, Because it is one of the mercies which does most of all set forth and
illustrate the glory of God; the greatest appearing of God in his glory in his
love, and in his grace, and in his mercy to forgive sins. Exodus 34. 6. The Lord
proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, Ver. 7. Forgiving
iniquity, transgressions and sins. In this Proclamation, the Lord opens and
shows his glory unto Moses, and one of the first sights of that is this, that
he is the Lord God merciful and gracious, and that appears by this, that he
forgives iniquity, transgressions and sins; and indeed this is the glory of his
Throne, that it is a Throne of grace, where sinners may find mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need, Hebr. 4. 16. Hence is it that his grace and
mercy is so often called his glory. Ephesians. 3. 6 According to the riches of his
glory; (i. e.) of his grace and mercy; see Rom 9. 23. That he might make known
the riches of his glory on the Vessels of mercy; see 2 Cor. 3. 18. Beholding as
in a glass the glory of the Lord; (i. e.) the glory of his mercy, and love in
Christ Jesus; therefore the Prophet says, Micah 7. 18. Who is a (strong) God
like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of
the remnant of his heritage! as if Gods forgiving of sins were one of the
greatest demonstrations of his Deity. Though his Godhead does appear in other
of his Attributes, and in other of his Works, (Romans 1. 20.) yet it does most
clearly, and most comfortably appear in this merciful Attribute, and work of
forgiveness of sins; his wisdom and his justice, and his power have put forth
themselves (as it were) in a way of subserviency to the glory of his mercy; he
found out by his wisdom a way to satisfy his justice by Christ, that so he
might bring glory to his mercy in the forgiveness of our sins.

Secondly, Because it is a mercy transcendently excellent, a mercy which excels
It is a mercy transcendently excellent. It excels the mercies of men.
most of the mercies which we do receive; there are,

1. The mercies of men; they do sometimes pardon offenses committed against
them; but Gods forgiving mercies far exceed this; e. g.

First. When man has forgiven you, yet God may call you to an account, and
question, and condemn you.

Secondly, Man's forgiveness may acquit you from some temporal punishment due
unto you by some humane Laws by you transgressed; but Gods forgiveness
reaches to the discharge of you not only from temporal but also from eternal
punishment.

Thirdly, The mercy of man in forgiveness looks only at outward offenses, but
it meddles not with inward sinnings (with those of the heart) but Gods
forgiving extends to internal, invisible obliquities, as well as external and
invisible transgressions.

Fourthly, When men forgive us, this perhaps may be some lesser offenses, but
no great and capital; or if these, then the benefit of this forgiveness is lost
and forfeited by the next offense, as in the case of Shimei; but when God
forgives a sinner, he forgives all sorts of sinnings, and will never remember
those sins again any more.

2. The mercies of God, whereof some are corporal, and some are spiritual; now
forgiveness of sins does excel.

First, All the corporal mercies or blessings which possibly can be enjoyed in
It excels corporal mercies.
this world; for

1. One may enjoy all corporal blessings in greater abundance, and this may be
all his portion; (they have their portion in this life, said David, Psalm. 17.
14.) but forgiveness of sins is a mercy which never goes alone, but has the
concomitancy of all choice blessings; it is a better portion, and yet not all.

2. The outward blessings respect only the condition of the body, the
preferment, delight, ease, relief, support and safety of that; and
notwithstanding this pre-eminence, the soul may be in a most miserable
condition; but forgiveness of sins has a special respect to the soul, and the
welfare and everlasting good of it, and happiness of it; it makes us truly
blessed.

3. Notwithstanding the presence of outward blessings, the spiritual misery of
man is nothing altered, they cannot release you from the wrath of God, nor
deliver you from that curse which the Law pronounces against you for your
transgressions; but when God forgives sins, then the forgiven person is freed
from wrath and curse, and condemnation, and God is pacified and reconciled.

4. One may possibly enjoy them, and yet never enjoy God, nor Christ, nor peace
in conscience, nor glory in heaven; nay, his enjoyment of these may
(accidentally) cause a farther distance from God and Christ; (as in the young
man whose riches and possessions kept him off from closing with Christ) but
forgiveness of sins necessarily involves all these grand enjoyments; if sins be
forgiven, unquestionably God is your God, and Christ is your Redeemer, and
heaven is your inheritance.

Secondly, It excells, if not all yet certainly most of Gods spiritual mercies:
I It excels most of Gods spiritual mercies.
am unwilling to make comparisons between them; yet with reverence I speak it,
that forgiveness of sins in some respects excells all the graces in man.

1. For the perfection of the work: the change of the soul by grace is indeed
an For the perfection in the work.
excellent work; nevertheless it is imperfect; (therefore it gets on by
degrees) but the forgiveness of sin is a perfect work: when God sanctifies a
man, he does it so that the person needs yet more holiness; but when he
forgives us, he does it not so that those sins need more of forgiveness; when
he sanctifies a man, there still remains some corruption; but when he forgives
a sinner, you cannot say there remains yet something behind of condemnation;
God can find enough in our graces to except against, but nothing in his
forgiveness of sins.

2. For the causality in the work; Compare your graces, and your forgivenesses
For the causality in the work.
together; there are several choice effects in the soul, which you cannot
affirm of your graces as their cause; yet you may safely affirm Gods
forgiveness of sins to be their cause; e. g. peace in conscience; you cannot
say that any holiness or righteousness in you is the cause of this; (for
conscience cannot be quieted by any thing in us) but forgiveness of sin is a
just cause of peace in conscience; being justified by faith, we have peace with
God, Romans 5. 1. I will say no more at present, but that all the springs of joy
and peace, and comfort, are in your justification. Romans 8. 11. Be of good
cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, Matthew. 9. 2.

Thirdly, Because it is a mercy which does exceedingly concern afflicted and It
is a mercy does exceedingly concern afflicted consciences.
distressed souls: Beloved, remember three things.

1. All the men in the world do need forgiveness of sins; for who is he that
lives, and sins not? and what sinner is there who needs not to have his
sins forgiven?

2. All the people of God do see the need and worth of it; how earnest have
they been to attain to it? David in Psalm. 51. prays ten times for it, so the
Church, Remember not iniquity, Isa. 64. 9. Take away iniquity, Hos. 14. 2.

3. Afflicted and distressed souls, they infinitely prize it, and thirst for
it, and their soul will sink and fail without it. Take me any soul whatsoever,
as soon as ever it comes to be a wounded and distressed soul, presently it
cries out, what shall I do? what will become of me without Christ, and without
forgiveness of sins? if God forgives not these sins, I am a lost man! O that I
might have mercy! when shall I find mercy! May I look for mercy? is there any
hope of mercy? I tell you Sirs, the wounded sinner apprehends wrath and
condemnation, and feels sin with such a weight and terror in conscience, that
if some hope of mercy did not presently appear, Isa. 57. 16. the spirit would
fail before him; it would be consumed with despair; therefore no marvail that
God is pleased in the first place to hold out this golden Scepter of
forgiveness of sins, whereby to relieve all brokenhearted sinners.

SECT. V.
O how dreadful then is the condition of such who refuse to How dreadful is the
condition of such as refuse to be in Covenant with God?
be in Covenant with God! The doctrine of forgiveness of sins is not so
comfortable unto the people of God, but it is as dreadful to all those who
refuse to be the people of God.

For the managing of this Use, I will lay down these three conclusions.

1. Some there are who do refuse God to be their God in Covenant, and do refuse
to be a people in Covenant with him. 2. All these are an unforgiven people;
their sins neither are forgiven, nor shall they ever be forgiven unto them. 3.
Because their sins are unforgiven, therefore they are in a most miserable and
dreadful condition.
First, There are some who do refuse God to be their God in Covenant, and do
refuse Some refuse to be in Covenant with God.
to be his people in Covenant. Job 21. 14 They say unto God, Depart from us;
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Ver. 15. What is the Almighty that
we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him? Prove.
1. 24. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hands,
and no man regarded. Ver. 29. For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord. Ver. 30. They would none of my counsel, they despised all
my reproof, etc.

But more particularly there are four sorts of men who refuse God to be their
God in Covenant, and to be his people.

1. Such as refuse the authority of God to rule and guide them by his Will and
Laws: Such as refuse to be guided by his Laws.
When God is a God in Covenant, there he is acknowledged as Lord and Lawgiver;
(the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, Isa.
33. 22.) nay, he will be so acknowledged or else he will not be a God in
Covenant with us; see Lev. 26. 14. If ye will not hearken unto me, and will not
do all these Commandments; and ver. 15. If ye shall dispute my Statutes, and if
your soul abhor my judgments; then ver. 17. I will set my face against you,
etc. Psalm. 81. 11. But my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel
would none of me. Ver. 12. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and
they walked in their own counsels. If any man has a nature which is at enmity
with God, and will not be subject unto his Will and Law, how can there be a
Covenant between them and God? for in forming up of a Covenant, there must be
an agreement between the parties; but if we set up our wills against Gods will,
that we will do, not what comes from his mouth, but what comes from our own
hearts; not what he commands, but what our own proud lusts do like; assuredly
God neither is, nor will be in Covenant with such a people; for hereby he
should lose the glory of being a Lord, and we should not submit to his
righteous will, but he should subject himself unto our ungodly lusts.

2. Such as maintain a contrariety and incompliance with the glorious nature of
God: Such as maintain a contrariety to the glorious nature of God.
This is the glory of the Divine nature, that it is holy; (Holy, holy, holy
Lord God Almighty, Rev. 4. 8.) and this is that about which God insists with
all persons, (whatsoever) whom he will own for his people in Covenant, Ye shall
be holy, for I am holy, Lev. 11. 44. For there must be a similitude 'twixt God,
and the people of God; and as he declares his choice love to them, so must they
be a choice generation, and an holy Nation to show forth his praises; therefore
such persons as are not only unholy in a privative way, but also hate holiness,
and cannot endure to be made holy in a positive adherency of holiness, God
neither is, nor ever will be a God in Covenant with them, nor can they be a
people in Covenant with God; for what communion can there be 'twixt light and
darkness? and what Covenant can there be made 'twixt the holy God who hates all
unholiness, and ungodly persons who do likewise hate and abhor all holiness?

3. Such as refuse to let go their sins, and will hold fast their iniquities,
who will spare Such as refuse to let go their sins.
them, and not forsake them, as Zophar speaks, Job 20. 30. who refuse to
return, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 8. 5. God is no God in Covenant with these,
neither are they, nor can they be a people in Covenant with him. Psalm 50. 16.
Unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that
thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction,
and castest my word behind thee. Josh. 24. 23. Now therefore put away the
strange gods which are among you, and incline your heart to the Lord God of
Israel. Ver. 25. So Joshua made a Covenant with the people that day. If a man's
heart be set on his sins, I will love them, I will serve them, I will not
forsake them, it cannot be that there should be a Covenant made up 'twixt God
and him. Such as through unbelief persevere in refusing Christ.


4. Such as through unbelief persevere in the refusing of Christ; you think it
no great matter to have Jesus Christ preached unto you, and offered unto you,
and yet for you to slight Jesus Christ thus offered; but remember what I say,
that person who refuses Christ, does refuse God to be his God in Covenant; He
that refuses you, refuses me; and he that refuses me, (says Christ)
despises him that sent me, Luke 10. 16. God becomes our God, and our Father
only in Christ, and therefore Christ says, I go to my God, and to your God;
and my Father, and your Father, Joh: 2. 17. We are brought near to God by
Christ, and he becomes near to us through the blood of Christ, there you find
h^s love toward you etc. and therefore if you will not embrace Jesus Christ,
there is no covenanting 'twixt you and God, he only being the foundation, and
head, and Mediator of the Covenant. All uncovenanted people are an unforgiven
people.


Secondly, The second conclusion is this, that all uncovenanted people are an
unforgiven people; (i. e.) all who do continue to refuse God to be their God in
Covenant, and to be his people in Covenant, their sins neither are forgiven,
nor ever shall be forgiven; why so will you say? because

1. Forgiveness of sins is only promised in the Covenant of Grace, in no
Covenant but Reasons of it.
this; not in the Covenant of Works, for that is a letter of death and
condemnation unto the sinner.

2. And as it is only in the Covenant of Grace, so it is promised only to the
people in that Covenant. 1 Kin. 8. 34. Forgive the sin of thy people. Ver. 36.
Forgive the sin of thy servants. Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity.

3. Only those who are in Christ shall have their sins forgiven. Romans 8. 1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Acts 10. 43.
Whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins. Joh. 8. 24. If ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins. Joh. 3. 18. He that
believes not, is condemned already.

4. All impenitent persons are unforgiven persons; all uncovenanted persons are
impenitent persons. Ergo. The first Proposition is clear in Scripture, see at
leisure. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby ye
have transgressed, for why will ye dye O house of ^srael? Luke 13. 3. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Prove. 28. 14. He that hardens his
heart, shall fall into mischief. Romans 2. 5. But thou after thy hardness and
impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

Thirdly Now follows the third conclusion, Because these sins are unforgiven,
therefore The dreadful ^^ndition of ^^ unforgiven people. S^mile.
they are in a most miserable and dreadful condition. It is reported of Caesar,
that he wondered at one who could sleep so quietly, and yet had so many debts
upon him: In like manner we may wonder at many persons who can live so merrily
and jovially, and yet have all their sins unforgiven; surely they are persons
of very gross ignorance and stupidity, or else are very high and desperate
Atheists.

But to the point in hand there are eight things which may set forth the
dreadful In eight particulars.
misery of an unforgiven sinner.

1. His unutterable privation and loss. 2. The full power of the Law against
him in all its threatenings and curses. 3. The wrath of God under which he walks
all his days, and which may fall on him whenever the Lord pleases. 4. The
authority which conscience has to deal with him in a way of accusation and
condemnation. 5. The unavoidableness of death, and the sting thereof, when sins
are unpardoned. 6. That just and irreversible sentence of condemnation from God
in the day of judgment. 7. The immediate portion and condition in hell amongst
the damned after the sentence of condemnation. 8. The eternity of that
miserable estate unto which impenitent and unbelieving, and unforgiven sinners
are adjudged.
First, The unforgiven sinner is under the greatest loss and privation which
man possibly He is under the greatest loss and privation.
can be; and what is that greatest loss and privation? if you know what the
greatest good and happiness is, you may then quickly tell what the greatest
loss and privation is; to enjoy God perfectly and fully and eternally in glory,
is there any good and happiness like unto this! O but the unforgiven sinner
shall never see God in glory, he shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord; heaven is no place for the enemies of God; sins
unpardoned, are like the Angel with a flaming Sword, who kept the passage into
Paradise; there is no entering into life with sins unpardoned; they do certainly
and eternally bar up that door of heaven, and heavenly happiness; and now how
miserable must that soul be which is eternally excluded from all true happiness?

Secondly, The Law of God is in full power against every unpardoned sinner. 1.
All the The Law of God is in full power against him.
inditements and charges of the Law for being transgressed. 2. All the
threatenings of the Law, in the several sorts of judicial punishment. 3. All the
curses of the Law, even to the utmost extent of them, Cursed is every one, etc.
the soul that sins shall dye; and there is no one moment of this life that he
can secure himself, etc. they may light on him in the house, or in the field;
when he is waking, or when he is sleeping; when alone, or when in company; when
rejoicing, or when making merry; when boasting, when in highest abundance and
confidence; when sinning, and putting far from himself the evil day.

Thirdly, The unforgiven sinner walks all his days under the wrath of God: He
is all his d^yes under the wrath of God.
God is angry with the wicked every day, Psalm. 7. 11. not with a Paternal, but
with a Judicial anger, even to hatred and abhorment: The wicked is an
abomination unto him, and he hates all workers of iniquity, Prove. 3. 32. 15. 9.
And this wrath God can reveal it to his soul, and pour it forth upon him when
he pleases: and when God poures on him the fierceness of his wrath and
indignation, he can neither decline it nor sustain it: it is like the tempest
and whirlewinds; it is like burning fire, and devouring flames; it drives the
sinner to his feet, breaks down all his arrogancies, and vain hopes, and
sensual joys, and fills him with amazing distractions, and terrors, and
despairs. How heavy was this wrath on Christ suffering for our sins? it made
him to sweat clods of blood; how terrible is the apprehension and fear of it to
David, to Heman? how infinitely dreadful will the sense of it be to the
unforgiven sinner who has no part in Christ, no hope nor plea by him?

Fourthly, The unforgiven sinner is obnoxious to the severe Authority of an He
is obnoxious to an awaking guilty conscience.
awakning guilty conscience, and unto all the powerful workings of it: Indeed
whiles the conscience remains stupid and seared, although sins be unforgiven,
there is a quietness in the soul (like a sick man asleep.) A wounded
Conscience (or Spirit) who can bear! Prove. 18. 14. He is like
Pashor-Magor-Missabib, a terror round abount unto himself; the guilt of his
unpardoned sins works on his soul, and on his body; his soul has them now
before it, and the thoughts of his soul are perplexed and astonished (what
shall I do, and what will become of me!) And his afflictions are breaking with
fears, and with despaires, his eyes are rolling, his feet and joints shaking,
and his body trembling: he knows not what to do with himself, nor how to fly
from himself! Conscience still cries, and still pursues, and still wounds, and
still gnaws, and still flames and burnt, and still condemns him; thou have
destroyed thy self, thou art lost for ever, God is thy Judge, thy sins are
unforgiven, and thy portion is damnation; the poor wretch of times cries out, O
Conscience be quiet, spare me a little, give me a little space, a minute, an
hours rest. I can allow thee no Interim, says Conscience, how can I! thy sins
are not forgiven, and God has given me a charge against thee, and therefore
how can I be quiet, or how can I speak to him, unto whom God says there is no
peace but wrath! Isa. 57. 21.

Fifthly, The unforgiven sinner must meet with death, and death must meet with
He must meet with death as a king of terrors.
him as a king of fears, and as armed against him with the guilt of his sins;
the sting of death is sin, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 56. death is no great
matter, but the sting of death, that is terrible, that is like the sting of a
Serpent, or of the Scorpion, piercing, poisoning, enraging, and killing.

Luther professes that there were three things which he durst not think of
without Christ, viz. 1. Of his sins. 2. Of death. 3. Of the day of judgment;
why what is death to an unpardoned sinner? I will tell you what it is.

1. It is a full period to all comforts and delights; the unpardoned sinner
shall never taste of delight more to all Eternity: when a justified person
dies, he shall never see any sorrow more; and when an unpardoned sinner dies,
he shall never see delight in any kind more.

2. A full period to all Reprieves and Bayles; the sinner during life may be
Reprieved from many an Execution of wrath and judgment; but when he dies,
there is no longer reprieving, he must now appear in person before the
righteous God, answer for himself; and give up his account, and to receive
according to what he has done.

Now how dreadful will this be to the unpardoned sinner, on whose soul and
conscience the guilt of all his sins is engraven! O says he, I cannot live,
and I must die, I have not a day longer, nor an hour longer, and then must I
appear before Gods Judgment seat; and what will become of one who never
repented, who never believed, who never had part in Christ, who never had his
sins forgiven to him?

Sixthly, the unpardoned sinner must receive that just and irreversible
sentence of He must receive the irreversible sentence of condemnation.
condemnation from God.

Beloved, there is a twofold sentence which God will pronounce at the last day.

1. One is of comfort and absolution: Come ye blessed inherit the kingdom
prepared for you, Matthew 25. 34.

2. The other is of terror and condemnation: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels: and both these sentences are already
notified unto us in this life: He that believes shall be saved, and he that
believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16. 16. How dreadful this sentence of
condemnation will be, I pray God that none of us may find; but certainly all
unpardoned sinners shall find it; God will pronounce it against them! how can
it be otherwise, if sinners be not pardoned? if sinners be not pardoned, then
the sinner is not absolved; and if he be not absolved, he must be condemned.

Object. But God may forgive him in that day?

Sol. No no, that day is not a day of forgiving, though it be a day of
publication who has been forgiven, etc.

Seventhly, Upon this sentence immediately follows execution: God condemns And
execution immediately follows, To all eternity
these sins, and they shall be condemned; he adjudgeth them to hell to be
tormented with the Devil and his Angels, and thither they go to suffer that
wrath which their sins have deserved.

Eighthly, And this poenal endurance of wrath, it must continue to all
eternity; As long as God is God, so long must the wrath of God abide on them:
the worm never dies, and the fire of hell never goes out.

And if these things be so, then by the way learn four things.

1. Come off speedily from your sins by true repentance. 2. Slight the Gospel
(as you have done) no more, stand no longer against the offers of Jesus Christ.
3. By all means yield your selves to be the people of God. 4. Whatsoever you
make sure of, make sure of Christ, and of the forgiveness of your sins, and the
salvation of your souls.
SECT. VI.
Use 2. Does God promise forgiveness of sins unto his people? Is it one of the
first mercies by him promised unto them? Then let us every one be exhorted to
get a capacity of the forgiveness of our sins. Get a capacity of forgiveness.


Beloved, it is true, that God can and does forgive sins, and will do so; but
yet he will do this in that way, and in that order which he has prescribed in
his own Word; we may not say, Why, I am a sinner, and therefore God will
forgive me: (as if one should say, I am a debtor, therefore the Creditor will
release me; and I am an offender, and therefore the Judge will absolve me:) Nor
may we say absolutely God is a merciful God, and therefore he will forgive me;
for as God is a merciful God, and may therefore forgive; so he is a righteous
God, and therefore he may condemn. Nor may we say that God promises
forgiveness of sins, therefore our sins are forgiven; for as God promises
mercy, he contracts that promise of mercy unto his own people: and as God says
he will mercifully pardon, so he says likewise that he will not be merciful to
any wicked transgressor, Psalm. 59 5. And he will not spare the audacious
sinner, who promises peace unto himself though he adds drunkenness to thirst,
Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.

Now because this Use is of the greatest consequence and necessity for us, who
stand in need of this vital and sovereign mercy, the forgiveness of sins,
therefore I will discourse of three position^ concerning it.

1. Some sinners do erroneously make and take some things for a certain
capacity of forgiveness of their sins, which absolutely is not so. 2. Some
sinners do certainly put themselves out of a capacity of forgiveness. 3. Some
sinners are in a right capacity of Gods promise of the forgiveness of their
sins.
Some plead for a capacity of pardon upon false grounds. As Gods mercifulness,
First, Some sinners do erroneously take these things for certain grounds, that
they are in the list and compass of forgiveness of sins which (absolutely)
considered cannot be so. e. g.

First, God is of a very merciful nature, ready to forgive, and his mercy is
over all his works, and he will not destroy his creatures, he did not make us
to damn us, therefore my sins shall be forgiven!

Sol. This cannot be a sure ground to build on, that we are within the compass
or capacity of forgiveness of sins, because

1. By this Reason, the Devils also may conclude the forgiveness of their sins,
for God is of a merciful nature, and ready to forgive, and his mercy is over
all his works.

2. By this ground no sinner should be damned, but every sinner should be
saved. For if every man has his sins pardoned, then no man shall be damned (to
have sins pardoned, is to be discharged from condemnation) but if this were a
strong and sufficient inference, Sins are pardoned because God is of a merciful
nature; then every sinner should have his sins pardoned.

3. Though mercifulness be natural to God, yet the dispensation or collation
of mercy is voluntary and Arbitrary; forgiving acts of mercy do not flow from
God in that way as effects do flow from natural Agents (in a way of necessity)
as the Sun necessarily gives out light, and fire necessarily breaths out heat:
But as effects flow from voluntary and free Agents; Romans 9. 15 I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion: So then it will not follow, Your sins are forgiven, because Gods
Nature is merciful; for forgiving mercy is not a necessary effect of that
Nature, but a voluntary effect thereof.

4. Besides Justice is as natural to God as mercifulness is, he is
(Essentially) as just as he is merciful, and he does intend the gloryfying of
his Justice upon sinners as ce^tainly as he does the glorifying of his
mercifulness: Romans 9. 22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make
his power known, endured with much long ^uffering, the vessels of wrath fitted
to destruction! Ver. 23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory
on the vessels of mercy which he had before prepared unto glory! Here you
plainly see a will and purpose in God to set up the glory of his Justice in the
destruction of the vessels of wrath, as well as the glory of his mercifulness
in the salvation of the vessels of mercy: Exodus 34. Keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgressions and sins, and that will by no
means clear the guiliy: Here also you find that mercifulness is so attributed
to God, as that justice likewise is preserved in him; though his merciful
nature in forgiving does extend to thousands, yet it does not extend to all:
For he likewise professes that he will by no means clear the guilty. Mercy
has a double consideration.

First, as in the nature of God.

Secondly, As in the promise of God, which shows whom he will forgive; and
therefore

5. It would be your wisdom, not absolutely to sit down with this notion that
God is merciful; but respectively to search out unto what sorts of persons he
does promise himself to be a merciful God in forgiving their sins: For in his
promises you may as certainly discern the will and extent of his mercy, as in
his threatenings you may espy the purpose and intent of his wrath; and if you
did so, you should presently find that forgiving mercy is promised, and
intended only for believing and repenting sinners. Prove. 28. 13. Isa. 55. 7.
Acts 3. 19. Acts 10. 43.

Object. And whereas it is objected, that (Psalm. 145. 9.) the Lord is good to
all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.

Sol. This place is not for your purpose; for

1. When he says that the Lord is good to all, this is spoken only as to his
general Providence, whereby he does good to all sorts of creatures, man and
beast in their sustentation and preservation.

2. When he says that his tender mercies are over all his works; if you take
all his works for the whole Creation, and his tender mercies for forgiveness of
sins; (unto which forgiveness is ascribed, Psalm. 51. 1.) then it cannot with
any sense he affirmed that forgiveness of sins extends to the whole Creation;
for this were to make beasts and trees, and the elements, and heavens to be
sinners; but when he says that his tender mercies are over all his works,
either this is spoken in an absolute sense, that all his works do taste of his
kindness, bounty and pity; or in a comparative sense, that of all the works of
God, his mercies are the highest and chiefest, they are above or over all of
them, none like to them.

Object. But God did not make us to damn us?

Sol. No, nor yet to sin against him, but to serve him.

Secondly, A second ground upon which some do conclude that they are within the
compass and capacity of the promise of forgiveness of sins, is this, that God
is a gracious God, forgiving sins freely; so indeed does that word signify,
Colos. 2 13. Gods graciousness;
Having forgiven you all trespasses, (...), freely forgiven; and Luke 7. 42. He
freely forgiveth them both.

Hence they conclude that God stands upon nothing, requires nothing, but
without any more ado will forgive the sins of men, as it were of course.

Sol. And yet by your favor God in his Word does say, Acts 3. 19. Repent and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Gal. 2. 16. We have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ.

But consider,

First, The graciousness of God in forgiving of sins, stands in opposition, not
to the means which God has prescribed to enjoy forgiveness, but unto our
merits and deserts of forgiveness; God forgives sins freely and graciously, (i.
e.) without any merit or desert of ours. Isa. 43. 25. I even I, am be that
blotteth out thy transgressions for mine name sake; but God does not forgive
sins freely, (i. e.) without our repenting and believing; for these he does
require of us, that we may receive the forgiveness of our sins.

Secondly, When God is said to forgive sins freely, the meaning is not that he
forgives every sinner in the world, (freeness notes the means, not the extent
of forgiveness) with such a free unlimited largeness he does not forgive; but
the meaning is, that all those sinners who are forgiven, they are freely
forgiven; God does not put them upon any personal satisfactions; nor does he
agree with them for any work of theirs, as a cause or desert of the forgiveness
of their sins. Jer. 3. 12. Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord; and
I will not cause mine anger to fall upon thee? for I am merciful, says the
Lord. Ver. 13. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed
against the Lord thy God, etc. Therefore take heed that you deceive not your
selves with a confidence that your sins are forgiven, because God is gracious,
and forgives freely; for God is gracious to whom he will be gracious, and they
whom he graciously forgives, are only the people of his Covenant, even
believers and penitents.

The death of Christ for all;
Thirdly, A third false ground upon which some do absolutely conclude the
forgiveness of their sins, is the death of Christ, that he shed his blood for
the remission of sins, and that he dyed (as to that purpose) for all and every
one; therefore their sins (amongst the rest) are unquestionably forgiven.

Sol. That Jesus Christ did shed his blood for the remission of sins is most
true, he himself has delivered it: Matthew. 26. 28. This is my blood which is
shed for the remission of sins; but that his blood did procure an actual
remission of sins for every sinner in the world, this is most false; for Christ
himself has said, Mark 16. 16. He that believes, shall be saved; and he that
believes not shall be damned. Joh. 10. 15. I lay down my life for the sheep.
Joh. 8. 24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins; and the
Angel to Mary, Mat. 1. 21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save
his people from their sins.

But for your help and direction in this point, take my mind in these three
conclusions.

1. That there was a necessity for Christ to shed his blood, that so our sins
might be forgiven. Hebr. 9. 22. Without shedding of blood there is no remission.

2. His death did purchase the forgiveness of sins. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we
have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins.

3. This remission purchased, though illimited as to the sins forgiven, yet it
is limited as to the persons forgiven: 1. By the Decree of God to the Elect. 2.
By the Covenant. 3. And by the intention of Christ. 4. And by the Gospel to
whosoever believes that the shedding of his blood for the remission of sins,
did so illimitedly procure the same. That every sinner in the world enjoys the
fruit thereof, (whether he believes or not, or whether he repents or not) as I
know no man living of so wicked an opinion, so the Scripture delivers no such
matter, but the quite contrary. Luke 24. 47. That repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations. Acts 10. 43. To him give
all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in him,
shall receive remission of sins. Acts 13. 38. Through this man is preached unto
you the forgiveness of sins. Ver. 39. Then Peter said, Repent, and be baptized
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. Romans
3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood,
to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past. It is
true, that remission of sins has foundation in the blood of Christ, as in a
meritorious cause, but our enjoyment of that merited and purchased remission
takes in faith and repentance; for neither God nor Christ ever intended nor
promised the application thereof unto any, but such as believe and repent;
therefore do not venture absolutely upon this, that Christ dyed for the
remission of sins, therefore your sins are forgiven; for as God did ordain the
death of Christ as the meritorious cause of forgiveness of sins; so did he
ordain that all who have the benefit thereof, should repent and believe.

Fourthly, A fourth false ground from which some do (absolutely) conclude that
their sins are forgiven, is this, their sins are but small and little sins,
which The smalness of sin.
God marks and regards not, and will never take notice of, but will pass them
by; indeed if they were guilty of great transgressions, then they had reason to
doubt whether they were within the compass of forgiveness promised, but alas
their sins are small, etc.

Sol. For answer unto this deceit, remember these four particulars.

1. No sin is simply little or small. 2. Those sins are not little or small,
which people do (ordinarily) count so. 3. God has severely expressed himself
against persons for those sins which we look on as small sins. 4. This very
conceit that sins are little, and are past by in course, may lose a man the
forgiveness of his sins.
First, No sin is simply or absolutely little or small, though comparatively
(when we set on sin by another) we find them to be of different magnitude; some
to be great abominations, and others to be lesser transgressions, yet
absolutely no sin is little; but as there is a greatness in the least mercy, so
there is a greatness in the least sin; for every sin whatsoever is a
transgression of the royal Law, and it is committed against a great God; sin is
to be considered as to the object, as well as to the act; how were ye not
afraid to speak against my servant Moses. Every sin does expose to a great
curse, even the curse of the Law; Cursed is every one who continues not in
every thing that is written to do it: Is that a small offense which may cost a
man his life? nay, it cannot be taken off but by the death and blood of Christ,
there is an infinite offense and merit in any sin; you read in the Mosaical Law
that the blood of the beast was to be shed for the expiation of sins of
ignorance and inadvertency, which did signify the shedding of the blood of
Christ for the expiation of the least sins; and surely that offense may not be
reputed little or small, which cannot be put away but by the death of the Son
of God.

Secondly, Those sins are not little or small which people (ordinarily) do
count so; people do look on it as a very small offense.

1. To omit praying and reading in their Families; but God threatens to pour
out his wrath upon the Families that call not upon his Name, Jer. 10. 25.
Though this be spoken of the Heathens, yet it is much more true of Christians.

2. To pass by Christ offered unto them; but the Scripture says, He that
believes not, shall be damned; and that he shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him, Mark 16. 16.

3. To despise the Ministers of Christ; but Christ says, He that despises
you, despises me, Luke 10. 16.

4. To come unworthily to the Lords Table; but the Scripture says, He that
eats and drinks unworthily, does eat and drink damnation to himself, 1 Cor. 11.

5. To be proud, and speak lies; but the Scripture says, that a proud look,
and lying tongue, are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 6. 16, 17.

6. To speak idly and vainly; but Jesus Christ says, Matthew. 12. 36. That every
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day
of judgment; for by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned.

7. To wound the name of others behind their backs, whisperingly and cunningly,
and privately; but the Scripture says, Deuteronomy. 27. 24. Cursed be he that smites
his neighbor secretly.

8. To give way to wicked thoughts, and sins of heart; but the Scripture shows
that these are no small sins. Acts 8. 22. Pray God if perhaps the thoughts of
thine heart may be forgiven thee.

9. To make mention of the Name of God vainly and rashly, and irreverently, on
any occasion in ordinary discourse, O God! O Lord! but the Scripture does not
look on this as a small sin. Exodus 20. 7. Thou shall not take the Name of the
Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his
Name in vain.

10. To profane the Sabbath by buying and selling; but God threatens to send a
fire for this, Jer. 17. 27.

Thirdly, God has expressed himself very severely against persons for those
sins which we (perhaps) look upon as small. Adam eating of the forbidden fruit,
it lost him Paradise, and brought an exceeding misery on mankind. Vzzah did but
put out his hand to stay the Ark, and he dyed for it on the place. Vzziah would
be meddling with the Priests office, and he was immediately struck with a
leprofie to the day of his death, 2 Chronicles. 26. 19, 21. Korah, Dathan and Abiram
misliked the authority of Moses and Aaron, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up. Ananias and Sapphira for a lie are struck dead.

Fourthly, This very conceit that sins are so little and small, that God will
pass them by in course, may lose a man the forgiveness of sin; for it is a means

1. Of carnal security. 2. Of impenitency. 3. Of neglect of Jesus Christ. 4. To
implore God by prayer for the forgiveness of sins like the proud Pharisee, who
sought not for mercy, and missed of mercy, because he took no notice of his
sins at all; the greatest sin is pardoned upon repentance; the least sin will
damn without repentance.
Secondly, I now come to the second position, which is this; That some do put
Some put themselves out of a capacity of forgiveness.
themselves out of a capacity of the forgiveness of their sins; and there are
eight sorts of these persons.

1. They who sin the sin against the Holy Ghost. 2. They who will not repent
and forsake their sins. 3. They who delay and defer Repentance. 4. They who do
repent feignedly and hypocritically. 5. They who do not believe on Christ, and
refuse to be his. 6. They who do absolutely despair. 7. They who do rest on
their own works as reasons and causes of the forgiveness of their sins. 8. They
who are unmerciful and unplacable, and will not forgive others who trespass
against them. They who sin the sin against the Holy Ghost.

First, They do put themselves out of a capacity of forgiveness of their sins,
who do sin the sin against the Holy Ghost. Matthew. 12. 31. All manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven unto men. Ver. 32. And whosoever speaks a word against
the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaks against the
Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, nor in the
world to come: Here you find it expressly and peremptorily delivered from the
mouth of Jesus Christ himself, that the sin against the Holy Ghost shall never
be forgiven.

Quest. But will some of you say, What is this sin against the Holy Ghost What
that sin is.
which never shall be forgiven?

Sol. It is a wilful and malicious, and reproachful opposition of the Gospel,
attended with a total and final Apostasy from it, after and against the clear
convictions of the Holy Ghost.

First, It is an opposition of the Gospel; the Gospel must be preached, and the
Gospel must be opposed by such as hear it, else it is not the sin against the
Holy Ghost; they therefore who are charged with this sin, are said to hate the
light, Joh. 3. 20. and to hate Christ, and to hate the truth, Joh. 15. 25. and
to be disobedient unto the Gospel, and to be a gainsaying people, Romans 10. 21.
and to reject the Corner stone, Acts 4. 11. and to refuse to hear, Acts 13. 46.
and to put the Word from them, who resist the truth, and contradict it, 2 Timothy
3. 8. as you may read of the Pharisees, and other of the Jews.

Secondly, It is a peculiar kind of opposition, not of ignorance, not of
inadvertency, not of passion; but

1. A wilful opposition; therefore they who commit this sin, are said to sin
wilfully; (Hebr. 10. 26. If we sin wilfully after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin.) A man sins
wilfully, when the reason of his sinning rests solely in the perverseness of
his will, though his judgment be disarmed of all Apology, and his conscience
be convinced, yet he will sin and oppose the Gospel, because he will do so.

2. A malicious opposition; it arises from a bitter hatred against Christ, and
rage against the truth; therefore they who sin this sin, are said to offer, or
do despite unto the Spirit of grace, Hebr. 10 29. as if they did sin on purpose
to vex and affront the Spirit of God.

3. A reproachful opposition; hence it is affirmed of these sinners, that they
speak evil of the ways of Christ, and blaspheme his Word: The Jews were filled
with envy, and spoke against those things which were spoken by Paul,
contradicting and blaspheming, Acts 13. 45. that they mock at Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 27. 41. The chief Priests mocking him, with the Scribes and Elders, etc.
Ver. 29. When they had platted a Crown of thorns, they put it on his head, and
a Reed in his right hand, and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him,
saying, Hail King of the Jews; so Acts 2. 13. Others mocking, said, these men
are full of new wine. And they are said (in Hebr. 10. 29.) to tread under foot
the Son of God, and to count his blood an unholy thing. How amazing is this
reproach? and thus is it with all who sin the sin against the Holy Ghost; the
precious blood of Christ, his holiness, his truth, his commands, his ways, his
servants are the objects of their mockings, and scorns, and reproaches.

Thirdly, This opposition is made against Christ and the Gospel, after and
against the clear Convictions of the Holy Ghost. They who sin this sin,

1. Have had such a light in them as to know Jesus Christ, Joh. 9. 41. Jesus
said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin; but now ye say we
see, therefore your sin remains. Joh. 7. 28. Ye both know me, and whence I
am. Hebr. 6. 4. who were once enlightened. They that sin this sin, do know that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and the Redeemer, and that there is salvation
in him, and in no Name but his, and that the way which he prescribes for
salvation, is the true way of life; and after all this, they crucify the Son
of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

2. The Holy Ghost has not only illuminated their minds, but has also raised
them to a kind of approbation of Christ and his truths, and his ways; so that
they have taken upon them the profession of Christianity, and side with the
Gospel for a time.

3. By the operation of the Holy Ghost, they have attained unto some spiritual
taste and experience, as you may see, Hebr. 6. 4. Have tasted of the heavenly
gift: Ver. 5. And have tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers of the
world to come.

Fourthly, And yet after all this they fall away, Hebr. 6. 6. Reject Christ and
his truths, and ways, and will go on in the ways of their sinful and worldly
lusts. This is that sin which shall never be forgiven; not only because God is
pleased to shut the door of mercy against it, but also because persons guilty
of this sin, do thrust themselves into such a desperate hardness of heart, and
they reject Christ in whom alone pardon is to be had; that (as the Apostle
speaks, Hebr. 6. 6.) It is impossible to renew them again unto Repentance.

2. Secondly, They do put themselves out of a capacity of the forgiveness of
their sins, who will not repent of their sins; (i. e.) who will not forsake
them, They who will not repent of their sins.
but will still persist and continue in them, though they be convinced, though
they be reproved, though they be threatened, though they be assured of the
inconsistence of forgiveness with impenitency. This point will manifestly
appear upon a threefold consideration.

1. Of Gods professed resolution, contrary to the presumption of mercy in the
impenitent sinner; indeed this sinner presumes to promise mercy unto himself,
though he goes on in his sins, but the Lord protests that he shall have none.
Deuteronomy. 29. 18. Lest there should be among you a root that bears gall and
wormwood. Ver. 19. And it come to pass when he hears the words of this
curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though
I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst. Ver.
20. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in
this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under
heaven. Ver. 21. And the Lord shall separate him to evil, out of all the Tribes
of Israel, according to all the curses of the Covenant that are written in this
book of the Law: So Psalm. 50. 21. These things have thou done, and I kept
silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self; but I
will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Ver. 22. Consider
this ye that forget, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

2. Of Gods restriction of his promise of forgiveness only upon condition of
repentance; only to such as forsake their sins; where do you find it otherwise
in the whole Bible? Isa. 1. 16. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings, cease to do evil, learn to do well; -- Ver. 18. Come now, let us
reason together, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my people shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face,
and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive
their sins. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

3. Of Gods peremptory sentence in case of impenitency. Exodus 34. 7. that will
by no means clear the guilty, (i. e.) the impenitent; in absolving he will not
absolve, (i. e.) whosoever finds mercy, they shall not. Ezekiel. 18. 21. Cast away
from you all your transgressions, for why will ye dye O house of Israel? Psalm.
63. 21. God will wound the head of such an one as goes on still in his
wickedness. Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent, ye shall perish. Jer. 13. 10. This
evil people which refuse to hear my words, which walk in the imagination of
their hearts; Ver. 14. I will dash them one against another, even the father
and the son together, says the Lord; I will not pity, nor spare, nor have
mercy, but destroy them. Eccles. 8. 13. It shall not be well with the wicked.
Isa. 65. 20. The sinner dying an hundred years old, shall be cursed, then
certainly not forgiven. O think of this, you who still go on in the hatred of
holiness, in profaning of the Sabbath, in drunkenness, in whoredom, in pride,
in lying, in any ungodly course, who mock at reproof, and despise instruction,
who flatter your selves with hopes of forgiving mercy: Be not deceived, for God
is not to be mocked; for whatsoever a man sowes, that shall he also reap, Gal.
6. 7. and Romans 2. 6. God will render to every man according to his deeds. Ver.
8. Indignation and wrath. Ver. 9. tribulation and anguish upon every soul of
man that does evil.

Thirdly, They do put themselves out of a capacity of forgiveness of their
sins, who do delay and defer their work of repentance. When some sinners are
convinced They who delay the^r repentance.
of the inconsistence of mercy with impenitency, and of the necessary presence
of repentance for forgiveness; then seeing it must be so, and mercy cannot be
otherwise had, they will repent, but not yet; hereafter they will, when they
are sick, and when they are old and near to death; and what mean you to do for
the present, til the time of sickness, or age, or death? is it not that you
serve your sins, and take your delights and pleasures? and when you can no
longer enjoy them, then you will give over your sins, and then God must give
down your forgiveness.

Fourthly, They do put themselves out of a capacity of the forgiveness of their
sins, who do presently repent, but it is fainedly and hypocritically, not
cordially They who repent presently but fainedly.
and really: Jer. 3. 10 Her treacherous sister Judah has not turned unto me
with her whole heart, but fainedly, says the Lord. Psalm 78. v. 4. They
returned and inquired early after God. Ver. 36. Nevertheless they did flatter
him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongue. Ver. 37. For
their heart was not right with him.

Now they do repent fainedly, who 1. Spare their beloved sins. 2. Who put them
off with a purpose to resume them again.

You have many persons who in the times of sickness, or of danger, or of loss,
or of fear of death, or of terror of conscience will forbear their sins, will
cry out against their sins, will pray and beg for mercy; and as soon as hope,
and ease, and safety appears, they do return again with the dog to his vomit,
and with the swine to the wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2. 22. They forget
their terrors, and tears, and prayings, and resolutions, and professions, and
are worse in ways of wickedness than heretofore; Their righteousness is as
the morning cloud, and as the early dew that passes away. To these God may
speak as in Hose. 11. 12. Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house
of Israel with deceit. They think to circumvent and deceive the Lord with
penitential pretenses, but indeed they do deceive their own souls; for God
searches the heart, and tries the reins, and his eyes are upon the heart, and
upon the truth: and it is just that they should be deceived with the fancy of
pardon, who think to deceive God with the shadow of repentance: He who is but
hypocritically good, is really wicked; and he that repents fainedly, and
falsely, does but provoke the wrath of God more against his soul, etc.

Fifthly, They do put themselves out of a capacity of forgiveness, who remain
They who remain unbelieving.
unbelieving, whose hearts are not subdued and brought in to Christ by the
Gospel, will not consent to take him for their Head and Lord, and will not
serve Christ in his commands, will not suffer him to reign over them, to set up
his kingdom in them, nor to destroy his enemies in them. Beloved, mark what I
say unto you, be you what you will, if yet you remain unbelievers, your sins
shall never be forgiven. Suppose you be great or mean persons, rich or poor
persons, learned or simple persons, covetous and civil persons, and just
persons, Papists or Protestants, of this or that Opinion for Doctrine or
Government, if you believe not on Christ as well as profess Christ, if your
hearts will not consent to match with Christ; if there be any sin, or any thing
of the world which lies nearer your heart than Christ, which holds it off, and
keeps it from Christ, you are now unbelievers, and your sin shall not be
forgiven: 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has life; and he that has not
the Son, has not life. Joh. 3. 36. He that believes not, shall not see life.
but the wrath of God abides on him. Mar. 16. 16. He that believes not shall
be damned.

Sixthly, They also do put themselves out of a capacity of forgiveness, who do
They who despair of mercy
absolutely despair of mercy: Isidore said right, Desperare est in infernum
descendere, to fall into d^spair, is to fall into hell, where there is
perfection of misery without any hope of mercy.

Here consider a few Particulars.

1. It is one thing to doubt and fear, and question whether God will be
merciful unto our sins; and it is another thing to despair of his mercies: one
may fear and doubt of mercy for his sins, who yet does not absolutely despair
of mercy; fear and questionings about mercy may arise from infirmity, Psalm. 77.
9. Has God forgotten to be gracious! has he in anger shut up his mercies! Ver
10. I said this is my infirmity; but absolute despair of mercy arises from
absolute infidelity, and it is a peremptory concluding against all the powers
and goodness of mercy in God: My sin (said Cain) is greater than may or can
be forgiven, Genesis 4. 13.

2. Again, there is a passionate and transient despair; And there is a settled
and permanent despair; The one is total, but not final; the other is total and
final; In times of strong temptation, and Gods desertion, and our own
melancholy, and troubles of conscience, one may possibly conclude there is no
hope of mercy, and his sins are such as exceed either the power, or else the
purpose of Gods mercy; but this dark and sad conceit falls off again from the
soul upon conference upon better information, upon prayer, upon hearing the
Word, and upon clear consideration of the Covenant of grace, and the terms of
it, and of the riches of Redemption by Christ; this kind of despair does not
prejudice you in the capacity of forgiving mercy: but then there is a settled
and permanent despair which is total and final, wherein the soul is swallowed
up, and for ever lies under water and never rises more with any hope of
possible mercy, conceiving of the guilt of sin so superlatively, that neither
the merits of the blood of Christ, nor the riches of mercy in God can or will
reach to the forgiveness of it. This poor sinner puts himself out of all
capacity of forgiveness, and that upon a treble account.

1. The infinite dishonor which he puts upon Gods throne of grace and mercy;
he gives reproach and the lie unto God who says he is rich in mercy, and
delights in mercy. 2. His utter incompliance with Christ; and riches of all
Gospel invitations, promises and assurances. 3. The confirming of his heart in
impenitency, seeing there is no hope of mercy.
Seventhly, they likewise do put themselves out of a capacity of the
forgiveness They who rely upon their own righteousness as the cause of
fornesse.
of their sins, who do rest and rely upon their own righteousness and good
works as the cause of forgiveness. It Is true that you must be holy, and
righteous, and do good works, and walk in them, and abound in them; But if you
rely on them as the reasons and causes why God will forgive your sins, you will
certainly lose the forgiveness of them: For

1. What is this but to set up a Covenant of Works, and to look for life by the
Law, and Justification by something of our own? and what says the Scripture to
this? Romans 3. 20. By the deeds of the Law there shall be no flesh justified in
thy sight. Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he has saved us. Gal. 3. 10. As many as are of the
work^ of the law, are under the curse, for it is written, cursed is every one,
etc.

2. This is to take away the Crown from Christ; and it is to make Christ to die
in vain, to lose the end of shedding his blood for the remission of sins: the
Scripture says, Acts 4. 12. There is no salvation in any other, for there is
no other Name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved: but you
will have it in your own name. Matthew. 26. 28. This is my blood which was shed
for the remission of sins. 1 John 2. 2. He is the propitiation for our sins.
Ephesians. 1. 7. In his blood we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins. Gal. 5. 4.
Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the
Law, ye are fallen from grace: therefore take heed what you do, and how you
place your confidences for the remission of your sins; you must neither
renounce good works, nor must you rely on them, but only on Christ for pardon,
else you debar your selves of all benfit by Christ.

Eighthly, Lastly they do put themselves out of a capacity of the forgiveness
of their sins, who are unmerciful, implacable, revengeful, and will not forgive
others They who will not forgive others their offenses done against themselves.
their offenses, and trespasses, or wrongs done against themselves.

Quest. You will say this is strange Doctrine, that God will not forgive me, if
I do not forgive others!

Sol. 1. Nay it were more strange that thou should expect forgiveness, who
wilt not forgive thy brother! but peruse the Scriptures, Matthew. 18. 32. O thou
wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt (ten thousand talents, ver. 24.)
because thou desiredst me. ver. 33. Should not thou also have had compassion
on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? ver. 34. And his Lord was
wroth, and delivered him to the tormenters, till he should pay all that was due
unto him. v. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if you
from the heart forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. Math. 6. 15.
If you forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly father
forgive your trespasses.

2. Again, see the express command for this by Christ, in Luke 17. 3. If thy
brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. ver.
4. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a
day turn again unto thee saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him.

Thirdly, I now proceed unto a third Position and Conclusion, viz. That there
Who are in a right capacity of pardon. Such as do truly repent. Four things
demonstrate this Scripture exhortations.
are some who are in a right capacity, and may safety lay hold on, and own the
promise of the forgiveness of their sins.

First, All who do truly repent of their sins; there are four things will
demonstrate this unto us.

1. Scripture exhortations to repent, that so our sins may be forgiven. Ezekiel.
18. 30. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity
shall not be your ruin. Acts 2. 38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of your sins. Act. 3. 19. Repent,
and be converted that your sins may be blotted out.

2. Express promises that our sins shall be forgiven upon our repentance
Express promises.
2 Chro. 7. 14. If my people shall turn from their evil way, then will I
forgive their sin. Prove. 28. 13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins shall
find mercy. Ezekiel. 18. 21. If the wicked will turn from all his sins which he
has committed, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not die. ver. 22. All his transgressions which he has committed they
shall not be mentioned unto him.

3. Assurance of the forgiveness of sins upon repentance, though they have been
Assurance of the pardon of great sins upon repentance.
very great and heinous. Isa. 1. 16. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil
of your doings, cease to do evil: ver. 17. learn to do well. ver. 18. Come now
and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be
as wool.

4. Express Records and Instances of forgiveness unto such as have repented:
Express instances.
2 Samuel 12. 13. And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord; and
Nathan said to David, the Lord has also put away thy sin. Jer. 31. 18. I have
surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself; and Turn thou me and I shall be turned,
etc. Ver. 19. Surely after that I was turned I repented; and after that I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea even confounded because I
did bear the reproach of my youth, Ver, 20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a
pleasant child! for since I spoke against him I do remember him still;
therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him,
says the Lord. Luke 7. 38. And she stood at his feet behind him weeping, and
began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her
head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with ointment. Ver. 47. Wherefore
I say, her sins which were many are forgiven, etc. v. 15. 18. I will arise and
go to my Father, and will say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and
before thee; Ver. 19. and am no more worthy to be called thy son, etc. Ver. 20.
and he arose and came to his Father; but when he was yet a great way off, his
Father saw him and had compassion, and ran and fell upon his neck and kissed
him.

Quest. But here some may reply, It is granted that all who do truly repent
are within the compass of the promise of forgiveness of sins, and many do think
How one may know he does truly repent.
that they do truly repent of their sins; but how may one know that he does
truly repent, that so he may safely conclude the forgiveness of his sins?

Sol. I thank you for the propounding of this doubt; for the clear resolution
whereof I shall thus deliver my self;

1. I shall show unto you the integral part of Repentance (i. e.) those
particular Branches of which true Repentance does consist, and unto all which
forgiveness of sins is promised.

2. I shall show unto you the right qualifications of those particular parts of
Repentance, that so you may know whether you do truly Repent or no.

First, For the first of these, you do know (as I suppose) that there are three
The integral parts of repentance. Contrition.
parts of Repentance, viz.

1. Contrition or grief of heart for sins committed, which is called sometimes
godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 10. and sometimes a contrite spirit, Isa. ^6. 2. and a
broken and contrite heart, Psalm. 51. 17. and sometimes the afflicting of our
souls, Levit. 16. 29. and sometimes the humbling of the heart, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
If my people shall humble themselves, etc. Lam. 3. 20. My soul has them still
in remembrance, and is humbled within me: and sometimes a mourning, Zach. 12.
10. And they shall mourn as, etc. and sometimes a weeping, Mar. 14. 72. And
when he thought thereon he wept.

First, There is no man a penitent sinner, but he is a mourning sinner; his
soul is No man is a penitent sinner, but a mourning sinner.
grieved, his heart is displeased, and humbled for his sins: If the heart be
hardened, it is impenitent; if thy sins which have grieved and troubled God, do
not trouble and grieve thy soul, thou art an impenitent and hardened sinner;
much more art thou so if thy sins be the matter of thy delight and rejoicing:
And on the contrary all penitent persons are mourning persons; Judge. 2. 4. The
children of Israel repented, and the people lift up their voice and wept. 1 Samuel 7. 6. They repented, and drew water, and poured it out before the Lord.
Psalm. 6. 6. David repented, and watered his Couch with his tears. 2 Chro. 32.
26. Hezekiah Repented, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. and humbled himself for the pride of
his heart. Manasses (as some think) repented, and he humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers. Jer. 31. 18, 19. Ephraim repented, and Ephraim
bemoaned himself, and smote upon his thigh, and is even confounded. Luke 7. 38.
Mary Magdalen repented, and she wept, and washed the feet of Christ with tears.
Luke 22. 62. Peter repented, and he went out and wept bitterly. 2 Cor. 7. 9.
The Corinthians repented, and they were made sorry after a godly manner.

Secondly, Thus you see that all truly penitent persons are brokenhearted
Mourning persons for sin, are in a capacity of pardon.
persons, and mourning persons for their sins; and now ye shall find that all
these persons are within the capacity of the promise of forgiveness of sins:
Zach. 12. 11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo. Zach. 13. 1. In that day
there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. Jer. 31. 18. I have surely heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself, etc. Ver. 20. I will surely have mercy upon him.
Mark the place, Ephraims heart is troubled for sinning, and Gods bowels (so are
his mercies styled) are troubled for Ephraim; Ephraim (like a penitent Child)
falls a weeping, and God (like an indulgent Father) falls a bemoaning of him. I
am grieved, and troubled, and ashamed at my very heart that I have thus sinned
against thee, says Ephraim. O peace, refrain thine eyes from tears, says God
to Ephraim; I cannot refrain my mercies from thee; Lo this is thy pardon for
thy sins: Psalm. 51. 17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; and why is a
broken spirit called sacrifices of God? Is it not for the acceptableness of it
unto God? and is it not because as upon sacrifices sins were put away, so upon
contrition of heart for sins, there comes out the forgiveness of sins? Isa. 57.
15. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and
humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones: And can the contrite heart be revived without forgiveness of
sins? Matthew. 5. 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Surely this is spoken of spiritual mourning (of mourning for sin) for can you
say of any other mourning besides these, that they are blessed! and their
blessedness lies in this, that they shall be comforted; and what comfort is
that which a mourning sinner looks upon as blessedness? why none bu^ that in
Isa. 40. 1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people says your God; speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her iniquity is pardoned.
Confession of sins.


2. The second part of Repentance is confession of sins which flows out of a
contrite heart: I speak not of a formal, verbal, empty confession (we are all
sinners, God help us, etc.) but of such a confession of sin as arises from a
true and full sense of sin, when the tongue speaks out of the abundance of a
troubled spirit, ingenuously and humbly acknowledging iniquities and
transgressions, and judging himself worthy of wrath, and unworthy of mercy, etc.

This confession you shall find in Repenting sinners, and those persons so
confessing, under the capacity of the promise of the forgiveness of their
sins. Repenting sinners confess their sins.


First, You shall find Repenting sinners confessing their sins. Ezra 9 6. O my
God; I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face unto thee, my God* for our
iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the
heavens. Ver. 10. And now O our God, What shall we say after this? for we have
forsaken thy Commandments, etc. Psalm. 51. 3. I acknowledge my transgressions,
and my sin is ever before me. Ver. 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned,
and done this evil in thy sight. Dan. 9. 4. I prayed unto the Lord my God, and
made my confession, and said, O Lord the great and dreadful God, etc. Ver. 5.
We have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments, etc.
Ver. 8. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of
face, as at this day. Luke 15. 18. I will arise, and go to my Father, and will
say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee: Ver. 19.
and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, etc.

Secondly, Now these penitently confessing sinners you shall expressly find And
are under the promise of forgiveness.
to be under the promise of the forgiveness of sins. I Joh. 1. 9. If we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. Psalm. 32. 5. I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid; I said, I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin, Selah.

3. The third and last part of Repentance, is conversion, or turning from
Conversion from sin to God.
sin unto God. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways. Repenting
in Scripture is (to this purpose) styled a putting away of sins. Isa. 1. 16.
and a casting away of our sins. Ezekiel. 18. 31. and a forsaking of our sins.
Prove. 28. 13. and a departing from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and a turning: to
repent of sin, and to continue in sin, are a contradiction; as if you should
say, that a man leaves his sins, when yet he holds them fast, and will not let
them go.

Two things you also read of this part of Repentance.

1. One, That truly penitent persons do forsake their sins, they turn from
Penitent persons forsake their sins.
them, they put them away. Isa. 30. 22. Ye shall defile the covering of thy
graven images of silver, and the ornaments of thy molten images of gold; Thou
shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth; Thou shall say unto it, Get thee
hence. Hos. 14. 8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols?
Judge. 10. 15. And the children of Israel said unto the Lord, We have sinned, Do
thou unto us whatsoever seems good unto thee. Ver. 16. And they put away the
strange gods from among them, and served the Lord. Job 34. 31. Surely it is
meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more.
Ver. 32. That which I see not, Teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will
do no more. Jonah 3. 8. Let them every one turn from his evil way. Ver. 10. And
God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way.

2. The other, That they who do penitentially turn from their sins, are They
who turn from sin, are under the promise of pardon.
under the promise of forgiveness, of sin. Prove. 28. 13. Whosoever confesses, and
forsakes his sins, shall find mercy. Many men confess their sins, who yet do
still love to keep their sins, and therefore shall miss of mercy; but the way
for mercy is, to forsake their sin, as well as to confess sin. Isa. 55. 7. Let
the wicked forsake his way, and let the unrighteous forsake his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon.

Thus have I opened unto you the integral parts of Repentance, which does
certainly bring us within the capacity of the promise of forgiveness of sins.

Secondly, I shall now proceed to handle the Qualifications of every one of The
right qualifications of those parts of Repentance.
these parts of Repentance, by which you may know that you do in truth act
every one of them* and consequently are under the promise, etc. And the rather
do I insist on this, because many persons do think that they are sorry for
their sins, and do think that they do rightly confess their sins, and do think
that they forsake their sins (and thereupon do presume upon forgiving mercy)
whereas really they are still under the love and power, and service of their
sins, and do not repent at all; all which you shall find (in every part which I
have mentioned) clearly instanced in Scripture.

First, For mourning and weeping, and afflicting the soul; persons have acted
something in this way, and yet have not repented in truth, and therefore have
missed of forgiveness. Mal. 2. 13. This have ye done again, covering the Altar
of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying, insomuch that ye
regarded not the offering any more. All this was but hypocrisy; for
notwithstanding all these tears, they dealt treacherously every one against his
brother, Ver. 10. And profaned the holiness of the Lord which he loved, and
married the daughter of a strange god, Ver. 11. Isa. 58. 3. Wherefore have we
fasted, and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our souls, and thou
take no knowledge? Ver. 5. Is it such a Fast as I have chosen? a day for a
man to afflict his soul? etc.

Secondly, For confession of sins, some have done this, and yet they have not
rightly and penitentially done this. Exodus 9. 27. Pharaoh said, I have sinned
this time, the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked; see what a
confession is here! but then see, Ver. 34. when Pharaoh saw that the rain and
the hail, and the thunder were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his
heart, he and his servants.

Thirdly, For turning from sin, some have pretended thus far, and yet have not
truly acted therein. Psalm. 78. 34. When he slew them, then they sought him, and
they returned, and enquired early after God. Ver. 35, 36. Nevertheless they did
flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues. Ver.
37. For their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant. Jer. 2. 20. Of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy hands,
and thou said I will not transgress; when upon every high hill, and under
every green Tree thou wanderedst, playing the harlot. Thus you see that some
have pretended to all the parts of Repentance, and yet have not acted up to any
one part in truth. Therefore I will now deliver unto you the right
qualifications of all those parts of Repentance, that so you may know whether
you do truly repent of your sins, and consequently are under this most
comfortable promise of the forgiveness of your sins.

First, The qualifications of penitential grief, or mourning for sins, are
The qualifications of penitential mourning for sin. It is a supernatural grief.
these.

1. It is a grief which is supernatural, and wrought in us only by the Spirit
of God; it does not arise from the strength of any natural principle in our own
hearts, as worldly sorrow does; (in which one may abound who has no grace at
all, and for which he needs not to pray at all) but this sorrow is given from
God, and is sought by us from him. Job 23. 16. God makes my heart soft. Ezekiel.
36. 26. I will take away the heart of stone, and will give you an heart of
flesh. Zach. 12. 10. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn, etc. You may easily mourn for worldly losses, and under worldly
distresses, and melt, and weep, as David's men did, who wept until they had no
more power to weep: 1 Samuel 30. 4. And yet under all these floods of grief, the
person may not be able to shed one tear of godly sorrow for his sins, because
this comes from another kind of Spring, and is raised upon other Motives and
Considerations; it will cost you many convictions, and many meditations, and
many earnest supplications, and attendances on the Word, to get this Fountain
set open in your hearts.

2. It is a grief which is sincere for sin as sin; sin as sin is a
transgression A sincere grief for sin as sin.
of the Law of God, a provocation of God, a dishonor unto God, a separation
and withdrawment of God, a defilement and pollution of the soul; and in a
respect (solely) unto these considerations of sin, does truly penitential
mourning break forth in the soul; though no hell to damn me, though no
conscience to torment me: Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy sight, says David, Psalm. 51. 4. I have sinned, what shall I do
unto thee, O thou preserver of men? Job 7. 20. One may be troubled for sinning
because of punishment from man, or of punishment from God, feared or inflicted;
but this is not a trouble for sin as an offense to God, but as an offense to
our selves.

How we may know that we grieve for sin as sin;
Quest. But now the scruple is, How he may know that he does grieve for sin as
sin, and only for sin?

Sol. He may know it:

First, By the acting of grief for sin, when there is an universal cessation of
punishment; though conscience cease to torment, and the hand of God is drawn
off, and there is no fear of man what he can do, yet the heart is humbled, and
mourns still for offending of God.

Secondly, By the rising of grief for sin, upon the Assurance and Certificate
of peace and reconciliation with God, of which the more certain evidence is
given into the soul, the more sorrow and grief breaks forth out of the soul for
sinning against such a God.

Thirdly, By the extension of grief, not only for our own sins, but also for
the sins of others, the punishment of whose sins reaches not to us, but yet
the dishonor by these sins does reach unto God, which therefore does cause our
hearts to mourn. Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because
they keep not thy Law.

3. It is a grief which is very high and great; the Scripture seems to make It
is a grief very high and great.
it a superlative sorrow, calling it a great mourning, like the mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo, and a bitterness, as one is in for his
first born, Zach. 12. 10. And my bowels are troubled within me, mine heart is
turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled, etc. Lam. 1. 20. and David
watered his couch with his tears, Psalm. 6. 6.

Quest. You know it is a question whether grief for sin ought not to be the
highest and chiefest; in quem dolorem.

Sol. For the resolution of which, they ^^stinguish of grief of passion, and
grief of the will, which is a displeasure of the heart with it self; perhaps
another kind of grief may be higher in a passion; but grief of heart for sin,
is the highest for displeasure, and also for duration; when that Land-flood is
gone, yet then the River of godly sorrow still runs; My sin is ever before me,
said David, Psalm 51. and yet his Absalom (for whom he took on so passionately)
was not ever before him.

4. It is a grief which is vertual; godly sorrow works Repentance, 2 Cor. It
is a grief which is vertual.
7. 10. He who truly mourns for sin, his heart does hate sin, and separates
from sin, and sinful ways; and it becomes more holy and godly; and he fears to
sin against his God any more; thus it is not with any false grief whatsoever.

5. Lastly, It is such a grief, under which the soul seeks comfort from God, It
is a grief under which the soul seeks comfort from God.
and nothing can relieve the soul so grieving, but the voice of joy and peace
from God. Psalm. 51. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. Psalm. 85. 8.
I will hear what God the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace unto his
people, etc.

The qualifications of penitential confession.
Secondly, The qualifications of true penitential confession of sins.

There are five Ingredients in penitential confession.

The acknowledgement of sin from a deep sense of sin.
1. It is the acknowledging of our sins from a deep sense or feeling of them,
and our misery by them: Penitential confession is the language of a sensible
and troubled spirit;

2. It is a self-judging acknowledgement of our sins, that for them we are A
self judging acknowledgement.
unworthy of the least mercy, and most worthy of the greatest judgment. I am
not worthy to be called thy son, Luke 15 19. not worthy to be called an
Apostle; confusion of face belongs to us, Dan. 9. 8. And thou art just in all
that is brought upon us; thou have done right, but we have done wickedly,
Nehem. 9. 33.

3. It is an ingenuous acknowledgement of our sins; not hiding or concealing An
ingenuous acknowledgement.
the greatest and worst, nor extenuating or lessning any one sin in the nature
or desert, or circumstances of it; nor afflictions devolving or throwing our
sins upon others, (as Adam did upon his Wife, and she upon the Devil) but it is
a clear Indictment, Accusation, or Charge against our selves before God. I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, said the Prodigal, Luke 15. 18. I was a
blusphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious, and of sinners the chief, said
Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15.

4. It is a fiduciary acknowledgement of our sins, it is joined with some A
fiduciary acknowledgement.
degree of faith; for it is made to God not as to a Judge only, who condemns
upon the Parties confession; but as to a Father, who knows how to pity and
forgive the mourning and repenting child, who begins to accuse and condemn
himself. Hosea 14. 2. Take with you words, and turn unto the Lord, and say unto
him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. Deuteronomy. 9. 8. O Lord, to
us belongs confusion of face, and because we have sinned against thee. Ver.
9. To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgiveness, though we have rebelled
against him. Lord, I am a sinful creature, but thou art a merciful God! I
deserve wrath, but thou can show mercy; I am unworthy of any mercy, but thou
forgivest sins freely: and thou have promised forgiveness unto them who confess
their sins; O forgive me all my sins for Christ's sake.

5. Lastly, True penitential confession (which shall obtain forgiveness of
sins) It is attended with desire, of humbling, and endeavors of reforming.
is attended with desires of humbli^^, and endeavors of reforming. When a
Patient lays open his diseases to the Physician, it is for this purpose, that
the Physician would cure them; as the poor man having related unto Christ the
grievous distempers of his child, requested, Mark 9. 22. But if thou can do
any thing, have compassion on us, and help us: So when a penitent person
confesses his sins to God, it is always accompanied with earnest desires, O
Lord, heal these diseases of my soul, heal my pride, and heal my vainglory,
and heal my filthiness, and heal my impatience, and heal my unbelief, and heal
my worldliness; as David with the confession of his sins, joined this petition,
Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within
me. Nay moreover, the right confession of sins, is attended with the real
endeavor of reforming our sins; therefore Solomon puts these together, He that
confesses and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. And this
was the practice of, the children of Israel, they joined Reformation with their
Confession, and good came of it unto them, as you may see, Judge. 10. 15. We
have sinned. Ver. 16. And they put away the strange gods from among them, and
served the Lord, and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.

Thirdly, The qualifications of the right turning from sin, which puts us
within The qualification of a right turning from sin. A cordial turning.
in the capacity of the promise of forgiveness of our sins.

First, It is a cordial turning. Joel 2. 12. Turn ye, even to me, with all your
heart. Deuteronomy. 30. 10. If thou turn unto the Lord thy God with all thine heart,
and with all thy soul. 2 Chronicles. 6. 38. If they return to thee with all their
heart, and with all their soul. Ver. 39. then hear thou from the heavens their
prayer, and their supplication, and forgive their sins, etc. Here are singular
expressions to set forth the life and truth of penitential turning from sin;
viz. To turn with the heart, and with all the heart, with all the heart, and
with all the soul; What may these expressions mean and signify?

There are two things principally intended in them.

1. One is a reality of turning; for he does indeed repent, whose heart
repents; and he does indeed turn from his sins, whose heart does turn from sin;
if the heart turns not, the repentance is but feigned and hypocritical: Suppose
you should for awhile lay ande your sins, you may therein seem unto men to
repent; but if you still love your sins, and hold them fast, and will not part
with them, you are so far from repenting in the sight and account of God, that
he looks upon you as plain hypocrites, who pretend only to forsake your sins,
when indeed you are the servants of sin, and intend not at all to fo^sake them.
Well then, to turn from sin with the heart, is to have an heart giving a Bill
of Divorce unto our sins, breaking the league with sin, casting it off for any
more love and obedience, etc.

2. Another is, a perfection or fullness of turning; that does the turning with
all the heart, and with all the soul, and with the whole heart, signify; as
when ones whole heart is set upon an object, or is employed in any service; the
meaning is, that every faculty of the soul is unitedly and concurrently engaged
to that object, and in that service: I have sought thee with my whole heart,
said David, Psalm. 119. 10. (i. e.) Not any one faculty of my soul, but is drawn
out, and exercised in that work. So to turn from our sin with the whole heart
(with all the heart, and with all the soul) is to have every faculty drawn off
from sin, and disinterested of sin and (as it were) outing and discharging it
self thereof, all of them agreeing and consenting to course it away; viz.

First, The understanding says, I will never give way to any deceitful motions
of sin any more, nor to any delightful contemplation of it any more; I will not
count it as pleasure or profit, but shall esteem of it as indeed it is, an
object every way to be hated and rejected.

Secondly, The Judgment turns away from it by disapproving and disallowing,
and condemning of it; I will never reason and plead for it more; I will never
contrive or devise to gratify it more; I will never make pretenses and shifts
to color it any more: O it is the greatest evil, the only dishonor of God,
the only cause of the death of Christ, and the only danger and damnation of the
soul.

Thirdly, The conscience turns away from it; O says conscience, sin has been
the thorn in my eye, and the arrow in my side, it has wounded me, and made me
restless, and filled me with bitterness, I will give warning against it, I will
threaten aganst it, I will trouble and vex you for it.

Fourthly, The will turns away from it in resolution and purpose; I will never
obey sin any more in the lusts thereof; I will never give over till I find the
virtue of Christ to crucify and mortify them.

Fifthly, And every affection of the soul turns away from sin in true
repentance.

1. Love says, I will never embrace thee more. 2. Desire says, I will never
long after thee more. 3. Delight says, I will never take content in thee more.
4. Hatred says, I will never be reconciled with thee more. 5. Fear says, I
will watch, lest the soul be surprised by thee any more, and I will fly all
occasions, etc. 6. Grief says, I will mourn and lament, because the soul has
been beguiled by thee. 7. Hope says, I will look up to Christ, that the poor
soul may at length get victory over thee, etc. This is indeed to turn from sin
with the whole heart, and this is the way (certainly) to find forgiveness of
our sins; whereas if the heart still retains sin, and cleaves unto it, our
repentance is but feigned, notwithstanding all the professions we make against
it; yea, if any one part of the soul continue an harbor and refuge to sin, you
do not truly turn from sin; perhaps you do sometimes for bear sin but yet you
love sin; perhaps you are sometimes troubled for sinning, but yet you will keep
sin; perhaps your judgment condemns your sins, but yet still your affections
run after your sins; why, this is not a true penitential turning from sin, etc.
Secondly, It is an universal turning, a turning from all sins. Ezekiel. 18. 30.
Repent, A Universal turning.
and turn your selves from all your transgressions. Ver. 31. Cast away from you
all your transgressions. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit. Psalm. 119. 101. I have refrained my feet
from every evil way. Ver. 128. I hate every false way. Ephesians. 4. 22. Put off
concerning the former Conversation, the Old man which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way. There are four
sorts of men in the world:

1. Some turn from no sin; these are profane, Ephesians. 4. 19. 2. Others seem to
turn from some sins only; these are hypocrites. 3. Some who turn from one sin
to another, from prodigality to covetousness. 4. And some there are who turn
from all their sins; and these are true penitents. Beloved, Mark what I am
going to say unto you; Every true penitent
First, Looks on the reasons of turning from sin, as universally binding his
soul; by the same reason he turns from any one sin, he sees reason to turn from
every sin. Do you turn from one sin, because God forbids sin? why, by the same
reason you are obliged to turn from every sin: Do you turn from any one sin,
because it is a transgression of the holy and righteous will of God? why, by
the same reason you are engaged to turn from every sin: Do you turn from any
one sin, because thereby you do offend and dishonor God? by the same reason
you turn from every sin: Do you turn from any one sin, because of the curse
which God threatens for that sin? why, by the same reason you are to turn from
every sin; for the curse reaches to every sin.

Secondly, Again, Every penitent person is a converted person, (else he were
not penitent) and every converted person is sanctified throughout; he is a new
creature; there is a new nature of holiness diffused and spread over his whole
soul; and that new nature of holiness is contrary to all sin, as light is to
all darkness, and heat to all cold; and delivers up the whole heart to God; and
this could not be, unless it did turn the heart from all sin.

Thirdly, There is in every penitent, a true hatred of sin; they hate the thing
that is evil, and they loath their abominations, Psalm. 79. 10. Now hatred is
universal, it is of the whole kind;

Fourthly, He knows that it is in vain to turn from some sins, and not from all
sins; for

1. This is but hypocrisy to spare any known sin, Job 20. 13. 2. Sin still
remains in dominion; one sin set up in the love and service of it, really
maintains the dominion of sin; His servants we are whom we obey, Romans 6. 16. 3.
That sin will be your ruin and damnation; for
First, It certainly keeps your heart from closing with Christ.

Secondly, It continues you Impenitent.

Fifthly, Would you have God to forgive you some of your sins only? why, any
one sin unforgiven, will undo and damn you; you would have every sin to be
forgiven, and is it not just then that every sin should be forsaken?

But no man turns from every sin;
Object. But will some object, If a man repents not, unless he turns from every
sin, then there is no man in the world who repents: For in many things we
offend all, Jam. 3. 2. And who can say My heart is clean? Prove. 20. 9. And
there is no man who lives, and sins not, 1 Kings 8. 46.

Sol. For answer unto this, Know, that turning in a penitential way from sin,
does not consist in this, that no sinful quality does remain any longer in the
soul; nor in this, that a person never commits any sin more, concerning which
both the places alleged do speak; but it does consist,

1. In the alienating of the heart from all sin; the heart is turned from the
love of all sin, and from all willing subjection unto sin.

2. In the detestation of the will; the heart hates all sin, and will not enter
into a league of friendship with any sin.

3. In the resolution of the soul, purposing never willingly to transgress any
more.

4. In the careful endeavor of the soul to leave all former sinful courses,
and to walk (for ever) in nea^ness of obedience, and in all well pleasing
before the Lord.

5. In the declining of all known occasions and inducements to sin, a shunning
and avoiding of them, etc. And can a man be judged truly penitential, who fails
in any one of these? or goes contrary unto them? Therefore look well to your
selves; for if there be any one way of wickedness wherein you walk, and which
you will not forsake, you are no truly repenting persons, and you will lose the
forgiveness of your sins.

But it is but some one small sin wherein we take delight;
Object. O but will some reply, It is some one small sin wherein we take
delight, and we hope that God will spare us in that; as for any other sin, we
are content to forsake and turn from it, but we cannot leave that sin; Suppose
it be the sin of whoredom, or fornication, or drunkenness, or swearing.

Sol. Do you call these sins small sins? Read the Scriptures concerning them,
and the persons guilty of them. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
mankind. Vet. 10. Nor Thieves, nor Drunkards shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
Ephesians. 5. 5. This ye know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean person has any
inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Ver. 6. Let no man deceive
you with vain words; for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon
the children of disobedience. Zach. 5. 3. This is the curse that goes forth,
Every one that steals shall be cut off on this side; and every one that
swears, shall be cut off on that side.

Secondly, Suppose indeed that thy particular sin (comparatively) were a small
sin, yet thy love of that sin, and delight in it, makes that exceedingly
heinous, and thy condition very dreadful. Is there any thing which God hates
but sin? and which he has forbidden but sin? and against which he has
revealed his wrath but sin? and must this be the only object of thy love and
delight? this which his soul abhors, which so dishonours, and provokes, and
grieves him, O what a condition is this? to delight in that which dishonours
thy God? to love that which grieves and provokes God? As Saul said to Jonathan,
Do I not know that thou have chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion? 1 Samuel 20. 30. So say I, Do thou not know that thou love that which will be
thy damnation? is there any thing which will damn a man but sin? and is there
any thing which will more certainly do it, than the love of sin? and is there
any thing more inconsistent with the nature and practice of true Repentance,
than to set the heart on sin?

Thirdly, Of all sins whatsoever, the sins which we have loved and delighted in
are to be forsaken, if we will approve our selves true penitents, and within
the hopes of pardoning mercies; because 1. Nothing keeps up the power and
dominion of sin, so as the love of sin does. 2. And nothing continues us in the
way and course of sin, so much as the love of sin, etc. 3. Nothing makes us
more presumptuous in sinning, than the love of sin. 4. And nothing makes us
more to neglect and slight the warnings and threatenings, and calls of God, than
the love of sin. 5. And nothing does more harden the heart in the way of sin,
than the love of sin. 6. And nothing does more hinder our hearts to close with
Christ, than the love of sin. 7. Nothing does more provoke God, and render us
more obnoxious to the wrath and curse of God.

Fourthly, There is not a clearer evidence of true Repentance, than (in time)
to forsake o^^ beloved sins, and to walk in ways contrary to them; I have kept
my self from mine iniquity, Psalm. 18. 23. This is the laying of the Axe to the
root of the Tree, this is indeed a change of the heart; and other sins will
easily fall off, if beloved sins be really renounced.

But we have been accustomed to such a sin, and cannot leave it;
Object. But yet some will reply, There are some sins unto which we have been
so accustomed, that do what we can, we cannot leave and forsake them; Will not
God pardon us unless we come off from them?

Sol. To this I answer.

1. Be the sin what it may be, if you see it to be a sin, and the way to be
sinful, it must be forsaken if we will have mercy.

2. Of all sins whatsoever, the sins of custom are to be repented of, custom
is no plea, but an aggravation; for a custom of sinning is a long course and
time of sinning; a long time of sinning against God, although he has exercised
much goodness and long-suffering toward the sinner, which should have led him
to repentance; it is high time for such a sinner to consider and fear, and
return, least the Lord give him up unto a seared conscience, and a reprobate
mind, and never treat with him more, but break out into wrath against him.

3. Although you cannot forsake any sin by your strength, yet you may be
enabled to forsake the accustomed sinning by the strength of God, to whom you
must pray to turn you, that you may be turned from sin. This work is very
difficult, but not impossible; perhaps impossible; to you, but yet not
impossible unto God, who can break the cords and chains a sunder, and say to
the Captives, Go free, and to them who have been long dead, Live and rise.

I but I should be undone if I should leave some sins;
Object. It is once more objected, But I cannot live, I should be undone if I
should turn from every sin; and should I not sometimes sell on the Sabbath, and
sometimes lie and forswear, and cheat, and cozen people, my trade should fall,
and custom be gone, and I go a begging; This is a strange plea, you should be
undone unless you commit those sins by which you are undone; but

Sol. To this let me thus answer.

1. There is no man whom God puts in a lawful Calling, that has any reason at
all to use any sinful way to uphold and maintain himself; why so? because God
has abundantly undertaken to provide for him, and to bless him, whiles he
conscientiously walks and labors in his Calling. Genesis 17. 1. I am the Almighty
God, Walk before me, and be thou perfect; q. d. Trouble not thy self for other
things, only be thou upright, and I (who am the Almighty God) will take care
for thee. Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall then dwell in
the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. Hebr. 13. 5. Let your Conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with such things as you have; for he has
said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

2. Sinful ways are no ways to live or thrive by, but expose to curse and
ruin. Jer. 17. 11. As the Partridge sits on Eggs, and hatcheth them not; so
he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool. Micah 6. 10. Are there yet the treasures
of wickedness in the house of the wicked? And the scant measures which is an
abomination. Ver. 11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and
with the bag of deceitful weights? Ver. 12. The Inhabitants have spoken lies,
and their tongue is deceitful in their mouths. Ver. 13. Therefore will I make
thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee desolate because of thy ^^ns. Ver.
14. They shall eat, and not be satisfied. Ver. 15. Thou shall sow, but thou
shall not reap; thou shall tread the Olives, but thou shall not anoint thee
with oil. 1 These. 4. 6. That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any
matter, for that the Lord is the avenger of all such.

3. Suppose thy trading should fall, it were much better to be piously poor
than to be wickedly rich; to have a little estate, and a good conscience, than
a large estate with a guilty conscience; to lose the world, and to save the
soul, than to gain the whole world, and to lose a man's soul, etc.

Thirdly, The third Qualification of a true penitential turning from sin, is
this, It is a constant and continued turning from sin: And thus also it stands
in opposition It is a constant and continued turning from sin.
unto hypocritical turning which wants depth, for it is not with the heart; and
which wants breadth. for it is not from all sins; and which wants length, for it
is not constant and steadfast, but inconstant, and unstedfast, and quickly off;
come say they in Hose. 6. 1. and let us return unto the Lord; but ver. 4. O
Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee! O Judah, what shall I do unto thee! for
your goodness is a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away.
Hypocritical turning from sin arises from a deceitful heart, and from mutable
grounds and circumstances, and therefore it is compared to a deceitful bow,
Hose. 7. 16. And to a dog who returns again to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 22. But
he who truly repents, does so turn from sin, that he never returns to his sins
again. The Israelites were charged never to return the way to Egypt any more,
Deuteronomy. 17. 16. So the Repenting sinner he never returns to the house of bondage,
to the service of his sins any more, Romans 6. 2. How shall we that are dead to
sin, live any longer therein! Psalm. 85. 8. But let them not return again to
folly. Hose. 14. 8. What have I to do any more with Idols? therefore repenting
is styled a ceasing to do evil, Isa. 1. 16. And casting away of sin as a
menstruous cloth, saying, Get thee hence, Isa. 30. 22.

But we have often sinned since we have endeavou^ed to turn from sin:
Object. But now will some of you reply, You break all our hearts by this
Doctrine: For if this only be the true penitential turning from sin, never to
return to sin any more, we are then all of us deceived in our repentance; for
we have often committed sin, since our hearts have been afflicted for our sins,
and have endeavored to forsake our sins; yea perhaps have committed the same
kind of sins.

Sol. I make no question but this is a very serious Objection which is made by
you, and it does deserve a serious answer, because indeed it may be an
Objection from con^^^ence it self something troubled about this qualification
of true turning from sin, and fearing the sincerity of repenting.

For answer therefore unto this great Scruple,

1. I shall lay down some Concessions. 2. I shall state out unto you the right
meaning of that continued and steadfast turning from sin, which is the certain
evidence of true repentance.
The Concessions or things which I would grant are these. Some Concessions. A
true Penitent may sin again.


First, A person may be a true penitent, and although he be so, yet possibly he
may sin again; did not David truly repent of his murder? and yet after that he
sinned again in the numbering of the people; did not Paul truly repent? and yet
he complains, (Romans 7. 19.) The evil that I would not, that I do. What
penitent is there upon earth, who does not fear least he should sin, and who
does not may times grieve because he has sinned again! Nay if we did every day
survey our walking, should we not every day find just cause to renew our tears
and our repentance? Prove. 24. 16. A just man falls seven times and rises
again. Luke 17. 4. If he trespass against thee seven times, in a day, and seven
times in a day turn again unto thee, saying I repent, thou shall forgive him.
And what did the continual burnt-offering which was to be made day by day,
import but a daily sinning and expiating of it? etc. Numb. 28. 3.

Secondly, A person may be a true penitent, and (possibly) he may relapse or A
true Penitent may relapse into the same kind of sin again.
fall into the same kind of sin again: as that is a Relapse into sin when one
does (after some recovery) fall back into the very same sin, either for course
or act: we read this in Abraham, and in Lot, and in Peter, and in other true
servants of God, they have been overtaken with the same sins into which they
did formerly fall. It is true, that they do not relapse in such a manner as
wicked men do, neither in respect of willingness, nor of choice, nor of
affectection, nor of course, nor of quietness, nor of continuance, nor of
worseness; but yet as to the very nature of relapsing, they have been overcome
with the same sins: 1. Partly from their own weakness. 2. Partly from their own
worldlyness. 3. Partly from the strength and subtilty of temptations from Satan.



1. His habitual purpose not to sin, still continues the same: I said I will
take heed to my ways that I sin not with my tongue, Psalm. 39. 1.

2. His habitual desire is that he may not sin: Psalm. 119. 133. Order my steps
in thy Word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. Ver. 5. O that my
ways were directed, etc. Ver. 10. O let me not wander from thy Commandments.
Ver. 36. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness.

3. His habitual endeavor still continues not to sin: Psalm. 119. 11. Thy Word
have I hid in in mine heart, that I might not six against thee: and Psalm. 18.
23. I have kept my self from mine iniquity, and Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclined
my heart to perform thy statutes always unto the end. and ver. 115. Depart
from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the Commandments of my God.

4. His hatred remains firm against sin, although sometimes he does sin: The
evil that I hate, that I do, Romans 7. 15.

5. His steadfast and continued path, or way, or course of life, is quite
contrary to sin: Isa. 26. 7. The way of the just is uprightness. Job 23. 10. He
Knows the way that I take. Ver. 11. My feet have held his steps, his way have
I kept and not declined. Ver. 12. Neither have I gone back from the
Commandment of his lips.

Secondly, Therefore for the right stating of the Penitents continued or
steadfast The right stating of the penitents turning from sin. It stands in
opposition, not to every new act of sin: But to the former course and way of
sinful conversasation. Not to an unwilling captivity; But to a willing
subjection.
turning from sin; Remember

First, It stands in opposition, not to every new particular act of sin (for
that cannot be expected in this life: not such a Repentance as a man shall
never sin any more, no more than such a Faith as that a man shall never doubt
any more) but it stands in opposition to the former course or way of sinful
conversation; (i. e.) He who truly turns from sin, he never does return any
more to that sinful way in which formerly he lived and walked; it shall never
(henceforth) be his Path, his Trade, his Course: How shall we live any longer
therein? Romans 6. 2.

Secondly, It stands in opposition not to an unwilling captivity by sin;
(Paul himself complains that he was brought into captivity to the Law of sin,
Romans 7. 23.) but unto a willing subjection, and a willing service of sin any
more. The repenting person never yields himself a servant any more unto any
sin; he never says that this, or that, or any sin shall be my Lord, my King,
my Master, unto which I will yield obedience willingly in its commands and
lusts: No, but as in the state of impenitency we were the servants of sin; so
in the state of repentance we do become the servants of Righteousness: See Romans
6. 17, 18, etc. Therefore though the penitent person does many times sin, yet
he never returns any more to the former service of sin.

Thirdly, It stands in opposition, not to every sudden and indeliberate
surprisal Not to any sudden and deliberate surprizal:
by sin, or to sin, but in opposition to all or any affectionate and deliberate
renewing of any league of friendship with sin any more: The penitent person may
and does sin; but it is one thing to sin, and it is another thing to love sin;
it is one thing to be overtaken with a violent temptation, and it is another
thing But to an affectionate renewing of the league with sin. Not to falling
into sin: But to resting in it.
to take sin into the affection and heart, to love it, and embrace it, and
delight in it again.

Fourthly, it stands in opposition, not (simply) to falling into sin; but
(modally) to resting in sin, for that as Solomon speaks the just falls seven
times, yet he rises up again; And even this that he will by no means lie in
any sinful act (but still rises with renewed Repentance) this shows that his
heart is fixed.

Therefore Beloved, let us sadly and seriously consider of these things which
do so intimately discover the truth of that Repentance, upon which God has
promised the forgiveness of sins, that we deceive not, and undo our selves at
the last.

There are three things which folish and presumptuous sinners do make out only
in their own fancies.

1. One is a God of their own, all of mercy, and nothing of justice. 2. Another
is, a Faith of their own, a confidence however that they shall be saved,
without any doubt or fear. 3. A third is, a Repentance of their own, which is,
I am sorry, and I forgive all the world, and God be merciful unto my soul: But
be not deceived, there is more in true Repentance than most of us do imagine;
This let me faithfully assure you of, that,
1. If your hearts be not broken with shame and sorrow for sin past. 2. If your
hearts hate not every present sin. 3. If your hearts fear not to sin for the
future. 4. If notwithstanding your professions (nay perhaps your vows) in times
of sickness, or danger, or agonies of conscience to leave your sins, you do
return again unto the same course of drunkenness, of whoredom, of swearing, of
Sabbath breaking, of lying, of stealing, of worldliness, of pride, of
maliciousness, of any known sin, so that you project for it, love it, serve it,
defend and continue in it; assuredly you are no true penitents; and if you
should live and dye in such a condition, you will never find God to be merciful
unto you in the forgiveness of your sins. And on the contrary, though you have
been formerly great transgressors, even notorious sinners, if now God has
given unto you hearts to see, and to bewail your sins, and humbly to confess
them, and to turn from all your wicked ways with a real purpose of heart never
to walk in any path of sin, but in all the paths of Righteousness, God will
certainly and accordingly to his many promises, forgive you all your sins. And
thus have I finished the first sort of persons who are within the compass of
promised forgiveness; I shall now proceed unto a second sort, viz.
Secondly, All who do truly believe in Jesus Christ, are undoubtedly within
the All who do truly believe in Jesus Christ are within the promise of pardon.
promise of forgiveness of sins: And for the clear opening of this Conclusion,
I will briefly speak unto three things.

1. There is a necessity of Faith, for to enjoy the Remission of our sins. 2.
That Faith must be true Evangelical faith. 3. That true Faith may be weak or
strong, and whether weak or strong (if it be true) it has a certainty of
forgiveness of sins annexed unto it.
First, There is a necessity of Faith for to enjoy the remission of our sins:
There is There is a necessity of says for pardon.
a necessity of the presence of Faith, and there is a necessity of the use and
exercise of faith.

1. A necessity of the presence of Faith: As repentance must necessarily be
present, A necessity of the presence of faith.
if you would have your sins forgiven; so faith must be necessarily present in
you, if you would enjoy the forgiveness of your sins. Put such a supposition
that, Repentance might be in a person without Faith, I dare affirm that the
sins of that person should not be forgiven;

Object. Why, will you say, have you not already proved several promises of
forgiveness upon Repentance!

Sol. True, I have done so; I have cleared iti that Remission of sins is
promised upon repentance, but not upon repentance as separated from faith; but
as repentance is required, so is faith required for the forgiveness of sins:
Neither Faith without Repentance, nor Repentance without Faith, but both of
them as inseparable Qualifications in every person whom God will pardon; Nay
and it is very convenient or useful to make comparisons between these two
graces, in reference unto the forgiveness of sins; I humbly conceive that it
might easily be demonstrated, that of the two Faith has the nearest relation,
and is of the stronger necessity, and of more immediate approach to the
forgiveness of sins than Repentance, although both of them are necessarily
required. But I shall not go that way to work, I will only demonstrate the
necessity of Faith in us for the forgiveness Five things demonstrate it.
of our sins; and there are five things which will do that.

First, The precept of Faith, in respect to our forgiveness; faith is expressly
The Precept of Faith.
commanded. 1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe on
the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. And it is enjoined and commanded us, if we
would have our sins forgiven: Acts 13. 38. Be it known unto you, that through
this Name is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. Ver. 39. And by him
all that believe are justified. Believe and thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 30.

Secondly, And the promise of forgiveness of sins upon the condition of Faith:
The promise of forgiveness upon condition of Faith.
Acts 10. 43. Whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins: And
truly if we do seriously consider the matter, we must acknowledge that faith
is the only condition of the Covenant of grace, wherein God becomes our God,
and we become his people; and by which (therefore) we become heirs of all the
promises of God, and consequently of the promise of the forgiveness of sins;
none are the children of God, and heirs of the Promises but by Faith.

Thirdly, It is expressly taken in to the justification of a sinner: So taken
in, that by no other means he can be justified, and by this only he must be
justified: It is expressly taken in to the justification of a sinner.
Romans 3. 28. We conclude that a man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of
the Law. Gal. 5. 4. Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you
are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace. You know that the
forgiveness of our sins is only in our justification, and that the
justification of a sinner is (as to him) only of grace (being justified freely
by his grace) Romans 3. 23. And that the sinner is justified by faith, and by
faith only, that so it may be of grace; and therefore there is a necessity of
faith for the pardon of sins, etc.

Fourthly, It is impossible to find remission of our sins out of Christ,
forasmuch No remission out of Christ.
as his blood (only) was shed for the remission of sins. Matthew. 26. 28. And in
him only we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. Ephesians.
1. 7. and him only has God set forth to be a propitiation, and to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sin, Romans 3. 25. And it is as impossible to
enjoy Christ without Faith, which is the only grace (on our part) to receive
Christ, to join us unto Christ, and by which Christ does dwell in us. Now if we
cannot have the forgiveness of sins, but we must first have Christ, and we
cannot have Christ but by faith, there is then a necessity of faith for the
remission of sins.

Fifthly, If for want of Faith, we shall certainly lose the remission of sins,
then the presence of faith is necessary for the forgiveness of sins (this
Consequence For want of Faith we lose the remission of sins.
cannot be denied by any rational Christian) but the want of faith will
certainly lose us the forgiveness of sins; three places will clear that. Mar.
16. 16. He that believes not shall be damned. Joh. 3. 36. He that believes
not, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Joh. 8. 24. If ye
believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your sins, If for want of faith we
dye in our sins, shall not see life, shall be damned, have the wrath of God
still abiding on us, then for want of faith we do certainly lose the remission
of our sins (for these are utterly inconsistent with remission) but you read,
that for want of faith we shall dye in our sins, etc. Ergo, there is a
necessity of the presence of Faith for the forgiveness of our sins.

2. As there is a necessity of the presence of faith, so is there a necessity
of the use or exercise of Faith for the remission of sins: For as in the
Covenant of works A necessity of the use and exercise of faith.
actual obedience was necessary to enjoy the life then promised, so in the
Covenant of grace actual believing is necessary to enjoy Christ and forgiveness
purchased by him, and promised in him.

Now there are two acts of faith (especially) required in every one who would
enjoy the forgiveness of his sins.

1. One is an Act of acceptance.

2. The other is an Act of reliance on Christ only for that forgiveness
promised.

First, An Act of acceptance, his soul must be brought into Christ, acknowledge
An act of acceptance.
and consent to receive him, and whole Christ with the whole heart. If a man
think thus, I will have my sins forgiven me, but I care not for Christ, my
heart cannot comply with him, his Commands are too strick, and his ways are
too holy for me, I cannot yield to be his upon such terms as he requires! Let
me tell you plainly and faithfully, you shall never have your sins pardoned;
why? because the forgiveness of sins is promised upon this condition, if you do
believe and receive Christ. You may as well say, that you will be saved for
ever in heaven, but you will not believe, you will not receive Christ, you will
not be his. No no, a Communion in what he has purchased cannot possibly be
without a precedent union with himself; all the Benefits, and all the
Privileges by Christ, are communicable only unto them who are Christ's; to them
there is no condemnation, but, etc.

Secondly, Besides this Act of acceptance of Christ, there must be also an An
act of reliance.
Act of reliance on Christ, and on him only for the forgiveness of your sins:
Put the case you do repent of your sins; yea put the case tha^ ^ou do by faith
receive Christ; if now you do rely on your Repentance, and on your Faith, or on
any other thing besides Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, you will
certainly lose the forgiveness of them. If you should say, God will forgive me
for my tears sake, for my grief sake, for my confession sake, for my turning
sake, for my believing sake, but not for Christ's sake, you will certainly miss
of pardoning mercy, because all forgiveness of sins unto us, is for Christ's
sake: Ephesians. 4. 32. Forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you. 1 John 2. 12. Your sins are forgiven you for his Name sake. So
then there is a necessity of such an act of faith as to rely only on Christ, as
the reason of the pardon of your sins (i. e.) to trust on his Righteousness, on
his Redemption, on his blood only, as the All sufficicient, and as the
effectual reason of your forgiveness, etc.

Secondly, The second thing which I would show unto you is, what that Faith is
What that faith is that is so necessary.
which is so necessary for us, if that we would enjoy the forgiveness of our
sins. For as to the (...) of Repentance, we generally grant it for a truth,
that men must repent i^ they will have their sins forgiven; so as to the (...)
of faith it is generally granted that men must believe; and if they do truly
believe, their sins shall be forgiven. But the difficulty is what this faith is
which intitles us unto, and really assures remission of sins: And great reason
there is to clear this, because of the general confidence in men that they have
faith, and because of the ordinary self-deceit of men contenting themselves
with a false faith, and because of the dreadful hazard and loss upon such a
mistake.

Therefore rightly to state out unto you this great Point (upon which our life
or death depends) lend me your patience and attention while I briefly discourse
upon four Conclusions.

1. All men have not faith. 2. All faith brings us not to a certain remission
of sin, although there is a faith which does so. 3. Some men may think they
have that faith which does entitle them unto remission of their sins, but yet
they are deceived. 4. That faith which is necessary unto the remission of sins,
and infallibly attains it, may be clearly made evident unto us for the truth of
its presence in us.
First, All men have not Faith; So the Apostle expressly, 2 These. 3. 2. Who has
believed our report! So the Prophet, Isa. 53. 1. He came amongst his own, All
men have not faith.
and his own received him not. Joh. 1. 11. Though he had done so many miracles
before them, yet they believed not on him, Joh. 12. 37. And there are four
things do demonstrate this. Four things demonstrate this. The ignorance in many
men.


1. The ignorance in many men, the know not Christ the Lord of glory: How shall
they believe on him, of whom they have not heard? Romans 14. So say I, how shall
they believe on him whom they have not known? though knowledge may be without
Faith, yet it is impossible there should be Faith without knowledge?

2. The carelessness in many men about the offer of Christ, and the invitations
of Christ; they make light of them, Matthew. 22. 5. an know not the day of Their
carelessness about the offer of Christ.
their visitation. Luke 19. 44. And follow their worldly pleasures and profits,
neglecting Christ, and the great things of Christ, Luke 14. 18, 19, 20.

3. The opposition of Jesus Christ; We will not have this man to reign over us,
Luke 19. 14. Let us break his bonds asunder, and cast away his cords from The
opposition of Jesus Christ.
us, Psalm. 2. 3. All day long I have stretched my hand unto a disobedient and
gainsaying people, Romans 10. 21.

4. The obstinate perverseness of will in the refusing of Christ: ye would
not, Matthew. 23. 27. Ye will not come to me, Joh. 5. 40. They have both seen,
and hated both me and my Father, Joh. 15. 24.

Secondly, Though some men have faith, yet all Faith does not bring us to All
Faith does not bring us to remission of sins. A Diabolical Faith.
the certain remission of sins. There are five sorts of Faith which may be had,
and yet no remission of sins is annexed to any one of them,

1. A diabolical Faith: The Devils believe and tremble, Jam. 2. 19. They
believe that there is a God, and that that wrath which he has threatened them;
shall inevitably befall them, and thereupon they tremble; such a kind of Faith
many have who do utterly despair of mercy, and are without hope.

2. A merely Historical Faith, which is an assent unto the Word of God as true,
and there it rests: many do firmly believe revealed truths, who yet never A
mere Historical Faith.
embrace the goodness of those truths; they do believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, that he was sent into the world to save sinners, that he died
for sinners, that he made peace by his blood, that there is remission of sins
to be had by him, that whosoever believes and repents shall be saved. All these
Points they do believe to be certain truths, because the Word of God says so;
and yet for all this their hearts are not drawn to receive Christ, nor to love
him, nor to serve him, without which there is no benefit to be had from Christ.

3. A temporary Faith; Luke 8. 13. They on the Rock are they which when they
hear, receive the Word with joy, and they have no root, which for a while
believe, A temporary Faith.
and in time of temptation fall away, Luke 8. 13. A man may go far, as to hear
the Gospel, and to receive it (to own it in some sort) and that with joy (he
may be somewhat taken with the newness of it, or with the sweetness of it) and
he may thereupon believe that it sets out the true way of life, and thereupon
may make a profession of Christ and the Gospel, and come into an outward
communion in the Gospel; and yet this man's faith may not be sound, which Christ
shows in two particulars. 1. It wants a root, and it is but superficial, it
does not root in the heart in Christ, nor does it flow from Chrisi as a Root or
living Principle. 2. It wants constancy or duration, it is not fixed on Christ
for Christ alone, but for some self advantages, and therefore in time of
temptation it withers and falls off: Now that Faith which neither roots us nor
ingraffs us into Christ, nor keeps us faithful and steadfast to Christ, is
false faith, and therefore shall miss of the forgiveness of sins.

4. There is a verbal Faith, a Faith which con^^sts only in profession, and
words A ve^bal Faith.
without any vital fruits and manifestations of truth and power: Jam. 2. 14.
What does it profit my brethren, though a man says he has Faith, and have not
works? can Faith save him? The Apostle in that place taxes the vanity of empty
and boasting Professors, who talked much of their Faith, and trusted for great
matters by it; alas (says he) you deceive your selves much in your Faith;
there is a Faith which will indeed profit and save, but the faith of which you
boast will not do so; for your faith is but a dead faith: If it were true, it
would appear in love and good works (as the living Tree does in fruits) but
there is no such working faith in you.

5. And lastly, there is a presumptuous Faith; which is nothing else but a
fantastical A presumptuous Faith.
faith: The simple believes every word, Prove. 14. 15. Ver. 16. The Fool
rages and is confident: So is it with the man who has presumptuous faith, he
believes every word, Christ is his and died for him, and his sins shall be
forgiven, and his soul shall be saved, and yet the fool rages and is
confident: He is a wicked man, and lives wickedly, swears, and lies, and
whores, and breaks the Sabbath, and derides holiness, and will not obey the
Gospel of Christ, and yet he is confident; he has no Scripture grounds at all
for his confidence; nay there is clear ground for him to believe the wrath of
God if he repent nor, etc.

Thirdly, Some men do think that they have that true Faith which does entitle
to Some men think they have true Faith, but ^e dece^ved.
remission of sins, but they are deceived. Beloved, self-deceit is very natural
and common, that a man may think himself to be in a very good estate when he is
in a very wicked estate; and a man may think he has every grace requis^te to
salvation, when indeed he has not any one of them; he may deceive himself
about repentance, and about faith, and about love, etc. For there is no true
grace, but there is also a counterfeit of that grace which may look like it,
but it is not so; Ahab humbled himself, and so did Hezekiah, but his humbling
was of another sort: David repented; and so did Judas; but David's repentance
was of another kind than his; Simon Peter believed, and so did Simon Magus, but
Peter's faith was another kind of faith than his.

There are three Grounds or Reasons upon which men may and do deceive Three
grounds o^ this deceit.
themselves that their Faith is the true Faith which shall bring Remission of
sins unto them, when really their Faith is not that Faith unto which
forgiveness is promised.

1. They find some things which are the Ingredients of true Faith, which yet
are They find some ingredients of Faith which are but common ingredient.
but common ingredients, which another faith may have that gives not title unto
forgiveness of sins. As suppose knowledge and assent unto heavenly truths:
these are in that faith which gives us the Remission of our sins (though not as
giving that Remission) and these may be in a faith which shall never bring you
to the Remission of your sins.

2. They find some affections like unto those which come from true faith: Some
And some affections (...).
sudden joys, and delights, and desires upon hearing the Word, and yet these
are not those joys which do flow from faith, but are sudden and tran^^ent
Raptures, flowing only from their own self-deceiving persuasions, and not from
any certain knowledge of union with Christ.

3. They find some kinds of conforming of themselves unto the Word in matters
And some (...) to the Wor^.
of practice, reforming and doing many things, and yet this is not that
conformity and that obedience which flows from true faith; For it is not
internal, but only external; and it is not universal, but partial; Let the same
word strike a^ a separation 'twixt their hearts and their beloved sin, and
press them to a strictness of holy walking, their Faith will not be able to
bring them up to a subjection therein unto the will of Christ.

4. These things being premised, I now come to set out before you that Faith
What that Faith is which will certainly get the remission of sins. Faith well
seated.
for the truth and quality of it, which will certainly get you the remission of
your sins. That Faith

First, It always follows special contrition and humiliation for sin: For
Faith cannot act on Chrst as a Savior until I find my self a sinner, needing
him to be my Savior; and therefore the ordinary usual way of the Spirit, is to
convince of sin, and to lay us low in the sense thereof (and to break down all
our high imaginations and self confidences, that we come to see no hope but in
the free grace and rich mercy of God in Christ) before he conveyes Faith into
our souls: Luke 3. 5. Every mountain and hill shall be brought low, etc. Ver.
6. and all flesh shall see the salvation of God. Acts 16. 29. He came in
trembling and fell down. ver. 30. and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?
ver. 31. and they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be
saved.

2. Is wrought in us only by the power and mighty working of the Spirit of
Christ; Faith rightly caused.
So the Apostle in Ephesians. 1. 19. called there the exceeding greatness of his
power, and the working of his mighty power: The Spirit of Christ does accompany
and actuate the Gospel, and it sets it on upon the heart (for the truth and
goodness of it) with such Majesty, Authority, and Efficacy, that the poor
sinner is not able to resist and withstand the precept of Faith, but is made
willing and ready, and yields up his heart to receive the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, It is always raised by Evangelical offers and premises; when the
Lord And well grounded.
works faith indeed, and draws the heart to believe on Christ, the heart takes
ground and encouragement for this from the Offers, and Invitations, and
Commands of the Gospel; Come unto me, says Christ; this is his Commandment
that we should believe. And from the Promises; He that believes shall be saved.
Come unto me and I will give you rest, etc.

Fourthly, In true Faith the whole heart or soul is carried out unto Christ:
True believing is a believing with all the heart; the whole heart yields unto
Jesus Christ; And unites the whole heart to whole Christ.
the understanding admires at the glory, and at the kindness, and goodness, and
love of Christ; the judgment is filled with choicest thoughts, and highest
estimations of Christ, None like Christ, and none but Christ; the will falls in
with Christ freely, readily, fully; O Christ, thou art my chiefest good and
blessedness; and Christ has all the affections of desire, love, delight, and
joy; these are taken up and filled with Christ, etc. Faith brings in all to
Christ.

Fifthly, True Faith sincerely sets up all Christ; takes and sets up Christ as
our Priest for Expiation of sins, Reconciliation, Intercession, and him alone;
and as It sincerely sets up all Christ.
our Prophet to teach and instruct us; and as our King to rule us, to destroy
his enemies in us, to give us Laws, to receive obedience from us.

Sixthly, True faith eternally unites the heart to Christ; neither earthly
preferment It eternally unites to Christ.
on the one side, nor persecutions and discouragements on the other side can
separate the heart of a true believer from Jesus Christ.

In a word, true faith (which has the promise of forgiveness of sins) does not
only know Christ, but approves of Christ; not only approves of Christ, but
receives Christ; not some of Christ, but all Christ; not with some part of the
heart, but with the whole heart; not for a time, but for ever; not upon our
conditions, but upon his own conditions; not occasionally and upon an exigence,
but freely and upon choice; not only for safety, but also for service; nor only
for profession, but also for union and communion. It matcheth us to Christ as a
Wife to the Husband; it unites us to Christ as Branches to the Vine; it joins
us to Christ as Members to the head. Beloved, this is that faith which is
necessary for the remission of our sins: If you have not a Faith produced by
the mighty working of the holy Ghost; if you have not a faith planted in a
broken heart; if you have not a faith grounded on Gospel-offers and promises;
if you have not a faith which brings in all your heart to match with Christ; if
you have not a faith which receives whole Christ in all his offers; if you have
not a says for service on your part, as well as for benefit on Christ's part;
if you have not a faith which will conform you to Christ, as well as apply
Christ to you, it is but a counterfeit faith; and as it gives you no interest
in the person of Christ, so it will never entitle and convey unto you any
forgiving mercy and salvation by Christ.

Thus you see what that Faith is which is necessary for the forgiveness of
sins: Now a word to the third Particular, viz.

Thirdly, That true Faith (which intitles to the forgiveness of sins) it may
True faith may be either weak or strong.
be either weak or strong: Compare believer with believer, there is this
latitude in true faith; therefore you read of great faith in some, and of a
little faith in others; of some whom Christ styles his lambs, and others his
sheep; and John calls some young men, others little children, and others
fathers; there are different measures of faith amongst believers, 1. Partly
from the different impartings of the Spirit, who is a free and wise cause; and
from partly 2. The different means and helps which conduce to the improvement
of faith; and 3. Partly from the different Age and times of faith; some have
been long in Christ, in others Christ is but newly formed; and who can expect
that babes newly born should have that strength and sufficiency as men have who
are grown to a riper age? yea, and the same faith is in the same person first
but weak and tender, but as the bruised reed, but as the smoking flax, etc.

Fourthly, Bur then in the last place, (which shall close up this Discourse)
Whether it be strong or weak, if it be true, it intitles to pardon.
whether the faith be strong, or whether it be weak, if yet it be the true
Gospel faith, (of which I have spoken) it has a certainty of the forgiveness
of sins promised and annexed unto it. The Scripture expressly clears this
Conclusion, Acts 10. 43. Whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of
sins. Joh. 3. 18. He that believes in him, is not condemned; why then he is
absolved or pardoned. 1 John 2. 12. I write unto you little children, because
your sins are forgiven you. Acts 13. 39. By him all that believe are justified.
Isa. 53. 6. The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.

And there are five clear Demonstrations of this. Five Demonstrations of it.
Every believer is in the Covenant.


First, Every believer (whether strong or weak) is in the Covenant; God is
their God, and they are all of them his people; he is their father, and they
are all of them his children. Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the children of God by
faith in Christ Jesus. Now every one in Covenant has the express promise of
forgiveness of sins. Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity, and I will
remember their sin no more.

Secondly, Every believer is in Christ, and Christ is in him; Christ dwells
in And in Christ, and Christ in him.
our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. and Gal. 3. 28. speaking of all sorts of
believers, he says, Ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

Now the Scripture affirms six things of all who are Christ's.

1. That they have l^^e. 1 John 5 12. He that has the Son, has life. 2. That
there is no condemnation to them, Romans 8. 1. 3. That they shall never perish,
but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16. 4. That in his blood they have
redemption, even forgiveness of their sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. 5. That Christ bears
their sins, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and did put away their sins by the sacrifice of
himself, Hebr. 9. 26. 6. That Christ is made unto them (and that of God)
righteousness and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Thirdly, The promise of forgiveness is made to the believer as a believer;
They have the promise of forgiveness as believers.
not as a strong believer, for then none but strong believers should be
forgiven; nor as a weak believer, for then none but weak believers should be
forgiven; but to the believer as a believer, and therefore to every believer
whether strong or weak.

Fourthly, All believers have the like and equal advantage (by virtue of All
believers have an equal advantage.
their union with Christ) in all things purchased by Christ, which are of a
necessary respect to their safety and salvation. I say of a necessary respect
to these; whatsoever is necessary to deliver from hell, and whatsoever is
necessary to bring to heaven, in that does every believer share alike;
therefore every believer is sanctified, because without holiness no man shall
see the Lord; and therefore every believer is justified, because only they are
glorified who are justified; and so every believer has his sins forgiven,
because pardon of sin is necessary to salvation; otherwise he must be damned
for his sins, and never shall see life.

Fifthly, Shall I add one Argument more? If there were any believer who Else
some believers ^ust ^e in the same condition with unbelievers.
should not have his sins forgiven, Then some believers might be in the same
condition with unbelievers, both unpardoned, and both under condemnation; but
this cannot be; for Christ has plainly differenced the state of the believer
and of the unbeliever thus, Joh. 3. 18. He that believes on him, is not
condemned; but he that believes not, is condemned already. Ver. 36. He that
believes on the Son, has everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

And thus you have heard these two Conclusions manifestly cleared from the Word
of God; viz. That

1. Every truly repenting sinner is within the promise of forgiveness of sins.
2. Every truly believing person is also within the same promise of forgiveness
of sins.
And on the contrary, you have heard it also cleared, 1. That no impenitent
person, 2. That no unbelieving person has any promise of the forgiveness of
sins.

What should these truths work on all us who have heard the testimony of God
given in so abundantly for them? I will tell you what impression they should
make upon us.

First, We should all of us fear and tremble, lest we should come short of such
a mercy which does so nearly, and so eternally concern us, as the forgiveness
of our sins.

Secondly, Be no more so averse unto the Doctrine and Practice of Repentance
and Faith.

Thirdly, We should with all carefulness and seriousness, and speediness search
our hearts, and try our ways, whether we have attained the grace and practice
of true Repentance; and whether true justifying faith be in us yea or no;
especially considering the general course of men is impenitency and unbelief;
and our own courses of life have been like that of other men, a walking (as the
Apostle speaks) in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings,
banquettings, and abominable Idolatries, 1 Pet. 4. 3. Foolish, disobedient,
deceiving, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating one another, Tit. 3. 3. And perhaps (as the Apostles fear
was of many of the Corinthians) we have not repented of the uncleanness and
fornication, and lasciviousness which we have committed, 2 Cor. 12. 21.

Fourthly, We should be most importunately fervent with the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, from whom alone every good and perfect gift does come;
that he would grant unto us (as he did unto those Gentiles) repentance unto
life, Acts 11. 18. and that it may be given unto us (as once unto the
Philipians) to believe, Phil. 1. 29.

Fifthly, We should more diligently and reverently attend the preaching of the
Word, by which God does put forth his power and his grace for the working of
Repentance and Faith in us. Luke 11. 32. The men of Nineve repented at the
preaching of Jonas. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard
the Word of truth, the Gospel of your Salvation.

SECT. VII.
Behold then (you who are the people of God) your condition, The happiness of a
pardoned condition.
and your portion; you are the Generation of Gods mercy, you (and you only) are
the people who have their iniquities forgiven, and upon this very account, your
very condition

1. It is a very comfortable condition; Son, Be of good comfort, thy sins are
It is very comfortable.
forgiven thee, Matthew. 9. 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her iniquity is pardoned, Isa.
40* 1, 2.

2. Yea, it is a very blessed condition; Blessed is the man whose transgression
And blessed.
is forgiven, whose sin is covered: Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord
imputed no iniquity, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

Quest. But will some say, Wherein lies the comfortableness and blessedness
This appears,
f^^m this, that our sins are forgiven?

Sol. I will show you, 1. In a privative way. 2. In a positive way.

1. In a privative way. In a privative way. You are for ever secured from Gods
wrath.


First, If God himself has forgiven you your sins, Then you are (for ever)
delivered and secured from the wrath of God. God will never deal with you, or
against you as a revenging Judge, as an enemy in wrath. Beloved, it is better
to have all the world to be our enemy, than to have God to be our enemy; and to
have all the world displeased with us, than to have God displeased with us; for
he is of infinite power, and his wrath is of infinite weight; it does
exceedingly distress and vex the conscience, and fills up the soul with
dreadful amazement, and with unsufferable pains, and with continual
restlessness, that the sinner (upon whom it is fallen) is utterly cursed, and
sinks with what he feels, and with what he still fears, and every day and hou^e
expects from the just God for all his unpardoned sins. Now from this wrath of
God as a revenging Judge, (whatsoever it may be in the nature of it, or in the
effect of it, and in the eternity of it) is every forgiven sinner delivered and
secured; it shall never fall upon him at all; though temptations may fall upon
him, and afflictions may befall him, and the fatherly displeasures may befall
him, and though some kinds of desertions may befall him, and though
misapprehensions of Gods love may befall him, and though sickness and weakness,
and death it self may befall him, yet the judicial (...) of God shall never
befall him; neither in whole, nor in part; neither in greater, nor in lesser
degrees; neither in this life, nor in the life to come; for Romans 5. 9. Being
justified by the blood of Christ, we are saved from wrath through him. Ephesians.
2. 16. And by his Cross all enmity is slain. Gal. 3. 13. And Christ hat^
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; when sin is
forgiven, wrath is gone, and curse is gone; sin being taken away, they are
taken away: Mine anger is turned away from him. Hos. 14. 4.

Secondly, You shall never be condemne^ for your sins, you are certainly off
You shall never be condemned.
from that sentence: Who (says the Aposte, Romans 8. 33.) shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies. Who (Ver. 34.) is he that
condemns? it is Christ that dyed. To be condemned, and to be justified, are
absolutely inconsistent: for condemnation is the act of justice; justification
is the act of grace; in condemnation si^ is imputed, but in justification sin
is not imputed; in condemnation the sinner is adjudged to that punishment which
his sins deserve; but in just^fication he is discharged of that punishment
which (for sin) he was obnoxious unto; in condemnation the sinner is called to
an account, and he is questioned, and sentenced as a cursed Malefactor; but in
justification he is dismissed, cleared, and acquitted by the blood of Christ,
and his sins are mentioned no more, and never shall be remembered. Now what an
unspeakable mercy is this, that thy poor soul shall never be damned? that
notwithstanding all thy sins, which deserve an eternal separation from God in
blessedness, and an eternal endurance of the flames of hell, yet none of these
things shall ever befall thee! but the Lord himself has delivered thy soul
from going down into the pit, in forgiving all thy transgressions, in which he
has cancelled the handwriting which was against thee, and taken it out of the
way; so that nothing is to be found any more which may be an effectual Charge
against you, and which can remain as a ground or reason for God to condemn and
destroy you. There is nothing whatsoever for which God will condemn any person,
but sin; and no person can be condemned for sin, if God has been pleased to
forgive him his sins in the blood of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Conscience has no more authority to accuse you; to threaten you;
Conscience has no more authority to accuse.
to terrify you; to disquiet or trouble you; why so? God has discharged you,
and conscience must speak as God speaks, and act in a subordination to Gods
acting. If God does bind, conscience must not loose, but bind; and if God
loses and acquits, conscience must not bind, but loose: If God condemns,
conscience must not acquit and forgive; and if God acquits and forgives,
conscience must not condemn; if God speaks trouble, conscience must not speak
peace; and if God speaks peace, conscience must not speak trouble; for
conscience is but Gods Deputy or Officer, and has Commission to act always in
the way of subordination and conformity unto God; as it must bring home the
threatenings unto those whom God threatens; so it must supply the comfort unto
those to whom God promises comfort and mercy: If God says, Be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee, conscience now has no longer Commission
to disquiet the heart, saying, Peace belongs not to thee, and comfort belongs
not to thee, but God is still displeased with thee, and holds thee for his
enemy, and will be avenged on thee for thy sins: If conscience (through
darkness and misinformation, o^ temptation) should speak thus, it now exceeds
its Commission, and deals unrighteously, and God will not ratify such a
testimony, or such a charge from such a conscience. But by the way, Take notice
what a mercy it is to have your sins pardoned, in that your consciences have no
more power or authority to wound and charge, and threaten, and condemn you for
any of your sins; if a wounded conscience be one of the dreadfullest
punishments here on earth; then to be totally secured from that, (and upon this
ground, that he has forgiven us our sins) is one of (...) greatest blessings
here on earth, which privatively concerns us.

Fourthly, If your sins be pardoned, then also you are discharged of the spirit
You are discharged of the spirit of bondage.
of bondage to fear; you are fenced from all slavish fears which formerly did
abound in your hearts, and oppress, and distract them. Before a man's sins were
pardoned, and guilt lay on him, there were ten distracting and crushing fears
lying on his heart; The sinner

1. Did fear the secret purpose or intention of God against him; O said he,
What will God do with this guilty soul of mine! I fear lest I be one of them to
whom he will never show mercy.

2. Did fear the open threatenings of God: O says he, Will not all these evils
and cu^ses which God has threatnd, will they not shortly be my portion?

3. Did fear every judgment of Go^ walking upon the earth, as if it were an
evil drawing near to him, and which his sins would bring to his house, and to
his person, and he should not escape

4. Did fear that some time or other his sinnings would be discovered, and that
they should be laid open to his shame and reproach before the whole world.

5. Did fear any outward enjoyment and comfort which he had, that for his sins
God would ere long deprive him of them in wrath.

6. Did fear many times to come and hear the W^^d of God, lest it should awaken
and trouble his conscience with more apprehensions of his own guilt and Gods
wrath.

7. Did fear the very thoughts of death, and especially lest God should
suddenly cut him off from the Land of the living, before he had so improved his
opportunities as to make his peace with God.

8. Did fear all appearings before the Judgment Seat, lest he should receive
his sad and eternal sentence there for his sins.

9. Did fear all his approaches and requests unto God, that God would not hear
nor regard them, because his sins were upon record in the Court against his
soul.

10. Did fear that no way could ever be found so powerful and effectual, as to
satisfy the justice of God, and purchase mercy enough for the pardon of his
sins; but now repenting of his sins, and believing on the Lord Jesus, and
having in his blood obtained the remission of sins, this spirit of bondage to
fear, is taken away; the forgiveness of his sins by God himself, has satisfied
him, and has answered all the doubts and fears of his soul; his sins are
pardoned, and God is reconciled, and now all is well and safe; of what, or of
whom should he be afraid?

Fifthly, If your sins be forgiven you, then nothing which befalls you in
Nothing which befalls you in life or death is an evil to you.
life or death shall ever be an evil or hurt unto you; for when sin is
pardoned, all curse is removed. Whatsoever state the unpardoned sinner is in,
it is a cursed estate to him; and whatsoever contingencies befall that sinner,
they are cursed unto him; his prosperity is cursed unto him, and his adversity
is cursed to him; his enjoyments are cursed, and his losses are cursed; his
blessings are cursed, and his crosses are cursed; his life is cursed, and his
death is cursed; nothing which he has does him good; and nothing which God
does, does him any good, but hurt; he is the worse under all: But when sins are
forgiven, the sting, the poison, the curse is gone, and nothing is for evil, or
for mischief unto him; prosperity shall do him no hurt, but good; and adversity
shall do him no hurt, but good; his enjoyments are a blessing, and his losses
are a blessing; if he lives, life shall be a blessing; and if he dies, death
shall be a blessing. All is food and physic all is good, or for good unto him,
he gains by his losses; and that which is another man's misery, is his mercy;
sweet shall come out of bitter; and light shall come out of darkness; and good
shall come out of evil; and comfort shall come out of sorrow; and life shall
come out of death.

Secondly, In a positive way. In a positive way. It is a clear decision of all
the questions of a troubled soul.


First, The obtaining of the forgiveness of your sins, is a clear, sure
decision of all the great Questions of a troubled soul. There are six things
concerning which we oft-times complain and question; viz.

1. Has God Elected us? 2. Are we in Covenant with God? 3. Is God reconciled
to us, and we are reconciled to him? 4. Is Christ ours, and are we his? 5. Have
we truly repented? and have we truly believed? 6. Shall these poor souls of
ours certainly be saved? have not all these been, and are not some of these the
constant debates and doubts, and questions of our hearts? Now mark what I say,
when God himself (according to his promise) forgives unto us all our sins, all
those debates are concluded and resolved; for
1. None are forgiven but the Elect of God; and all the Elect either are or
shall be forgiven their sins. Ephesians. 1. 4. Having chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world. Ver. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood,
the forgiveness of sins.

2. Whosoever have their sins forgiven, are certainly in Covenant with God; God
is their God, and they are his people. Psalm. 85. 2. Thou have forgiven the
iniquity of thy people; Thou have covered all their sins, Selah. Remission of
sins is the portion only of the Church and people of God.

3. God is certainly reconciled if sins be forgiven. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them.

4. Christ is unquestionably yours, and you are Christ's, forasmuch as the
partaking of this, and other choice benefits by him, does necessarily
presuppose a precedent union with him, and relation unto him; whom he called,
them he justified, Romans 8. 30. And what is it there to be called, but to be
brought in effectually to Christ? and what is it to be justified, but to be
pardoned?

5. And so for Repentance and Faith, certainly they have been true, if
forgiveness of sins have been granted unto you, because to none but unto such
who do truly repent, and who do truly believe, is forgiveness of sins promised.

6. And lastly, If your sins be forgiven, you shall be undoubtedly saved. Romans
8. 30. Whom he justified, them also he glorified: So Acts 26. 18. That they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified.

Secondly, If your sins be forgiven you, then your way is opened and cleared,
You have access to God with all boldness.
with all boldness of access and confidence to your God and Father. There are
three choice Cordials and Encouragements to all who have obtained pardoning
mercy.

1. They may look upon their God as sitting altogether and always on his Throne
of grace and mercy; as their loving God, as their kind God, as their good God,
as their Father, as their Helper, as their Savior. O what a sight of God is
that sight of him in heaven, where there is love, and nothing but love; peace,
and nothing but peace; joy, and nothing but joy; favor, and nothing but
favor; blessed communion, and nothing but blessed communion! Such a kind of
sight of God have justified and pardoned persons here on earth; they may now
look on God as their God, as their Father, as loving of them, delighting in
them, and rejoicing over them to do them good; and what should hinder them to
come with a filial confidence to such a God and Father?

2. They may look up unto him for any mercy which they do need, and which he
does promise unto them. Psalm. 81. 10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and
in loving kindness, and in mercy. Ver. 21. And it shall come to pass in that
day I will hear says the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and the heavens shall
hear the earth. Ver. 22. And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and
the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel. Beloved, there is no partition wall but
sin; nothing that separates between God and us, but sin; nothing that hinders
good things from us, but sin; now if that partition wall be broken down, (as
certainly it is when sin is forgiven) there is nothing on your part to hinder
you from asking, and nothing on Gods part to withold him from giving any
thing that is good unto you.

3. They may look on all their enjoyments as mercies, as the fruits of love
with marvailous contentment and delight; mercies are sure and sweet unto them*
As every one of the Vessels had that inscription upon it, (Holiness to the
Lord) so every receipt which the forgiven sinner partakes of has this
superscription on it, A token of love from the reconciled God; you have the
bond and the seal, the wine and the sugar, the day and the Sunshine, mercies
from mercy, mercies in mercy, this and that, and my sins pardoned.

Thirdly, If your sins be forgiven you, this will be a great support, strength,
It will be ^ great support in all times and occurrences whatsoever. In times of
outward wants.
relief, upholdment unto you in all occurrences wha^soever, and in all times
whatsoever.

1. In times of outward wants and straits; as Lactantius said of Lazarus, he
was sine domo, but not sine Domino; sine vest, but not sine Fide; sine cibo,
but not sine Christo: The like may we say of the pardoned person, he may be
without money, but not without mercy; he may be without friends, but he is not
without a Father; he may be without outward mercies, but he is not without the
God of mercies; his body may want riches, but his soul is not without
forgiveness: God is his forgiving God, and his reconciling God, and his blessed
God and portion for ever and ever.

2. In time of outward troubles; when all the world is in combustion and
distraction, and there is no rest nor peace to be found amongst men, why then
can the pardoned sinner find rest and peace; peace in his God, and peace in his
In time of outward troubles.
Christ, and peace in his conscience; my sins are pardoned, it is God that
justifies me; he is at peace with me, and I am so with him, and therefore I can
rejoice in tribulation it self.

3. In times of losses and trials: God has taken away this friend, and that
parent; this child, and that comfort; but he has not taken away his
loving kindness In times of losses and ^ryals.
from me: It Is but a cross, it is not a curse; it is but a refining fire, it is
not a consuming fire; it is but the rod of Father, it is not the word of a Judge;
it is to heal and pacify, it is not to harden and destroy; it is but the physic
of love, it is not the sting of wrath; for if sins be pardoned, then enjoyments
are from love, and then losses are from love: If God gives, that is in mercy;
if God takes away, that also is in mercy. O Sirs, a loss, a cross sits heavily
on the heart, when the guilt of sin sits strongly on the conscience; but if the
guilt be taken off there, (as certainly it is upon the forgiveness of sins)
then may a man take up the cross, and kiss it, then may he stoop down, and bear
it; then may he take in a mercy, and rejoice; and then can he give back a
mercy, and bless, that God who has given, and now has taken, etc.

4. In times of sickness and death; when all the world is leaving of us, and
when we are leaving all the world, and the short minute of time is expiring, In
times of sickness and death.
and the larger date of eternity is appearing; when Physicians say there is no
hope, and friends are taking their farewell for ever, and no earthy thing can be
of comfort or relief: O then the fiduciary apprehension of a reconciling
Christ, and of a reconciled God, and of all our sins as pardoned; why this
revives, this stays, this chears up our spirits, this is better than life, this
is life in death: Now let thy servant depart in peace, said Simeon, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation; now let me dye, and go to my God and Father; it
is certain, that that man may look on death with joy, who can look on Christ,
and the forgiveness of his sins with faith.

5. In times of temptations; How many temptations are answered, if once our
sins are pardoned. In times of temptation^.


1. God will damn thee for thy sins; O no; he has pardoned my sins, and
therefore he will not damn me for them.

2. But do not thy sins deserve hell and damnation? they do so, but God has
forgiven according to the riches of his grace in the blood of Christ.

3. But think thou that God will not one time or another remember thy sins,
and judge thee for them? O no; he says that he will forgive iniquity, and
remember my sin no more.

4. But do thou not see that he remembers thy sins, when his hand lies now so
heavy upon thee? O no; this is no judicial remembrance, but a paternal
chastisement.

5. But certainly God loves thee not; nay; if he had not loved me freely, he
would never have justified me freely.

6. But thou have nothing to do with Christ, nor ever shall thou have benefit
by Christ. Why this is strange, that my sins are forgiven me for his Names
sake, yet that I should have no part in Christ, and no benefit by Christ.

7. But God is still displeased, and angry with thee. No; for he has taken
away iniquity, and therefore his anger is turned away from me.

8. But God will not hear any prayer which thou make, nor may thou be
admitted into any communion with him. O but this is false; for God himself has
said, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my people shall humble themselves and pray, and seek
my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven, and
forgive their sins, and will heal their Land. Ver. 15. And mine eyes shall be
open, and mine ears attend unto the prayer that is made in this place.

9. But what good will the pardon of thy sins do thee, as long as thy sins rule
and prevail over thee? O but that God who pardons iniquity, says also that
he will subdue our iniquities, Micah 7. 18, 19.

10. But I can and will charge thy sins upon thee, and condemn thee for them. O
but what have thou to do to charge sins, when God has discharged sins? and
what have thou to do to condemn me, if God has forgiven me? Romans 8. 33. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies.
Ver. 14. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed.

SECT. VIII.
Instruction unto all the people of God Instruction. Duties of such whose sins
are forgiven. Bless much.
whose sins God himself has forgiven.

There are five duties which do in a special manner take hold of you.

First, Bless much; How should the heart be filled with the praises of so good
a God, and be enlarged in the blessings of him! Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the Lord O
my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name. Ver. 2. Bless the Lord
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Ver. 3. Who forgiveth all thine
iniquities. Beloved,

1. Set this mercy in comparison with other mercies, and if you find just
cause to bless God for them, surely you will find more cause to bless God for
this forgiving mercy. You many times bless God for delivering your life from
death, and have you not more reason to bless God for delivering your souls from
hell? You many times bless God for delivering your bodies from pains and aches,
and have you not more reason to bless God for delivering your conscience from
wrath and terror? You many times bless God for a blessing which is but for a
time, and but for this life, and have you not more reason to bless God for this
blessing of forgiveness, which reaches to eternity, and unto everlasting life?
You bless God many times for peace with man, and have you not more reason to
bless God for peace with God? Being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
etc. Romans 5. 1. You bless God many times that all is well on earth, and no
cross befalls you; have you not more reason to bless God that all is well at
heaven, and that no curse shall ever befall you. You many times bless God that
differences and suits are taken up between you and men, so that you shall never
be troubled and punished by men, and have you not more cause to bless God that
all differences are taken off betwixt you and God, so that you shall never be
questioned, nor be damned by him?

2. Set the unpardoned sinners condition, and your pardoned condition together;
How cursed a condition that is, and how blessed a condition this is; and tell
me then whether you have not great reason to bless your God: When a sinner
lives and dies an unpardoned sinner, he lives under wrath, and dies under
wrath; he lives an enemy to God, he is a Christless person, and an hopeless
person; all his transgressions stand upon Record, and in their full power of
guilt against his soul, and all that curse and punishment which God has
threatened, and which all his sins have deserved, they shall certainly and
perfectly, and eternally be inflicted upon him; God will question him, and
convince him, and judge him, and damn him, and none shall ever be able to
deliver him, or help him; he shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, etc. Now all this would have been the portion of
your cup, had not the Lord in much mercy pardoned your iniquities and your
sins; for your sins were of the same kind, and of the same guilt, and of the
same desert as the sins of others, yet they are condemned, and you are
pardoned: They dye, and you live; wrath is inflicted on them, but mercy is
bestowed on you; they shall never see Heaven, and you shall never see Hell;
they shall be damned for ever, and you shall be saved for ever; they have no
reason to complain, because the righteous God does punish them (only) for their
sins; and you have reason to bless, because the gracious God has mercifully
prdoned your sins for his own sake.

Secondly, Love much; Love your God much, who has forgiven you much: Love much:
He frankly forgave them both; tell me therefore which of them will love him
most, Luke 7. 42. 47.

There are six Reasons why we should love God.

1. Because he is good. 2. Because he does us good. 3. Because he loves us, 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he loved us. 4. Because he sent his Son to be
the Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4. 10. 5. Because he has provided and
promised a Kingdom to them that love him, Jam. 1. 12. 6. Because he has
forgiven us our sins, and that freely, when we deserved it not, nay when we
deserved the contrary. O how should this God be loved by you, who alone share
in his love, in his Christ! in his forgiving mercy! how should your hearts be
endeared unto him, be knitted unto him, be taken and affected with him!
The Schoolmen do distinguish of a twofold love, Amor gratuitus; such a love
was Gods love to us in the forgiving of our sins: Having forgiven you, Col. 2.
13. (the word signifies freely, or graciously forgiven you) all trespasses; and
Amor debitus; such a love we do owe to God who does forgive us: all love, all
kinds of true love, and all degrees of true love.

First, A love of desire, our souls should long after him, Psalm. 73. 25.

Secondly, A love of delight, our souls should take their fill of contentmtent
and satisfaction in him.

Thirdly, A love of ecstasy, wondering and admiring at this great love and rich
mercy of God toward us; Who is a God like unto thee, who pardons iniquity?
Mich. 7. 18. But I obtained mercy: I, said Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

Fourthly, A love of similitude: Forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 32. shall we be so hardened to others, when God is
so tender to us?

Fifthly, And a love of zeal, in promoting what God loves, and does respect
his honor; and in removing what God hates and makes for his dishonor.

Sixthly, A love of friendship, to have our hearts knit unto him, and bound
unto him in an everlasting Covenant.

Thirdly, Fear much: They shall fear the Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3. 5.
There Fear much.
is forgiveness with thee that that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130. 4. He
will speak peace to his people, and to his Saints, but let them not turn again
to folly, Psalm. 85. 8. No man should have a more tender Conscience, than he who
has gained a pacified Conscience: None more fear to commit sin, than he whose
sins God has remitted; though God can multiply pardons, yet it is not good nor
safe for you to put him to it. It is the right and proper improving of
forgiveness of sins, to watch our hearts, and to take heed that we sin no more:
It argues a profaneness of heart to sin because God is merciful; so it argues a
most wicked heart to sin after God has shown mercy in the forgiving of sins.
Is forgiveness of sins so cheap and ordinary, that you will again venture to
sin! Did it cost Jesus Christ his precious blood to purchase the forgiveness of
sins, and will thou as it were crucify him again to procure thee another
pardon? Did it cost thee so many troubles of heart and confession, and
supplication to gain forgiveness of former sins, and will thou break thy bones
again, that mercy may set them again! did God show unto thee such riches of
grace after all the evil thou had committed, to discharge thee, to be
reconciled unto thee, to quiet and pacify thy Conscience, to pass by all, and
will thou now break the Laws of Love, and Bonds of Friendship, to sin and
provoke a pardoning and a kind God?

Fourthly, Improve much this singular mercy that ye are within the promise
Improve much.
of the forgiveness of your sins: Improve this four ways;

1. As to what depends upon it. 2. As to what accompanies it. 3. As to what may
still preserve you in the sweet and comfortable fruition of it. 4. As to what
you may conclude from it, both a part Ante, and a part Post.
First, Improve it as to all the fruits which do depend upon it, and flow from
it: Our justification (or remission of sins) is a Root which bears very
precious fruit, Improve it as to all the fruits which depend upon it.
and a Fountain from which do flow many sweet streams: Thence arises all the
peace in Conscience; thence arises all the transcendent joy of the heart;
thence arises all the hope of the soul; thence arises your great confidence
in your communion with God. Peace in Conscience depends on peace with God,
which certainly you have when God forgives your sins: And therefore beseech the
Lord to speak this peace unto you: O Lord, thou say in thy promise unto me,
thy sins are forgiven; now I beseech thee say unto my Conscience, Go in peace,
live in peace, peace be unto thee; in forgiving thou respectest thy glory and
my comfort; say unto my Conscience, Neither trouble, nor be troubled more; let
me know that I have found grace in thine eyes, let grace and peace come from
thee. Joy of heart, this also springs from forgiveness of sins received by
Faith: A condemned Malefactor has no cause to joy, but the pardoned sinner
has, Romans 5. 11. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have
received the atonement. Psalm. 51. 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that
the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Sin brake his bones (his
strength, his comfort, his joys) and the forgiveness of sin, the news of that,
the hearing of that, the knowledge of that would be a ground of joy and
gladness to him. O thou pardoned sinner, why do thou walk so heavily, so
dejectedly, so pensively, so unchearfully? is not the promise of forgiveness of
thy sins clear and open to thee? and should not a forgiven sinner rejoice? God
rejoices when he shows us mercy, and should not we rejoice when we receive
mercy: Indeed when we seek for pardoning mercy, we should seek it with tears;
but when we have found mercy we should go home with joy.

Beloved, pardoned sinners may rejoice, and should rejoice: In whom after ye
believed, ye rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory, ^ Pet. 1. 8.
Should not the forgiveness of of sins, a passing from death to life, from wrath
to love, from hell to heaven, and the enjoying of God as our God, and as our
Friend, and as our Father, are not here causes good enough, sufficient to
^ejoyce in the Lord? Therefore in the times of your sadness cheer your hearts,
and expostulate with your hearts, why are you thus cast down? and why walk you
thus heavily? what, God your God! what, Christ your Christ! and all your sins
freely forgiven! and out of all danger, and within all hopes, and yet be so
heavy! etc.

Secondly, Improve the forgiveness of sins, as to what accompanies a forgiven
Improve it as to what accompanies a pardoned condition.
condition: Beloved, forgiveness of sins never goes alone in promise, nor in
participation; you shall find the great Covenant of gifts linked together in
promise, and they are jointly desired by the people of God; a false heart is
only for pardon; do you not find the new heart, and the new Spirit, and the
soft heart, and the obedient heart all conjoined with this promise of
forgiveness? Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. O then rest not here, saying, My sins are
pardoned, but press the other promises there of sanctification: O Lord subdue
mine iniquities, as well as forgive iniquities; thou have given me mercy, O
give me grace! thou have broken my fetters, O heal my diseases! thou have
covered my sins, O turn my sinful soul! enable me to bring thee glory by holy
walking, seeing thou have graciously pardoned the wickedness of my former
living!

Thirdly, Improve the forgiveness of your sins as to what may still preserve
you in Improve it as to what may still preserves you in the comfortable
fruition of it.
the sweet and comfortable fruition of it: Though one cannot lose the
forgiveness which God has given him, yet he may lose the comfortable sight and
feeling of it, either by some great transgression, or by his pride, or by his
covetousness, etc. O but do not lose the hive which has so much honey; by all
means (so) preserve this favor and this mercy, that still you may fetch joy,
and comfort, and support from it; and therefore when you have attained unto the
forgiveness of your sins, learn then

1. To walk humbly with your forgiving and reconciled God (the more is
forgiven, the more cause of humility) confessing still your unworthiness of so
great a mercy, and that God did forgive your sins, not for your sake, but for
his own Name sake; be not lifted up at all, but remember still your own sins
which God has forgiven (as Paul did) and upon what gracious terms God forgave
you: Who am I, said David; I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies, said
Jacob.

2. To walk exactly before your forgiving God; David says in Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven. Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is
the man in whose Spirit there is no guile. and Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the
undefiled in the way, who walk in the way of the Lord. Ver. 3. They do no
iniquity, they walk in his ways; O that my ways were so directed that I might
keep thy statutes!

3. To walk steadfastly with so good a God: O that we could but attain one
thing! viz. to keep up that frame of spirit, and that path or practice of
walking which we found in our selves, when God was pleased to let into our
hearts the news that our sins were forgiven, and that we could still continue
so to walk with that thankfulness, with that humbleness, with that tenderness,
with that delightfulness with that enlargement; then would our Sun still shine
with strength, then would our forgiveness still appear in sight, and would
afford unto us a long harvest of joys, and living springs of last^ng comfort.

Fourthly, Improve the forgiveness of your sins so as to be able (in your
distresses Improve it in distresses and trials, to draw comfortable conclusions
from it.
and trials) to draw out and maintain such Conclusions every way, as that mercy
is a ground and Foundation for.

Quest. You will say, What might one conclude from this that God has forgiven
his sins?

Sol. I will mention some Conclusions which may infallibly be drawn from it,
viz.

First, You may conclude the seasonable enjoyment of lesser mercies, because
God has forgiven your sins which is the greater mercy; if he fulfils his
promise in the As The seasonable enjoyment of lesser mercies.
greatest blessings, surely he will not fail you in the least blessings; as the
Apostle argued, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him to death for
us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things! Romans 8. 32. So say
I, has the Lord freely pardoned thy sins! questionless he will freely give
thee other things; will he deny thee food and raiment, who has given thee
Christ, and forgiveness? if his love extend to the greatest of mercies, will it
fail and fly off for the least of mercies?

Secondly, You may conclude that certainly you are his people, and that the
Lord That you are Gods people, and he is your God.
is your God, that you do stand in a near Relation unto him, and that he stands
in a near Relation unto you; why so? because forgiveness of sins is the
portion only of the people of God, of such who are in Covenant with him. A
Prince may forgive a Malefactor, and yet there be no Covenant between them; But
God forgives none, unless such as are first in Christ, and by Christ are in his
Covenant of mercy and peace.

Thirdly, You may conclude that in all your changes and losses certainly you
are That you are still under grace and love.
still under grace and love, that the Lord has set his love upon you, that his
favor is toward you; Because forgiveness of sins is an act of special grace
and favor; and no man is forgiven, but the Lord does love him with an
exceeding great love in and by Christ.

Object. I but I am chastened and afflicted.

Sol. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, Heb. 12. 6.

Fourthly, You may conclude certainly that God is reconciled, and that his
wrath is off, and shall never redound unto you, and that the accusation and
condemnation God is reconciled.
of the Law are stopped and superseaded, etc.

Fifthly, You may conclude that at length your souls shall go to heaven; for
your And you shall be saved.
sins are for that end forgiven, that you might be brought to glory, etc.

Fifthly, Having your sins pardoned in Gods promise, rest not until you have
got the notice and assurance of this in your own hearts and consciences: Here
let me Rest not till you have got the assurance of your pardon. God does
sometimes pardon sin, and not give the assurance of it.
speak briefly unto two things.

First, That God does sometimes pardon sins, and yet does not presently notify
or make the same manifest or evident unto the person pardoned, no not though he
truly repents: As it is clear in David, whose sin God did put away, and yet it
was a long time before David could get the evidence and assurance thereof in
his own heart: I grant that upon true repentance sin is forgiven, and it is as
true that sin may be forgiven, and yet the forgiven sinner not be assured
thereof. Whether the Reasons of this may be,

1. Because the manifestation of pardon to us is a mere act of grace and divine
liberty. 2. Or because God would teach us hereby, that it is not so easy a
matter to get the voice of joy, after we have sinned and provoked him, and
should therefore fear to ^n any more. 3. Or thirdly, because it is so difficult
to believe the forgiveness of sins, though promised by God himself, when the
Conscience has been previously troubled for sin, etc.
Secondly, That the assurance of our own hearts and consciences that God has
pardoned oer sins, is a mercy much to be desired, and would be of great
advantage Yet it is a mercy much to be desired, and of great advantage for our
Settling. Satisfying.
to pardoned sinners: For

1. This would exceedingly settle our hearts, and put an end to all our hard
suspicions, and fears, and jealousies. 2. This would abundantly satisfy the
longing desires of our souls, to see our great discharge, and relief, and
acquittance under the hand and seal of God: Return O my soul unto thy rest,
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. 3. This would admirably enlarge
our hearts in the praises of mercy, Psalm. 103. 1, 2. Enlarging.
4. This would wonderfully inflame our hearts in the love of God; the sense of
love begets love, 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he loved us Loving.
first. 5. This would most powerfully melt our hearts in filial grief, and pure
Melting.
mournings for our sins; nothing melts the heart more than the apprehension of
mercy, Zach. 12. 10. 6. This would effectually constrain us to walk in all well
pleasing before God; Obedience.
Paul obtained mercy, and returned duty. 7. This would mightily strengthen and
advance our confidence toward Confidence.
God. 8. This would make all our communions with God more pleasant and
delightful, Present communion. Cheerful endurance of afflictions.
etc. 9. This would make us patiently to bear all our afflictions, and to
rejoice under them, Mich. 7. 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned; and why so? because I am pardoned. 10. This would make
us willing to dye; Thy loving kindness is better than life; Comfortable dying.
and in death to be above death. O death, where is thy sting? the sting of
death is sin, etc. but thanks be to God who has given us the victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.
Ezekiel. 36. 25. From all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you.
THese words are a fuller and larger discovery of this sweet and gracious
promise of Gods mercy in the forgiveness of sins: They do contain in them the
quantity of that forgiving mercy, respecting both the number of sins, and the
greatness of sins; (From all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I
cleanse you.) There are two Propositions which these words do afford unto you.

1. That Gods promise of forgiveness of sins does extend unto all the sins of
all his people.

2. That though the sins of persons have been exceeding great, yet when they
become the people of Gods Covenant, even these sins also are forgiven them.

CHAP. III.
1. Doct. THat Gods promise of forgiveness of sins does extend unto all the
sins of Gods promise of forgiveness extends to all the sins of all his people.
all his people (from all, etc.) They have been guilty of Original sin, and of
Actual sin; of sins of Omission, and of Commission; of sins of Ignorance, and
of sins of Knowledge; of sins against the first Table, and against the second
Table; of sins against the Law, and sins against the Gospel; of sins in Youth,
and of sins in riper Age; of sins considered only in Kind, and of sins
considered in their aggravating Circumstances: Now all these and other sins
(all which though they are in number like unto the hairs on the head, and a^
the sand on the Sea shore, so, the Scripture alludes) of which the people of
God have been guilty; upon their repentance, and upon their faith in Christ, I
say all of them, every one of them is forgiven to them. Jer. 33. 8. I will
pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have
transgressed against me. Ezekiel. 18. 22. All his transgressions which he has
committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him (i. e.) not one of them shall.
Col. 2. 13. Having forgiven you all trespasses. ver. 14. blotting out the
handwriting of Ordinances that was against us; which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross. 1 John 1. 17. The blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Mich. 7. 19. Thou will cast all
their sins into the depth of the Sea: (Alluding as is supposed) to the drowning
of Pharaoh and all his host, Psalm. 106. 11. The waters covered their enemies,
there was not one of them left; so there is not one sin of the people of God,
which God does not pardon in the depths of his mercies, and of the blood of
Christ.

SECT. I.
NOw there are four Arguments which may demonstrate this comfortable Arguments
to demonstrate it.
truth.

First, The first shall be taken from Jesus Christ in relation to the people of
God: where observe From Jesus Christ. All the sins of Gods people were imputed
t^ him.


1. That all their sins were imputed unto Christ, Isa. 53. 6. He laid upon him
the iniquity of us all. 2 Cor. 5. 21. He has made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body
on the tree.

2. That Jesus Christ stood in their room, as to answer for all their sins,
as He sto^d as a Surety for all the^r sins.
a Surety. Heb 7. 22. He was made a Surety of a better Testament: That Surety
is that other Person who stands legally charged with all our debts, and is
bound to discharge it for us: and at his hands it is required.

3. That Jesus Christ suffered as much as all the sins of the people of God did
He suffered as much as all their sins did deserve.
deserve, and which could be inflicted on them for their sins, Gal. 3. 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us;
More than the curse of the Law could not be deserved on our parts, nor
inflicted on Gods part for our sins; and that curse (which was the
comprehension of all punishment) Christ was made for us; and for this end to
Redeem us from that curse, yea he has done so.

4. That Jesus Christ by his suffering for all their sins, did purchase for
them the He purchased the pardon of all their sins.
pardon of all their sin; I pray you to remember, This was the purpose and
intention of Christ in his sufferings, to procure the remission of sins, Matthew.
26. 28. This is my blood which is shed for the remission of sins. This was the
fruit and effect of his sufferings, Ephesians. 17. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins.

5. Nay, yet more, Jesus Christ by his sufferings did make peace between us and
He made peace between us and God.
God, and reconciled us, which could not possibly be, if he had not discharged
all our sins; for any one sin unsatisfied for, and unpardoned, hinders that
peace and Reconciliation, Col. 1. 20. He made peace through the blood of his
Cross. ver. 21. And you that were sometimes alienated and enemies has he
reconciled. v. 22. in the body of his flesh through death.

6. So did he suffer and satisfy, That there is no condemnation to any who are
in So that there is no condemnation to them.
Christ, Romans 8. 1. And who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died. ver.
34. If there be no condemnation to any in Christ, and none to condemn them,
then all their sins are pardoned; for if any sin remained without pardon, that
sin would be matter and reason of condemnation, and for that sin God himself
would condemn.

Secondly, The second Argument to demonstrate the total forgiveness of sins
From God himself.
unto the people of God, shall be taken from God himself, and some
Considerations of him in a respectiveness unto his people: Here take notice of
five particulars;

1. God will show unto his people the riches of his mercy, and the exceeding
riches of his grace, even those hidden and unsearchable Treasures of his loving
kindness, God will show his people the riches of his mercy.
such as infinitely exc^ed all the mercies, and all the kindness of men, not
only for acting, but also for thinking and comprehending; Ephesians. 2. 7. That in
the ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness
towar^s us through Jesus Christ. Chap. 3. 30. To him that is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we are able to ask or think, etc. Now
although the pardon of sin does assure us that God has mercy, and grace, yet
it must be the pardon of all our sins which does demonstrate the exceeding
riches of his grace: To pardon a few sins, and to damn us for the rest, this is
not exceeding riches of grace, nor exceeding abundance of mercy, nor exceeding
great kindness.

2. The Reasons within God himself, yea and the Reason without God, are both of
The reasons within God, and without him, are of an universal obligation.
them of an universal and total obligation from God, to pardon all the sins of
his people, as well as any one of their sins.

The Reason within God himself which moves him to forgive the sins of his
people, is his own love and grace, they are a ground of perfect mercy and
forgiveness: Now the same love and grace which moves him to pardon one, does
likewise move him to pardon all the sins of his people.

Again, the Reason of forgiveness without God, which is the meritorious
sufferings of Christ, on which God also looks (for he forgives us for Christ's
sake, Ephesians. 4. 32.) this is an universal motive; for Christ did not suffer for
some of the sins of the Elect, and not for other of their sins; he did not dye
for some of the g^eater sins only, or for some of the lesser sins only, but for
all and every one of their sins, and accordingly made such a satisfaction as
reached to the discharge of all.

3. This must necessarily be granted, that when God forgives the sins of his
Whose sins God forgives, he becomes their friend.
people, he does then show so much of his grace that he now becomes their
friend; and so much of his love toward them, that he cease to be their
enemy: O but if all their sins were not forgiven (but if some were, and some
were not) then this inequality of his grace, and partiality of his love, would
at the same time set him out as our friend, and also as our enemy; and would
also at the same time set us forth as a people of love, and a people of hatred;
so far as we are forgiven, there you see the love of a Father; and so far as we
are not forgiven, we may also see the wrath of a Judge.

4. He qualifies his people for an universal remission of their sins, in
bestowing on them such gracious qualities, upon the presence and actings
whereof, he has He qualifies his people for an universal remission.
by promise assured them of that universal Remission: For he has given such a
Repentance by which their hearts are turned from the love unto the hatred of
all sin, and from the service of all sin, to a contrary course of new
obedience: And upon this does God expressly settle a forgiveness of all sin,
Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22. He has likewise given such a Faith unto his people which
joins and unites them to Christ, and consequently gives them a full claim unto
Justification (Romans 5. 1. Being justified by Faith) Now Justification is
opposed to condemnation, Romans 8. 33, 34. and therefore it carries with it the
forgiveness of all sins.

5. There is such a Relation, and such a love between God and his people, as
The relation and love betwixt God and his people, proves it.
must necessarily take in the forgiveness of their sins: The relation is very
near, and full of love and delight in his people, and they are very dear unto
his heart, his soul delights in them, and all the tokens of his loving
kindness are sent unto them, and bestowed on them; his presence is with them,
and he takes up his habitation in their hearts, he dwells in them; they are his
Temples where they meet with him, and he with them. Now none of these would be,
if yet any of their sins stood before his eyes as unpardoned: For unpardoned
sins make a separation and distance, and so are contrary to the nearness of
union; and likewise do hold up a difference and an enmity, and so the contrary
to all gracious communion.

Thirdly, A third Argument which may demonstrate that the forgiveness of sins
is univesal (it is of all sins) to the people of God, is this, viz. The
consideration From the gracious effects of forgiveness of sins.
of forgiveness of sins as a sure ground of many precious effects redowning
thereby unto the people of God: The Scripture delivers five of them unto us.

1. One is, Peace with God, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace
with God. 2. Another is, Peace in Conscience, which if I mistake not, the
Apostle calls the peace of God which passes all understanding, Phil. 4. 7. and
Psalm. 85. 8. He will speak peace unto his people, etc. 3. A third is, Joy and
rejoicing: We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, having now received the
atonement, Romans 5. 11. 4. A fourth is, the hope of glory: The Apostle delivers
this as the proper effect of our justification, Romans 5. 1, 2. 5. A fifth is, a
boldness of access unto the throne of grace, that we may find grace and
mercy to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16. Which of these fruits could any of
the people of God enjoy, were not all their sins forgiven? Did any of their
sins yet stand upon Record, did God yet hold them guilty,
1. Ye could not say that ye have peace with God; for God is not at peace with
you, nor are ye at peace with him, whiles enmity continues between you; and so
it does whiles any sin remains unpardoned.

peace in Conscience: In three cases Conscience cannot be quieted. 1. When it
sees no forgiveness at all. 2ly When it fears it is such a forgiveness as God
will quickly recall and reverse. And 3ly, When it sees only a part of the debt
forgiven, but much, or some of it still standing upon the accomp^. O but says
Conscience, your condition is sad, and unsafe; any one of these sins (yet
unforgiven) will lose your soul, will bring you to hell.

3. And what joy can you have from a partial forgiveness only? suppose the
Malefactor be pardoned as to his theft, if yet he shall be tried and condemned,
and executed for murder, what joy can he have?

4. Again, where were the hope of glory? has the unpardoned sinner any hope of
heaven? does not every sin deserve the loss of heavenly glory? and will it not
effectually and eventually prove so, unless God pardons it?

5. Where is the liberty of access, and boldness of approaching to God, if any
of your sins are unpardoned? the very spirit of fear and bondage lies still on
you, that God is not reconciled to you, but is your enemy, and he will not own
and bless you, but will reject and curse you, and will bring on you all the
evil that he has threatened.

Fourthly, A fourth Argument to prove that God will forgive all the sins of We
are to forgive all the trespasses against us.
his people, is this, We are to forgive all the trespasses of an offending
brother, in case he repent, Luke 17. 4. If he trespass against thee seven times
in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou
shall forgive him. Now we are to forgive our brother, as God forgives us
(Ephesians. 4. 32. Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven us; his forgiving is a pattern to our forgiving, and he would have
ours to be universal, therefore his is so to us: Matthew. 18. 32. I forgave thee
all that debt, because thou desiredst me. Verse 33. Should not thou also have
had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee?

Thus have you heard the Assertion cleared by Scripture and Arguments, that God
will fo^give all the sins of his people. Now before I pass to the useful
Application of (...) unto our selves, I would speak something unto a Question
much agitated amongst the Learned and others, viz.

SECT. II.
Quest. Whether God (which promises to pardon all the sins of his people)
does Whether all sins be pardoned together at once.
pardon all their sins Simul, and Semel, together and at once? all sins past
which his people have committed, and all sins present which they do commit,
and, all sins future which they may hereafter commit.

Sol. This is (I confess) a very nice question, and has (if it be well
weighed) something of difficulty in it, peremptorily to resolve it: And there
are very godly and learned men, who have spoken and written differently
concerning it, and yet all of them consent in this, That God does forgive all
the sins of his people: If it might not be burdensome unto you, I would

1. Present unto you the several opinions of men, with their chief Arguments
for their different opinions concerning this Question. 2. Offer my own private
thoughts concerning this Controversy.
First, Some are for the Affirmative, and their opinion is this, that as soon
as Some are for the affirmative
any are made Believers in Christ (and so are within the Covenant Actually) all
the sins which they have committed in time past, and all the sins which they
are guilty of as to the time present, and all the sins of which they do come to
be guilty of in time future, they are actually pardoned unto them, in general
and in particular: Neither are Believers ever henceforth to pray unto God for
the pardon of any sin which they do or shall commit, but only for the assurance
of the pardon of them in their own Consciences; neither is any future
Repentance required to attain the forgiveness of any new and future sin; but
only for the more comfortable assurance of former forgiveness unto our selves:
Nay Repentance is not required of God as an Antecedent work to pardon of sins,
but only as a consequent work and fruit thereof, etc. This is their Opinion.

Quest. Now what might be the ground inducing unto this Opinion, That all the
sins of a believer, not only past, but also present, and to come, are pardoned
ot once, and The grounds for the affirmative.
actually unto them?

Sol. The chief which I do find in writing are these.

First, The Covenant expressions: Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he which blotteth
out thy transgressions Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful unto their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities I will remember no more.
Ergo, all is pardoned at once.

Secondly, Again, Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus. And Ver. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?
it is God that justifies. And ver. 38, 39. Nor things present, nor things to
come shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord. And Joh. 5. 24. He that hears my word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
passed from death to life. Ergo, all sins are pardoned at once, or else they
were in a state of condemnation, etc.

Thirdly, A believer (even when he sins) is still united to Christ, and is
clothed with the righteousness of Christ, which covers all our sins, and
discharges us from them, so that no guilt shall redound to us.

Fourthly, A believer is not to fear curse, or hell at all, which he might do,
if all his sins were not pardoned at once, but some of his new sins were for a
while unpardoned.

Fifthly, Repentance is not at all required for our justification (where our
pardon is only to be found) but only faith; therefore pardon of sins is not
suspended until we repent of our sins.

Sixthly, Again, if new sins were not pardoned until you do repent, then we
should be left to an uncertainty whiles our sins be pardoned, or when they will
be pardoned; for it may be long ere we repent, and more long ere we can know
that we do truly repent of our sins.

Seventhly, If all sins were not forgiven at once, then justification is not
perfect at once, but is more and more increased and perfected, as more and more
sins are pardoned, which (as they conceive) cannot consist with the true
Doctrine of Justification.

These are the chiefest and strongest Arguments which I have read for the
Affirmative Some for the Negative.
Opinion, and I have delivered them rather with advantage than with any
prejudice.

Secondly, Nevertheless, there are others of the Negative and contrary Opinion
unto this, who although they do hold that God has pardoned all sins past unto
believers (brought into Covenant with Christ) and that he will pardon also all
the sins of which hereafter they shall be guilty, yet they do conjecture, that
all these are not forgiven (at once) unto them, but upon (though not for) their
renewed repentance for them, and upon a renewed act of Faith on Christ for the
particular forgiveness of new and particular transgressions unto them: Neither
do they lay any Popish reason of worthiness, or merit in Repentance (as some
unjustly do charge upon them) for the forgiveness of any sin (old or new) but
do urge Repentance in relation to forgiveness upon those very accounts, which
(as they The grounds for it.
conceive) the Scripture promises of forgiveness do require: Now the Arguments
produced for this opinion (that God does not pardon all sins past, present, and
to come, at once and together) are these.

First, Those very Covenant expressions respecting the pardon of sin, which the
former Opinion used to the contrary, e. g. Heb. 8. 12. Their iniquities I will
remember no more: Not to remember iniquity any more, does (say they) in common
sense, suppose say they, that that iniquity was before; for if it never yet
was, it cannot be said to be remembered at all, nor to be remembered any more; So
that passage in Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity. and Jer. 33. 8, I
will pardon all their iniquities: do suppose an iniquity or offense committed:
For if it be not yet committed, how can it be properly said to be forgiven?
unless (as Bishop Downham says) we will make God like the Pope, who aforehand
forgave sins Of the Coven. Chapter 8 p. 119.
to come, which never yet were committed? So Isa. 43. 25. I am he that blotteth
out thy transgressions: where pardoning of sins is compared to the blotting out
of debts entered into a book: But say they, debts which as yet never were made,
may not be entered into the book, and therefore cannot be said to be blotted
out; and consequently sins yet to come, cannot be said already to be pardoned.

Secondly, other Sriptures (purposely) speaking of the forgiveness of sins,
have a restrainedness unto sins committed, and look only at them, Jer. 33. 8. I
will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned, and whereby they
have transgressed against me. Mark, have sinned, and have transgressed!
respecting the sins past, not what they shall commit, which if already
forgiven, must have come in also, which they have sinned, and which they shall
sin. Ezekiel. 18. 22. All the transgressions that he has committed shall not be
mentioned unto him. 1 John 2. 1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father. Here Christ makes intercession for sin as an Advocate, but it is upon
this supposition, if any man sin, as if sin must be committed before he makes
Intercession for their pardon of it: As in the Old Testament there were no
sacrifices for any future sin, but all the sacrifices for sin were for sins
already committed so; etc.

Thirdly, These conditional qualifications which God himself makes, with
respect to the forgiveness of sins (and therefore I wonder how any one dare to
call them Popish and Antichristian) they do necessarily suppose a precedent
Commission of sins: vide 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my people which were called by my
Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways, then will I forgive their sin. 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our sins. Prove. 28. 13. He that
confesses and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy. Acts 3. 19 Repent and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Mark, if my people shall humble
themselves, if they shall pray, if they shall tu^n from their wicked ways; If
we confess our sins, etc. All these penitential Qualifications (which God makes
Antecedents unto forgiveness) do suppose a peculiar respect unto sins already
committed; for, does God put us to humble our hearts for s^n which we never yet
committed, or for sins only which we have committed? does God put it upon us to
pray for mercy, to pardon sins which never were, or sins which have been? would
he have us to confess these sins which never yet were in being to offend him,
or only such whereby we have offended him? does he at any time enjoin us to
forsake, and turn from sins which perhaps we never thought on, much less
actually fell into, or else the sin in which we have walked, and into which we
have fallen? Why then, say they, if these be required for forgiveness, and
these respect sins only that are past, then all sins past, present, and to
come, are not pardoned at once.

Fourthly, If all sins (past, present, and to come) are forgiven at once unto
believers, then no believer is to pray unto God for the forgiveness of any sin
which he commits after he is once brought in to Christ; yet Jesus Christ does
teach even believers to pray, Forgive us our trespasses, Matthew. 6. 12. Luke 11.
4. For he teaches them thus to pray, who could upon good grounds call God
their Father, which none can but true Believers.

Here some do think to evade the strength of this Argument by distinguishing
'twixt pardon of sin, and the manifestation of that pardon unto the soul: They
grant that Believers do pray for the pardon of their sins committed in respect
of the manifestation thereof unto their consciences, but not for any new act of
remission as unto sin committed before God.

Unto which there is a double Reply.

1. One, that it cannot easily be demonstrated in Scripture that to pray for
the forgiveness of sin, is any where so to be taken, as to mean (only) the
manifestation of forgiveness, and not the act of forgiveness: And in the
Petition (before mentioned) it seems it cannot hold: For Christ teaches us to
pray unto God, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us; now our forgiving of their trespasses is not only in way of
manifestation to the trespasser, but also in a real precedent act of
condonation.

2. The other is, that the Saints in Scripture when they sinned against God,
did humbly acknowledge their sins, and did earnestly pray unto God, first, for
the pardon of those sins; and next for the manifestation of that pardon; e. g.
David, in Psalm. 51. 1. prays expressly for the pardon of those great sins which
he had committed, Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness,
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions: He
uses the very same Phrase, which God himself uses in his Covenant for the
actual fogiving of sins, I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, Isa. 43.
25. so he blotteth out my transgressions, and not for a mere manifestation
only. And after this he prays for the manifestation and sense of the
forgiveness of his sins, in ver. 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the
bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

Fifthly, It is possible that a believing person may fall into such a sin, or
sins of scandal, for which he may be justly cast out from the visible Church,
and upon his neglect of Repentance, or practice of Repentance, he stands bound,
or loosed from his sin, not only in earth, but also in heaven; for so Christ
himself delivers it to us, in Matthew. 18. 18. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever
you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. But this cannot possibly be, if all
his sins be already pardoned in heaven; for then he is always loosed, and
never bound in heaven. This Argument is of that strength, that I do not see how
it can be answered: for if upon the right sentence of the Church of Christ, the
offender is bound in heaven as well as on earth in respect of his sins, then
his sins are not all pardoned at once; and if upon repentance he is loosed in
heaven (i. e.) absolved and forgiven, as well as loosed on earth; thence also
it follows that all his sins past, present, and to come, are not at once
forgiven in heaven: take the one or the other, or both, still it shakes that
Opinion of a forgiveness of all sins at once.

Sixthly, If all sins (past, present, and to come) are forgiven at once, before
they are repented of, then a Regenerate and a justified person in the midst of
his grossest sins (as suppose David's adultery and murder) may joy and rejoice
as much in God, and look on him as well pleased, as when they do humble their
soul, and repent, and seek his face.

To this one Francis Cornwell answers freely and plainly; When sin is most In
lib. of the difference between Legal and Evangelical repentance, p. 54.
prevalent, and the heart is most hardened (he speaks expressly of Regenerate
and justified persons) yet then can they glory in Christ Jesus with a large
heart breaking forth into thanksgiving, as Paul did, Romans 7. 25. I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Yea, and he that commits a gross sin, and
doubts the pardon of it, commits a double sin; the one against his
Sanctification, and the other against his Justification: And what though a
believer (usually upon the page 56.
committing of gross sins) doubts of his estate? this is from a defect in
faith, and not from any Rule and Precept of Gods Word.

And that it is all one, and alike unto God, when a person is humbled, or not
humbled; and when he repents and forsakes his gross sins, or repents not of
them, but continues in them; for all is already pardoned on Gods part, etc.

But these strange deliveries are contrary

1. To the Word, which in case of gross transgressio^^ calls for humbling, and
mourning, and repenting of the heart, and weeping, an^ ^^plication, because God
is dishonored and displeased. 2. To the exigence in all the children of God so
fallen, who thereupon have broken their peace, and lost their joy, and
exceedingly interrupted their confidence with fear. 3. To the Assertion of
these very men who do hold, that in case of gross transgression, there must be
deep humiliations to get assurance and joy.
Seventhly, To these another Reason may be added, and is added by some, that
forgiveness of sin is a judicial act in God, as the contrary act of condemning
is; now the Judge neither condemns, nor yet forgives offenses which are not
extant, and which cannot be proved upon the Offender, that ever he was guilty
of them: But when they are charged, and pleaded, then does he condemn or
acquit; so it would be strange for a Judge to condemn one for faults not
committed, and so acquit a man for sins never in being, and so not deserving
punishment.

Eighthly, Lastly, the great and continual work of Christ in heaven as our
Intercessor and Advocate, 1 John 1. 2. and the daily suing out of pardon in his
Name, and for his sake, seems to carry much in it for the acquiring of daily
pardon, and continued forgiveness of sins: His great work of Intercession and
Advocater-ship, surely it contains in it something more than to obtain an
assurance that all is still pardoned.

Thus have I delievered unto you the two different Opinions, with their several
Arguments concerning this great Question, whether all the sins of believers
(past, present, and to come) are pardoned by God at once. Now I shall make bold
to deliver unto you my own thoughts concerning it, and those different Opinions
about it. The truth concerning these different Opinions. They agree in five
particulars.


First, I do observe that they do both agree in five particulars. e. g.

1. That as to Gods eternal decree or purpose of forgiveness, all the sins
of his people are forgiven. God did not intend to forgive some of their sins
and not the rest; but an universal, and full, and complete forgiveness was
fixedly purposed and resolved on by God.

2. That all the sins of his people (in their absolute number, from first to
last) were laid upon Christ; who in the days of his suffering did
meritoriously purchase perfect Remission of all their sins, to be applied in
future times to them and by them.

3. That as soon as ever any person is brought into the Covenant by believing
on Jesus Christ; all his sins past (whatsoever they have been) they are
actually forgiven unto him, and God will never remember them any more.

4. That as to the state of Justification, there is a full and perfect
remission of all sins (considered under the differences of time past, present,
and to come) As in the state of condemnation there is not any one thing
pardoned, so in the state of Justification there is not any one sin but is
pardoned; for the estate of Justification is opposite to all condemnation, and
curse, and wrath.

5. That no Repentance or work of ours is a meritorious cause (neither God, nor
any true believer looks on it as so) of Justification, or pardon of any sin;
neither the repentance which we call Initial, neither that which we call
Renewed; we acknowledge no meritorious cause of pardon of sins, but the blood
of Christ.

Secondly, The maine differences which I do observe, do rest in two The
differences betwixt them.
things.

1. One is, that sins not yet committed are actually pardoned, and we are to
believe so, say the one party; not so, say the other party, until committed or
repented.

2. Repentance is required say both of them, but with this difference, because
sin is pardoned say the one; but the other say, that sin may be pardoned. That
we may have the comfortable sense and experience of pardon, say the one; that
we may have the^ (...) forgiveness, as well as the comfort of it, say the other.

In this difference, my own judgment inclines to that Opinion which holds, That
all the sins past of a Believer are (at once) forgiven, and all his future sins
are remitted unto him upon renewed acts of believing and repenting for Christ's
sake. If that Opinion be true that Justification be one continuing, or
continued act, this would reconcile all.

To me this Opinion

1. Has clear grounds in the Scripture. 2. Does best suit with the Covenant,
which in this case still suits Faith and Repentance together. 3. Does best
agree with the ways which God still has put his people upon, in relation to
forgiveness. 4. And with the practice of the Saints all along. 5. And it seems
to be a strong Guard against presumption and carnal security, and looseness. 6.
And has no direct natural appearance of inconveniences in or from it.
Object. Whereas they say this is Popish and Legal.

Sol. They speak ignorantly, if not maliciously; for they know that Jesus
Christ in the Gospel-Commission joined Repentance and Remission of sins: It is
as Popish to say Repentance is required for Assurance as for Remission, for
both are acts of grace.

Object. But what if one should die before he repents?

Sol. And what if he should not dye? That God who has promised renewing mercy,
has likewise promised renewed repentance.

Object. But a man may be damned for the sins committed, if all be not
forgiven at once?

Sol. 1. As if a particular sin destroyed the state of Justification.

2. What a sin deserves is one thing; what it shall redundantly and eventually
bring on the person, is another thing.

3. Though God does not forgive all the sins at once, yet he will certainly
forgive them unto his people, when committed, and when repented of; for God
has promised so to pardon them: And no one promise of God can be showed to the
contrary. It was Fulgentius his prayer, Domine da poenitentiam and postea
indulgentiam.

Object. But God justifies the ungodly; therefore no need of subsequent
repentance in relation to forgiveness.

Sol. 1. Nay and put in too, any Repentance or Faith at all, for God justifies
the ungodly.

2. But he justifies the ungodly, (i. e.) a man stands before God when he
justifies him, as a poor undone sinner, having no righteousness of his own; nor
is Repentance required as the meritorious, or as the material cause of
Justification; but as a means to enjoy what God has p^omised to the believer.

Having thus waded through this great Controversy, I shall now proceed unto
the useful Application of the Doctrine, That God does promise to forgive all
the sins of his people.

SECT. III.
Use 1. THe first Use shall be of Information; It may inform us of five
Information.
things.

1. Of that exceeding greatness of mercy which is in God. 2. Of that exceeding
love and kindness which is in God unto his people. 3. Of what a heavy weight
did lie upon Jesus Christ. 4. Of the high Obligations which rest upon us who do
enjoy this promise of universal forgiveness. 5. Then multitude of sins is not
absolutely inconsistent with pardon.
First, In that God engages himself by promise to forgive all the sins of all
That God is a God of infinite mercy.
his people, This does manifestly declare unto us, that he is a God of infinite
mercy; must he not needs be so, who forgives such a number of sins and
transgressions.

There are two things which discover unto us the infinite fullness and depth of
mercy in God.

One is, that vast Title attributed unto him, and his mercy: He is said to be
of great mercy, Psalm. 105. 8. and to be rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. and to be
plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86. 15. and to pardon abundantly, Isa. 55. 7. 1 Pet.
1, 3. according to his abundant mercy: and to keep mercy for thousands, Exodus
34. 7. and to be of everlasting mercy, Psalm. 100. 5. and to be of transcendent
and incomparable mercy (As the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his
mercy toward them that fear him, Psalm. 103. 11.) In like manner there are
ascribed to his mercy and mercies a multitude, Psalm. 51. 1. According to the
multitude of thy tender mercies. A depth, Mich. 7. 19. Thou will cast all their
sins into the depth of the sea. Not only an abundance, but an exceeding
abundance: 1 Timothy 1. 14. The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant. Nay an
over abundance: where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, Romans 5. 23. It
did superabound, etc.

2ly The other is the vast quantity of sins of which the people of God have
been guilty: Who (says David, Psalm. 19. 12.) can understand his errors? (i.
e.) the number of a man's sins is so numerous, that with all the Arithmetic he
has, he is not able to cast up how often he has sinned. Nay, David surveying
the number of his own sins, he is non-plused, and professes that they are
innumerable, and that they are more than the hairs of his head, Psalm. 40. 12.
And Ezra in his confession, Chap. 9. 6. Our iniquities are increased over our
heads, and our trespass is grown up into the heavens. Now if the number of
sins in respect of one person be so innumerable; what then is the number of all
the sins of all the people of God? yet there is mercy enough in God to pardon
all and every one of them: To pardon ^^ their sins which they do know, and
all the rest which they do not know.

Secondly, In that God does pardon all the sins of all his people; this does
likewise discover the exceeding love and kindness of God to his people: The
Apostle The exceeding love and kindness of God to his people.
says, in 1 Pet. 4. 8. That Charity or love covers a multitude of sins,
and that he that converts a sinner, shall hide a multitude of sins, Jam. 5. 20.
Certainly then it shows exceeding love in God to cover, to blot out, to forget,
to pass over, to pardon all the multitude of sins in his own people: To injure
God, is infinitely more than to injure man; to offend and dishonor him, is
infinitely more than to offend and dishonor man; and for God to pass by all
this, it must needs flow from his infinite love and kindness; and therefore God
is said (Romans 5. 8.) To commend (or highly to exalt) his love toward us, in
that whiles we were yet sinners, Christ died for us; and to show the exceeding
riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 7.
And the forgiveness of our sins is rightly attributed to the riches of his
grace, E^^es. 1. 7.

Thirdly, in that God forgives all the sins of all his people, this may inform
us, What a heavy weight did lie upon Christ.
What an heavy weight did lie upon Jesus Christ, and of that wonderful power
and virtue of his sufferings. There is no man who is able to express the
surpassing desert and burden in any one particular sin: we find (many times)
that some one sin (set on with the wrath of God) does drive us to our feet; it
is more unto us than the shadows of death; it does fill us with such
distractions and horror, that we can neither live nor dye; we are not able to
sustain it, nor yet to decline it: what work then would all our sins make
within us, if the Lord should in wrath return them upon us? Now all the sins of
all the people of God (from the beginning of the world to the end thereof) were
in all their kinds, and numbers, and aggravations laid upon Jesus Christ, he
bare all our sins; he was made sin for us, and a curse for us: How heavy was
this burden, all the sins of all the Elect (at once) lying upon him! and all
the curse, and all the wrath due unto those sins (at once also) lying upon him!
no marvel that he did sweat drops of blood, and cried out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? And yet all this he went through, and so endured, as
that he satisfied the very Justice of God for all these sins, and purchased the
discharge or forgiveness of all those sins, which he could never have done, had
he not been both God and Man, and of infinite dignity, and merit, and power.

Fourthly, This likewise may inform the people of God, what exceeding
Obligations What Obligations he upon us unto our God.
do lie upon their souls unto their God, who forgiveth all their iniquities,
transgr^ssions and sins, Psalm. 103. 2. When some few of them heretofore fell
into your Consciences, you would have given (if you had possessed it) all the
world to have gained but a hopeful possibility and probability of pardoning
mercy; but now you are come to a certainty, the Lord himself assures you in his
word of promise, that he will forgive, not a few sins only, but all your sins;
O beloved, how should your souls love your God, and bless your God who forgives
all your sins, and casts them all into the depths of the Sea! why, every one of
your sins would have been the loss of heaven, and a curse, and an hell, and a
damnation, and an eternal wrath unto you, had not the Lord been merciful unto
you in the forgiveness of it, or them: But now God will discharge you of all,
and blot out all, so that damned you cannot be, and saved you shall be; O the
depth of love and mercy, and kindness to your souls! meditate more of them, be
taken up more with them, and as you are the only objects of riches of mercy, so
strive to express your selves the choicest people in exactness of love and life
answerable to your mercy:

Fifthly, This (that God promises to pardon all the sins of all his people)
may A multitude of sins is not inconsistent with pardoning mercy.
likewise inform us that no, not a mltitude of sins (though the number be
exceedind large and exceedingly increased) Is always an absolute prejudice or
bar, or inconsistent with pardoning mercy; this consequence is clear and sound;
for if God will pardon all the sins of all his people, and their sins are
multitudes of sins, and (in some sort) innumerable, then certainly a large
number of sinnings is not absolutely inconsistent with forgiveness; not that
every one who is guilty of a number or multitude of sins, is, or shall be
certainly forgiven; but that the multitude of sins is not an absolute bar or
exclusion, so as to make the condition hopeless and unpardonable: All manter of
sin and blasphemy (says Christ) shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men, Matthew. 12. 31. where he
plainly expresses a capability of forgiveness for any sin or sins, the sin
against the Holy Ghost only excepted; which may be a singular preservation
against despair, etc.

SECT. IV.
Exhortation, unto all the people of God, and that unto two duties. Exhort.
1. To believe this truth. 2. To make use of this truth.

First, To believe this gracious promise of their God unto them. As the Apostle
To believe this truth.
spoke unto them of Antioch, Men and Brethren, Children of the stock of
Abraham, and whosoever among you fears God, to you is the Word of this
Salvation sent, Acts 13. 26. so say I unto all of you who are brought into
Christ by faith, and by him are brought into Covenant with God, unto you I say
is this promise of mercy made; (I will pardon all your iniquities; from all
your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.)

For the better managing of this Point, I will lay down four Conclusions.

1. The people of God may believe this truth. 2. Many times they do not believe
it for themselves. 3. It is very difficult in many cases to believe the same.
4. It is necessary for them at all times to believe and apply it.
First, The people of God may believe this truth, that God will forgive all The
people of God may believe this truth.
their sins; they have very good ground and warrant so to do; for

1. They have not merely a single promise from God to this purpose, (which yet
were sufficient warrant) but manifold promises; they have the same promise
multiplied, often transcribed, and that not darkly and doubtfully, but clearly
and plainly, Jer. 33. 8. Micah* 7. 19, etc.

2. They are the very people unto whom this renewed promise is made; they are
believers, they are converted and renewed, they have the very Characters of the
Covenant stamped and sealed upon their hearts and lives.

3. They have Jesus Christ (1. In his Person. 2. Mediatorship. 3. Purchase. 4.
Benefits.) to be their Mediator both of Redemption and Intercession, who was
once offered to bear the sins of many, Hebr. 9. 28. and is entered into heaven
it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, Ver. 24. It is no more
than Christ has purchased, nor than Christ will so apply unto you, nor than
God intended for you, when he sent Christ into the world.

4. What other of the people of God have found and applied, that may they
believe; but Psalm. 85. 2. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou
have covered all their sin, Selah. Psalm. 103. 3. Who forgiveth all their
iniquities; this may they believe.

Secondly, Though the people of God may believe that God will forgive all Yet
many times they do not believe it.
their sins, yet many times they do not believe it; for many times

1. They do not believe lesser matters, a few earthly mercies, Matthew. 6. 2.
They cannot believe that God will forgive any one of their sins which they
have committed, but do fear the wrath of God exceedingly. 3. They stick a long
time upon some particular sins, and are in long debates concerning the
intention and will of Divine mercy as to the pardon of them; yea, and conclude
very often that the Lord will never pass them by. 4. Upon new commissions, they
are so far from believing their pardon, that they do question whether God has
(indeed) pardoned their old and former transgrestions. 5. They doubt and fear
whether it be not presumption in them to believe the forgiveness of all their
sins.
Thirdly, It is (unquestionably) a very difficult matter for any one to believe
It is a difficult matter to believe it.
that God will forgive all his sins, especially when a person does distinctly
and seriously consider them in their number and circumstances, and the heart is
really sensible of the injuries against God in them. O how much oft-times has
he been provoked and dishonored! Psalm. 40. 12. Innumerable evils have
compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold of me, so that I am not
able to look up; they are more than the hairs of my head, therefore my heart
fails me. Mark, he is not able to look up, and his heart fails him: O
thinks he, here is such a number of sins indeed; will the Lord ever pardon all
these? I fear he will not, I can hardly believe that he will.

There are three things which make it so difficult to believe that God will
forgive all our sins.

1. The weakness of faith, which cannot presently apprehend and reach the
height and depth, and breadth, and lenght of the love and mercy of God;

2. The tenderness of conscience, which being very sensible of a multitude of
sins, and feeling Gods displeasure and anger, raises strong fears and
exceptions against universal forgiveness of all our sins; Shall I find mercy,
who do feel wrath? Can I be persuaded that God will speak forgiveness to all my
sins, who do find him speaking such bitter things for some of my sins? will he
ever discharge me of all my sins, who does charge my sins with that strong
displeasure upon my soul?

3. The strong and manifold, and subtle temptations and suggestions of Satan,
who knows how to heighten our sins, and to diminish the mercies of God, when he
would bring us to despair; as he does know also how to diminish our sins, and
enlarge mercy when he would draw us to presumption. O says Satan, here are
such sins, and here are so many of them, that here is no hope at all for mercy;
the wrath of God (you know) is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness,
and all unrighteousness of men, Romans 1. 18. For some of these sins has God
(long since) destroyed and damned multitudes of men. What then will he do to
you for all these sins? here is sin upon sin, and nothing but sin (without any
interruption, and without any cessation) for twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years
together are committed against many threatenings, warnings, examples,
punishments, yea, and against many calls of mercy, and offers of grace, which
had they been accepted in time, there might have been some hope; but you went
on, and multiplied your transgressions against all these; therefore for such a
multitude of sins no mercy will be found. It Is true, that God has promised to
pardon all the sins of his people; but you are none of that number; had you
been so, would you, or durst you thus to have multiplied and increased your
transgressions against such a God? you would have repented long ago; and
besides all this, think you that you should not have had news of forgiveness,
(after so many tears and prayers, and hearknings, and waitings) if God would
have forgave those sins.

Fourthly, Though it be very difficult to believe that God will forgive all our
Yet it is very necessary to believe this promise.
sins, yet it is very necessary to believe this promise of God, and that upon a
threefold account.

1. The honor of God, which is as much concerned in this Branch of the
Covenant, as in any other; he does lay forth in it (as I hinted before) the
riches of his grace, and the glory of his great goodness, and his heart of
mercies to the very full; and besides this, he seals this part of his Covenant
with the same infallibility of truth, and ratifies it with the same blood of
Christ, which though it respects the stablishing of the whole Covenant, yet it
is more frequently expressed to confirm the Branch of the forgiveness of sins,
as you may see in Mat. 26. 28. Ephesians. 1. 7. 1 John 1 7. Rev. 1. 5. etc. that
our faith might be the more strengthened, and so give unto God the more glory
in and for such a gracious truth. And let me tell you one thing, that what
ground you have to believe that God will forgive you any one of your sins, the
very same you have to believe that he will forgive you all your sins; and upon
the same reason that you believe not the promise as to the forgiveness of all
your sins, upon the same reason you must deny belief of the promise as to the
forgiveness of any one sin; and so God lose all the glory of his rich mercies
by your unbelief.

2. The peace of your own consciences; for suppose you did believe that God
would forgive some of your sins, but some others of your sins he would not
forgive; could this partial forgiveness settle and quiet your consciences?
would they not hold you under as much fear and bondage, as if not one of your
sins were forgiven? surely it would, because there is still in any unforgiven
sins so much guilt and merit as will serve effectually to the everlasting
destruction of your souls and bodies.

3. The renewing of you again to repentance, and bringing of you back again
unto God; for suppose you confine your faith to believe that God will pardon
the sins which you have committed in time past, and beyond this your faith will
not stir; tell me then I beseech you, what will you do for the sins you have
committed since conversion? will you have them pardoned, or will you not have
them pardoned? will you go on in them, or will you forsake them? will you still
go away, or will you return to your first husband? surely you would have them
pardoned; surely you would renew repentance, and return to the Lord your God;
but how can this be, if you cannot, or will not believe that God will forgive
those sins as well as the former? If you be persuaded that forgiving mercy is
at an end, and God has no more mercy to forgive any more sins, I dare assure
you that where the hope of mercy cease, there the practice of repentance will
cease: But on the contrary, when you can by faith see God willing and ready to
pardon you, and accept of you, this will melt, and this will move your hearts
to repent, and to return unto the Lord, etc. God has yet thoughts of mercy
toward me; I will arise, and go to my Father, and say, Father, I have sinned
against thee, etc.

Secondly, And this leads me unto the next Branch of the Exhortation, which
Make use of this truth.
is, that we must not only believe that God will forgive us all our sins, but
we must make use of this truth in all our occasions. What one day of our life;
have we not occasion to make use thereof? After conversion there are two sorts
of sins incident unto us.

1. Daily sins of ignorance and infirmity; and they are so many, that we know
not the number of them; yet all of them do need forgiving mercy.

2. Voluntary sins, and of a very gross and heinous nature, which make a deep
wound, and raise an hideous cry in the conscience, and shake all our
foundations, and lie as an heavy burden upon us; and they do the more wound and
afflict us, because committed after mercy, and against mercy. Now in such a
self-wounding, and self-judging, and self-humbling condition, what should the
ashamed and confounded sinner do? why, he should return speedily to his God,
and with tears and shame spread his sins before the Lord, and acknowledge that
he is unworthy of any more mercy, and yet beseech the Lord to show him mercy
again, who has promised to forgive all the sins of his people; and he should
hearken what God the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace unto his people,
but let them return no more to folly, Psalm. 85. 8.

SECT. V.


First, Of Comfort to all who are brought into Covenant with God, especially
Comfort.
to such as have stood out a long time, and have abounded in transgressions,
who have made the very creature groan with the burden of their many sins; why,
all these are forgiven as soon as God has brought you into the Covenant. Luke
7. 47. Her sins which are many, are forgiven. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Who was before a
Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained mercy. O what a day
of salvation is the very day when God brings a man into Christ, and into the
Covenant; all his enemies that pursued him are drowned, not one of them is
left, so all his sins are forgiven, and not one of them is alive to his
condemnation!

Secondly, Of Encouragement to come out of a sinful and unbelieving condition,
Encouragement.
and to yield up our selves to Christ, and to be willing to become the people
of God, and to walk in his ways; why, all the sins that ever you have committe^
shall be forgiven you, they shall not be mentioned unto you; your Drunkenness,
Swearing, Whordome, Theft, Lying, Sabbath-breakings, all your sins of Omission,
and of Commission; sins against the Law, and sins against the Gospel; sins that
your own hearts can charge you with, and that God himself can charge upon you,
all forgiven; any one of them would damn you, and now all shall be pardoned, if
you will hear and believe, and repent, etc. Cast away all your transgressions,
repent, return and live, why will ye dye O house of Israel, I offer to you life
and death, choose life: Do not for lying vanities forsake your mercies. A
greater offer there cannot be than Christ; nor motive, than the pardon of all
your sins.

EZEKIEL. 36. 25. From all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse
you.
HAving spoken somewhat unto the extensive part of promised forgiveness, that
it reaches all the sins of all the people of God, I now proceed unto the
Intensive part of that promised The intensive part.
forgiveness, which respects the greatness and hainousness of sin, as well as
the number and multitude of sins, (from all your filthiness, and from all your
Idols will I cleanse you) whence you may observe:

CHAP. IV.
THat although the sins of persons have been exceeding great, yet when these
persons become the people of God in Covenant, even those sins also are forgiven
them, (from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols Great sins are
forgiven to the people of God in Covenant.
will I cleanse you) forgiveness reache^^ to the greatest sins which the people
of God have been guilty of; this assertion

1. I shall clear from the Text it self. 2. From other Scriptures. Proved.
3. Demonstrate by some Arguments and Reasons. 4. And then apply it unto our
selves.
SECT. I.
1. THE Text clearly holds out the Assertion; for God does give here By the
text.
instances of two great kinds of sins: One against the second Table, (all your
filthiness) and the other against the first Table, (all your Idols) in the one,
is implied the great injury done unto our Neighbor; and in the other, the
great injure done unto God, yet God promises to forgive both.

I will speak something of both these sins, and something of the greatness of
them both, which yet God promises, etc.

First, From all your filthiness) that word (filthiness) is sometimes taken
What is meant by filthiness.
for any sin; every sin is a pollution, and uncleanness, a filthiness,
therefore the Apostle says; (2 Cor. 7. 1.) Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit; there are bodily sins which the Apostle
here calls the filthiness of our flesh; and there are spiritual sins arising
from, and acted in the soul, which the Apostle here calls the filthiness of the
spirit. Sometimes that word (filthiness) is taken restrictively, for bodily
pollution or uncleanness; when the bodies of men and women are defiled and
polluted, and do defile and pollute themselves, Several kinds of it. Bestiality.
of which in Scripture you find several sorts and kinds.

1. Bestiality; that (...), abomination not to be named, it is confusion; you
read of this sin in Lev. 18. 23. and of the punishment of it with death, Lev.
20. 15, 16.

2. Sodomy; of this horrid sin, and the punishment thereof, you read in Sodomy.
Lev. 20 13. This is not only a sin, but also a recompense of other sins, and
for which God gives men over to a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 27, 28. and for which
he destroyed those five Cities with fire from heaven, Genesis 19. 24, 25.

3. Incest; ubi servatur sexus, sed non gradus; it is the sin cum agnata Incest.
or cognata, with a kinswoman of the fathers or the mothers side, (yea, and
with ones fathers wife) see Lev. 20. 17. (and with ones brothers wife)

4. Fornication, which is between single persons. Fornication. Adultery.


5. Adultery, which is uncleanness between persons married to others, or when
one of them is married to another, and yet defiles himself with a stranger;
some of these sins of uncleanness are so horrid, that they are said to be
against nature, yea, against corrupt nature; the very natural light in natural
conscience condemns and opposes them; and the rest of them (as fornication and
adultery) the Scripture sets them out as very odious in the eyes of God, and
very foul transgressions, and extremely pernicious; in them you may read ten
things concerning Ten things concerning these.
^hese sins.

First, That they are the express fruits of a vile and naughty heart; out of
the heart proceeds fornications, adulteries, says Christ, Matthew. 15. 19. The
works of the flesh are manif^^^ which are adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, Gal 5. 19.

Secondly, The Apostle reckons them up amongst the most detestable sins which
the most loathsome Gentiles were guilty of, who were filled with all
unrighteousness.

Thirdly, They are so vile sins, that Christians may not once name them
(without detestation) Ephesians. 5. 3. But fornication and all uncleanness, let it
not be once named among you, as becomes Saints.

Fourthly, They are such sins as are repugnant unto, and inconsistent with
Christian society; Christians must not entertain fellowship with persons guilty
of them. 1 Cor. 5. 11. If any man that is called a brother, be a fornicator,
etc. with such an one, no not to eat.

Fifthly, They are sins (especially adultery) against the three persons of the
Trinity.

1. Against God the Father, who created the man and the woman, and married them
to each other, and said, they two shall be one flesh, Genesis 2. 24. Now by
adultery they are separated whom God has joined together, and made one; yea,
God has made Marriage a resemblance of Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5. but
adultery brings contempt upon this resemblance of union.

2. Against God the Son; Jesus Christ has paid a price for our bodies, as
well as for our spirits; and upon that account we are to glorify him in both,
1 Cor. 6. 20. nay, says the same Apostle, Ver. 15 Know ye not that your bodies
are the members of Christ? Now to alienate Christ's purchase from Christ, and to
bestow it upon an Harlot, and make the members of Christ, the members of an
Harlot, (as every adulterer does) is exceedingly injurious unto Christ. Shall I
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? God forbid?
so the Apostle, in ver. 15.

3. Against God the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Know you not that your body is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost? and Chap. 3. 17. If any man defile the Temple of
God, him shall God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are.

Sixthly, Of all sins these are the most brutish, making persons like the
beasts; and therefore in Scripture unclean and adulterous persons are compared
to beasts. To the Ox, Prove. 7. 22. He goes after her as an Ox to the
slaughter. To the Horse, Jerem. 5. 8. They were as fed Horses, every one
neighed after his Neighbors wife: and Jer. 13. 27. I have s^en thy adulteries,
and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredoms, etc. To the Dog, Deuteronomy. 23.
18. Thou shall not bring the hire of an Whore, or the price of a Dog into the
house of the Lord. By Dog here is meant an unclean, adulterous person; An
persona Canina ego? replied Abner to Ishbosheth, (am I a person like a Dog?)
who charged him that he lay with his fathers Concubine, Rizpah, 2 Samuel 3. 8.

Seventhly, Adultery in some respect is worse than many other sins against our
Neighbors; it is a very great sin to slander the name of our Neighbor, and to
bear false witness against him; it is very bad by theft to take away the goods
of our Neighbor; it is yet worse to kill and take away the life of our
Neighbor; but adultery is (in some respect) more sinful than any one of these.
v. g. In all these sinnings, the person sinning brings a guilt only upon
himself; for when he defames another, though he casts reproach on him, yet he
makes him not guilty; and in stealing from another, though he brings loss to
him, yet he makes him not guilty; and when he kills another, he brings death to
him, yet he makes him not sinfully guilty; but in adultery, there is a mutual
consent to sin, and a mutual contract of guilt; and although the one party
should repent, and so escape wrath, yet the other party repenting not, has a
soul which (for this sin) must be cast into hell.

Eighthly, They are such sins, for which God himself will judge the offender,
though possibly they may escape the hands of men. Hebr. 13. 4. Whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge; and verily God has severely judged persons for
these sins, even in this life. The Old World was drowned for them, Gen 6. 2, 3,
etc. Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by fire, Genesis 19. Twenty and four
thousand destroyed with the plague, Number. 25. 9. The Tribe of Benjamin was
almost extinguished, and rooted out upon this account, Judge. 19. 28. The Land
of Canaan spued out her Inhabitantt for them, Lev. 18. 28. How often does God
make these sins (in this life) a punishment unto those who are guilty of them?
by causing unto themselves most loathsome and irksome, and incurable diseases,
such as make them odious to others, and a shame and burden to themselves.

Ninthly, They are such sins as (many times) do bring with them an universal
loss and ruin.

1. To our name. Prove. 6. 33. A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his
reproach shall not be wiped away. 2. To our estate. Prove. 5. 10 Lest strangers
be filled with thy wealth, and thy labors be in the house of a stranger, Job
31. 11, 22. it roots out all our increase. 3. To our health. ib. ver. 11. And
thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed. 4. To our
consciences. Prove. 7. 23. till a dart strike through his liver, etc. The great
terrors of conscience (usually) arise from these sins. Job 24. 17. If one know
of them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. 5. To our souls; and
as unto them you shall find three very sad expressions in the Word of God.
1. That they are the way to hell. Prove. 7. 27. Her house is the way to hell,
going down to the chambers of death: and Prove. 9. 18. Their guests are in the
depths of hell. 2. That they destroy the soul. He that commits adultery with
a woman, destroys his own soul, Prove. 6. 32. 3. That they exclude from the
Kingdom of God; nor adulterers, nor fornicators, nor effeminate, nor defilers
of themselves with mankind shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Tenthly, They are such sins as whereof persons cannot easily repent; they do
exceedingly dispose the soul to hardness and impenitency, they darken the mind
and infatuate the judgment, and harden the heart, and so make the sinners
condition almost desperate. Hose. 4. 11. Whoredom and wine take away the heart.
Prove. 2. 19. None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the
paths of life. None (i. e.) very few repent of these sins: For her heart is
snares and nets, and her hands are bands, Eccles. 7. 26. All these things do
abundantly show what an exceeding great sin the sin of uncleanness is; yet God
has pardoned them unto his people; Lot was pardoned: and David's adultery was
pardoned, and the fornications and adulteries, and effeminateness, and Sodomies
of the Corinthians were pardoned: 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you, but ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

Secondly, From all your Idols] Having showed the greatness of the sins of
uncleanness, I now proceed briefly to show unto you the greatness of the sin of
Idolatry, the greatness of that sin.
Idolatry; This people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of
gold, Exodus 32. 31. And you shall find it very great;

First, By Gods singular detestation, and loathing of Idolatry and Idols: Idols
are frequently in Scripture called abominations, 1 King. 11. 5. Solomon went
after By Gods singular detestation of it.
Milcom the abomination of the Amorites. Verse 7. And he built an high place
for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, and for Molech the abomination of the
children of Ammon. Idolatries are called abominable Idolatries, 1 Pet. 4. 3.
which the Learned call Epithetum perpetuum and non distinguens; see Acts 15.
20. That they abstain from pollutions of Idols, (...), Contaminations,
filthinesses, defilements: Therefore Idols are called dunghill-gods, stinking,
filthy, and defiling.

Secondly, By Gods special warnings of his people against this sin of Idolatry.
Jer. 44. 4. Do not this abominable thing which I hate. Deuteronomy. 18. 9. When thou
art come By Gods special warnings.
into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not do after the
abomination of these Nations. Deuteronomy. 4. 23. Take heed unto your selves, lest you
forget the Covenant of the Lord your God which he made with you, and make you a
graven image, the likeness of any thing which the Lord thy God has forbidden
thee. 1 Cor. 10. 14. Flee from Idolatry. 1 John 5. 21. Keep your selves from
Idols.

Thirdly, By the grievous threatenings of Idolaters; read at your leisure, Deuteronomy*
32. By grievous threatenings.
15. He forsook God. Ver. 16. they provoked him to jealousy with strange gods.
(and ver. 19. and when the Lord saw it, be abhorred them.) and ver. 20. and I
will hide my face from you, and ver. 22. A fire is kindled in mine anger, and
shall burn to the lowest hell. ver. 23. I will heap mischief upon them, and
will spend my arrows upon them. ver, 24. they shall be burnt with thunder, and
devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction. ver. 25. The sword
without, and terror within shall destroy, etc.

Fourthly, By the unparalled judgments on Idolaters; God has given the bill
By unparalleld judgments on Idolaters.
of divorce and broken them in pieces, and rooted them out of their dwelling
places, and scattered them over all the earth, and persecuted them in his
wrath, until he has destroyed them from off the face of all the earth.

Fifthly, And besides all this, he has shut the door of heaven against
Idolaters, and threatens them with no less then hell and damnation, and the
lake that burns The door of heaven is shut against them.
with fire and brimstone.

Sixthly, But once more consider the nature or effect of this sin of Idolatry;
it is so every way contrary to Gods glory of which he is most tender, Isa. 48
11. The nature or effects of this sin.
and Isa. 42. 8. and will not give it to graven images: It is the changing of
his glory (They changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made
like corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things, Romans 1. 23.) and the sordid abasing of his glory to imagine any creature
capable of that excellency, and of that worship which belongs to God; and
verily we do no less than make the creatures to be God, when we do confer on
them that worship which is proper unto God, or suppose such excellencies to be
in them, which are to be found only in God.

It is the exceeding provocation of God, Hos. 12. 14. Ephraim provoked him to
anger most bitterly; therefore he shall leave his blood upon him. Idolatry is
therefore often called adultery, and Idolaters are said to commit adultery with
stocks and stones; what greater offense and provocation in a wife than to
forsake her husband, and to play the adultress with strangers? the Lord for
this sin of Idolatry has utterly forsaken people, he would be their God no
more, nor would he own them for his people any longer. Nevertheless though this
sin of Idolatry is so exceedingly high and provoking, yet God has pardoned it
unto his people: He pardoned it to Abraham, Solomon, to all the Churches of the
Gentiles; to those of Rome, to the Corinthians, Ephesians, Galatians.

Thus you see the Assertion evinced from the Text.

Secondly, I shall in the next place evince it from other places of Scripture,
that From other Scriptures.
God will forgive the greatest sins, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Who was before a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained mercy. O what sins
were these? blasphemy, persecution, injuriousness, even to banishment and
death! but I obtained mercy: In Acts 3. 14. And ye denied the Holy One, and
desired a murderer to be granted unto you. ver. 15. and killed the Prince of
life. yet Acts 44. Many of them which heard the Word believed, and the number
of men were about five thousand. Isa. 1. 18. Though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow; though they be red as Crimson, they shall be as
wool.

Thirdly, Let us see it further demonstrated by some Arguments. Arguments to
demonstrate it. God is great in mercy.


1. God is great in mercy; Who is a strong God like unto thee, that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the Remnant of his heritage!
Micah 7. 8. Grave est quod habeo, sed ad Omnipotentem confugio, said Austin.
Infinite mercy can forgive great iniquity.

2. The satisfactions of Christ are great aad full; so that by them grace did
Christ's satisfaction is great.
super abound: He undertook the whole state of the sins of Gods people; sins
great and small, many and few, ^gnorance and knowledge, all their iniquities,
and all their trespasses, and all their transgressions: and did satisfy the
Justice of God fully, and to the utmost, so that in him there is plenteous
Redemption: The obedience of Christ is as much above our sins, as his person is
above our persons.

3. When the Lord calls upon people to repent, as therein he deals with them to
leave and forsake all their sins, great and small (he excuses them in no one
God calls us to repent of great sins, and promises pardon
sin) but of all sins he presses them to forsake their great sins; so to
draw and encourage them to this repentance he does hold out his promise of
pardon indefinitely of all their sins; this Covenant makes no distinction at
all twixt small and great: God (usually) instances in the greatest sins.

4. God by the Gospel gathers of all sorts into his kingdom; The notorious God
gathers all sorts of sinners.
sinners as well as the civil sinner (Mary Magdalen as well as Lydia, Saul as
well as Nicodemus) great sinners as well as small offenders. But unless God
would pardon great sinners, the Gospel cannot invite all sorts of sinners: For
when you preach it to persons guilty of great sins, alas say they, mercy
belongs not to us, and what have you to do to press upon us to believe? suppose
we should believe, yet we shall not be saved, God will never justify and
pardon us, etc.

5. God brings great sinners into Covenant, Publicans, Harlots; and when God
brings great sinners into Covenant in a perfect league of love and peace.
God brings any (actually) into the Covenant, there is a perfect league of love
and peace made between them; a mutual reconciliation and relation; therefore he
pardons their great sins: For unless these were pardoned, such a league of love
and peace would be impossible: Persons are not perfectly reconciled, whilst
the greatest matters of difference do continue.

6. Son, said Christ, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee, Matthew. 9.
2. Every just^fied person has cause of rej^ycing.
Every justified or pardoned person is in a comfortable condition, he has
cause of joy and rejoicing: But if God did not pardon their great sins, as well
as the rest of their sins, their condition would not be comfortable at all, but
most miserable, and full of just horror and fear, etc.

7. God has made use of the great sins of persons to humble them; and will he
not God makes use of great sins to humble men
now make use of his great mercies to pardon them? all our humbings are wrought
by the Spirit, in a reference unto mercy: when God intends to make us vessels
of mercy, he does first make us broken vessels: Acts 2. 37. Pricked in their
hearts. Ver. 41. then believed. Acts 9. 6. Trembled. Chap. 16. 29. And when he
intends to break and humble the heart of a sinner, usually he makes the
Conscience of him to apprehend and to lay hold of some of the greatest and
worst of his sins. Paul's Conscience took hold of his persecuting of Christ, and
the Jailer of his injuriousness to the Apostles; Zacheus on his exaction, and
Mary Magdalen on her adultery. God lays on us the sense of our great sins, to
make us see the great need of mercy, and to confess the greatness of mercy in
the pardoning of such great sins, and to quicken earnest prayers for mercy.

8. God has great glory in the pardon of great sins: Who, is a God like unto
thee, etc? Mich. 7. 19. q. d. there is not such a merciful and gracious God in
all the God has great glory in the pardon of great sins.
world. Prove. 25. 2. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing. Prove. 19. 11.
It is the glory of a man to pass over a transgression. So Jer. 33. 8. I will
pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have
transgressed against me. Ver. 9. And this shall be to me a Name of joy, and
praise, and honor before all the Nation. This was his glory: Exodus 34. 7.
Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, etc.

9. God would have his people to pray for the forgiveness of their great
sins: God would have his, people to pray for pardon of great sins.
Hose. 14. 2. Take away iniquity and receive us graciously; and they have
prayed for the forgiveness of their great sins: Psalm. 25. 11. For thy Name
sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity for it is great. And they have prevailed,
Exodus 32. 32. Therefore certainly he will forgive their great sins: For
whatsoever we ask according to his will, and in Christ's Name, he will do it for
us.

SECT. II.
1. Use Does God promise to pardon the great sins, yea the greatest sins of his
people! Hence we may be informed of the unspeakable goodness Information of the
unspeakable goodness of God to his people In not taking advantage against us.
of God to his people.

First, That he takes not advantage against them; he seeks not occasions to
fall off from them: if he did, then small offenses would serve the turn; our
daily failings would have broken up all communions betwixt him and us; much
more would our great transgressions have raised up a partition wall, and caused
his soul to abhor us: Psalm. 103. 10. He has not dealt with us after our sins,
nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. Great transgressions are great
provocations, and great injuries, and great dishonours unto God; yet you see he
promises to pass them by, to pardon them; therefore certainly he takes no
advantage against us, he does not mark iniquities and what we have done amiss.
There are no small matters God does for us.


Secondly, That they are no small matters which he does for us: There are two
things which God does for his people which are not small favors.

1. One is the giving of Christ unto them, and the giving of them unto Christ.

2. The other is the forgiving of their great sins: Moses reputes this work as
the fruits of his great power, and of his great mercy; Numb. 14. 17. I beseech
thee let the power of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, saying,
ver. 18. The Lord is long-suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgression. ver. 19. Pardon the iniquity of this people, according to the
greatness of thy mercy. And so does the Apostle, in Ephesians. 1 17. He puts this
upon the account of the riches of Gods grace, wherein (ver. 8.) he abounds
toward us. Was it a small thing for the King (in Matthew. 18. 23, 24.) to
forgive the servant who owed unto him ten thousand talents? What is the desert
of any one sin, even of the least of our sins? death, and wrath, and curse, and
hell; what then is the punishment and recompense meritoriously belonging to us
for our great transgressions? yet God forgives them, etc.

Thirdly, That his love is very great, and very firm, and sure unto his people;
His love is very great and firm.
and never to be taken off and removed; why so? because he forgives all the
sins of his people, and the great, and the greatest sins of them. If any thing
breaks off the love of God, it must be sin (for that he hates, and that is the
only provocation of him) and if any sin does it, it is likely that a multitude
of sins will, (daily and continual offenses) and if any of these will, it is
most probable, that great and high sinnings will cut the knot asunder. But you
see it is not the multitude of sins, nor yet the magnitude of sins which
separates the people of God from the love of God, but he will pardon all their
sins, yea the greatest of their sins; therefore his love is fixed, and never to
be changed: For if these will not alter it, nothing else shall, or can.

Fourthly, That God takes away all grounds of despair from the hearts of his
people: There are but three principal grounds of despair; God takes away the
grounds of despair.


1. O my sins are so many, that there is no hope of mercy.

2. O but my sins are so high, and so great, that God will never forgive them.

3. O but though God can and will forgive many sins, and great sins; yet he
will not forgive my great sins: My sin, said Cain, is greater than shall be
forgiven, Genesis 4. Now God answers all these Arguments and Grounds of despair
which possibly may arise in the hearts of his people; For

1. He promises that he will forgive all their sins, and will cast them also
into the depth of the sea.

2. He promises to forgive their great sins; though they have been as scarlet,
and red like crimson, and though adulterers, and though idolaters, etc.

3. This promise he himself does make, with respect unto every one of their
persons, as you may see here in the Text, and in other Scriptures; So that
there remains no ground at all of despair for them: Indeed there may be matter
enough for their humiliation, but none for desperation.

SECT. III.
2. Use. Does God promise, the forgiveness of all sins, yea of the great sins
of his people? Then let all the people who are sensible of any great Make out
for the pardon of great sins.
transgression, speedily and seriously make out unto the Mercy-seat for the
pardon of their great sins.

For the managing of this Use, I will

1. Premise a few Conclusions. 2. Lay down some Directions, what is to be done
to get the pardon of great sins. 3. Discover some Signs and Evidences by
which one may know that even his great sins are forgiven.
First, The Conclusions which I would premise (as Motives to get the
forgiveness Conclusions premised.
of our great sins) are these.

First, Even the people of God may be guilty of great transgressions, both
before The people of God may be guilty of great sins.
their conversion, and also after their conversion.

1. Before their conversion, scarce any of them but have been guilty; wh^^
soul sins were those Corinthians guilty of, before God had called them by his
grace? even of drunkenness, and idolatries, and adulteries, and Sodomies; and
Paul himself, who seemed so unblameable in his conversation, yet what great
sins stood he guilty of? He was mad in persecuting the Saints, he had his hand
in the blood of Stephen, he was consenting to his death; nay, the Lord Jesus
Christ arested him, and accused him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts
9. 4. Ephesians. 2. 3. Among whom also we had our conversation in times past, in
the lust of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind.
Titus 3. 3. We our selves were also foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one
another.

2. After their conversion, they have also been guilty of great sins. Noah of
drunkenness, Genesis 9. 21. Lot of drunkenness and incest with his own daughters,
Genesis 19. 35, 36. Solomon of abominable Idolatries, 1 Kin. 11. 6, 7. and David
of adultery and murder, 2 Samuel 11. 4. 12. 9. And a thousand to one but most of
us have been guilty of some great sin or other, either for the kind of it, or
for the circumstantial aggravations of it, either of Omission, or of
Commission: so that we all have cause to look after the forgiveness of great
sins.

Secondly, Their great sins do dishonor God as much, nay more than the great
sins of others. 2 Samuel 12. 14. By this deed thou have given great occasion to
the enemies Their great sins dishonor God as much, if not more than others.
of the Lord to blaspheme, etc. Romans 2. 24. The Name of God is blasphemed among
the Gentiles through you. Yea they do exceedingly provoke God to withdraw his
comfortable presence of joy from their spirits, and to speak bitter things unto
them, and to correct them with a strong and exemplary chastisement, and to
suffer them to be buffeted by Satan with very heavy and distracting
temptations: upon this accout also they have reason to look after the
forgiveness of their great sins.

Thirdly, Apprehensions of their great sins as unpardoned must needs fill their
hearts with mavelous fears, and their Consciences with unutterable
unquietnesses The apprehension of these sins will fill their hearts with fears.
and burdens; as in David's roarings, and his complaint of broken bones. There
is (I think) not any one person whose great sins have not (at some time or
other) returned upon him, and deeply wounded him. Great sins (of all other) are
certain terrors unto the Conscience; and of all great sins, these are so. 1.
The sins against nature. 2. Those of gross uncleanness. 3. Those of blood and
murder. 4. Those of compact with the Devil. 5. Those of blasphemy. 6. Those
against the workings of Conscience. 7. Those against the Gospel. 8.
Presumptions. 9. Relapses. Any of these, and any other great sins of which one
has been guilty, they sit heavy upon the Conscience, and do make dreadful work
there, and do often arise with exceeding terror and distraction, so that the
soul sinks under the guilt of them, etc.

Fourthly, There is nothing whatsoever which can allay and quiet Conscience
troubled, and troubling for the guilt of great sins, but the presence or (at
least) Nothing can allay those fears, but the sense or hope of pardon.
the hope of forgiveness of them: No earthly thing can quiet conscience in that
condition; David wanted not for them, and yet he roared all the Day long, and
his bones waxed old, and his moisture was turned into the drought of summer,
Psalm. 32. 34. Nay (let me speak a bold word) there is nothing in God which can
do it, but this merciful and gracious nature to forgive: If the distressed
sinner looks on his Justice, he falls down confounded; if he looks on his
holiness, O he is of purer eyes than to behold sin! if on his power, O it is
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God! Nothing but mercy
answers this distress, or gives ease to this pain and trouble: Be merciful
unto me, O God, said David; God be merciful to me a sinner, said the Publican;
Take away iniquity said the Church: Beloved! In all sorts of distress, there is
but one thing which is a proper relief: In sickness, health is the only help;
in hunger, bread is the only help; in thirst, water is the only help; in pains,
ease is the only help; and so under the guilt of sin, mercy is the only help:
This is life, this is deliverance, this is all.

Fifthly, Though your sins have been, or are very great, yet there is hope of
mercy, Though your sins be great, yet there is hope of mercy.
and that for you; which may appear briefly by four particulars.

1. The promise of God reaches (as you have heard) to the pardon of great sins.

2. The instances or acts of mercy, they are recorded, grants of grace and
mercy to great transgressions: You know thus they have passed to David, to
Solomon, to Mary Magdalen, to Peter, to Paul, to the Corinthians: As great sins
as yours has God pardoned, yea and perhaps greater sins than yours.

3. God is still of a merciful nature; he is as able, and as ready to forgive
as ever; the Fountain is as full, and as open; Although the Lord has shown
mercy to many and great sinners already, yet he reserves and keeps mercy for
thousands, nay for a thousand generations. You are not the first great sinners,
nor yet the last great sinners, on whom he has, or on whom he will show mercy;
his mercy endures for ever.

4. He calls upon such as have been guilty of great sins, to leave their sins,
and to come in unto him; and has assured them that if they do so, he will
forgive their great sins. Isa. 1. 10. Hear the Word of the Lord ye Rulers of
Sodom, and ye people of Gomorrah. Ver. 15. Your hands are full of blood. Ver.
16. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, ver. 17. learn to do well, etc. Ver. 18. Come now and
let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool. Jer. 3. 1. They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go away from
him, and she become another man's, shall he return again unto her? shall not
that Land be greatly polluted? but thou have played the harlot with many
lovers; yet return again unto me, says the Lord. Ver. 5. Will he reserve his
anger for ever? will he keep it to the end; behold thou have spoken and done
evil things as thou could. Ver. 7. And I said after she had done all these
things, turn thou unto me, but she returned not. Ver. 12. Return thou
backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall
upon you, for I am merciful, etc.

Secondly, I now proceed to lay down some Directions, what one should
Directions how to get the pardon of great sins.
do who has been guilty of great sins, to get the pardon of them.

I will propose unto you no other Course or Practice than what you may read in
the Scriptures, that some have taken who have been guilty of great sins, and
have thereupon found mercy in the pardoning of them.

Quest. What Is that? will you say.

Sol. You shall find

First, That they have been greatly humbled, and have greatly mourned for Be
greatly humbled for them.
their great sinnings, and then God did show them mercy in the pardon of those
sins. Zach. 12. 11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem,
as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo. Chap. 13. 1. In that
day there shall be a Fountain opened to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness. Jer. 31. 19. I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Ver.
20. I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord, Psalm. 6. 6. I am weary
of my groaning, all the night I make my bed to swim, I water my Couch with my
tears. and (you know the Lord forgave his great sins.) Luke 7. 38. Mary
Magdalen stood at the feet of Christ behind him weeping, and began to wash his
feet with tears. Ver. 48. And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee.
Peter went out and wept bitterly for his great sin, and that sin was forgiven.
And Paul fell down and trembled for his great sins, and they were pardoned. In
all these instances you see great mourning for great sins, and gracious pardon
for them; Go you and do likewise, and you shall find friendship.

Secondly, That they have cordially and really forsaken their great sins;
they durst not continue in them, but have loathed themselves and their
abominations, Cordially forsake them.
and have cast them away: Ez^a 9. 14. Should we again break thy Commandments,
and join with the people of these abominations? Isa. 30. 22. Ye shall also
defile the covering of thy graven Images of silver, and the ornaments of thy
molten images of gold, then shall thou cast them away as a menstruous cloth;
thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence! Ver. 23. Then shall he give the rain of
thy seed, etc. Hos. 14. 8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with
Idols? I have heard him and considered him. I am like a green fur tree, from
me is thy fruit found. Judge. 10. 16. And they put away the strange gods from
among them, and served the Lord. Acts 3. 19. Repent and be converted that your
sins may be blotted out. Thus did David, thus did Manasse, thus did Mary
Magdalen, thus did Paul, and the Prodigal, and thereupon did find mercy: Such
were some of you, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, etc. Lookst thou
for mercy to pardon great sins, and yet still go on in thy trespasses! etc.

Thirdly, That they have earnestly prayed unto the Lord for the forgiveness of
their Earnestly pray for the pardon of them.
great sins: Exodus 32. 31. O this people have sinned a great sin, and have
made themselves gods of gold. Ver. 32. Yet now if thou will forgive their
sin; and if not, blot me I pray thee out of the book which thou have written;
so Moses prayed. Psalm. 25. 11. For thy Names sake O Lord, pardon mine iniquity,
for it is great. Dan. 9. 5. We have sinned and committed iniquity, and have
done wickedly, and have rebelled by departing from thy precepts. Ver. 9. To the
Lord our God belong mercies, and forgiveness, though we have rebelled against
him. Ver. 19. O Lord hear; O Lord forgive! O Lord hearken and defer not for
thy Name sake. Ver. 18. We do not present our supplications unto thee for our
righteousness, but for thy great mercies. Luke 18. 13. And the Publican stood
a far off, and would not lift up so much as his eyes to Heaven, but smote
upon his breast, saying, God be merciful unto me a sinner. In these Prayers
for the pardon of great sins, you may espy four Ingredients.

1. That they have come from broken hearts, sensible of their greatness. 2.
That they have come from humble hearts, sensible of their own unworthiness. 3 s
That they have been sent up with believing hearts. 4. That they have been plied
and followed with earnest, and servent, and importunate hearts which would have
no denial, and all of them found acceptance.
Fourthly, That they have pleaded with God upon such grounds which have always
Plead with God upon prevailing grounds.
been prevalent with God for the obtaining of the forgiveness of their sins.

1. For his mercies sake: Psalm. 51. 1. According to the multitude of thy
mercies blot out my transgressions. Psalm. 6. 4. O save me for thy mercies sake.

2. For his Christ sake: Ephesians. 4. 32. Even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you: Therefore when of old they would have their sins pardoned, they
offered sacrifices, and blood was shed and poured out, which Typified the blood
of Christ that was shed for the remission of sins: For without shedding of
blood is no Remission, Heb. 9. 22.

3. For his Promise sake: Numb. 14. 17. I beseech thee, said Moses, let the
power of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, saying, (Ver. 18.)
The Lord is long-suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgression. (Ver. 19) Pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this people,
according to the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this people
from Egypt even until now.

Fifthly, They have patiently waited upon the Lord, until that he has showed
them Patiently wait till he show mercy.
mercy. Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak; for he will
speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints. Isa. 30. 18. Therefore will the
Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted
that he may have mercy upon you; for the Lord is a God of judgment; blessed
are all they that wait for him. Ver. 19 He will be gracious unto thee at the
voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he will answer thee. These are the
ways which great sinners (yea, which the people of God being guilty of great
transgressions) have taken to get the forgiveness of them, and in which ways
God has met them with his pardoning mercies; and if in the like cases we do
thus follow the Lord, he will be merciful and gracious unto any of us, though
greatly sinning and guilty.

Thirdly, Having showed unto you what course is to be taken for to get the
pardon Evidences of the pardon of great sins.
of great transgressions, I shall now deliver unto you some signs or evidences
by which one may certainly know that God has forgiven his great sins.

There are six Evidences of this.

First, There always goes a great change with the forgiveness of great sins; A
great change accompanying it.
It is a great question whether Justification be before Sanctification;
whatsoever may be disputed for the priority of nature, yet it is agreed there
is no priority of time; for as soon as any sinner is justified and pardoned, he
is changed and sanctified the blood and the water go together; as soon as any
one is in Christ, he is forgiven, and there is no condemnation unto him, Romans
8. 1. And so as soon as any is in Christ, he is a new creature; old things are
past away, and all things become new, 2 Cor. 15. 17. What an unclean person was
Mary Magdalen before she was called to Christ, and found mercy? and after mercy
was obtained, what an eminent Christian was she? what a violent and injurious
Persecutor was Paul in times past? and when he obtained mercy, what an
admirable and exemplary Christian was he? Of all the changes incident to
sinners, the greatest change appears in the greatest sinner received to mercy
and forgiveness; there are two conspicuous changes in them.

1. The greatest inward change; the sins which he formerly loved more than his
soul, he now does hate more than hell; (he once out faced the Word, and now
trembles at it.)

2. The greatest outward change; the worst sinner (being received to mercy)
proves the choicest Christian; he is now as notable in a gracious walking, as
he was (once) notorious in a licentious living, exemplary in both respects, and
in both ways and courses.

is our great Great love to a forgiving God.
love to a forgiving God; this note Christ himself gives, Luke 7. 47. Her sins
which are many are forgiven her, for she loved much; but to whom little is
forgiven, the same loves little. Christ brings there a Parable of a Creditor,
who forgave two debts; one of them a great debt, and the other a lesser debt;
hereupon he demands of Simon the Pharisee which would love him most? who
answered, I suppose he to whom most was forgiven; this he applies to the woman
there forgiven (much was forgiven her, and therefore she loved much) he speaks
not of a love an^^cedent to pardon, but of a love following it: 1 John 4 19. We
love him, because he loved us first. Ver. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins. And indeed none can love God, but such who can by faith see him a
merciful, pardoning, and reconciling God in Christ.

Thirdly, A most tender fear to offend and grieve the Lord any more. Psalm. 130.
A tender fear to offend God.
4. There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared. Hosea 3. 5. They
shall fear the Lord and his goodness. It is wonderful to observe the singular
frame of spirit in a converted and pardoned sinner from what it was in former
times; heretofore he feared not the most cursed Oaths, but now he fears an idle
word; heretofore he feared not the most beastly practice of uncleanness, but
now he fears the very thoughts, and mental imaginations of it; heretofore he
could omit all good duties, now he fears to neglect the least; he has found so
much good, so much mercy at the hands of God, and tasted of so much gracious
goodness, that he would not willingly offend him in any thing in any part of
his life; a tender heart has tasted of tender mercies.

Fourthly, Exceeding zeal for God, who has showed him great mercy, and
Exceeding zeal for God.
for Christ (for whose sake) God has forgiven all; the greatest sinners have
ever been most zealous; before they have obtained mercy, they have been most
zealous for what was evil; and after they have obtained mercy, they have been
most zealous for what is good. How zealous was Paul? even besides himself for
Christ; actively zealous; I labored more abundantly than they all, 1 Cor. 5.
10. And passively zealous; I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to dye at
Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 21. 13.

Fifthly, Great compassions; Ought thou not to have had compassion on thy
fellow servants, as I had compassion on thee? There are no men so merciful, as
Great compassions.
those sinners to whom God has showed most mercy; there is a threefold
compassion in them.

1. A pitying compassion of all sinners, especially of great sinners, grieving,
bewailing, praying.

2. An helping compassion, especially to those unto whom he has been the
occasion or cause of great sins, even pulling them out of the fire, weeping,
entreating, instructing them with meekness, if peradventure God will give them
repentance. David after the pardon of his great sins, then says he, (Psalm. 51.
13.) will I teach Transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto
thee.

3. A forgiving compassion; bearing much, and forgiving much, as God for Christ
sake has forgiven them.

Sixthly, True peace and joy, which flow only from forgiving mercy. Luke True
peace and joy.
7. 48. Thy sins are forgiven. Ver. 50. Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.
Romans 5. 11. We also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have
now received the atonement.

There is a twofold peace in a sinner.

1. One arises from stupidity, and depends upon an ignorant and seared
conscience, as a sick man is quiet while he sleeps.

2. Another arises from faith, which seals to the goodness and truth of the
promise, and causes the soul to rest in that good and faithful Word, that God
for Christ's sake will indeed forgive their great sins; a peace that follows
faith, is a right peace, and a right testimony that sin is forgiven. 1 John 3.
21. If our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God.

So there is a twofold joy.

1. Of presumption, which is ungrounded and rash, irrational and irreligious; a
joy that a man's sins are pardoned, and yet no Word of God has said it; only
his own heart says it, and with that joy there is (at the same time) conjoined
sinful, sensual joy in some lust or other.

2. Of the Holy Ghost; a joy which comes fr^^ the Holy Ghost, and depends
likewise upon faith in Christ: By whom we do receive the atonement; this joy
does exceedingly enlarge the heart to God, and fills it with special
complacencies and delights in God, and sweet communions with him, etc. such a
peace in conscience, and such a joy in God, are the very fruits of his grace
and love, and mercy.

SECT. IV.
Caution, that we take heed, lest we abuse and pervert this gracious promise of
God, touching the forgiveness of great sins; Caution. Abuse not this gracious
mercy.
either by continuing under the guilt of former transgressions, or by adding
new guilt in the commission of more great iniquities. O say some wild Atheists,
God is such a merciful God, that he will forgive any sin, yea, the greatest
sins, (adulteries and idolatries, and drunkenness, and blasphemers) and
therefore we will continue in these sins, we will not be curbed and restrained,
but will take our delights, and give over our selves unto lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19.

To prevent such presumptions, and desperate inferences in all that hear of
Gods Six antidotes against presumption.
great mercifulness to pardon great transgressions, give me favor to lay down
fix Conclusions or Antidotes.

First, Such presumptuous inferences are expressly contrary to the goodness and
Such inferences are contrary to Gods goodness.
intention of Gods great mercy. Psalm. 130. 4. There is forgiveness with thee,
that thou may be feared: He does not say* There is forgiveness with thee,
that we may therefore boldly go on in sin, but that we may fear to sin any
more. Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? Romans 6. 1. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God
forbid: q. d. Thou do utterly m^stake and pervert the aim and intention of
Gods mercy in sparing of thee, and forbearance to punish and destroy thee;
alas, it is not that thou should therefore continue in sin, but that thou
should repent of sin. Beloved, there is no Attribute of God which can be an
encouragement to sin, but every one of them is a strong reason to tu^n us from
sin; he is holy, and of purer eyes than to behold sin, therefore we should not
sin; he is just and righteous to recomp^^ce the sinner according to his ways,
therefore we should not sin; he is mighty in Power, and of great Might, able to
make good, and to execute all the judgment which he has threatened sinners
with, therefore we should not sin; he in much patience bears with us, and
forbears to deal with us according to our sins, therefore we should not sin;
and he is merciful and gracious, ready to forgive, therefore we should not sin;
not therefore we will continue in our sins; not therefore we will multiply and
add sin to sin.

Secondly, As God is merciful in pardoning great sinners, so God is just in
condemning God is just as well as merciful.
great sins; and as he has, and will glorify his mercy in forgiving and
saving some great sinners, so he has and will glorify his justice, in judging
and damning some other great sinners; therefore do not presume to go on in
great sins, because God has promised to forgive great sins. Exodus 34. 6. The
Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious. Ver. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. Here you see his mercy declared,
that he will forgive the great sins of some persons; but then read on, and you
shall find his justice, that he will punish the great sins of others. -- And
that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the childrens children, unto the third and to the fourth generation. You
read that some of the Corinthians were justified and pardoned, who had been
guilty of adultery and Sodomy. 1 Cor. 6. 9. And so you read of others that were
damned for those sins. Jude, ver. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities
about them in like manner giving themselves over unto fornication, and going
after strange flesh, are see forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire.

Thirdly, There was never any great sinner whom God pardoned, nor is there
Never was any great sinner pardoned, but he repented.
any great sinner whom God does promise to pardon, but he has repented, and he
must repent of his great sins.

1. Consider the great sinners whom God has pardoned, as they were great
sinners, so they were great penitents. David was guilty of great sins, but he
repented of them all; he repented of his murder, and he repented of his
adultery, and he repented of his pride in numbering the people. Manasses was an
exceeding great sinner (hardly any the like, 2 Chronicles. 33. from ver. 1. to ver.
11.) but he repented of his great sins; he besought the Lord his God, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, Ver. 12. And prayed unto
him, and he was entreated of him, Ver. 13. And he reformed all again; for he
pulled down, and put away all his Idolatry, Ver. 15. And he did set up the true
worship of God again, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel, Ver.
16; etc.

2. Consider the great sinners whom God does promise to pardon, certainly you
shall find that promise to pass upon terms of repentance; not else. Isa. 1. 16.
Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes,
cease to do evil, learn to do well. Ver. 18. Come now, let us reason together
says the Lord; Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Acts 3. 19. Repent ye
therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out; what their great
sins were, you may read in Ver. 14. They denied the holy One. And Ver. 15.
Killed the Prince of life; and if they would have these sins blotted out, they
must repent of them.

Fourthly, God has threatened unto great sinners (on whom his mercy has God
threatens eternal wrath to them that repent not.
not wrought repentance) eternal wrath, and a peremptory privation of mercy,
with inevitable destruction unto them who have presumed to go on in their sins;
for the first of these, see the known place of the Apostle, Romans 2. 4. Not
knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance. Ver. 5. But after
thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up to thy self wrath against the
day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God: For the latter
of these, see that smart place in Deuteronomy. 29. 19. And it come to pass, when he
hears the w^^ds of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst. Ver. 20. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger
of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses
that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out
his Name from under heaven. Ver. 21. And the Lord shall separate him unto evil
out of all the Tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the Covenant
that are written in this book of the Law.

Fifthly, A going on still in great sins, if it be any sure testimony at all,
it is Persisting in great sins, if any testimony at all, it is rather that God
will not pardon.
rather that God will never forgive you, than otherwise; why so, will you say?
because

1. There is no promise of mercy to any that goes on in his great
transgressions, but refuses to hearken, and to return; in such a condi^ion and
course no promise.

2. There are dreadful threatenings of God against such who shall go still on in
their trespasses. Psalm. 68. 21. And God shall wound the head of his enemies,
and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses. Isa. 65.
20. The sinner being an hundred years old, shall be accursed. Prove. 29. 1. He
that being often reproved, hardens his neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy.

3. Your going on still in sinning (unless the Lord be infinitely and
extraordinary merciful toward you) will render you utterly incapable of
forgiving mercy; for

First, This course of sinning is that which does desperately harden your
hearts, and fear your consciences, that no dealing whatsoever can make any
impression upon you toward Repentance.

Secondly, The Lord does usually give up such sinners to their own hearts
lusts, and to a reprobate mind and soul.

Sixthly, Though (possibly) some few sinners (who have for a long time
continued Though a few such obtain mercy, yet they are hardly persuaded of Gods
mercy.
in great transgressions) may obtain mercy, yet they shall find it a very
difficult work to be persuaded of Gods mercy to their souls. Psalm. 6. 3. My
soul is also sore vexed, but O Lord how long?

My Reasons are these.

1. Because the threatenings of God are so many, and so express against great
sins, (especially against the continuing in them) that it will not be easy to
overbalance these threatenings of God with the promise of God.

2. Because the truth of repentance is very apt to be much questioned by great
sinners, when yet indeed they do repent; they do conceive (and that rightly)
that for extraordinary sinnings, extraordinary repentance is required; but they
feel such a hardness, such a deadness of heart, O they cannot repent! And let
me tell you, if any great sinner be in dispute about the truth of his
Repentance, he will also be in dispute about the apprehension of mercy.

3. Because of all sins whatsoever, great sins do incline us (under the clear
apprehension of them) to despair: You shall find this experimentally true, that
the more desperate people have been in sinning, they are more apt to despair,
when conscience ever sets upon them for their sins. The guilt of great sins
will be heavy and bitter, and the woundings for great sins will be sharp and
deep; always (for them) there falls in the sense of Gods great wrath, and the
fear of Gods great judgment, and the instances of the great punishments of God
inflicted on great transgressions; and with all these, Satan's great and subtle
temptations, all which are powerfully apt to sink the sinner with despair; and
then this is clear, that the more apt any sinner is to despair, the less apt is
the sinner to close with pardoning mercy; nay, it falls off the more from the
hope of it.

4. Because the Lord is pleased to hold up the manifestation of his love a long
time, from those that have a long time sinned against the offers and calls of
his love and mercy; thereby teaching great sinners how unworthy they are to
taste of his goodness, and warning other great sinners not to presume of any
easy enjoyment of mercy. And you shall find it a hard work to settle and
persuade the conscience of a great sinner about mercy, when the Lord does
(after many seekings) still hold up the manifestations or sensible expressions
of his favor and mercy toward him.

5. Because it is a very difficult thing to act faith under the sense of great
transgressions; lesser iniquities do many times check and keep down our
confidences, much mort do great transgressions, etc.

SECT. V. Cases of con^ience. What a troubled sinner should do that can find no
parallel instance of the like sin forgiven; Ans^ered. Troubled sinners look
after instances of like sinners pardoned.

BEfore I pass away from this Point of Gods pardoning great sins, I would speak
to a few Cases or Scruples of conscience with which some are, or may be
troubled.

Quest. 1. What that troubled sinner should do who has been guilty of some
great sin, for which he cannot find any one parallel instance of forgiveness
in all the Scriptures, (i. e.) that ever God did forgive any that were guilty
of that sin.

Sol. To this very sadly distressing Case, I would deliver these six Answers.

First, It is true, that a person convinced of, and really troubled with the
sense of any great sin, does look after, and will not easily be satisfied in
conscience without a parallel instance in the Scripture of some sinners in the
like condition of guilt with himself, whom yet God did pardon; but did ever any
sin as I have sinned? and did God ever pardon any who have sinned as I have
sinned? or had their sin all those aggravations (though God has pardoned them)
as my sin has? can you give me any one clear record or pattern of the same?

There are two reasons which draw a troubled sinner thus to search, and thus to
enquire.

1. One is, because he thinks that what God never did in a way of mercy, he
will never do.

2. Another is, because he thinks that the apprehension of great mercy past in
a case parallel with his, will be a quicker help to his hope and faith, that
God may likewise forgive his great sins, even as he has forgiven the same to
others.

Nevertheless (under favor be it spoken) this is not so regular a way, Yet
this is not so regular, nor so sure a ground of hope.
nor yet so sure a ground for hopes of mercy; for

1. If instances and precedent patterns of former mercy were necessarily to be
looked at as grounds for hopes in us of the like mercy, then the first
transgressors, they that had been first in the guilt of great transgressions
must have despaired of forgiveness; for no pattern, example or instance of the
like was ever found before; but mercy was pleased to make them the pattern of
mercy for others; as Paul speaks of himself in 1 Timothy 1. 16. Howbeit for this
cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might show forth all
long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to
life everlasting. The Lord himself would have put us upon that way of searching
records and instances, before we should look up unto thi^ promise by faith.

2. These instances of mercy will not (absolutely) quiet the troubled
conscience; but notwithstanding them, the fire will still burn, and the
torments and fear will abide in strength, and that upon a double account.

First, Though God show mercy to a great transgressor in the like kind, yet he
has not showed mercy to every one in that kind; so that still the sinner is
troubled, But will God show mercy to me?

Again, that a like great transgressor I find has had a great change wrought
in him; O but this I cannot find or discern in my self. Ergo. So then troubled
sinners do (usually) look after instances and examples of pardon, before they
do look up to the promises of mercy; but this is not so regular, nor so sure a
way to raise faith, as I shall presently show unto you.

But secondly, Though you cannot find a powerful instance, yet possibly there
Though you cannot find a parallel instance, yet instances in the same kind may
be found.
may be found instances of transgressors in the same kind of sinning, whom God
has formerly pardoned; though you cannot find them, yet they may be found in
the Scriptures: Suppose your great sin has been

1. Extortion, you may read that forgiven in Zacheus. 2. Drunkenness, you may
read that forgiven in Noah. 3. Theft, you may read that forgiven to the
Penitent Thief on the Cross. 4. Whoredom, you may read it forgiven to Mary
Magdalen; and adultery, it was forgiven to David. 5. Incest, you read it
forgiven to Lot, and to the incestuous Corinthian. 6. Sodomy, you read it
forgiven to some of the Corinthians. 7. Murder, you read it forgiven to David.
8. Idolatry, you read it forgiven to Solomon, and also to some of the
Corinthians. 9. Blasphemy, why, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven, etc. Matthew 12 31. 10. Apostasy; Return thou backsliding Israel,
says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am
merciful, Jer. 3. 12. 11. Scoffin and mocking of the Gospel, and the Ministers
thereof, yet some of these heve been forgiven, Act. 2. 13, 38. and 17. 32, 34.
12. Denying and forswearing of Christ; yea and that after knowledge and faith,
yet pardoned unto Peter; possibly the great sin (which lies so heavy upon the
Conscience) may be soon one of these, and then you see a parallel instance as
you do desire.
But 3ly, admit you read not of a particular personal example, yet if you do
May not instances of pardon of sins that exceed yours serve the turn?
read of any instance of forgiving mercy to any sinner whatsoever, whose great
transgressions do not only equal, but far exceed that or those of which you
are guilty, may not that serve you? Surely it is not impossible that thy great
sins may be forgiven, if mercy has past an Act of grace in forgiving some
sinners their great transgressions.

Object. O no! no man's sins were ever greater than mine, etc.

Sol. Well; but what if I produce one whose sins have been such, that thy heart
will be amazed at, and dread to think of being guilty of such transcendent
iniquities? my instance shall be in Manasseh, of whom you may thus read, 2 Chro
33. 2. He did evil in the sight of the Lord, like unto the abominations of the
Heathen whom the Lord has cast out before the children of Israel. Ver. 3. For
he built again the high places which Hezekiah his Father had broken down, and
he reared up Altars for Baalim, and made Groves, and worshipped all the Host of
heaven, and served them. Ver. 3. Also he built Altars in the house of the Lord,
whereof the Lord said, In Jerusalem shall my Name be for ever. Ver. 5. And he
built Altars for all the Host of heaven, in the Courts of the house of the
Lord. Ver. 6. And he caused his children to pass through the fire in the
valley of the son of Hinnom: Also he observed times, and used Enchantments, and
used Witchcraft, and dealt with a Familiar spirit, and with Wizards; he wrought
much evil in the sight of the Lord to provoke him to anger. Ver. 7. And he set
a carved image (the idol which he had made) in the house of God. Ver. 9. So
Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse
than the Heathen, whom the Lord had destroyed before the children of Israel.
Ver. 10. And the Lord spoke unto Manasseh, and to his people, but they would
not hearken. Are not these sins greater than thy sins? Such high
Idolatries, sacrificing of Children to the Devils. Yet this greatest of sinners
that you read of in the old Testament, upon his deep repentance found mercy; as
Paul who called himself the chiefest of sinners in the New Testament, did
likewise obtain mercy, etc.

Fourthly, Under the sense of (incomparably) great sinnings, the business is
not Under the sense of great sinnings, the business is not to debate, but to
repent.
to debate, but to repent: Not what great sins you or others have committed,
and whose great sins God has pardoned, but to obtain an heart from God to
repent of those sins; for though sins be lesser sins, a sinner shall be damned
for them, if he repent not: Though sins have been exceeding great, yet they
shall be forgiven upon repentance.

You demand what a great sinner should do, who can find no instance of mercy to
any under the same guilt with himself! I answer plainly;

1. He should do what God calls upon him to do (and what he has called upon
other great sinners to do) and that is to repent: Let the wicked forsake his
way, etc. Isa. 55. 7. Repent and be converted, Act. 3. 19. Put away the evil of
your doings, Isa 1. 16.

2. He should by faith lay hold on the promises of mercy by Christ to a
repenting sinner: To dispute who has found mercy, is the least of your
business, but do you repent, and you shall quickly see mercy in a promise to
your own souls, although you cannot find Instances of mercy unto others

Fifthly, Though you cannot find particular and answerable instances, yet in
case Though you cannot find instances, yet in case of Repentance you shall find
promises.
of Repentance you may, and shall find sufficient promises (which are proper
grounds for your faith to work on) to answer your conditions: All manner of sin
and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy aganist, etc.
Matthew. 12. 31. Certainly this promise will reach your sin, be it never so
great, unless it be the sin against the Holy Ghost, and that sin you are not
guilty of, because you are repenting of your sin, whereas it is impossible to
renew those (who are guilty of that sin) unto repentance, Heb. 6. 6.

Sixthly, And let me tell you one thing more; That as when God forbids any kind
of sin, he does therein forbid the particular individual branches of that sin:
So (if I do not exceedingly mistake) when he does promise to forgive a sin in
any kind, that promise of forgiveness will extend to any one particular or
distinct sin of that kind; be that particular sin never so heinous, v^g. When
he promises to forgive uncleanness indefinitely upon the repentance of a
person, this promised forgiveness is appliable to the most vile and horrid
ways of uncleanness, of which a person has been guilty: But I have said
enough to this Scruple.

Whether the first work of a sinner be to repent or to believe:
2. Quest. Whether in case of great transgressions, the first work which
concerns the sinner, be to repent of his sin, or firsc to believe that God has
forgiven his sin, or rather will do so?

Sol. Truly I think that whatsoever we may (Theoretically) argue in such a
case, yet (practically) he that is wounded in Conscience for any great sin,
has little leisure or ability to keep Rank or File; I mean thus artificially
to consider the Method or Order of Spiritual actings: But one while he thinks
on sin, and another while on mercy; when on his sin, then with great fears; and
when on mercy, then with great doubts. That he should repent, he knows; that he
may presently believe, he questions; and to speak plainly, he can neither well
repent, nor yet well believe; a third work ordinarily presses him, which is of
a troubled; and troubling Conscience.

But yet if you would have me speak my thought to this Nicity, rather than Case
of Conscience, I should say,

First, As to experience; trouble and tears, and fears, and sighs, and groans
are (usually) the immediate workings and issues of great sinings:

Secondly, As to the command; Repentance is the first work which God lays out
for the great sinner; This generally you read prescribed both in the Old and
New Testament, 2 Chronicles, 7. 14. Isa. 1. 16. Isa. 55. 7. Ezekiel. 18. 21. and Luke
24. 47. Act. 2. 38. Act. 3. 19. And truly it will be no easy work to clear
out, that a man can or may believe, that God (according to promise) will
forgive him his sins (though very great) whiles he yet remains impenitent.

Thirdly, As to the order of practice; I would prescribe both of them to be
first; The sinner should repent first, and the sinner should believe first; and
that he may do both first, he should pray for both first. A believing
Repentance, and a Repenting Faith; such a Repentance which is accompanied with
Faith; and such a Faith as accompanied with Repentance: And verily in this
case, if the Faith be right, it is not without Repentance; and if the
Repentance be right, it is not without Faith: you cannot rightly repent unless
you have Faith to see some mercy; neither can you confidently believe unless
there be some Repentance. I beseech you whiles others are a disputing which of
these should appear first, do you earnestly and seriously beg of God for grace
to act them both.

What that sinner should do who cannot find a heart to repent or believe.
3. Quest. But there is another Case which is more real, and more to purpose,
viz. What that sinner should do, who upon the commission of some great sin,
cannot find a heart either to repent, or to believe? the heart is become
hardened, and no workings can be raised either of mourning for the sin post, or
of believing for mercy future!

Sol. This is unto the sinner a very dreadful case; because

1. God seems to deal with him in a plain judicial way, and in a forsaking
manner, denying unto him the presence and power of his Spirit, to raise him out
of the depth of his sin and misery into which he has plunged himself.

2. God seldom leaves a sinner thus, but where the sinner has presumed to
commit some great transgression against some special actings of knowledge and
Conscience. Nevertheless to the case propounded,

First, Let the sinner in this condition consider whether no penitential, and
no believing operations at all are to be found in his heart: whether he does
not (at least) Consider whether there be no penitential and believing
operations at all to be found.
with a sad and troubled heart consider into what a condition he has (by his
great sinning) brought himself! whether there be not some judgings and
abhorrings of himself, and some desires after a Spirit of mourning and
believing.

Secondly, this sinner should acknowledge it as a great and righteous judgment
of God upon him for his sinning; And that the Lord may for ever withdraw from
Acknowledge it a righteous judgment of God upon him
him, and utterly leave him, because he has thus presumptuously sinned against
him: Never let him open his mouth against God, but justify and clear him as
most righteous, and condemn himself as most unthankful, and unworthy that ever
the Lord should look on him any more: That he should thus (against light and
warnings, and reluctancies of conscience, and against mercy, and love, and
perhaps experience) presumptuously venture to offend and provoke God.

Thirdly, If under all the d^stinct Considerations of this sinning, and his
free confessions unto God, and his self-judgings, no tenderness yet appear, and
no Use private helps of Conference and Prayer, with godly and experienced
Ministers and Christians.
special workings yet arise, and no hope of mercy; then let him confer with
some godly and well experienced Ministers and Christians (if there be a
messenger with him, an Interpreter, one among a thousand, Job 33. 23.) to pity
his soul, and to show him his way, and to open counsel unto him, and to pour
out his heart in prayer to the Lord for him. The fervent prayers of the
Righteous are effectual and prevalent, Jam. 5. 16. and should be called in for
help in such a case: And when all of them join together and cry mightily unto
God, O Lord, in the midst of judgment remember mercy; Lord deal not with this
sinner according to his sinning against thee: Lord! do not forsake him and
leave him; Lord! return in mercy to his soul; and renew him again unto
repentance; for thy Name sake, for thy Christ's sake do not abhor him, but heal
his backslidings, and be merciful unto his back slidings! I te^l you that such
joint and earnest prayers of the people of God, are seldom denied by God.

Fourthly, If yet no spiritual working can be revived, but his heart like the
Shunamites Repair to some soul-searching and quickening Ministry.
child, which for all that Gehazi could say or do, still remained dead, so this
man's heart, for all that private helps can do, still remains hard and
unaffected; then let him think on, and repair to some soul-searching and
quickening Ministry, which God does (ordinarily) bless, to break down a
presumptuous heart, and to lift up a contrite heart; to pierce and wound a hard
heart, and to comfort and revive a troubled heart: Who can tell what the Lord
will, or may do in and by his own Ordinance? especially when a poor ^^nner
comes directly for that end to receive impressions from God? and renouncing all
his own power* (as well he may, for it utterly fails him) offers up his heart
(such as it is) unto the Lord to be created (as it were) again, and new
mou^ded, and formed, and quickened. O Lord! I doubt I have lost all since my
sinning against thee (oh that sinning against thee!) I can neither find thee,
nor my self; Repentance seems to be dead, O I cannot grieve or mourn! and Faith
seems to be dead, and I cannot believe or trust! Lord! may I come to thee! may
I look up to thee! may I call upon thee! may I hope in thee! thou can yet do
me good, will thou so! O that thou would make thy power to appear, if yet
thou will not make thy grace to appear! I have cast my self down, and I cannot
raise my self; I have hardened my heart, and I cannot soften it; I have
weakened every grace, and I cannot quicken any one again: yet O Lord, thou
can do all this; thou can convince, and humble, and turn, and raise, and
renew: I bring my heart to thee, do with me what seems good in thine eyes,
only take not thy Spirit from me; by thy Spirit breathe some life into this
dead heart; I have lived a presumptuous sinner, yet O Lord, let me not dye an
hardened, and impenitent, and unbelieving sinner!

Fifthly, If after all this, nothing appears of change in thy hard heart, then
set Set some time apart for fasting and prayer.
somesolemn time apart for fasting and prayer to humble thy soul, and to seek
the face of God: And indeed this is convenient and necessary in this case; for
extraordinary sinnings do require extraordinary humiliations; and God gives in,
and comes unto us upon such extraordinary seeking, when he holds off upon
ordinary and common addresses: The Word of God tells us so much, and experience
seals and bears witness thereunto. And therefore let nothing hinder or divert
thee from this work; not that this kind of service has any kind of merit in
it, but that 1. God expects it if we would have peace after great sinnings. And
2ly it shows how much the heart is displeased with itself, and truly longs to
be raised and reconciled. And 3ly God is usually found in this way, and returns
again, and shows compassion, and forgives sins, and subdues iniquities. And
withal remember three things about this work.

1. Be not discouraged though at the beginning thou find thy heart very
hardened, and dull, and straightened, yet still hold on, and before the end of it,
thou shall find it altered into some mournings, and meltings, and hopes of
mercy, and gracious answers.

2. Fasten all thy hopes on the Lord Jesus; pray, and ask in his Name, and
trust in his Name for thy pardon, and for thy recovery, and resolve plainly to
wait, and hearken what the Lord in his time will speak to thee, and do for thee.

3. Apply those promises which do especially respect thy ^ad condition: What
are those, will you say? They are 1. the promise of softening a hard heart. 2ly
The promises of healing a backsliding heart. 3ly The promises of pardoning
great transgressions; you have them all expressed in the Word. Ezekiel. 36. 26. I
will take away the heart of stone, and will give them an heart of flesh. Hose.
14. 4. Isa. 1. 18. I will heal their back slidings. Though your sins be as
scarlet, I will make them as white as snow.

EZEKIEL. 36. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean, etc.
YOU have heard already from this Verse two things. One was the Quality of the
mercy promised by God unto his people, and that was the forgiveness of their
sins. The other was the Quantity of that promised mercy, respecting partly the
multitude of their sins, and partly the magnitude of their sins (From all your
filthiness, and from all you Idols will I cleanse you.)

Now there remains yet a little more which God does promise about the
forgiveness of the sins of his people, and that is expressed in the words which
I have read unto you (I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean.

Object. For it might be objected, How it is possible, that our sins which are
so many, and which are so great, should be forgiven us? what can be found to
appease Gods justice for them, and to take them away, so that they shall never
be imputed unto us? and how may we be assured or ascertained concerning this?

Sol. The Answer is made in the Text (I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and
What is meant by sprinkling clean water upon them. The blood of Christ. The
particular application of his blood.
you shall be clea^^^ by which expression two things are meant.

1. The blood of Christ, which is the effectually meritorious reason of the
forgiveness of the most, and of the greatest of the sins of the people of God.

2. The particular application of the blood of Christ unto them, with an
assurance that it was shed for their sins. Both these does the sprinkling of
clean water import: You read in the Mosaical Law of diverse Ceremonial
sprinklings.

1. Of the blood of the Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12. 7. 2. Of the blood of the
Bullock, Levit. 16. 14. 3. Of the blood of the red Heifer, Numb. 19. 4. And of
the clean water with hysop, ver. 5. 4. Of the blood of the burnt-offering, and
peace offering, with which the people were sprinkled: Exodus 24. 8. And Moses
took the blood and sprinkled it on the people; and said, Behold the blood of
the Covenant which the Lord has made with you: All this the Apostle sums up
in Heb. 9. 19. Moses took the blood of Calves, and of Goats, with water, and
scarlet, wool, and hysop, and sprinkled both the book and people. By all these
is meant the taking away of sin by the shedding of the blood of Christ; and the
applying of the blood of Christ to the people of God, that is meant by
sprinkling. Hence you read, Isa. 52. 15. He shall sprinkle many Nations. Heb.
12, 24. The blood of Christ is called the blood of sprinkling. 1 Pet. 1. 2. We
are elected (and saved) through the Sanctification of the Spirit, and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Now from all this, there are two
Propositions observable.
1. That the blood of Christ is the Cause, and it is the only Cause for which
the people of God have their many and great sins pardoned (that is the clean
water which makes us clean.)

2. That the Lord will, and does make a particular Application (even to the
Consciences of his people) touching the forgiveness of their sins by the blood
of Christ: (He will sprinkle that clean water upon them.)

CHAP. V. Christ's blood the merit of pardon.
THat the blood of Christ is the Cause* and it is the only meritorious cause
for This blood of Christ is the cause, and the only meritorious cause of
forgiveness.
which the people of God have their many and great sins pardoned: (That is the
clean water (or according to the Original, the clean waters) which makes them
clean.)

SECT. I.
OF this Assertion there are two Branches. It is the cause of forgiveness.


First, That the blood of Christ is the Cause for which the people of God have
all their sins pardoned: This truth the Scripture clearly holds forth. Matthew.
26. 28. This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation
through Faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of
sins that are past. Mark, Christ is our Propitiation, and he is our
Propitiation by blood: It is the blood that makes an Atonement for your souls:
Levit. (...) 11. And without shedding of blood is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. And
therefore the High Priest (who was a Type of Christ, when he was to make an
Atonement, he always came with the blood of the Sacrifice) Ephesians. 1. 7. In
whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. Rev. 1. 5.
Who washed us from our sins in his own blood. 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Besides these Scriptures, you shall
find other places putting the forgiveness of sins expressly upon Christ's account
as the Cause, Ephesians. 4. 32. Forgiving one another, even as God fir Christ's sake
has forgiven you. 1 John 2. 12. I write unto you little Children, because your
sins are forgiven you for his Name sake. Romans 5. 11. We joy in God through our
Lord Jesus Christ by whom we have received the Atonement. Beloved, The people
of God have a threefold anchor to trust upon for the pardon of their sins.

1. One is the free grace of God: Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by his
grace. 2. A second is the blood of Christ: Romans 5. 9. Being now justified by
his blood. 3. The third is the Covenant of God: Jer. 33. 8. I will pardon all
their iniquities whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed
against me.
Before I quit this first Branch of the Assertion, I would directly answer
three Questions.

1. How the blood of Christ can be such a Cause as amounts so high as the
forgiveness of sins, though very many, and very great? 2. What necessity there
was for the effusion of his blood in a Causal order to the forgiveness of our
sins. 3. How it may be demonstrated that it does reach so far, etc.
Quest. 1. How the blood of Christ can be such a cause as to amount How there
can be such an efficacy in the blood of Christ; Ans^e^ed.
and reach so high for the forgiveness of all our sins, though very many, and
very great?

Sol. To this it may be answered, that it does arise from

1. The dignity of the person of Christ who was God-man.

2. The Concurrence of both the natures of Christ, in all his Mediatory actions
and passions, so that they were Theandrical, sufferings both Humane and Divine;
and therefore his blood is called the blood of God, (Acts 20. 28. God purchased
the Church with his own blood.) and the Lord of glory is said to be crucified,
(they crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8.) And from these two
Considerations there is light enough to convince us of the wonderful power and
virtue in the blood of Christ to reach the forgiveness of all our sins, because
he was an infinite person, and for him to suffer and dye, was more than if all
the sons of men had done so. And because the virtue of his Deity did so extend
unto, and attend his Death or Sacrifice, that thereupon it came to be of more
than sufficient worth to satisfy Gods justice, and to expiate our sins; for
although there was in our sins an abounding measure of guilt, yet there was in
the blood of Christ (it being the obedience of one who was God) a
superabounding worth to weigh down and remove all the malignity and demerit in
the sin of man; there being no more proportion 'twixt the demerit of our
sinnings, and the demerit of his sufferings, than there is 'twixt our persons
and his person.

What necessity was there of it;
Quest. 2. But secondly, It is demanded, What necessity there was for the
effusion of his blood in order to the forgiveness of our sins?

Sol. It was necessary that the blood of Christ should be shed to wash us from
our sins, because

First, Divine justice must be satisfied before sins can be forgiven; till that
Divine justice must be satisfied.
be done, mercy it self (if I may so speak) is not at liberty; therefore the
Apostle tells us that God did set forth Christ to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood, (Romans 3. 25.) To declare his righteousness, that he might
be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus, (Ver. 26.) The
meaning is, that the blood of Christ reconciled both these Attributes of God;
justice calls for satisfaction; there it is says Christ, my blood has
satisfied you; and mercy longs to help and pardon the poor sinner; it shall
come says Christ, for my blood has purchased it.

Secondly, Jesus Christ must make good his bargain and agreement; he did agree
with Christ must make good his bargain.
his Father to be a Surety for all his people, and was content to stand in
their stead, and to have all their iniquities laid upon himself, and to answer
for them, and to suffer for them, and to clear and discharge them, and to
reconcile and save them by his death; and therefore even upon that account it
was necessary that Christ should dye, and shed his blood, that the agreement
'twixt him and the Father might be performed.

Thirdly, It was necessary also in this respect, To convince us of the
hainousness To convince us of the hainousness of sin.
of sin; we ordinarily look on sin as a small matter, as if God were not
offended and provoked by it; and if he be, ^et a small matter will serve the
turn to satisfy God, to pacify him toward us* and get forgiveness; but we do
extraordinarily delude our selves; for without shedding of blood there is no
remission; it cost Jesus Christ (the Son of God) his precious blood, and if
that had not been shed, never could any have got the forgiveness of any one sin.

Fourthly, It was necessary likewise as to the acquiescing, quieting or
satisfying To satisfy conscience.
of conscience, which would never come to any rest or peace, unless Jesus
Christ had shed his blood; for still the conscience cries out, Gods justice
must be satisfied, and who will undertake that great work? Lo I come says
Christ, I have laid down a price, I became sin, I was made a curse, I wrought
redemption, I have satisfied the just God, and purchased the forgiveness of
your sins; and now conscience is quieted; Who shall condemn? it is Christ that
dyed.

How it may be demonst^ated;
Quest. 3. How it can be demonstrated that the blood of Christ is the cause of
forgiveness of our sins, though many and great?

Sol. Besides the clear Scriptures already mentioned, these Arguments may help
us to demonstrate it.

First, We are set free by the blood of Christ. Zach. 9. 11. By the blood of
thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit.

Secondly, We are justified by his blood, and saved from wrath. Romans 5. 9. Much
more being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him. Pray,
tell me what is it to be justified, but to be pardoned? and what is it to be
saved from wrath, but to be delivered from all punishment? and both these
depend upon the blood of Christ.

Thirdly, So we are said to be made nigh by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13.
and to be reconciled through the blood of his Cross, Colos. 1. 20.

Secondly, Now I come to the second Branch of the Assertion, that as Jesus
Christ's blood the only cause of pardon;
Christ's blood is the cause, so it is the only cause for which God forgives the
sins of his people.

Yet let me distinguish; causes of forgiveness are of two sorts.

First, Internally moving God, and that is his own free grace only.

Secondly, Externally meriting, and that is the death or blood of Christ only.
Isa. 63. 3. I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was
none with me. Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other Name; for
there is none other Name under heaven given amongst men whereby we must be
saved. Acts 13. 38. Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins. Ver. 39. And by him all that believe are justified from all things from
which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Other
foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

The truth of this will easily appear, if you consider Demonstrated.


First, The works of God the Father, who laid on Christ (and none but Christ)
the iniquities of us all, Isa. 5. 3. 6. and sealed him, John 6. 27. (and set
him apart, authoritatively commissioned him) and set him forth to be a
propitiation, Romans 3. 25.

Secondly, The office of Christ (amongst the rest) to be our High Priest; and
in this respect, two things are proper unto him. 1. The oblation of himself for
sin. 2. His intercession for transgressions.

Thirdly, The nature of merit, which

1. Must be opus indebitum; for he who does do no more than he ought to do, or
suffers but what he deserves to suffer, merits nothing by his doing, or by his
suffering. 2. Must be opus perfectum, against which no exception can be taken;
nothing is meritorious which is short and faulty. 3. Must be opus infinitum, a
work of infinite value and worth, which cannot only stand before justice, but
plead also with it, and challenge it for the dignity of what is done or
suffered.
Now these qualifications (not to mention any more) set the Crown on the head
of Christ alone, and strike it off from us, and all our works, yea, the best;
for they are

1. But debts; our best obedience is but so, and our best repentance is but so.

2. But imperfect; when we have done all, we are but unprofitable servants; and
so much iniquity accompanies our holy offerings, that we need Jesus Christ to
be our Aaron to bear them, and have need to pray, as he that mourned for his
sins, Domine, Lava lachrymas me as.

3. Were they perfect, yet they are but of a finite worth, and rise not to the
far more exceeding m^rit in sin, nor yet to the surpassing worth of Divine
mercy: If Jacob were not worthy of the least of mercies, much less are we of
the greatest of mercies.

Fourthly, The purpose of grace, which is universally to be exalted in the
forgiven^s^ of sins* with which, though Christ's merits can well consist, (Romans
3. 23. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ.) yet our merits are contradictorily repugnant. Romans 11. 6. If by grace,
then it is no more of works; and if it be of works, then it is no more grace.

SECT. II.
Hence learn To judge of the hainousness of sin.


First, To judge in another manner of our sins than in former times we have
done; how heinous they are, and how high the ^uilt of them is.

There are five glasses in which we may behold the hideous guilt of our sins,
of which yet many persons do but yet make a work of pastime.

1. One is the dreadful threatenings of the Law of God, which reveals and
discharges the wrath of God, and all sorts of curses, corporal, and spiritual,
and eternal against people for their sins.

2. A second is the unspeakable terrors in conscience, raised only from our
sins, which makes us like the troubled Sea that cannot rest; and to cry out
with Cain, and to despair with Judas, and to long for death with Spira.

3. A third is the wonderful outward judgments inflicted by God on people for
sin, plague and famine, and the sword, and tormenting diseases, burning down of
Cities, renting up of Kingdoms, and all the miserable evils in the world.

4. A fourth is the eternal duration of the flame of hell fire, the suffering
of the vengeance of eternal fire, as the Apostle speaks, Jude, ver. 7.

5. The fifth is the death and suffering of Jesus Christ; one says, that if it
were possible for us to see and feel the torments which the damned do suffer in
hell, it could not be so clear and eff^ctual conviction of the true desert of
sin, of the hainousness of it, of the odiousne^s of it, of the dreadfulness of
it, as the consideration of it in the death and blood of Christ, without which
there could be no forgiveness of our sins, no no^ of the least of them; I
beseech you to attend a little, ^in is of such a provoking, deserving nature;

First, That no creature, no not all the creatures in heaven and earth could
pacify God, and cleanse us from our sins, and procure the pardon of them, but
Jesus Christ the Son of God alone: Neither Angels nor Saints, nor
righteousness, nor prayers nor gold, nor silver can give unto God a ^ansome for
our soul; the redemption of it is more precious, it cannot be without the
precious blood of Christ.

Secondly, As none can procure the pardon of sin but Christ, so Christ could
not do it, but by dying; indeed there was very much excellency and worth in the
active obedience of Christ, in the holiness of his life, and exactness of his
works; nevertheless to get off our sins, his passive obedience is likewise
required, without that there was no remidion: Thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, Rev. 5. 9.

Thirdly, As Christ must dye to get the pardon of sin, so every death of Christ
is not sufficient, but he must dye that accursed death of the Cross, and become
a curse for us, or else he could not have got the pardon of our sins; hear the
Apostle, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us; for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a
Tree. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree.
Colos. 1. 20. He made peace through the blood of his Cross.

Fourthly, Neither would this have sufficed to dye on the Cross, (there
enduring the grievous torments in his soul and body due to our sins) if he had
not been God as well as man. 1 John 3. 16. speaking of the person of Christ, he
says, God laid down his life for us; and indeed that must be of infinite price
and merit, which must answer the everlasting torments due for all the sins of
all the Elect; there had not been enough in the death of Christ, had it not
been the death of a person who was God as well as Man. Thus you see (even in
the blood of Christ) the hainousness of sin, and the high guilt thereof, which
may make us to fear and tremble at the consideration of our own exceeding
guiltiness, etc.

Secondly, To look after Christ in another manner than formerly we have done:
To look after Christ in another manner than formerly.
Why, will you say? because in his blood only we have the remission of sins,
that it is the only cause for which God does forgive us.

Now because this is the principal Use which (I think) can be made of this
point, I will therefore briefly speak unto these three questions.

1. How we should look after Christ, seeing that there is no forgiveness but in
and by him. 2. Whether we do indeed look after Christ, so as that we may get
him to be ours, and have the benefit of forgiveness in his blood. 3. How one
may know that he has got Jesus Christ to be his, and consequently an interest
in his blood for the pardon of his sins.
Quest. 1. Seeing that there is no forgiveness of sins but for the blood of How
we should look after Christ.
Christ, how therefore should we look after Christ?

Sol. To this I answer.

First, We should look after Christ (so as to enjoy him to be ours) with With
all speediness.
all speediness, as David spoke in another case, I made haste, and delayed not
to keep thy Commands, Psalm. 119. 60. So should not we delay from time to time,
but hasten in to Christ, that so our sins may be pardoned: Whiles it is called
to day, to hearken unto his voice, Hebr. 3. 7. Isa. 60. 8. Who are these that
flee as a cloud, and as the Doves to their Windows? In three cases, swiftness
and presentness of action are required, viz.

1. When the danger is great. 2. When the mercy is great. 3. When the
opportunity is uncertain, all these circumstances meet together to stir us up
speedily to look after Christ, to get him to be ours; for
1. All the guilt of our sins lies upon our own souls, until Christ be ours;
no sin is forgiven, but we are under wrath and condemnation.

2. All our sins shall be taken off by the blood of Christ, if Christ be ours;
so that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1.

3. We have but our day, our hour, our opportunity, our present moment to look
after Christ; the day of life is uncertain, and the day of grace is uncertain,
the Spirit blows when and where, and how long, and how short, as himself
lists; O that thou had known, even in this thy day! etc. Luke 19. 42.

Secondly, We should look after Christ very seriously and carefully; our Very
se^iously.
souls should make it their solemn work and business, yea* all that is in our
souls should be united and engag^d for to get Christ. Percute tanquam ad
Aratrum, Strike as thou wast wont to strike at the Plough; so would I say, look
after Christ as ye are wont to look after the world) (the riches, and honor,
and pleasure of it) earnestly, and with all your heart, and with all your mind,
and with all your might; the Kingdom of heaven should suffer vi^lence, etc.
Ma^th. 11. 12. Prove. 8. 17. Those that seek me early, shall find me.

Thirdly, We should look after Christ diligently and laboriously, not shrinking
Diligently.
at any pains, and any ways, and any means to get Christ. Prove. 8. 34. Blessed
is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of
my do^rs. Cant. 3. 1. By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves. Ver.
2. I will rise up, and go about the City in the Streets, and in the broad ways
I will seek him whom my soul loves. Ver. 3. The watchmen that go about the
City found me, to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my soul loves? We should give
all diligence to make our c^lling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. so should we
to make Christ sure to our souls; for Prove. 8. 35. Who so finds me, finds
life; and ver. 36. All they that hate me, love death.

Fourthly, We should look after Christ resolutely, against all the
discouragements Resolutely.
of our own hearts, and against all the reproaches and contempts of the world,
and against all the suggestions of Satan: as Jacob spoke, I will not let thee
go, except thou bless me. Genesis 32. 26. Or as David, one thing have I desired of
the Lord, that I will seek after, etc. Psalm. 27. 4. So Lord, My heart is fixed,
my heart is fixed, and engaged. O give Christ to my poor soul, O bring in my
soul to Christ; I perish without him, as those out of the Ark; I live only in
and by him, I shall be damned if I have not Christ.

Quest. 2. Whether we do so indeed look after Christ, as that we may get him
Whether we do indeed look after Christ. He looks after Christ so as to get him,
Who seeks him with a burdened spirit.
to be ours, and find the forgiveness of our sins in his blood?

Sol. This is a great and necessary question, which may be thus resolved.

First, That man looks after Christ (as most probable to get him) whose minding
of Christ does arise from a burdened spirit, and a broken heart: O when the
Spirit of God does so set our sins upon our consciences, that they appear
indeed as sins, and do become the grievous burden of our souls, and we are ^ow
concluded and shut up by them as poor Prisoners, utterly lost and undone, and
no hope nor help but in a Christ. And hereupon our oppressed and dejected souls
(even from a clear experimental sense of our absolute need and want of Christ)
are carried out to the Prince of life and peace, Master, save us, or else we
perish; thou art life, and thou art peace, and thou art help, and thou only art
our hope; this is a right looking after Christ, and this will bring us at
length to the enjoying of him.

Secondly, That man looks after Christ, so as to get him, whose soul does Who
hungers and thirsts for Christ.
come to an hungring and thirsting for Christ; if any man thirsts, says
Christ, etc. my meaning is,

1. If it be Christ himself that the soul would have; as it is bread which the
hungry man would have, and it is water that the thirsty man would have.

2. If his heart be so affectionately set on Christ, and drawn out after him,
that all shall go which hinders the fruition of Christ, and that all shall be
embraced that makes way for the enjoyment of Christ.

3. If his soul be incessantly importunate for Christ, even importunate for
him, O Lord how long! will not be denied, etc. For whom I have suffered the
l^ss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, Phil. 3.
8. so Matthew. 23. 46.

Thirdly, That man looks so after Christ, as to get him, who strives with Who
strives with God for faith.
God for faith, and attends the Word of faith, and meditates much on Christ,
and on the promises of the Gospel, and invitations of the Gospel, and the
encouragements of the Gospel to persuade and breed faith in him to join him to
Christ. O I want faith, O that God would give me faith, O that he would
persuade and draw me by his own Spirit, O that I could lay hold on Christ, and
receive him, and give glory to his love and willingness, and offers, and
promises! and still the soul is upon this request, Lord give me Christ, and
Lord give me faith, and Lord strengthen faith, etc.

Quest. 3. How may one know that he has got Christ to be his Christ, and How
one may know he has got Christ to be his.
consequently the forgiveness of all his sins by Christ, and for Christ?

Sol. I do but occasionally move this question for their sakes who would fain
be ascertained that their sins are forgiven, of which they cannot be, unless
and until they be ascertained of Christ; but to the Quaeries, one may know
that he has got Christ, that Christ is his, and he is Christ's, by three
Characters, expressed in Three Characters of it.
three places of Scripture.

First, If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. A new
creature is changed, his mind new, and judgment new, and affections new, and
words and conversation new, and company new, and employment new, etc.

Secondly, They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections
and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. No sin has dominion, every sin is crucified, it has
lost its dominion; we are no friends to sin, no servants to sin; as Christ dyed
for our sins, so they that are Christ's, dye unto their sins, in respect of
love, and of action.

Thirdly, Christ becomes the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey
him, Hebr. 5. 9. Christ rules where Christ saves; if he be thy Lord, assuredly
he is thy Savior: His we are, whose servants we are, whom we do obey. Thou
have delivered us, and therefore thou shall reign over us, said they to Gideon;
so the man who is in Christ, Thou have redeemed me by thy blood, and therefore
thou shall rule me by thy Spirit; but if we will not obey Christ, we have no
interest in him.

the miserable condition of many persons; for if forgiveness of sins come unto
us only for the blood of Christ, The miserable condition of such Who regard not
the offers of Christ. Who look for pardon on another account.
then two sorts are in a miserable condition, they shall certainly miss thereof.

First, Who regard not the offers of the Lord Jesus Christ, but stand out and
refuse him, and will be enemies or strangers to him; they reserve their hearts
for the world, and for their sins; these men will live and dye in their sins.

Secondly, Who look for the pardon of their sins upon another account than the
blood of Christ; if they give some alms, there is a foundation which they lay
for the pardon of their sins; if they say their prayers, if they leave a sin,
they conceive here is cause enough why God should forgive them; and if they
serve him a little, that also they build their hopes upon. But all this (unless
God opens the eyes, and changes the heart) will prove a damnable mistake unto
you; for lying vanities you do forsake your mercies. It is 1. Folly. 2. Sin. 3.
Loss and Ruin thus to place thy confidence on any thing but the blood, etc.

Object. But have you not told us that God promises forgiveness upon repenting
and praying?

Sol. Yea, but never for repenting and praying, but only for Christ's sake;
means they are for pardon, but reasons and causes they are not of forgiveness;
therefore this do, mourn and repent still, but remember to stick unto Christ's
blood alone, as the meritorious cause of your forgiveness. O Lord, I am a
broken and penitent si^ner, I beseech thee to forgive me my sins; Why, what
reason, upon what account? says God O Lord do it for Christ's sake, whose I am,
and whom I serve; he shed his precious blood for the remission of sins, for his
sake forgive all my sins, etc.

stay and comfort unto poor sinners who are rightly sensible of their sins and
of the surpassing goodness of forgiving mercy, and also of their For stay and
comfort to poor sinners.
utter unworthiness thereof, and many times are doubting and disputing what
they may bring for mercy, and what they should plead for mercy. I will tell you
what you should bring, and what you should plead, for which God will forgive
you your sins; bring Jesus christ, and plead in his blood, and in his Name; he
is the propitiation for your sins, and through his blood you have the
forgiveness of your sins: I am a great sinner, and do need pardoning mercy; O
Lord, I come not in mine own name, but in Christ's Name; I cannot offer up any
worthiness of mine own, but I do by faith offer up the blood of Jesus Christ, O
pardon me for his sake, wash me from my sins in his blood, drown them in the
depth; his blood speaks better things than the blood of Abel; it was shed to
satisfy thy justice, and to reconcile and make peace; Lord, I rest not on my
self, but on thy Christ; not on my works, but on his merits; his blood was shed
for the remission of sins, that is my plea, and that is my confidence, etc.

Poor soul, this will carry it, this will prevail for thee.

1. The blood of Christ is the meritorious cause. 2. And it is the only
meritorious cause. 3. And it is the effectual cause of forgiveness of sins; God
has appointed it, and God will own and accept of it; he would have us draw
nigh by the blood of Christ; therefore make use of it, rest upon it*
EZEKIEL. 36. 25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean,
etc.
I Now come to the handling of the second Proposition from these words, viz.

CHAP. VI.
2. Doct. THat the Lord himself does promise not only to forgive the sins of
his God promises not only forgiveness, but the Application of it to our
souls. What is meant by the sprinkling of Christ's blood.
people in the blood of Christ, but also to apply to every one of their souls
that forgiveness for the blood of Christ: (I will sprinkle upon you, etc)

The sprinkling of the blood of Christ on any, is nothing else but the
Application thereof to them for their good and benefit. The sprinkling of the
blood of the Lamb upon the posts of the house, and the sprinkling of the blood
upon the Leper, did signify the applying of the blood of Christ for pardon,
deliverance, and salvation.

Here now I must show unto you

1. What this sprinkling or the Application of the blood of Christ for
forgiveness is. 2. Why the Lord makes this promise of sprinkling, or applying
unto his people. 3. Why he himself undertakes that work.
SECT. I.
1. Quest. WHat this sprinkling or application of the blood of Christ unto the
What this sprinkling or application of Christ's blood is.
people of God for the forgiveness of their sins, is?

Sol. I humbly conceive, That it is such an imputing of the blood of Christ
unto them in particular, as that they come to be certainly assured of the
forgiveness of their very sins, by the Spirit of God, and by Faith.

In this description there are three things remarkable concerning this
sprinkling or application of the blood of Christ for forgiveness.

1. That in it there is a particular and personal imputation of the blood of
Christ for forgiveness. 2. That it is not only an imputation, but also a
Certioration, or a respective asserting of them touching the forgiveness of
their sins in and for Christ. 3. That this asserting Application is made by
the Spirit of God, and by Faith.
First, This sprinkling it is a particular and personal imputation of the blood
of It is a personal imputation of his blood.
Christ unto the people of God for the forgiveness of their sins. As the Lord
did impute their sin unto Christ (He laid on him the iniquity of us all; Isa.
53.) And as Christ was made sin for them (Hew as made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.) So
the Lord does impute the sufferings of Christ unto them; (i. e.) accepts of
them on their behalf, and puts them upon their account; and as if the Lord
should say unto every particular believer, my Son was thy Surety, and stood in
thy stead, and suffered, and satisfied, and took away thy sins by his blood,
and that for thee, in his blood I find a Ransom for thy soul, I do acknowledge
my self satisfied for thee, and satisfied toward thee, and thou art delivered
and discharged, I forgive thee thy sins, and am reconciled unto thee, and will
save thee for my Christ sake: In his blood thou have Redemption, the
forgiveness of thy sins: God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing their trespasses unto them. But this is not all which is meant by
sprinkling, viz. A particular Application or Imputation of the blood of Christ,
to the believer for the forgiveness of his sins, which is (if I may so call it)
an Immanent Action or work within God himself. But moreover

Secondly, This sprinkling of the blood of Christ for forgiveness, it is a
notifying, It is a notifying of this unto the soul.
declaring, ascertaining work of God making known to the very heart and
consciences of his people, that for Christ's sake he has forgiven them their
sins: Psalm. 51. 7. Purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean. The Prophet seems
expressly to alude unto the Leper, and the cleansing of him, and to the
pronouncing of him clean, of which you may read in, Levit. 14. 3. The Priest
shall go out of the Camp, and the Priests shall look, and behold, if the plague
of Leprosy be healed in the Leper. Ver. 4. Then shall the Priests command to
take for him that is to be cleansed, two birds alive and clean, and Cedar wood;
and Scarlet, and Hysop. Ver. 5. And the Priest shall command that one of the
birds be killed in an earthen vessel over running water. Ver. 6. As for the
living bird, he shall take it and the Cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the
hysop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the living bird
that was killed over the running water. Ver. 7. And he shall sprinkle upon him
that is to be cleansed from the leprosy, seven times, and shall pronounce him
clean, etc. Now that the Lord does on this wise sprinkle the blood of Christ on
his people for the forgiveness of their sins (namely in a way of assurance that
their sins are forgiven) may thus appear by Scripture: Rev. 2. 17. To him that
overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white
stone, and in the stone a new name written which no man knows saving he that
receives it. The white stone was given in token of absolution; and the black
stone in token of condemnation by the Athenians. Psalm. 103. 2. Bless the Lord,
O my soul; Ver. 3. who forgiveth all thine iniquities, Matthew. 9. 2. Son, be of
good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. Luke 7. 48. He said unto her, thy sins
are forgiven. Ephesians. 4. 32. Even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.
Col. 2. 13. Having forgiven you all trespasses. 1 John 2. 12. Your sins are
forgiven for his Names sake. Isa. 60. 16. Thou shall know that I the Lord am
thy Savior and thy Redeemer. Chapter 40. 2. Speak ye comfortably unto Jerusalem,
and cry unto her that her iniquity is pardoned. 1 John 3. 14. We know that we
have passed from death to life, etc. But unless they did know that their sins
(in particular) were pardoned, they could not have said, we know that we are
passed from death to life.

Thirdly, This ascertaining Application is made by the Spirit of God, and by
How this app^ication is made.
Faith, and by the testimony of Conscience.

First, By the Spirit of God, which is given to the people of God, that they
might know the things that are given to them of God, 1 Cor. 2 12. The Spirit By
the Spirit of God.
is given not only for implantation of grace, but also for demonstration to
manifest (by his light) those graces which he has wrought in us. Not only for
union with Christ, but also for manifestation of that union unto us; not only
to bring us into Covenant with God, but also to open and reveal unto us the
love and mercy of God unto us in his Covenant: Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self
bears witness with our spirits that we are the children of God, ver. 17. and
if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. If the
Spirit testify unto us that we are the children of God, and heirs of God, then
certainly he witnesses with this, that we are justified and pardoned persons:
^phes. 1. 13. In whom after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy
Spirit of promise; ver. 14. which is the earnest of our inheritance. What is
that sealing by that holy Spirit of promise, but the evidencing, confirming,
assuring of us concerning the things which God has promised unto us; and
amongst the rest of the pardon of our sins in order to salvation?

Secondly, By Faith: There is an ability in Faith, not only to give a general
evidence and assent, that whatsoever God has promised, is true, but also By
faith.
to raise a particular evidence concerning our very interest in the things
promised by God unto us, 1 John 4. 16. We have known and believed the love that
God has to us. Cant. 15. 6. He is altogether lovely: (There is a direct act of
Faith) This is my beloved, and this my friend (here is the reflexive act of
faith) 1 John 5. 20. He has given us an understanding that we may know him
that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ.
Beloved! whatsoever good the Lord does promise unto his people, he will give
them Faith to believe it, (for that is one great end of his promising, that we
might inherit the good promised by believing) but God has promised the pardon
of sins in particular to every particular believer: Act. 10. 48. Whosoever
believes on him, shall receive the remission of sins. Ergo.

Thirdly, Besides this, there is given unto every one of the people of God an
By a renewed Conscience.
illightned and renewed conscience which knows the present frame of heart, and
can give in a clear testimony concerning it, whether it does indeed Repent, and
indeed believe (finding it such as the word requires) from whence it can make a
concluding evidence that our sins are certainly pardoned; for thus conscience
reasons: Whosoever does truly repent and believe, God himself in his Word
says, that his sins are forgiven: But (says the enlightened and renewed
conscience, which knows what is in man) thou do truly repent and believe, for
I find such lively acts and effects of them both, which the Word of God gives
concerning them in truth; Ergo, Be of good comfort and rejoice; thy sins are
forgiven thee.

Thus you see what the sprinkling is in the Text, namely the imputation of the
blood of Christ for forgiveness to every particular believer, with an assurance
of the forgiveness of his sins, for Christ's sake.

SECT. II.
Quest. 2. NOw I proceed unto the second Question, Why the Lord is Reasons of
it.
pleased to make such an application, and such an assurance unto his people?

No benefit by the blood of Christ without application
Sol. 1. One reason is, because though there be forgiveness for the blood of
Christ, yet this is of no benefit unto any but unto whom it is applied, and
appropriated, and imputed: me, unless my great debt be discharged: Suppose that
a release from the prison or from death, be granted, what is this to me, if the
release be not imputed unto me in particular? So though God forgives sins only
for the blood of Christ, unless he applies this to me, I am not the better for
it. O but God did peremptorily intend the particular good of every believer in
the death of Christ (Christ dyed for them, and gave himself for them) and
therefore he applies the blood of Christ to them; his intention was for them in
particular, they shall fare the better for Christ. Ergo.

Secondly, Their great comfort lies in this apprehension and assurance of the
forgiveness The comfort o^ it lies in assurance.
of their sins in the blood of Christ: There are two Requisites for the
Christians comfort concerning Christ and forgiveness.

1. One is Propriety; that Christ is his Christ, and dyed for his sins; Who
gave himself for me, said Paul, Gal. 2. 20.

2. Another is, evidence of the propriety; a knowledge that Christ is mine, and
that he washed my soul from my sins in his own blood; without these what joy
and comfort can there be? Romans 15. 13. The God of peace fill you with all joy
and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope through the power of the
Holy Ghost. A good prayer for believers, for joy, for peace, for hope; yea and
God has promised every one of these unto them; and therefore he applies unto
them the blood of Christ for the forgiveness of their sins, and assures them of
the same; Romans 5. 11. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we
have now received the Atonement.

Thirdly, God will be praised and blessed by his people for Christ, and for all
the God will be praised for Christ.
blessings accruing unto them by Christ; and his servants do bless him for
them, Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who
has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.
Psalm. 103. 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul; ver. 3. which forgiveth thy
iniquities: But unless the Lord did impute the blood of Christ for the
forgiveness of their sins, and did give them some assurance thereof, how could
they praise and bless him?

3. Quest. I now come to the last Question, viz. Why the Lord himself does Why
the Lord himself does undertake it.
undertake to impute the blood of Christ unto his people for the forgiveness of
their sins, and to assure them thereof (I will sprinkle)

Sol. There may be these Reasons given for it.

First, The difficulty, nay the impossibility of this work, unless the Lord
himself undertake it: There are three things which you can never attain, unless
the Lord The difficulty of the work.
himself does undertake for them.

1. To forsake your sins: Jer. 31. 18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned.
2. To believe in Christ; Ephesians. 1. 19. 3. To gain assurance that Christ is
yours, and that God has for Christ's sake forgiven you your sins. As Christ
spoke to Peter, when he confessed his Diety, Flesh and blood has not revealed
this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven: So say I about the particular
application and assurance of your forgiveness of sins; it must be God himself
by his spirit which must raise us to that, and make us to know that. Take me a
person rightly sensible of his sins, although he be converted, although he has
faith, although he studies the promises, although he has all the grounds made
clear unto him, upon which he may conclude that God has forgiven him; although
others can evidently discern his particular interest and propriety; yet unless
the Lord himself let in a special light by his Spirit to make him to see the
special love of God toward him in this, he cannot see it, so as to be assured
thereof: Therefore you find in experience that this assurance is one of the
longest, and last, and most questioned works in the soul. The glory that comes
to God by it.

Secondly, The glory which God does reserve unto himself of all the effects of
his Covenant; he will be known to be the Cause and Author of them all; he will
be acknowledged to be the God of grace, and the Father of mercies, and the God
of love, and the God of comfort, and the God of joy, and the God of peace; I
the Lord create peace, the fruit of the lips peace, Isa. 57. 19. As none in the
world can give trouble but God; so none can give peace but God, Job 34. 29.
None can cast down the heart but he; and none can raise the heart but he; none
can make sin known to the Conscience but he; and none can make mercy known to
the conscience but he: All the Covenant-gifts come from him; and all the
knowledge and assurance that we have of those very Covenant-gifts come from
him; all the promises are of him; and all the evidences of our propriety in
them, are from him; in his light we see light: our graces, our abilities, our
comforts, our assurances are from him.

Thirdly, That the effect might he certain unto his people; O what great things
does God promise unto his, and for which he alone undertakes! And if he That
the effect might be certain.
did not so, his people could never enjoy them! Neither grace, nor comfort, etc.

If the Lord himself did not work the grace in our hearts which he promises,
whose soul should ever partake of it? And if the Lord did not bring in that
comfortable assurance of his forgiving mercy, who should ever taste the
sweetness of it?

Object. Why! will you say, what does hinder it? what does stand in the way,
but that we way enjoy it, though God appears not to our help for it?

Sol. I will tell you what does hinder, and what will hinder, unless the Lord
himself remove them.

1. Your own unbelief of heart, does and will hinder with such continual fears,
and doubts, and exceptions, and reasonings, that unless the Lord himself does
silence that unbelief, it will never be assured, nor will your hearts be
quieted with assurance.

2. Satan will and does hinder it by his many, and subtle, and strong
suggestions, and puzlings of your weak faith, that none but the Spirit of God
can answer them, and settle your hearts with persuasion and assurance. But now
because God himself undertakes to sprinkle clean water upon them, they shall be
sprinkled; if he will make Christ thine, and forgive thy sins for Christ's
sake, and make this known to them, they shall certainly enjoy all, for who is
too strong for God? who can resist his will? he is too hard for our unbelieving
hearts, and Satan; If he says to the heart, be of good comfort, be at peace,
and it shall be so.

1. Use Does God himself promise and undertake to sprinkle clean water upon his
people? so to apply unto them the blood of Christ, as that every one of them
shall have forgiveness, and assurance of forgiveness by it.

Then in the first place, let this serve to stir up the hearts of all the
people of God, Not to be sluggish, or rest contented without this, but to give
all diligence, Rest not contented without this.
until they do attain the knowledge and certain evidence or assurance that
their sins are forgiven to them in particular for Christ's sake: You have
attained to much already, but strive also for this.

The Reason why I would press this duty upon you, are these,

1. Many of the people of God are not yet come unto this sprinkling of
assurance. Reasons of it.
2. Many of them are too remiss and negligent about the attaining of it. 3. By
reason of the want of it they are in a very uncomfotable condition. 4. There is
a possibility to compass this assurance. 5. The advantages upon the
encouragement of it will be many and great.
First, Many of the people of God are not as yet come to this sprinkling
assurance: Many are not yet come to this sprinkling assurance.
They never yet tasted the goodness and graciousness of God in this kind, so as
(certainly and evidently) to know that God has for Christ's sake forgiven them
all their sins; they desire that he will do so, and hope that he has done so,
but yet they were never assured of it; nay, they do usually (in ^reat and near
afflictions, and in times of sickness, and in their retired considerations of
their souls estate) exceedingly fear and question whether God be their God,
whether Christ be their Christ, whether all their sins be indeed forgiven or
no: Moreover, it is an exceeding discouragement unto them that they still are
in darkness, and that the candle of the Lord does not shine upon them.

Secondly, Some of them are too remiss and negligent about the attaining of
Some are too remis. about it.
it; although they are publicly and privately spoken unto, although they have
felt the grief and want of it in their sickness, and times of workings of
conscience, and of distresses, although they are extremely afraid to dye,
although they do sometimes take up purposes and resolutions to set upon this
work yea, although they have begun to enter into the ways by which assurance
might be attained; yet they faint and give over, and slack, and lay aside their
diligence, either because of the difficulty of the work, or of the inconstancy
of their spirits, or of the unbelief of their hearts, or of the many earthly
cares which do alienate their minds, or because of the presumption of their
souls, to take some more fit time hereafter for so solemn a business: Upon
these or some other grounds, they foolishly neglect to discover, and to
determine the great estate of their souls, and to ascertain their propriety in
Christ, and their personal interest in the forgiveness of their sins, a
business of the greatest and nearest consequence which does or can concern
their souls.

Thirdly, By reason of this neglect of assurance, and leaving their condition
and For want of this they are in an uncomfortable condition.
interest thus undetermined, they make their condition and their hearts very
uncomfortable; for

1. They must necessarily be in suspense, in division of mind under all the
Ordinances of Christ: When they come to hear the Word, they know not what part
thereof to apply to themselves as their p^oper portion; when mercies are
opened, they hope this is their portion; and when judgment is threatened, they
fear lest that may be their lot; they cannot certainly apply the one, nor
certainly apply the other; neither mercy nor wrath, neither heaven nor hell,
neither comfort nor discomfort. And so when the Lords Supper is administered,
they know not what to do, whither to go, or whither to forbear; they think they
are prepared, and yet they doubt they are not prepared; and when they come to
that Ordinance, they hope that the Sacrament and Promises may be held out to
them, and yet they are not sure that they are. This is my blood which is given
for you, and this is my blood which is shed for you; they cannot deny the one
or the other, and yet they dare not affirm the one or the other. What a sad
condition is this of particular inevidence, wherein a poor soul knows not on
what to settle, on what portion to pitch on? what confidently to own and apply
unto it self? but wavers and reels, and comes on, and falls off, sees mercy and
much comfort, and dares not taste of them, Saul's Soldiers might of the honey
which they saw dropping from the Trees.

2. They cannot avoid the edge of Satan's destructive temptations; when Satan
assaults them with fear and sad conclusions, How can they easily come off, or
how can they uphold and acquit themselves? Suppose that Satan lay unto your
charge the many and great sins which you have committed, What will God do unto
you for all these sins? How will you escape the wrath revealed against you for
them? and will you say God has pardoned them, and Christ has satisfied them?
it is Christ that dyed, and God that justifies. I but not for every one (says
the subtle Adversary) Many presume, and so do you: Are you upon good ground
assured that Christ dyed for your sins, and that your sins are forgiven for his
sake? you think so and hope so; but what grounded assurance have you for this?
This temptation you see will lie fair against you, and very strong, and Satan
knows how to follow it, unto thy great disadvantages, and trouble, and grief,
if not despair of heart.

3. They are frequently distressed about spiritual services, and their
acceptance with God: Beloved, remember what I say unto you, That man who has
these questions unresolved, Is God my God? has he pardoned my sins? is he
reconciled to me? will also have many more questions to be answered, May I pray
un^o him? will he hear my requests? is there not yet the partition Wall
standing 'twixt him and me?

4. Nay once more, If death (the King of fears) should approach near unto them
in this their irresolved and undetermined condition, about the pardon of their
sins; alas, for the woeful and tumultuous, and heavy thoughts working in them; O
what fears, and what mistrust, and what cryings out, Whether shall I go? what
will become of me? shall I be saved? I am not sure that Christ is mine; I am
not sure that my sins are pardoned; O Lord, space me a little that I may
recover strength, and that I may make sure work for my immortal foul.

Thus you see what an uncomfortable condition you lie in, for neglecting to get
the assurance that God has sprinkled the blood of Christ on you for the pardon
of your sin, and therefore be awakened, and stir up your hearts to give all
diligence to make it fure unto your souls.

Fourthly, Especially considering (in the next place) that this assurance is
This assurance is possible.
possible to be attained by you.

There are three things which may convince you of that.

1. One is the promise of it unto the people of God in this Text, and sundry
other places of Scripture, which I have already mentioned; and surely this is
clear, that whatsoever God does promise to give unto his people, that is not
impossible for them to attain; for promised mercies are not only possible, that
they may be had; but also certain, they shall be had.

2. Another is the giving of the Spirit of God unto you, and that for this very
end, to make known unto you the things which he has prepared for you, 1 Cor.
2. 10. and which he has freely given unto you, Ver. 12. and to shed abroad his
love in your hearts, Romans 5. 5. and to seal or assure you, Ephesians 1. 13.

3. The several experimental seize of the people of God in this one
particular. David gained this assurance of the pardon of his sins, in Psalm.
103* 3. So did Paul, when speaking of Christ who loved me, and gave himself for
me, Gal. 2. 20. and 1 Timothy 1. 15. But I obtained mercy. So have many thousands
more in former times, and in our times, who believing, rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory for their interest in Christ, and in the
forgiveness of their sins in and for him.

Fifthly, But lastly, propend the advantages which would certainly result The
advantages of it.
unto you upon the assurance that God has for Christ's take forgiven your sins;
what com^ortable advantages?

First, This would quiet all your fears, and possess your consciences with
peace. Being justified by faith we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. I will lie
down in peace, says David, Psalm. 4. 8. Having got assurance, Ver. 6.

Secondly, This would be a spring of joy and rejoicing. ^sal. 51. 8. Make me to
hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Psalm.
4. 6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me. Ver. 7. Thou
shall put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and wine
increased.

Thirdly, This would raise cheerful confidence in your approaches to your God.
Hebr. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, etc.

Fourthly, This would fully answer all temptations: Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies. Who is he that condemns?
it is Christ that dyed.

Fifthly, This is it which would bear up your hearts in all the sad days which
do or may befall you. If you be sick, this would be better than health; what a
cordial did Christ deliver to the diseased man in Matthew. 9. 2. Be of good
cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee! If you be persecuted and troubled, this
would be a triumphant security unto you. Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? shall tribulation? or distress? or persecution? or famine?
or nakedness? op peril? or sword? Ver. 37 Nay, in all these things we are more
than Conquerors through him that loved us. Romans 5: 1. Being justified by faith,
we have peace with God. Ver. 3. And we glory in tribulation. I confess that
faith can make a man to submit in a cross, but assurance will make a Christian
to triumph on it and over it.

Sixthly, What shall I say more? this assurance would make your whole life a
delightful Paradise, and your death (at the last) a desirable and quiet harbor
and passage. 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens. If your sins for Christ's sake be pardoned, and
you are assured thereof by the testimony of Gods Spirit, then unquestionably
there is no condemnation unto you, and then as unquestionably your souls shall
be saved, and everlastingly blessed; for Justification does infallibly end in
Glorification, etc.

SECT. III.
I would have Be careful you be not deceived about it.
you very careful and circumspect, that you deceive not your selves with a
false assurance in this great and mighty business.

There are four sorts of people in the world.

1. Some have no kind of assurance at all, nor do they look after any. 2. Some
apprehend the want of assurance, and are weeping and praying for it. 3. Some
have attained unto a true assurance, and are rejoicing and blessing God for it.
4. Some do deceive themselves with a false assurance that their sins are
pardoned, when indeed there is no such matter.
For the better managing of this Caution, not to deceive our selves with a
false assurance, I will deliver my self in four Conclusions.

1. It is possible thus to be deceived. 2. Many have in this deceived
themselves. 3. Many do deceive themselves with a false assurance. 4. It is a
most dangerous deceit.
First, That it is possible for men to be deceived with a false assurance, and
persuasion that their sins are pardoned, and that God is reconciled unto them.
I It is possible to be deceived.
do not know any one thing in reference to salvation, but it is possible for
some or other to be deceived in or about it. It is possible to mistake a false
Religion for a true Religion. It is possible for a man to please himself with
false graces instead of true graces; and with false repentance instead of true;
and with false faith instead of true; and with false love instead of true; and
with a false persuasion or assurance instead of a true persuasion and
assurance. Are you assured that Christ is yours, and God is y^urs, and
pardoning mercy is yours, and salvation is yours? another (even upon deceivable
grounds) may be falsely persuaded of a propriety in all these. Error is a
natural to the corrupt judgment of man as any other sin; and
heart-deceitfulness is as proper unto us as heart-sinfulness.

Besides, Does not the Prince of darkness often change himself into an Angel of
light? And as he deludes men about the state of grace, so he can as easily
delude them about the comforts of that estate: Why is it not as probable that
Satan may render a bad estate as good, and so cheat us with joy, as he does
sometimes render a good estate as bad, and so oppress us with fear and grief?

Nay once more, Men will set up such opinions as do easily lead them into a
false assurance; v. g.

1. That God is made up only of mercy. 2. That Christ dyed for all, none
excepted. 3. That it is but to cry God mercy, and all is well. 4. That a good
heart and a good meaning is enough, and that they always have had.
Secondly, As it is possible, so it is real; Many have deceived themselves with
a false assurance instead of a true. The Jews did so, who called God Many have
deceived themselves.
their God, and their Father, and insisted upon it with Christ that so it was,
and that they were his children and freemen. So did Laodicea cheat and delude
her self with a false persuasion, that she was rich, and increased, and stood
in need of nothing, Revel 3. Nay the Apostle Paul, he himself was thus deluded;
I says he (Romans 7. ^9.) was alive once without the Law: (2 Cor. 10. 7. If any
man trust to himself that he is Christ's, etc.) Did not they deceive themselves
with a false persuasion, who call upon Christ to open the door of heaven unto
them, Lord, Lord, open unto us? Matthew. 25 11. And they also who plead with
Christ, and contest with him, Have we not heard thee preach in our Synagogues?
Have we not eat and drunk in thy presence, etc? Luke 13. 26. There is not any
one hypocrite, there is not any one formal Professor, but he does deceive
himself with a false opinion of his estate, and with a false assurance.

And there are four great Reasons why these men do thus delude themselves.

1. One is Pride of heart and vainglory; they will appear not to be inferior
to any, and therefore will deceive themselves to deceive others, and will boast
of what they have not.

2. Another is the reach of common gifts, which may give them a taste of
Christ, and of the good Word, and of the Powers of the world to come, Hebr. 6.
5. A taste makes them think it is assurance.

3. A third is the neglect of self-examination; they take things upon trust,
and will not search their hearts, and try their ways, and bring them to the
light, to the rule, to the touchstone, to the Word; they will not try their
hearts by the Word, nor their supposed graces by the Word, nor their comforts
nor assurances by the Word, and therefore they deceive themselves.

4. A fourth is the just judgment of God upon them, to send them strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie, because they received not the love
of the ruth, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. Only a notion of it, but not the love of it;
only the form, but not the power of godliness.

Thirdly, As many have deceived themselves with a false assurance, so Many
still deceive themselves. How one may know he has a false assurance.
many still do deceive themselves with a false assurance instead of a true
assurance.

Quest. But will some of you say, that is the question unto which we desire you
to speak a few words, what are the discoveries of a false assurance? or how one
may know that the assurance or persuasion which he has if the forgiveness of
his sins is false, is but a delusion.

Sol. For your help in this, I will present unto you six infallible discoveries
of a false assurance.

First, The first is, When it is a seal without any date; my meaning is, when a
person When it is a seal without a date.
always has had assurance, never was there any time when he doubted of this
point, he was never troubled concerning it, but always believed, and his heart
has always been confidently persuaded that Christ dyed for him, and that his
sins were pardoned. Why, this alone may convince thee that thy assurance is but
a delusion: Mark the Apostle a little in Romans 8. 15. Ye have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear, but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father. Ver. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits that
we are the children of God. Here the Apostle lays out three works of the Spirit
with the order of his workings.

1. First, He is (efficiente and operative) the spirit of bondage to fear; (i.
e.) making us rightly sensible of our sinful and miserable condition, which
makes our hearts to fear what the Lord will do against us.

2. Secondly, Hereupon (in time) he is the Spirit of Adoption, working faith in
us, by which we become the children of God, and look on him as a Father, with
love, and without any servile fear.

3. Thirdly, After both these, he is the Spirit of assurance, bearing witness
with our spirits that we are the children of God. This is the last work of the
Spirit, it is not the first, nor the only work of the Spirit; it comes after
the Spirit of Adoption, as that comes after the spirit of bondage to fear. From
this place thou may evidently discern the assurance (of which thou boastest)
to be false, to be no work of the Spirit, who begins in a work of conviction
and humiliation, and ends in a work of testimony and assurance; begins in
bondage, and ends in liberty; begins in fear, and ends in peace and comfort;
the Spirit never begins, but ends in comfort.

Secondly, The second discovery of a false assurance is this, that as it has
It has not the Spirit of God for the Author of it.
not the Spirit of God for the Author of it, so it has not the Word of God for
the Instrument and means of it. Beloved, the Word of God is the Organ or
Instrument which the Spirit of God does (ordinarily) use for the forming of all
his gifts and graces, and comforts upon the soul of man; I hardly know any one
of them for which he does not employ the Ministry of the Word; when the Spirit

1. Enlightens the soul; he makes use of the Word to convey and let in light
into the soul. Psalm. 19. 8. It enlightens the eyes.

2. Humbles the heart; he makes use of the Word to break the heart, and to lay
it low. Acts 2. 37. When they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts.

3. Converts and calls the soul; he calls it by the Word, and converts it by
the Word, 1 These. 2. 19. He called you by our Gospel, Jam. 1. 18.

4. Brings in a soul by faith unto Christ, he does this by the Word, Romans 10.
Ephesians. 1.

5. Raises and comforts; when he strengthens and assures the soul, he does
quicken it by the Word, and comforts it by the Word, and strengthens it by the
Word, (...) assures it by the Word, yea, and recovers by the Word assurance
when it is lost. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom we also trusted, after that ye heard the
Word of truth, the Gospel of salvation; In whom after that ye believed, ye were
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise. 1 These. 1. 5. Our Gospel came unto
you, not in word only, but power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance.
Here you see the Word to be the means of believing, and so making way for
sealing and assuring. Psalm. 119. 50. Thy Word has quickened me; but now a false
assurance was never wrought by the Word; which will appear plainly, if you do
consider three things that are usually found in men presumptuously and
deludingly assured.

1. They care little for the Word, especially for that Word of God which does
powerfully search and prepare the heart, and fit it for the assuring work of
the Spirit.

2. They have most peace and assurance, when they keep them most from the
faithful and powerful delivery of the Word; and their assurance is never more
interrupted and shaken, and dashed, than under the soul searching, and
convincing Ministry of the Gospel; it cannot stand before it, nor abide the
trial of it.

3. Notwithstanding all their seeming regards unto the Word, yet never is there
any thing contributed by the Word unto their assurance, nor further confirming
or strengthening, or enlarging; all which does evidently demonstrate, that a
false assurance was never wrought by the Word, but is the fruit of fancy, and a
dream of our own hearts only.

Thirdly, A further discovery of a false assurance, is this, it is enjoyed at
an It is enjoyed at an eas^e rate.
easy rate; the price of it is very cheap; as that ill piece of ground
presently received the Word with joy, Luke 8. 13. so a false assurance rises
very suddenly: This hour very wicked, and the next strangely assured, it cost
the man no tears, nor prayers, nor wrestlings; for a man to be much in
ignorance and wickedness, and much in joy and assurance, this cannot be right;
for the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 10. would have us give all diligence to make our
calling and election sure; and Phil. 2. 12. To work out our salvation with fear
and trembling: All diligence, and much pains must be laid out to attain a true
assurance. Many prayers: Psalm. 51. 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness. Many
tears: Psalm. 6. 6. All the night make I my bed to swim, I water my couch with
my tears. Many waitings: Psalm. 85. 2. I will hearken what God the Lord will
speak; for he will speak peace, etc.

Fourthly, A false assurance, is a possession without a title: The man talks of
It is a possession without a title.
much joy and peace, and comfort, and assurance; but there is not any one
promise of God, of these things to him; nay, God is so far from promising
assurance of forgiveness, that (in the condition wherein this person remains)
there is not any one promise of forgiveness; for he is wicked and unconverted,
and a stranger to Christ; and to one remaining so, there is not so much as a
promise of pardon, much less a promise of assurance that sin is pardoned. Now
take this for a certain truth, that the assurance which any man has of the
pardon of his sins, if it has no foundation in a promise, it is but a false
delusion; if God has not promised to forgive you, you cannot be safely assured
that you are forgiven; much more is it false, if God threatens to destroy you
for your unbelief and impenitency. Suppose one does promise and ensure (in a
conveyance of land) such or such an estate, to such or such a person, whose
name is there inserted and expressed, Will you, or may you thereupon seize your
self of that estate, and think to make money of it as yours, who are not named
in it? this were a ridiculous madness: and will not let them go? Do you
believe, who still refuse to obey the voice of Christ? God does promise to
comfort those that are cast down. 2 Cor. 7. 6. Were your souls ever cast down?
And that they who sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126. 5. Did you ever
sow in tears, whose heart is hardened to this very day?

Fifthly, A false assurance, it is either without all ground, or without all It
is without ground, or without sure ground.
proper and sure ground; it is like the house built on the sand, and not on a
rock, Matthew. 7. For put it to any presumptuous sinner, what are the reasons and
grounds of your confidence? what is the medium which does thus persuade and
assure you that your sins are certainly forgiven? The man cannot (if he will
speak the truth) give you any reason at all; but so he thinks, and he is of
that mind, and will be so; and if he does give you arguments and grounds, they
are of such a vulgar and common nature, as no solid Christian dare build on
them, and the Scripture rejects them as unsafe, being (at the best and highest)
no other than civil men or hypocrites may be possessed of; perhaps some outward
temporal prosperity; perhaps some works of civil righteousness; perhaps some
common supernatural gifts; perhaps some external religious performances;
perhaps some sudden transient affections; these, or some other common works of
the Spirit (or matters below these) are the foundations and bottomes upon which
all his assurance is built.

Sixthly, I will add one discovery more of a false assurance, and that is It
is vain and ineffectual.
this, it is a vain and ineffectual assurance; like painted fire, which heats
not; or like a counterfeit drug, which purges not.

There are five things which it never produces, and therefore it is not true
assurance, but an empty delusion.

1. It makes not the heart more holy: He that has this hope, purifieth himself
as he is pure. 2. It makes not the heart more humble, but always more proud;
therefore it is no work of the Spirit. 3. It makes not the heart more sorrowful
for sin past, and ashamed for sinning against such gracious mercies, but leaves
it hardened. 4. It makes not the heart more fearful to sin, but rather more
ventrous; neither do any more additions of sinning shake and interrupt, or
trouble this assurance. 5. It puts not out the heart in more love to God, or
zeal for him, or to express one jot more of godliness in the conversation: all
which does infallibly prove that the assurance comes not from the Spirit of
God, but from a spirit of delusion
Fourthly, Now in the fourth and last place, I will show unto you that this
false assurance concerning the pardon of our sins, is a most dangerous deceit,
It is a most dangerous deceit. It is soul deceit.
which will appear unto you thus.

First, It is a soul deceit; such a sinner deceives his own soul, which is of
all other deceits the highest and the worst.

There is a twofold self deceit.

1. One respects our bodies, and our outward temporal estates; this many times
proves very uncomfortable unto us, and very miserable to our posterity.

2. Another respects our souls, and our s^iritual and eternal estates, as to be
confident that we are in a good estate, when really we are in a bad estate; and
that we belong to Christ, when really we do belong to Satan; and that our sins
are pardoned, and that God loves us, and will indeed save us, when indeed our
sins are not pardoned, but remain debts uncrossed, and we still lie under the
wrath of God, and under condemnation. This is soul deceit, and most woeful
deceit; it is worse than to rest upon a false title for all our worldly estate;
it is worse than to trust to a false plea, and vain defense for a man's life;
and it is the worse because

1. The sinner will not easily be convinced. 2. Nor come back, and begin the
work aright, in a contrary grief and sorrow for his mistake. 3. Nor be shamed
of his own foolishness.
Secondly, It is soul loss: unless the Lord break down this false assurance It
is soul loss.
in our hearts, it will end in the eternal loss of our souls. I told you the
last day, that that man's condition is more hopeful, whose conscience is filled
with terror for his sins, than his condition is, whose heart is filled with a
false persuasion and assurance that his sins are pardoned; as Christ spoke to
the self-conceited Pharisees; Publicans and Harlots enter into the Kingdom of
God before you, Matthew. 21. 31. Or as Solomon spoke, See thou a man wise in
his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool, than of him, Prove. 26. 12. So
say I, there is more hope of the salvation of the most doubting, and most
terribly dejected and distressed sinner, than of the confident and (falsely)
assured sinner; why so will you say? my reason is this, because

1. When a person is in a troubled condition, he is rightly sensible of his
condition, he sees that it is ill with him; but the falsely assured sinner does
not see in what an evil condition he is, and certainly it is a worse matter to
be in an evil condition, and not apprehend it, than to be in that evil
condition, and yet to discern it.

2. When a person sees himself in an evil condition, there may be, and usually
there are fears to remain in it, and cares to get out of it: Men and Brethren
what shall we do? spoke those wounded in their hearts for their sins. Acts 2.
37. And the Jailer came in trembling, and cried out, What shall I do to be
saved? Acts 16. 30. But when a person has deluded himself with a false
confidence that his estate is good, and with a false assurance that his sins
are pardoned, and God is reconciled unto him; this man is whole, he minds not
the Physician, looks not after Christ and mercy, and so loses his soul.
Beloved, this is certain, that false assurance breeds carnal security, and
carnal security breeds neglect of Christ, and neglect of Christ breeds loss of
mercy, and loss of mercy will be the loss of the soul. It is soul
disappointment.


Thirdly, It is soul-failure and disappointment; what Solomon speaks in Prove.
25. 19. Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, is like a broken
tooth, and a foot out of joint. He is of no use or service unto you, that say I
of a false assurance, when you come to a time of need, and then expect help
from your false assurance, and deluded confidence, then you will find that it
will be of no more strength and service to you, than a foot out of joint, it
will utterly fail you, and deceive you. When the winds and the waves arose,
then the house built on the sand did fall, Matthew. 7. 26, 27. So when death
comes, and conscience is awakened, and arises in exceptions and accusations,
and charge guilt (as unpardoned) upon the soul, in that day what will become
of all your vain confidences? and of all your foolish and false excusations?
they will be swept away as the Spiders web, and like a dream they presently
vanish into nothing. Now from all that has been said, you do see great reason
as to strive for a right assurance, so to take heed, and beware of a false
persuasion and assurance that your sins are pardoned.

SECT. IV.
3. Use Does the Lord promise to sprinkle clean water upon his people? i. e. to
apply unto them in particular the pardon of their sins, with the assurance
thereof: Hence let me inform two sorts of the people of God;

1. Those who have found this sprinkling of assurance concerning the pardon of
their sins, how they may know that this is the very assurance which is given by
God himself

2. Those who never yet have attained to this sprinkling of assurance from God,
what they should judge of their estate, and what they should do to enjoy or
partake of the same.

1. Quest. How may one know that the assurance which he has found How one may
know his assurance is true.
concerning the pardon of his sins, be the right and true assurance which God
himself undertakes to give by his Spirit, unto his people?

Sol. I humbly conceive that this may be discerned, partly

1. By some precedently preparing works. 2. By some presently accompanying
works. 3. By some subsequently following works of the Spirit.
First, You may know that the assurance which you have had, or which you now
have, is indeed from the Spirit of God, By these works or qualities which By
some precedent works.
the Spirit always lays in the soul, before he gives this particular
assurance. And there are four works of the Spirit (if I may so style them)
qualifying and preparing the heart* to receive this impression of assurance
from the Spirit.

1. Humbling and mourning. 2. Reconciling and sanctifying. 3. Believing and
relying. 4. Praying and wrestling.
First, There always goes an humbling and mourning heart before a revived
heart about the pardon of our sins: Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is
Humbling and mourning.
upon me (says Christ) because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
poor, to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance unto the captive. And
Isa. 61. 2. To comfort all that mourn. Ver. 3. To give unto them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness, etc. Mark, here are brokenhearted sinners, and these does the
Spirit heal; and here are captivated sinners, and these does the Spirit deliver
and free; and here are mourning sinners, and these does the Spirit comfort:
Why, it is not reasonable to imagine that the Spirit of God will do any thing
which is impertinent, or improper, or repugnant to his own Word; but all his
works within us are pertinent, and are consonant with the Word.

1. They are pertinent; he will comfort those to whom comfort pertains.

2. They are proper; he will comfort them that need comfort, and in the times
of their need.

3. They are consonant; he will apply comfort to them unto whom God promises
comfort. Now comfort pertains to the brokenhearted, and unto mourners for sin;
and it is proper for them, they stand in need of the voice of joy and gladness;
and God has (in a special manner) promised to comfort them that mourn.
Therefore if the assurance (which you find) of the pardon of your sins be a
gracious peace and quietation, and persuasion after conviction, and after godly
sorrow for your sins, this is no feigned nor deluding work of fancy, nor of
Satan; but it is the very voice of joy from the Spirit of God. O when a poor
troubled soul has been laid low in the sense of sin, has gone heavily all the
day with that burden, is even confounded and ashamed, and is ready to fail and
faint, and cries out, O Lord, pity and pardon, and comfort my distressed soul
with the assurance of thy love, and of forgiving mercy for Christ's sake: And
then the voice of comfort and joy speaks, Be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee; and writes this good news upon the conscience. Why, this is
right assurance, and right comfort of the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, There always goes a renewing and sanctifying work of the Spirit, A
renewing and san^^ifying work.
before the assuring and witnessing work of the Spirit; Here I will briefly
clear two Points.

1. That the sanctifying work of the Spirit goes before the assuring work of
the Spirit. 2 Cor. 1. 21. He who has anointed us, is God. Ver. 22. Who has
also sealed us. Psalm. 85. 8. He will speak peace unto his people, and to his
Saints. I beseech you tell me whose portion is forgiveness of sins and peace?
Has the Lord promised it unto any but unto his people? and who are indeed the
people of God, but Saints, but holy people? see 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people. God will
forgive none their sins, but such as are his people, much less will he assure
any that their sins are forgiven but his people; and all the people of God
(actually called into Covenant with him) are holy; therefore men must be
sanctified before they are assured.

2. It cannot be otherwise, whether you consider

First, The Nature of the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God is a holy Spirit,
and he will not aford his presence to any, unless he first make them holy; he
always makes the Temple holy, in which he intends to abide and dwell; and if he
will not abide in us, unless he sanctifies us, will he give us the assurance of
the great love of God in Christ, that our sins are pardoned before he
sanctifies us?

Secondly, You find in Experience, that when the people of God fall into sin,
and do oppose the sanctifying work of the Spirit, presently they lose comfort
and assurance; (David did so, Psalm. 51.) if we must uphold sanctity, to
preserve the peace and comfort of the Spirit, surely then there must be
sanctity wrought before peace and assurance be spoken.

Thirdly, A man must be in Christ before he can have propriety in the
forgiveness of his sins, and assurance that God has for Christ's sake forgiven
him; this all of you will grant, as says the Apostle, If any man be in Christ,
he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

Fourthly, Once more, Mark what God has threatened to wicked and ungodly
persons, namely wrath and judgment, and destruction, and visiting of their
sins upon them; this is the portion of their cup. Now would you have the Spirit
of God to misapply the Word of God? whatsoever God has threatened or promised
in his Word, that the Spirit of God is to apply; his work it is to apply
threatenings, and his work it is to apply promises; and his office it is to
apply the one and the other respectively to the persons under the threatenings,
and under the promises; he knows the mind of the Lord, and therefore as he will
not apply the threatenings of wrath unto the godly, so he will not apply the
promises of God to the wicked: and if so, then no assurance shall be by him
applied unless men be holy. Therefore let no man deceive himself with a deluded
persuasion or assurance that his sins are pardoned, as long as he remains
wicked, ungodly, or unholy; no, no, the holy Spirit never seals any but holy
persons.

And there is a twofold holiness wrought in us before the Spirit gives
assurance.

1. One is Internal and Habitual, which is the renewing and changing of the
heart into a conformity with the Image of Christ.

2. Another is External and Actual in the life and conversation. Psalm. 50. 23.
To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.
Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Although this be true, that every one who is
sanctified, is not present^y assured, yet this is true, that the Spirit of God
assures no man, but first he sanctifies him.

Thirdly, There always goes the believing work before assuring work of the
Believing work
Spirit; the Spirit of God is a Spirit of faith, and then the Spirit of comfort
or assurance. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after that ye believed, ye were sealed with
the holy Spirit of promise: Romans 15. 13. Now the God of hope fill you with all
joy and peace in believing. Mark, first believing, and then a filling with all
joy and peace. Psalm. 13. 5. I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice
in thy salvation. This Assertion I suppose will pass without dispute, that the
Spirit first works faith, and then assurance, and really it must be so; for

1. You must be in relation of children and heirs before you can assure your
selves of the portion of children: Therefore the Apostle places the Spirit of
Adoption before the witness of the Spirit, as I hinted out of Romans 15. 16. But
it is by faith that we are children, Gal. 3. 26 And receive the dignity of
sons, Joh. 1. 12.

2. None can assure himself of benefit, but he who has first a propriety in
Christ, (union is the sole foundation of communion) see 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of him
are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption.

What faith prece^es assurance;
Quest. But now the question may be what faith that is which (necessarily) is
precedent unto assurance.

Sol. A twofold faith is previously required.

First, A faith of union with Christ.

Secondly, A faith of dependence upon the promises.

1. A faith of union, from which results propriety that Christ is yours, and
you are Christ's; as upon civil Marriage, there ensues a mutual propriety; this
faith does unquestionably precede the testimony or assurance of the Spirit; for
no part of Christ's purchase can be sealed unto you, before you have a part in
Christ himself.

2. A faith of dependence upon God, that according to his promises he will both
pardon you, and also give you the assurance that he has pardoned you for
Christ's sake; and this faith is many times put forth to believe in hope against
hope, Romans 4. 18. Before the Spirit lets in the assurance that our sins are
pardoned, I will hearken what, etc. Psalm. 80. 8.

Fourthly, There always goes praying and wrestling before this assuring Praying
and wrestling.
work of the Spirit: The Spirit of supplication goes before the Spirit of
assurance. Zach. 13. 9. They shall call upon my Name, and I will hear them; I
will say it is my people, and they shall say the Lord is my God. Jer. 30. 21,
22. Who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me says the Lord? ye
shall be my people, and I will be your God. Isa. 56. 7. Even them (especially
of those that take hold of Gods Covenant, ver. 6.) will I bring to my holy
Mountain, and will make them joyful in my house of prayer. Isa 30. 19. He will
be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry, when he shall hear it, he
will answer thee. Psalm. 35. 3. Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. O what
earnest wrestling prayer came from David before he could hear that voice of joy
and gladness in Psalm. 51. And this is so experimented a truth that usually the
sweetest assurances do attend our deepest tears, and our highest prayers. If
therefore the assurance which you find concerning the pardon of your sins, be
the persuasion given to you by the Spirit of God, it does always follow
mournfulness of heart for sin, and an holy change of heart, and faith in
Christ, and on the promises of Christ, and earnest prayer; if it be before, or
without any of these, it is not the assurance of the Spirit of God, but a
delusion of our own spirits.

Secondly, You may know that your assurance is the right assurance of the
Spirit, by those present appearing qualities which do always accompany the
assurance By some presently accompanying works.
which comes (indeed) from the Spirit.

I will mention three of them.

First, If it be the very assurance from the Spirit of God that your sins in
particular L^ve to God.
are forgiven, this will immediately kindle such a flame of love to God, as you
never found the like in all your lives. We love him (says John) because he
loved us first, 1 John 4. 19. O Sirs, when the love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5 5. ( Jonathan delight more in David, than
this poor soul does in his God; why, he loves him so sensibly, so enlargedly,
that he meditates and meditates, that he admires and admires, and cries out,
Who is a God like unto thee? O I love thee for this love, for this mercy of
mercies. Mary had many sins forgiven her, and Christ assured her of it,
therefore she loved much, Luke 7. 47.

Secondly, If it be the very assurance of the Spirit of God that your sins are
forgiven, Softness of heart.
this will immediately soften and melt your heart into such pure springs of
tears, that hardly you ever found the like for kind or degree. There are tears
which a man sheds before assurance for his sins, and they are acceptable to
God, nevertheless they are something brakish, and mixed with some trouble and
distress; but the tears of sorrow for sinning against God, assuring us that he
has pardoned our sins, they are so without all legality (if I may phrase it
so) they flow from the soul so freely, so tenderly, so feelingly, so
abundantly; I think that a man never wept more bitterly, nor ever condemned
himself more freely, nor ever was more ashamed of himself and sinnings, than at
that time when God gave him his full discharge and pardon under the seal and
witness of his own Spirit. Ezekiel. 16. 61, 63. Ashamed and confounded when God
was pacified toward them. The Prophet expresses the quality and the quantity
of their mourning, in Zach. 12. 10.

Object. I but it should rather produce joy!

Sol. So it does at the same time (which is strange) the greatest joy, and the
deepest sorrow.

Thirdly, If it be the very assurance from the Spirit of God, the heart
thereupon Humbleness of heart.
becomes so humble, and so lowly, and so nothing; the nearer that God draws to
his people, the more humble they are; for when Gods Spirit assures us, he does
cause us to see our own unworthiness, and the exceeding riches of Gods grace.
Mark the men most eminent for assurance in Scripture, of all men they were the
most humble and lowly. There are three men most high in assurance.

First, Abraham was so: He was strong in faith, and he was fully persuaded; and
he was a most humble man, Romans 4. 20, 21. Behold I have taken upon me to speak
unto the Lord, who am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27.

Secondly, David also was so; Thou art my God, Thou have forgiven my
iniquities; and he also was a most humble man: Who am I O Lord God! and what is
my fathers house! 2 Samuel 7. 18.

Thirdly, And Paul was so; Who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20.
yet this man was a very humble and lowly man: The least of the Apostles; 1 Cor.
15. 9. Less than the least of all Saints. Ephesians. 3. 8. and not meet to be called
an Apostle. O Christian, you who talk how much and how long you have been
assured, where is this high love? where is this deep sorrow? where is this
humble lowliness? did your assurance ever produce these in you? if not,
assuredly you have mocked your souls all this while with vain delusions.

Thirdly, You may know that your assurance is right, and comes from the very By
the effects flowing from assurance.
Spirit of God by these singular fruits and effects which (consequently) do
flow from your assurance; I will mention six of them.

1. Quietation of heart. 2. More care to walk in all well-pleasing before the
Lord. 3. More regard unto, and delight in the Word. 4. More zeal. 5. More fear.
6. More height of heart.
First, One effect which flows from a right assurance that our sins are
forgiven, is a Quietation of heart.
present quietation of heart; all storms cease upon one word spoken from the
Spirit. There were many doubts, and many fears, and many disputes, and many
reasonings, and many sad thoughts, and restless motions in the soul; but when
assurance of forgiveness is given in by the Spirit of God to our spirits, all
these do cease, and there ensues a gracious calm in the conscience, even an
excusing, delightful and joyful rest. When God lifted up the light of his
countenance upon David, he lay down in peace, Psalm. 4. 6, 8.

Now this quietation differs much from that. Stupidity in a man deluded with a
false assurance; for

First, This stupidity is not the quieting of a troubled soul, but so is this.

Secondly, Their quietness is the effect rather of ignorance, because they do
not know their miserable condition, than of assurance, that they do certainly
know their pardoned condition.

Thirdly, Their quietness is from a seared conscience, but not from an assured
and pacified conscience.

Fourthly, It is a passive silence, but in this conscience does witness, and
the heart rejoices. Well then, spiritual and joyful rest or quietation is the
proper fruit of true assurance; and verily it cannot but be so; for assurance
(in the very nature of it) does so satisfy the mind, and prevail upon it, as
to exclude all actual doubtings and fears at that time; and it is a clear
manifestation of Gods love and pardoning mercy, with our propriety in them in
particular, and therefore necessarily does quietation of heart flow from it.

Secondly, More carefulness to walk in all well-pleasing before the Lord;
assurance Carefulness to walk in all well-pleasing.
breeds two excellent properties about holy walking and services.

1. One is more alacrity; O it is now no burden, but a delight to do the will
of God. Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do thy will, and thy commands are my delight,
said David, I will run the way of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my
heart, Ps. 119. 32.

2. The other is more carefulness: Mark that place, Psalm. 26. 1. I have walked
in mine integrity. Ver. 3. For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes. Never
were any more strict in paths of righteousness, than those who have tasted most
of Gods loving kindness: I am thy servant, etc. Psalm. 116. 16.

Thirdly, More delight in the Word, and greater appetite after it. 1 Pet. 2. 2,
3. As Delight in the Word.
new born baves desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby,
if so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

Fourthly, More zeal for God; What will not this assured Christian act and
suffer? Zeal.
he will do any service for Christ; yea, the highest and greatest, (the love of
Christ constrains him, 2 Cor. 14.) nay, he will dye for Christ; but to dye for
the Name of Christ, Acts 21. 13. Who loved me, and gave himself for me, says
Paul: Gal. 2. 20. What shall I render to the Lord? what shall I do for my God?
Cant. 3. 5. I charge you* stir not up, nor awake my love.

Fifthly, More fear to sin against God; let me tell you a truth, the assured
person Fear to sin.
would even dye presently in the Arms of Christ, that he might never sin
against him any more; but see Hosea 3. 5. They shall fear the Lord and his
goodness.

Sixthly, An height of heart; presently the heart is above all the world, the
world Height of heart.
is nothing, of no account when the Lord once gives in the assurance of his
love in the pardon of our sins in the blood of Christ.

Quest. 2. I now proceed to the second question, which is this, What those weak
Christians and Believers should judge of their estate, who never yet could
attain unto this particular assurance of the pardon of their sins, and what
course they may take to enjoy What weak Christians should judge of their
estates, who could never get assurance. For their support.
the same.

Sol. There are two things in this question to be spoken unto. 1. One respects
the support. 2. The other respects the direction of such Christians as have not
yet attained the assurance, etc.

1. For the support of those weak believers who are apt to judge heavily of
themselves, and of their spiritual estate, because they never yet attained to
the pardon of their sins, I would present these four Conclusions.

First, One may be in a justified or pardoned estate in the Court of heaven,
who as yet A man may be in a pardoned state, who is not assured.
is not in an assured estate in the Court of his own conscience; sins may be
forgiven, when yet the sinner is not assured of the forgiveness of his sins. 2 Samuel 12. 13. The Lord has put away thy sins, and yet David prayed exceedingly
to get the assurance thereof. Psalm. 51. 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness,
etc. Joh. 14. 20. At that day (after his Ascension) ye shall know that I am in
my Father, and you in me, and I in you. Ye shall know, etc. yet of these he
says, Joh. 15. 5. I am the Vine, ye are the Branches. Job 13. 24. Wherefore
hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? Psalm 88. 14. Lord, why
castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? Ver. 15. Whiles I
suffer thy terror, I am distracted. Ver. 16. Thy fierce wrath goes over me,
thy terrors have cut me off. Isa. 64 8. But now O Lord thou art our Father; we
are the clay, and thou art the potter, and we all are the work of thine hand.
Ver. 9. Be not wroth very sore O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever;
behold, see we beseech thee, we are all thy people. Mark, though thou art our
Father, and we are thy people, yet be not wroth, etc.

Secondly, If one does truly believe in Christ, his condition is sure, although
the His condition is sure, though his person have not assurance.
person has not assurance; true faith, (though weak, though compassed with
doubts and fears) does really make Christ to be yours; and if Christ be yours,
then your condition is sure. 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son, has life.
Joh. 10. 27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. Ver.
28. and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Joh. 6. 47. Verily, verily I say unto
you, he that believes on me has everlasting life. Beloved, neither Christ nor
salvation are settled upon assurance, but upon faith; it is not said that Christ
dwells in our hearts by assurance, but by faith; nor is it said, Whosoever is
assured shall be saved, nor Whosoever is assured shall receive remission of
sins, but Whosoever believes. The weakest true faith is enough to make Christ
to be yours, and consequently it is enough to give you an interest in his
Redemption, and to free you from condemnation, and to bring you to that
purchased inheritance of life; see then, this is another comfort; though you
have not assurance, yet the condition of life is sure if ye be true believers,
etc.

Thirdly, A third support is this, Though you have not the assurance of the
forgiveness Though you have not this assurance, yet you are laboring for it.
of your sins, yet you are laboring and striving for it; there are degrees of
assurance; some are weaker, some are stronger; some are more permanent, some
are transient. Beloved, though a man be not in heaven, yet it is a great
comfort if he be walking toward heaven; though a man be not in Christ, yet it
is good when he is crying out for Christ; and so though a man has not as yet
the assurance that his sins are pardoned, it is a good sign when he is found in
the ways for assurance.

Object. But what comfort is there in this, that one is laboring for
assurance, when as yet he never had it?

Sol. There is in this four comforts to them that labor for assurance.

First, The comfort of obedience, that you are (according to Gods commands)
giving all diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and
proving and trying your selves, whether Christ be in you of a truth, 2 Cor. 13.
5. and working out your salvation, Phil. 2. 12.

Secondly, The comfort of sincerity, that you are on the way to be assured, not
resting in the want of assurance, nor in idle complaints, but as you pretend,
an opinion and judgment, rightly valuing it, and that your hearts are set upon
it, so your souls are indeed drawn forth to the ways of enjoyment.

Thirdly, The comfort of Gods presence; for it is from the Spirit of God that
your hearts do thus prize, and thus long for, and thus labor for assurance; he
begets those thoughts, and those desires, and those prayers; you have the
presence of the Spirit, though not the assurance of the Spirit.

Fourthly, The comfort of hope, that at length you shall see the God of gods in
Zion, that you shall see his face with joy, that he will create peace and
assurance in your hearts; for he never fills the soul and stirs and draws it
unto himself for his gracious favor, but at length he does make his loving
kindness known unto that soul; and he does thus prepare the heart, because he
will incline his ear.

Fourthly, A fourth support unto you is this, although you have not this
assurance in your own hearts, yet you have it in Gods promise, who assures you
that he will sprinkle it upon you, and faithful is he who has promised, who
will also do it.

Secondly, But now I come unto the Direction which I would commend to weak
Direction.
believers for the attaining of their assurance, and they are these.

First, Diligent attendance upon the Word of God; that this is a good means to
attain D^ligent attendance upon the Word.
assurance, may appear by three particulars.

1. God has instituted or ordained his Word, not only for the conversion, but
also for the consolation of his people, and the assuring of them. Romans 15. 4
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. 1 John 1. 4.
These things write we unto you that your joy may be full. 1 John 13. These
things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that
you may know that ye have eternal life. Mark, written for our comfort, written
that our joy may be full, written that believers may know they have eternal
life; why then unquestionably the Word is a means to attain assurance, etc.

2. The people of God have attended the Word for this very end, to gain
assurance. Psalm. 48. 9. We have thought of thy loving kindness O God in the
midst of thy Temple. Psalm. 85. 8. I will hearken what God the Lord will speak,
for he will speak peace unto his people.

3. They have found assurance upon the attending on the Word. Psalm. 63. 1. O
God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee. Ver.
2. To see thy power and thy glory so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Ver.
3. Because thy loving kindness is better than life. He had seen experimentally
the power and the glory of God in the Sanctuary; (i. e.) the mercy and the
loving kindness of God in Christ, the assurance and feeling of it in the use of
the Word, etc. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word
of truth, the Gospel of your salvation; in whom also after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise.

Secondly, Fervent prayer unto the Lord, this is also a means to obtain
assurance. Fervent prayer.
Ps. 119. 58. I entreated thy favor with my whole heart; and two things
demonstrate this unto us.

1. Some special promises to this purpose; viz. Isa. 56. 7. Even them will I
bring to my holy Mountain, and will make them joyful in my house of prayer,
etc. What is that which makes the heart of the people of God joyful? David
tells you in Psalm. 4. 6. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon
us; and Ver. 7. Thou have put gladness in my heart, etc. and where is this
joyfulness promised? by what means? I will make them joyful in my house of
prayer. Joh. 16. 24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. Ver.
22. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. Here is a
fullness of joy, (and that certainly is in assurance) and that fullness of joy is
promised upon prayer.

2. Some particular experiences. Psalm. 30. 10. Hear O Lord, and have mercy upon
me, etc. Ver. 11. Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing; thou have
put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness.

Object. But will some say, We have heard the Word a long time, and we have
prayed and sought the Lord a long time, and yet we cannot attain to this
assurance of forgiveness.

Sol. Therefore be sure to take in three things when you pray for this
assurance.

1. Apious valuation of it; Thy favor is life, Psalm. 30. 5. Thy loving
kindness is better than life, Psalm. 63 3. O visit me with thy salvation, Psalm.
106 4.

2. A believing persuasion that God will hear you in this Luke 11. 13. How much
more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? and
that Spirit is the Spirit of Adoption, that witnesses with our spirits that we
are the children of God, Romans 8. 16. David has a singular passage in Psalm.
119. 147. I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried, I hoped in thy
Word; where observe three things. 1. The earliness of his prayer, (I prevented
the dawning of the morning) he could not sleep, but must arise and pray. 2. The
earnestness of his prayer, (I cried) he was solemn, serious and fervent. 3. The
faith with his prayer, (and I hoped in thy Word) in one of these our prayers do
fail, and so we get not our assurance.

3. A patient expectation, a continuance in prayer, still importuning the Lord,
and waiting on him for this great testimony of his pardoning mercy. Isa. 30 18.
Blessed are all they that wait for him. Psalm. 85. 8. I will hearken what God
the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace, etc. These Ingredients are still
to be remembered, and taken in, if you would prevail for the assurance, etc.

Thirdly, A conscientious care in all our ways to walk before God in all
well-pleasing. A conscientious care to walk in all well-pleasing.
A godly walking brings most glory to God, and most comfort to our own
consciences; there are two excellent places for this purpose. Isa. 32. 17. The
work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness
and assurance for ever. Joh. 14. 21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps
them, is he that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father,
and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him. I beseech you to
remember five passages.

1. That men who make no conscience of their ways, but walk licentiously and
dissolutely, they can never come to their assurance. Isa. 59. 8. The way of
peace they know not. Isa. 57. 21. There is no peace says my God, to the
wicked. Psalm. 119. 155. Salvation is far from the wicked, for they seek not thy
statutes.

2. That the people of God for particular failings in a conscientious and
careful walking, have forfeited their assurance; David did so, Psalm. 51. 8, 11,
12.

3. That assurance is frequently promised to an upright, conscientious, careful
walking. Psalm. 11. 7. The righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance
does behold the upright. Psalm. 50 23. To him that orders his Conversation
aright, will I show the salvation of God.

4. That such persons have found abundance of joy and comfort. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with flesh wisdom, but by the grace of God, we had our
Conversation. Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they which love thy Law.

5. That all persons that do thus walk, and continue so to do, (although for
some space of time they may not find this assurance yet) they shall at length
enjoy it. Psalm. 97. 11, Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the
upright in heart.

1. Keep up a mourning heart for your sins. 2. Enter into, and keep on in the
paths of righteousness; follow on to know the Lord, and ye shall know him.
Hosea 6. 3. Then shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord.
Fourthly, An humble dependence upon the Lord, graciously to work this
comfortable An humble dependence upon God to work it in us.
assurance in our hearts, although we be utterly unworthy thereof. Psalm 33. 21.
Our hearts shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy Name. As
you can plead no worthiness of pardoning mercy, so neither of the assurance
thereof, but only in Christ; and therefore you must depend upon God, (who
loves freely, and receives graciously) that he according to his promise, and
for his Christ's sake, will make his face to shine upon you; Go in peace, your
sins are forgiven you.

You that have this assurance;
sins) remember and heed a few things which do especially concern you.

First, Be you exceedingly thankful; indeed you cannot but be so, if God has
Be thankful.
thus sprinkled your consciences, to bring you into Covenant, and to assure you
that you are so; to bring you into Covenant, and to assure you that you are
Christ's; to forgive you all your sins, and to assure you thereof; O how great,
how sweet is this goodness! Mercy, and the assurance of mercy; love, and the
assurance of love; a good estate, and a comfortable estate; life, and the
assurance of life; heaven, and the assurance of heaven; this was the first
desire of the Church. Cant. 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth,
for thy love is better than wine; and this was the last desire of the Church:
^ant. 8. 13. Cause me to hear thy voice. Assurance is the top of all our
comfortable mercies, and the top of all our desires.

Be cheerful.
Secondly, Be more cheerful in your spiritual course; when God gives you
assurance, David Psalm. 105. 3. Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the
Lord. How joyful then should the hearts of them be that find the Lord! When
Simeon got Christ into his arms, he rejoiced: The possession of Christ, and the
evident fruition of pardon, are matter of great joy; walk like pardoned men,
and like a people assured of a reconciled God in Christ.

Thirdly Be very watchful; no mercy must make us secure; assurance it self must
Be very watchful.
make us the more vigilant, Christ was tempted after that voice came from
heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: And Paul's temptations
were very strong after that he had been wrapped up into the third heaven. Let me
tell you two things (and they may serve to make you watchful) after your
sweetest assurances.

1. One is, that still much of sinful corruption dwells in you; though
assurance does (for the present) clear the mind of all doubts, yet it does not
cleanse the heart of all sins.

2. Another is, that temptations usually attend assurances, (Satan is an enemy
to our comforts as well as our graces) and sometimes they prevail over us if
they find us careless.

Fourthly, Be very faithful and steadfast: He will speak peace unto his people,
and to Be faithful.
his Saints; but let them not turn again to folly, Psalm. 85. 8. Sin should be
most odious, when mercy has been most gracious; O do not for a taste of sinful
pleasures, lose all the taste of most sweetest assurance; sinnings do most
provoke God and prove most bitter to us after the greatest experiences of Gods
loving kindnesses.

Fifthly, Be very fruitful; the assured Christian (of all others) should be the
tallest Be very fruitful.
Cedar, the brightest Sun, and most fruitful Vine. Who should abound more in
duty, than he who has found God most abounding to him in mercy? I will say no
more but this; thy assurance was never right, if it has not made thee a more
zealous friend for God, and a more diligent servant to Christ, and a more
deadly enemy to sin.

Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh.
CHAP. VII. Sanctification promised as well as Justification.
AS the former words contained the promise of Justification in the forgiveness
of all the sins of all the people of God, so these words do contain the promise
of Sanctification in the renewing of all the hearts of all the people of God.

In them there are three things very observable.

First, The Connection of this promise with the former in that particle (also)
also a new heart will I give unto you.

Secondly, The Author or undertaker of the particular good promised, viz. God
himself (I will give you a new heart, and I will put a new spirit within you.)

Thirdly, The very blessing here distinctly promised by God unto his people, (a
new heart, and a new spirit.)

From these Parts there are three Propositions which I would briefly discourse
upon.

I. That Sanctification is promised unto the people of God as well as
Justification. II. That God himself does undertake to sanctify, or to renew
the hearts of his people. III. That a new heart, and a new spirit God will give
unto all his people in Covenant.
SECT. I.
Doct. 1. THat Sanctification is promised unto the people of God as well as
Justification, Sanctification is promised as well as Justification.
or with Justification: God does promise not only to pardon the sins of his
people, but also to sanctify and renew the hearts of his people (a new heart
also will I give you.)

For the opening of this precious Truth, I will show unto you

1. The distinction or difference between Justification and Sanctification; for
the word (also) imports as much. 2. The Connection between them both. 3. The
Reasons why God promises the one with the other.
First, The distinction or difference 'twixt Justification and Sanctification;
for they The difference between Justification and Sanctification.
are promised as two distinct or several gifts (I will also, etc.) which could
not be spoken if they were both of them one and the same thing.

They differ thus,

First, There is in Justification a change of the state; he who was in the
state They differ in six things.
of death, and wrath, being justified, is in the state of life and love (he is
passed from death to life) but in Sanctification of the heart, he who was
unholy, is now made holy, his heart is changed.

Secondly, Justification looks at the guilt of sin, and frees us from
condemnation (There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 8. 1.)
But Sanctification looks at the filth of sin, and frees us from the dominion of
sin: Sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the Law but
under grace, Romans 6. 14.

Thirdly, In Justification there is the righteousness of Christ imputed to us,
for which God accounts us righteous; but in Sanctification there is grace
infused into us, by which we are made conformable unto the image of Christ;
that depends upon the merit of Christ, and this depends upon the Spirit of
Christ.

Fourthly, The matter of ^^^^^ification is perfect, and without any defect and
exception (the justice of God cannot find any want in the obedience of Christ
which was full and complete, and perfectly satisfied the Law of God) but the
matter of our sanctification is imperfect, and weak, and we cannot stand before
Gods Judgment Seat with it.

Fifthly, All who are justified, are justified alike; there is no difference
amongst believers as to their Justification; one is not more justified than
another (for every justified person has a plenary Remission of his sins, and
the same righteousness of Christ imputed) but in Sanctification there is
difference amongst believers; every one is not sanctified alike, but some are
stronger and higher, and some are weaker and lower in grace.

Sixthly, In Justification there is nothing of sin remaining, which has any
cotrariety to the justified estate; but in Sanctification there is something of
sin remaining in the sanctified person, which is contrary to that grace which
is wrought in us by the Holy Spirit; Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the
other, etc.

2ly The Connection of Sanctification with Justification. You may read in The
connection of Sanctification with Justification.
Scripture of a fourfold conjunction of these two great gifts of God unto his
people.

First, In the promises of the Covenant, they join hand in hand, come forth
like A fourfold cennexion. In the promises.
twins out of the womb of grace; Jer. 33. 8. I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their
iniquities whereby they have sinned and whereby they have transgressed against
me. Here you see them both expressed together in the same deed: I will cleanse
them from all their iniquity, there is our sanctification promised: And I will
pardon all their iniquities, there is justification promised: Mich. 7. 19. He
will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths
of the sea. Here you find them again in promise: He will subdue our
iniquities, this is sanctifying; and he will cast all, etc. there is
justifying: Heb. 8. 10. I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in
their hearts; (there is the promise of sanctification? Ver. 12. And I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities will I
remember no more (there is the promise of justification.) Rev. 2. 17. I will
give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, etc.

Secondly, In people of the Covenant: All who are effectually called and In the
people of the Covenant.
brought into Covenant, they are justified, and they are sanctified, they
partake of mercy, and they partake of grace: If any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. He is made holy; so 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of
you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And in 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of him
are ye all in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Righteousness, and
Sanctification. So Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood,
the forgiveness of sins, Chap. 2. 1. And you has he quickened who were dead in
trespasses and sins.

Thirdly, In the desires of the people of the Covenant: Their hearts are drawn
In the desires of the people of the Covenant.
forth with the desires of both; Psalm. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me, O God,
according to thy loving kindness: according to the multitude of thy tender
mercies, blot out my transgressions: Here is earnest prayer for mercy to pardon
sin. Ver. 10. Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me;
here is earnest prayer* for grace to sanctify.

Fourthly, In the Mediator of the Covenant, who is the Head of his Church, as
well In the Mediator.
as the Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5. 23. And gave himself for it that he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word. Ver. 26.
as well as to wash it from its sins in his own blood. Rev. 1. 5. And gave
himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Tit. 2. 19. And bare our
iniquities in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live
unto Righteousness; by whose stripes we are healed: 1 Pet. 2. 24. He was
anointed not only to be our Priest to take away our sins by his body, but also
to be a Prophet to reveal unto us the whole will of God: (And this is the will
of God, even our sanctification, 1 These. 4. 3.)

3ly The Reasons why God does promise these two great Gifts of holiness and
forgiveness; to sanctify his people as well as to justify them. There Reasons
why God does sanctify as well as justify. Both have a necessary respect to
our salvation.
may be these Reasons for their Connection.

First, Both of them have a necessary respect to the salvation of the people of
God: A man must be justified if he will be saved; and a man must be sanctified
if he will be saved; he cannot be saved without both* he cannot be saved unless
he be justified: Romans 8. 30. Whom he called, them also he justified; and whom
he justified, them he also glorified: None are justified: but such as are
called, and none are glorified but such as are justified: Mar. 16. 16. He that
believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned: He cannot
be saved unless he be sanctified: Joh. 3. 5. Jesus answered. Verily, very, I
say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God: Heb. 12. 14. And holiness without which no man shall
see the Lord: Here you see a necessity of both of them in reference to
salvation; we many times think that if our sins are pardoned, there needed no
more to save us, but we are deceived; for as forgiveness is necessary, so is
holiness necessary to our salvation; as no unpardoned person, so no
unsanctified person shall be saved.

Secondly, The people of God do stand in need of them both; neither can they be
Gods people stand in need of both.
restored or repaired without both; for the sins which are in them, are

1. Guilty obligations; they bind them over to wrath and curse.

2. Filthy pollutions; they do stain and defile them, and make them odious in
the eyes of God: Under the first notion they are a debt; and under the other
notion they are a disease; and under both they render us needy of mercy and of
grace. Pardoning mercy alone does not answer the sinful condition of man, for
that is a remedy only against the guilt of sin; sanctifying mercy is also
required to be a recovery from the filthy pollution of sin: As if one be a sick
Malefactor, this man has a double need; he needs a pardon as he is a
Malefactor, and he needs a healing medicine and plaster as he is sick. Now the
Covenant of grace is a full remedy to the sinner, and it is a full recovery:
Ergo, God promises to sanctify as well as to justify.

Thirdly, God does intend an everlasting communion twixt his people and himself
God intends an everlasting communion betwixt him and his people.
in the Covenant; a communion in this life, and a communion in the other life;
and indeed the people of God, their fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ: 1 John 1. 3. They are made nigh by the blood of Christ, and
have access unto him: But they must be sanctified as well as justified for the
enjoying of that communion; because two things are opposite to our communion
with God.

1. One is enmity.

2. The other is inconformity. Whiles God and we are enemies, how can there be
communion between us? Therefore in justification that enmity is removed and
slain by the blood of Christ; and whiles God is holy, and we remain unholy,
there is such a dissimilitude, and inconformity of our natures, that there can
be no communion neither; and therefore God does sanctify our hearts by his
Spirit, that we partaking of the Divine Nature by way of similitude, may have
fellowship and communion with him: Pardon of sins only, makes not sufficient
way for this communion; for notwithstanding that pardoning mercy, the heart of
man is so sinful, that God cannot endure us, being of purer eyes than to
behold sin: Put away your iniquities from before mine eyes, and then come and
let us reason together, etc. Isa. 1.

Fourthly, We cannot glorify God, unless he sanctify us: Beloved, the people
of God are formed by him to show forth his praise; they are the only people We
cannot glorify God without sanctification
that do glorify him, and honor him: But this cannot be unless he were
pleased to sanctify them; God indeed can glorify himself toward us, though
we be not holy; but we cannot glorify him until we are made holy; we cannot
glorify him in our hearts; for what glory can God have by an unbelieving,
impenitent, hardened, sensual, ignorant, proud, ungodly heart? Nor in our
actions; for they are as our hearts are; the fruit is as the tree is, etc. What
can a dead or a sick man do for service?

Fifthly, we should have small comfort and peace, if the Lord did not sanctify
as well as justify us; to have sinful lusts still reigning, and ruling, and
breaking out, this would make our life uncomfortable.

Sixthly, Are not the people of the Covenant his children? and would you have
the holy Father to be the Father of unholy children? is this to be born of the
Spirit? Whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh; and whatsoever is born of the
Spirit is Spirit, Joh. 3.

Use 1. This serves to reprove those men who divide those things which God
Reproof o^ those who do divide these.
has jo^ned together; who are altogether for Justification, but nothing at all
for Sanctification: They exalt the Righteousness of Christ, but they cry down
the holiness of Christ: They would have men to be believers of Christ, but they
would not have men to be holy; and why not holiness as well as Faith? because
(say they) holiness cannot justify us: But this is both an Erroneous and
Ridiculous Opinion; as if Christians had nothing to look after but
Justification; and as if the gracious works of the Spirit must therefore be
rejected, because they are not able to justify us! Luther arguing upon this
Point, says, that we must give In Gal. 3 p. 356.
unto every thing that which is proper unto it: would you (says he) conclude
that because your money, and lands, and eyes and hands, do not justify you,
therefore you must reject all these? So because holiness does not justify you,
will you conclude that you must reject it! As the Righteousness of Christ has
its proper excellency to justify us, so has holiness its proper excellency to
renew us, to conform us unto Christ; and to make us to walk as becomes men in
Christ: Besides, would God have made Christ to be our Sanctification as well as
our Righteousness, if holiness did not concern us as well as faith? and would
he have joined Remission of sins with the sanctifying of our hearts, if that
alone were all that concerned us! Nay, Faith is said to sanctify us, as well
as to justify us.

Use 2. It also reproves the general presumption of men, who think of nothing
Reproof of the general presumption of men.
in order to their salvation but Gods mercy; they talk much of mercy, and
sometimes seem affectionate for mercy to pardon their sins, and never mind
holiness, nor how to get their hearts to be sanctified? Nay, they oppose
holiness, and scoff, and scorn at holiness. These men will lose their souls,
because both of these which God has promised, are necessary for salvation; you
must have your sins pardoned, or else you cannot be saved; and so you must have
your hearts sanctified, or else you cannot be saved.

Quest. 1. But you may say unto me, why do men look only after mercy, and Why
men look after mercy and not holiness.
not also after holiness, seeing God has joined them together in his promise,
and both must be in persons which will be saved?

The Reasons may be these:

First, Holiness is more contrary to man's sinful nature than mercy: Mercy
indeed relieves the sinner in a more easy and delightful way; but holiness
though it does relieve the sinner, yet it does it in a way more cross to our
sinful love, for it fights against our sins, and does purge, and work them out
from our hearts, and will not suffer sin to bear Rule there.

Secondly, Though holiness be the way to heaven, yet sinful men do not look on
it as so; but they look on it as the way of trouble and reproach, as a way that
is contradicted, and exposing them to crosses, losses, and contempts, and which
is too severe against their carnal liberties, and pleasures, and wills, and
therefore they like it not. No man reproacheth another because he is justified,
but because he is sanctified; for sanctification is a reproach and condemnation
to the evil ways of men.

Use 3. Does God promise to sanctify his people as well as to justify Be not
content with the one, without the other.
them? Then be not content with the one without the other, but join them in
your prayers, which God has joined in his promises: Be not satisfied that you
sins are pardoned; neither be satisfied that your hearts be sanctified; as he
cried out, Domine! de penitentiam and da indulgentiam; so do you, Lord give me
grace, and Lord give me mercy. God is a holy God as well as a merciful God;
and Jesus Christ came by water and blood, 1 John 5. 6. Let your hearts be
earnestly carried out for both; To this end remember six Conclusions.

First, Though your Right and Title to heaven lies in Justification, yet your
meetnesse and fitness for heaven lies in your Sanctification: Col. 1. 12.
Giving thanks unto God the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light. Acts 20. 32. I commend you to God, and to
the word of his grace which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them that are sanctified. Is it meet or fit that an
ungodly person should be in heavenly glory! The Leper had a right to his house,
yet was not fit to dwell in it until he was cleansed.

Secondly, When you look at the pardon of your sins, you seem to look more at
your selves (your own safety, your own peace, your own deliverance from wrath
and hell) but when you look after sanctification, you rather look more at Gods
glory how you may be enabled to honor him more: 1 Pet. 2. 9. Yea are a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, that you
should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light.

Thirdly, We should be complete in Christ, Col. 2. 10. And in all the will of
God, Chap. 4. 12. How can this be, if Christ be not your sanctification, as
well as Righteousness, if you be not partakers of his Spirit, as well as of his
merit! if you do not dye and live with him.

Fourthly, It is a sign of a naughty heart; when mercy alone is desired, and
that only will satisfy: In an exigence the most wicked man will cry out for
mercy, but he never cries for sanctity. Pharaoh put Moses upon it to pray that
God would forgive his sin, but never that God would heal his hardness.

Fifthly, As God promises the one as well as the other, so he will never give
the one without the other: If he justifies you, he likewise sanctifies you; and
if you are not sanctified, assuredly you are not justified: when you are by
Faith united to Christ, your communion immediately falls in for sanctification
as well for Righteousness: And it is impossible that Christ should be yours,
but you must have the Spirit of Christ; (Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his) and that Spirit quickening us with a new
life, and mortifies our lusts: Some hold that sanctification is an inseparable
effect of justification, but unquestionably it is a companion of it, and a
lively testimony of it.

Sixthly, Because he promises both, therefore seek for both; Consider,

1. God promises nothing that is superfluous, or useless; but it is good, and
for our good. 2. He promises no good, which he 1. Is not able to perform: And
2ly willing to perform.
Holiness is an excellent good; it is the image of God, it is the glory of God,
it is called glory, 2 Cor. 10. it is the glory and excellency (an unholy person
is but vile and base) the Saints are the excellent on the earth; Psalm. 16. 2.
It is our perfection, it is the highest elevation of our names here on earth,
and hereafter in heaven; it is the prime work of the Spirit, it is the scope of
election* he has chosen us that we should be holy. Ephesians. 1. 4. It is the
scope of vocation; God calls us unto holiness, 1 These. 4. 7. And this God has
promised to give, etc.

But I shall speak no more at present of this general Observation; I will touch
a little also upon the next general Proposition, and then I will come to the
principal matter in the Text.

SECT. II.
Doct. 2. THat God himself undertakes in promise to sanctify the hearts of his
people (I will give you a new heart, and I will put a new spirit within God
himself undertakes to sanctify his people.
you) Levit. 20. 8. I am the Lord that sanctifies thee. Luke 11. 13. How much
more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him! Joh.
17. 17. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is truth. 1 These. 5. 23. The
very God of peace sanctify you wholly.

Quest. Why God undertakes it?

First, Else it were impossible to be effected. Consider

First, That no creature can make it self holy; it cannot change it self, no
man Why God undertakes it, Else it were impossible. No creature can make itself
holy.
can change his own sinful heart, Who can say I have made my heart clean? Prove.
20. 9. And this will appear by two particulars.

1. No sinful man has any supernatural power in him to produce any
superdatural work in himself; he is without all strength; without me (says
Christ) ye can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. We are not sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves. says the Apostle in 2 Cor. 3. 5. And we are
dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1.

Secondly, There is in every natural man a resistance, a contrariety and
opposition to the work of holiness: Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity
against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.
Ephesians. 4. 18. Being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that
is in them. Jer. 13. 27. Woe unto thee O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean?

Secondly, That no creature can make another holy; we may wish holiness to N^
(...) can make another ho^y.
others, and we may pray the Lord to sanctify others, and we may direct others
to the ways of holiness, but make them holy we cannot. For

1. No man can impart any of his own grace unto another; he cannot divide the
grace which he has, as he can the earthly estate which he has amongst his
children: The actings of his grace may extend to others; but the habit or
quality of his grace he can no more impart to others, than he can his own soul
or life.

2. All that we can do for others (to work grace in them) is but in a moral way
of counsel, and exhortation, and entreaty, and reasoning; but we cannot open
their ears to hear that counsel, nor their hearts to receive that grace unto
which they are by us exhorted; nor can we expect that our exhortations should
have more power to prevail with men than Gods exhortations; yet these alone
were not sufficient to change any sinner without some inward workings of his
Spirit, upon the spirits of men.

3. Besides, to change the heart of a sinner by grace, is a work proportionable
This is a work of Omnipotency.
with Creation, and with the resurrection of the dead (so the Scripture styles
our conversion or sanctification) for which Omnipotency must put forth it self,
to sanctify us. God can do it.


Secondly, God can sanctify, or graciously change the heart of a sinner; which
may thus appear.

1. He has dominion and power over the heart; he can turn, and command, and
rule it as he pleases.

2. He has dominion over all grace; he can give it, and work it in the heart
of men by his Almighty Spirit and Power. If he will say to the dead, Live, the
dead shall live; if he will say to the blind, See, the eyes of the blind shall
be opened, and they shall see: If he will say to the deaf, Hear, the ears of
the deaf shall be opened, and they shall hear. If he will say to the most
wicked heart, Be thou changed, it shall be changed and healed; for by his
Spirit he can infuse that grace into the heart, and with that power, and with
that efficacy, as shall be sufficient to beat down and subdue all the
resistances of sin, and to renew and alter the whole soul.

Thirdly, God does undertake this sanctifying work in promise for his people;
God undertakes this work


1. That they may know that be alone is the Original and Author of all their
Spiritual good: No Fountain of mercy, but their God of mercy; and no Fountain
of grace, but their God of grace; no Fountain of peace, and salvation, and
comfort, but their God of peace, but their God of salvation, but their God of
comfort.

2. That their hearts might be supported under the sense of their sinfulness,
and under the sense of their want of holiness, and under the sense of their own
insufficiency, and inability to give themselves any holiness. Though they
cannot, though no creature can help their hearts to holiness; yet their God can
and will; for he has promised it to them, and he is able to perform what he
has promised, and is also able, and will do it.

3. That he might have the glory, that we may glory in him, and not in our
selves; for what have we that we have not received? Let no man take this work
upon him, upon a confidence of his own strength.


1. Use. Does God himself undertake to sanctify the hearts of his people? Then
let none take upon him this work upon a confidence of his own will, and power,
and sufficiency: will you take the work of God out of his hand! When Rachel
said to Jacob, Give me children or else I dye? he said, Am I in Gods stead!
Genesis 30. 1, 2. So when the King of Syria sent Naaman to the King of Israel to
heal him of his leprosy, said he, Am I God, to kill, and make alive, that this
man does send to me to recover a man of his leprosy! 2 Kin. 5. 7. So, will you
be in Gods stead! will you be Gods to yourselves, that you take on you to
change and sanctify your own hearts! and yet men are frequently presumptuous
in this, they will change their hearts, and they will become new men. Is not
this a presumptuous, nay is it not an impossible work? will you create, will
you quicken the dead?

Object. But does not God bid us? Make unto your selves a new heart, and a new
spirit? Ezekiel. 18. 31.

Sol. The Precepts of God in this kind,

1. Show our impotency, and convince us thereof; they do not imply our power.
2. He commands us this, for this very end, that we should seek unto him to work
this. 3. That we might apply our selves to the means through which he will work
this.
2. Use. In the sense of want of holiness, be not discouraged, give not up the
work Be not discouraged in the sense of the want of holiness.
as impossible; say not I shall never see a change in my heart, my sins are so
strong, and my power is nothing; but go to God, remember that he has
undertaken to sanctify; Master, If thou will, thou can make me clean, said
the poor Leper; said Christ, I will, be thou clean;

Remember five things in this that God himself undertakes to give grace or
holiness by promise.

First, He intends to give what he promises in any Particular.

Secondly, He is able to work it; nothing is able to stand against his promise;
nothing can hinder it; all the power of hell, and of thy sinful heart cannot
hinder him from the healing and sanctifying according to promise.

Thirdly, He does put thee but upon coming, and asking, and trusting: He will
give hiss holy Spirit to them that ask, Luke 11. 13. Believe only and thou
shall be saved, and thou shall see his power.

Fouthly, You cannot put up a request that does more concern his own glory;
Lord let me not dishonor thee any more, grieve thee any more; sanctify and
change my heart that I may bring thee glory.

Fifthly, He never denied any heart that was serious and fixed in desires of
holiness.

Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, etc.
I Now come to the principal matter (here) distinctly promised by God unto his
people, viz. A new heart, and a new spirit.

CHAP. VIII. God gives a new heart and a new spirit to his people in Covenant.
Doct. 1. THat a new heart, and a new spirit God will give unto all his people
in Covenant [A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit, etc.]

SECT. I.
FOr the opening of this great and necessary Truth, I will speak unto a few God
gives a new heart and a new spirit to his people in Covenant. What is meant by
heart and spirit. Heart taken diversely.
Questions.

Quest. 1. What is meant by heart and spirit?

Sol. The word (heart) is taken

Sometimes Physically, for that noble and vital part of man, which is the seat
of the soul, and life in man: Thus it is not looked on in this place. Sometimes
it is taken for the soul of man which has its principal residence in the
heart: Genesis 6. 5. God saw that every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart
was only evil continually (of man's heart (i. e.) of man's soul) Prove. 23. 26. My
Son, give me thy heart; (i. e.) thy soul, thy will, thy affections; thus it is
taken in this place.

Secondly, That word (Spirit) is in Scripture taken sometimes in opposition
Spirit how taken.
to the body of man, as in Eccles. 12. 7. Then shall the dust (i. e.) the body
of man return to the earth as it was; and the spirit (i. e.) the soul shall
return to God who gave it.

Sometime it is put in a direct distinction from the soul, as in 1 These. 5.
23. I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved
blameless, etc. Here the Spirit denotes the intellectual part, and the soul
denotes the will and affections. And so I humbly conceive the word (Spirit) is
taken in the Text: Namely for the mind and judgment (called the intellectual
part of man) and the word (Heart) is taken for the will and affections; and by
both is meant all the soul, the whole soul in all the faculties of it.

2. Quest. What is meant by the newness of heart, and by the newness of spirit?
What is meant by newness of heart. How many wa^es a thing is said to be new.
for this is the thing promised.

Sol. A thing may be said to be new, either in respect of substance, or in
respect of qualities.

First, There is a substantial newness, where all the materials are so; as an
house is new, and a garment is new, and a ship is new, being all made of new
materials: under this notion God does not give a new heart, and a new spirit
unto his people; (i. e.) he does not give unto them another soul for substance
from what formerly they had; they have one and the same substantial soul still,
etc. all the same essential faculties of the soul still, the same faculty of
understanding, the same will, the same affections still.

Secondly, There is an accidental newness, where the substance remains the
same, yet the qualities supervinient, or super-added to the substance are new:
Naaman was the same man when he was a Leper, and when he was cured, the cure
was accidental. In this respect God gives a new heart, and a new spirit, (i.
e.) he does (as it were) new shape the heart and spirit; he puts into them such
gracious qualities which are opposite to the wicked or sinful qualities in them
before.

And these are called new, not in opposition to our Creation (for God made us
holy and righteous) but in opposition to our degeneration; for by the fall we
lost all our excellencies, and corrupted our hearts, and filled them with all
unrighteousness, with sinful corruptions: when God does purge out of our
hearts, and infuseth into them the graces of his Spirit, then are our hearts
said to be new, and our This newness of heart
spirits are said to be renewed. This only in the general: Now I shall more
particularly discover unto you what this newness of heart is which God does
promise unto his people. Described.


It is that great and eminent change wrought in all the soul by the Spirit of
Christ, infusing a new principle of grace, which inclines and conformes the
heart to the whole will of God, and opposes and mortifieth all the old sinful
lust formerly residing and prevailing in the heart.

There are many particulars in this description which I shall in order unfold
unto you.

First, A new heart is a changed heart; Newness (in the very nature of it) A
new heart is a changed heart.
implies an alteration; for whatsoever is altogther the same that it was,
cannot be said to be new. If the heart was ignorant, and so remains still; if
it was proud, and vain, and filthy, and earthly, and so remains still; this
heart is an old heart still, there is no newness, because no change. Newness of
heart peremptorily implies a change of the heart; therefore it is (in
Scripture) called a new birth; (Joh 3. 3. Except a man be born again.) And a
quickening from the dead; (Luke 15. 24 This my son was dead, and is alive
again.) And a turning from darkeness to light; (Act. 26. 18. To open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God.) And a transformation; (Romans 12. 2. Be ye transformed by the renewing of
your mind.) And a translation; (2 Cor. 5. 17. Old things are past away, all
things are become new.) And a washing, and a cleansing, and a refining; 1 Cor.
6. 11. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Mal. 3. 2, 3.

Secondly, When the heart is made new, there is a great and eminent change made
It is an eminent change.
in it: There are three great changes of man's heart.

1. One was by sin; when man being in honor abode not, but fell by
transgression, and became like the beasts that perish. This was a woeful
change, like that of the apostatizing Angels from heaven to hell. 2. Another is
by grace, wherein we are changed into the very image of God. 3. A third is by
glory, when we shall be like God himself; For we shall see him as he is, 1 John
3. 2.
The change which makes newness of heart is a great and eminent change,
reckoned therefore amongst the wonders of God, called a Creation, and a
Resurrection, and the opening of the eyes of the blind, and unstopping the ears
of the deaf, Isa. 35. 5. And loosing the tongue of the dumb. It is such a
change that others beholding it, stand amazed at, as they did when they saw
Paul appear another man at Damascus from what he was at Jerusalem, Acts 19. 21.
Yea the very Angels are affected with it, and rejoice: I say unto you there is
joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents, Luke
15. 10. I call it an eminent and great change, because it surpasses all other
changes which may be found in men who yet have no newness of heart.

There may be a change

1. From rudeness of life to civility of conversation. 2. From profaneness of
walking, to formality in Religion. 3. From ignorance and blindness of mind to
knowledge. 4. From the practice of sin to a forbearance of sin. 5. From
quietness of Conscience to perplexity and trouble of Conscience; and yet no
newness of heart: The change which constitutes a new heart, is a very deep
change, it makes man to be a new creature, it does quite alter the frame and
estate of a man's heart and Spirit.
It is a change in the soul.
Thirdly, When the heart is made new, there is a change made in the soul, and
in the whole soul.

1. It is a change in the soul: Pharisees made clean the outside of the cup,
and they were painted Sepulchers, which within were full of rotten bones.
Hypocrisy can make a new garb of visible actions, but it can never make an
new heart; it never changes and alters the soul; that still remains under the
love and power of sin: But when the heart is made new, there is some inward
work of grace by which the soul is changed from death to life, from unholiness
to holiness.

2. It is a change in the whole soul; when the heart is made new, all the soul
In the whole soul.
is divinely changed: Therefore this newness or Renewingness is compared to the
light which disperseth itself into the whole body of the Air, so that there is
not any one part of the Air which is not enlightened: To the ointment which
fills the whole room with sweet Odor: To leaven, which diffuseth itself over
the whole lump. As it is with Original sin, it is an universal defilement, it
infects all the soul, there is not one faculty of the soul but it is defiled by
it: So it is with Renewing grace, or newness of heart, it is an universal
alteration or change; it alters all the soul, and all the faculties of the
soul; when a new heart is given, there is a change made.

1. In the mind or understanding, which now is freed from darkness, and enjoys
an heavenly light to know the things of God, and to discern things that are
excellent; and the mysteries of Christ and salvation appear in their glory. We
all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, etc. 2 Cor.
3. 18.

2. In the Judgment, which is now freed from mistakes, and Errors, and high
imaginations, and carnal reasonings and disputes, and is now captivated to the
Truth, and approves of what is good, and condemns what is evil: It counts sin
the g^eatest evil, and Christ the most incomparable happiness, and the
enjoyment of God the only portion: I count all things but dross for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, said Paul, Phil. 3. 8. Whom have I in
heaven but thee, and there is none on earth that I desire besides thee? says
David, Psalm. 73. 25.

Thirdly, In the Will, which was proud, and stubborn, and unwilling, and
averse, and perverse; nothing would persuade it to hearken to Christ, to yield,
to receive, to obey, all the arguments of mercy and glory would not ^ffect and
take it: Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life, Joh. 5. 40. But when
the heart is made new, the Will also is changed; now it falls down before
Christ, Lord, what will thou have me to do, Acts 9. 6. Draw me, and I will run
after thee! Cant. 1.

4. In all the affections of the soul: Never was there such a change, such a
newness! how they fall out with one another; Grief falls out with Love, and
Love with hatred; nay, they seem to be changed one into another: Joy into
Grief, and Love into Hatred, and Hatred into Love: what a man did love, he now
hates, and what a man did hate, he now loves: and what a man desired, he now
fears; and what a man delighted in, he now grieves at it! Nay, look on them
distinctly in their several motion. The desires were, Who will show us any
good? Now the desires are, What shall we do to be saved? The delights were in
sin, in sensualities, in vanities, in vain societies; now they are in the
favor of God, in Christ, in pardoning mercy, in holy and heavenly society in
doing the will of God: The like may be said for love, for grief, for fear, etc.

Fourthly, This change (which constitutes newness of heart) is wrought by the
Spirit of Christ: Therefore our Sanctification (which is the same with the
giving A change wrought by the Spirit of Christ.
of a new heart) is called the Sanctification of the Spirit, 1. Pet. 1. 2. And
our change into the image of glory, from glory to glory, is by the Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And the newness of heart is the work of the Spirit of
Christ; no man changes or renews his own heart, but the Spirit does all: And
therefore he is called the Spirit

1. Of Knowledge, because he illuminates and gives knowledge and light, 1 Cor.
12. 8. 2. Of Grace, and holiness, because he makes us holy, Ephesians. 4. 30. 3. Of
Faith, because he causes our hearts to believe, 2 Cor. 4. 13. 4. Of Love and
joy, because he works these in our hearts. All saving good comes from the
Father as the Fountain, and through the Son as the Mediator, and is wrought in
us by the Spirit. As in the Creation the Spirit moved upon the waters, and so
did as it were brood and frame all the Creatures; To in Regeneration, the
Spirit descends upon the hearts, and by his vigor does form all the newness
and spiritual change in it.
This change is wrought by infusing a new Principle.
Fifthly, The Spirit works this change in the heart by infusing a new Principle
or quality of grace; A new Principle is necessary to make a new heart, there
must be something put into the heart to change the heart; in all alterations
thus it is. which quality is Regenerating or Renewing grace, and is called
sometimes holiness, sometimes the New man, sometimes the Inward man, sometimes
the Law of the mind, sometimes the Spirit, sometimes Christ, sometimes the
Anointing, sometimes the seed of God; and according to the several ways of
working, it has several names; v. g. As it is the forming of an heavenly being
in the soul, it is called Regeneration. As it is the turning of the heart, it
is called Conversion. As it is the humbling of the heart, it is called godly
sorrow. As it is the turning of us from sin, it is called Repentance. As it is
the bringing of the heart in to Christ, it is called Faith, etc. As it is the
abasing of the heart, it is called Humility. As it is the gentle tempering of
the heart, it is called Meekness. As it is a submitting of the heart to God in
sufferings, it is called Patience; and as it is the raising of the heart to the
allowance of God, it is called Contentment and Self-denial, etc.

Sixthly, Into the Elect and Called of God] Renewing grace is peculiar and Into
the Elect and Called of God.
proper to the Elect people of God; the Papists and Arminians do hold that
Reprobates and Apostates may have the same truly renewing and sanctifying grace
which the Elect of God have; and that the grace in the one, and in the other,
differ not quantum ad essentiam, (as to truth) but only quantum ad
permanentiam, as to continuance.

But this opinion we reject as unsound and dangerous; for although we do grant
unto some Reprobates and Apostates the common gifts and works of the Spirit; as

1. Illumination; whereby they may know the revealed will of God, and assent
unto the truth of the Word; which appears by the Parable of the stony ground,
and in Simon Magus, etc.

2. And some transient working on their affections, as upon hearing the Word,
to receive it with joy (Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and the temporary
believers took in the Word with joy) and with fear as Felix did, and with
humbling as Ahab did.

3. And some kind of external Emendation or Reformation, as Herod did many
things, Matthew. 6. 20. Nevertheless no Reprobate attained unto the state of
Renovation or Adoption, or Justification; they were never renewed intensively
by the Holy Ghost, never had a new heart given unto them; because

First, The state of Renovation is founded in Gods Election. He has chosen us
that we should be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. therefore none but the Elect are renewed.

Secondly, This Renovation flows from union with Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any
man be in Christ, he is a new creature.

Thirdly, All renewed persons are in special Covenant with God; he is their
God, and they are his people; and he will put his fear into their hearts, that
they shall never depart from him.

Seventhly and lastly, Newness of heart arising from grace infused by the
Spirit This newness consists in
of Christ, consists, 1. In a Rectitude of Inclination. 2. In a powerful
mortification.

First, A Rectitude of Inclination; every faculty of the soul is now brought A
rectitude of Inclination.
into its due place and order, and inclines and conforms unto God, whereas
before it was turned from him; now we approve the will of God, and choose the
way of God. Newness is the conformity of our nature with Gods nature, 2 P^t. 1.
4. and of our inclinations and actions to Gods will; what God likes, we like;
what God disallows, we disallow; what God sets up, we set up; what God would
have done, we would have done; and in what God takes delight, in that do we
also take delight; and in that manner that God would have it done, we love with
simplicity, we pray with fervency, and we hear with reverence, and we give with
cheerfulness, and we walk with sincerity.

Secondly, In a mortification of old lusts; this is called a cleansing from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor, 7. 1. and a crucifying of the flesh with
the In a mortification of old lusts.
affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. and a putting off the Old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. and a dying unto sin,
Rom 6. 2. and a not suffering sin to reign, that we should obey it in the lusts
thereof, Romans 6. 12. Beloved, this is most certain, that newness of heart is

1. An universal contrariety to all our sinful corruptions; and therefore where
newness of heart is, there is a constant hatred of sin, and a continual
conflict or combat with it.

2. A real predominancy; renewing grace is stronger than remaining sin, and
will never suffer it to rule the heart, and sway as in former times.

Quest. 3. Why God will give unto all the people of his Covenant a new heart,
Why God gives a new heart.
or an heart renewed by grace?

Sol. The Reasons may be these.

First, God predestinates them unto the means as well as unto the end: Gods God
predestinates to the means, as well as to the end.
predestination in the aim or end of it, respects the glorifying of his
people, (who are therefore called Vessels of mercy, before prepared unto glory,
Romans 9. 23. and are said to be chosen, and called to the obtaining of the glory
of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 2. 14.) and Gods predestination in the means
tending to that glory, is his eternal will and purpose to communicate
effectually to his people all that is requisite to bring to the participation
of that glory; therefore says the Apostle, Romans 8. 29. Whom he did foreknow,
he did predestinate to be conformable to the Image of his Son. Ver. 30.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified: Mark,
predestination has a respect to the means as well as to the end; to calling
and justifying as well as to glorifying; (and calling is to holiness as well as
to happiness) to conformity to the Image of his Son, as well as unto an
inheritance by his Son, and what is that being conformed to the Image of his
Son, but (amongst other things) to be changed into his Image? 2 Cor. 3. 18. And
what is that but to have our heart renewed by the Spirit of grace?

Secondly, God will give unto his people all that Jesus Christ has purchased
God will give all that Christ has purchased.
for them, and which was the very design of his death: Now Jesus Christ did by
his death make a threefold purchase.

1. Of the Persons of all the Elect; he bought them with a price: Ye are not
your own, for ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 19. 20.

2. Of all the Services of the Elect: He has delivered us out of the hands of
our enemies, that we might serve him in holiness and righteousness, Luke 1. 74,
75. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14.

3. Of all Graces for the Elect* the donation of the Spirit (as to all the
effects of grace) is the fruit of his death and purchase; not only eternal
glory, but renewing grace is purchased by Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, The Lord does put several duties and services upon his people, which
God has several services for his people.
are impossible for them to perform, unless he did give them a new heart, an
heart changed and renewed by grace. They must deny themselves, they must love
the Lord their God with all their soul, and all their might. They must hate
every evil way. They must walk uprightly. They must be contented in all
conditions. They must resist temptations, and wrestle against principalities,
and against Rulers of the darkness of this world, and against spiritual
wickedness in high places. They must overcome evil with good. They must love
their enemies, bless them that curse them, and do good to them that hate them.
They must be ready to do every good work. They must take up the Cross, and
suffer reproaches and losses; they must persevere to the end. It is impossible
for a natural heart to perform these: Is there not then a necessity of renewing
grace to enable the heart for these?

Fourthly, Again, The people in Covenant, they have a new and choice relation,
They have a new relation.
and must have natures suitable to it: No people have such a relation as they,
and unless they were renewed by grace, they could never hold that relation. God
is their God, and their Father, and they are his children, they are his sons
and daughters, 2 Cor. 2. 18. I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my
sons and daughters, (says the Lord Almighty) and Ver. 16. Ye are the Temple of
the living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people; this is their relation, but
then mark what he infers from this, in Ver. 17. Wherefore come from among them,
and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. q.
d. Holiness is necessary for this relation, you must be separate, you must be
renewed, you must have no communion with sin, you must be another kind of
people, you cannot hold communion with me, nor will I own you for my people and
children if you do so, etc.

And Christ is their head, and they are his body, this is another relation,
(Colos. 1. 18. He is the head of the body, the Church) Now is Christ the head
of profane and ungodly men? Is he the head of the dead, or of the living? Do
not the head and the body agree in the same kind of nature and life? Are not
they who are joined to the Lord one spirit? 1 Cor. 6. 17. Certainly as all who
come from the first Adam do bear his image, so all who are of the second Adam
do bear his image. Ergo. They must be a redeemed and sanctified people.

Fifthly, I will add one reason more why God will give unto all his people The
congruity of it as to their Conversation.
a new heart, and it is this, The congruity of it for that conversation which
they are to have amongst men, both good and bad.

First, For good men, they are to have society and communion with them With
good men.
in all holy things, and in all holy duties, their hearts should be knit unto
them in love, their delight should be in them, as in the excellent of the
earth; and you know the mutual comfortings and edifyings, and strengthnings,
and spiritual supportings which believers should be to one another: But this
requires a new heart, until that be given, there can never be that love, that
delight, etc.

Secondly, For wicked men, the people of God are to shine amongst them as With
wicked men.
lights, Phil. 2. 15. and to win them by their godly walking, at least to stop
their mouths, and make them ashamed that falsely accuse their good Conversation
in Christ; they are to convince them, and reprove them, etc. But all these
things would fail, they could not be, if God did not renew and change the heart
of his people by grace, etc.

SECT. II.
Use 1. Does God promise to give unto all his people a new heart and a new Then
many are not Gods people, they have their old hearts still.
spirit? here it follows that many people are not the people of God in
Covenant, because they have not a new heart given unto them; but they have
still their old hearts, and old spirits, their old corrupt lusts, which they
obey and serve, and which they will hold fast, and will not forsake: For the
managing of this Use, I will briefly show you two things.

1. The infallible Characters of an old and unclean heart. 2. The woeful
miseries of people still retaining those old hearts.
1. The Characters of an old or unrenewed heart. Characters of an old heart.


The Scripture gives us five Characters of an old heart; (i. e.) of an heart
never yet changed or renewed by grace.

First, Ignorance; generally the sinful estate is set out by ignorance. 1 Pet.
1. 14. Not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts in your
ignorance. Ignorance.
Ephesians. 4. 18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of
God, through the ignorance that is in them. Acts 17. 30. The times of this
ignorance God winked at.

There are three things, of which if a man be ignorant, he is unquestionably in
an old sinful estate.

1. Himself; if he knows not what a wicked, wretched, vile and miserable heart
is within him, and how accursed he is by reason of it. 2. Jesus Christ, and the
mystery of salvation in and by Christ. 3. The excellency and necessity of the
new creature, of Regeneration and renewing grace; this man is still in his
sins, he is in the gall of bitterness, he is dead, etc. The first work of the
Spirit is, to open the eyes, and to turn men from darkness to light, Acts 26.
18. And to give knowledge of salvation, Luke 1. 77. To enlighten the
understanding, Ephesians 1. 18. There begins the first change and dawning of Christ
and grace; therefore if that be not done, the old heart remains.
Secondly, Carnal security and quietness, a perpetual silence and rest, (Luke
Carnal security.
11. 21. When a strong man armed keeps his Palace, his goods are in peace)
where sin reigns, and still keeps possession, all is qu^et; the man feels not
his burden, nor wounds, not wants, nor spiritual trouble; no conflict is to be
found in his heart. What lack I yet? said that desuded covetous young man in
the Gospel. And I was alive once without the Law, said Paul, Romans 7. And I
stand in need of nothing, said Laodicea, Rev. 3 All is well, and all is safe,
and all is quiet; sin is no enemy to it self:

Th^rdly, Enmity to godliness in the power of it, and to grace in the life of
Enmity to godliness.
it, and holiness in the practice of it. Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity
against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.
Ephesians. 4. 18. Being alienated from the life of God. Joh. 3. 20. Every one that
does evil, hates the light. Prove. 29. 27. He that is upright in his way, is
abomination to the wicked. Amos 5. ^0. They hate him that rebukes in the gate,
and they abhor him that speaks uprightly. Psalm. 2. 3 Let us break their bands
asunder, and cast away their cords from us. This is an evident sign of a wicked
heart, of an heart far from renewing grace: Thou child of the Devil, thou
enemy of all righteousness, said Paul to Elymas, Acts 13 10. and Cain hated his
brother, etc. Why do you not love such a child as well as the other? and
countenance such a servant as well as the other? and regard such a one of your
Kindred as well as another? and why do you not speak evil of such a neighbor,
rather than of another? Live they not as peaceably and as inoffensively? and
deal they not as justly and squarely? O but he is godly, he is religious, he
will not run with us to the same excess of Riot, he will not Swear and Drink,
and play the Good Fellow, etc.

Fourthly, Bondage unto sinful lust; spiritual slavery is a real testimony of
Bondage to sinful lusts.
an old heart; when a man is held fast with the cords of his sins, when he is a
servant to sin, obeys it in the lusts thereof, has an heart that cannot cease
to do evil, does project for sin, and is at the commands of it, and will not
forsake it, but takes pleasure in unrighteousness; his heart and sin are joined
and matched together as it were by Covenant; he will reject Christ, and
renounce mercy, and be contented to forfeit salvation, and venture to damn his
own soul, rather than he will forsake his sin, and come under the power of
changing and renewing grace. Unchangedness of Conversation.


Fifthly, Vnchangedness of Conversation; when the Leopards spots continue, and
the Blackmores skin remains, and the scum of a vain, graceless life departs
not, but a person walks still in the paths of unrighteousness and ungodliness;
what he was, that he is; as he has lived, so he dies, and so he will live and
dye; hates to be Reformed, scorns to be a Changeling, is Proud still, is a
Drunkard still, a Whoremonger still, a Sabbath breaker still, a Swearer still,
a Scoffer still, etc.

2. The woeful misery of persons continuing in their old sinful condition. The
misery of such.


I will but mention the sum of their misery.

First, Certainly they are out of Covenant, and therefore God is none of
theirs, he neither does nor will own them for his; and if God will not own
them, then mercy will not own them.

Secondly, They belong not to Christ at all; for in 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be
in Christ, he is a new creature. O how cursed is the sinner who has not Christ
to redeem him from the curse.

Thirdly, They shall never be saved; for Hebr. 12. 14. Without holiness no man
shall see the Lord.

Fourthly, They shall certainly be damned. 2 These. 2. 12. That they all might
be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

SECT. III.
Use 2. Does God promise to give unto all his people in Covenant a new heart
Try our selves what newness is in us.
and a new spirit? then let us search our hearts, and look what newness God
has wrought there? We find new fashions upon the backs of persons; and we find
new opinions in the heads of persons; and we find new changes in the Civil
State; and we find new afflictions upon our persons; and we find new fears in
the hearts of men; and we find new and strange dispensations of Gods
Providence; but where is this new heart? one looks after a new place, and
another after new preferment, and another after new pleasures, and another
after new friendship, and another after new safety; but who looks after the old
truths, the good Christ, and the new heart; who of us can say in a spiritual
sense, what he spoke in a corporal sense, One thing I know, that whereas I was
blind, now I see, Joh. 9. 25. May it be affirmed of us, what Paul spoke of the
Ephesians, Ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord, Ephesians 5.
8. Or what he spoke of some of the Corinthians, Such were some of you, but ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, etc. 2 Cor. 6. 6. And what he spoke of the
Romans, Ye were the servants of sin, but you have obeyed from your heart that
form of doctrine which was delivered you. Romans 6. 17. And being made free from
sin, ye became the servants of righteousness, Ver. 18.

Object. But will some reply, we are much deceived if that we have not new
hearts and changed spirits?

Sol. I answer, ye may be deceived, and in nothing sooner than in your own
hearts; Our hearts may deceive us in this.
the Prophet says, that the heart is desperately wicked, and withal he says,
it is deceitful above all things, Jer. 17. 9. Nothing so wicked, and nothing so
deceitful as man's heart, and as in many other things it may deceive us, so
especially in this one thing of newness, it may make us believe that it is
changed and renewed by grace, when indeed there is no such matter, which may
arise, 1. Partly from the Ignorance in us, what newness of heart is. 2. Partly
from Self-love and self-flattery; we are apt to make the most of what makes the
most for us, as we are apt to make the least of what makes against us. 3.
Partly from a slothfulness of spirit, to take pains, to search and try the
truth of our spiritual conditions. 4. Partly from the partial resemblances
which some things have with that which is called newness of heart or renewing
grace, and yet they differ from it, toto coelo. Now because this is one of the
greatest and commonest grounds by which persons do deceive themselves, I shall
therefore insist the more fully upon it.

There are four things which have a resemblance (lesser and greater) with
renewing Four things have a resemblance with renewing grace, which yet is no^
it.
grace, and yet renewing grace is quite another different thing from them.

1. Civil Righteousness, especially if joined with the true Religion. 2.
Restraining grace, in the forbearance of sins, especially notorious and
flagitious. 3. The presence of common gifts, which man had not before. 4. The
powerful effect of an awakend conscience.
1. Civil Righteousness, especially if conjoined with Profession Civil
Righteousness.
of true Religion.
What do men (generally) repute for renewing grace, and for godliness, but
this; if they be no Papists, if they hold no Errors, if they keep their Church,
and deal fairly and justly with their neighbors, why, they conclude their
hearts are good, and their estate is sure, and what can men have more.

But now give me leave to say two things unto this.

First, Civil Righteousness is good, and so is external profession of the true
Religion; Civil righteousness is good.
God requires that and this: Matthew. 7. 12. All things whatsoever you would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the
Prophets. Mich. 6. 8. He has showed thee O man, what is good, and what does
the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? To do justly is one of the things required. The like may
be said for external profession; as we must believe with the heart, so we must
confess with the mouth, Romans 10. 11. And we must hold forth the word of life,
Phil. 2. 16.

Secondly, Nevertheless, newness of heart (or renewing grace) is a quite
different Yet newness of heart is differing from it.
quality from their civil Righteousness; and one may be civilly righteous, and
honest, who never had his heart renewed by grace, nay whose heart does
extremely loath and oppose it.

Now civil righteousness, and heavenly newness of heart does differ in six They
differ in six things.
things.

First, Civil Righteousness is of a low and inferior birth or original; there
are Civil righteousness is of an inferior birth.
three things which may be sufficient to make a man civilly righteous.

1. One is the light of nature, which has some notions and principles of
common equity and honesty.

2. A second is the power of edification; Parents and Tutors may so represent
the honor of just dealing, and the forbid unworthiness of unrighteous dealing,
that young and tender natures may take in a savor, and taste of them all their
days, though they never act upon any knowledge that God enjoins them.

3. A third is the influence of example, beholding such a course and way of
Righteousness in Parents, and Superiors, in Friends, whose examples we are
ready to imitate, because their persons we do love and reverence. But newness
of heart, or renewing grace is wrought by a higher hand than the dictates of
nature, or counsels of friends, or examples of men; it is the birth of the
Spirit of God (every regenerate or renewed person is born of the Spirit) the
immediate power of the holy Ghost is put forth in the creating of a new heart.

Secondly, Civil Righteousness either totally confines us to the duties of the
second Civil Righteousness confines to duties of the second Table.
Table (as if we had none to eye and please but our neighbor) or if it gives
way to the duties of the first Table, it is but to a formal and superficial
observance. The civil righteous man though he is strict in duties to man, yet
is irreligious in all his religious performances: He says a Prayer, but he
knows not how to pray in the Spirit, and with Faith; and he hears a Sermon, but
it is as if he heard it not, sleeping and waking, with running and roving
distracted thoughts on the world; he talks of a Sabbath, but he knows not how
to keep a Sabbath, and is weary of it, and counts the strict observance of it a
Jewish burden: But renewing grace brings in the heart to all the will of God,
it enables to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the
things that are Gods; to be righteous with good men, and to be upright with
God, to serve him with love and fear.

Thirdly, Civil Righteousness may look at some outward, easy, ordinary actions
of It looks only at outward easy duties.
Religion, but it leaves the heart destitute of the great inward actings of
Religion. When did you ever see a person only civilly righteous lay the Axe to
the root of the tree? searching of his heart, and judging the corruptions of
his heart, and humbly mourning and lamenting under the sense of his wicked
heart, and hungring after Jesus Christ, and importunately wrestling for grace
and mercy, striving to crucify the lusts of his heart. He is so far from
these, that he thinks them either superfluous, or impossible. But renewing
grace does chiefly act upon the heart, there it sets up the Throne, and gives
the Law, and exercises Authority and Rule, etc.

Fourthly, Civil Righteousness rests mostly in negatives (I am not as other
men, said he) if the civilly righteous man does not swear, this is enough
although he It rests mostly in Negatives.
should likewise fear an Oath: if he does not take away the life of another, if
he does not do wrong, that is enough, although he ought also to do good. But
renewing grace comes off to Positives as well as Negatives; it teaches us to
cease to do evil, and it learns us also to do good: Isa. 1. 16, 17. It teaches
us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts. And also to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 12.

Fifthly, Civil Righteousness it will allow such things which renewing grace
will not; It will allow us It must have its indulgence.


1. To associate our selves in a way of familiarity with the enemies of God and
holiness, and rather with these than those that are good. 2. To omit many
personal and family duties. 3. To defer repentance, and making peace with
God. 4. To mispend his time day after day, week after week, year after year in
vain pleasures, and sports, dicings, cardings, etc. 5. To conform and fash^on
our selves to the world, and perfidiously to flatter persons in their sins only
to keep up a correspondency and interest* it must have indulgence in sinful
thoughts, vile affections, petty Oaths. But renewing grace makes the heart to
tremble at these things, and to loathe and abhor them. It alters not one
sinful quality.

Sixthly, Civil Righteousness alters not one sinful quality in the heart, nor
gives it any new spiritual ability; notwithstanding it the heart is as
ignorant, and malicious, and unbelieving, and impenitent, and hardened, and
earthly, and vain, and proud as ever, and cannot deny itself in any delightful
way of wickedness, etc.

II. Restraining grace, by which a person forbears many sinful act,
Restraining grace.
especially such, as are scandalous and dangerous in the opinion of men.
With this do many men sit down and bless themselves for renewed and changed
persons, for they are not as other men, neither whore nor thief, and dare not
commit such and such sins!

But Beloved! there is a vast difference between restraining grace, and
renewing grace; they differ in six particulars.

Difference betwixt restaining and renewing grace. Restraining grace is only an
impediment to sinful actions.
First, Restraining grace is only an impediment to sinful actions; but renewing
grace is an amendment of our sinful inclinations. When a man is only restrained
from sin, although he forbears any visible acts of sin, yet his heart is as
wicked as ever, and his sinful inclinations and affections the same as before:
But this it is not when the heart is renewed by grace; for renewing grace is
not only a cord to withold, but it is likewise a plaster to heal and change,
as it is a preservative against sinful actions and works, so it is a spiritual
salve to cure our sinful natures; the renewed Christian does not only forbear
sin, but he does also hate sin; a restrained sinner at sometimes cannot sin; a
renewed sinner at no time would sin: the one does not commit the sin which yet
he still loves* but the other does sometimes do the sin which yet his soul
still hates.

It is an unvoluntary impediment.
Secondly, when a man forbears sin by the sole power of restraining grace, it
is involuntary; There is a secret regretting or rising of the heart against
this restraining power: (Keep thy servant, etc. So David, Psalm. 19. 13.) and he
heartily blesses God for being kept from sin: (Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, etc. 1 Samuel 25. 32.) and is more troubled, and discontented, and
burdened that he carries within himself a body of sin, which rebels against the
law of his mind, than that he is hindered and kept from sin.

Thirdly, A person acting only under the strength of restraining grace, though
a while he may hold off from gross sins, yet he will not strive seriously to
mortify It does not mortify those sins it restraines from.
the lusts from which those sins do arise, but he will give his heart leave to
a delightful contemplation of them, and to secret desires after them, and will
venture very near to the commission of them: But when the heart is renewed by
grace, the person flies from sin, yea from all appearances of evil, and is so
far from sparing of any sin, that he lays the Axe to the root of the Tree, and
endeavors (in good earnest) the mortifying and crucifying of sin.

Fourthly, when a person has only that grace which we call restraining, his
Sin breaks out with more violence upon the removing of the restraint*
sinful corruptions (upon the removing of those restraints (do break out with
more rage and violence, if once it recover its liberty) the course of it now is
with more strength and fury: Take you any child, or servant, or any other
person loving of sin, yet not daring to commit sin of their fear of those under
whom they live; if these once get but their liberty, none prove more insolently
and outragiously wicked: But where the heart is renewed by grace, it has a
constant tenderness, and habitual fear, a fixed contrariety and detestation of
sin: Though Parents be dead, though Governors be absent, though Friends be
departed, it is all one, God still lives, and God still sees; and therefore how
can the renewed person commit any wickedness and sin against God? and the
longer he lives, the more he hates sin.

Fifthly, Though men acting by restraining grace, may, and do sometimes forbear
He forbears sin upon other grounds.
to sin, yet it is upon other grounds, than those do who abstain from sin, from
renewing grace. In restriction men abstain from sin for fear of outward shame,
or of outward loss, or for fear of Gods wrath, or for fear of terror of
conscience, which has formerly befallen them for sinning: But in Renovation
men abstain from sin, out of a love to God, and out of an hatred of the
filthiness of sin, because it will offend and grieve their God, and defile and
pollute their souls.

Sixthly, Lastly, though by restraining grace, there is some temporary
cessation from There is only a temporal cessation.
sinful evil, yet there is no settled inclination unto, nor delight in spiritual
good, no heart to prize God or Christ, or holiness, or the ways or works of
new obedience: But where God gives renewing grace to the heart, as there is
more than a mere ceasing to sin; So there is another heart given inclining
to God, to (...) his Will, to love his Commands, to walk in his Paths, to
delight to do his Will; I delight in the Law of God after the inner man, said
Paul. Romans 7. 22. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes, Psalm.
119. 5. And ver. 112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always
to the end.

III. The presence of common gifts. The presence of common gifts.

I call then those gifts common gifts, which the Spirit of God does give,
though not to every man, yet unto men who are really bad and unconverted, as
well as to men who are really good and converted; of which some do respect,
What those gifts are.


First, The mind, in light or knowledge of the Scripture in general; and of
Christ and the way of salvation by him in particular, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10.

Secondly, The judgment, in a credence or assent unto what God reveals in his
Word as true: King Agrippa believe thou the Prophets, I know that thou
believe? Acts 26. 27.

Thirdly, The heart; as those tastes you read of in Heb. 6. 4. The tasting of
the heavenly gift. ver. 5. The tasting of the good Word of God, and the powers
of the world to come.

Fourthly, The Conscience, unto which may be given a deep sense of sin, and
extreme trouble for it; as you read in Ahab and Judas, etc.

Fifthly, The affections, in which there may be found some joys at the hearing
of the Word, as in Herod, and in the third sort of ground, and delight in
approaching unto God, Isa. 58. 2.

Sixthly, The conversation, in reforming of some sins which the Apostle calls
an Escaping the pollutions of the world, 2 Pet. 2. 20. and in conscience to
some duties, as Herod heard John Baptist, and did many things, Mar. 6. 20.

Object. But will some of you say, does not the presence of all these things
These alone do not argue a new heart.
certainly conclude the presence of newness of heart, or of an heart renewed
by grace?

Sol. All these gifts of them (alone) do not conclude it, the effects which may
appear unto you in these four Conclusions.

First, A man may attain to all these, and yet be a very notorious wicked man:
Most of these did Herod attain unto (if not unto all of them) yet the man A man
may have these, and remain wicked.
was very vile and wicked; and three things did manifestly declare him to be
so; 1. He kept Herodias his brothers wife, Mar. 6. 17. 2ly He took away the
life of John the Baptist, Mar. 6. 27. 3ly He set Jesus Christ at naught, and
rejected him, Luke 23. 11. That man who will live in a known notorious sin, and
who will unjustly murder the messenger of God, and mock and reject Jesus
Christ, as vile, is a very wicked man; but all this did Herod who knew much,
and heard much, and did much, and had some temporary affections. Ergo,

Secondly, No Hypocrites heart was ever renewed by grace (if it were so, he An
Hypocrite may attain to these.
were no Hypocrite) but an Hypocrite may attain unto all these. Knowledge he
may have, none doubts of it; he may excel in it: The Pharisees knew the Law,
yea and knew Christ: Faith of assent he may have, this they had who believed
for a season, and this had Simon Magus. Some taste and affections he may have,
such had they in Isa. 58. 2, 3. and in Heb. 6. Trouble in Conscience he may
have for sin committed, this had Judas: And outward Reformation he may have so
far as to seem righteous in the sight of men, etc.

Thirdly, Apostates never had truth of Renewing grace (for Renewing grace, it
Apostates may have all this. Renewing grace has power in the heart above
common gifts.
is a living spring, immortal and abiding seed, a gift of God without
repentance, the earnest of our glorious inheritance) but Apostates may attain
unto all common gifts whatsoever; see at leisure, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.

4. Renewing grace has the power in the heart, which no common gifts have, v.
g.

1. It separates the heart from the love of all sin. 2. It sets the heart upon
the mortification of all sin. 3. It brings in the whole heart to God. 4. It
sets out such a new obedience with Spiritual Ingredients and affections, and
with such a sole entire respect to Gods glory, that no common gift does or can.
IV. The strange and powerful effects of an awakened and troubled Conscience.
An awakened and troubled conscience. This is the nearest to renewing.

I hardly know any such nearness to the work of renewing grace, as that arises
from Conscience awakened and troubled for a person in this condition.

First, Has a clear sight, and an exquisite sense of his sin, not only
present, but long since committed, they seem to be set in order before his
eyes.

Secondly, His very soul is troubled and distressed, so that he would give all
the world that he had never sinned so and so.

Thirdly, he cannot hold, but he must confess his sins before God, and
sometimes before men, with surpassing lamentations, and tears, and severe
accusings, and condemnings of himself.

Fourthly, He puts away all visible sin, and resolves, and protests against
it, yea and binds his soul with solemn vows never to return to folly more.

Fifthly, He cries out for Christ, and how he may get Christ to make his peace.

Sixthly, There is no visible duty, but he does set upon, and in such a manner
as he never did before; prays most earnestly for mercy, hears attentively for
any hope of mercy, and perhaps associates himself with the people of God, and
begs their counsel, their prayers, their pity, and their comfort.

Seventhly, He will not (in this anguish of conscience) come near the occasions
of sin, but does withstand temptations from wicked company, and cries out
against them as the seducers of his soul.

Eighthly, He sets up a kind of Reformation in his Family, which before had
(perhaps) no face of Religion in it; but now all notorious profaneness is
banished, and the neglect of Gods worship is redressed, and Prayer is set up in
the Family, morning and evening, and the reading of the Scriptures, etc.

Object. Surely will some men say, this man's heart is changed, and all this
could never be, unless the heart were renewed by grace (and some of us never
went so far as this) can you show any difference 'twixt those effects of an
awakened and troubling conscience, and those flowing from renewing grace?

Sol. These ^ffects (I confess) are high, and with them (for the present)
Differences betwixt these and renewing grace. In the Ca^se.
many do deceive themselves, looking on them as the fruits of renewing grace;
but there are manifest differences between them.

First, In the Cause or Grounds, when they come only from an awakened and
troubling Conscience; the cause of them is only the sense of Gods dreadful
wrath which is such an unsufferable evil that it breaks and tears the senses,
the sinner will (in that condition) do any thing, and comply with any course.
How conformable was Pharaoh when the hand of God was heavy upon him; and unto
what confession, and restitution, and repentance was Judas wrought, when the
wrath of God fell upon his Conscience! But now when the heart is renewed by
grace, the man is sensible of his sinning, and mourns for his sins, and puts
away his sins, and sets up a course of new obedience, not from the mere sense
of wrath, but from another Cause, even from a love to God, and an apprehension
of Gods love to him, which raises in him a loathing of all which God loathes,
and a liking of all that God likes, and a desire in all things to walk in all
well-pleasing before the Lord.

Secondly, In the secret Principle which sets the sinner thus awork; In the In
the Principle
troubled sinner it is self-love; a poor wretch now plainly sees that he must
be damned if he does not leave and change his sinful course; and if he slights
Christ and holy duties, as formerly he has done, there is in him (in this
condition) an horrible fear of death, and of Gods eternal vengeance, and he
would not fall into the consuining fire; (no creature likes its own
destruction, much less an eternal damnation) and therefore this troubled sinner
will set upon duties, and will make much moan for Christ, and all that moves
him unto this, is his self-love, he loves his life, and he loves his safety;
but yet all this while does not love Christ for Christ, nor holy Duties as ways
to glorify God; but where renewing grace is in a man, the principle which sets
him a work for Christ, is faith, and which draws him out, is a love of
godliness, and a love of the glory of God, etc.

Thirdly, In the end or aim, which in works done upon the sole account of In
the end.
a troubling conscience, is only self-ease and quietness, and calmness of
conscience, as the distemper lies only in trouble, so the remedy lies only in
ease. Oh if the wrath of God were off in the feeling of it; but the poor wretch
does not think of removing the wrath of God in the state of it; and O if the
painful terrors of conscience were off, that and this he aims at directly; if
he thinks of Christ, if he prays, if he hears, if he confers, if he reforms,
all tends to this, viz. the removing of sensible evil, of penal evil, of
terrors and troubles, and that his conscience may be quiet, and hold its peace,
and speak bitterly no more unto him; but where the heart is renewed by grace,
the conscience should trouble, yet it is not that only, nor that principally
which the person looks at to be removed; but it is the cause of that trouble; O
Lord, take away iniquity; O Lord, heal my soul; O Lord, subdue my sin; O be
thou my sanctifying God as well as my pardoning God; my sins trouble my soul, O
let me no more trouble thee by my sins, etc.

Fourthly, In the event or issue: Let the troubled sinner (who appears now with
such a great change) let him I say, be taken off the Rack, let him get respite,
In the event.
let him get deliverance from his fears, and from his terrors, and from his
distresses: There are four things which will appear in him.

1. He will quickly abate, and grow remiss in all these duties; will not be so
serious, so earnest, so constant. 2. He will give way to contemplative evil,
and will be venturing upon the occasion of sin again. 3. He will return in love
to his sinful practices, and with the dog will return again to his vomit, 2
Pet. 2. 22. 4. His latter end is worse; his conscience from being a troubled
conscience, will now become an hardened conscience, and seared* 2 Pet. 2. 20.
But thus it never is with an heart renewed by grace, which turns us from evil
to good, and from good to better; and still increases in the soul a greater
hatred of sin, and fear to sin; and the more that renewing grace abounds in the
soul, the more is tenderness abounding in the conscience.
Thus have you heard (by way of Use) 1. A conviction that many persons are
still in their old sinful conditions, and never bad this new heart given them.
2. That there is a possibility to be deceived about the fruiton of this newness
of heart, and wherein that deceit may be.

SECT. IV.
Use 3. I Shall now proceed to a Use of Discovery, wherein I will propound For
discovery.
unto you some Characters by which you may know whether God has indeed
bestowed upon you this new heart and new spirit which he has promised to give
unto all his people in Covenant.

The Signs and Characters are these ten. Ten Characters of a new heart.


1. A New Sight and Feeling. 2. A New Judgment and Opinion. 3. New Cares and
Requests. 4. New Principles. 5. A New Combat and Conflict. 6. New Abilities
and Powers. 7. New Works and Obedience. 8. New Delights and Satisfactions. 9.
New Society. 10. New Rules.
First, To whomsoever God does give a new heart, unto him he does give a A new
sight and feeling.
new sight and feeling of their spiritual condition; before the Lord renews the
heart by grace, there were two qualities predominant in it.

One was ignorance or blindness; an unregenerate man is a dead man, Ephesians. 2.
1. and an ignorant man, he understands not, he knows not what he is, nor what
he does, nor what his condition of soul is: We were never in bondage, said they
in Joh. 8. 33. The way of wickedness is as darkness, they know not at what they
stumble, said Solomon, Prove. 4. 19.

Another was hardness and unsensibleness; a wicked man has a wicked heart, but
he is not sensible of it; and his heart is desperately wicked, but he is not
sensible of it: He is ignorant and proud, and impenitent, and malicious, and
serving diverse lusts, and under the curse and wrath of God, but he is not
sensible of it: His sin abounds in heart and life, and rules, and bears sway,
and he is a slave unto them, but he is not sensible of this; but when the Lord
renews the heart by grace, there is (presently) a spiritual life, and presently
a spiritual sense; the man sees that in himself, which he never saw before, and
experimentally feels that in himself which he never felt before: Alas says he,
What a wretched creature am I? and what a sinful heart is here? full of
wickedness, desperately evil; here is no good dwelling in me; here is that
sinfulness abounding in me; here is that ignorant, vain, worldly, stubborn,
sensual, rebellious, unbelieving, hardened heart, of which the Lord speaks, and
which the Lord threatens, and the man groans under this burden of his sinful
heart and life: Psalm. 38. 4. and exceedingly complains of it: Romans 7. 24. and
now loathes himself in his own eyes: Ezekiel. 36. 31. and bewails his condition
with trouble of heart.

Secondly, To whomsoever the Lord gives a new heart, he does give unto A new
judgment and opinion.
them a new judgment and opinion; before the Lord renews a man's heart, he has
a corrupt and false judgment:

Partly of himself, in respect

1. Of his estate; that he is alive, that he is righteous, that he needs no
Repentance, that he stands in need of nothing. 2. Of his own ways; that they
are the wisest for safety, and best for delight and profit.
Partly of Gods commands and ways; that of all other they are most unequal, and
most burdensome, and most undelightful, and for the most part needless; what
needs a man to trouble himself so much for his sins, and what needs a man
presently to set upon the practice of Repentance, and what needs a man to make
so sure of Christ and mercy, and grace, and heaven: But when the Lord gives a
man a new heart, his judgment is rectified, and he has now another opinion
than formerly he had, his judgment is diverse from what it was, in respect of
himself and his ways. As the Apostle spoke, I was alive without the Law once,
but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed, Romans 7. So before
renewing grace came into the heart, a man thinks high thoughts of himself, and
of his ways; but when that comes, then he judges of himself as he is, and of
his ways as indeed they are, and have been. Psalm. 73. 22. So foolish was I, and
ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee, 1 Timothy 1. 15. To save sinners, of whom
I am chief; and for his ways, he now looks on them as ways of death, and paths
of hell, in which who so walks, shall find no rest nor peace.

In respect of God and his ways: God is now looked upon as an only happiness,
and could I enjoy him for my God in Christ, I were blessed for ever; and his
ways are righteous, and good, and holy, and most pleasant, and only safe; the
way of Repentance, the way of faith, the way of holiness, the way of a godly
Conversation; how excellent, how beautiful, how desirable are all of them to an
heart renewed by grace, which yet in former times were judged with scorn and
contempt, and hatred.

Thirdly, Where the Lord gives a new heart, there he gives new cares and New
cares and requests.
requests: Before the Lord renews the heart by grace, a sinner is very careful,
and very careless.

He is very careful for two things.

One is for the world; What shall I eat? and what shall I drink? and wherewith
shall I be clothed? Matthew. 6. His heart is set on the world, and he minds
earthly things, and his heart goes after his covetousness, and who will show us
any good? his affections are set on things below.

The other is for his fleshly lusts: They that are after the flesh, mind the
things of the flesh, Romans 8. 5. And they make provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14. But he is very careless about his soul,
therefore he is said to despise his soul, and not to know the day of his
visitation, nor the things which concern his peace, and to make light of the
invitations of Christ. But when the Lord begins to renew the heart by grace,
there are new cares and new desires: O how the soul is taken with the soul, and
for the soul: Lord, What will become of my poor soul? and what shall I do for
my poor soul? if I get not Christ, my soul is lost; and if I get not mercy, I
am undone: Take the world who will, and take sinful pleasures who will, but O
Lord be merciful to me a sinner, and O Lord be thou reconciled to my soul, and
lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me: Every new heart has new
thoughts, and cares, and desires: What shall we do, said they to John the
Baptist? Matthew. 3. And What shall we do, said they to Peter? Acts 2. 37. And
What shall we do to be saved, said he to Paul and Silas? Acts 16. 30.

Fourthly, If a new heart be given, there will then be found in you the
presence New principles.
of all new principles, which are contrary to all the old principles in the old
sinful heart; there is not any one spiritual and heavenly principle respecting
salvation, but they may be found in you; v. g.

1. Ignorance, that is one principle of an old heart, the contrary unto it;
viz. Knowledge is given when you come to partake of a new heart. Colos. 3. 10.
And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge. Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were
sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord.

2. Carnal wisdom, that is another principle of the old heart; the contrary
unto that, is given to a person when God renews his heart; viz. Spiritual and
heavenly wisdom, a wisdom for salvation. 2 Timothy 3. 15. A wisdom unto that which
is good. Romans 16. 9. A wisdom to approve the things that are excellent. Phil.
1. 10. A wisdom to know the times or seasons of grace, and to embrace and
improve them: Hebr. 3.

3. Vanity of spirit, that is another old principle in the old heart; an old
heart is a vain heart, and an old mind is a vain mind; but when the Lord gives
a new heart, he then gives a spiritual seriousness unto the heart, To work out
its salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. And to serve God
acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, Hebr. 12. 28. And to give all
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 1^. And taking heed
of neglecting so great salvation, Hebr. 2. 1, 3.

4. Hardness, this is another principle in an old heart; the heart is a stony
heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26. and an heart of Adamant, Zach. 7. 11, 12. But when God
gives a new heart, there is a principle contrary unto this put into the heart,
namely a soft and tender, and mournful heart. Josiah had a tender heart, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. God makes my heart soft, Job 23. 16. They shall mourn, as one
mourns for his only son, Zach. 12. 10

5. Pride, this is another old principle of the old heart. Mark 7. 22. so Psalm.
73. 6. Pride compasses them about as with a chain: So Jer. 48. 29. We have
heard the pride of Moab, (he is exceeding proud) his loftiness, his arrogance,
and his pride, and the haughtiness of his heart: So Romans 1. 30. Deceitful,
proud boasters: But when the Lord gives a new heart, there is a principle of
humility given, which is contrary unto that pride of heart. Deuteronomy. 33. 3. All
his Saints are in thine hand, they sit down at thy feet, every one shall
receive of thy words. Psalm. 131. 1. Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine
eyes lofty, etc. Ver. 2. Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child
that is weaned of his mother, my soul is even as a weaned child. Acts 20. 19.
Serving the Lord with all humility of mind.

6. Stubbornness of resistance and unyieldingness, this is another principle of
an old heart, an old heart is a stubborn heart; as for the Word which thou have
spoken in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, said they to
Jeremiah, Jer. 44. 16. Ye always resist the Holy Ghost, ye stiff-necked, and
uncircumcised in heart, said Stephen unto them in Acts 7. 51. But when God
gives a new heart, there is given a contrary principle unto this, even a
yielding and obedient spirit to the Word and Will of God: Acts 9. 6. Lord, what
will thou have me to do? Acts 10 33. We are all here present before God, to
hear all things that are commanded thee of God. Isa. 66. 2. To him that
trembles at my Word. Psalm. 119. 161. My heart stands in awe of thy Word.
Romans 6. 17. Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which was
delivered you.

7. Hypocrisy, this is another principle in the old heart; an old heart is an
hypocritical heart; it is full of guilt and deceit. Jer. 17. 9. Deceitful above
all things: But when the Lord gives a new heart, he gives a principle contrary
to this; viz. sincerity and uprightness of heart, and a true heart. John 1. 47.
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity
we have had our Conversation in the world.

8. Unbelief, coffeehouse, impatience, discord and variance, these are other
principles of the old heart; but when the Lord gives a new heart, then he works
in us contrary principles unto these; viz. faith: Phil. 1. 29. Unto you it is
given to believe; Repentance. Acts 11. 18. God has granted to the Gentiles
also repentance unto life. Contentment: Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in
whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. Patience: 1 Cor. 4. 12. Being
reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it. Love: 1 These. 4. 9. Ye are
taught of God to love one another. I could name many more such heavenly
principles and qualities contrary to the old sinful principles and qualities
which are certainly found (though not in the same measure or degree, yet in
truth) in every man whom the Lord does give a new heart.

Fifthly, Whenever the Lord gives a man a new heart, there is presently a new
A new combat and conflict.
combat and conflict: Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusheth against the Spirit, and
the Spirit lusts against the flesh, and they are contrary the one to the
other, etc. Romans 7. 23. But I see another Law in my members warring against the
Law of my mind. The flesh (which is our corrupt heart or nature, the old man,
the Law in our members) and the Spirit (which is our new heart, or renewed
nature, the new man, the Law of our mind) these are both in the same regenerate
person, and they are dispersed over every faculty of the soul, and they are
contrary the one to the other, and do war one against another; and that war
is from the first moment that renewing grace enters into the heart, to the last
moment that the soul leaves the body.

Object. Now here it may be objected, that this cannot be a true and real sign
of newness of heart, because in a natural and unregenerate man, there is many
times a combat and conflict between their judgment, and their affections, and
between their conscience, and their temptations unto sin?

Sol. That there are such combats and conflicts in unregenerate men, I grant;
Differences betwixt the conflicts in a regenerate and unregenerate man. In
their Principles.
but then they are of another nature, different from those in a renewed or
regenerate person.

First, In their Principles: The conflict in the one arises from servile fear;
the conflict in the other arises from spiritual hatred. A natural Conscience
may see the danger of sinning, and thereupon oppose the affections inclining to
sin; but a renewed heart sees the baseness of sin, and thereupon inclines the
heart to hate it: As sin a coal of fire, there is the fire which burns, and
there is the coal which defiles; so in sin, there is considerable, the wrath
unto which it does expose, and the filthiness whereby it does pollute the soul:
The fear of burning wrath, this makes the unregenerate conscience to hold off,
and to argue against the temptations to sin: but it is the defilement and
pollution by sin which makes the renewed heart to abhor and contest with it:
Not only or principally the evil by sin, but the evil of sin which is so
extremely contrary to God in his Nature, and Will, and Glory, which we entirely
love, etc.

In the Seat.
Secondly, In the Seat and place of combat; Jacob and Esau struggling in the
same womb; or like heat and cold in the same water, and in every part of it.

Thirdly, In the Extent of the combat; that in unregenerate persons is only
with some gross, scandalous, and infamous sins; but for secret sins, or other
In the Exte^t.
sins which the world applauds, these are still favored and harbored; the
natural man can go no farther than his light, which in him cannot make a clear
and full discovery of sins; nor will he quarrel with his sins further than he
needs must, to save his ease in Conscience, and credit with men: But when the
heart is renewed by grace, there the combat is against all known sin, the
reason whereof is this, because the ground of opposition is not accidental and
particular, but natural and universal: the newness of the heart is not an
humor, but a contrary nature to that of sin, and therefore the heat does
conflict with all that is cold, because it is naturally contrary unto it; so
does renewing grace combat with all sin, because it is a nature contrary to
sin as sin; not as little or great, secret, or open, etc. but as sin.

4. In the event: In regenerate men the issue of the conflict is either a plain
giving up to the will of lust in the affections (the man being tired and In the
event.
vexed with the violent solicitations of them, as Sampson was with Dalilahs
importunities) or in case that natural conscience does prevail, it is not to
the mortifying of any sin, but only to a temporary repressing and restraining
of sin; but the combat ends otherwise where the heart is renewed by grace; for
it makes a more constant and resolute resistance, and at the last (though
perhaps after some foiles) it gets the victory over sin, and wins the field:
Thus you see that the new spiritual combat or conflict, is a true character of
a heart indeed renewed by grace: It is not a sign of true grace that a man has
no sin, but that his heart is conflicting with all sin,

Sixthly, Whenever a new heart is given by God unto any person, then are New
abilities.
there given new abilities unto that person.

Beloved, two things I take for granted.

1. That renewing grace is in itself a very powerful quality: There is a Spirit
of power and might in it, and going along with it; if it were not so, it could
never change the heart of a sinner, nor unthrown sin, nor maintain conflict
with all the powers of sin and Satan; nor send out such high works of services
as it does.

2. That it does confer an ability or power on the soul; to what end else is
it given unto us, if by it we have no more power than what we had before in our
natural condition? When we are renewed by grace, we are said to be quickened who
were dead; which necessarily implies that there is a power imprinted in us when
we are renewed.

Now there is a twofold power given when renewing grace is given.

1. One is to do such things which no natural or unregenerate person ever did,
or could do. 2. Another is to do such things which we our selves were not able
to do, before God did renew our hearts by grace.
First, take me the bravest Heathen that ever was, or the most accomplished
Hypocrite that ever was, and consider what they have done, how far they have
gone; if you are not able to go beyond them in doing some things which they
could not rise unto, assuredly your hearts were never renewed by grace: As
Christ spoke, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.
20. So say I, except you be able to do more than the choicest Heathen, or
exquisite Hypocrite, or any unregenerate person in the world, your hearts were
never changed by renewing grace.

Object. Will some say unto me, what do you mean, for many unregenerate men
have gone very far, and so high, that it is a question whether some of the
people of God have risen so high?

Sol. First, Let them go as far as unregenerate men may or can go; yet every
regenerate or renewed person goes far beyond them, and the demonstration of
it is this: renewing grace is the highest elevation and perfection of man's
nature; common gifts (with which alone unregenerate men are possessed) are
far below, and behind it in excellency, and abilities.

Secondly, But plainly to open my mind unto you; there are six things unto
which renewing grace does enable a man, and unto which no unregenerate person
could ever attain.

1. Self-denial in a man's opinion and affections, and worth, and ways, and
ends. 2. Sincere love of Jesus Christ, and of all that do belong to Christ. 3.
A cordial compliance with the whole revealed will of God. 4. A submission of
the whole heart to Christ in all his offices, and with all his conditions. 5.
An unfeigned hatred of every sin. 6. To live by faith upon the promises of God
in all the contingencies and occurrences of the world. No unregenerate person
ever did or could (in that estate) rise unto any one of these things, and every
renewed person does attain unto them in the truth of them; therefore if you
find a power to do those things, assuredly your hearts are renewed by grace.
Secondly, Moreover, you may discern the presence of renewing grace, by that
power and ability to do such works as you your selves were never able to do
before. Heretofore you were not able to shed a tear for sin, to forsake any one
beloved sin, to send up an affectionate prayer to God, to prize Christ above
all, and to thirst after him; to take any delight in God, to suffer any
reproach for Christ: But now ye are able to mourn for your sins, and to abhor
them. 2 Cor. 10. 4. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God, to the pulling down of strong holds. To forsake the dearest lusts,
and to cry mightily to God, and to take delight in him, and in his will and
ways, and to prize Christ above all, and to hunger and thirst after him as the
only chiefest good and happiness, and you can do for Christ, and you can suffer
for Christ, etc. Do you find it thus with you? then are your hearts renewed by
grace.

Seventhly, You may know whether God has given a new heart, by the By new
works.
new works, and the new means of working: We say, that ut res se habent in
essendo, sic se habent in operando: All works and operations are answerable to
the nature in us; the old nature finds out old works, and the new nature finds
out new works. Before the Prophet healed and seasoned the spring of water, it
did send out bitter and unwholesome water, but afterward the waters (the spring
being healed) were sweet and wholesome, 2 Kings 2. 21, 22. So before the Lord
does heal our old hearts, the works flowing from them are bitter, corrupt,
vile, abominable, (that which is born of the flesh is flesh, Joh. 3.) but when
he heals the heart by renewing grace, there are new works of holiness and
righteousness answerable to a renewed heart, (whatsoever is born of the Spirit
is Spirit.)

Now then take a survay of your former Works, and of your former Conversation,
and compare them with the present works and course of life, and be your selves
the Judges what newness you find in them. Have you left your former works of
uncleanness, of drunkenness, of profaning the Sabbath, of scoffing at holiness,
of mispending your precious time in gamings, and in vain pleasures: Are you not
still to be found in the same paths and ways, and works of wickedness? Are
there not still the same fruits growing out of the old root? and the same
stream flowing out of the same corrupt spring? How can ye say that you have new
hearts, when still you live old lives, and go on in the old course of sin?
Beloved, this is most true, that a new life ever attends a new heart; if the
heart be changed, the life will be changed; newness of heart will appear in
newness of Conversation. Did Paul, did Mary Magdalen, did Zacheus, did any (of
whose Conversion you read in Scripture) lead such lives as formerly? Did they
not put off concerning the former Conversation, the Old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts? Ephesians. 4. 22. Have they not had their fruit
unto holiness? Romans 6. 22. Therefore let no man deceive himself, saying, though
I walk as in former times, and live still as I have lived, yet my heart is as
good as the best; thou do but delude and destroy thy self in this vain
boasting, for the Tree is known by his fruits; it is impossible that thy heart
should be a new heart, as long as thy Conversation remains a wicked
Conversation.

Object. But you may say, Do you not see that hypocrites do appear in good
works, and yet they are wicked persons; and good men sometimes appear in evil
works and actions, and yet they are not wicked: Ergo. This appearance in new
works cannot be a sure sign of a new heart:

Sol. To this I answer.

First, Whatsoever the good works may be which a wicked man may do, I shall not
at this time dispute; but this may suffice you, that where there is no newness
of life, there is no newness of heart.

Secondly, It is not this or that particular passage in the life which
denominatively declares the estate of the heart either way; one particular good
action may be done by him whose heart is naught; and one particular ill action
may be done by him whose heart is good, and truly renewed by grace. As the new
heart brings forth new works, so it does act them after a new manner of
working; it is possible that an unregenerate man may do many works which are
morally good, but then he does not perform those works in such a manner as that
man does, whose heart is renewed by grace.

The qualification of works for the manner in a man renewed.
There are four qualifications as to the manner of working, or performance of
duties which are found in the renewed person, and in no other man.

1. He performs them in the strength of Christ, by virtue of union and
communion with him, I can do all things (said Paul) through Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. And as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me, Joh. 15. 4.

2. He performs them as with love; the love of Christ constrains me, said
Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 14. If a man love me, he will keep my Word, said Christ, Joh.
14. 23. Now when a man does works of obedience out of love, he is ready and
willing to do them; the work is written in his heart, he takes delight in the
doing of them: I delight to do thy Will O God, Psalm. 40. 8. And make me to go
in the paths of thy Commandments, for therein do I delight, Psalm. 119. 35. It
is a man's meat and drink to do the will of God, Joh. 4. 34. The yoke is easy,
and the Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.

3. He performs them with fervency of spirit, not coldly, and carelessly, and
indifferently, but closely, and seriously, with a fervent spirit. (Romans 12. 11.
Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord) he seeks the Lord with his whole heart; an
heavenly impetus and aestus, and vigor, etc.

4. He performs them with integrity of intention; looks not at himself, but the
glory of God in Christ, etc.

Eighthly, You may know that God has given you a new heart, if you find New
delights and satisfactions.
new delights and satisfactions. There is not a man in the world but the frame
of his heart may be known by that which he takes delight, and contentment, and
satisfaction in. If one has a proud heart, the vanities, and fashions, and
dresses, and braveries of the world are his delight and satisfaction. If one
has an ambitious heart, the honors and applauses, and dignities, and
preferments, and powers of the world are his delight and satisfaction. If one
has a covetous heart, the riches and profits, and treasures of the world are
his delight and satisfaction. If one has a sensual and unclean heart, the
filthiness and actings of lusts are his delight and satisfaction: And there is
no unregenerate person, but either some worldly object, or some sinful object
is his delight and satisfaction; might he have wealth enough, or honor enough,
or pleasure enough, he would desire no more, here he would rest, and with this
he would be contented and satisfied: But now when the Lord changes and
renews the heart by grace, that which delights and contents, and satisfies
other men, will not delight and satisfy him; nay, those very objects which
formerly satisfied himself, will not now by any means satisfy him; but he has
new objects, and new ways of delight and satisfaction: If the Lord should say
unto a regenerate and renewed person, I will give thee all the world, this
would not satisfy him or delight him, though heretofore a little of it would
have gone far, and have done much. The renewed person sees what a vanity of
vanities the world is, and what a hell of hells sin is; and his delights and
satisfactions are now in objects suitable to his new nature, the highest and
best objects, these are suitable with the highest and best heart. A God, a
reconciled God, the favor of God, the knowledge of him as so, the fruition of
him as so, the meditations on him as so, the communions with him as so, the
manifestations of him to the soul as so, the hopes of the future and eternal
enjoyment of him as so, Psalm. 73. 25. These, these are the delights, the
contentments and satisfactions of an heart (indeed) renewed by grace. The
excellent glories of Christ, a near relation unto Christ, the life of Christ,
the peace by Christ, the comforts of Christ, the enjoyments of and by Christ,
the love of Christ, the powers of Christ, the presence of Christ, and
fellowship with Christ, these are the new delights, the new contentments, and
the only satisfactions of a new heart; these are food and raiment, these are
houses and lands, these are parents and friends, these are treasures and
pleasures to a renewed heart; these are the rest of it, and the heaven to it;
one sight of God in Christ, one smile of his love, one word of peace and joy
from Christ, delights and satisfies a renewed heart more than all which the
world can afford.

Ninthly, Another sign of a new heart, is new society; when God gives a A new
society.
man a new heart, that man has a new Master, and new work, and new friends,
and society. Psalm. 119. 63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of
them that keep thy precepts. 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from
death to life, because we love the Brethren. 2 Cor. 6. 14. What fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? Psalm. 139. 21. Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? O what a
burden is it to a good heart to be in ungodly company? Woe is me that I so
journ in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120. 5. And what a
delight is it to a renewed person to be in the company of renewed persons.
Psalm. 16. 3. To the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom
is all my delight. Psalm. 42. 4. I went with them to the house of God, with the
voice of joy and praise. Holy society is the only society for persons of holy
hearts; and in that society can no man take delight, until God renews his
heart by grace.

Tenthly, Lastly, When God gives a man a new heart, he does presently A new
rule.
set up a new rule of life to walk by; and according to that is his course
ordered all the days of his life; and what is that rule? not our own judgment,
not revelations, not our own will, not our own lusts, not our own affections,
not the opinion of men, not the customs of the world, not the applauses of the
world, not the ways of worldly advancements and advantages: But the rule which
a renewed heart sets up to guide and prescribe him, is none other but that
which God himself sets up for his people to walk by, and that is his written
Word. Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
path. Ver. 133. Order my steps in thy Word. This rule he sets up for all
matters of faith, and for all matters of fact; this I must believe, because God
reveals it and commands me to believe it; this I receive for truth* because God
delivers it for truth; and that I reject as erroneous, because the Word of God
condemns it as contrary to the truth: And this work I do, and that way I walk
in, because God sets it out in his Word for me; and that I do not do, and so
and so I dare not walk, for I have no Word of God for it; nay, the Word of God
is against it; why? man's heart is right indeed, it is renewed by grace; but if
a man will walk contrary to this rule, if he will not speak and live, according
to this Word, it is because there is no light in him, Isa. 8. 20.

SECT. V.
Use 4. Does God promise to give unto all his people in Covenant with him a new
heart and a new spirit? then there is comfort and joy to Comfort to those that
have a new heart.
all those who find the new heart given unto them; it is true, that when the
Lord does renew the heart of any by his grace, and separate them from the world
unto himself, that

1. They shall meet with many troubles and scoffs, and reproaches, and
persecutions from the world: All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecutions, 2 Timothy 3.

2. They shall meet with many temptations and oppositions from Satan; if he
cannot hinder grace, and conquer grace, yet he will molest and disquiet grace.

3. They shall meet with many conflicts and warrings within their own hearts,
and with many weaknesses and failings, and trials; nevertheless their condition
is a very happy and comfortable condition, and there are eight Eight comforts
proper to them.
choice comforts which are proper to every renewed person, and which may cheer
up his heart all his days; v. g.

1. Newness of heart is a sure and infallible testimony of the best, and of the
greatest matters which can concern the soul. 2. This newness of heart is an
unquestionable effect of our union with Christ. 3. It is the noblest and
highest elevation of the soul here on earth, and the clear evidence of the
presence of the Spirit of Christ. 4. It enables you for all heavenly communion
and serviceableness to Divine glory. 5. God will own and accept of it, and the
fruits of it, though but little and weak. 6. He will strengthen and uphold, and
perfect it unto the day of Christ. 7. He will pour upon every person who
enjoys it, all necessary blessings for this life, and will take special notice
of him, and care for him in the days of adversity. 8. Renewing grace shall
(without all doubt) bring us at the last to eternal happiness.
First, Newness of heart is a sure and infallible testimony of the best, and of
It is a clear testimony of the greatest matters which can concern the soul.
the greatest matters which can concern the soul.

There are six things which do concern the soul as nearly I think as any can,
and of every one of them is renewing grace a sure testimony. 1. The love of
God. 2. The election of God. 3. A relation to God. 4. A change from death to
life. 5. The pardon of sin. 6. The hope of glory.

1. Of the love of God, that the Lord does indeed set his special love, A
testimony of the love of God.
his very heart upon a person. 1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner of love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God. Psalm.
146. 8. The Lord loves the righteous; for any to be made the sons of God, this
is an effect or fruit of the love of God; now all the sons of God are new born,
they are born again of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 5. Ephesians. 2. 4. But God who is rich
in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us. Ver. 5. even when we were
dead in sins and trespasses, has quicked us together with Christ. As it is one
of the greatest testimonies of Gods hatred and wrath, for any to be left to his
old sinful heart and lusts, and ways; so it is one of the greatest testimonies
of Gods love, when he pities them in their sinful condition, and delivers them
out of it, and gives his Spirit to enliven and renew them by grace.

2. Of the Election of God; for this see two places: 1 These. 1. 4. Knowing Of
election.
(Brethren, Beloved) your Election of God. Ver. 5. For our Gospel came unto you
not in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 1. 4. He has
chosen us in him that we should be holy. Holiness (or renewing grace) it is (as
one speaks) the counterpane of Gods decree of Election; God by his own
eternal prescience knows whom he intends for salvation, and we by that work of
renewing grace in our hearts, come to know that eternal purpose of his grace
concerning us, it being given unto us an effect flowing from his Election, and
in order unto that happiness unto which he has chosen us.

3. Of our Relation to God as our God and our Father; as none but his Of our
relation to God.
people and children are holy, so all his people and his children are holy.
Isa. 63. 18. The people of thy holiness; they are, 1 Pet. 2. 9. an holy Nation,
and a peculiar people. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Come out from among them, and be ye
separate, and touch no unclean thing. Ver. 18. And I will be a father unto you,
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

4. Of our translation from life to death; See Isa. 4. 3. He that is left in Of
our translation from death to life.
Zion, and he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one
that is written among the living in Jerusalem. Ezekiel. 16. 6. When I passed by
thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee, when thou
wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood,
Live. Luke 15. 32. This my son was dead, and is alive again. Rom 6. 11.
Likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God.
Renewing grace is one of the strictest differences between men of death, and
men of life; not any man has it, but he who is made alive by Christ, and is in
the state of life; no profane person has it, nor does any hypocrite partake of
it.

5. Of the pardon of our sins; if any man fancieth that his sins are pardoned,
Of the pardon of our sins.
and yet his sinful heart remains, he deceives himself; for when God pardons
sins, he changes the sinner. Jer. 33. 8. I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity, and will pardon all their iniquities. Mal. 4. 2. The Son of
righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings. 1 Cor. 6. 11. But ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified.

6. Of the hope of glory; Christ is the hope of glory, as a meritorious Of hope
of glory.
cause: Colos. 1. 27. And renewing grace is the hope of glory as a testifying
means: 1 Pet. 1. 3. Who has begotten us again to a lively hope. Ver. 4. To an
inheritance incorruptible, etc. 1 John 3. 2. We know that when he appears we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Ver. 3. And every man that
has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure.

Secondly, Newness of heart is an unquestionable effect of our union with
Christ; It is an effect of our union with Christ.
Is it no comfort to you that you belong to Christ, that Christ is yours, that
you are in him of a truth! hear what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of him
are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man he in Christ, he is a new
creature. Beloved, this is most certain, that unction flows from union; you are
not first sanctified and renewed, and then brought into Christ; but you are
first brought into Christ, and so are you sanctified and renewed by the Spirit
of Christ, partaking of him, you do partake of life; none have their hearts
renewed by grace, but such as are in Christ; and all that are in Christ have
their hearts renewed by grace: Joh. 1. 16. Of his fullness have all we received,
and grace for grace.

Thirdly, Newness of heart is the noblest and highest elevation of our hearts,
It is the highest elevation of our hearts.
As the degenerate and corrupt nature is of all other the worst and basest (for
there is nothing more vile than that which is most sinful) so the renewed
nature which is directly opposite unto it, is of all other the most excellent
and raising; it is therefore called, the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. The image
of God, Col. 3. 10. The image of his glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

There are three things which may convince any Christian, that renewing grace
or newness of heart is our highest elevation and perfection.

1. One, because it is the nearest resemblance of that nature which is in God
himself; when you are renewed by grace, then you are like unto God himself: 1
Pet. 1. 16 Be ye holy, for I am holy.

2. Another, because it is the choicest work or effect of the Spirit of God,
who though he produces many other works, yet this is the chiefest of them,
herein is his Arm revealed; and in this does his glory most appear, and shine.

3. A third is, because it is our nearest conformity to Christ our Head, in
whom the image of God does most appear. The image of God does consist in
knowledge, holiness, and righteousness, as you may see if you compare Col. 3.
with Ephesians. 4. and this image was perfect in Christ who was the image of his
Father; and unto this are we conformed (in our proportion) when we are renewed
by grace; for we are then changed into the same image, 2 Cor. 3 18. And upon
this one account are they said to be one Spirit with him who are joined with
him, 1 Cor. 6. 17.

Fourthly, Newness of heart enables you for all heavenly communion, and
serviceableness It enables for heavenly communion.
to Divine glory. Now you may aproach, and come near, and stand in the presence
of your God, and he will take delight in you, and impart himself unto you; when
you call, he will answer you, and say, Here I am; and when you hear his Word,
he will meet you, and teach, and guide, and rejoice your heart. When God renews
our hearts, he does then set us apart for himself, owns us as his jewels, looks
on us as his Hephziba and Beulah, as his beloved, as such in whom he delights,
as his friends, as his favorites; you may open all your wants, and desires,
and conditions unto him, and he will open all his goodness, and kindness, and
mercies unto you: Your hearts are now become his temples in which he will
dwell, and walk, and appear with glorious manifestations of his love, and
grace, and help. Besides this newness of heart makes you serviceable unto his
glory; you can glorify him in your hearts by believing on him; in your lives
by heavenly, upright, humble, obedient faithful walking.

Fifthly, God will own and accept of it, and the fruit of it, though but little
and God owns and accept of it, though little and weak.
weak; As the least degree of newness does denominate the condition, so the
weakest expressions of it are accepted; He will not despise the day of small
things, Zach. 4. 10. The bruised reed he will not break, nor will he quench the
smoking flax, Matthew. 12. 20. But he will spare his people as a man spares his
son that serves him, Mal. 3. 17.

Sixthly, Nay he will stand by it, and uphold it, and strengthen it, and
perfect it: When you are under spiritual conflicts with your corruptions and
temptations, He will stand by it.
he will be present with you; he will put forth his strong hand upon your weak
hand; he will make his power to appear in your weakness, he will strengthen
what he has wrought, and finish what he has begun.

Seventhly, Certain blessings, and special cares are for all whose hearts are
renewed by grace: No people on earth have such a title to earth, nor such a
Special blessings are for (...).
sure revenue, nor such tender care for them, as renewed and regenerate
persons. The Lord is near unto them, he is round about them, he is in the midst
of them, he will do them good, he will surely bless them, no good thing shall
be wanting to them, he will never leave them nor forsake them, he will be a
present help unto them in the time of trouble, he will know their souls in
adversity, and will contend against all who do contend against them.

Eighthly, Renewing grace will at the last bring you to the enjoyment of
eternal It will bring us to eternal happiness.
happiness: Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God. Romans 6 22. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God,
you have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. Why! It is the
first fruits of the Spirit; the earnest of the Spirit; the seal of the Spirit;
holiness is happiness begun; grace is glory begun already, etc.

SECT. VI.
Use 5. Does God promise to give a new heart? Then let the next Use Exhortation
to use the means for it.
be for Exhortation to use the means by which every one of us may at length
enjoy it.

For the managing of this Use, there are three things I will offer unto you.

1. Motives to persuade you to strive after a new heart. 2. Cautions what to
avoid if you would get the new heart. 3. Scripture-informations what the ways
are, which if you take, will certainly bring you to the enjoyment of a new
heart.
1. The Motives to persuade us to look and strive after this new heart. Motives.


They are these three. 1. The misery of an old heart. 2. The necessity of a new
heart. 3. The possibility to be delivered from that, and to be possessed of
this.

1. The misery of an old heart: It is such an heart that (remaining under the
power of it) you cannot please God; Romans 8. 8. Nay, you cannot but displease
The misery of an old heart.
God, you cannot but still sin against him, cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2 14.

But more particularly, the old heart,

First, Is a fleshly and corrupt heart (the old man which is corrupt, Ephesians. 4.
22. It is called the plague of the heart, 1 King. 8. 38. It corrupts all your
thoughts, and all your affections, and all your speeches, and all your actions.

Secondly, Is an abominable heart; the Lord loathes and abhors it, as the
defacing of his image, as the workmanship of the Devil, as that which is most
contrary to his Nature, to his Will, and to his Glory.

Thirdly, Is a debasing heart; it makes us more vile than the vilest of
creatures, it makes us like the Devil, it makes us his children, his slaves,
his captives and bondmen.

Fourthly, A prejudicing heart, it keeps us off from God, from Christ, from all
heavenly communion, from all ability to do good, or to receive good; it holds
up our distance from mercy, from blessings, from heaven, and from all hopes
thereof: Ephesians. 2. 12. Without Christ, having no hope, and without God in the
world.

Fifthly, It is a deceitful heart: Jer. 17. 9. It tempts you, and deceives you;
it promises one thing, and pays you another thing; it pretends but to a
little more sinning, and yet it is unsatiable: It tells you that it will bring
you off from sinning, and yet still it engages you to farther sinning: It
makes you to believe that you shall have mercy, and yet it continues you in a
course of sinning which will lose you mercy; it says that you shall at last
repent, and yet it makes your heart more hardened and impenitent; it gives you
vain pleasures, and so cheats you of all true joy; it feeds you with some empty
profits, and thereby deprives you of all true riches; it brings in (sometimes)
a little of earth, but then it makes you to lose Christ and your own souls.

Sixthly, Is a dreadful heart: It is the root of gall and wormwood, and the
fruits of it are terror, and wrath, and death, and hell. All the terrors of
conscience spring from it; all the wrath of God breaks out upon you by reason
of it; all the bitter feelings, and all the dreadful fears and expectations
depend upon it; you cannot know peace whiles you live under the power of it:
Neither God, nor Christ, nor his Spirit, nor his Word, nor Conscience will
speak peace unto you in that condition. But on the contrary, the Law of God
threatens and condemns you, and the Gospel does as much and more, and God and
Conscience are all in arms against you; and every judgment of God (which
respects your soul and body for this life and the next) does await but one word
and commission from the just God to fall on you, and to torment and destroy you.

2ly The necessity of a new heart. The necessity of a new heart


You know there is a two fold necessity.

One is absolute, without which a thing cannot be at all, as the union of the
soul with the body to make a man. Another is Hypothetical; if one would be in a
well-being, then such or such a thing is necessary: Now you can never be in a
well-being, unless the Lord give you a new heart; renewing grace is necessary
as to that. Our well-being respects either this present, or that future life;
and newness of heart necessarily concerns both.

1. For this life; we cannot be well whiles we are under the curse for sin, For
this life
and under the power of sin; to deliver us from the first of these, it is
necessary to get Christ, and to be justified; and to deliver us from the last
of these, it is as necessary to get renewing grace, and to be sanctified.

2. For the future life of blessedness, it is also necessary, forasmuch as
there For the life to come.
cannot be a fruition of that, without an antecedent fruition of this: Joh. 3.
5. Except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Heb. 12. 14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord.

3ly The Possibility of getting this new heart.

I confess, that though newness of heart be necessary, yet if it be impossible
to be The possibility of getting of it.
attained, it were in vain to put you upon the seeking for it; but as it is
necessary to enjoy it, so it is possible to find it; and three things may
convince us of that.

First, One is the power of God, to whom nothing is hard or impossible: It Is
true, that an Almighty power must be put forth to make a Creature, and to make
a new creature: But God is able to quicken the dead, and to restore his own
image, and to slay and subdue the power of our sins, and to create in us a new
heart, and to put another spirit within us; whatsoever he does command and
require, he is able to give and work.

Secondly, The second is the promise of God; you see here that he promises to
give a new heart, and upon this condition, if men will enquire of him for it,
as he likewise upon the same terms promises to give his holy Spirit to them
that ask it, Luke 11. 13. Now the promise of God as it includes his power to
perform what he has promised, so it does express his intention and will to
give what he promises to give, if we seek unto him, and rely upon him.

The third is the work of God: He has according to his Word of promise given
this new heart to many thousands in the world; we find large Records of this in
the Scripture, Act. 2. 4. and we see manifold instances amongst our selves what
changes he makes in the hearts and lives of men, and many times of such as have
been very wicked, and utterly unworthy. The Cautions what to avoid.


2ly. The Cautions what to avoid if we would get a new heart.

If ever you would seek for, and obtain a new heart, then remember these five
Cautions.

First, Beware of a self-deceiving opinion that you have it already; and that
you Beware of a self-deceiving opinion that you have it.
(for your part) stand not under the want and need of it. This is that which
undoth many hearers, when we press Christ and faith upon them, O they have
believed on him: And when we press repentance, why, they need no repentance,
they have repented long ago; and when we tell them they must be converted, they
must be new creatures, they must get new hearts, O they need them not, their
hearts are as good as the best, and they have very good natures and
dispositions: With this the Pharisees deceived themselves; they were righteous
and needed no repentance, and so they rejected Christ; and with this, Laodicea
deceived her self; She was rich and increased, and stood in need of nothing;
and yet she was blind, and wretched, and naked, and poor.

Secondly, Beware that you hearken not to the exceptions and prejudices of your
Of harkening to the prejudices of your old hearts.
old and corrupt hearts, which are blind and cannot see the excellency of
renewing grace, and which also are averse, and have a natural antipathy unto
it. You would not imagine (until you come to the trial) what exceptions and
oppositions there are in our hearts against their Conversion and Renovation;
Sometimes we look on it as a melancholy and troubling humor: sometimes we
look on it as a needless and vain preciseness; sometimes we look on it as a
proud and unsociable quality; sometimes we look on it as too low and mean a
state and practice for persons of our greatness; sometimes we look on it as
that which will expose us to the contempts, and scoffs, and reproaches of men;
sometimes we look on it as the grave of all our delights and profits; sometimes
we look on it as a business utterly impossible for any man on earth: Now if any
of these prejudices, or if any other besides these prevail with us, we will
then sit quiet and contented with our old heart, and will never be persuaded to
look out for new hearts; therefore beseech the Lord to deliver you from the
lying vanities and prejudices of the old heart.

Thirdly, Beware of consulting with worldly men, or setting up the favors Of
consulting with worldly men.
or frowns of them: O if I should become a new man, and lead a new life; if I
should regard holiness, and life godly, I should lose favor, and hopes; how
would my Parents look on me? what would my friends and acquaintance think of
me! what opposition would befall me! how would men scoff and jear at me! and
what reports and reproaches would they raise of me! let me tell thee plainly
and faithfully, that if the Lord does not in much mercy mortify and subdue
this weakness (that I say not wickedness) of spirit in thee, that thou art
contented rather to enjoy thy old heart and courses with the applauses of the
world, than to yield in thy heart to Christ, and be willing and resolute to get
thy heart renewed by the Spirit of grace, although for this thou may meet
with all sorts of afflictions and reproaches from the world, thy poor soul will
be for ever lost.

First, Beware that you rest not on your own strength and sufficiency, to renew
or Of resting in your own strength.
change your hearts; if you do, two fruits there will be of it.

1. You will either not seek to the Lord at all, or if you do, you will then
seek him in a careless and unbelieving way.

2. Another is, you will but labor in vain, you will never be successful; for
you have no strength and sufficiency of your own: Without me, says Christ, ye
can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. And it is God (says the Apostle) that works in
us to will and to do of his good pleasure.

Fifthly, Beware that you neither delay, nor dally in using the means Of
delaying and dallying in the use of means.
to get this new heart: Do not say to morrow, the next year, when I am sick,
when I am old; these may be too late, and these may provoke the Lord to turn
away his mercy, and to deny his Spirit, because you put him off, he may
therefore justly put you off: Neither dally in the use of means, one while
attending, another while neglecting; one while being fervent, and another while
being remiss; one week going forward, and then for a year to fall backward,
but resolve to seek this new heart with all your heart, and with all your
pains, following on, and pressing forward, and running till you enjoy this new
heart, which God has promised to give unto them that seek it.

3ly The ways or means to get a new heart.

First, Strive to be willing that God should make your hearts new, that he The
ways to get a new heart
should change and renew them by grace; Pars est sanitatis velle sanari; Jer.
13. 27. O Jerusalem, will thou be made clean? Joh. 5. 6. Jesus said unto him,
Be willing.
will thou be made whole? O that we could get thus far, O Lord, I am weary of
my old sinful heart, I am willing that thou should heal it, and reform it:
If the unclean person were willing that God should cleanse him from his
filthiness; and the proud person were willing that God should make him humble,
this would be a fair step to newness of heart.

Secondly, Express this willingness in earnest Prayers to God, who only is
Express this willingness in earnest Prayer.
able to give a new heart: Jer. 17. 14. Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed;
save me, O Lord, and I shall be saved. Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean
heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

And let your Prayers have three Ingredients or Concomitants.

1. Sincerity; let them come from your very hearts, let them be the desires of
your souls: My soul follows hard after thee, Psalm. 63. 8. With my soul have I
desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early,
Isa. 26. 9. That the Lord may see that in very deed you would have your hearts
changed, and nothing will satisfy you till he grant you that request.

2. Faith; give up your earnest request for this in Faith, 1. Of Credence, that
he can give it. 2. Of Reliance, that for his Christ's sake, and for his promise
sake he will do it: Lord! It is thy promise to give a new heart, and all thy
promises in Christ are Yea and Amen; none does need the new heart more than I
do, and none can give that heart but thy self; and thou have promised to give
it unto them that ask; I come unto thee in the Name of Christ, and do beseech
thee for his sake to answer me according to thy Word; thou art able and
faithful, thou will give what thou promisest to give to them that seek thee; I
believe all this, Lord help my unbelief, etc.

3. Perseverance; hold on this request; and against all the rebellious workings
of your old heart, and against all the fears, and disputes, and discouragements
of your old hearts, yet lift up one Prayer more, and one Prayer more; you shall
certainly prevail if you can persevere in Prayer.

There are three Requests which a poor broken-heart is sure to speed in, if he
will pray always, and not faint; One is for a Christ, and another is for
pardoning mercy, and a third is for a new heart.

Thirdly, Diligently and patienly attend the Word, by which God converts,
Attend the Word.
and changes, and renews the heart: Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting souls. Jam. 1. 18. Of his own Will begat he us with the
Word of Truth. Ephesians. 5. 26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the Word. How many old sinful hearts has God convinced and
converted by his Word, that have come unto it with ignorance, and been sent
from it with knowledge! that have come to it with hardness, and have been sent
from it with tenderness! that have come to it with pride, and have been sent
from it with humility! that have come to it with all manner of profaneness, and
have been sent from it with all manner of holiness, with the Love of God, and
fear of God, and hatred of sin, and real purpose to walk with God in newness of
obedience; O therefore attend the Word of the Gospel, which is the power of God
unto salvation, and therefore the power of God to Renovation, etc.

Fourthly, Lastly, beseech the Lord to give you the uniting faith; that faith
which will unite your hearts to Jesus Christ, which will effectually bring you
into Beg uniting Faith.
relation with him, as Members of the Body of which he is the head; as Branches
of himself the true Vine.

Object. Why, what will this do, may some of you say?

Sol. I will tell you what it will do; it will infallibly bring in renewing
grace to your hearts: You can never be changed and renewed Creatures, unless
you be in Christ, 2 Cor 5. 17. For our spiritual life is in and from him; he is
the Author of life unto us, as Adam was the author of death unto us: And he
was anointed with the Spirit, that we from him might be Anointed with the
Spirit: And if once you be united by Faith unto him, you partake of his Spirit
to sanctify and renew, and conform you unto himself; He that is joined to the
Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17.

EZEKIEL. 36. 26. And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I
will give you an heart of flesh.
THese words are yet a further Declaration of the gracious will and intention
of God toward the people of his Covenant: Two things already has God promised
unto them; one was to justify them, to pardon all their sins; another was to
sanctify them, to renew all their hearts.

And there are two more choice mercies and blessings which he does graciously
undertake to bestow upon them.

First, One is, to take away the stony heart out of their flesh.

Secondly, The other is, to give them an heart of flesh: O what a mercy is it
to be rid of the stone in the body which puts us to such exquisite pain and
torment! your mercy is infinitely greater, to be delivered from the stone in
the heart, which is the depth of sin, and the height of judgment.

There are three Propositions which these words do hold forth unto us; viz.

First, There is a stony heart, or an heart of stone in every man.

Secondly, That God will take away the stony heart from his people.

Thirdly, He will not only take away from them the heart of stone, but he will
also give them an heart of flesh.

CHAP. IX. A heart of stone in every man.
Doctr. 1. THat there is a stony heart in every man, (I will take away the
There is a stony heart in every man.
stony heart out of your flesh) there it was, else it could not be taken away;
the natural heart is a stony heart; not Physically so, as if it were so indeed;
but Metaphoriaclly so it is like the stone, it is a hard heart, spiritually
hard, that is meant by the stony heart. Zach. 7. 12. They have made their
hearts as an Adamant stone. Isa. 48. 4. Thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow
brass. q. d. Thy heart is exceeding hard like Iron, which will not bow; and
like brass, which will not change; both which are explained in the first words
of the verse, (Thou art obstinate.)

For the opening of this Point, I will show unto you:

1. Why the hard heart (which is in every man) is called a stony heart. 2. What
stonyness or hardness of heart is to be found in man. 3. Several Demonstrations
or Convictions that the heart of every man (naturally) is a hard or stony
heart.
SECT. I.
Quest* 1. WHY is the hard heart called a stony heart? Why called a stony
heart.


It is so called, for the resemblance which it has with a stone; and in five
particulars. 1. Unsensibleness. 2. Unflexibleness. 3. Resistingness. 4.
Heaviness. 5. Unfruitfulness.

First, Because it is an unsensible heart: What sense is there in a Rock? in a
An unsensible heart.
Stone? in the Adamant? in Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. hardened sinners are said to be
past feeling; and that expression, past feeling, seems to be taken from the
hands of laboring men, which are so thickened, and hardened by pains, that they
can grasp nettles and thorns, and yet not feel the sharpness nor sting; the
natural heart is in this respect a stony heart, (i. e.) unsensible. Though he
has as many sins upon the soul which makes the very Creation to groan, and to
travail in pain: Romans 8. 22. yet he neither complains nor feels, he goes on
from day to day, and adds drunkenness to thirst, and drinks up iniquity as
water, yet he says, What evil have I done? and there is no iniquity in my
doings; though the judgments of God be very near him, and the tokens do
abundantly appear, yet like Ephraim, when gray hairs were here and there upon
him, he perceived them not, Hosea 7. 9. Yea* though the anger of the Lord be
poured upon him, and sets him on fire round about, yet he knows it not; nay,
though it burn him, yet he lays it not to heart, Isa. 42. 25. Such a gross
stupidity is there in the natural and stony heart. What one spoke of himself in
an humble way; Erubescenda video nec erubesco, dolenda intueor nec doleo,
peccata inspicio Bern. in Med. cap. 12. p. 1200.
nec geno; This, and much more may be said of him that has the hard and stony
heart; he blushes not, he grieves not, he sighs not for his sins; nay, he
rejoices and boasts, and makes but a mock of sin, so utterly unsensible is
he of sin.

Secondly, Because it is an unflexible heart; you may bow a stick, and melt An
unflexible heart.
the brass, and bend the very iron; but you cannot bow nor bend the stone; the
stone may be broken in pieces, yet you can never so mollify it as to make it
to bow, it is naturally hard, and naturally unyielding. Thus it is with the
heart which is hard, it is unflexible and unyielding; it will be what it has
been: Ezekiel. 3. 7. It will not hearken, it will not obey, it will receive no
instruction, advice, counsel; let God speak, and do what he will; let men
speak, and do what they can, yet a hard heart fears not God, nor regards man.
God sends Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh with a command to let Israel go; he
rejects this command, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? etc. Then
they show wonders before him, yet he will not yield; then God sends plagues
upon the fruit and corn, and cattle, and servants, yet he will not yield nor
obey. Thus when the Israelites fell sick of the stone, I mean, when their
hearts became hardened, then they became unflexible and unyielding. 2 Chronicles. 36.
15, 16. The Lord sent Prophets to them early and late, but they mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his Word, and misused his Prophets: You may
read in Amos the 4th. how God dealt with them in manifold ways of judgment,
yet there was no yielding; in ver. 6. He sends them cleanness of teeth, and
want of bread, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord; in ver. 7. He
withheld rain from them, yet ver. 8. have ye not returned unto me; in ver. 9.
He smites them with blasting and mildew; yet have ye not returned unto me; in
ver. 10. He sent the pestilence among them after the manner of Egypt, yet have
ye not returned; in ver. 11. He overthrew some of them, as he overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrah, and the rest were as a firebrand plucked out of the fire, yet
have ye not returned: O this is the hard heart, which when God speaks, it will
not hear; when God calls, it will not yield; though God entreats it by mercies,
yet it will not yield to leave sin; though God threatens it with wrath for
continuing in sin, yet it will not forsake sin; though God plucks away mercies
after mercies; though God lets down judgment after judgment; though he wounds
the conscience; though he throws it into hell, yet it will not yield to obey
the voice of the Lord, to turn from sin.

Thirdly, Because it is a resisting heart; the hard stone does not only not A
resisting heart.
receive impression, but it resists and turns back the strokes; even so when
the heart is hard, it does not only not admit the Word, but instead of
yielding, it opposes the Word, and resists the Spirit of God. Jer. 44. 16. As
for the Word which thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will
not hearken unto thee. Ver. 17. but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes
out of our own mouth. Zach. 7. 11. They refused to hearken, and pulled away the
shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear. Ver. 12. And made
their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law. Acts 7. 51. Ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost.
Hence it is that sinners of hard hearts are said to make light of the Word, to
despise it, to reject it, to mock at it, to contradict it, to blaspheme, and
speak against it, as the Pharisees and the Jews, etc.

Fourthly, Because it is an heavy heart; the stone is naturally heavy,
descending A heavy heart.
and inclining downward; if you will find it, you must look for it in the
earth; and if you throw it up, it will fall down again to the earth; that is
its center, thither it inclines, and there it rests: So the hard heart, it is
an heavy heart; not only heavy in a way of indisposition and untowardliness to
what is good, (no mind to pray or hear, or repent, etc.) but also heavy in a
way of inclination; it is an heart which inclines downward to worldly lusts,
and sinful lusts; in them it delights and rests as in its center. Although
sometimes in an exigence of outward trouble, and inward anguish of conscience
it seems to be lifted up, yet upon the cessation of their working, it returns
again to its old love and practice of sin.

Fifthly, Lastly, The hard heart is called a stony heart, because it is a
barren A barren heart.
and unfruitful heart: What fruit is to be gathered from the stone or rock?
Cast the seed on it, let the rain come down from heaven upon it; let the Sun
shine with its beams upon it, yet the stone is a stone still, a barren and
unfruitful lump of earth: And thus is it with an hard heart; though the man
lives under many precious means of grace, and manifold helps, and daily
opportunities; and though others are wrought upon by the Word, the Word brings
forth in them the fruits of knowledge, of godly sorrow, of repentance, of
faith, of love, of newness of heart and life, etc. yet in him it is unfruitful;
though he lives under it many years, yet his heart is ignorant still, and proud
still, and earthly still, and filthy still, he is not humbled nor changed, nor
reformed at all.

Thus you have some Reasons why the hard heart is called a stony heart: Now in
the next place lets enquire:

Quest. 2. What kinds of stonyness or hardness of heart is to be found in man?
The kinds of hardness in man.
that so we may the more admire at the greatness of Gods mercy, who promises
to take it away out of our natures.

Sol. For this, know, that there is a threefold hardness incident to the heart
of man.

1. One is Natural.

2. The second is Habitual or Contracted.

3. The third is Judicial or Penal.

First, Natural hardness of heart, (is that Tombstone of sin and death)
Natural hardness.
it is one part of that wretched nature conveyed unto us by the fall of Adam,
by which our hearts are made dark and unsensible of our sins, and untoward, and
disobedient, and gainsaying, and unyielding, and refractory, and obstinately
set against the commands and ways of God, and the strivings of his Spirit, and
all his dealings, either in ways of mercy, or in ways of judgment. This
natural hardness, as it is in every man by nature, so it is in every part of
man, in every faculty of his soul. In his understanding there is a wonderful
incapacity and stupidity, and inapprehensiveness of them, though distinctly
opened, and often revealed truths and ways of God. In his memory there is such
a hardness, that all the heavenly delivery of the mind of God in things
pertaining to salvation, fall away as waters from the Rock, are forgotten, and
they slip away; they stay not sometimes one minute, though other discourses are
held fast. In his judgment there is such a hardness that raises enmity and
resistance, and affords a world of carnal reasonings to oppose and put by the
truth In his will there is such a hardness of obstinacy and perverseness, that
when all is said that can be said by Law or Gospel, yet men will not hear, Joh.
5. 40. though they may be saved; nor will they hear, though therefore they
shall be damned. In his affections there is such an hardness, that men sin
without fear, and without all compunction and sorrow of heart; and though the
glorious things of Christ are revealed and offered, and pressed upon them, yet
no delight, no love, no desire at all can be raised in them, etc. In his
conscience, which under all the threats of God, and terrors of God revealed,
remains quiet, unstirred, scared, and careless, as if these were fables, and
impertinent notions.

Secondly, The Contracted hardness is that which we bring upon our sinful
Contracted hardness.
hearts (and add unto them) by the frequency of our sinning actions or
practices, or by a voluntary opposing of all the means which do tend to the
softning our heart. And by the way let me tell you, that there are three kinds
of sinning which do extremely super add to the hardening of man's heart.

One is the sinning against clear light.

The second is the sinning with delight.

The third is the customary way of sinning; long going in a path, often beating
the anvile.

Thirdly, The Judicial hardness, which is that unto which God gives the
stubborn sinner up for not harkning unto him, but still continuing and
persisting Judicial hardness.
in a sinful course; and therefore he leaves him unto himself, and to his own
lusts, and his Spirit shall no more strive with him; and hereupon the sinful
heart being left unto it self, breaks forth into all manner of wickedness, and
so does exceedingly obdurate it self; it becomes more unsensible, and more
fearless, and more enraged against all that is good, etc.

Now the stony heart, or hard heart spoken of here in the Text, is principally
that which is natural; and I will not deny that the Contracted hardness may be
meant, but not the Judicial.

Quest. 3. But how then may it be demonstrated that naturally every man's
Demonstrations of it.
heart is a stony or hard heart?

Sol. There are six things which may convince us that it is so.

First, The forwardness in men to sin; every natural heart is ready to sinful
The forwradness in men to sin.
acts, and easy unto them: Ephesians. 4. 19. If temptations present themselves,
the natural heart presently entertains them, and complies with them; and if no
temptations from Satan and the world present themselves, the natural heart will
tempt it self; why this is a conviction that the heart is hard; for if it be a
good sign of a tender and soft heart, when it is afraid to sin: How can I do
this great wickedness and sin against God, said Joseph? Genesis 39. 9. Then surely
it is a sign of a hard heart when it is forward to sin, and greedy to sin, and
easily and willingly lets out it self to sin, and fears not at all to sin; but
every man's heart (naturally) is so forward and bent to sin, that it cannot, and
it will not be restrained from sin. Genesis 11. 6. Nothing will be restrained from
them, which they have imagined to do. Zeph. 3. 5. The unjust know no shame.

Secondly, The silence and quietness in conscience under all sinnings: Men
neglect Quietness under sinning.
all holy duties, and swea^, and lie, and deceive, and are drunken, and commit
adultery, etc. and conscience says nothing to them. Assuredly this is a strong
conviction, that their hearts are hard; for where there is any softness of
heart, there conscience is alive, and has some power to warn and check, and
oppose before sinning; and likewise to accuse and condemn, and trouble after
sinning: But now natural men (generally) find it thus, that conscience is dead,
and takes no notice, or it is weak, and can do nothing with them; before
sinning it appears not, and after sinning it troubles not. Ergo. their hearts
are hard.

Thirdly, The security of heart: Taken me any one brokenhearted sinner;
Security of heart.
why under the sense of any one transgression he goes heavy all the day long,
and he weeps bitterly, and he waters his couch with his tears, and he is afraid
of the Lord whom he has provoked, and he makes in earnestly for reconciliation
and peace with God; and why does he so? because his heart is soft and tender.
But on the contrary, the natural man he sins, and is confident; exposes himself
to wrath, and yet is secure; and though God says he is offended and displeased
with him; and though God threatens him with wrath; and though he knows that God
has destroyed some for the same sin of which he is guilty, yet the man goes on
in his sinful practices, and makes no account of this. And what is the cause of
it? it is this, his heart is hard, and hardened: Were not the man under a
reprobate sense, infinitely stupid and seared, he could not rest so secure.

Fourthly, The absence of all penitential works: Whenever the Lord gives The
absence of penitential works.
a soft heart (which is opposite to this stony heart) then arises presently

1. A sight and solemn consideration of sin. 2. An humble mourning and
lamenting for sin. 3. A self-judging confession of sin. 4. A cordial aversation
from sin. 5. Importunate supplication for pardoning mercy and grace. 6. A
serious application of the heart to Christ.
And on the contrary, where the heart is hard, there are none of these; no hard
heart considers of its ways, saying, What have I done? no man smites on his
thigh, and is humbled; no man repents; no man seeks after the Lord; no man
cries out for mercy, or for grace, or for Christ. Certainly so much as there is
of impenitency, so much there is of hardness of heart; but naturally every man's
heart is impenitent, and he is not only a stranger to these penitential works,
but also he is an enemy unto them: Ergo.

Fifthly, The inefficacy of the Word; the Word of God is compared The
inefficacy of the Word.
sometimes

1. To the Sun, which enlightens and quickens.

2. To water, which softens and cleanses.

3. To the hammer, which bruises and breaks.

4. To fire, which heats and melts, and refines; but on the natural heart
either it has no efficacy at all, or it is a long time before it can make any
impression, and yet a longer time before it make any saving impression; either
the heart will not suffer us to hear the voice of the Word, or it will not
suffer us to acknowledge the truth of the Word; or it is so hard, that it will
not suffer us to do any thing according to the Word; indeed the heart is so
hard, that unless the Lord himself be pleased to put out his Almighty power, it
will never yield unto any saving operation of the Word.

Sixthly, I will add one Demonstration more of the hardness of man's heart, The
unsensibleness of it.
which is this, the unsensibleness of that hardness of heart; naturally the
heart is so hard, that it does not, and cannot perceive its own hardness
indeed; when grace comes into the heart, then a spiritual sensation comes into
the heart, then we can feel our sins, and feel our hardness, and complain of
the one, and bewail the other: O Lord, why have thou hardened our hearts from
thy fear? Isa. 63. 17.

But while men are in this natural, sinful condition, they are not sensible of
their finful burdens, nor are they sensible of the unsensibleness of their
stupidity and hardness of their hearts. They are sensible of this loss, and of
that want, and can complain of this, and take on for that; but when did you
ever hear a natural man complain of his hard heart? O I have such an heart so
full of sin, and yet I cannot mourn for sin; so unteachable, so untractable, so
resisting, so opposing the Word of God, and ways of God! What shall I do?
whether shall I go? O it is a burden that I cannot bear, etc. Why, this
unsensibleness that our hearts are hard, it is a demonstrative conviction that
they are hard; and indeed no heart is more hard than that heart which is not
sensible that it is hard.

Now I come to the useful Application of this unto our selves.

SECT. II.
Then wonder not to see so little good done upon men; wonder Wonder not to see
so little good done upon many. By private instructions.
not

1. That our own private instructions, and counsels, and entreaties, and
reproofs usually come to nothing. How often do we find parents abounding in
cares and watchings, and teachings, and advising, and checking, and correctings
of their children! and when they have said and done all they can, they fall a
weeping and a sobbing, and sighing; why what is the matter? O nothing will work
on my child! and what is the reason of it? thy child has a hard heart, and an
hard heart is an unteachable and an untractable heart.

Public pains.
2. Wonder not that public pains and labors in the Ministry of the Gospel of
Christ, many times proves but like rain that falls upon the house top, or upon
the rocks; little or no fruit comes of studies, of prayers, of doctrines, of
exhortations, of reproofs; but people remain still what they were, as proud, as
vain, as profane, as impudent in sins as before. And Ministers are apt to be
discouraged, and complain that they spend their strength in vain, and labor
for naught, Isa. 49. 4. And some imagine, if other Ministers came into their
room, the matter would be much mended; and other Ministers do come, and then
awhile they fall a weeping and complaining, What a people are these, that no
part of the Word of God will work on? and no kind of delivery of the same will
take hold of them; if we entreat them, they slight us; and if we plainly
reprove them, they grow worse: Now I say, wonder not at this; Christ himself
met with such kinds of people, when he preached here on earth, and he did hit
upon the right cause of all this untowardliness and aversness, and that was the
hardness of men's hearts: I have heard some preach that if Ministers would use
clear convictions in their preaching, that their hearers would be taken, for
they were reasonable creatures; alas, that they should proclaim their own
ignorance; that men are rational creatures, a Philosopher can teach us; but
that men are sinful creatures, and have hard hearts, the Scriptures teach us;
and all the convictions and demonstrations of the will of God will never make
impression, unless the Lord take away the stony heart out of them.

3. Wonder not that all the Providential Dispensations of God work not better
amongst men; you see many times that personal affections do no good at
Providential Dispensations.
all, though one loses husband, wife, children, estate, he fears not, he
returns not, he mends not; wonder not at this, for the man has an hard heart.
You find many times public judgments in a Nation, and God pouring contempt
and wrath upon it, and on all sorts of men; and yet the Inhabitants thereof do
learn no righteousness, but he that was ignorant, is ignorant still; and he
that was filthy, is filthy still; and he that was proud, is proud still; and
men grow more wicked under the judgments and plagues of God upon them; wonder
not at this, for their hearts are hard hearts, and nothing whatsoever will or
can effectually work as long as the heart continues hard. Thou may pity and
pray, and weep, and fear; but persons of hard hearts will do none of these,
until God take away the stony heart from them.

wonder at the exceeding patience of the Lord, and his long-suffering; that he
can Wonder at the exceeding patience of God.
bear so much, and forbear, and hold in his wrath, and not make an end of
sinners, and utterly destroy them. You cannot possibly comprehend what affronts
and injuries the hard heart puts upon God; and what continued provocations that
heart daily sends forth, and raises against him. O what careless neglects of
his commanding will? What proud slightings of his severe threatenings? What
contemptuous refusals of his gracious offers of mercy? What audacious
resistances of his Spirit? What desperate boldness in sinning? What an
obstinate course and progress in offending of him? What unteachableness and
barrenness after all the pains that God takes with it, all the cost that he is
at to work upon it for good, and yet the Lord is patient toward it, and renews
offers of grace, and sends early and late, and there is line upon line, and
precept upon precept, and yet he does not leave the sinner for all this, but
for a long time stands at the door and knocks, and waits that he may be
gracious, and gives him time, and expects him when he will consider and
hearken, and return! Truly the hardness of man's heart is wonderful, which will
not bow after so many gracious dealings of God, and the patience of God is more
wonderful, who will bear so many, and so long affronts from a proud and hard
heart. If the Husbandman has a piece of ground, which (after all his Tillage)
still bears briars and thorns, he will cast it off. If the Schoolmaster has a
Scholar, which (after long teaching and instructing) continues dull and
incapable, he will meddle no more with him; Sir, I can do no good on your
child. If a Master has a Servant or an Apprentice, who (after all his care and
pains to instruct him in his Trade) yet remains unapprehensive and stupid, and
perhaps vicious, he longs to be rid of him. If a Parent has a child that is
naught and stubborn, and will not hearken, nor be reclaimed, the Parent is.
weary of him, and casts him out of doors, or sends him into another Country.

Thus none but God will bear with a hard and stubborn heart; God I say, who is
most provoked by it; therefore unquestionably his patience is exceeding great,
it is wonderful toward sinners.

inform us of three things. Informs us: The conversion of a sinner is a
miraculous work.


First, That the conversion of a sinner is even a miraculous work: We wonder
that so few persons are converted by the Word; nay, but we should rather wonder
that any person is converted by it; because there is such a stony and hard
heart in every person, which is so unsensible of its own miserable condition,
which is so incapable to be taught the knowledge of the matters of salvation,
which is so opposite and averse, and unyielding, and resisting as to all the
means and ways of grace; where there is a blind and proud judgment that will
not be persuaded, where^^ there is such a stubborn will that will not be made
willing; and where^^ there are so many vile affections which w^ll not be tamed
and awed, and subdued. It is matter of greater wonder that any one sinner is
brought in by grace, than if all sinners should fall into hell.

Secondly, That it is from grace, and from that alone, if any sinner be
converted; ^^ is from gr^^e that any are converted.
it is from the freeness of Gods grace, and from the power of Gods grace, not
from any thing at all in the person converted: And my reason is this, because
the heart of every sinner is (naturally) a stony heart, a hard heart; and a
stony heart is not only an impotent heart, but also a resisting heart to grace:
Verily the best man may, and must confess that it is only of the Lords mercy
that he was not consumed; and that his present life and estate in grace was
never of himself who is called, but only from the favor and power of the grace
of God who did call him: What I am, I am by the grace of God, said Paul, 1 Cor.
15. 10. Our hearts were hard hearts, and therefore contradicting and opposing,
until beaten down and conquered by the love and might of divine grace.

Thirdly, That God is most righteous in all his judgments here on earth, God
is righteous in all his judgments.
and in all those future and eternal punishments of sinners in hell; for
sinners have hard and hardened hearts: Why if sinners will not hearken to God;
if they will not obey his voice; if they will stop their ears, and withdraw
their shoulders; if they will not receive his Laws; if they will not receive
instruction, and take warning; if they will not know the day of their
visitation; if they will not know the things which concern their peace, but
harden their hearts; it is righteous with God to reject them who do reject him;
to cast them off who do cast him off; to abhor them who abhor him; to punish
and plague, and destroy them who harden their hearts against him.

Object. We have many amongst us who do wonder at Gods judgments abroad in the
world, and at all the changes and miseries which they have seen, and perhaps
felt.

Sol. And why do ye wonder at them? rather wonder at the hardness of your own
hearts, which under all the judgments of God continue so proud, and so
scorning at holiness, and so hating to be reformed, and so manifestly
irreligious and profane; it is righteous with God to punish hard-hearted
sinners. Who ever hardened his heart against him, and prospered? Job 9. 4. If
we will never be instructed to repent, God will certainly destroy us: Prove. 29.
1.

SECT. III.
Strive all that he can to be cured of the stone in the Labor to be cured of
this hard heart.
heart: (i. e.) to use all spiritual means to be delivered from hardness of
heart.

And for this let me propound unto you, 1. Some Motives which possibly may work
on you. Secondly, Some means for the cure of it.

1. The Motives to look after the cure of a stony or hard Motives.
heart, are these.

First, The Consideration of those sins which are included in this one sin of
hardness From the sins included in hardness of heart. Stupidity.
of heart, which make it to be exceeding sinful; What sins will you say? There
are three sins in this sin.

1. Stupidity and senslesness of spirit; O how dangerous! there are three very
dangerous qualities.

A Seared Conscience, this is the worst of all Consciences.

A Reprobate Mind, this is the worst of all Minds.

A Senseless Heart, this is the worst of all Hearts; tanto pejior, quanto
insensibilior. This is to be at the farthest distance and hope of conversion;
Vicinior saluti dolor poenitentis quam stupor non sentientis, says Austin.
Judas, who was sensible, and cried out, I have sinned; nay, (in some respect)
worse than that of the Devils, who do believe and tremble. Isa. 6. 9. Go and
tell this people, hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see you indeed, but
perceive not. Ver. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed.

Contempt of God.
2. Contempt of God: O what a child is he who will not hearken to his father?
and what a sinner is he who will not hearken to his God? q. d. What tell you me
of God, or of his will? I care not for him; what care I what he says? I will
follow mine own hearts lusts, I will not be guided and commanded by him.

3. Desperate wickedness: I will be sinful still, and I will go on in my
Desperate wickedness.
sinful ways, though I lose mercy and heaven; yea, though I shall be damned for
ever: O Lord, What a condition is this? yet this is the condition of hardness
of heart.

Secondly, The Consideration of the Losses unto which you will certainly The
losses you are exposed to.
expose your selves, if you get not the cure of your hard and stony heart.

There are six losses which do and will befall you by it.

1. You lose the benefit of Christ; hardness and unbelief ever go together; the
same word which we render hardness, does signify unbelief many times; and the
same word which we render unbelief, sometimes signifies hardness; but certainly
hardness of heart keeps you from Christ; for it keeps you from the sense of
your sins, and seeing a need of Christ; and it keeps up a rebellious ^^^
unyielding, and unsubjection to the voice of Christ. Hebr. 3. 7. Therefore
says the Holy Ghost, To day if ye will hear his voice. Ver. 8. Harden not your
hearts.

2. You lose the benefit of pardoning mercy; for hardness of heart and
impenitency go together: Romans 2. 5. After thy hardness and impenitent heart; an
hardened sinner is an impenitent sinner, and neither the one nor the other
(remaining so) shall have mercy. Prove. 28. 13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes
his sins, shall have mercy. Ver. 14. But he that hardens his heart, shall
fall into mischief.

3. You lose the hope of heaven; Read the Apostle, Romans 2. 5. But after thy
hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up wrath unto thy self against the
day of wrath.

4. You lose the benefit of all the Ordinances of Christ, all of them are in
vain unto you; the Word of the Gospel cannot profit you, and the Seals of the
Gospel cannot comfort you; nay, you will pervert the one, and abuse the other;
and will g^ow more wicked, and more hardened after them, as the Clay by the
shining of the Sun, etc.

5 You will lose the benefit of all the Providence of God; if the Lord shines
upon you with outward prosperity, you will sin the more, by how much the more
he blesses you; and if the Lord visits you with afflictions, the more he
strikes you and smites you, the more stubbornly and frowardly will you go on in
your sinful ways.

6. You will lose all the benefit of the workings of the Spirit of God, whom by
the hardness of your hearts you do resist, and despite, and grieve, and quench.

Thirdly, Consider the sad effects and fruits of an hard and hardening heart.
The effects and fruits of a hard heart.


1. You grieve the Lord by it exceedingly, and cause him to complain of you
bitterly: Psalm. 95 10 speaking of the hardened Israelites, Ver. 8. he says,
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation. Mark 3. 5. Christ was
grieved at the hardness of their hearts. As a father grieves at the continued
course of wickedness in his child, Alas all my counsels and corrections are
lost, they do no good, etc.

2. You provoke the Lord by it; the day of hardening the heart, is the day of
provocation: Hebr. 3. 15. Harden not your hearts as in the provocation; you do
incense him to wrath against your own souls; Ephraim provoked him to anger most
bitterly.

3. You will cause him to leave you, and forsake you, and to give you up to
your selves. Psalm. 81. 11. But my people would not hearken to my voice, and
Israel would none of me. Ver. 12. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust,
and they walked in their own counsel. What a sin is it for a sinner to forsake
God? what a judgment is it for God to forsake a sinner? Woe unto them when I
depart from them, Hosea 9. 12.

4. You will cause him to punish you; the hard heart is like the barren ground,
which is near to the curse, Hebr. 6. 8. Now you shall find three sorts of
punishments which God has inflicted upon hard hearts.

First, Corporal: Pharaoh hardened his heart, and he was drowned: Exodus 15. 17.
The Jews hardened their hearts, and they were carried away captive: 2 Chronicles. 36.
16. Nebuchadnezzar hardened his heart, and he was driven out amongst the beasts
of the Field: Dan. 4. 33. with 5. 20. Jerusalem hardened her heart against Jesus
Christ, and is a desolation to this day.

Secondly, Spiritual: God gives up the hard heart to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.
28. To vile affections, and unnatural lusts, Romans 1. 26. To the efficacy of
Satan's temptations: 2 These. 2. 11. To delusions, to belief of lies, and
frequently to final impenitency.

Thirdly, Eternal: 2 These. 1. 8. The Lord Jesus shall come in flaming fire to
take vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel. Ver. 9. And to punish them
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power; so true is that of Solomon, Prove. 29. 1. He that being often
reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy.

2ly. The means to cure the hardness of heart. Means to cure a hard heart.


Concerning this there are three questions unto which I desire to speak.

1. Whether stonyness or hardness of heart be a curable disease or no? 2. If
any hardness of heart be curable, then What is the way of the cure of it? 3.
How one may know that he is cured of the hardness or stonyness of his heart?
Quest. 1. Whether stonyness or hardness of heart be a curable disease yea or
no? Whether it be curable? Three sorts of hardened sinners. Some hardened sinners
reject the means.


Sol. For answer unto this, know that there are three sorts of hardened sinners.

First, Some are so hardened in their heart and ways, that they are obstinately
resolved to walk in them, and are likewise desperately set against all counsel
and reproof; they do not only decline and disregard them, but also do make a
mock and scorn of them; they stop the ear, and withdraw the shoulder, and
refuse to hearken, and the Word of the Lord is a reproach unto them; they hold
fast their iniquities, and refuse to return; and the more they are spoken unto,
the more are their hearts enraged: We may say of this voluntary and malicious
hardness of heart, what the Prophet spoke, thy Wound is incurable. And there
are five things which declare it to be so.

1. Such persons will put and keep themselves out of all ways of cure, (how
then can the Patient be cured?) they will not come in public to hear the Word,
and they will not in private call upon God, they forsake the Lord.

2. They do not only forsake the means of cure, but also do reject and despise
them; the words and ways of God are abomination unto their souls.

3. They do continually strengthen themselves in the hardness of their hearts,
by adding drunkenness to thirst, and iniquity unto iniquity; and by a wilful
progress in sinning, they do make their hearts more incapable, and more
untractable, and more averse.

4. They do not only quench the Spirit of God in all his motions, (so that he
will no longer strive with them) but also they do (by their daring
presumptions) extinguish also all the light and power of conscience in them, so
that conscience is stupefied and seared.

5. They are rejected of God, and judicially given up to their own hearts
lusts; and having resisted and despised his grace and mercy, he will now never
give grace, nor show mercy unto them. Ezekiel. 24. 13. In thy filthiness is
lewdness; because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not
be purged from thy silthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee, Ver. 14. I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do
it: I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent, etc.

Secondly, There are some hardened sinners whose hearts still take delight in
Some frequent the means.
their sinful ways, and are extremely opposite to the Reformation of them;
nevertheless they will present themselves unto the means; they will come to
hear the Word, although they cannot comply with the Word which they do hear;
but do secretly dislike and gainsay it, and go on in their wicked ways, which
do harden their hearts: Now although this kind of dar^^ess is very fearful, and
in it self very damnable, and very difficult to be cured, yet it is not utterly
incapable of cure; it is not impossible for that hardened sinner to be cured,
who has gone on in his wicked ways, contrary to the voice of the Word of God
which he has heard, and still does hear; which may thus appear.

1. Whiles any sinner is in Gods ways, he is not utterly incapable of Gods
blessings; if yet the sinner has an ear to hear, who can tell but God may give
him a heart to consider, and to repent? Indeed it is confessed, that neither
this sinner, nor any other can convert or soften his own heart; to change the
heart, and to mollify the heart, is the proper work of the Almighty God; and
as God can do it, so he does it by the Word, which is his Hammer to break, and
his Furnace to melt; and therefore whiles the sinner will come and hear the
Word, God may put out such a power of grace upon his heart, as may break down
the pride of his heart, and may take away the hardness and resistance, and
opposition of his heart.

2. All the sinners who have been converted by grace, they have been such
hardened sinners, ^^ they have been disobedient, and have served diverse lusts;
they have opposed the Word, and they have gone on in wicked ways contrary unto
the Word, and yet God did break in by the power of his grace, and overcome all
the proud resistances of their hearts, and made them to yield and cry out,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 6. And what shall I do to be saved?
Acts 16. 3.

3. Although it be true that there are many hardened sinners on whom God will
^^ never work, yet no particular hard heart may say that his cure is
impossible, because that grace (by which hardness of heart is cured) is
gracious and very free; it is given unto whom God will please to give it, and
when he pleases to give it; sometimes to one, sometimes to another; sometimes
to one whose heart has been less hardened; sometimes to another whose heart
has been more hardened; sometimes to one who has been sinning and hardening his
heart twenty or thirty years; and sometimes to one who has been hardening his
heart forty or sixty years, etc.

Thirdly, There are some hardened sinners who have been a long time unyielding
Some are sens^ble or their ^^^dness.
and disobedient to the Word, and no threats of wrath, nor offers of mercy, nor
treaties of the Spirit, nor strokes of affliction could ever yet make their
hearts to bow or yield; but still their base hearts would go on in their sins,
and they would not hearken unto Christ, and nothing that God has spoken or
done has made them to stoop; but on they would in their ways and works of sin
which they had ch^sen and loved. But now they are sensible of all their
hardness against God, and likewise of the present hardness which lies upon
them; sensible how stout and refusing they have been, and sensible what
resisting hearts still they have, and sensible what unsensible hearts they have
of all their sins.

Now concerning those hardened sinners, there is (without all just dispute) a
possibility of cure; because,

1. There is in them a sense of their disease of stonyness of heart, which is
the beginning of the cure. 2. They are willing to use the means, and for this
end, that they may be cured. 3. If any are under this promise of God to take
away the stony heart, probably these are the men.
Quest. 2. If this hardness of heart be curable, then what is the way, and what
What is the means of care?
is the means for the cure of it?

Sol. If indeed you would be cured of this stony and hard heart within you,
then you must do as men who would be cured of the disease of the stone.

1. You must have a care to remove and forbear all which breeds and increases
the stone.

2. You must take such Medicines as are proper to heal it.

First, You must have a special care to remove and forbear all those things
which do Remove what breeds this hardness.
breed and increase the stonyness or hardness of heart, or else you can never
be cured.

There are six things which give being and strength to the hardness of man's
heart.

First, One is ignorance of mind; you shall find in Ephesians. 4. 8. a conjunction
Ignorance.
'twixt the darkness of the understanding, and alienation from the life of God,
and hardness of heart; the word is there rendered blindness of heart, but that
is the original word; spiritual blindness breeds spiritual boldness, and
boldness to sin will presently breed hardness of heart. O get off this
ignorance, which knows not what it is to sin, nor what is the danger of
sinning, and therefore leaves the heart to his own vile inclination, and unto
Satan's temptations.

Secondly, Pride of heart; you read of Nebuchadnezzar, that his heart was Ptide
of heart.
lifted up, and his mind was hardened in pride, Dan. 5. 20.

There are four cursed effects of pride.

1. One, It will not suffer the heart to obey the voice of God: Who is the Lord
that I should let Israel go? said proud Pharaoh; Exodus 5. 2. As for the Word
which thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken
unto thee, spoke those proud men to Jeremiah, Jer. 44.

2. Another, It makes us Self-willed; we will have our will, and our own
desires, and our own ways; and who is Lord over us? so those proud men, Psalm.
12. 3, 4.

3. A third is, It makes the Lord to abhor a person, (Every one that is proud
in heart, is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 16. 5.) and to leave a person,
as the Lord left Hezekiah, because his heart was lifted up, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25, 31.

4. A fourth is, It makes us self-confident, (as in Peter) and therefore
watchless and careless, and open to the strength of temptations. And certainly
all these will cause or occasion exceeding hardness of heart; therefore if you
would be rid of a hard heart, beseech the Lord to cure you of a proud heart,
which is above counsel, and without fear.

Thirdly, Unbelief of heart: Take heed (says the Apostle, Hebr. 3. 12.) lest
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living
God; Unbelief.
but (Ver. 13.) Exhorting one another daily, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. One said well, that Unbelief will in time
make a man an Atheist; When a man believes not that there is a God, or that God
is true in his threatenings, or in his promises, this man will not fear to sin,
(where there is no faith, there is no fear) and where there is no fear of God,
there is no fear to sin against God; and where there is no fear to sin, there
the heart will let out it self to all wickedness; and who can now question but
all this will cause exceeding hardness of heart?

Fourthly, Hypocrisy of heart, this likewise breeds and strengthens hardness
Hypocrisy.
of heart: When a man will d^ssemble with God and godliness, pretends love to
them, and zeal to them, and yet secretly his soul loves sin, and keeps up a way
of wickedness, and bears down the light and actings of conscience, this man
does woefully obdurate his own heart, and fears his conscience by speaking lies
in hypocrisy.

Fifthly, Deceitfulness of sin. Hebr. 3. 13. Lest any of you be hardened through
Deceitfulness of sin. Lib. de Consc. p. 1749. Edit. Basil.
the deceitfulness of sin. Bernard does notably describe the degrees by which a
man steps up unto hardness of heart!

1. Says he, the man with much ado ventures to commit a sin, and this sinful
act or work, it is importabile; oh the terror and hell that it is unto him! 2.
Then after a while, when the terror is off, he ventures to sin again, and now
that which was importabile, becomes grave, it is only a burden, but not a
terror unto him. 3. Then after some little time he commits the sin again, and
now that which was grave, becomes love; it is no such great matter, vulnera non
sentit, verbera non attendit. 4. After a lesser space he returns again to
folly, and now leve becomes dulce; non solum non sentit, sed and placet; that
sin which was light, is now become delight and pleasant. 5. And after this,
Dulcedo becomes consuetudo; that which was pleasant to him, now becomes
constant with him; it is no more to sin, than it is to eat and drink. 6. And at
last, Consuetudo vertitur in naturam; whereas at the first it did almost seem
impossible to draw him to commit the sin; now it proves more impossible to
restrain him from sinning; sic itur in aversionem and duritiem cordis; thus the
sinner makes way for the hardening of his own heart: Take heed of this, and keep
far from this, and break off all progressive ways of sinning, or else you will
never get off hardness of heart, but you will dye and perish under it.
Sixthly, Wicked Society: From this you must be removed if ever you would
Wicked society.
have hardness of heart removed; wicked company will easily entice you to sin,
and will cunningly lead you on to more sin, and will teach how to plead for sin
and how to despise and reject the counsel of friends, and the commands of God
to turn from sin.

2ly. You must take such Medicines (you must use such means) as are proper
Medicines for cure.
to cure the stonyness or hardness of your hearts.

Now these means I shall reduce unto, 1. Meditations. 2. Practical Actions.

1. The solemn and serious Meditations.

First, Consider and Meditate upon the multitude and greatness of our sins,
which Serious Meditations. Of the multitude and greatness of oursins.
are

1. A separation from God. O what is this to be in such a condition, wherein a
man's soul is separated from God and blessedness. 2. A vexing and a provocation
of God: What is it to provoke the Lord to wrath, and to kindle his displeasure
against you! 3. A rebellion against God, and trampling under feet his holy and
righteous will. 4. A dishonouring of God; it had been better that thou had
never been born, than that God should lose so much of his honor by thee. 5. An
exposure to the curse of God, who may every moment damn thee for thy wickedness
and transgression. 6. An unutterable madness, to set thy delight on that, and
serve that, and take pains to accomplish that which only brings all misery and
destruct on on you.
Secondly, Consider and Meditate on the wonderful evil of an hard heart; by
which Of the evil of an hard hear^.


1. You are so unlike to God; he is tender, and thy heart is hard; he is
sensible of thy sinnings, but thou art not sensible of them; he is troubled at
thy sins, but thou art not troubled for thy sins; he cries out against them,
but thou cryest not out for them; forty years long was I grieved, etc.

2. You are unlike to Jesus Christ the Son of God; Christ did g^ieve at the
hardness of man's heart, and yet thou do not grieve at the hardness of thine
own heart; he shed tears, and wept over the hardness of Jerusalem, and yet thou
weepest not at the hardness of thine heart; he complained of this, yet thou
complainest not of this.

3. You are unlike to the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of God; thy hard heart grieves
him who has moved so often, and striven so long with thee, yet thou grievest
not, but rejoycest; thy hard heart vexes the Spirit of God, and yet thou art
not sensible at all.

4. You are worse than the Devils who tremble, but thou fear not by reason
of any Word that God does speak, nor of any wrath or judgment which God has
threatened.

5. You have been more brutish than the very beasts; they are teachable, and
they are tractable, and they are sensible of love and anger; but nothing does
thee good, thou art unteachable and untractable, and unsensible, and stupid.

6. You maintain an enmity and contradiction to God, whom you are bound to obey
as creatures, as redeemed, etc.

Thirdly, Meditate of the judgments upon hardened sinners; the judgments Of
the judgments of God upon hardened sinners.


1. Threatened by God against them: Job 9. 4. They shall not prosper: Prove. 28.
14. They shall fall into mischief: Romans 2. 5. They treasure up wrath against
the day of wrath: Prove. 29. 1. They shall be destroyed suddenly, and without
remedy.

2. Executed; Pharaoh drowned in the red Sea; Saul falling and dying upon his
own Sword; the King Zedekiah, his eyes put out, and bound with chains, and
carried into Babylon; the Jews scattered over all the world; Jerusalem a
desolation by the Romans; Julian killed with a dart; Spira longing for death
rather than life, etc. if the Lord should let fall any of these judgments upon
thee, what would become of thee!

Fourthly, Meditate on the patience of God, and on the goodness of God. Of the
patience of God.


1. On the patience of God, who has been so long provoked by thy hard heart,
and yet has spared thee, held off his hand from striking of thee, has all
this while born with thee, and forborne to judge thee.

2. On the goodness of God both to thy body and soul; thou (who have so Of the
goodness of God.
much hardened thy heart against him) have yet every day tasted of his bounty
and blessings; yea, and that he is treating with thy soul, sends Ministers,
deals with thee in a Gospel way, calls on thee to repent, offers thee Christ
and mercy, and heaven, and assures thee, if thou will yet hearken, thy soul
shall live.

2ly. Practical Actions, and they are these. Practical actions. Come and hear.


First, Come and hear; It Is true, an hard heart cares not to hear the Word, yet
because thou have a power to come and hear the Word, as well as to go to any
other place or work, use thy power rather to come and hear the Word, and that
Word which is most convincing, piercing, humbling. Moses rod made the waters to
come out of the Rock: The Word of God is able to save a soul, and therefore
certainly it is able to convert and soften the soul: The dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and live, Joh. 5. 25. All who have got the cure of
hardness of heart, they have found it at the Word, and by the Word, which is
the Sword of the Spirit, and the power of God.

Secondly, Go and pray, beseech the Lord himself to circumcise thy heart; he Go
and pray.
only can cure the stone in the heart, he only can take away the stony heart
out of the flesh; nothing is too hard for him; Lord, Lord, leave me not to the
hardness of my heart; Lord, open mine eyes, make me sensible, overpower my
stiff and rebellious, and gainsaying heart.

Object. O but my heart is so hard that I cannot pray?

Sol. 1. Pray as thou may, at least grieve.

2. And sigh under the burden of thy hard heart; cry out, O that I were made
sensible, and that I could pray to God to be cured!

3. And go to them that can pray, beseech them to beseech the Lord for thee: O
Sirs, be sensible of one who is not sensible of himself; pray for me who cannot
pray for my self.

Thirdly, Look a little on Jesus Christ, whom thou have pierced, that thou
may Look on Jesus Christ.
mourn: Zach. 12. 10 Look on him, and what thy hard heart has done unto him;
thy hard heart it was which crucified him, which pierced him, which shed his
precious blood. And now hearken what Jesus Christ says unto thee, O
hard-hearted sinner, thy sins have put my soul to grief, thy sins have drawn
tears from mine eyes, and blood from my heart: Thou have been very cruel to me,
I will not be so to thee; lo, I offer my self unto thee, and my blood unto
thee; it shall wash thee from all thy sins, it shall make thy peace, it shall
save thy soul, if yet thou will no more harden thy heart, but forsake thy sins,
and receive my offers: Methinks this cannot but bow and melt thee; if this does
not, what will? if the love of Christ, if the blood of Christ will not, nothing
will: They say that the blood of the Lamb is that which can soften the Adamant;
if any thing will work on, will melt an hard heart, it is the blood which came
from the heart of Christ.

Fourthly, If at any time the power of God appear on thy heart (in meditation
or hearing, or praying, or affections, or secret workings of his Spirit) that
it begins to yield, to hearken, and consider, to relent, to soften:

1. Do not dash and quench these by sinning, by unbelief, or by wicked security.

2. But cherish them, work with these workings, keep them up, raise them up.

Quest. 3. How may one know that he is cured of a stony and hard heart; at the
How may one know that he is cured?
least that the cure is beginning?

Sol. The resolution of this question has reference unto the second
Proposition; viz. that God promises to take away the heart of stone from his
people; but to speak unto the question as it now falls.

First, When hardness of heart is cured, or curing, there is instantly wrought
a By a spiritual sensation.
spiritual sensation, such a sight, and such a feeling, as the poor sinner
never had the like in all his life.

This is the first evidence of the cure of an hard heart; viz. the sensibleness
of the unsensibleness and hardness of the heart.

Secondly, When hardness of heart is cured, or curing, then the sinner will By
judging of himself and sins in another manner.
judge of his ^^ns, and of himself, so as he did never before. He looks on his
sinful heart, as on a root of gall and wormwood; and he looks on his sinful
ways and doings as vile, and cursed, and wonders at himself what he meant to be
so forward to sin, and to be so obstinate in sinning, and to be so desperately
profane as to contend with God in slighting the knowledge of him, in refusing
to hearken unto him, in opposing of his Word, in rejecting all the gracious and
saving offers of Christ. O my madness and folly! O my pride and misery! to
forsake my me^cies for lying vanities! to pitch on hell rather than heaven! to
love darkness rather than light; O how j^st were it with God to reject me, who
have rejected him! and never to hear me calling upon him, who have so often
turned away my ears from hearing him when calling upon me! I am the chiefest of
sinners, and unworthy of any mercy, Lord be merciful to me a sinner!

Thirdly, When hardness of heart is cured, or curing, then conscience recovers
Conscience recovers it se^^ in all its offices.
it self in all its offices and operations; it was

1. Asleep before, but now it is awakened; it was 2. Dead before, but now it is
alive; it was 3. Silent before, but now it speaks, and now it shows it self
with wonderful authority and power.
First, Now it is an Accuser, These have been your sins.

Secondly, Now it is a witness in testifying against thee, that thou wast
guilty at such a time, and in such a place, and in such company.

Thirdly, Now it is a Judge, and condemns the sinner; Wrath belongs to thee,
from which thou shall never escape unless thou get into Christ.

Fourthly, And now it wounds, and troubles the sinner for what he has done;
thou did withstand such means of grace, and thou did resist such strivings
of Gods Spirit, and thou did scorn and mock at the Word of God, and thou
did hate instruction and reproof, and thou did therefore harden thy heart,
and would commit such and such sins, because thy sins were discovered and
reproved, etc.

Fourthly, When hardness of heart is cured, or curing, then the sinner will not
The sinner will make out for counsel.
rest in the sense of his miserable condition, but out he goes for counsel to
this Minister, and that Minister, and there he cries out with tears, O Sirs,
what shall I do to be saved? Acts 16. 30. I have slighted God, and I have
despised you, and mocked at your counsel, (the good Lord forgive it me) I now
see what I saw not before, and my heart is overwhelmed within me, I know not
what to do, what way to take; for the Lords sake show me the way of life and
mercy, and peace.

Fifthly, When hardness of heart is cured, or curing, then there is a special
teachableness He is become teachable.
and tractableness fallen into the heart of a sinner; the man can now hear
reason, and he is content to receive the Law from the mouth of God; his
slighting, mocking, despising spirit is departed from him, and now it is, Lord,
what will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 6. and now it is, Cause me to know the
way wherein I should walk Psalm. 143. 8. Whiles hardness prevails upon the
heart, no word of mercy, no work of affliction, no command of God, no counsel
of man can do any thing, but the sinner will hold on in his sinful way, come of
it what will; but when hardness is off, then the heart becomes like a tender
branch, you may bend it which way you will; or like the soft wax, which
presently receives the impression. Speak but one word, Take heed, do not such a
thing, it is evil; the heart presently flies off; Have a care, do such a work,
the Lord requires it at your hands; presently the heart yields, it stands in
awe of the Word.

Sixthly, When hardness of heart is cured, or curing, then all the dealings The
dealings of God will work kindly
of God will work kindly and effectually upon thee: When thou hear the
threatenings of God, thy heart will tremble and melt, as Josias did; when thou
see the judgment of God, thy heart will lament and mourn, as David's did;
when the Lord meets thee in a way of affliction, thy heart will humble it self,
and bow before the Lord; when the Lord shows thee any mercy and blessings, thy
heart will receive them with tears, O how good is God to me a sinner* when the
Lord reveals himself in his Covenant and Promise, and sets out himself in the
exceeding riches of his grace and love, and mercy; why, thy bowels are stirred
within thee, and tears do trickle down thine eyes, and longings rise up in thy
heart; O Lord, that thou would be my portion!

Seventhly, When hardness of heart is cured, or curing, then the sinner He will
never be quiet till he have Christ.
will never be quiet until he has Christ, and until he can see God to be at
peace with him, and reconciled in Christ. There is no ho^ with a broken and
tender heart without a Christ, and without a reconciled God: Lord, give me
Christ; and Lord, take away iniquity; and Lord, receive me graciously: O he is
now sensible what a sinner he has been, and what injuries God has received
from him, and what God may do against him, and what need he has of a Christ to
make peace for him, and therefore his soul is impatient, and strives, and
wrestles for Christ, and the distressed man indeed is become willing to part
with all, so that he may have his part in Christ, and Gods reconciled favor.

Eighthly, What shall I say more? when hardness of heart is cured or curing, He
has a singular aptitude to prayer.
the sinner will find a singular aptitude to prayer, and his great delight will
be to be with God, unto whom he can now open himself with enlarged confessions,
and with floods of tears and grief, even for an heart to be given unto him to
mourn and bewail his sins, and to obey, etc. and that he would never suffer his
heart to harden it self any more.

Ninthly, When hardness of heart is cured, or is curing, there will be A
singular fear to sin.
then a singular fear to sin against God any more; the man would not live and
do as formerly for all the world: How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? Genesis 39. 9. How shall we live in sin any longer? Romans 6. 2.

Ezekiel. 36. 26. And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and will
give you an heart of flesh.
You have heard something of the first Proposition, v^ That there is a
stoninesse, or hardness of heart in every man naturallyiz I now proceed to the
second Proposition which is this.

CHAP. X. The stony heart taken away.
2. Doct. THat God will take away that hardness of heart from his people. (I
God takes away hardness of heart from his people.
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh) you have the same promise in
Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will take the stony heart out of their flesh.

For the opening of this Point, I would speak unto these Particulars.

1. The manner how God takes away the hardness of heart from his people. 2. Why
the Lord will do so? 3. How this can be affirmed, seeing there does remain much
hardness of heart in the people of God?
SECT. I.
Quest. 1. THe manner how God takes away the hardness of heart from his The
means how God takes it away.
peeople?

Sol. For Answer unto this, remember that hardness of heart may be taken away,

1. Preparatively. 2. Effectually. 3. Successively. 4. Perfectly and
completely.
First, The Lord takes away the hardness of heart Preparatively, when he lets
in such a powerful work of his Spirit, by the Law which does both convince
Preparatively.
and break the heart of a sinner: The Spirit by the Law does let in the sense
of sin and wrath which is irresistible upon the Conscience, which is of that
authority and force, that it rents the heart, and fills it with fear, and
trembling, and astonishment. This is that which the Schoolmen call Attrition:
And our Divines usually style Legal preparation, and the Scripture the spirit
and bondage whereby all the powers, and presumptions, and confidences of the
soul are shaken, and the heart is made so sensible of its transgressions, that
it quakes, and trembles, and has no rest nor peace, but is filled with
bitterness, and terror, and cries out with woeful complaints, I have undone my
self, I have sinned, I have sinned, and what will become of me! I feel the
wrath of God, and what shall I do to be delivered! I cannot live thus, and I
dare not dye thus! if the Lord show me not mercy, I perish for ever!

Secondly, The Lord takes away the hardness of the heart Effectually; and this
Effectually.
he does when he di^solves and melts the stonyness of the heart. It is one
thing to break a stone into pieces, and it is another thing to melt a stone (as
it were) into water:

1. By revealing of mercy, and hope of mercy to the broken and distressed
sinner; thus and thus have thou ^^nned against me, and now thou see and
find it to be an evil and bitter thing to slight my Word, and resist my
Spirit, and to harden thy heart; thou art now fallen into the hands of the
living God, and I can make all my wrath to fall on thee, and to destroy thee at
once for all thy rebellions; But I am the Lord, merciful and gracious; I desire
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn and live. Lo! I have given
mine own Son Jesus Christ to dye for sinners, and I have said that whosoever
believes on him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3 16.
Therefore go thou brokenhearted sinner, go thou unto him and be saved; accept
of him, and thou shall find mercy to pardon all that is past; he is able to
save thee to the uttermost, and he is a merciful High Priest. O how this works
on that sinner! but is it possible that there should be such a surpassing
goodness in God? what, and to such a proud and stout-hearted sinner as I have
been? what mercy to one who has so often slighted mercy? and Christ for one
who has so often refused Christ? this begins to melt the hard heart of the
sinner.

2. By the offer of mercy, and particular invitation of the brokenhearted
sinner to lay hold on it: The Lord Jesus comes as it were to the very house of
this sinner, and knocks at the door, and says, Here dwells a brokenhearted
sinner, and my Father has sent me to him that I may save his poor soul: Come,
come unto me, be not afraid, I my self do call thee to come unto me: And I do
assure thee in the word of a Savior that I will not reject thee, but I will
pity, and help, and refresh thee; I will answer for thy sins, and I will make
thy peace; though thou have been very wicked, I will not stand upon that; and
though thou art utterly unworthy, yet I will not stand on that neither; only
receive me, and I will be thine, and mercy and salvation shall be thine freely
and a^suredly.

3. By the collation of Faith which makes the sinner willingly and really to
close with Christ: The Lord by his Spirit does enable the brokenhearted sinner
to receive Jesus Christ, and to take livery and seizin of a reconciled,
merciful, loving, blessing God in and by him. And now the apprehension and
possession of all this rich mercy, and great love, and exceeding goodness of
God in Christ melts and dissolves the stonyness of the heart, this works in him
a tenderness, a mournfulness, a pliableness, and all that is contrary to
hardness of heart.

Thirdly, The Lord takes away the stony heart from his people, successively,
Successively.
or by degrees; indeed the dominion of it is taken away in an instant, as soon
as ever the sinner is brought into Christ, as soon as he is called and
converted, the reigning power of hardness is taken away, the man shall never
have such a stubborn, opposing, resisting, base heart any longer.

But yet the grudging of the stone, the remaining gravel, the relics of
hardness are taken away by degrees; the remaining hardness the Lord takes away

First, one while by Afflictions: Psalm. 119. 67. Before I was afflicted I went
astray, but now I have kept thy Word.

Secondly, Another while by mercies and kindnesses: Ezekiel. 16. 60. I will
remember my Covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, I will establish unto
thee an everlasting Covenant. Ver. 61. Then shall thou remember thy ways and
be ashamed. So Hose* 3. 5. Afterward shall the Children return and seek the
Lord, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness.

Thirdly, Sometimes by his Word and Ordinances, which are like Refining fire to
melt and purge away our dross. How frequently do the people of God find the
Word of God to be the power of God to melt away their carelessness, and their
indisposition of heart, and deadness of heart, and backwardness, and unruliness
of heart!

Fourthly, The Lord takes away the stony heart from his people perfectly and
completely, Root and Branch; so that no part of it, and no degree of it shall
Perfectly.
ever be found in their hearts any more. This shall be done in the very moment
of death; when we come to the dissolution of soul and body, we shall then come
to the perfect dissolution of all hardness, and of all remaining sinfulness of
heart.

Quest. 2. Now to the second question, why the Lord will take away the stony
Why God takes away the stony heart, and that by promise. The Lord will do it,
that They may be his people.
heart from his people? and why he himself does undertake it by promise?

Sol. The Lord will take away the heart of stone from his people, That

First, They may be his people, and receive him for their God and Lord:
Beloved, as long as hardness of heart prevails on any people, it is impossible
that they should become the people of the Lord; they will not hearken to his
voice, nor obey his voice, nor receive his Laws, nor fall in with his offers
and entreaties; but will reject his Word, and despise his counsel, and will
follow the lusts of their own hearts; and therefore of necessity the Lord must
take away the hardness of heart; if he will have any people to be his people,
he must break down the pride, and stoutness, and resistance, and rebellion of
their hearts; there must be a mutual will, and consent, and agreement, which
cannot be, till resistance in our hearts be removed, that so our hearts may be
made willing to comply with him, and with his will, and with his ways, and
with his works.

Secondly, That he may bring them all into union with Jesus Christ; his people
Bring them into union with Christ.
are a people given unto Christ from all eternity (Thine they were, and thou
gave them me, Joh. 17. 6.) And as they are given to Christ by an eternal
compact; so they must be given in to Christ in time by effectual vocation in a
way of believing: And for this reason also he will take away the hardness of
their hearts, which is imcompatible with closing with Christ; Heb. 3. 7. To day
if ye will hear his voice; ver. 8. harden not your hearts.

Thirdly, That he may enjoy communion with them, and they with him: This is one
Reason why he makes us to be his people, that he might make known all Enjoy
communion with them.
his love and goodness unto us, and that our hearts might be taken up with him,
and set on him in love, and fear, and desire, and joy and hope: None of which
will or can be, unless the Lord were pleased to take away the heart of stone
from his people, etc.

Fourthly, That he may bring upon them all the good which he has promised unto
And bring upon them all the good that he has promised.
to his people, viz. All the blessings of mercy, and peace, and comfort, and
joy, of which they are not capable until the Lord take away the hardness of
their hearts. Would you have the Lord to settle pardoning mercy on a hard
heart! and to speak peace to a hard heart, and to revive with comfort and joy
the soul of an hardened sinner, who will hold fast his iniquities, and who will
not obey his voice, and will none of him, This is as it were a foundation-work
for the other works of the Covenant.

Sol. 2. Again, the Lord himself does again by promise undertake to take away
God by promise undertakes it. Because of the impossibility of it.
the stony heart from his people, upon a twofold account.

First, On the impossibility of the work without his own Omnipotency: None but
the Almighty can cure the stone of the heart; neither Angels, nor Men, nor
Ministry, nor Self-power; for the hard heart is too hard for all means
whatsoever; only the Lord is too hard for it; he can subdue all the powers of
sin, and he can pull down all high imaginations which do exalt themselves, and
he can abase the pride of man, and he can circumcise all the stoutness of the
heart, so that the rebellious shall submit themselves.

Secondly, The other, that his people (when they are made sensible of their
That men may not despair.
hardness) may not despair, but may apply themselves unto him who is able to
work all their work in and for them, and to heal all their diseases, and to
subdue all their iniquities. Beloved, a Promise of God (in any kind) is a
singular foundation for Faith and Prayer: And so it is in this business of
hardness of heart; if the Lord promise to take it away, then the work is
possible, it may be done, and it is likewise de futuro, it shall be done: As
the Lord is able to perform whatsoever he promises to his people, so he is
faithful and will perform the same. And both these are grounds for Faith and
Prayer to go unto the Lord and beseech him, and trust upon him, that he will
according to his word take away the hardness of our hearts.

Quest. 3. How this can be affirmed for a truth, seeing that much hardness How
this can be, since much hardness remains. A difference betwixt the hardness
remaining in the best, and that in the wicked. The godly are sensible of it.
of heart remains in all the people of God, all the days of their lives?

Sol. This has been answered in part already, in the manner how God takes away
the hardness of heart from his people: only I will add, that there is a vast
difference 'twixt the hardness of heart remaining in the people of God, and
that hardness of heart abiding in ungodly men, v. g.

First, Though hardness of heart (in some degrees) remains in the people of
God, yet they are sensible of it as their great evil and burden, and do
exceedingly bewail it, and complain to the Lord of it, and cry out, Why have
thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? Isa. 63. 17. But wicked men are
unsensible of the hardness of their hearts, they are past feeling, and their
consciences are seared as with a hot iron, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
When a part of the body is feared with a hot iron, it becomes utterly stupid
and unsensible, etc.

Secondly, The hardness of heart remaining in the people of God, it It is
still mortifying in the best.
is still mortifying and decreasing; the more they feel it, the more they pray
against it, and never give over till they have obtained more grace and strength
against it, until they find their hearts more tender and pliable: But the
hardness of heart in ungodly men, as it is reigning, so it is raging, it still
increases unto more hardness; ungodly men sin more and more, and still oppose
the means of softning their hearts; and the more they do sin, the more they do
harden their hearts; and the more they do oppose the light and means of
softning, the more they do augment their sins and hardness.

Thirdly, Though hardness of heart does remain in the people of God, yet Though
it remains, yet They do not willingly take those ways that tend to hardening.


1. They do not willingly and advisedly give up themselves to any ways and
courses which tend to the hardening of their hearts; as to the neglect of the
Ordinances, to the omission of holy duties, to the commission of sins against
the light of the Word and of Conscience.

2. They do cordially use all the means to work off the hardness of their
hearts, as frequent self-examinations, humble confessions, and self-judgings,
earnest Prayer for more Faith, and fear, and tenderness of spirit, and the Lord
does Cordially use the means against it.
graciously ^ear them in these Requests. But thus it is not with ungodly men
whose hearts are hardened, they practice wickedness, and they sell themselves
to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, 1 King. 21. 25. And give
themselves over unto lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness,
Ephesians. 4. 19. And trample under feet the light of the Word, and the actings of
Conscience, and whatsoever stands in their way to restrain them from sinning,
and are so far from improving any means for the removing of the hardness of
their hearts, that they deride and scorn at them, and reject and abhor them.
When did you ever see any ungodly hardened sinner judging himself for his hard
heart, and begging of the Lord to heal it! or willingly applying himself to a
(...) heartbreaking Ministry! etc.

SECT. II.
Use 1. Does the Lord promise that he will take away the stony heart from his
people! and does he really do so in his time! Hence it will follow;

First, Then they are none of the people of God, whose stony heart does They
are none of the people of God whose hard heart is not removed.
still abide in them, and completely reign in them; and then in what a woeful
condition are many people (^ fear) amongst our selves! e. g. All those who are
unsensible of their sinful estate! all those who incorrigibly go on in their
sinful ways! all those who were never wrought on by the Word of Christ! all
those who oppose, and reject, and slight the Word in the threatenings and
precepts thereof! all those who do continue impenitent and unbelieving,
notwithstanding all the offers and invitations of grace, etc.

Secondly, Then no marvel that the people of God are of another spirit, and The
people of God are of another spirit than other men.
of another temper than the common sort of people are! that they dare not run
into the same excess of riot with others, nor live so as other men do live;
that they are so much altered as to themselves: Heretofore they were frequent
in swearing, and now they fear an oath; heretofore they made nothing of great
transgressions, and now a small sin (even a little neglect, carelessness,
remisness) does exceedingly disquiet and deject their hearts; heretofore they
could neglect the Word as well as others, and scoff at it, and refuse to be
ordered by it; but now they stand in awe of the Word, they are presently bound
up by it, and wholly molded, and fashioned, and ruled by it. The reason of all
this is, because God does take away the hardness of our hearts, etc.

Thirdly, Then it is no sign of an evil estate to be troubled for our own sins,
or for the sins of others: David did water his couch for his own sins, Psalm. 6.
6. It is no sign of an evil state to be troubled for our sins.
And rivers of tears did fall from his eyes for the sins of other men, Psalm:
119. 136. When your former sins are your grief, and your present sins are your
burden, and future sins are your fear, and other men's sins are your sorrow,
this is a clear evidence that the stony heart is taken away; and therefore you
stand in relation to God as his people. To sin and not to be troubled for sin,
is a sign of an hard heart, and of an evil condition; but to fear sin, and to
be grieved for sinning, this is a sign of a changed and broken heart. They are
not to be blamed who oppose Heresies and blasp^emies.


Fourthly, Then it is very unjust to accuse and discountenance any of the
people of God (as ill affected) for this reason only, Because they do oppose
the Heres^es, and blasphemies of these times; and because they do so earnestly
contend for the Gospel and Ordinances of Christ by Prayers, and tears, and
speaking, and writing, etc. Why, are you angry with them that God has taken
away from them the heart of stone? must we be sensible of Gods dishonor, or
must we not! And if if Christ wept at the hardness of heart in Jerusalem
because she would not receive the Gospel, is there not much more reason to weep
and pray because of the hardness, nay of the desperateness of any man who
endeavors to pull down and extirpate the Gospel! I say the Gospel in which all
the love and goodness of God is revealed, and in which all the glory of Christ
is interested, and in which all the salvation of poor sinners souls is so
necessarily concerned.

Use 2. Will the Lord take away the heart of stone from his people? what Bless
God for this.
cause then have those people to bless the Lord, who do find this cure wrought
in their hearts! O it is an unspeakable mercy and favor! whether you respect
the evil from which you are delivered, or else the good which falls in upon the
removal of hardness of heart.

First, If that you do consider the evil from which you are delivered, by
being In respect of the evil from which you are delivered.
delivered from an hard heart. One says it is the greatest sin in the world;
another says it is the greatest judgment in the world: Certainly it is one of
the strongest holds of sin, and it was the hardness of heart which kept up all
the power of your sins, and all the sinful pract^ses; it was the foundation of
your long impenitency; you had long ere this repented, had not your hearts been
hardened. If the Lord had not in wonderful mercy by his exceeding power of grace
taken away the hardness of your hearts, your souls would never have been
brought in to Christ, but you would have gone on in your sins, and dyed in your
sins, and been damned for your sins: And yet again, that after the long
re^stance of Gods grace, offers of mercy, callings of the Gospel, strivings and
resistings of his Spirit, the Lord shall pass by all this, and mercifully cure
thy foolish, proud, stout, self-destroying* soul; O what mercy was this, and
what grace was this? And the good which falls in with it.


Secondly, If you do likewise consider the good which falls in upon the removal
of hardness of heart, certainly you have great cause to bless God, etc. e. g.

1. An immediate receptivity or capacity to have the Law or will of God written
and engraven on your hearts, 2. A spring of repentance is set up in the heart
to bewail all our sins and transgressions; and fear to transgress any more. 3.
An obediential principle appears in making of us ready and willing to comply
with the precepts of God; liberty and ability, etc. 4. The great work of Faith
to receive the Lord Jesus into our hearts. 5. Affectionate communions with God,
and a special delight in his presence, and Ordinances, and Services. 6. A
liberty, and confidences in our accesses unto the throne of grace. 7. In one
word, a newness of heart, and a newness of relation unto God as our God and
Father. All these flow in upon the soul when God takes away the hardness of the
heart; and in time all the good of the Covenant; and therefore unquestionably
you have great obligations lying on your hearts to bless God if he does take
away the hardness of your hearts.
Object. I, will some say, no question it is a great blessing to be delivered
from an hard heart! but we fear it is not so with us; for we find sometimes,
such

1. A strange indisposition to what is good. 2. A mavelous unsensibleness,
and cannot mourn for our sins. 3. No delight in communion with God, cannot
pray.
Sol. For your help in these cases, know

First, Melancholy is one thing, and hardness of heart is another thing:
Melancholy breeds an indisposition to all works Religious and Civil; unfit to
Pray, and unfit to Trade: But hardness of heart is rather an opposition than an
indisposition: Melancholy indisposeth for a time, for a fit; but when that is
off, the soul is free again.

Secondly, Indisposition from temptation is one thing, and from affection is
another: Temptations may deject the heart, and distract it; but these are
grievous and burdensome to the soul.

Thirdly, Indisposition is absolute; no heart at all; or comparative, not so
full, free, quick, and lively as at sometimes.

Fourthly, Constant, And transient, approved, resisted, and bewailed.

And to that of unmournfulness;

First, There is direct grief, and there is reflexive grief; a mourning because
we cannot mourn.

Secondly, There is dolor voluntatis, which is displeasing; and dolor
passionis, which is vexing; this not always, nor always alike.

Thirdly, Though you find not your hearts so mournful, yet you have hearts to
beseech the Lord to give a Spirit of mourning, Zach. 12. 10.

We cannot pray!

First, What, not at all, never, no desires!

Secondly, Not at sometimes, with that freedom, fullness, cheerfulness,
uninterruptedness.

Thirdly, Yet you will pray, you will look up.

Fourthly, Three things may comfort and quiet you, though you cannot pray with
that earnestness, and enlargedness; yet if you can can pray, 1. With a
believing heart. 2ly With an humble heart in the sense of it. 3ly With a
sincere heart and desire, God will accept you.

SECT. III.
Use 3. Does the Lord himself undertake to take away the heart of stone from
They who partake of this mercy, should beware of hardening themselves again.
his people? O then let all such who are the people of God (whose hearts God
has cured of this Spiritual disease of hardness) let them in a special manner
beware that they suffer not their hearts to harden themselves again.

Perhaps this may be a word in season to some of us this day, who have lost our
former tenderness of heart, and do now find a strong obduration upon our
spirits, and we know not therefore what to think of our selves and conditions.

With your favor I will speak three things unto this Case.

1. The real Symptoms of an heart harding in a godly man. 2. The sadness of
that condition. 3. Directions in this case for recovery.
I. The real Symptoms of an heart hardening in a godly man.

Symptoms of it. Listlestness to the Ordinances.
First, A listlestnesse of heart to the Ordinances; the man has not that
flying spirit unto them (flies not as Doves to the windows) nor that hungring
spirit after them as heretofore; he longs not for a Sabbath, nor does his soul
complain for his appointed food. It is with him as with a man on whom a disease
is seasing; his stomach begins to fail him, and he minds not his meat as he
was wont to do: So it is with a good man on whom hardness of heart is seasing;
the Ordinances are not so precious and dear to him as heretofore, he falls in
the high estimation of them, and in the wonted affectionateness of them, and
the man can miss many a Sermon quietly, and neglect any Ordinance: Ah friend,
remember from whence thou art falling; consider whither thou art going:
Hardness is growing, when carelessness is rising, etc.

Secondly, A flatness of spirit under the Ordinances: The time was that the
Flatness of spirit under Ordinances.
man's heart was to the Word, as wax to the seal; every part of the world would
have wrought, and imprinted something on his heart; a threatening would have
startled him; a Precept would have guided him; a promise would have revived
him; there was ordinarily a vigor and warmth falling from the Ordinances upon
his heart. But now his heart is chill, and cold, and formal, and dead under the
means of life; he is little or nothing stirred or moved: He comes and hears the
sound of the Word, but he seldom meets with the power of the Word; there is
not that mourning, nor joy, nor fear, nor trusting as formerly: Divine Precepts
do not quicken his heart; Divine Promises do not establsh his heart; Divine
Exhortations do not encourage and enlarge his heart; Divine Trials and
discourses do not make him to search his heart; Divine Rewards do not affect
and open his heart as heretofore they have done.

Thirdly, A carelessness of mind after the Ordinances: Heretofore when the man
had heard the Word, home he would go, and retire himself, and consider,
Careiesnesse of mind after Ordinances.
and confess, and pray, and bless the Lord; Lord! in such a Point thou did
discover my sin and failing, O pardon and heal me! in another thou did clear
my doubts, be pleased still to settle and quiet my soul; in another Point thou
did show me more of my work, O now grant unto thy servant more of thy
strength; in another Point thou did raise my faith, and comfort my soul; my
soul did therefore love and bless thee. You would not imagine what pains the
man took with a Sermon; after a Sermon what wrestlings with God; what tears and
cries to take out the lessons of God, to be cast into the mould of every Divine
Truth.

O but now it is not so with him, he has quickly done with the Word, after he
has read or heard the Word; the Word does not dwell with him, nor go home with
him; he is seldom in after Meditations, in after Applications, in after
Supplications: The Word of God comes and goes; is heard and laid aside; perhaps
the man speaks a little of it, but minds it not as a Message or Errand from
God to him.

Fourthly, A remissness concerning private duties; when these begin either to
Remisness in private duties.
be omitted, or seldomly to be performed; rather out of course than Conscience,
without that intentiveness of mind, and without the labor of the heart and
affections which God requires, and which the Christian formerly found and
expressed. v. g. The Christians confessions, were wont to be with singular
sense of sin, compunction, and brokenness of heart* judgings, mournings,
shames, and condemnings of himself; his Prayers were wont to be strong cries,
importunate wrestlings, vehement strivings and pleadings in the name of Christ;
humble urgings and pressings of the promises of God, unsatisfiable thirsts
after mercies, graces, comforts. O but now they are not so, or are very seldom
so: This poor Christian is scarce sensible of the sins which he does now
confess; and scarce apprehensive of any Spiritual good which he seems to crave;
he does not insist on these with his ancient affections, and ancient
expectations; he seems to be satisfied with what he does, and not with what he
desires: Ah friend! when the edge and fervor of the spirit is gone, when
fervency daily degenerates into formality, surely tenderness is falling into
hardness of heart. Watchlesness over the spirit


Fifthly, A watchlesnesse over the spirit or soul; it is not minded, observed,
looked unto in its motions, affections, transactions as formerly; but the guard
is drawn off; there is less fear, and more security; less diligent care and
more loose presumption. The man was wont to keep his heart with all diligence,
narrowly observing the passages and workings of his Spirit, the inclinations of
his heart, temptations of Satan, behaviors of every day, alone and in company;
and accordingly did apply himself with variety of petitions to God, and humbled
himself for what was amiss, and renewed his strength in the Lord for the time
to come: O but now it is not thus; the precious soul is neglected, the City is
not watched, the thoughts, and affections, and actions are not observed, the
poor man is asleep, and drowsy, and his spiritual frame is impaired, and he
considers it not.

2ly The sadness of this condition. The sadness of this condition. It is an
evil distemper.


First, It is a very evil and naughty distemper; an hard heart softning, that
is good; but the soft hardening again, that is very evil. Was it good to tremble
at the Word? what is it now not to be moved by the Word! was it good to think
of sin, and mourn? what is it now to hear of thy sins, and not to be troubled
at all! was it good to act duties with affections and life? what is it now to
neglect the duties, or to act them with a heavy and careless Spirit!

There are four things which show this hardening to be very evil.

1. The mavelous ingratitude in it, that the Lord should show so much mercy
to heal the disease, and yet you relapse into it again.

2. There is an express self-condemnation; why! you were exceedingly troubled
at the hardness of your hearts, and prayed against it, and sought the prayers
of others, and now to harden your hearts again!

3. There is presumption in it, you do tempt the Lord by it; Do you mean to
continue in this case? then you are undone; do you mean to come out of it? why
do you then tempt the Lord by falling into it, and presuming on his grace to
recover you?

4. If you look not speedily to your selves, where think you will this hardening
end! perhaps in some great desertion, perhaps in some great transgression!
perhaps in some exceeding great and long trouble of conscience.

Secondly, It is a very uncomfortable condition: How is thy Sun eclipsed! It is
a very uncomfortable condition.
and thy Spring cut off! what is become of that spirit of Prayer? what is
become of that excellent assurance of which thou have so much spoken? where is
that sweetly excusing testimony of Conscience! what is become of that joy in
the Holy Ghost? and that peace with which thou wast wont to work? Ah! thou have
suffered thy heart to harden again, and God looks not on thee as he was wont,
and Conscience speaks not as it was wont, and the Spirit of God manifests not
himself as he was wont, and Ordinances smile not on thee as they were wont, nor
does Providence shine upon thy Tabernacle as it was wont: But instead of these,
thou meetest with many a sharp affliction, with many piercing reproofs, with
many a sad item, and reckoning, and scourges, which no man knows and feels (in
the sting and bitterness of it) but thou thy self.

Thirdly, It is a very formal and empty estate; how may it grieve thee to see
It is an empty state.
a fruitless Vintage of thy soul? Tell me what returns have thou had all this
while that this hardening distemper has been upon thee! thou hear carelessly
and negligently; what have thou been the better for all the Sermons which thou
have heard! thou prayest coldly and formally; and what good has returned upon
thy soul after them! thou have had no trading all this while at heaven! how
dull must grace be which is not used! and how decaying must thy Spiritual
strength be, which all this while recovers no more strength?

Fourthly, It is a very dangerour posture; though it be not absolute Apostasy,
It is a dangerous posture.
yet it looks toward it. Though I will not say that it is the turning of the
grace of God into wantonness, yet it bends toward it: Though it be not
falling from grace, and though it be not a forsaking of God; yet unquestionably
it is a g^ieving of God, and a provoking of him, and for which he may very far
leave a person.

3ly. Directions in this case for recovery. Directions for recovery. Find out
the cause.


First, By all means find out the cause or causes of the hardening; observe well

1. What conscience tells thee in thy bed at night, or in the day of fear and
affliction, or in a day of Solemn Humiliation, or in the meditation of thy
short appearances before God.

2. What the Word of God hints and points at in thee, at what it levels and
strikes; there is an arrow (some time or other) shot which falls into thy very
heart; a message that is secretly delivered in way of conviction and reproof,
which says, Thou art the man, and this is thy way and thy doings.

3. What thy faithful and watchful friends say unto thee; what their suspicions
and fears are, and unto what their friendly counsels do tend. A thousand to one
but some of these things (which I shall mention) have brought on thee this new
hardness upon thy heart.

1. Either spiritual pride, this has made thee to neglect thy watch, and to
neglect the Ordinances.

2. Or a worldly surfeit; thou have been taking in too much of the world, and
worldly business, and this has robbed thee of thy precious time, to converse
at heaven, to meditate, to examine, to read, to hear, to pray, to confer with
thy Fellow Christians.

3. Or the deceitfulness of sin: Thou have ventured on lesser sins, and they
have ensnared thee, and drawn thee to greater sins, and these have brought upon
thee the hardness of thy heart again, etc.

Secondly, When you have found out the spiritual causes by which your hearts
Judge your selves and repent.
have been hardened, then judge your selves and repent; remember from whence
thou art fallen, and repent, said Christ unto Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. Nay, do not
stay to look when this hardening will fall off from thee; but hasten, but compel
thy self to retiredness, and to a penitential consideration of thy hardening
with the causes of it, and the great evils in it, and fall down before the Lord
in humble confessions of thy great backslidings, and pour out prayer upon
prayer: O wrestle with the Father of mercies for his Christ's sake to pity, and
pardon, and heal, and once more to cure and recover thee: Follow on to seek the
Lord, though he does secretly upbraid thee, though for a while he delays thee;
though to thy apprehension thy heart is more hardened, yet pray, and yet pray
that God would heal thy backslidings: Praise the Lord in the Name of Christ,
presenting his Covenant unto him, wherein he promises to take away the heart
of stone. And this contains in it not only the natural or original hardness of
heart, but also the accidental contracted hardness by his people; the Covenant
of taking away the heart of stone extends to both of them: O Lord, cure this
hardening as well as the former hardness: I have hardened the heart which thou
have softened, O do thou soften the heart which I have hardened; revive thy work,
and quicken my almost dead heart, restore my soul, and recover my ancient
estimations, affections, tenderness, love, fear, care, zeal, etc.

Thirdly, If the Lord (at length) begins to make thy heart to relent by Bless
God for any softning.
his Word or by his Rod, or by his Spirit, O bless his Name; He is come, he is
come, said the Martyr; so, etc. get thee into a corner, help on the spring,
pump the water when the water comes, enlarge thy confession, abound now in
supplications.

Fourthly, Be earnest with God to pardon thee, and to give thee assurance of
the pardoning Be earnest for pardon and assurance.
of this hardening, and be importunate with him for it; I tell thee such a
gracious assurance will presently soften and melt thy soul, assuredly raise and
restore thy soul to those careful and tender communions with God, and watchful
walking with him.

Fifthly, When you are recovered, then bless God and keep up tenderness Keep up
tenderness of heart.
of heart, and beware of suffering hardness to grow upon your hearts again.

Quest. What is to be done for this?

Sol. I answer.

First, Never trust hardening causes any more; as Eliphas spoke, in Joh. 15.
Never trust hardening causes.
31. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity, for vanity shall be his
recompense. After your great humblings, and prayings, and wrestlings, and
prevailings with God, do not now go and tamper with sin and sinful occasions
again; and do not go and over-world your selves again; and do not go and renew
familiarity with wicked company again; and do not neglect the Ordinances any
more, etc. If you do, you will harden your hearts more than ever.

Secondly, If at any time you do espy any hardness creeping and rising Resist
hardness returning.
upon your spirits, O make a present resistance, and wrestle against it, even
unto present victory: When you pray, if you find coldness and formality in
your spirit, O stir up Prayer, stir up the heart, and stir up the grace^;

Thirdly, Be often in the search of your hearts; and keep a daily and Search
your hearts often.
strict watch over them and your ways: Blessed is the man that fears always,
Prove. 28. 14.

Fourthly, Constantly and seriously attend the Ordinances, which do beget,
Attend the Ordinances.
and preserve, and increase softness and tenderness of heart.

Ezekiel. 36. 26. And I will give you an heart of flesh.
I Have finished two Propositions already from these words, viz.

1. That there is a natural hardness in every man's heart. 2. That God will take
away that stonynesse, or hardness of heart from his people.
I shall now proceed unto the third and last Proposition from the Text, which
is this.

CHAP. XI. God gives a heart of flesh.
Doct. 3. THat God will not only take away the heart of stone from his people,
All the people of God have a softened heart given them.
but also he will give them an heart of flesh; or that all the people of God
have soft and tender hearts given unto them.

And by the way, before I insist upon this Point, observe two things.

1. That Gods works in restoring and renewing of man, are no^ terminated in
Privatives, or Negatives; but they are Positive also and Collative: Evil is
removed, and good contrary to that evil, comes in the place of it. He does
take away the old heart, and also he gives a new heart; he takes away the heart
of stone, and also he gives an heart of flesh: He takes away ignorance, and
gives knowledge; he takes away pride, and gives humility; God is a wise and
perfect Agent; he will not only deface and abolish Satan's Image, but also he
will repair his own Image; he will not only root up what is evil, but also he
will plant and lay foundations, and build up. Therefore have a care of your
selves, that you be not deceived in the judgment of your conditions; you are
not so wicked as you were; but what good is wrought in your hearts? what
contrary quality unto the former evil, etc?

2. That as to the conversion or change of the sinner, all the work rests on
God; he does all, he works all; if the heart of stone be to be removed, he must
do that work, he must take it away; and if the heart of flesh be to be enjoyed,
he must also do that work; he must give unto us the heart of flesh; power
against evil, and power to any good, all from God; we are the Patients, he is
the Agent; we are the receivers, he is the giver; you cannot take away the
hardness of your own hearts, nor can you give unto your selves an heart of
flesh; both of them are the work of God.

These things being briefly premised, I now come to the Proposition it self;
viz. That the people of God are the people of soft and tender hearts; God gives
unto them (unto every one of them) an heart of flesh; (i. e.) a tender and soft
heart. An heart of flesh (in this place) stands in opposition to the heart of
stone, to the unsensible, unmournful, stubborn, unyielding, resisting heart,
and it notes a sensible mourning, relenting, yielding, complying, tender,
teachable and tractable heart.

But for the opening of this excellent Point, I shall discuss these three
Questions.

1. What this heart of flesh is? what this soft and tender heart is? 2. How it
may appear that the people of God are a people of soft and tender hearts? 3.
Why the Lord gives such an heart to all his people?
SECT. I.
Quest. 1. What this heart of flesh is? or what the soft and tender What a
heart of flesh is.
heart is?

Sol. To understand this, you must remember that there is a fourfold softness A
fourfold softness.
or tenderness.

First, One is Natural, and this is that which we call commonly a good nature,
Natural.
and tender disposition, and a softly spirit, on which any thing is apt to
work, any harsh word, any sad news, any affliction, any cross, any thing that
has the notion of calamitous or grievous.

This tenderness or softnes:, is not the soft heart here in the Text; for

1. It is no heavenly quality, nor is it let in by heavenly means; a man never
got this tenderness by praying, or hearing, or reading, or meditating, etc.

2. It is such a softness as leaves a person in as great a pliableness (nay
greater) to evil, than to good: You may as soon draw them to an Ale house, and
Playhouse, and Gaming-house, as to Gods house; they cannot deny their friend
and request, etc.

3. Notwithstanding this softness and tenderness, yet a man's heart remains
spiritually hardened; for take me this soft natured person which can weep almost
at every thing, and put him upon mourning for his sins, for his long ignorance,
for his manifold profaness, for his exceeding unprofitableness under the means
of grace; why, this soft-natured man now cannot shed a tear, and is ordinarily
so far from relenting and mourning that even his heart rises against what you
speak, and is extremely incensed, etc.

Secondly, The second is Moral, which arises from education and learning,
Moral.
and is of that force as to restrain and civilize, and scowre off the barbarous
rudeness of spirit and behavior, and trims up the person to a gentleness of
conversation; but neither is this the heart of flesh in the Text; for

1. This is but an outward and seeming softness.

2. If any thing of it may be said to be inward, yet it flows not from any work
of grace, but from the Rules of Moral Philosophy, admitted i^to the
understanding, as fit to be received and practiced for a man's reputation in the
world.

3. It is Humane and not Divine; it is a tenderness to respect men, when all
this while there is a stubbornness, and resistance, and unyieldingness, and a
constant irrespectiveness to God and his will and ways.

Thirdly, The third is a legal tenderness, which is the yielding tenderness
Legal.
and pliableness of the heart under the sense of Gods dreadful wrath for sin;
what will not a sinner do in such a case? he will pray and hear, and forbear,
and do what God will have him to do, and forsake what God will have him
forsake; but this is not the heart of flesh neither; for

1. This is but anguish of heart, it is not tenderness of heart.

2. This will off when anguish is off; like Iron that is softened in the fire,
when the fire is taken away, it grows more hard: Pharaoh yet hardened his heart
more, when God gave him some respite.

3. The sinner is quickly weary of this tenderness, and would with all his
heart be rid of it; but so it is not in the right softness.

4. The fourth is Evangelical tenderness or softness of heart; and this
Evangelical.
is a gracious temper of heart given or formed by God himself, whereby the
whole soul becomes me^^ing and yielding, and pliable, flexible to God, in
respect of his Attributes, Word and Works; here observe,

First, It is a gracious temper or frame of heart] no man has it, but first It
is a gracious temper.
he partakes of the Spirit of grace; his heart is converted and renewed by
grace; before the work of grace, the heart is stubborn and rebellious,
disobedient and gainsaying; the natural man is a child of disobedience as well
as of wrath; he is stiff-necked, and unto every good work reprobate; but when
grace enters into the heart, now his heart is changed and subdued, and
mollified, and is easy to be entreated, and is ready to take any impression
that God will stamp upon it. Acts 10. 33. We are all here present before God,
to hear all things commanded thee of God.

Secondly, It is a temper or frame of heart] it is not an occasional and
transient A temper of heart.
work, but an inherent and permanent, and fixed work upon the soul; Pharaoh
under some of Gods judgments did relent; and Ahab under those sharp
threatenings of God did humble himself; and Felix upon the hearing of Paul, did
tremble; and the Israelitet in their distress did cover the Altar with tears;
and Judas with the terror of conscience did repent; but these were fits and
passions only, they did not last and abide on their hearts* when exigences were
off, their natural hardness appeared again. It is not thus when God gives an
heart of flesh; (i. e.) a tender and soft heart; for this dwells and reigns,
and continues in all estates, in all changes; in perplexity, and in adversity;
in freedom, and in danger; under blessings as well as under afflictions.

Thirdly, It is such a temper, whereby the whole heart becomes a melting and By
it the heart becomes melting and yielding.
yielding heart, and pliable, and flexible; the Scripture calls it sometimes a
contrite heart, Psalm. 51. 17. sometimes a trembling heart, Isa. 66. 2.
sometimes a tender heart, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. sometimes a mourning heart, Zach.
12. 10, 11. sometimes an obedient heart, Romans 6. 17. sometimes an heart that
bows and stoops to receive the Word of God, Deuteronomy. 33. 3.

And this softness and pliableness spreads over the whole soul when God gives
an heart of flesh. It spreads over the whole soul.


First, The mind is willing to see, and to be taught, and know the mind of God;
his will, his way, his work concerning us. Teach me thy truth, and teach me thy
way, and teach me thy will, says David, Psalm: 27. 11. Let us go up to the
house of the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, Isa. 2. 3.

Secondly, The judgment is willing and ready to assent, and to acknowledge the
truths and commands of God; the Law is good and holy, said Paul, Romans 7. I
esteem thy precepts to be right, said David, Psalm. 1 19.

Thirdly, The will is made tender and pliable: I will keep thy statutes, Psalm.
119. 8. I will run the way of thy Commandments, Ver. 32. The Lord is our God,
and him will we serve, Josh. 24. 18.

Fourthly, All the affections are tender and pliable: O what propensions to
mourn for sin (they that escape of them shall be on the Mountains as Doves of
the Valley, all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity, Ezekiel. 7. 16.) and
so a tender fear, they fear the Lord and his goodness, Hosea 3. 5. a tender
love, a tender delight, etc.

Fourthly, This frame of tenderness and softness appears toward God; This
tenderness appears toward God.


1. In respect of his Attributes: His mercifulness melts the heart, and leads
it to Repentance; his goodness melts and draws it to more obedience; his
greatness and power, and wisdom awes the heart; O who would not fear and serve
such a God?

2. In respect of his Word: Promises work on the heart, and threatenings, and
precepts, and reproofs; the promises draw and raise the soft heart; threatenings
awaken, and awe the soft heart; precepts direct and bind the soft heart;
reproofs do pierce and recover, and mend the soft heart.

3. In respect of the Works and Dealings of God, all of them make impression on
the soft heart; those of mercy, and those of judgment; those of blessing,
those of affliction, they all work kindly.

Fifthly, The Author and Cause of all this is, God himself: Job 23. 16. God is
the Author of it.
God makes my heart soft: Zach. 12. 10. They shall look on him whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn, etc. The Lord does give this soft and tender
heart, when he does effectually call and convert a sinner, as you may see in
Paul's conversion; and thus you see what the heart of flesh is, what a soft and
tender heart is.

SECT. II.
Quest. 2. NOW to the second Question, How it may appear that the people of How
this appears?
God are people of soft and tender hearts?

First, By Instances all the Scripture over; I will mention some. David was By
Instances.
a godly man, and he was a man of a soft and tender heart; when he did cut off
the lap of Saul's garment, his heart smote him; as soon as Abigal spoke with
him, he was withdrawn from his rash and dangerous resolution: Nathan spoke but
one word unto him (Thou art the man) and presently he is struck (I have sinned)
and that made him to water his couch with tears. Josiah was a godly man, and he
was a man of a soft and tender heart; see 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Because thine heart
was tender, and thou did humble thy self before God, when thou heardest his
words against this place, and against the Inhabitants thereof; and humbledst
thy self before me, and did rent thy clothes, and weep before me, etc. Joseph
was so both to God (Genesis 39. 9. How can I do wickedness, etc?) and to Man; How
tender to his father and brethren? Job was so, and so was Peter, on whom one
look of Christ did work so kindly, that he went out and wept bitterly. What
should I speak of Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Nehemiah, Ezra, Daniel, or of Paul, or
of the Corinthians? 2 Cor. 3. 3. Ye are the Epistle of Christ, written not with
ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in
fleshly tables of the heart; nay, see more of this softness and tenderness: 2
Cor. 7. 11. Behold this same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves; yea, what
indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what vehement desire, etc.

Secondly, By Practice; and there are eight things appearing in their By
Practice.
practice, which do show that they are persons of soft and tender hearts.

First, Quick apprehensions, even of a frown, and of Gods displeasure afar
Quick apprehensions.
off; in the beginnings, in the threatenings, in a with-drawment, in any stop or
estrangedness of communion and visits, and unusualness, in these cases
presently the heart of them begins to misgive and fear, Is all well? is not the
Lord angry? He looks not on me, I hear not from him as formerly, Have not I
offended him, etc?

Secondly, Easy convictions: A reproof (says Solomon, Prove. 17. 10.) enters
Easy Convictions.
more into a wise man, than an hundred stripes into a fool; and so does any
conviction, if the people of God have sinned: Christ's look to Peter; Nathans
word to David; sometimes a glance, an hint, a passage in a Sermon, or in
Discourse is enough; for conscience is very tender, and takes presently, and
yields, and confesses, etc.

Great griefs for lesser trespasses:
Thirdly, Great griefs for lesser trespasses: Great sins trouble not an hard
heart,

Fourthly, Special care of sure warrant for special actions: They must have
Care of sure warrant for special actions.
a light, and a voice going before them, This is the way, Walk in it: May I do
this? and may I do that? Does the Lord command such a work? and does he enjoin
me? and am I sure and clear that I do not transgress if I should venture upon
it?

Fifthly, Wise Caution in doubtfuls: Where if the work or way seems doubtfully
Caution in doubtfuls.
good, or doubtfully evil, the godly person makes a pause, a stand, a stop; he
dares not to act boystrously; if it be but (a perhaps) it is evil, but (a
perhaps) God may be dishonored, or his Gospel prejudiced, he will abstain
until he gets more light to clear his steps; as Job offered sacrifice in the
case of perhaps.

Sixthly, Present obedience: When God commands, no delays, no shufflings,
Present obedience.
no consultings with flesh and blood; their hearts are indeed at Gods command:
I made haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 60. You need
not use many arguments and persuasions to the people of God, a word of Gods
command is of easy authority, etc.

Seventhly, And Choice obedience; they would serve the Lord with their spirits.
Choice obedience.
Romans 1. 9. and seek him with their whole hearts. Psalm. 119. 10. and serve him
acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Hebr. 12. 28. and love him with all
their might.

Eighthly, Earnest supplications, that they might not offend; or if they have
Earnest supplications.
offended, that they might not offend; so David, Keep thy servant from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19. 13. Let not any iniquity have dominion over me,
Psalm. 119. 133. And in case of offense, O take away iniquity: I have sinned, I
have done exceeding foolishly; O Lord forgive, be merciful unto my
transgressions, heal my backslidings, return in mercy, speak peace; whence is
all this, but from the tenderness of their hearts?

Quest. 3. Why the Lord gives a heart of flesh, a soft and tender heart to his
Why God gives a heart of flesh. Four reasons of it.
people?

Sol. The Reasons may be these, which I will but mention:

First, God will teach them (they shall be taught of God) and write his Law in
their inward parts. Ergo.

Secondly, His people must be his servants, they must serve the Lord their God,
be at his command to do his will and his work. Ergo.

Thirdly, They must be like unto their God and Father, and have a nature
answerable to his nature; God is a God of very merciful nature, very tender,
and gentle, easy to be entreated, and (if I may so say) to be wrought on;
sometimes a prayer works on him, sometimes a tear, sometimes a groan and sigh.

Fourthly, That they may walk without offense to God and man; tenderness of
heart is a ground of circumspection and holy jealousy, and that is a ground of
unblameable walking; not to do any thing (willingly) by which God may be
dishonored, or men (justly) offended.

SECT. III.
Use 1. Does God give unto all his people in Covenant a soft and tender Trial,
whether we have such a heart.
heart, a heart of flesh? Let us then carefully survey and search our hearts,
whether God has bestowed on them this heavenly quality, this Jewel, this
Covenant-grace of softness or tenderness of heart?

This Point is of wonderful consequence, and therefore I must carefully
dispense it, and manage it, which shall be in this manner.

1. Convictions in a privative way, that many persons are utterly destitute of
spiritual softness of heart. 2. Convictions in a defective way, that many
persons deceive themselves with a false softness of heart. 3. Demonstrations of
the manifold miseries incumbent upon, and incident unto all persons destitute
of softness of heart. 4. Testimonies and true Characters of a heart really
softened by grace.
1. Convictions in a privative way, that many persons are utterly Convictions
that many are destitute of it. By the disposition of their hearts to sin. Six
things show this. Easiness to sin.
destitute of spiritual softness of heart.
First, By the disposition of their hearts unto sin, by which only God is
offended and grieved, and dishonored; yet there are six things evidently
appearing in in many men about sin, which show that there is no spiritual
softness or tenderness of heart in them at all: v. g.

First, Easiness to sin: Solomon speaks of some who will transgress for a piece
of bread, Prove. 28. 21. The Prophet* speaking of Ephraim, says, that he
willingly walked after the commandment, Hosea 5. 11. Ahab sold himself to work
wickedness, 1 Kings 21. 25. Judas goes and offers himself to betray Christ,
Matthew. 26. 15, 16. and the chief Priests and Captains were glad, Luke 22. 5.
When a small temptation is bait and hire enough, but a look, but a thought, but
a word, and the man is presently ready to sin, has he a soft and tender heart
to fear the Lord? any temptation will master him, nay, he will sin without a
temptation.

Secondly, Boldness in sinning: When a person makes no bones of great
transgressions, Boldness in sinning.
but can sin with an high hand, and dares to venture on presumptuous sins, and
yet is not ashamed at all. Isa. 3. 9. They declare their sin as Sodom, they
hide it not. Jerem. 6. 5. Were they ashamed when they had committed
abominations? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush! When
people can swear and for-swear, and curse and blaspheme, and commit whoredom,
and steal and oppress, and lie and murder, and with the Whore in the Proverbs,
Wipe their mouths, and say, What evil have I done? does this show the least of
tenderness of heart, which quakes at lesser iniquities?

Thirdly, Joy and delight in sinning: Solomon speaks of such who rejoice to
Delight in sinning.
do evil, Prove. 2. 14. and the Prophet in Isa. 66. 3. Their soul delights in
their abominations; and the Apostle in Phil. 3. 19. Whose glory is in their
shame; and the Psalmist, Ps. 10 3. The wicked boasts of his hearts desire:
Who can say that any man has a tender heart least he should sin, and after he
has sinned, who makes his very sins the object of his delight and joy, and
rejoicing and boasting, such a time of his filthiness, another time of his
drunkenness, etc?

Fourthly, Diffusion or spreading of sin; of such Solomon speaks, Prove. 4. 16.
Spreading of sin.
They sleep not except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away,
unless they cause some to fall; like Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made
Israel to sin, 1 Kings 16. 26. or like Manasseh, who made Judah and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, 2 Chronicles. 33. 9. or like the Whore in the
Proverbs, With much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of
her lips she forced him, Prove. 7. 21. O where is this softness and tende^ness
of heart, when it suffices us not all alone to offend, and anger, and
dishonor the Lord, but we will also cause others to sin against the Lord! draw
others to drunkenness, and uncleanness, seduce others to errors and profaness,
make others to neglect Ordinances and duties, to break the Sabbath, to steal
and purloine, to lie, and forswear themselves, etc.

Fifthly, Progress in sin, to go from evil to worse; not only to multiply sins
Progress in sin.
in several kinds, but to heighten and raise sins in further degrees, and still
to step on further in sinful ways; to be like Ezekiels waters which did rise
from the ancle to the feet, from the feet to the knees, and then into a river.
Or as the Prophet spoke, Isa. 2. 7. There is no end of their Charets; so there
is no end of their sinning, but they overflow in wickedness and revolt more and
more, and add drunkenness to thirst.

Sixthly, Unalterable resolution to sin: when men will not forsake their sins,
but Unalterable resolution to sin.
will hold them fast, and will not cease from evil, though the Lord expressly
threatens them, and although the Lord punishes others for the same sins, nay,
although the Lord does in eminent manner judge them themselves, and punish them
for their wicked doings, as in Amos 4. 6, 7, 8, etc. and made them sick in
smiting of them, and desolate because of their sins, Micah. 6. 13. Who can say
that these obstinate and perverse sinners who dare thus to contend with God
himself, and will try to the utmost, and provoke him (when he inflicts his
wrath on them for provoking of him) have in them the least degree or pretense
of softness and tenderness of heart!

Secondly, By the carriage of their hearts toward the Word of God; which is
such By their carriage toward the word.
as palpably proclaims they have no spiritual softness or tenderness of heart;
and that appears in four particulars.

First, They care not to know it, nor to be taught by it the mind and will of
God, They care not to know it.
Job 21. 14. They say unto God depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways. Hose. 8. 12. I have written unto them the great things of my Law,
but they were accounted a^ a strange thing. Prove. 1. 23. Though the Lord says,
I will make known my words unto you, yet ver. 24. they regarded not: but ver.
29. they hated knowledge. Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says
to the Churches, Rev. 2. 7. Be swift to hear, James 1. 19. Let the word of
Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, Col 3. 16. Come and let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us of his ways, Isa. 2. 3. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, Psalm.
119 33. But many people, they have no desire to hear the Word, nor any heart to
be taught by the Word: Nay they think the Word is much beholding to them, if
they will vouchsafe him an hours time to come and hear; have these men tender
hearts to please God, who care not at all to know the mind of God?

Secondly, They will not walk according to the rules and prescriptions of it,
but They will not walk according to it.
esteem of them as burdens which they would cast off, and as cords which they
would break asunder, Psalm. 2. 3. or as superfluous niceties, and preciseness
which they need not to regard. Their wills are absolutely incomplying with the
will of God, and condemning the will of God, and perking up above the will of
God: Can any rational man imagine that such persons have soft and tender
hearts, to fear the Lord, to obey his voice, whose heart will not yield to his
Word, nor submit at all unto it!

Object. But will some say, Are there any such men?

Sol. 1. There have been such amongst those to whom the Word has come: Jer.
44. 16. As for the word which thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord,
we will not hearken unto thee. And ver. 4. I sent unto you all my Prophets,
saying, O do not this abominable thing that I hate. ver. 5. But they harkned
not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn incense to
other gods. ver. 17. But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes out of our
own mouths, etc. Zach. 7. 9. Thus speaks the Lord of H^sts, Execute true
judgment, and show mercy and compassion every man to his brother. ver. 10. and
oppress not the widow or the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and let
none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. ver 11. But they
refused to hearken, and pulled away their shoulder, and stopped their ears that
they should not hear.

Secondly, And there are such amongst our selves who will not conform unto the
will of God, nor obey his Word. The Lord says, swear not at all, Matthew. 5. 34.
but they will swear by their faith, and by their troth, and by the creatures,
etc. The Lord commands every man everywhere to repent Acts 17. 30. but they
will not leave their sins; he that was proud is proud still; and he that was
filthy is filthy still; and he that was drunken is drunken still The Lord
commands us to keep the Sabbath day holy, Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day
to keep it holy; but men will not hearken to the Lord in this; they will have
their delights, and will sell their wares, and will have their pastimes, and
meetings on that day, etc. The Lord commands Parents to teach and instruct
their children, and to bring them up in the nurture of the Lord; and Governors
of Families to set up his worship and fear in their houses; but men will not do
this, etc. The Lord commands us all to walk strictly and circumspectly, Ephesians.
5. 15. and according to the rule, Gal. 6. 16. But we will not be bound up to
the straight path of life, we will allow our selves such a loosnesse of
Opinion, and such a looseness of speaking, and such a looseness of walking, which
the Lord does not only not allow, but expressly forbids and condems in his Word;
assuredly this is far from the frame of tender and soft hearts.

Thirdly, They do slight and mock at the threatenings of the Word, and misuse
They slight the threatenings of the Word.
the Messengers of the Lord: Isa. 21. 11. Watchman, what of the night?
watchman, what of the night? Jer. 23. 23. What is the burden of the Lord? Chap.
5. 12. They have belyed the Lord, and said, It is not he, neither shall evil
come upon us, neither shall we see sword nor famine. Jer. 6. 10. Behold, the
Word of the Lord is a reproach unto them. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. But they mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets. Acts 2.
13. Others mocking, said, These men are full of new wine. Unquestionably such
men as these are far from softness and tenderness of heart, which when any have
it, they do fear the Word of the Lord, and do tremble at his threatenings.
Nevertheless we do find it among our selves, that many persons do slight and
mock at the reproofs and threatenings of the Word, and do misuse the Messengers
of God when reproving their sins, and applying those threatenings which God
himself has denounced against them for their sinnings: As (like Solomon's fool)
they do make a mock of sin, so like those hardened Jews, they do make but a mock
of Gods threatenings for their sins, despise and laugh at them, whereas they
should humble their hearts under them, and repent of their sins, that so they
may avoid that wrath which God threatens them for their sinnings.

Fourthly, They will not be brought under the obedience of it, let the Lord do
what he will: Hose. 6. 5. I have hewed them by the Prophets, I have slain them
by They will not be obedient to the Word.
the words of my mouth, and thy judgments are as the light that goes forth.
ver. 7. But they like men have transgressed the Covenant, there have they dealt
treacherously against me. Zeph. 3. 5. Every morning does he bring his judgment
to light, he fails not, but the unjust knows no shame. ver. 6. I have cut
off the Nations, their Towers are desolate, I made their streets waste, that
none pass by; their Cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there
is no inhabitant. ver. 7. I said, Surely thou will fear me, thou will receive
instruction, so their dwellings should not be cut off, howsoever I punished
them; but they rose early and corrupted all their doings.

Thirdly, By untowardlinesse and untractablenesse of their hearts under all the
mercies By untractablenesse under mercies.
of God, and all the merciful dealings of God. Beloved, that man is certainly
under the dominion of hardness of heart, and without all softness and
tenderness, on whom no mercies of God will work; why, nothing will work, if
mercy will not work.

Now there are six choice merciful dealings of God, which yet work not to any
purpose on the hearts of many men; viz. 1. Gods merciful Providence. 2. Gods
merciful Treaties. 3. Gods merciful Strivings. 4. Gods merciful Waitings. 5.
Gods merciful Warnings. 6 Gods merciful Repentings.

First, Gods merciful Providence, in manifold, nay in daily fruits of
preservation, His merciful Providence.
and deliverance, of goodness and blessings; the Lord it is who gives us life,
and all things that pertain to life; he feeds our bellies, and clothes our
backs, and maintains our health, and multiplies our seed sown, and makes us to
prosper, and thrive, and with this hedge has our portion been secured. Yet
this Providential mercy and goodness of God does not work kindly and
effectually on the hearts of many men; no penitential plyableness and obedience
at all: Hos. 11. ^. I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love, and I
was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and laid meat unto
them. Ver. 5. But they refused to return. Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches
of the goodness, and forbearance, and longsuffering of God, not knowing that
the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? ver. 5. But after thy hardness
and impenitent heart, etc. Nay instead of yielding unto and complying with God
by reason of his good hand of blessing, many sinners do therefore grow more
disobedient and wicked: I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou saydst, I
wilt not hear, Jer. 22. 21. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. But Jesuron waxed fat, and kicked;
then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his
Salvation.

Secondly, Gods merciful Treaties. The Lord sends the Gospel unto a people, His
merciful Treaties.
and by that sets open his Mercy-seat, and sets up his Throne of Grace, and
proclaims himself to be the Lord, the Lord gracious and merciful in goodness
and truth, and by it reports unto sinners, that he has raised up an horn of
salvation for them, that he has (out of his infinite love) sent his own Son
Jesus Christ into the world to save sinners, and that whosoever believes on him
shall not perish, but have everlasting life. And he offers his Christ unto
sinners, invites them, commands them, earnestly urges them to come unto him,
to receive him, to believe on him, and assures them of the pardon of all their
sins, and of eternal life; nay, intimates clearly, that though they have no
worthiness, yet they may come and drink of the water of life freely. O what
merciful dealing is this, and yet after all this, the hearts of many sinners
are no more stirred or drawn than the stones or Rocks! Who has believed our
report! says the Prophet. Who has believed our report! said Christ. Matthew.
23. 37. Who has believed our report! said the Apostle; Sinners are not
gathered, and ye will not come unto me that ye might have life, Joh. 5. 40.

Thirdly, Gods merciful Strivings; what he offers by his Word, he presses the
His merciful Strivings.
same (ofttimes) by his Spirit, who follows our hearts with one work after
another; with Humiliation, and then with Conviction, and then with Pulsation,
and Excitation; the Spirit of God does (ofttimes) make sinners to see their
sins, and their need of Christ, and that their life, and health, and hope is
only in him, and in no other Name; and that they shall certainly perish and be
damned if they believe not; nay, he troubles their Consciences, and sets them a
work to regard Jesus Christ, and to comply with his excellent self and gracious
offers; and yet all this is lost; many sinners harden their hearts, and will
not put their necks into his yoke, they will not have him to reign over them.

Fourthly, Gods merciful waitings: The Lord does not presently take the denial
His merciful Waitings.
and forfeiture, but waits that he may be gracious; comes to the door again,
renews the offer, sends one servant, and a second, and a third; gives yet more
time, he waits thus on sinners; more than three years, sometimes more than
twenty years, sometimes more than forty years, sometimes more than sixty years
(for so long, and perhaps longer does he continue his Gospel to them) yet after
all his patient waiting, many sinners do continue as they were, ignorant,
proud, obstinate, impudent, and unbelieving, and are not drawn either by the
goodness, or by the patience of his grace.

Fithly, Gods merciful warnings; when all this works not on sinners, then the
His merciful Warnings.
Lord gives notice unto them, that if they will not hearken unto his voice of
mercy, he will forsake them, he will give them up unto their own hearts lust,
and they shall perish, and never enter into his rest: Joh. 8. 24. If ye believe
not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins. Hebr. 2. 2. If the word spoken by
Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward; ver. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect such great
salvation, which at the first began to be spoken of by the Lord! Heb. 12. 25.
See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him that speaks from heaven! And yet all the warnings of God that he will not
bear any longer, that he will close up the day of grace, that refusers of his
grace in Christ shall not escape, but shall receive a just recompense of reward
for their disobedience; I say, all these move not many sinners at all; but
though they must die in their sins, perish and be damned for their unbelief,
yet will they not yield to come to Christ.

Sixthly, Gods merciful recoilings or repentings, (i. e.) when the Lord (being
so His merciful Repentings.
contemned and provoked by proud and obstinate sinners) draws out his wrath,
and is now ready to execute vengeance on them that obey not his Gospel; his
hand is even stretched out to destroy, yet his bowels work within him, and his
mercy prevails with his justice for a little forbearance and trial: Luke 13. 7.
Behold these three years I come seeking fruit on this figtree, and find none?
cut it down. O Lord let it alone this year also, etc. Hose. 11. 8. How shall I
give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as
Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together? ver. 9. I will not execute the fierceness of
mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not man.
Nevertheless though God repents of his wrath, yet how few do repent of their
sins! they do not return to the Lord, nor seek him, for all this! by all which
it does evidently appear that many sinners are destitute of all spiritual
softness and tenderness of heart.

2ly. The convictions in a defective way, that many persons do deceive
Convictions that many deceive themselves in a false softness.
themselves with a false softness of heart.
There are six sorts of softness or tenderness of heart with which many do
deceive themselves, instead of this true spiritual softness of heart. v. g.

1. Exigential softness. 2. The Legal softness. 3. The Partial softness. 4. The
Temporary softness. 5. Worldly softness. 6. The Desperate softness and
tenderness.
First, The Exigential softness and tenderness; I mean that which arises only
from fear of punishment, as in Ahabs case, or from that present sense of
punishment, An exegential softness.
as in Pharaohs case: You would not imagine what tenderness may appear in men
while the rod is held over them, or whiles the rod lies heavy upon them; penal
evils have a mavelous contrariety unto our natures, and they have (many
times) a strong authority with us; the rod of God commands and obtains that
from us which the Word of God cannot, because our natures are servile, and are
more ready to act out of fear, than out of love. Hence is it that we read of
such a quick plyableness in distressed and punished sinners unto the will of
God. Psalm. 78, 34. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned
and enquired early after God. ver. 35. They remembered that God was their Rock,
and the high God their Redeemer. Nevertheless, ver. 36. they did flatter him
with the mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues. Hose. 5. 15. In
their affliction they will seek me early. Chap. 6. 1. Come and let us return
unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he
will bind us up. Judge. 10. 15. And the children of Israel said unto the Lord,
Do thou unto us whatsoever seems good unto thee. ver. 16. And they put away
the strange gods from among them, and served the Lord. How many persons in
times of common judgments, and in personal sicknesses, how mournful,
prayerful, dutiful! yet their hearts are not softened.

Secondly, The Legal softness, which is when Conscience is awakened with the
Legal softness.
sense of Gods wrath; O what a softness, what a tenderness, what a plyableness
does there appear in persons at such a time as this? they will weep most
bitterly; they will pray most earnestly; they will hear most diligently; they
will not come near to sin, or the occasions thereof, they set upon a
^eformation; what may not God have now from them? what resolution, Covenants?
yet all this is but iron in the fire; all this is but a Mariner in a storm, but
a Sea sickness; all this is but forced work; all this crouching is but to
compound the sooner; self-love, and self-ease, and self-fear, and self-deceit
are the Grounds and Reasons of this softness or tenderness: And when this
Conscience troubled sinner has got safe to land, and all grows quiet and calm,
then his tenderness and plyablness is gone; he lays aside his cares, and
fears, and tears, and reformations, and resolutions, and he returns to folly
again, and his heart grows more hard, and more unsensible, and unmournful, and
unflexible and disobedient than before.

Thirdly, The Partial softness, which is, when the heart of man is uneven in
Partial softness.
this work of tenderness; it appears in some things, but not in other things,
v. g. In trouble for sin, where the sin has been foul and notorious, now the
man is sensible and troubled, but not so for spiritual sins which are more
dishonouring of God, and more dangerous, though less infamous amongst men;
ignorance, guile of heart, unbelief, etc. In commission of sin, a tenderness is
like to be discovered when it is with them as with those, Job 24. 17. If one
know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death, but none, if it may
be carried with security; Jehu is against Ahabs idolatry, but not against
Jeroboams idolatry. Some have a tenderness not to swear, but no tenderness to
lie, and slander, and speak idly: In practice of obedience there may be a
tenderness, not wholly to neglect it, but no tenderness conscienciously to
perform it; a tenderness in duties to man, but no tenderness in duties to God.

Fourthly, The Temporary softness, which may be great, even to zeal, and yet
at length it wears away; what an earnestness have we seen in some against sin!
Temporal softness.
and what a forwardness in duties! nay they have seemed very much to bewail
their own sins, as well as to bewail the sins of others; and to put on
themselves as well as others to the practice of duties both public and
private; and yet after a while this tenderness is lost; their jealousy, and
watchfulness, and provocation of themselves and others, it is gone; they grow
very negligent, very careless, and may perhaps be found amongst the companions
of profaneness, and ungodliness: Again, some in the hearing of a Sermon, in
good company, etc. as Felix when he heard Paul, may express much tenderness.
This tenderness does nor arise from renewing grace, but from some secret lash
in conscience, or from some inconsiderateness of spirit, or from some carnal
design, or from vain glory, etc..

Fifthly, The Worldly softness: I have observed a kind of tenderness, and
plyableness, and softness in some persons.

First, When they would get some worldly things, as the Shechemites would be
Worldly softness.
circumcised upon this ground, Shall not their cattle and their substance be
ours! Genesis 34. 22, 23. O how many persons will come to the public Ordinances,
hear the best Ministers, be acquainted with them, order their conversations
demurely, and inoffensively, yea, and religiously; and all this is but to get
some good match, or some rich place.

Secondly, When they have lost some worldly things, a Husband, a Wife, a Child,
a Parent, a Friend, an Estate; now they melt into tears, mourn, and will not be
comforted! they accuse their sins, and send for a Minister, and what must they
do! But this softness is only worldly sorrow, and a^^seth from natural
affections; and is quickly alayed and cured by the access of some other
worldly comfort and blessing.

Sixthly, The Desperate softness, and tenderness of despair: And indeed when
Desperate softness.
any one does despair, there is in him an exceeding and surpassing
sensibleness; he is deeply semsible of his sins, and dejected, and overwhelmed
in the apprehension of them, and often cries out in an amazing manner
concerning them, and the wrath of God for them, and the expectation of
judgment and destruction. But this is also a false tenderness of heart, and it
comes not from faith, and is not raised by mercy, drives the soul from God,
keeps up impenitency, and hardens the heart against all help and hope.

3ly The demonstrations of the manifold miseries incumbent The misery of
^ersons desti^ute of softness of heart.
upon, and incident unto all persons destitute of softness and tenderness of
heart.
I will mention some of them unto you.

First, Certainly there is no work of grace in such persons; they are still in
their sins, under the power and dominion of them, in a dead and unconverted
condition, There is no work of grace in them.
without the Spirit and the life of Christ: For where renewing grace is wrought
in the heart, there is always an heart of flesh, a soft heart, a pliable
heart; the heart is brought in and made willing, and obedient, and ready, and
serviceable unto God: Now a graceless condition is a most miserable condition.

Secondly, Certainly these people are out of Covenant; God is not their God,
nor are they his people: For God does give unto all his people in Covenant an
heart They are out of Covenant.
of flesh (i. e.) a soft and tender heart: Now remember that as it is our only
happiness to have God to be our God (Blessed are the people whose God is the
Lord) so it is our greatest misery to be none of the people of God, not to have
the loving God to be our God, not to have the merciful God, the pardoning,
blessing, comforting, saving God to be our God.

Thirdly, It cannot but be a most dreadful and reproachful frame of heart, To
be at an utter incompliance with God, and contradiction unto his will; his will
They are at an u^^er incompliance with God.
being a Holy, Good, Righteous, Perfect, Sovereign will, unto which every
creature should yield.

What would you think of that Child, or of that Servant who casts off all
acknowledgement of a Father, or of a Master, and will not own their commands,
but will set up their own wills against their wills! Mal 1. 6. If I be a
Father, where is my honor? And if I be a Master, where is my fear? So what
should we think of those men, but as of a company of Atheists, who will not
acknowledge the Lord God, and will not obey his voice, but reject his Word, and
despise his Counsels!

Fouthly, It seems to be a very hopeless and desperate condition, and ripe for
destruction, when no word of God does a man any good, and no blessings do him
It is a hopeless condition.
any good, and no afflictions do him any good, but still he goes on in his
wickedness, still he refuses Christ, still he is unmoved and unperswaded; why!
what will the end of this man be at the last!

Fifthly, Although nothing does this sinner good, yet he must be accountable to
God He must be accountable to God for all means.
for all the means which have been used to do him good, and he shall be judged
of the Lord, because his hard heart has received no good by them: God will
call him to an account, for every disobedience to every command of God, and for
his slighting of every request and warning, and threatening of his Word, and for
neglecting and refusing every offer of Christ, etc.

Sixthly, A sinner that is destitute of all spiritual softness and tenderness,
he is He is in danger of every temptation.
in danger of the powerful efficacy of every great temptation, which may easily
prevail upon an heart void of Spiritual tenderness. For as a man is preserved
from lesser sins, when there is tenderness in his heart: so he is open and
obnoxious to great sins, where there is no tenderness of heart; And verily that
he does not upon every temptation and occasion fall into great sins, it is not
because the sins are great, and that God will be greatly dishonored by them,
but only because of shame and trouble which may befall him.

Seventhly, He can never be recovered out of his lost estate, by repentance and
faith, till his heart be softened.

4ly The Testimonies or Characters of a heart Spiritually Characters of a heart
spiritually soft and tender.
soft and tender.
Now I come to the discovering evidences by which we may know whether we have
indeed the hearts of flesh (i. e.) the soft and tender hearts which God has
promised to give unto his people in Covenant. If there be such a soft and
tender heart given unto us, it will appear

1. By our behavior toward sin. 2. By the special activities in Conscience. 3.
By the respectiveness of our hearts to the Word of God. 4. By the sense and
expressions of our souls, in the cases of Gods honor and dishonor. 5. By the
performance of our duties both for matter and manner. 6. By the temper of our
spirits in times of temptation.
First, If you have hearts Spiritually soft and tender* this will appear by the
disposition and behavior of your heart toward sin. v. g. The disposition of
our hearts toward sin. Shame for sin.


First, Shame for sin; one of a soft heart is ashamed of sin, and for sin, as
one who is ashamed of any deformity in his body, or of any thing that is a
reproach and dishonor unto his name: Ezra 9. 6. O my God, I am ashamed and
blush to lift up my face unto thee my God; for our iniquities are increased
over our heads, and our trespasses are grown up to the heavens. Here are two
expressions directly contrary to those in hardened sinners, mentioned Jer. 6.
15. Were they ashamed when they had committed abominations? Nay, they were not
at all ashamed, neither could they blush: But soft-hearted sinners are ashamed,
and they do blush for shame that they have offended their God. Jer. 31. 10.
Surely after I was turned I repented; and after I was instructed, I smote upon
my thigh; I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach
of my youth. In the former place there was shame and blushing; in this place
there is shame and confusion: Ephraim was ashamed and confounded for the
reproach of his youth: Confounded (i. e.) amazed, knew not what to say, or do,
could not open his mouth; O such a sinner has sinned against God! Job 7. 20. I
have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men! Luke 18. 13.
The Publican standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes to
heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful unto me a sinner! One
that is ashamed, keeps a loof off, looks with a dejected countenance, and is
angry and vexed with himself for doing what was unworthy, and reproachful, and
would fain have his offense and reproach wiped away: Thus was it with the
Publican (and thus is it with every soft-hearted person*) he does by reason of
his sinning judge himself unworthy unmeet to draw near to God, or to look up
unto him; he is ashamed of what he has done; dejected, vexed troubled at his
sins which are appearing with him before God, and earnestly begs the Lord to
remove them out of his sight by a merciful forgiveness, that his shame may
appear no more.

Secondly, Grief for sinning: A soft and tender heart is a mournful and
sorrowful Grief for sinning.
heart; no heart so stout against sin as a soft heart; and no heart so mournful
for sin as a soft heart, which is therefore called a broken heart, and a
grieved heart, and an affl^cted heart, and a weeping and lamenting heart. A
person of a soft heart mourns more for one sin, than a hardened person does for
all his sins; how bitterly did Peter weep for his one sin! yet Pharaoh never
mourned for his many sins; a person of a soft heart mourns more for one sin,
than for all the afflictions that ever have or shall befall him; dolor
appreciationis, and dolor voluntatis, and dolor perennitatis and durationis.
He that has a soft heart, mourns and grieves

1. For his own sins: Ezekiel. 7. 16. They that escape of them, shall escape,
and shall be on the mountains like Doves of the valleys, all of them mourning,
every one for his iniquity. David that man of a soft heart, how mourning and
lamenting for his sin! My sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51. 3. I water my couch
with my tears, Psalm 6. 6. Those in Zechary mourning as one mourns for his
only son; And in bitterness as one that is in bitterness for his first born,
Zech. 12. 10. Mary Magdalen weeping and washing the feet of Christ with her
tears, Luke 7. 38. Peter remembered the words of Jesus, who said unto him,
Before the cook crow twice thou shall deny me thrice; and he went out and wept
bitterly, Mat. 26. 75. The Penitent Corinthian, so mourning for his sin, that
Paul writes unto the Church, by all means to forgive and comfort him, least he
should be swallowed up with over much sorrow, 2 Cor. 2. 7. Now by the way
observe, that persons whose hearts have been really soft and tender, they have
mourned not only for their gross sins, but also for their lesser sins; not only
for corporal sins, but also for their spiritual sins; for pride, hypocrisy,
vainglory, unbelief; not only for outward sins, but also for inward sins; not
only for the sins in life, but also for their sins in heart; for the sin of
nature (original sin) and the secret motions thereof; not only for his sinful
doings, but also for his sins which do accompany his best doings; not only for
the sins which they have committed alone, but also for the sins which they have
caused others to commit, either by their persuasion, or by their evil example:
Not only for their sins of knowledge, but also for their sins of ignorance, as
he prayed, Lord forgive me my known sins, and Lord forgive me my unknown sins;
so, etc. not only for present sins, but for sins long since committed and
pardoned.

2. For the sins of others, as well as for his own sins: Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers
of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law. Ezekiel. 9. 4. Go
through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark
upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations
that be done in the midst thereof. Jer. 13. 17. If you will not hear it, my
soul shall weep in secret places for your pride. Exodus 32. 31. Oh this people
have sinned a great sin, and have made them Gods of gold! Luke 19. 41. When he
came near, he beheld the City, and wept over it. The sins of others do grieve
the Lord; (Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, Psalm. 95. 10.)
and dishonor him; and how can a tender heart endure to see his God and Father
grieved and dishonored, but his soul must grieve and mourn, be afflicted and
troubled! Paul reproves the Corinthians because they grieved not for the sin of
the incestuous Corinthian.

Thirdly, Fear to sin: True tenderness of heart always breeds the greatest
care to please God, and the greatest fear to displease God: where there is no
Fear to sin.
fear to sin, there is no tenderness of heart; and where there is true
tenderness of heart, there is an exceeding fear to sin against God: Prove. 23.
17 Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. Act. 9. 31. The Churches
walked in the fear of the Lord.

There is one who sets out seven degrees of fear, which are to be found in
every truly tenderhearted child of God. viz.

1. He is afraid to commit gross sins, though never so secretly, as you
find in Joseph when tempted by his Mistress; O says he, How can I do this
great wickedness and sin against God! Genesis 39. 9. And in David when he was
strongly tempted to take revenge of his mortal enemy, and had an opportunity
also put into his hands, yet he durst not do it, and why, because he durst not
sin against God! Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and
be guiltless! 1 Samuel 26. 9.

2. He is afraid to commit little sins: what a small matter had it been for
Daniel and the three children being brought into Babylon, to have eaten of the
meat, and to have drunk of the wine which Nebuchadnezzar appointed for them?
but Daniel saw it was such meat as was contrary to the Ceremonial Law then in
force, and therefore he would not defile himself with it, Dan. 1. 8.

3. He is afraid to omit the least duty: Moses was commanded to fetch the
people of Israel with their cattle and substance out of Egypt: Pharaoh consents
for the people and their little ones, but he would have the Flocks and Herds
stayed; by no means says Moses, Our Cattle also shall go with us; there shall
not an hoof be left behind, Exodus 10. 24, 26. So in the setting up of the
Tabernacle, and in all other Services commanded by God, he was faithful in all
things, he durst not leave out one knop, not one tach, not one pin which the
Lord prescribed about the Tabernacle, etc.

4. He is afraid to serve the Lord carelessly and negligently: Awake Psaltery
and Harp, I my self will awake early, Psalm. 108. 2. With my whole heart have I
sought thee, Psalm. 119. 10. Not slothful in business, fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11.

5. He is afraid to do any thing that is of evil report, which though in itself
it may be lawful, yet if advantage may thereby be taken to cause Religion or
the profession to be reproached and evil spoken of, he is afraid to do that
thing: 1 Cor. 6. 1. Dare any of you having a matter against another, go to Law
before the unjust, and not before the Saints? And why might they not do so,
what unlawfulness was there in that? Is not civil Magistracy ordained of God?
it is true; but though all things are lawful, all things are not expedient, 1
Cor. 6. 12. At that time such applications would have exposed the Christian
Religion and Profession unto scorn and contempt amongst unbelievers, etc. Give
none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of
God; he speaks it concerning things indifferent, 1 Cor. 10. 32.

6. He is afraid not only of apparent evils, but also of the appearance of
evil. 1 These. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil; if it has the look
or show of evil, it is enough to a tender heart to avoid it, and abstain from
it. If it looks like pride, if it looks like unchastity, if it looks like
unbefitting service of God, if it looks like persecuting of the Gospel, etc.
like error, idolatry, etc.

7. He is afraid not only to do any thing that is evil (Let not any iniquity
have dominion over me, Psalm. 119. 133.) nor only to speak any evil (Set a watch
O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 141. 3.) but also to
think any thing that is evil: Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of
my heart be acceptable in thy sight, Psalm. 19. 14. So Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Beware that
there be not a thought in thy wicked heart; the seventh year, the year of
release is at hand; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, etc. So
Ezekiel. 7. 10. Let none of you imagine evil against his brother in his heart. So
Job 31. 26. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in
brightness. ver, 27. and my heart has been secretly entised, or my mouth has
kissed my hand, etc. You see by all this, that where there is true softness or
tenderness of heart, there is a singular fear to sin against God, or to offend
him.

Fourthly, Zeal against sin: A soft and tender heart is a zealous heart; a
heart Zeal against sin.
earnestly and inflamedly set against sin; not coldly and faintly, but stoutly
and courageously; And that

First, Against our own sins: a person of a tender heart is zealously carried
against his own sins; which appears thus.

1. By the impartial opposition of them; he will not hide and spare any one sin
in himself, neither pleasant nor profitable, nether great nor small, neither
open nor secret, but he hates every false way, Psalm. 119. yea he hates all vain
thoughts, and cleanses himself from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2
Cor. 7. 1.

2. By the deep and deadly persecution of them: It does not suffice that he
disallows and condemns sin in respect of his judgment, not that he abstains
from sin in respect of his practice, but he strives after the utter extirpation
of sin; He lays the Ax to the root of the tree, Matthew. 3. 10. Crucifies the
flesh in the affections thereof, Gal. 5. 24. And mortifies the members of sin,
Col. 3. 5.

3. By the Irreconcilable resolution against them; He will never admit of
league, or friendship, or have any peace with them, but loathes and hates, and
resists, and conflicts, and fights with them all his days; and if at any time
he be surprised and foiled, he rises again and renews the war more firmly
against them, by calling in all the helps and powers that make against his
sins; the power of Christ, and the power of the Spirit, and the power of the
promises, and the power of grace.

4. By cutting off all the Succors of sin, in occasions and temptations, yea
many times denying himself the use of lawful things, lest by them he should be
accidentally overcome by sin.

5. By watching his deceitful heart, and binding it with special vows and
Covenants from starting aside, and harkening unto sin in the motions of it any
more.

Secondly, Against the sins of others. A soft and tender heart would not sin
itself, nor would that any other should sin against God, and offend him, and
therefore (in a proportion to its sphere) it will act against sin wheresoever
it finds sin: Sometimes by entreating, as Lot unto the men of Sodom, I pray you
brethren do not so wickedly, Genesis 19. 7. Sometime by directing: Judah says
unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his
blood? Genesis 37. 26. Come and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not
our hand be upon him, for he is our brother and our flesh; and his brethren
were content, ver. 27. Sometimes by reproving, as Elijah to Ahad; I have found
thee, because thou have sold thy self to work evil in the sight of the Lord, 1
King 2. 4. And Nathan to David, thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12. 7. and Job to his
wife; thou speak as one of the folish women speaks, shall we receive good
at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? Job 2. 10. Sometimes by
vuthoritative opposing and punishing, domestically in the family, as David:
Psa. 101. 7. He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house; he that
tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. Public in the state, and for this
remember three admirable instances of zeal against sin by godly persons of
public place and authority.

The first in Asa, who removed Maacha his Mother from being queen, because she
had made an idol in a grove, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16.

The second in Josiah, who burnt all the vessels made for Baal, and put down
the idolatrous Priests, and Groves, and brake down the houses of the Sodomites,
defiled Topheth, beat down all their Altars, and high places, and images, and
all old relics of I dolatry. The third in Nehemiah: See the history of his
zeal, Nehem. 13. 15. In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine-presses
on the Sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading Asses, as also Wine,
Grapes, and figs, etc. and I testified against them in the day wherein they
sold victuals etc. ver. 17. Then I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said
unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day?
ver. 21. I testified against the Merchants and sellers, Why do ye lodge about
the wall? if you do so again I will lay hands on you. From that time forth came
they no more on the Sabbath. ver. 23. In those days also saw I Jews that had
married wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab. ver. 24. And their children
spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, etc. ver. 25. And I contended with them,
and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made
them swear by God, ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take
their daughters to your sons, or for your selves, etc.

Fifthly, Special cares, and requests to be kept, and blessings when kept from
sin: Psalm. 18. 23. I kept my self from mine iniquity. Job 31. 1. I made a
covenant with mine eyes, why then should I look upon a maid? Psalm. 39. 1. I
said I will take Special requests to be kept from sin.
heed unto my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth with a
bridle while the wicked is before me. Psalm. 119. 11. Thy Word have I hid in my
heart that I might not sin against thee. Psalm. 119. 133. Order my step; in thy
Word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me; and so for blessing when
kept from sin. 1 Samuel 25. 32. David said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me. ver. 32. And blessed be thy advice,
blessed be thou which have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from
avenging my self with mine own hand: So when the ten Tribes and an half
returned, the rest blessed God that they were kept from sinning, Josh. 22. 33.

Sixthly, Restlesnesse under the commission of sin, and importunity for the
pardon Restlestnesse under the commission of sin.
of it, and the testimonies of Gods reconciled favor. O how does the tender
heart take on, and judge, and condemn it self, if at any time it fall into sin!
O what a fool! what a beast! and why have I dealt thus with my God! why did I
deal so unkindly with my kind God? is this my love unto him? is this my fear of
him? is this my tenderness of his glory? O my soul! what have thou done! why
have thou broken the bonds of friendship! what has the Lord been to thee, that
thou have thus sinned against him! And now the man falls a weeping, and
lamenting, as if his heart would break; and after some respite he thinks of his
father again; but he is ashamed to come to him, and yet he will go to him and
return with weeping and supplications: O I cannot live thus, I will home again
to my fathers house, and say, I have sinned, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son, Luke 15. Though shame and confusions belong to me, yet mercies and
forgiveness to him; Dan. 9. O Lord, heal my backslidings, and forgive my
backsldings, and reoeive me graciously, Hose 14. 2. And return again in mercy,
and make thy face to shine upon thy servant for the Lords sake!

Thus have I opened unto you the first Character or evidence of a heart
spiritually soft and tender; it is a heart filled with shame for sin, and with
grief for sin, and with fear to sin, and with zeal against sin, and with care
to be kept from sin, and with restlestness till it can find God mercifully
pardoning sin! O that such tenderness, and that such fruits of tenderness might
be found in all our hearts!

Secondly, A second Character by which we may know that we have the true The
activity, and life, and power in conscience.
spiritual softness and tenderness of heart, is the activity, and life, and
power in conscience; when God gives any one a soft and tender heart, he gives
him a conscience arrayed and enabled with other qualities and powers than in
times past. The Conscience heretofore was asleep, but now it is awakned;
heretofore it was blind, but now it sees; heretofore it was silent, but now it
speaks; heretofore it was loose and large, but now it is strict and narrow;
heretofore it was dull and weak, but now it is quick and powerful; heretofore
it was stupid and senceless, but now it is apprehensive and active: But I must
not speak of all things about this; that which I will pitch on, is this, the
special Activities of Conscience (where the heart is indeed tender)

1. Concerning the good estate and welbeing of our souls. 2. Concerning
particular facts, as to our doing or walking.
First, Where the heart is tender, there Conscience becomes active to clear out
The conscience is active to clear our state.
the good and safe estate, and well-being of our souls; It will not suffer the
poor soul to delude and deceive itself in matters of life and death; to lay no
grounds, nor to venture all upon false bottoms and grounds of salvation and
damnation, of favor and wrath. O, says Conscience, thy soul is immortal and
is for eternity, and there are ways to that eternity of Gods making, and of
men's making; there is a real relation to Christ, and there is a seeming
relation to Christ; there is the power of godliness, and there is the form of
godliness; there were virgins with oil, and there were virgins with lamps
only; there are some which believe and are saved, and there are some that
believe but for a time, and perish: If a man mistake himself, he is undone for
ever; hereupon it is, that Conscience in tender hearts dares not take up the
estate of the soul upon trust, and proud confidence, and vain pretenses, or
common grounds, or every appearance, but puts them on, and makes them to study
the Word of God, and to prove what is the good and acceptable will of God, and
what indeed are the marks which do accompany salvation; what are the infallible
tokens of life, of union with Christ, of the new creature, of a child of God
born of the Spirit; it causes us to search our hearts, and try our ways, to
prove and examine our selves whether Christ be in us of a truth, to give all
diligence to make our calling and election sure, and to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling; it will not suffer us to be careless, sluggish,
dallying, delaying, etc. Conscience takes those saving promises of the lord as
unquestionable, that a man must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ that will be
saved, and that he must repent that will have his sins pardoned, and that he
must be regenerated and born again who will enter into the kingdom of heaven:
And hereupon Conscience puts us on (if our hearts be tender) exceedingly to
make clear and evident the assumption: I do truly believe, I do truly repent,
I am born again, and my sins are pardoned, and my soul shall be saved. A tender
heart would be sure that it is in a state of life and favor.

Secondly, Where the heart is tender, there conscience is alive, in respect of
the particular facts of our lives whether good or evil.

For good actions which concern us in our places and callings, Conscience puts
us upon the careful and sincere practice of them, will not suffer us to omit
and neglect them, but enclines and hearkens unto them, although danger and
trouble be incident unto us for the performance of them: Act. 4. 19. But Peter
and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God
to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. ver. 20. For we cannot but
speak the things which we have seen and heard. Act. 21. 13. Then Paul answered,
What mean you to weep and break mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound
only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. Josh. 24.
25. If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you
will serve, whether the gods which your fathers served, that were on the other
side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land ye dwell; but as
for me and my house we will serve the Lord.

For evil actions, Conscience puts forth itself against them, partly by
warning, It is evil if thou do it not; partly by threatening, It will be bitter
unto thee, it wlll deceive thee, and break thy peace and confidences; partly in
striving with us, and presenting argument upon argument, consideration upon
consideration; Gods favor on the one hand, and Gods displeasure on the other
hand: the happiness of walking uprightly, the shortness of sins deceitful
pleasures, etc. and all to keep us from sinning; which if they prevail not,
then Conscience begins to be unquiet, and it smites for sinning, and accuses,
and condems, and The respectiveness of our hearts to the Word of God.
troubles, and vexes, and will never be quiet until repentance be renewed, and
God appears to be pacified.

Thirdly, If we have hearts spiritually soft and tender, this will appear by
the respectiveness of our hearts to the word of God.

And there are ten Properties of a tender heart in relation to the Word of God.

1. It sets up the Word as a Light and Rule: So Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is a
lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. ver. 133. Order my steps in thy
Word.

2. It studies the Word, and meditates therein, to understand the mind of God
concerning it: Psalm. 119. 15. I meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto
thy ways. ver. 148. Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate
in thy Word.

3. It lays up and gives special heed unto what God says in his Word: 2 Pet.
1. 19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed. Psalm. 119. 11. Thy Word have I hid within my heart, that I might not
sin against thee. Prove. 7. 1. My son, keep my words, and lay up my commands
with thee. ver. 3. Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of
thine heart.

4. It stands in awe of the Word: Psalm. 119. 161. My heart stands in awe of thy
Word.

5. It is led and guided by the Word: Thou shall guide me with thy counsel,
Psalm. 73. 24. Thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors, Psalm. 119. 24.
My sheep hear my voice, and follow me, Joh. 10. 17.

6. It keeps close to the Word in all matters of faith and practice; receives
all, and admits no more; will not go without it, and dares not strive against
it.

7. It conformes itself unto the Word: Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes,
and I shall keep it even to the end, Psalm. 119. 33. All that the Lord has
said, will we do and be obedient, Exodus 24 7. O that my ways were directed to
keep thy statutes! Psalm. 119. 5. He will teach us his ways, and we will walk
in his paths, Isa. 2. 3. Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine
whereto ye were delivered, Romans 6. 17. Molded, cast.

8. It is quickly reduced, wrought upon, and recovered by the Word: As in
David's case, when Nathan said, Thou art the man: 2 Samuel 12. 7. David said unto
Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord, ver. 13. So Judges 2. 2. Ye have not
obeyed my voice; why have you done this? ver. 4. And it came to pass when the
Angel of the Lord spoke these words unto all the children of Israel, that the
people lift up their voice and wept. ver. 5. And they called the name of that
place weepers Bochim, and they sacrificed there unto the Lord.

9. It will often review and try itself by the Word, lest it has sinned, or
lest it should sin against God: Psalm. 77. 6. I communed with my own heart, and
my spirit made diligent search. Psalm. 119 59. I considered my ways, and turned
my feet unto thy testimonies.

10. It desires and endeavors to comply with all the Word of God, and to
fulfill all the will of God, and to walk according to it in all things: I have
lived in all good Conscience unto this day, Act. 23. 1. We trust we have a good
conscience, Heb. 13. 18. I have respect unto all thy commandments, Psalm. 119.
6. Zachary and Elizabeth walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances before
the Lord blameless, Luke 1. 6.

Fourthly, If we have hearts Spiritually soft and tender, this will appear by
By our sensibleness in cases of Gods honor or dishonor.
our sensibleness and choice behavior in the cases of Gods honor and
dishonor: This I think is one of the fullest discoveries of a soft and tender
heart, and therefore I will insist the more upon it by showing unto you,

1. The several ways how God is honored. 2. The several expressions of a
tender heart in relation unto Gods honor. 3. The several ways of Gods
dishonor. 4. The several affections and workings of a tender heart in the case
of Gods dishonor.
First, The several ways of Gods being honored; God may be and is honored,
How God is honored: As ^^ his Name and Attribu^es.


1. As to his glorious Name and Attributes; (Deuteronomy. 28. 58. That thou may
fear this glorious and fearful Name, the Lord thy God.) When we do acknowledge,
and admire, and exalt God in his holiness and goodness, and mercifulness, and
Omnipo^ency, and wisdom, and greatness, and authority and justice, and
faithfulness, etc. Exodus 15. 11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the
Gods! who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders! Job 9. 4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength. Exodus 34. 6.
The Lord, the Lord God merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, abundant in
goodness and truth. Ver. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniqui^y,
transgressions and sins, and that will by no means clear the guilty. Deuter. 7.
9. Know that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God which keeps
Covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments to a
thousand generations.

2. As to his worship and service: Psalm. 29. 2. Give unto the Lord the glory
due unto his Name; or as it is in the Hebrew, the honor of his Name; worship
the As to his Worship.
Lord in the beauty of holiness. When we set up the true worship of God, and
serve him only, and worship him only in Spirit and in truth, and keep faithful
unto it, now we do honor and glorify our God: Thou have not honored me with
thy sacrifices, Isa. 43. 23. The place where God is worshipped, is called the
place where his honor dwells.

3. As to his Word and truths, when they are magnified, believed, and embraced,
At his Word.
and upheld, and obeyed; when they have liberty, and prosperity, and success of
efficacy,

4. As to his works of Providence, whether merciful, respecting the good As to
his Works.
of his people; or judicial, respecting the punishment of his adversaries, in
both which very much of God is to be seen, and admired and blessed.

Secondly, Now a soft and tender heart is exceedingly affected with Gods honor
How the tender heart is affected in case of Gods honor
and glory; and with all the ways (public and private) for the honoring of
God: Such a person will take much pains to recover and restore the honor of
God, as you may see in Jehoshaphat and Hezekiah, and Josiah, to restore the
true worship of God; such a person will be at much cost to promote the honor
of God: 1 Chronicles. 29. 3. Because I have set my affection to the house of my God,
I have of mine one proper goods, of gold and silver, which I have given to the
house of my God (over and above all that I have prepared for thy holy house)
even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand
talents of refined silver to overlay the house withal: such a person will
exceedingly rejoice in any way by which God is honored: 2 John ver. 4. I
rejoiced that I found of thy children walking in truth. 3. Joh. ver. 3, 4. So
Paul in Phil. 1. 18. That Christ is preached I do rejoice, yea and I will
rejoice: So David, Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go
into the house of the Lord: Such a person will be content to lose his own
honor, so that God may have honor: David will be yet more vile, and counted
so, that he may the more promote Gods honor; 2 Samuel 6. 20, 21, 22. John must
decrease, that Christ may increase, and this was the fulfilling of his joy:
Joh. 3. 29, 30. Such a person will make all his parts, his gifts, his graces,
his power and authority, yea his very life serviceable to the honor and glory
of God, yea his very eating and drinking; Whether ye eat or drink, er
whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God, etc. 2 Cor. 10. 31.

Thirdly, Now on the contrary, there are several ways of dishonouring of God,
The ways of dishonouring God.
both public and private, as swearing, blaspheming, looseness of walking,
pulling down his true worship, setting up a false worship; forsaking the truth,
and holding error; reproaching the true God, the Persons of the Trinity, the
Gospel, the whole Scripture, the Ordinances of Christ, and the practical ways
of Christ in holiness and godliness, etc.

Well, A soft and tender heart is passionately sensible and working in the
apprehension The workings of a tender heart in case of Gods dission^r
of any dishonor cast on God; a person of such a heart will be troubled and
mourn in this case: When Hezekiah heard the blasphemies vomited out by
Rabshakeh against the Lord, he rent his clothes, and covered himself with
sackcloth, and went into the house of the Lord; this day is a day of trouble,
and of rebuke, and of blasphemy, Isa. 63. 1, 2, 3.

Will be stirred in his spirit; as Paul when he saw the people of Athens given
to idolatry, his spirit was stirred in him, Act. 17. 16. he could not bear it,
he could not hold, he must testify against it.

He will put himself to the utmost of his place and power, as Phineas did
against Zimri and Cosby; and as Josiah did against all the idolatry and
wickedness in his days.

Will hazard and expose all his honor, and estate, and his very life, as
Elijah did, and Daniel did, and the three children, and those in Rev. 12. who
loved not their lives to the death.

Will bear any reproach and injury done unto themselves, more patiently and
quietly, than those done to God; he can sit down under them, and weep, and
makes his moan to God, when they tear his own name; but when comes to Gods
Name, now his zeal is kindled, etc.

Fifthly, If we have hearts spiritually soft and tender, this will appear by By
the acquitting of our selves in duties, both for matter. He makes conscience of
duties to God and men.
the acquitement of our selves in duties both for matter and manner.

1. For the matter; concerning which, observe these conclusions.

1. A person of a tender heart makes conscience of duties both to God and to
men, not only of duties unto God, nor only of duties unto men, but of the
duties which he does repectively owe unto them both: Acts 24. 16. Herein do I
exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and
toward men. Mat. 22. 21. Render therefore to Caesar the things which are Cesars,
and unto God the things which are Gods. Tit. 2. 11, 12. The grace of God
teaches us to live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world.
Mar. 12. 29, 30. The first of all the Commandments is, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind and
with all thy strength. verse 31. And the second is like, namely this, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Many plead a conscienciousness of duty
unto men, they dare not but deal justly, and squarely, and honestly; and yet
they make no conscience of duties unto God; no conscience of praying, of
keeping the Sabbath, of fearing an oath, of walking holily; and many pretend a
conscienciousness of duty unto God, but yet they make no conscience of duty
unto men; they dare to revile, and to control, and to oppress, and rob a man
of his right, and to slander and reproach: Neither of these are persons of soft
and tender hearts, but of deceitful and hypocritical hearts, who fear not God,
and follow not him, but their own lusts; A person of a tender heart indeed,
dares not withold from God what is due to God, nor from man what God requires
to be done in way of duty unto man: but as the Apostle speaks of subjection
unto powers ordained of God, That it must be for conscience sake, Romans 15. 5.
so say I of a tender heart, it performs duties to God, and duties to man, even
for conscience sake; it dares not defraud the one or the other.

Object. But will some say, What if God and man be contrary in their commands,
how can I obey and perform duty to them both?

Sol. I answer.

1. There is no duty which God commands to himself, and unto men, which admits
of contrariety, but of subordination. 2. If man commands any thing of us
contrary to Gods command, we must do (as the Apostle did) obey God rather than
man.
Secondly, A person of a tender heart, makes conscience of all duties to God,
and of all duties unto all sorts of men unto whom he ows duty. Of all duties
unto God; He makes conscience of all duties to God and man.
of fearing of him, as of praying, and of praises, as well as of rejoicing in
him; of repenting of sins, as well as of believing the pardon of sins; of
walking uprightly, as well as of trusting in the promises; of keeping the
Sabbath, etc.

Of all duties unto all sorts of men: If they be his Superiors, to honor and
yield obedience to them; if they be his Inferiors, to regard and condeseend
unto them; if they be his enemies, to love them, and to pray for them; if they
be poor, to pity and help them; on whatsoever, and to whatsoever God is pleased
to lay a command, there the person of a tender heart, has a readiness and
willingness to obey.

Thirdly, The person of a tender heart makes conscience of relative duties:
There is a Relation twixt He makes conscience of relative duties.


1. The Magistrate and the people. 2. 'Twixt the Minister and his flock. 3.
'Twixt the husband and his wife. 4. 'Twixt the Parent and the child. 5. 'Twixt
the Master and the Servant.
And many are the duties which reciprocally do concern all these persons in all
their several relations; and any one who is of a soft and tender heart, makes
conscience of them all.

The tender Magistrate makes conscience of governing and ruling, and believing,
and protecting, and reclaiming, and punishing, and rewarding; and dare not be
unjust, neglect, or unfaithful, or oppressing, or out-facing, or over-bearing;
and so people of tender hearts dare not to be disobedient, unruly, reviling,
despising, etc.

The tender Minister makes conscience of feeding his flock with wholesome food,
and not to keep back any of the counsel of God concerning them; he is instant
and diligent in his work, he instructs and exhorts, and warns, and reproves,
and comforts according to the several conditions of his people; and the people
will pray, will love, will honor, will encourage, will obey them that have the
rule over them in the Lord.

The tender husband will love and cherish his wife; and the tender wife will
love and please, and reverence her husband.

The tender Parent will pray for, will instruct, will teach his children, and
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and the tender child
will hearken, etc.

Fourthly, A person of a tender heart and soft heart, makes conscience of all
He makes co^sc^ence of all duties (...) the ^im^s.
the duties respecting the times and changes that do befall him. He meets with
times of adversity, and with times of prosperity; with times of love, and with
times of hatred; with times of peace, and with times of trouble; with times of
light, and with times of darkness; with times of Gods clear presence, and with
times of Gods desertions. And there are several and distinct duties proper unto
these variations, the which he strives to draw out, and act in their time.

If his time be the time of prosperity, he is doing whilst he has that time,
and to honor God with his increase, and to bless him, and to do for him; and
if his be the time of adversity, he desires patient submission unto the hand of
God, and special instruction, and improvement, and refining, etc.

In an high estate he will love his God, and in a low estate he will by faith
live still upon his God.

Fifthly, A person of a tender heart, will make conscience of duties.

1. Though never so small and little; thou shall not lay a stumbling block
before the blind, nor cause the deaf, etc. thou shall fear the Lord thy God.
The smallest.
2. Though never so great and difficult, and strict; to deny himself, to enter
in at the strait gate, to render good for evil, blessing for The greatest.
cursing. 3. Though contemned and reproached by profane men, and erroneous Most
contemned.
men, or disaccepted by those unto whom it is performed. 4. Though dangerous
and exposing, etc. as Daniel of praying, the three children Most dangerous.
of worshipping God only, the Apostles of preaching Christ.
2ly For the manner of performing these duties; The manner of performance of
duties.


A tender heart has a special regard unto that; he will serve God acceptably
with reverence and godly fear, Heb, 12. 28. And as David, after the due order,
1 Chro. 15. 13.

The duties which he performs they are by him done

1. Willingly: Psalm. 110 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power. Romans 7. Willingly.
19. The good that I would do. And Isa. 26. 8. The desire of our soul is to thy
Name: freewill-offerings.

2. Delightfully: 1 John 5. 3. His Commandments are not grievous; Nay,
Delightfully.
Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do thy will. It was Christ's meat and drink to do the
will of his Father that sent him, Joh. 4. 34.

3. Humbly, as Paul; Act. 20. 19. Serving the Lord with all humility of Humbly.
mind, and with many tears.

4. Believingly; resting on the strength of Christ for their performance: Phil.
4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. And he
acknowledges Believingly.
all that is done, to be done in his strength: 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more
abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me:
and expecting all the acceptance of duties for Christ's sake: Rev. 8. 3. The
prayers of the Saints were offered up with incense upon the golden Altar.

5. Sincerely; with a plain, honest, obediential heart, with all his heart*
Sincerely.
with his very soul and spirit; in truth without guile; and with a direct,
pure, and single respect unto Gods glory.

These are the desires, and these are the endeavors thus to serve and obey the
Lord, by every truly soft and tender heart; and if he misseth, or is
interrupted in any of these, his heart is troubled and grieved, and he strives
and wrestles with God to cloth him with the strength of his Spirit, that he may
thus serve his God according to his will.

Sixthly, If our hearts be soft and tender hearts, this will appear by the
temper of our spirits in the occurrences of temptations.

There are temptations and suggestions By the temper of our spirits in
temptations. From Satan.


1. From Satan; he many times presents unto the minds (even of the people of
God) thoughts of Atheism, and blasphemy, and other vile and inglorious
thoughts. O what an affrightment, amazement, and grievous burden are these unto
a person of a soft and tender heart! they do even crack and crush his spirits,
and take away all rest from him, and fill his heart with tears, and complaints,
and prayers.

2. From the World, to withdraw from God and Christ, and the truth and From the
World.
holy walking, partly by reproaches, scoffs, threatenings, restraints, and
punishments; these a tender heart will bear, and suffer, and rejoice in; and by
them grows more resolute for Christ, and to hold fast his truth, and to walk
with him: And partly by profits, pleasure, friendship, fears, and honors:
these a tender heart will trample under foot, rather than sin against Christ;
Like Moses, who refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter, Hebr. 11.
24. Ch^sing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season. ver. 25. Esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches than the creasures of Egypt, ver. 26.

3. From our own hearts, in several wicked motions, to several vile affections:
From our own hearts.
And if your heart be tender, it will not dally with them in contemplation, nor
yield unto them in prosecution, but will resist them, and pray against them,
and strive to have them mortified and subdued, and instead of them, would have
a daily frame of holy and heavenly thoughts reigning in the mind.

SECT. IV.
Use 2. Does the Lord promise to give unto all his people a soft and tender Get
such a heart.
heart, an heart of flesh? Then by all means let every one of u^ strive to get
this heart which God promises to give.

Now for this I will propound, 1. Some Motives to persuade you to get a soft
and tender heart. 2ly. I will show you the way and means to compass and enjoy
it.

1. The Motives to get a soft and tender heart.

First, The possibility of getting this heart; God can give it, therefore it is
Motives. The possibility of it.
possible to get it; God can take away the heart of stone, and he can give the
heart of flesh. Again, God has promised to give it, therefore it is possible;
why should any one think it more impossible for God to give any spiritual good
which he has promised, then to give any outward good which he has promised?
he having as much power, and willingness, and faithfulness to perform spiritual
promises, as he has to perform temporal promises. Nay once more, he has given
this soft and tender heart; do you not read in Scripture, and do you not find
in your own experiences many persons of soft and tender hearts? and who but God
has made their hearts soft? it was God who subdued the pride, and stoutness,
and hardness, and rebellion of their hearts; and it was God who made their
hearts humble, and sensible, and mournful, and teachable, and pliable; is not
God as able, as willing, as powerful now, as ever he was?

Secondly, The necessity of having this heart; can you be saved without it?
what will become of an hardened sinner? of the disobedient sinner, of the
sinner The necessity of it.
that does and will walk contrary unto God, that will not hearken unto him;
shall heaven open to to let him into glory, who will not open his heart to let
in grace? can you be brought into this without it! if your hearts continue
hardened, will they not continue unbelieving! and if they continue unbelieving,
will they not continue Christless! and if they continue Christless, will they
not continue hopeless! Ephesians. 2. 12. Without Christ, having no hope: For
Collos. 1. 27. It is Christ in you the hope of glory: can you find pardon of
your sins without it? Do you find in all the Bible pardon of sins either
conferred, or promised unto the hardened sinner! wrath and destruction are
threatened unto unto that sinner; but mercy and forgiveness are promised only to
the soft, and mourning, and tenderhearted penitent. Thus you see that there is
a necessity to get this soft and tender heart, if you will be saved, if you
will have Christ, or be Christ's, and if you will be pardoned. Ergo.

Thirdly, The excellency of this heart; As an hard heart is a base heart, so
The excellency of it.
the soft and tender heart is an excellent heart; Pharach stands upon Record
for a hard heart, and it is his infamy as long as the world lasts. And Josiah
stands upon Record for a person of a tender heart, and it will remain for his
glory as long as the world continues.

There are five things which are a man's glory and excellency.

1. One that he belongs to God in a special relation, that God is his Father,
and that he is one of the children of God; why! the person of a soft and tender
heart is indeed in this relation; he is in Covenant with God, God is his God
and Father, and he is a child of God.

2. A second, that he is a new creature; that new creature is an excellent
creature, he is a glorious creature, he is changed into the glorious image of
Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And made partaker of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Now
every person whose heart God has made soft and tender, he is a new creature;
God has changed his heart, which was a heart of stone, but now is made an
heart of flesh.

3. A third, that he is an humble person: Humility is an ornament, and God much
esteems of the humble, and puts honor upon them, and will give grace to them;
but he abhors and resists the proud: Now every tenderhearted person is an
humble person; and the more softness of heart there is, the more humbleness of
heart there is; they always go together, as hardness of heart and pride do;
David, Hezekiah, Josiah, Job, Paul, the Publican, the Prodigal, were persons of
soft hearts, and of humble hearts.

4. A fourth, that he is one who loves the Lord exceedingly: Is not this a man's
honor and excellency to love his God! O love the Lord all ye Saints, Psalm. 31.
Saw ye him whom my soul loves! Cant. 3. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy soul, etc.

5. A fifth, that he is obedient to the voice and will of God; ready to
hearken, ready to follow, willing to obey, careful to come up fully to the mind
and command of God: Is not this our honor and our excellency? Speak Lord, for
thy servant hears; And O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!
Surely it is a shame and reproach to be disobedient to God; For 1. Sam. 15. 22.
To obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Lambs. Ver.
23. But rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity
and idolatry: And certainly the tender heart is an obedient heart, very ready
to receive the Law from the mouth of God.

Fourthly, The Benefits and helpfulness of this heart: It would be of wonderful
use and advantage unto you sundry ways. The benefits of a tender heart. A help
to repentance.


1. It would be an help to repentance, both initial and renewed: It would help
you to repent of your old sinful course of life, to bring you off from it with
shame and grief, it would not suffer you to continue in such ways of
dishonouring God any longer; but would hasten and compel you out of it, with
grief and detestation; you would quickly cast away your sins as a menstruous
cloth, saying, Get ye hence; if the heart were once made soft and tender, it
would recover you out of particular falls, you would quickly see and
acknowledge them, and bewail them, and return to your first husband, and do
your first works, if you had but soft and tender hearts; as David, Hezekiah,
Peter; and the Church of Ephesus, etc.

2. It would be a daily preservative against sin, and temptations unto sin: A
preservative against sin.
tenderness is the foundation of fear, and fear is the Guardian of the soul
against sin. No man is more secured against sin, than the man of tenderness,
and of faith, and of fear; as the hardened sinner is presumptuous, and will
venture on any sin, and on the occasions thereof; so a tender heart is fearful
of the least sin, and keeps off from all the occasions thereof: And from these
two Consectaries do flow: viz.

Great peace in conscience; For it is sin committed which disturbes and
disquiets the Conscience, and breaks up the peace of it; but the more that any
person is kept from sin, the better does he walk with peace and joy of Spirit:
Great peace have they that keep thy Law, Psalm. 119. 165.

Great confidence in access to God: 1 John 3. 21. If our heart condemn us not,
then have we confidence toward God. And (ver. 22.) Whatsoever we ask, we
receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things which
are pleasing in his sight. Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me. ver. 19. But verily God has heard me, be has attended
to the voice of my Prayer. Job 11. 13. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch
out thine hand toward him. ver. 14. If iniquity be in thine heart, put it far
away. ver. 15. then shall thou lift up thy face without spot: So Zophar.

3. It would be a Table Book for God to write his will upon: what the Apostle
It would be a Table Book for God to write his will upon.
spoke of the Corinthians, that would be affirmed of us: 2 Cor. 3. 3. Ye are
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not
with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in Tables of stone, but in
fleshly tables of the heart: The heart of flesh is the Table on which the
Spirit of God writes the will of God; his will is there engraven, it makes
impression, it admits and receives the will of God, there it is to be seen and
read: Thy Law is within my heart, said David, Psalm. 40. 8. How kindly would the
Word of God take with us! how powerfully and effectually would it work upon us!
how easily would it prevail, and rule, and order us, how wonderfully would it
prosper amongst us, run and be glorified! why, all our souls would be
convinced, and converted, and allured, and brought into Christ, and walk in
Christ, and be obedient to the faith, and become the servants of righteousness;
if we had soft and tender hearts, we would no longer walk contrary to God, or
to his Word, we would no longer hate instruction and despise counsel, and
resist the Spirit, but would presently fall down at the feet of God, and desire
to be taught the ways of God, and be willing, and ready, and glad to walk in
his paths.

4. It would be a means of upright walking: There are three sorts of people in
the world; It would be a means of upright walking.


Some that walk not at all with God; as all profane Atheists, who walk without
God, and contrary unto God, by reason of the blindness and hardness of their
hearts.

Some that walk unevenly with God, only in some things, and in some places, and
at some times; as hypocritical and temporary believers, by reason of the
unsoundness and deceitfulness of their hearts.

Some that walk cordially and uprightly before the Lord, turning neither to the
right hand nor to the left, keeping close to the rule in the whole course of
their life: (Isa. 66. 7. The way of the just is uprightness) they are undefiled
in the way, do no iniquity, but seek the Lord with the whole heart: walk in the
Law of the Lord, and in his ways, Psalm. 119. 1, 2, 3.

Now softness or tenderness of heart is a special means of this upright
walking: For

1. It raises in the heart an universal regard to all the Commandments of
God, Psalm. 119. 6. And ver. 10. would not wander from the Commandments, and to
walk in all well-pleasing before him.

2. It fills the heart with a hatred and fear of all sin, that it may not
offend the Lord in any thing, nor at any time, nor in any place: Still seeing
him who is invisible: Job 31. 4. Does not he see my ways, and count all my
steps! Prove. 5. 21. The ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he
pondereth all his goings.

3. It lifts up the glory of God; that is the great end, and aim, and scope,
and motive to a tender heart; he does all to the glory of God, and so that
Christ may be magnified.

5. It would be a means of promoting the knowledge of Christ, and the power of
godliness, and of casting down whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine, and
unto the ways of godliness; for it would fill the hearts of men with spiritual
compassion to souls with zeal, and it would draw out their graces, and gifts,
and powers in a right way for God, and for the good and salvation of others. If
Magistrates had but as much tenderness of heart in relation to the interest of
God, as to their own interest, they would be more quick and active for God than
for themselves; they would justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked; they
would countance the faithful in the Land, and contemn the profane; they would
honor and exalt the truth of God, and disgrace and repress the errors and
blasphemies against God and his truths; they would encourage every godly
person, and they would appear against all open ungodliness and unrighteousness
of men.

If Ministers had more tenderness of heart, they would (in their places also)
give all diligence to make Christ known, and the truths of Christ, and contend
for them, and oppose men of corrupt minds, and that which is Antichrist indeed,
and they would exceedingly persuade, and encourage even to the knowledge of the
truth, and to the love of the truth, and to walk in all manner of holiness and
godliness: and they would reprove, threaten, warn, and declare the wrath of God
against all sorts of wickedness in all sorts of men.

If Parents, and Masters of Families had this tender heart, they would not
suffer ignorance and looseness in their dwellings; but on the contrary would
study and take pains to instruct and teach their children and servants, and
would reprove and correct, etc. How would they pray and strive on the behalf of
knowledge, and faith, and holiness, and fear of God, and of walking with God!
Verily the whole Land would in a short time, be made an habitation of holiness,
a Land flowing with knowledge, and fear of the Lord, had we more of this
tenderness of heart, which would undoubtedly make us more zealous, and
industrious for the glory of God.

6. It would be a special help unto stedfastness, and perseverance to hold out
and continue It is a special help unto stedfastness.
to the end: Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me. As long as fear holds, stedfastness does hold; and as long
as tenderness of heart continues, the fear will continue. Again, where the
heart is soft and tender, it makes us to be much in Prayer, and diligent and
serious in our communion with God, and to rest on his Arm, acknowledging that
our standing and safety is not in our strength, but in the presence and
influence of his grace.

2ly The Means how to compass a soft and tender heart. The Means.


First, You must go to the Lord by Prayer for it; a sinner can harden his own
Beg it by prayer
heart, but God only can soften the heart. If four things were wrought in the
heart; it would be soft and tender. viz. 1. An experimental Sensation. 2. A
mournful Humiliation. 3. A spirit of Fear. 4. An yieldingness and plyableness
of the heart to the will of God.

Object. True, will some say; but who can work these things in the heart?

Sol. That can God, and he has promised to work every one of them in our
hearts, if we do earnestly and unfeignedly seek him:

1. He can make us to see, to feel, to remember, to consider our sins, and our
doings which have not been good: Job 34. 32. That which I see not, teach thou
me, etc. Job 13. 26. Thou make me to possess the iniquities of my youth:
Ezekiel. 16. 61. Then shall thou remember thy ways and be ashamed.

2. He can make the heart mourning, and humbling, and lamenting: Zac. 12. 10.
They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn, etc. Ezekiel.
7. 16. All of them mourning, every one for his iniquity.

3. He can put his fear in their hearts: Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear in
their hearts. And Hose. 3. 5. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness.

4. He can make the heart yielding and pliable unto his Word and Will: Psalm.
68. 18. Thou have received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also, that the
Lord God might dwell amongst them. Acts 9. 6. Lord, what will thou have me to
do? Jer. 31. 33. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts.

Secondly, You must to his Word, which is the hammer to break, and the fire to
Attend the Word.
melt the heart: Acts 2. 37. When they heard this, they were pricked in their
hearts, and said unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren,
what shall we do? 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Thou did humble thy self before God,
when thou heardest his Word, etc.

Object. But many men hear the Word, and that a long time, and yet their hearts
are not at all softened by it; therefore it cannot be a means to soften the
heart.

Sol. I answer.

1. It is true, that many men do hear the Word, and for many years, and are not
softened, but their hearts are more hardened under it; nevertheless this
induration comes not from the Word, which is a means to soften; but from the
pride and perverseness of the hearts of men, who do hear the Word, but will
despise and reject the Word.

2. It is also true, that though many men have not their hearts softened by the
Word: yet many others have their hearts softened by it: savor of death unto
death unto some, yet it is the savor of life unto life unto others: And as we
must not conclude that the Word is not the means of saving faith, because all
that hear the Word do not believe; so neither must we deny the Word as a means
to soften the heart, because many who do hear it, do remain hardened; but if we
find

First, that God has instituted his Word for such a purpose and end.

Secondly, That God has blessed his Word, and made it effectual to that
purpose.

Thirdly, Does call even sinners to come and attend, that they may attain that
blessing depending upon this Word.

And lastly, that without the attendance upon the Word, there is no enjoyment
of that softness of heart; but a greater access and confirmation of hardness of
heart. Thence we may confidently conclude, that the Word of God is a means to
soften the heart: But, etc;

3. You must know that the efficacy of spiritual means does not depend upon the
mere presence of the means, but upon the concomitancy and influence of the
Spirit of God, who sometimes does put forth his power through those means, and
sometimes does not so. The Word by its own natural and proper vigor, does not
convince, nor convert, nor soften the heart (for then every one that hears it
should be convinced, and converted, and softened) nor then should it be a means,
but a principal efficient; but those effects it does work on all who hear it,
when the Spirit of God comes with the Word unto their hearts in his mighty
power, working that grace in us which the Word commands from us: And therefore
when we come to hear the Word, to have our hearts softened, we should look on
the Word as the means; but withal on the Spirit of God as the principal cause,
who works that effect by the Word; nor should we ever hear the Word without
special prayer and requests, that the Lord would by his Spirit make his Word a
lively and effectual means of knowledge, of faith, of all grace unto us; and if
we did do so, the Lord would be found of us, and he would give this softness of
heart which he promises in his Covenant.

Thirdly, If you would have softness of heart, you must then get newness of Get
newness of heart.
heart: Your hearts can never be softened, until they be renewed; and if they
were renewed, certainly they would be softened: The old heart is an hard heart,
and the new heart is a soft heart. You may as well expect that a dead man
should weep, and mourn, and go, and come, as that an old sinful heart (dead in
trespasses and sins) should be a soft and mournful heart for sins, or be
willing and ready to obey the will of God; why! hardness in all the causes of
it, and in all the effects of it, is predominant and reigning in an unconverted
graceless heart. But if the heart were once changed by renewing grace, then
softness must needs fall into it: Forasmuch as the change made by renewing
grace, brings into the soul another nature, quite contrary to our sinful
nature, and other principles quite contrary to all our old principles, Light
contrary to darkness; and humbleness contrary to pride; and yieldingness
contrary to stubbornness; and softness contrary unto hardness.

Fourthly, if we would have softnses or tenderness of heart, then we must get
Faith; for faith is indeed the foundation of a soft and tender heart; and the
Get Faith.
more of Faith, the more of tenderness.

Quest. What Faith will some say?

Sol. I answer, a Faith

1. Of Knowledge, or Credence, that God is, that he is a great God, the living
God, the Almighty God, the dreadful God, most knowing, most holy, most
righteous, and faithful, who will be so to us, as his Word reveals him, who
will be merciful to the penitent, and will by no means clear the guilty.

2. Of union and compliance to bring us into Christ, and to make us one with
him, and to give us fellowship with him, and to make us one Spirit with him,
and to change us into the glory of his image; if we had this faith, the work
were done: Now we should be made like unto him in meekness, and humbleness, and
tenderness of heart.

3. Of dependence and reliance upon Gods Promises, believing that what he has
promised, he will also perform; that all his promises are Yea and Amen in
Christ Jesus; that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; that he
is mindful of his Word, and remembers his Covenant, and will not suffer his
faithfulness to fail; and therefore he will give unto us (humbly seeking and
waiting upon him) this soft and tender heart which he has promised. How
quickly and easily would such a faith prevail with, and obtain from such a
Father and God!

Fifthly, If we would compass soft and tenderness of heart, we must then Get
hearts to love the Lord.
get hearts to love the Lord; Did we love him, we would be tender of his glory,
and tender of his love; tender to please him, tender not to displease him,
tender to obey him, and tender to honor him. Joh. 14. 23. If a man love me, he
will keep my words. ver. 24. He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings.
Love (you know) is of all affections the most tender, most watchful to observe,
the most careful to please, and the most fearful to offend: If we did love the
Lord, we would not, we could not grieve him. Beseech therefore the Lord to
circumcise your hearts, that you may love him; and consider the exceeding
greatness of his love to you, that you may love him again (We love him, because
he loved us first, 1 John 4. 19.) And this love would raise a tenderness of
heart in us, in all the effects of tenderness which you have heard.

Sixthly, What shall I say more? if you would have softness and tenderness of
heart indeed, and to some purpose; Then get the assurance of Gods Get the
assurance of Gods love.
love, and mercy, and favor sealed unto your consciences by the testimony of
his Spirit; this would melt, etc.

Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.
THese Words are one gold link more of the precious chain of Promises in the
Covenant of grace: They do contain in them another excellent promise unto the
people of God, wherein you have

1. The matter promised (I will put my spirit within you.) 2. The virtue or
benefit of this promise; which is twofold.
1. Obedience (and cause you to walk in my statutes) 2. Perseverance (and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them.)
I begin at this time with the matter promised (I will put my Spirit within
you.)

CHAP. XII.
Doct. 1. THat all the people of God have the Spirit of God; or, that God will
put his Spirit within his people (I will put my Spirit within God will put his
spirit within his people.
you) Psalm. 51. 11. Take not thy holy Spirit from me. Zech. 12. 10. I will
pour upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit
of grace and of supplication. Romans 8. 15. Ye have received the Spirit of
Adoption whereby we cry Abba, Father. 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received not the
spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given of God. 1 Cor. 7. 40. I think also that I have the
Spirit of God. 1 These. 4. 8. Who has given unto us his holy Spirit. 1 John 3.
24. Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.
Chap. 4. 13. Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit.

For the opening of this excellent Point, I will speak unto these particulars.

1. In what sense the Spirit is given, or put within the people of God. 2. How
it may be demonstrated, that the people of God (every one of them) have the
Spirit of God. 3. Why the Spirit is put within every one of the people of God.
4. Whether all the people of God, do in the same measure partake of the Spirit.
SECT. I.
Quest. 1. IN what sense the Spirit is given, or put within the people of God?
Sol. There is a fore fold opinion concerning this. In what sense the Spirit is
said to be put within us. Not to make us one person with himself.


First, Some have held, that the Spirit is so given unto the people of God, as
to make them one person with himself, and to communicate unto them his very
personal propriety; so that they in their own persons, are that person in the
Trinity which is called the Holy Ghost.

This was the desperate opinion of Montanus the Heretic, and I fear some wild
persons amongst us, are of the same wicked opinion.

But this cannot possibly be; because

1. No Creature is capable to be God, which yet he should be, if he could be
the person of the Holy Ghost, for the person of the Holy Ghost is God: 1 John
5. 7. There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

2. If any man were the person of the Spirit, and the very Holy Ghost; then 1.
He is eternal, for the Spirit is the eternal Spirit: Heb. 9. 14. Who through
the eternal Spirit offered himself, etc. And 2ly He is Omnipresent in every
place, for the Spirit is so: Psalm. 139. 7. Whether shall I go from thy Spirit.
And 3ly. He is Omnipotent, for the Spirit is so: Who raised Jesus Christ from
the dead, Romans 1. 4. And quickens, and changes the hearts of sinners: Joh. 6.
36. 2 Cor. 3. 18. And 4ly He is Omniscient, for so is the Spirit: Who searches
all things, yea the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. And lastly, then he might
be adored and worshipped with Divine Worship; be prayed unto, be trusted on,
etc.

Secondly, Some do hold, that although the Spirit be not so given as to make us
one person with himself, yet he is given personally unto the people of God, (i.
e.) Some say he is personally given.
he is personally in them; not only his gifts and graces are in them, but also
his very person is in them; and they do allege several places of Scripture to
make good this their Opinion: Joh. 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. Ver. 17. Even
the Spirit of truth. Ver. 26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things. Joh. 15. 26.
But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father, etc. Whence it is thus
argued; That Comforter which proceeds from the Father and the Son, is the
person of the Holy Ghost; but that Comforter dwells and abides in us: Ergo,
the person of the Holy Ghost does dwell in us: 2 Timothy 1. 14. That good thing
which was committed unto thee keep, by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us:
Hence it is also argued; the Holy Ghost that keeps the good gift (or gifts)
in, us dwells in us; but the Holy Ghost which keeps these gifts, is not the
gifts, but the person of the Holy Ghost distinguished from them. Ergo, it is
the person of the Holy Ghost, and not his gifts only that dwells in us: Romans
8. 11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you,
he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies
by his Spirit that dwells in you. Hence also it is thus argued; the Spirit
that dwells in us, is the Spirit that raised Christ from the dead, and shall
likewise quicken our mortal bodies: But it is not the gifts and graces of the
Spirit, but the person of the Spirit himself that raised up Christ from the
dead, and that shall quicken our mortal bodies. Ergo, the person of the Spirit
himself dwells in us.

Thirdly, Some do hold that the putting of the Spirit within the heart of the
Some say it denotes only the gifts and graces of the spirit given to us.
people of God, denotes only the donation of the gifts and the graces of the
Spirit: And so is the Spirit often taken in Scripture by a Metonymie of the
Cause for the Effect: Luke 1. 15. He shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even
from his Mothers womb. Act. 6. 3. Look you out among you seven men of honest
report, full of the Holy Ghost, and of wisdom. Ver. 5. And they chose Stephen a
man full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost. 1 These 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit.
(i. e.) the gifts or graces of the Spirit, for the Spirit in himself (either
Essentially or Personally considered) is not capable of being quenched; there
is no abating, or remission, or vacation possibly incident unto him.

Fourthly, Some do hold that the giving of the Spirit unto the people of God,
is only the letting in of his vigor and assistance for the works which they
are to do; Some for the letting in of the vigor and assistance of the spirit.
and not any Inherent presence of the Spirit in the people of God, either as to
his person, or as to his graces: But as a Bowl moves from that power and
strength which the hand lends unto it; so do the people of God act and move
from the vigorous influence which the Spirit of God puts into them, and not
from any inherent principle of grace which they deny to be in them.

But this Opinion is not sound; for the people of God do possess the Spirit,
not only in way of assurance to do good; but also in way of inward influence to
make them good: Therefore they are said to be born of the Spirit, Joh, 5. 6.
And to be washed and renewed, Tit. 3. 5. And sanctified by the Spirit, 1 Cor.
6. 11. which notes an inward change made by the Spirit, and not a bare
assistance only.

And besides here in the Text, the Lord says, that he will put his Spirit
within us, which certainly is something more than external assistance.

Again, They who do hold the donation of the Spirit as to assistance only; hold
likewise free will to supernatural good; that there is in the will of man such
a power unto the same, that it needs not any renovation by the Spirit; but only
the assistance of the Spirit to that purpose, etc. which is a dangerous Error.
Well then, the meaning of this expression (I will put my Spirit within you) is
principally to be understood of the person of the Spirit. It is principally
meant of the person of the spirit.


And there are three Reasons which incline me thus to think.

1. One is, because the graces of the Spirit were promised before in the 26.
ver. A new heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you: which
unquestionably takes in the renewing graces of the Spirit; and if in this 27.
verse. by putting his Spirit within us, should be meant only the graces of the
Spirit, then one and the same thing only should be promised: But this is no way
probable or congruous to affirm, q. d. I will give you the graces of my Spirit,
and I will give you the graces of my Spirit, etc.

2. Another is, because the Spirit here in this verse promised, is that Spirit
which does cause us to walk in the Statutes of God, and to keep them; which
cause of such walking cannot well be attributed to any but the Spirit himself.

3. Unto which I may add a third, viz, The usual way of trial and evidencing
whether we have the Spirit here promised, namely by the graces of the Spirit;
which were very improper, if by the Spirit in the place were meant the graces
of the Spirit, q. d. you may know that you have the graces of the Spirit, if
you do find in you the graces of the Spirit. How it may be demonstrated.


Quest. 2. How may this be demonstrated, that all the people of God in Covenant
have the Spirit of God within them?

Sol. Besides these Scriptures already, produced, which do bear witness unto
this truth, it may be further demonstrated thus;

First, All that are Christ's, have the Spirit of Christ (for says the Apostle,
Romans 8 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And 1
Cor. 6. 17. He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.) But all who are in
Covenant are Christ's; because all that are in Covenant are believers, and all
believers are Christ's; Ergo, all that are in Covevant have the Spirit.

Secondly, All that are in Covenant are the Sons of God; God is their Father,
and they are his sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 18. Now says the same Apostle
in Gal. 4. 6 Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying Abba Father.

Nay, Thirdly, all the people of God have a fellowship and communion with every
person of the Trinity; and so high is that fellowship, that every person of the
Trinity does (as it were) take up his mansion, and make his abode, and dwelling
in them: They have a fellowship with every person of the Trinity; 1 John 1. 3.
Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Phil. 2. 1.
If there be any fellowship of the Spirit, etc. Every person of the Trinity
dwells and abides in them: Joh. 14. 23. If a man love me, he will keep my
words, and my Father will love him, and we will come and make our abode with
him. Ver. 16. The Father shall give you another Comforter that he may abide
with you for ever. The Father dwells in us: 2 Cor. 6. 16. I will dwell in them.
The Son dwells in us: Ephesians. 3. 17. Christ dwells in your hearts by Faith. The
Spirit dwells in us: Romans 8. 11.

Fourthly, That all the people of God have the Spirit of God, may plainly
appear by the works ^f the Spirit, which are to be found in every one of them.

1. They are sanctified by the Spirit: Ye are sanctified by the Spirit of our
God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. 2. They are led by the Spirit: As many as are led by the
Spirit of God, are the sons of God, Romans 8. 14. 3. They are upheld and
strengthened by the Spirit: Psalm. 51. 12. Uphold me with thy free Spirit.
Ephesians. 3. 16. To be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man. 4.
They are partakers of the first fruits of the Spirit: Romans 8. 23. Our selves
have the first fruits of the Spirit. 5. They are helped by the Spirit: Romans 8.
26, The Spirit also helps our infirmities, and the Spirit itself makes
intercession for us, with groans which cannot be uttered. 6. They are taught by
the Spirit: Joh. 14. 26. The Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in my Name,
he shall teach you all things. 7. They are comforted by the Spirit: Acts 9. 31.
They walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost. 8.
They are sealed by the Spirit: Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise.
Quest. 3. Why does the Lord put his Spirit within every one of his Reasons of
it.
people?

Sol. There may be assigned six Reasons for it; viz. 1. Necessity. 2ly
Congruity. 3ly Conformity. 4ly Excellency. 5ly The love of God. 6ly The
purchase of Christ.

First, Necessity; The presence and enjoyment of the Spirit is necessary for
The necessity of it.
them in many respects.

1. For applying of Christ unto them, and for the applying of them unto Christ;
For applying Christ.
that there is a conjunction or union between Christ the Head, and his Mystical
body the Church, is an unquestionable truth. And how Christ who locally in
heaven, should be joined or united to his Church here on earth; this cannot be
done but by the Spirit who does knit or join Christ to us, and us to Christ, as
really as the head is joined to the body, and as the body is joined to the
head: But take the instance in any particular believer, that Christ is his, and
he is Christ's, it is certain; but how comes Christ to be his? what is that on
Christ's part which makes this union? it is the Spirit, and none but the Spirit;
and what is it on our part which makes this union? it is faith, and it is
caused by the Spirit: So that the Spirit is necessary to this union on either
part; on Christ's part to apply or unite him to us; and on our part in causing
faith which applies and unites us to Christ: And unto this reciprocal union,
the Spirit is such a necessary agent, that without him there cannot possibly be
any union at all: No man can be united to Christ, but by the Spirit; neither
can Christ (I speak it with reverence) unite himself to us, but by his Spirit.

2. For conveying of spiritual life into them, or a new being into their souls.
For conveying of spiritual life.
Naturally all men are dead in trespasses and sins, and every faculty in them
is totally defiled, and polluted, and corrupted, and is deprived of the glory
of God; nor can any man help himself in this case, nor can any creature do it:
None can raise him from his death, but that Spirit who raised* Jesus Christ
from the dead: Therefore is the Spirit called the Spirit of life, and the
Spirit of grace, forasmuch as he is the author of both unto our souls; it is
the Spirit who quickens them by infusing the life of Christ into them; and who
renews them by changing of them into the image of Christ.

3. For all the actings of grace: Take me any Christian though endowed with For
all the actings of grace
all the principles of grace, and great measures thereof; now put him upon any
particular acting, put him upon believing, put him upon repenting, upon
mourning, upon any acts of obedience; why, loo^ ^s no member of the body can
move or strive* but from an influence from the head; no more can we act any
grace we have, but by an influence from the Spirit of Christ our Head; Joh. 15.
5. And we find it in experience, that it is with our souls,

For all our receptions.
4. For all our Receptions: Would you know any truth of God? you cannot know
it, unless the Spirit of God give you his light to know it; 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
would you be acquainted with the love of God? you can never perceive it, unless
the Spirit shed abroad that love in your hearts; Romans 5. 5. would you be clear
and satisfied in your relation of sonship unto God as your Father? all the men
in the world cannot persuade and satisfy as to that, unless, and until the
Sperit bears witness with your Spirits that you are the children of God, Romans
8. 16.

Secondly, Congruity: It is meet and fit that the people of God should have the
Spirit of God; For Congruity.


1. They are his children: and is it not meet that the children of God should
have the Spirit of God? should they not bear his image? if they were led by the
same spirit by which the children of this world are led, had they not another
Spirit, they could not be his children.

2. They are his servants, and therefore they have much to do for him, and they
have much to suffer for him: Is it not meet that the Lord should help his
servants? The services of the people of God which they are to do for him, and
to suffer for him, are above all their own strength; and therefore God will
give them his Spirit to enable them for all their services, whether active or
passive, the Spirit can supply them for every work.

3. They are his Heirs, and intended for eternal glory, and is it not fit that
they should have the Spirit of grace, who must have the Spirit of glory? Heirs
of God, Romans 8. 17. Before a person comes to heaven, it is fit that he should
be fitted for heaven, be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. And who can fit and prepare us for that heavenly
glory, but the Spirit, etc.

Thirdly, Conformity: There is a twofold conformity required in the people
Conformity.
of God.

1. To God their Father; they must be like their heavenly Father; be holy as he
is holy; be merciful, as he is merciful; love what he loves, hate what he
hates, honor what he honors, etc. this cannot be unless they have the Spirit
given unto them.

2. To Christ their Head; they must partake with him of the same Nature, of the
same Life, which cannot be, unless they partake with him of the same Spirit.

Fourthly, Excellency; the people of God are the most excellent people in all
Excellency.
the world, they are the precious of the sons of men, a chosen generation, a
royal Priesthood, the beauty of the earth; there is that in them which exceeds
and surmounts all the glories of the world; but what is that which does exalt
them, and raise them with such a differential excellency? it is the presence of
the Spirit, and the graces of the Spirit: As Pharaoh said concerning Joseph,
Genesis 41. 38. Can we find such a one as this is, in whom the Spirit is? etc.
Before they had the Spirit of God given unto them, they were but as other men,
vile in their natures, and at the most but of love and ordinary gifts: It is
the Spirit which changes into the image of glory, From glory to glory, 2 Cor.
3. 18.

Fithly, The love of God unto them, which is exceeding great, and rich in the
The love of God.
communication of himself unto them; he counts nothing too dear for them,
neither himself, nor his Christ, nor his Spirit: God is their God, and Christ
is their Christ, and the Spirit of God is also their portion.

Sixthly, Christ has purchased for them, all that is happiness, and all that
makes for happiness, and therefore he has purchased the Spirit of God for
Christ's purchase.
them, etc.

Thus you see that God gives his own Spirit unto his people, and the Reasons
why he does so; now follows the last Question.

Quest. 4. In what measure God gives the Spirit unto his people? whether all
the people of God have the Spirit given unto them in the same In what measure
he gives the Spirit.
measure?

Sol. For the resolution of this Question, I will lay down these Conclusions.

First, There are different gifts of the Spirit, some are extraordinary, as
were There are different gifts of the Spirit.
those of speaking with Tongues, and those of Miracles, in Raising the dead,
and Healing the sick, and of which some did partake in the Apostles times, but
now are ceased: And some are ordinary, which are gifts that the Spirit still
bestows, and these are either gifts of Edificatation, or of Sanctification, of
which the people of God do partake; they have all of them such gifts of the
Spirit which do make them good, and which do enable them to do good. And
different measures.


Secondly, There are different measures of the gifts of the Spirit in the same
kind; some are more, and some are less holy: And in Faith, some ar^ strong in
faith, and some are weak in faith: And in Knowledge, some are higher and
fuller, and some are shorter and flatter: As all the people of God have not
absolutely the same gifts of edification; so all of them have not the same
gifts for sanctification in the same measure or degree.

Thirdly, Every one of the people of God has a portion of the Spirit; as all
the Every one has a portion of the Spirit.
servants had at least a talent; the first had five, the second had ten, and
the other had one; Matthew. 25. 15. so all the people of God partake of the
Spirit of God; though they differ in their proportion (for the Spirit divides
to every man severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12. 11.) yet every one has a
portion; though Benjamins mess was five times so much as his brethrens, yet
every one of his brethren had a mess sent unto him by Joseph, Genesis 43. 34. One
Christian may have abundant knowledge of Christ, yet every Christian has a
knowledge of Christ: and one Christian may be strong in faith, yet every
Christian has faith; some are young men, and some are aged in Christ, some are
babes in Christ, yet every one of them is born of the spirit. Every one has
but a small portion at the first.


Fourthly, Every one of the people of God has but a small portion of the
Spirit at first; therefore the grace given us by the Spirit (as to the first
plantation of it) is compared unto a grain of mustardseed which is sown in the
fields, and is the least of all seeds; Matthew. 13. 31, 32. unto a bruised reed,
which is very weak; and to smoking flax which is newly kindled, Matthew. 12. 20
and it is called the day of small things, in Zech. 4. 10. I believe, said the
Father of the child, Lord, help my unbelief, Mar. 9. 24. What I would, that do
I not; but what I hate, that do I, Romans 17. 15. And to will is present with me,
but how to perform that which is good, I find not, ver. 18. The people of God
in respect of the first workings of the Spirit, are called new born babes, 1
Pet. 2. 2. and children, and little children, Gal. 4. 19. and lambs, and plants.

Fifthly, Not any one of the people of God has the Spirit in perfection; in
None have it in perfection.
this life he has not the Spirit in the absolute fullness of the Spirit: 1 Cor.
13. 9. We know in part, and we prophecy in part; now we see as through a
glass darkly, but then face to face; Now I know in part, but then shall I know
even as also I am known. Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I had already attained, or
were already perfect; but I follow after, that I may apprehend that for which
also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Though the spirit be perfect, we do
partake of him imperfectly in this life, we have but the first fruits of the
Spirit, Romans 8. 23. As the children of Israel had the bunch of Grapes, and some
of the Figs, and Pomgranates before they entered into the land of Canaan, Numb.
13. 23.

Object. But do we not read that some were filled with the Holy Ghost, and were
full of the Holy Ghost? as Stephen, Acts 6. and Barnabas, Acts 11.

Sol. There is a threefold fullness of the Holy Ghost.

1. Absolute and Intensive, as to all degrees; this we cannot reach unto in
this life; none but Christ was thus filled with the Holy Ghost. 2. Comparative
(i. e.) more than some, or many others; this is granted. 3. Respective, as to
such or such a particular work and service, unto which the Spirit may let out
himself in an eminent and vigorous manner; thus were they filled with, or were
full of the Spirit, etc. Every one of Gods people has so much of the spirit as
is necessary to salvation.

Sixthly, Though none of the People of God in this life have the Spirit in
perfection, yet every one of them has so much of the Spirit as will bring him
to salvation: For he has so much of the spirit as will bring him to Christ;
and he who has as much as will bring him to Christ, certainly he has as much
as will bring him to heaven: Again, he has as much of the spirit as does
sanctify and renew, and regenerate him; and therefore he has as much as will
bring him to salvation: Matthew. 5. 8. The pure in heart shall see God. 1 Pet. 1.
3. We are begotten again to a lively hope. Ver. 4. To an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
us.

SECT. II
Use 1. Does the Lord put his own Spirit within his own people? Then let Try
whether we have the spirit within us.
all of us look well to this, whether we have within our hearts the the Spirit
of God, yea or no. O beloved! think much and often of that expression of the
Apostle in Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his; he has no part in Christ, who has no part in the Spirit of Christ.

There are four Reasons why I should press this great search and great care
upon Reasons of this search.
you, to know whether God has put his own Spirit within you.

1. Because many persons have not the spirit of God. 2. Because many persons do
deceive themselves with a false and lying spirit, instead of the Spirit of God.
3. Because many have the spirit as to many effects and works, yet the spirit is
not fully given to them.
1. Many persons have not the Spirit of God. Many have not the spirit of God.
They who blaspheme the Spirit.


First, What think you of those who blaspheme and scoff at the Spirit! As those
Jews did at the effusion of the Spirit upon the Apostles, These men are full of
new wine, Acts 2. 13. And ordinarily among our selves the Spirit of God is
jeared, derided, mocked, and reproached in his graces which he bestows upon the
people of God: O these are men of the Spirit! these are the Saints! your holy
brethren, and your holy sisters forsooth, they are full of the Spirit! Ah thou
profane wretch, unworthy to live among Christians, and unworthy of the name of
a Christian, who dare thus openly to reproach the holy God, and the holy
Spirit of God! and the graces in the people of God, which are the excellent
faculties of the Spirit promised unto all who are in Covenant with God! Is the
Spirit of God a scorn unto thee? is any work of the Spirit a derision unto
thee? is holiness (the chief of all his works) a matter to be scoffed and
mocked at: O how wicked art thou! what a child of the Devil art thou! what an
Atheist! how deep in the guilt of blasphemy? will the Lord ever pardon thee?
can thou ever repent? can thou ever be saved who deridest the Spirit,
without whom, and his holiness, without which there is no salvation?

Secondly, what think you of those who do despite to the Spirit of grace? Who
do despite to the spirit of grace.
of such you read in Heb. 10. 29. And have done despite unto the Spirit of
grace?

Men do despite to the Spirit of grace many ways*

1. When they have base thoughts of Jesus Christ and his blood (treading under
foot the Son of God, and counting the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing)
these the Spirit sets forth as most high and precious, and worthy of all
reverence and acceptance; but when sinners come to despise Christ and his
blood, looking on them but as common and ordinary things, and regarding them no
more than the dirt under their feet, they do now despite unto the spirit of
Grace; they do now prejudice, and disgrace, and dishonor, and shame him in his
Revelation, and Commendation of Christ and his blood.

2. When they will sin on purpose to vex and grieve the Spirit; when they
know Who sin on purpose to grieve the Spirit.
such or such a work or way is evil and displeasing unto him; they will
therefore choose to do it, knowing that it is grievous and vexatious to the
Spirit; as they in Jer. 44. 4. Oh do not this abominable thing that I hate.
Ver. 5* But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ears. And verse the 17.
profess that they will burn incense unto the Queen of heaven, etc.

Thirdly, what think you of those that either have no work of the Spirit within
Who have no saving work of the spirit in them.
them, or no saving work of the Spirit within them? have those the spirit put
within them? The spirit is never present in any, but there is some work or
other of the spirit appearing in them; for he is most active, and working some
way or other in the hearts of those where he is present and dwells. Ergo.

But in some persons

1. There is no work of the Spirit at all, neither highest nor lowest: the
lowest works of the Spirit within men are illuminations, and pulsations; when
he enlightens sinners to see their sins, and moves and stirs them to leave
their sins, and gives them some trouble for their sins; But many persons
there are who never had any light from the Spirit to see their sins, nor were
they ever troubled for their sins, nor did they ever find those strong motions
and persuasions of the Spirit to leave their sins.

2. Though in many persons these common works of the Spirit may be found, yea
so many works as the Spirit uses the Ministry of the Law for (as Illumination,
Conviction, Excitation, Humiliation, and Terror, and Fear) yet in them we no
Evangelical and saving works of the Spirit to be found; no works of
Regeneration, no works of union with Christ, no hungring and thirsting after
him, no faith in him, no love in him, no holy sorrow, no repentance, no newness
of obedience, no walking and living in the Spirit, etc.

Fourthly, What think you of those who have in them another spirit quite
contrary Who have in them another spirit.
to the Spirit of God; even that spirit which works effectually in the children
of disobedience! and in whom all the qualities and works of a contrary spirit
are manifestly appearing and ruling? The Spirit of God is a pure and holy
Spirit, but they are unclean and unholy: The Spirit of God is (effective) an
humble and lowly Spirit, but they are proud, and lofty, and arrogant: The
Spirit of God is meek and gentle, but they are turbulent, and furious, and
violent: The Spirit of God is merciful and compassionate, but they are
unmerciful, incompassionate, cruel and bloody: The Spirit of God is a Spirit of
love, and of peace, but they are full of hatred, variance, discord, etc.

2ly Many have a false, and lying, and deluding spirit, but it is not this Many
have a false and deluding spirit.
spirit which God promises to put within his people.

You read in Scripture of the Spirit of truth, and of the spirit of error (1 John 4. 6. Hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error) and so
you read of the Fancies, and Delusions, and Revelations of men, called by the
name of the spirit: 2 These. 2. 2. Be not shaken in mind or troubled, neither by
spirit nor by word, etc. And we are charged not to believe every spirit, but to
try the spirits, whether they are of God. 1 John 4. 1.

Quest. But here it may be demanded, how it may be known that the spirit by
which How a false spirit may be known.
man is moved and stirred, and put on, and led, is a false spirit, and not the
Spirit of God.

Sol. This may be known many ways:

First, A false spirit is never let in by the Word; The Ministry of the Gospel
is It is not let in by the Word.
the Channel or the Conduit by which we partake of the true Spirit of God: Gal.
3. 2. Ye received the spirit by the hearing of faith (i. e.) the Word or Gospel
of Faith, as those who hearing Paul Preach, the Holy Ghost fell upon them, so,
etc. But a false spirit comes not in that way, nay it is so far from being
breathed by the Word, that it works in men a slighting and contempt of it, as
you shall hear presently.

Secondly, A false spirit is a loose spirit; persons that partake of it, do
pretend It is a loose spirit.
unto strange Visions, and high Revelations, and mysterious Notions; but for
all them, this false spirit leaves their hearts unchanged, and their lives
unreformed; ordinarily men led by a false spirit, are unfound and corrupt in
their judgments and opinions, and are idle, and lazy, and vicious in their
walking.

Thirdly, A false Spirit is an irregular spirit; the motions and works of it
are It is an irregular spirit.
such, as

1. The Word of God does not warrant, nay does exceedingly condemn: As for the
Husband to take a way the life of his Wife; and the Parent to kill the child;
and for a man to take away the goods of his neighbor, etc.

2. Neither a man's General nor Paticular calling can warrant: The false spirit
puts on to such works which a man may not do as he is a Christian, nor may he
do as he is set in such or such a private Relation.

Fourthly, A false spirit is a preposterous spirit: It fills a man with strange
joys A preposterous spirit.
and Raptures of heaven, before a man knows Christ aright, and receives him by
Faith, and before he repents of his sins, or ever made his peace with God; it
is all in joy, and nothing in humbling and mourning for sin.

Fifthly, A false spirit is an earthly spirit: 1 John 4. 5. They are of the
world, An earthly spirit.
therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them: They talk much
of the Kingdom of Christ, and setting up of that, but they pull down the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ: and it is a temporal kingdom which they strive
after, as you may read in those of Munster.

Sixthly, A false spirt is a disordering, and turbulent, and bitter spirit:
There A turbulent spirit.
are two things which men of a false spirit have been tumultuously, violently
railing, and reviling, and lifting at; One is Public Magistracy; the other is
Public Ministry: It is a certain truth, that the false spirit, is an enemy to
order, and peace, and authority, and likewise to sound teaching, and the
instituted Ordinances of Christ.

Seventhly, A false spirit is a Scripture-slighting spirit: This is evident in
all A Scripture-slighting spirit.
sorts of men led by a false spirit: Papists are more for unwritten Traditions
than for the written Word: Ignorant Formalists are more for superstitions and
superstitious worship, than for the worship which the Word of God requires:
Anabaptists and Enthusiasts are more for Revelations and Visions, than for the
Word of God; nay they reject the Word, and do close with them, etc.

Eigthly, A false spirit is a self-contradicting spirit: It frequently gives
itself A self contradicting spirit.
the lie; confidently foretells and determins of matters, and for such
particular times, and none of these prove true; as I my self know, etc.

Ninthly, A false spirit is a proud spirit, and extremely impudent and
consorious; A proud spirit.
it swells a man up in a conceit of himself, and in a contempt of others above
all measure. The Scriptures are but poor things, and the Apostles but ordinary
men, and Ministers but a company of dogs, and others differing from them in
their Opinion but the firebrarnds of hell, etc.

Tenthly, A false spirit is a presumptuous spirit. A presumptuous spirit. Many
have the Spirit, yet come shorrt of what they should have.


3ly, Many have the spirit as to diverse gifts, and works, and effects;
nevertheless these do not amount to the putting of the spirit within the people
of God here promised in the Text. e. g.

First, A man may be enlightened by the spirit, he may come into a knowlede of
God and of Christ, and of the way to heaven, etc. This is the enlightening
spirit, yet this is not the sanctifying spirit.

Secondly, A man may be gifted by the Spirit; he may have the gift of
understanding, of memory, of utterance, of praying, of preaching, etc. and yet
not not have the Spirit spoken of in the Text.

Thirdly, A man may be humbled by the spirit, he may see his particular sins,
be exceedingly distressed, and terrified, and he may confess his sins (as
Pharaoh and Judas did) and yet not have this Spirit in the Text.

Fourthly, A man may have desires of heaven, to be saved, as Balaam, Let us dye
the death of the righteous, Numb. 23. 10. and the young man that came running
to Christ, saying, Good Master, What shall I do that I may inherit eternal
life? Matthew. 19. 16. and yet not have, etc.

Fifthly, A man may have many motions of the Spirit, to take him off from his
evil course, to stave him off from some sinful action, and to put him on to a
new course of life; yea so far working in him as to raise him to some kinds of
purposes and resolutions (as in hearing the Word, etc.) and yet not have, etc.

Sixthly, A man may by the spirit taste of the heavenly gifts, and taste the good
Word of God, and the powers of the world to come, Heb. 6. 4, 5. he may be
joyfully affected (a while) upon hearing, and knowing, and in some sort
believing the great happiness purchased by Christ, and yet not, etc. The misery
to be distitute of the Spirit.


4ly, The extreme miseries to be destitute of the Spirit of God.

I will mention a few of them unto you:

First, If you have not the Spirit, you belong not unto Christ, you are none of
his; most men amongst us presume that they belong to Christ, and that be dyed
Such belong not to Christ.
for them, that Christ is theirs, and that they are Christ's; but read the
Apostle, Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his, Gal. 4. 6 O what is that man who is none of Christ's! whose is he, and to
whom does he belong, who is none of Christ's, and belongs not unto Christ!

All the men in the world are divided 'twixt Christ and the Devil; if you be
not Christ's members, then you are the Devils slaves.

But yet consider that expression a little more (none of his)

1. None of his in way of Relation, he owns you not: Is no Head to you, Who are
none of Christ's. None of Christ's in relation. None in respect of Mediation.
None in respect of beneficial application.
no Husband to you, no Savior to you. 2. None of his in respect of Mediation,
he is no Mediator for you, he never took your sins upon him, he is none of
your Surety, he became not a curse for you, made not your peace. 3. None of his
in respect of beneficial application; he is not your Righteousness for
Justification, he is not your holiness for Sanctification; he is not your life
for Salvation; if you be none of his, you shall have none of him.
None of his, why! then God is none of yours; then the Promises are none of
yours, then future glory can be none of yours; then the hope of glory can be
none of yours; for it is Christ in us the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27.

None of his! then you have no true faith, then you are separated from Christ,
then you alone must answer for all your sins, and then unquestionably you are
under the condemnation and curse of the Law.

Secondly, If you have not the Spirit of God, then are you dead in your sins,
you are still in the natural, unregenerate, loathsome and cursed estates, like
so Are dead in their sins.
many carrions stinking in your graves; for it is the Spirit, and he only that
quickens and changes the estate of the sinner: All spiritual life which
quickens the soul, comes only from the Spirit of life:

O what misery is this to be a sinner, and nothing but a sinner! to be totally
wicked, to be utterly destitute of the glory of God, not any thing of his image
in holiness, in knowledge, in righteousness; not any love of him, not any fear
of him, but filled with all unrighteousness, and all ungodliness, with all the
powers of sinful lusts (ignorance, pride, envy, malice, enmity, unless
hardness of heart, etc.) and all of them raging and reigning, oppressing, and
resisting, etc.

Why! this is our condition really if we have not the Spirit of God, for there
is no change, and there can be no charge from it, but by the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, If you have not the Spirit of God, than are you in bondage unto
Satan, and are led and ruled by the wicked spirt: There are but two spirits
which lead all In bondage to Satan.
sorts of men; either the good Spirit, or the wicked spirit; all the sons of
God are led by the good Spirit; and all the children of darkness and
disobedience are led by the wicked spirit; he moves and stirs, and teaches, and
inclines your hearts, and leads, and rules, and commands them; and his will you
do obey and act all your days (though you perceive it not) if you have not the
Spirit of God, under that bondage do not continue, for only the Spirit of God
is the Spirit of victory, of liberty, of delivery.

Fourthly, You can never be bettered by any Ordinance whatsoever: You may come
Cannot be bettered by Ordinances.
and hear, and go home, and say, or read a prayer, thrust your selves upon the
Sacrament, but all in yain; for what are any of these without the Spirit? he
can do do good; cannot repent, believe, mourn, why no not any good desire.

Can any man hear so as to know the mind of God without the Spirit of God? Can
any man pray and make supplication who has not the spirit of Prayer, and the
spirit of supplication? Can any man receive benefit and comfort in the
Sacrament from Christ, that has not faith? and can any man have faith, and act
faith, who has not the spirit?

Fifthly, You are open and obnoxious to all temptations, and unto all erroneous
Are exposed to all tentations.
disobedience; for to overcome temptations, there is need of much strength
(much spiritual strength) and that comes only from the Spirit of God, who is
the spirit of might and power, Ephesians* 6. 10, 11. And to prevent erroneous
disobedience, a man needs to know the truth, and to be well grounded in the
truth: O but it is the spirit of truth who leads us into all truth.

Sixthly, Nay you are (if your conscience should be awakened) exposed to
Exposed to dreadful fears.
dreadful fears, and troubles, and despairs, for the sense of your great
transgressions, and of the wrath of God for them; and in this case you will not
be able to find any comfort, or at least you will not be able to apply it unto
your selves; for only the Spirit is the Comforter; though you may read much in
Christ, and much in the Promises, and much in God, apt to give comfort, yet
nothing in any of these can be your actual comfort, unless the spirit of God
make it to be so unto you.

Seventhly, Take you at the best can be but formal Christians (Christians in
Are but formal Christians
show) if you have not the spirit of God; for it is the spirit put within us,
which makes us Christians indeed: When the spirit makes our hearts his Temple,
reforms, renews, enlivens us with his graces, then are we Christians indeed:
Union with Unction constitutes us in the reality and truth of being Chrstians,
etc.

Eighthly, I will say but one thing more; You cannot be possibly saved, if you
Cannot be saved.
have not the spirit of Christ: Reasons whereof are these.

1. Without Christ no salvation: Act. 4. 12. And if we be without the spirit,
we are certainly without Christ. 2. Without holiness no salvation: Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, Why such cannot be saved. Because without
Christ. Without holiness. Without faith.
Heb. 12. 14. But without the spirit, no holiness, for he is the holy spirit,
Essentially in himself, Causally in us, etc. 3. Without faith no salvation: He
that believes not, shall be damned, Mark. 16. 16. But without the spirit there
can be no faith, because that grace is the fruit and effect of his Almighty
power. So now you see plainly the infinite misery of being destitute of the
Spirit of God.
Quest. But how may we know whether the Lord has put his own Spirit within How
to knw that we have the Spirit of God.
us? that the spirit of God is given to us indeed?

Sol. This may be known. 1. By the works of the spirit. 2ly By the qualities of
the spirit. 3ly By the properties of such who have the spirit in relation unto
the spirit.

1. By the works of the spirit:

The spirit of God is a vigorous, and active, and operative spirit; and By the
works of the Spirit.
when he is indeed put within any man's heart, there he works in order unto the
salvation of that man; for unto that do all the works of God the Father (as our
Father) tend; and unto that do all the works of Christ the Son of God (as our
Redeemer) tend; and unto that do all the works of the spirit of God within us
tend;

What are the works of Gods Spirit in them that shall be saved
Now the works of the spirit in them which shall be saved are these..
Conviction.

1. Conviction: Joh. 16. 8. And when he is come (that is the spirit whom Christ
calls the Comforter, ver. 7.) he will reprove the world (he will convince the
world) of sin: represent the sinful foulness that lies therein. Here now I
will briefly speak unto two Questions.

Quest. 1. How the spirit convinces a person of sin?

Sol. He does convince of sin,

1. By opening the Law of God unto us, partly in the spiritualness of it, as
How the Spirit convinces of sin.
reaching not only to our outward words and actions, but also to our inward
thoughts and affections, both in the commands of it, and likewise in the
prohibitions of it; that God does not only command of us a Righteousness and
holiness* of conversation, but also a righteousness and holiness of heart and
nature: not only that we do good, but also that we be good; not only that we
hear him, but also that we know, and love, and fear, and trust upon him; not
only that we draw near unto him with our lips, and bodies, but also that we
draw near unto him with our hearts, and serve him in spirit and in truth. That
God in his Law does not only forbid and condemn sinful words and deeds, but
also sinful desires, and delights, and motions; not only murder in the hand,
but murder also in the heart; not only adultery in the act, but adultery also
in the heart; as Christ assures us himself in Matthew. 5 28. Whosoever looks on
a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his
heart. Perfection of it, that it is so precise and exact, that it expects from
us not this or that particular duty, but an universal obedience, and full
conformity unto all and every particular which is required; and not for some
little space of our life, but constantly and invariably as to all the time of
our lives; and if we fail either in the fullness, or in the continuance of
obedience at any time, in any particular, presently the Law pronounces a
sentence of curse against us; Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all these things which are written in the book of the Law to do them.

Secondly, By opening our sins (the transgression of the Law) unto us: Romans By
opening our sins to us.
7. 9. When the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died; (i. e.) when the
Law came accompanied, with the Spirit of God, now sin revived, now it
appeared, now I saw what a sinful creature, and what a miserable creature I was.

This is certain, that when the spirit of God does convince any one of sin,
he then does (by an invincible evidence or l^ght) so set out a man's sinful life
and heart, that he cannot but confess and acknowledge the same, and withal,
himself to lie under the curse of God, as long as by unbelief he remains in his
sinful estate.

Quest. 2. Whether a wicked person may not be convinced of sin? and if he may,
how then can this work of conviction be any distinguishing character that we
have the spirit?

Sol. To this I answer.

First, I do not make every work flowing from the Spirit, a character of his
What are not characters of the presence of Gods Spirit.
gracious presence; not illumination, not conviction solitarily considered by
themselves alone, but as concomitantly considered with other more powerful and
effectual works of the spirit following them.

2. But secondly, there is a difference between that conviction of sin in
wicked The difference between the convictions of the wicked and the godly.
men, and that in the people of God, and the difference lies thus.

First, The conviction in wicked men, is ordinarily levis and mollis; it is
such an evidencing of their sins, as does not much afflict and distress them;
indeed they cannot deny but that they are sinners, yet they hope to escape well
enough for all this, etc.

Secondly, The conviction in wicked men is ordinarily semiplena and imperfecta,
it is of some outward gross sins, as swearing, lying, adultery, drunkenness;
but for all these, they think their hearts are as good as the best; they are
seldom convinced their sinful hearts and natures, and that original sin which
is the fountain of all sins, and which pollutes the whole soul.

Thirdly, The conviction in wicked men if it be full and strong, it is but
Judicialis, it is not Remedialis; it is not in salutem, but proves only in
perniciem; for when they are so convinced, either they sin more desperately
against the convincing light of the Spirit, or else they fall into despair, as
Cain, and Judas, and Spira, crying out that their sins are greater than can,
or shall be forgiven!

But now the conviction of sin by the Spirit in the people of God, is another
kind of conviction: For

1. It is deep and powerful, it makes discovery of the very root and foundation
What is the conviction of the Spirit in Gods children
of all sins, even of that corruption and vileness in the heart: In sin did
my Mother conceive me, said David, Psalm. 51. 5. And I see another Law in my
members, said Paul, Romans 7. 23. And Ecce cor meum Deus meus, ecce cor meum,
said Austin! Ah Lord, what a wicked heart had I? etc.

2. It is graciously effectual, this work of conviction works graciously upon
them, and in an order to Christ and their salvation by him; for by this they
see that there is no longer staying or resting in their sinful conditions; but
then they must and will arise from their sleep in sin: By this they find there
is nothing in themselves for them to rest upon; for when the Spirit indeed
convinces us of our sinful condition, as he does therewith convince us of the
curse and wrath, so does he at the same time convince us of our own personal
impotency, and insufficiency, and that there is no help at home; if they are
there, they perish: By this they are occasioned, and indeed do actually look
out for Christ, and Righteousness, and Peace, and Salvation by him, and in the
event come in to him, stoop unto all his Precepts, and gladly accept of him and
them, and with all their hearts do magnify and bless the grace of God for
appointing and setting up such a way of life for miserable, lost, and
self-undone, and self-unable sinners!

Secondly, Humiliation; this is another work of the Spirit when he is given
unto Humiliation.
us: Romans 8. 15. Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear; If
they had not received it again, then sometime or other they had received that
spirit of bondage to fear: Indeed it is a question, whether any who are by
faith brought into Christ, are under the spirit of bondage to fear; but it is
(I think) without all question, that the spirit of bondage to fear, goes before
the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father: And so likewise is it
without question, that humiliation for sin, or bondage unto fear, is the work
of the Spirit; for none but the Spirit of God can work that work within us.

Now there are two things in that expression (the Spirit of bondage to fear)
Whar is the spirit of bondage.
which I intend in that outward humiliation.

First, An apprehension and feelling of our present sinful condition (of which
we have been convinced) as our bondage or slavery, which you know is 1. A base
and contemptible condition. 2ly A restrained and depriving condition. 3ly A
subjected and stooping condition to the will of another. 4ly A laborious and
toylsome condition, and that upon very hard and cruel terms. 5ly A vexations
and grievous condition, even ready to break the heart. 6ly A most dangerous
condition, wherein our life lies at the mercy of him who has it in bondage
every hour. 7ly It is a most wearisome, and burdensome condition; one would be
most glad of escape and deliverance out of it.

Thus it is with a man who has received the spirit of bondage.

1. He looks on his sinful condition and on himself as vile and base, and cries
out like the Leper, unclean, unclean; like Paul, O wretched man that I am! 2.
He looks on himself as in prison, as one shut up, and shackled and fettered; no
liberty, no power to any good. 3. He looks on himself as fallen into the hands
of the living God, and righteous God, who may when he will execute his fierce
wrath upon him. 4. On himself as a very drudge to sin, at the command of every
lust, and working out his own damnation. 5. He feels this condition full of
vexation, and terror, and burdensome; so that his very soul does fail him, and
he knows not what to do with himself, nor for himself. 6. And oftimes in the
anguish of his spirit, cries out, O who will pity, who will deliver me, who
will break the bonds of my distress!
Secondly, A sad expectation of evil settling upon the soul, which is here
called fear, for fear is the expectation of evil. The humbled sinner lying
under the spirit of bondage, is far from jollity, and mirth, and vain
confidences; he fears what the holy, and righteous God (who has revealed his
wrath from heaven against all ungodliness) will do unto him for all the sins of
which he is guilty: And he fears exceedingly to dye in this condition; if I
dye, I am damned for ever: and he fears to come near to God, he is afraid that
God will never look on him, nor answer him, nor show him mercy; in a word, he
is a very troubled sinner for what he has done against God, and for what God
may justly do against him?

Object. But will some say, Does every one who receives the Spirit of God
Whether all the godly have first the spirit of bondage.
find it thus with him? has every one the Spirit of bondage to fear?

Sol. I answer, every one who has the Spirit, has this; those in Act. 2. 37.
found it thus; Paul in Act. 9. 6. found it thus; the Jailer, Act. 16. 29. found
it thus; only you must distinguish

1. Of the intentions and measures of it: All that have received the Spirit,
have not the like equal measure of bondage to fear: Some drink deeper of the
cup than others: It is terror in some, and burden in others; it is horror in
some, it is only pain in others; it is the breaking of the bones in some, and
only the lash of the rod on others.

2. Of the duration and continuance of it: Some are longer under the spirit of
bondage than others are:

Object. But this work of humiliation cannot be any demonstrative note of
having the Spirit of grace, because many wicked men, living and dying so, have
had this work of humiliation?

Sol. Humiliation may be considered two ways.

1. As a mere Legal and Judicial work for sin, as it is a pure retribution of
wrath and horror upon the conscience, and one of the first fruits and taste of
deserved damnation: Thus I grant that a Cain and Judas may meet with it.

2. As a preparati^e work of the Spirit for Christ; thus it is not given to any
but to such whom God intends to convert and save by Christ.

Quest. But may some reply, There lies the Question; How may one know that How
to know which is true humiliation.
this work of Humiliation is not a judicial, but a preparative work?

Sol. It may (I humbly conceive) be thus known. When humiliation is a
preparative work of the Spirit,

First, Then the heart is troubled for the filthiness of sin, as well as for
the guiltiness of sin: Not only because God may punish us, but also because we
have offended God; not only because I am a guilty sinner, deserving and feeling
wrath, but also I am a filthy and defiled creature, destitute of the image and
glory of God.

Secondly, Then the heart is broken from sin, as well as for sin; sin troubles
me, and I trouble sin; former sins are my burden and grief, and present sins is
become the object of my hatred; I hate that which has so much provoked God
against me, and which is the cause of all the evil upon me; I will never love
nor serve it any more.

Thirdly, Then all our hopes are in mercy alone, of which we judge our selves
unworthy.

Fourthly, Then it draws out the heart to make after a Christ, who only can
give peace, and ease, and bind up the broken in heart; the Spirit of God leads
out this humbled sinner to Gospel enquiries, and to Gospel helpers: As Act. 2.
37. What shall we do? And Act. 16. 30. What must I do to be saved?

Fifthly, Thus the heart strives earnestly with the Lord to give Faith, that it
may be able to close with Christ, and the man is not, and will not be satisfied
until he be by faith possessed of Christ? how he prays; how he hears? how he
attends and waits till it be given unto him to believe?

3. Union and Conjunction with Christ; this is another choice work of the
Spirit apparent in all to whom God gives his Spirit. Union with Christ.


It is the Spirit of God who persuades, and inclines, and draws in the
brokenhearted sinner unto Christ, by him is the match made between the soul
and Christ, by him is Christ joined unto us, and by him are we joined unto
Christ.

Now the Spirit unites, or brings in the humble and brokenhearted sinner to
How the Spirit unites the brokenhearted sinner to Christ.
Christ on this wise.

First, By opening the Gospel (that word of glad tidings, and of good news,
that good word of life, and of hope) unto the humbled sinner, wherein, as in a
glass he does see the great love, rich mercy, and free grace of God in Jesus
Christ; unto such, who was sent and given by the Father to suffer for our sins,
and to take away our sins, and to make our peace, and to reconcile us unto God,
and to deliver, and save our souls; and that'^ the way to partake of him; and
all good by him, is to believe on him; this the Spirit of God makes evident
unto the humble sinner, and withal, offers him, that whosoever believes on him
shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16.

Secondly, By presenting strong and safe Grounds or Arguments to the humble
sinner, that he ought to believe, and may lay hold for his particular, v. g.

1. The express command of God: 1 John 3. 23. This is his command, that we
should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. 2. The express offer unto
the humble sinner, and plain call of Christ: Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy laden, etc. 3. The designation of Christ to this work
of help and comfort: Isa. 66. 1. The Lord has anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted. 4. The
promises and assurances of Christ, that he shall not be disowned if he comes to
him: Joh. 6. 37. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out; nay he
shall be accepted and eased. Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Thirdly, by answering and resolving all the doubts, and fears, and exceptions
of unbelief, from the greatest of former sinnings, and from present
unworthiness, and multitudes of wants; these the Spirit inwardly answers, and
takes off by convincing the sinner that Christ must be his Righteousness, and
will be so to every one that believes; and that our unworthiness hinders not,
but he that is athirst may come and take the water of life freely, Rev. 22. 17.
And he that has no money, he may come and buy wine and milk without money, and
without price, Isa. 55. 1.

Fourthly, By making the Gospel (at length) through his own power, an effectual
means of faith; so that the humbled sinner becomes a believing sinner, his
heart is persuaded and opened to Christ, and he glorifies all the goodness and
kindness of Christ, he receives and embraces him, takes Christ for his Lord,
and Savior, and Husband, and Head, and is joined unto him, and made one with
Christ, and Christ is one with him.

This is the great and notable work of the Spirit, which he works in every one
of the people of God in Covenant; not one of them but he is by the Spirit
brought in to Christ. The Spirit does not only in a preparative way convince
and humble them for their sins, but also he does in an effectual manner bring
them in to Christ, whom he has before prepared for Christ. Therefore let us
look well unto our selves; by this may you know undoubtedly whether God has
put his Spirit within you. If his Spirit be in you, then you are in Christ. If
the Spirit be in your hearts, then Faith is in your hearts. If you be possessed
of the Spirit, then you are possessed of Christ; your hearts are overcome, are
persuaded, are drawn to Christ; he has been the great desire of your souls,
and he is the very portion of your souls: You are Christ's, and Christ is yours.

But if your hearts remain ignorant of Christ, or undesirous of Christ, and
careless of Christ, and stubborn, and opposite to Christ, you will not have
Christ to reign over you; and you will not come to him though you may have
life; and you love your sins better than Christ, and you will sit down with the
pleasure, and with the profit of the world; assuredly you have not the Spirit
of God; and if you continue thus, you shall dye and perish in you sins.

Fourthly, Regeneration or Renovation; this is another eminent work of the
Spirit extant in all the people of God; they are all of them regenerated, and
Regeneration.
renewed by the Spirit: Joh. 3. 5. Except a man be born of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Tit. 3. 5. According to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost.

For the better opening of this, I will show unto you

1. What this work of the Spirit is, what Regeneration or Renovation is. 2.
That this work of the Spirit is to be found in all the people of God to whom
the Spirit is given.
Quest. 1. What is this work of Regeneration or Renovation?

Sol. It is that work of the Spirit by which we partake of a new spiritual
being, What regeneration is.
even of the life of Christ, yea of the same image of Christ, and by which we
are made new creatures.

As in every natural generation there is (as the Philosophers speak) an
introduction of a new form; as when the water is turned into air, or the are
is turned into fire, there is still another form, a new form brought into them;
or as when a child is generated, there is another new form brought into the
matter which it had not before, viz. a reasonable soul.

So is it in Spiritual Regeneration, there is a new Divine being or quality
brought into our souls by the Spirit, by which we are Spiritually changed from
what we were: Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit: Look as
that which is born of the flesh is flesh: the sinner begets a sinner; and that
which is born of the sinner, it is born after his own sinful image: In like
manner that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. If any man be born of the
Spirit, there is the life and holiness of that quickening and holy Spirit in
him; he is not what he was; there is an excellent change wrought in him; he is
quite contrary to himself, not only for conversation, but for inclination; his
mind, his judgment, his will, his affections, there is a new principle in
every one of these; Old things are past away, all things are become new, 2 Cor.
5. 17.

Quest. 2. Whether this work of Regeneration or Renovation is in every one of
the people of God unto whom the Spirit is given? Regeneration is in every child
of God.


Sol. Certainly it is: The Spirit is never put (in medio) within the heart of
any man, but he does regenerate and renew him: 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all with open
face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: Mark it, we are
changed by the Spirit of the Lord into the same image which we see in Christ: 2
Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Nay surely, all that
ever had the Spirit of God put within them, you shall find that they were new
creatures; you read it in Mary Magdalen, in Zacheus, in those Acts 2. in Paul,
Acts 9. in the Jailer, Acts 16. in the Corinthians; Such were some of you, but
ye are weshed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of our
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

Therefore consider well what you were, and what you now are; if there be not a
Regeneration, a work of Renovation in you, verily you have not the Spirit; God
has not put his Spirit within you.

If the old sinful qualities remain and prevail in you, of drunkenness, of
filthiness, of pride, of malice, of hatred of holiness, of unbelief, of
hardness of heart; if these or any other sinful lusts continue unmortified, you
have not received the Spirit: And if no new qualities contrary unto these are
to be found in you, if the image of Christ, if holiness, if faith, if love,
etc. are not in you in some measure, you are none of the people of God, you
have none of his Spirit within you.

For as they say of the soul of man, the soul does build and frame a house fit
for itself to dwell in, that is most true of the Spirit of God; when he comes
into our hearts, he does purge them, and renew them, and make them Temples fit
for himself to dwell in: Indeed he does not find us holy when he first comes
into us; but as soon as he comes he makes us holy, and sanctifies us throughout
in soul, spirit, and body; he fills our Temple with his glory.

Fifthly, Direction or leading: This is another work of the Spirit to be found
Direction is another work of the Spirit.
in all who have the Spirit given unto them; Spiritus Dei docet and ducit: Romans
8. 14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

And so (for the words are Reciprocal) as many as are the sons of God, they are
led by the Spirit of God. That expression of leading is a Metaphor taken either
from blind men, and men in the dark who do need a guide; or from little weak
children not able to go alone, and therefore are held and led by the hand: Now
concerning this work of the Spirit, I will briefly open two things unto you.

1. Quest. How the Spirit of God leads the people of God?

There is you know, a twofold leading or guidance of the Spirit. How the Spirit
leads Gods children.


1. One is general, by a common virtue or influence which assists the creatures
in all their powers and faculties to their several operations.

2. The other is special, by a more high and peculiar influence upon the hearts
of men in order to the estate, and acts, and ways of grace and salvation: Thus
the Spirit of God leads the people of God.

First, By way of Irradiation or illumination; he opens the eyes of their minds
to see the paths and ways of life, and the will and ways concerning them;
what way the Word reveals, certainly he reveals internally giving light to see
it: Isa. 2. 3. Come and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and he will
teach us of his ways. Chap. 20. 21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and
when ye turn to the left.

Secondly, By way of inclination: when the Spirit leads, he does not only show
us what good we are to do, but also he does powerfully incline our hearts to
comply with, and follow that direction of his; Psalm. 25. 4. Show me thy ways O
Lord, teach me thy paths. Ver. 5. Lead me in thy truth. Isa. 2. 3. He will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. The Spirits leading is
not a mere Revelation of the will and way of God unto the people of God, as if
one should point out the way to Traveller, but it is an efficacious persuasion,
add a secret and strange inclination, in enabling to walk in that good way of
life revealed by him unto them:

Thirdly, By way of Ex^ortation, stirring up their hearts, and quickening them
to holy services, and to walk according to his motions and directions: Cant. 1.
4. Draw me and I will run after thee. Psalm. 119. 37. Quicken me in thy way.
Cant. 4. 16. Awake O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden that
the Spices thereof may flow out.

Forthly, by way of Cooperation: As the Spirit leads us by inclining our hearts
unto good, so also he leads us by working with us in doing of good: He works
in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. And 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more
abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.

As when the King of Israel was to shoot the arrow, he did put his hand upon
the Bow, and Elisha did put his hand upon the Kings hand, 2 King. 13. 16. So
when we are to do any good work, we are to put up our hand, and the Spirit of
God likewise puts out his hand; he puts his strength to our strength, or rather
to our weakness; we are to pray, to mourn, to believe, to obey; and that we may
do these, he comes in with a new influence, help, and power assisting us unto
all these.

Fifthly, by way of Confirmation, sustaining, upholding, carrying us on from
path to path, from work to work, until we have finished all our work; he leads
us on in the course of holy obedience all the days of our life, from first to
last, till we come to our journeyes end: Psalm. 73. 24. Thou shall guide me with
thy counsel, and afterward receive me unto glory.

2. Quest. Why the Spirit of God thus leads the people of God?

Sol. Because

First, Of our ignorance; we cannot see but by his light. Why Gods Spirit leads
Gods people.


Secondly, Of our own inability or weakness; even when strongest, their own
graces of themselves alone are not sufficient strength unto them; which appears
in the great falls of the best of them, when left but a little unto themselves.

Thirdly, Of the difficulties of their work, and in their way and journey to
heaven; their work is very great, and the encounters which meet them are very
sharp; there was a red Sea, and a wilderness to pass through, and strong
enemies to be fought with, and conquered before they came to Canaan. So is it
with Christians in their way to heaven, etc. Thus you see that the Spirit of
God leads the people of God; he is given unto them for a Guide and Leader, and
they do hearken unto him willingly, desirously, carefully, constantly, and
follow their Leader.

But where is this leading work to be found? who amongst us is led by the
Spirit of God? Many

First, Are led by their own hearts lusts; they are at the command of every
sinful motion. Many are led

Secondly, By Satan; they presently follow every temptation of his, and his
will and works they will do. Many are

Thirdly, Led by the world; by the example of it, they will do as most men do;
by the fashions of it, they will not be like no body, but will attire
themselves as the world does; by the pleasures of it, by the profits of it, as
Balaam was led for reward even to curse the people of God. Many are led

Fourthly, By their own judgment, and by their own wills, and they will not be
controlled. And many are led

Fifthly, By the spirit of error, and not by the Spirit of truth: They are led
away with the error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3. 17. And follow their pernicious
ways, 2 Pet. 2. 2.

If all the men in the world were drawn out and stood under their proper
Colors and Leaders, how thin, how few would be found to follow this best, this
only safe Leader, the Spirit of God! but remember what the Apostle says, Romans
8. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye; as it is a sure sign of
salvation when we walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1.
and 4.) so it is a sure sign of damnation when we walk after the flesh, and not
after the Spirit.

Thus have you the discoveries of the Spirit of God by his works: Now follows
the second way of discovery by which we may know whether we have the Spirit of
God. viz.

2ly By the qualities of the Spirit.

There are many qualities by which the Spirit of God is set forth unto us in
scriptures; Having the spirit, may be known by the qualities of the Spirit.
all which (virtually) every one who has the Spirit does, or may find in
himself in some measure: I should be too tedious if I should discourse upon
every one of them, therefore I will fix upon some of them, e. g.

1. The Spirit of God is the Spirit of judgment, and of burning. 2. The Spirit
of God is the Spirit of knowledge. 3. The Spirit of God is the Spirit of power.
4. The Spirit of God is the Spirit of liberty. 5. The Spirit of God is the
Spirit of truth. 6. The Spirit of God is the Spirit of love. 7. The Spirit of
God is the Spirit of glory. 8. The Spirit of God is the Spirit of goodness.
First, The Spirit of God is the Spirit of judgment, and of burning: Isa. 4.
4. When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and
shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the Spirit
of judgment, and by the Spirit of burning. In the former verse God does make a
promse unto the Relics of Zion, and unto the Remnant of Jerusalem that they
shall be holy: In this verse he declares when this shall be, namely, In the
day when he shall wash them from their filth, and purge them from their blood:
Lastly, he shows how this should be caused, and that is by the Spirit of
judgment, and by the Spirit of burning. Some by the Spirit of judgment do
understand that Spirit by which God judges and punishes the wicked; others by
it do understand, a mind and power given to execute judgment or righteousness
for the deliverance of the people of God from their enemies, but (with
submission) I conceive, that by the Spirit of judgment is meant ^^ judicial (or
Judge-like) condemnation, such a Spirit as enables us to sit in judgment upon
our sinful lusts, in the arraigning of them, censuring, disallowing, and
condemning of them, even to death it self: And so by the Spirit of judgment may
be meant the efficacious fruit of the Spirit, which (in a way of execution)
separates sinful lust from the heart, and by degrees consumes, as the fire does
the dross: And certainly this is a truth, that such a Spirit as this, is the
Spirit of God in every man unto whom he is given: viz. He is a Spirit of (...),
he sets up (as it were) a Judges seat into the heart, and makes our selves to
be the judges, to give a righteous sentence, that all our sins and lusts are
such evils as are not to be endured, not to be harbored any longer, nay not
fit to live, but presently to dye, and to be destroyed. And he is also a Spirit
of burning; like as fire to the dross, which separates it from the metal, and
wastes and consumes it: in like manner does the Spirit work in our hearts a
separation from our sins, and a daily mortification of them: Hose. 14. 8.
Ephraim shall say, What have I any more to do with idols? Isa. 31. 7. Every man
shall cast away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold. Chapter 30. 22. Thou
shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, Get thee
hence: Romans 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body,
etc.

Beloved! as this is one special end why Lord gives his Spirit unto his people;
viz. that they may judge and condemn, and mortify their sinful lusts, so it is
(if I may so speak) the very Genius and natural disposition of the holy Spirit
to be casting out, pulling down, cleansing, and purging of all our impurities
and fleshly lusts which are so contrary to his nature, and so offensive unto
his presence: Hence it is that he maintains a constant and perpetual war with
sin in the hearts of the people of God, till at the last he gives unto them a
complete and perfect victory.

Now from what I have delivered in this concerning the Spirit of judgment and
of burning, two things will flow.

1. A conviction unto some, that they have not yet received the Spirit of God;
because,

1. They have not received the spirit of judgment to disallow and condemn
their sinful lusts and ways, but are so far from it, that on the contrary,
they do approve them, and defend them, and support them, and cannot endure to
hear the reproof and condemnation of them from the Word, or Ministry, or any
other, but presently they rage, and swell, and grow discontented, and
malicious, and revengeful.

2. They have not received the spirit of burning to abhor their sins, and to
crucify them, forasmuch as they do still love their sins, and will serve them,
and will not forsake them, Job 20. 13. But their great delight is in their
sinful ways, and they hold fast their iniquities, and hate to be reformed;
surely these persons have never received the Spirit of God.

2. A comfort unto others, that they have received the Spirit of God: Because,

1. They do judge themselves, and really do disallow and condemn all sin in
themselves: Romans 7. 15. That which I do I allow not.

2. They are daily mortifying their sinful lusts, by striving after a fuller
fellowship in the death of Christ, by relying on sin-subduing and mortifying
promises, and by constant hatred and opposition of their lusts which war
against the law in their mind; so that they will not serve sin any more; and
though (as the Apostle spoke in 2 Cor. 10, 3.) they walk in the flesh, yet they
do not war after the flesh.

Secondly, The Spirit of God is the Spirit of knowledge and wisdom; so you read
in Isa. 11. 2. The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. Ephesians.
1. 17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory, may give unto
you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him. Whosoever has
the Spirit of God, that man has wisdom given unto him by the Spirit; not
carnal wisdom, but heavenly wisdom, true wisdom indeed; which wisdom appears
in four things.

First, as to the subject; If thou be wise (says Solomon) thou shall be wise
for thy self, Prove. 9. 12. And herein is a man's wisdom for himself, when he
principally minds, and looks after, and spends his choysest cares, and lays
out his chiefest pains to make sure work for the saving of his immortal soul.
That man is wise indeed, and he only is wise who so attends his soul, that he
is never at rest until he finds his soul to be ready in a safe and sound
condition: And thus does every one who has the Spirit of God given unto him;
he is by the Spirit made wise unto salvation: What shall I do to be saved! Act.
16. 30 He work^ out his own salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. And
gives all diligence to make his calling and election sure. 2 Per. 1. 12. 2ly As
to the Object, in making choice of the best and most necessary object for the
soul, and in refu^ing that which is pernicious and impertinent: And this wisdom
all have who have the Spirit of God: For

1 They pitch upon the most excellent and most necessary object to enjoy that;
viz. God to be their God, and reconciled Father; and Christ to be their Lord,
and Redeemer, and Savior. One thing is necessary, and Mary has chosen that
good part, etc.

2. They abhor sin, which is the pernicious object: I hate every false way,
said David, Psalm. 119. 104. And Solomon says, Prove. 14. 16. A wise man fears
and departs from evil.

3. They are above the world, which is the impertinent object for the soul; We
look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen;
for things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 18.

Thirdly, As to means and ways tending to the fruition of eternal blessedness;
These they find out, and in these they walk, until they come and appear before
God: Repentance, Faith, Holiness, Righteousness, Love, new Obedience,
Uprightness, these are the vety paths and ways to heaven, and all these do
they choose and walk in, who have the Spirit of God given unto them: Psalm. 119.
30. I have chosen the way of truth. Ver. 35. Make me to go in the path of thy
commandments, for therein do I delight. Isa. 26. 7. The way of the just is
uprightness.

Fourthly, As to time or season: Eccles. 8. 5. A wise man's heart discerns
both time and judgment: And this part of wisdom also is found in all that have
the Spirit of God.

There is a day of visitation, a day of knowledge of the things which do
concern our peace, Luke 19. 42, 44.

A day of salvation, an accepted time, 2 Cor. 6. 2. A time when Christ offers
himself, and love, and mercy, and happiness, and strives with the hearts of men
to know and accept of him: And this time they who have the Spirit of God,
discern and do lay hold on, and do gladly embrace; they do not slight, nor
delay, nor harden their hearts; But while it is called to day they hearken:
Like the wise Merchant, who as soon as he found the pearl of great price, sold
all and bought it, Matthew. 13. 45, 46.

Now if this wisdom of the spirit be (as indeed it is) the evidence that we
have the Spirit; O how few then have the Spirit of God given unto them! Who
takes care in the first place for his soul, and makes sure the salvation of
it! Who sets his heart upon a God, upon a Christ, upon Reconciliation, upon
pardoning mercy; and not rather upon his sins, and on the world? Who knows the
day of grace, the day of his visitation, the day of his salvation, the accepted
time! Who choose the path of holiness, the way of uprightness, etc.

3. Thirdly, The Spirit of God is the Spirit of power; and he is such a Spirit
in and unto all unto whom he is given: Romans 15. 18. The Gentiles were made
obedient. Ver. 19 By the power of the Spirit of God. 2 Timothy 1. 7. God has
given unto us not the spirit of fear, but of power. Isa. 11. 2. The Spirit of
the Lord is there called the Spirit of might: Ephesians. 6. 10. Be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might. The Spirit of God is a most strong and
powerful Spirit; and he puts forth a wonderful power in all them unto whom he
is given: e. g.

First, he raises every one of them from the dead; what the Lord spoke of the
people of Israel touching their civil estate: Ezekiel. 3^. 13, 14. I have opened
your graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves, and will put
my Spirit within you, and you shall live: That is true in a spiritual sense of
all the people of God unto whom the Spirit of God is given: Though before the
donation of the Spirit they were dead in tresp^sses and sins; yet when the
spirit is given unto them, they are by the operation of that spirit quickened,
made alive, and raised from that dead estate: Ephesians. 2. 1. You has he quickened
who were dead in trespasses and sins; they have the life of God and Christ in
them: O what a power is put forth in the raising of a dead man! and yet there
is a greater power of the spirit put forth in the raising of a dead sinner.

Secondly, He enables them, both to perceive, and also to receive the things of
God; to perceive the glory and excellency of them, and to receive the goodness
and sweetness of them.

1. To perceive them: Mat. 13. 11. It is given unto you to know the mysteries
of the kingdom of God; but to them it is not given. And 1 Cor. 2. 6. We speak
wisdom amongst them that are perfect. Ver. 7. The wisdom of God in a mystery.
Ver. 8. Which none of the Princes of this world know. Ver. 14. Which are
foolishness unto the natural man, and which he cannot know, q. they are
spiritually discerned: Compare these places together, and you shall find two
differences 'twixt them who have the Spirit, and them that have not the Spirit,
concerning the things of God; viz

To the one they are wisdom, yea, and wisdom of God, but to the other they Who
have, and have not the Spirit.
are foolishness.

When we preach Jesus Christ and the things of salvation, the new creature,
self-denial, living by faith in Christ promised, etc. and make offers of him
unto a people; some make light of him, and regard not the offer at all, they
see no beauty at all in him that they should desire him: Yet others see in him
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father; and do admire at that infinite
mercy, and goodness, and love, and life, in and by him; the reason is, because
the one knows him not; but to the other it is given to know him, and to discern
the mystery of salvation in him.

2. To receive hi^: Joh. 1. 11. He came amongst his own, and his own received
him not. Ver. 12. But as many as received him, etc. And who were these that
received him; See Ver. 13. Such as were born, not of blood, nor of the will of
the the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. So Acts 2. 41. They that
gladly received the Word were baptized. But 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God: If Christ be offered, the
natural man will not receive him; If Christ says, He that is my Disciple must
deny himself: This is a hard saying, who can bear it? Joh. 6. 60. And take up
his cross and follow me; the natural man will not receive this: If the Word
says, Repent and be converted that your sins may be blotted out, Acts 3. 19.
The natural man will not receive this, nor will he receive that truth in Matthew.
7. 41. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, etc.
But every one who has the Spirit of God, as he has a power given to perceive
or discern the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and all the ways and rules
belonging thereunto; so he has also an heart given to close with the Kingdom
of Christ, and with every part and path of it.

Thirdly, The Spirit enables them to pray, and under the sense of their wants
and troubles to come unto God as their Father, and to open their conditions
unto him with judgment, affection, and confidence; Romans 8. 15. We have
received the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father. Ver. 26. Likewise
the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray
for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with
groanings which cannot be uttered. Here you see that they who have the Spirit
of Adoption, have received the Spirit of supplication, every son of God is able
to call God Father, and to cry unto him as his Father; and that the Spirit of
God is in this work of Prayer by making intercession for them, appears, 1. By
enabling them to make requests for themselves, with groanings which cannot be
uttered. 2. With fervency and earnestness of heart.

Object. But will some reply, This cannot be a distinguishing sign that we have
the Spirit, because many wicked men do pray, and so do many hypocrites: Isa.
26. Whether the Spirit of Prayer be a sure sign of a child of God.
16. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they have poured out a Prayer
when thy chastening was upon them; Ergo, etc.

Sol. I answer,

First, By way of Concession, granting three things unto wicked men and
hypocrites; viz.

1. They may and do in their distresses put forth natural desires for help, as
the very beasts do under their burdens and wants.

2. They may, and generally do satisfy themselves with a form of Prayer, which
they read, or hear read unto them, which is another thing from the Spirit of
Prayer.

3. They may have the gift of Prayer, or an ability to pray by the strength of
gifts, and parts; and upon hearing of others, to gather up some good
expressions and fragments, and ^utter them as if they did pray.

Secondly, By way of Negation: Notwithstanding those three Concessions, I deny
that any man has the spirit of supplication, who has not the Spirit of grace;
because, the spirit of supplication is given with the spirit of adoption which
is proper to the sons of God: Every one who has the Spirit of Prayer, he can
come unto God, and call him Father, which none can do, but such as are in
Christ, in whom he becomes our reconciled God and Father. To pray with the
Spirit of Prayer, is to pray with a special (My soul is sore troubled, Psalm.
6.) feeling of our wants, and of our (I am not worthy to be called thy son)
unworthiness, and the desires of our soul, etc. (with my whole heart, and my
soul follows hard after thee; with affectionate earnestness of heart, and with
(I believe, therefore I have spoken) confidence toward God in the name of
Christ, that he will give unto us the good things which he has promised to us
in his Covenant, 2 Samuel 7. 27. Thou have revealed unto thy servant, saying, I
will build thee an house, therefore thy servant, etc. Who can pray thus, but he
who is a child of God, but he who has the Spirit of God, to show unto him his
spiritual wants, to stir up in him spiritual and earnest desires to quicken
his Faith on God, and to depend on his good and faithful Promises in Christ!
etc.

Fourthly, I will add one instance more concerning the power in all who have
received the Spirit, and that is this; All who have received the Spirit, have
received a power to do such works as none else in all the world can do; for
they are able in the strength and power of the Spirit,

1. To abhor the dearest lusts, which have formerly been more unto them than
their lives and heavenly happiness.

2. To forsake Father and Mother, Husband and Wife, and Children and Friends,
Houses and Lands for Christ, and an afflicted estate with Christ.

3. To prize communion with God, and to take more satisfying delight therein,
than in all earthly enjoyments whatsoever: But Lord lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon me: Psalm. 4. 6. Show us the Father and it suffices us.
Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee, etc.

4. To live by faith in the times of desertion (Though he kill me, yet will I
trust in him, Job 13. 15.) and in times of desolation when as creature helps
and comforts fail; Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit
be in the Vine, and the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat, and the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be
no herd in the stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my salvation, H^b. 3. 17, 18. The Lord God is my strength, ver. 19.

5. To be contented in every estate, and to comply with it: Phil. 4. 12, 13.
and to glorify God under it: O where is this power of the Spirit of God? where
are any great things or works of the Spirit within us? I cannot pray, says
one, and I cannot leave my sins, says another; and I can find and take no
delight in God, or communion with him, says another; and I cannot trust on his
Word, nor wait upon his Promise, etc. Few men have any Spiritual power, and
therefore few men have the Spirit of God.

Fourthly, The Spirit of God is the Spirit of liberty: 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: Liberty is a freedom from bondage, or
slavery; and Gospel-liberty (which principally respects the soul) is a freedom
accruing unto us

Partly by price and purchase, namely by the blood of Christ: The Lord Jesus by
his death has purchased many glorious liberties for us; he has freed us from
the Law as it is a Covenant of Works, Gal. 3. 11, 12. and from the curse and
wrath, ver. 13. and from all condemning power of sin, etc. Romans 8. 1.

Partly by strength and efficacy; this liberty comes unto us by the Spirit who
puts forth a strong and mighty hand upon all the hearts of all the people of
God, and rescues and frees them from spiritual slavery under which they were
held whiles they were in their natural condition.

The Spirit of God does free them

First, From slavery to sin: See Romans 8. 2 The law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death: (i. e.) The power
of the Spirit has freed me out of the hands and power of sin, so that it shall
not command and rule over me as heretofore; it is no longer my Lord, nor am I
any longer his servant; I am delivered and freed from the dominion and tyranny
of it, and service unto it, by the Law (i. e.) by the powerful and
authoritative command and work of the Spirit: upon this account the Apostle
affirms, that all the servants of God are made free from sin, Romans 6. 18, 22.
they are not in bondage, they are not at the command of it; sin has lost its
law and authority in them; the yoke is broken by the spirit which is given unto
them; sin indeed will stir, and trouble, and usurp; but slavery unto it is
taken away: Isa: 10. 27. The yoke shall be destroyed, because of the anointing.

Secondly, From slavery to Satan: Before we receive the Spirit of God, we are
in bondage unto the Devil, who rules or works effectually in us: Ephesians. 2. 2.
and takes us captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. as one that has a bird tied,
etc. O what power has Satan over a natural man! how he fetters, and shackles,
and binds him, and imprisons him, and makes him to drudge in the fulfilling of
his motions, and obeying of his suggestions and temptations! But now when the
Spirit of God comes into us, he spoils the strong man armed, and takes from
him all the armor wherein he trusted, Luke 11. 21, 22. For he is stronger than
he. 1 John 4. 4. He leads captivity captive; he turns us from Satan unto God,
Acts. 26. 18.

Object. But Satan still tempts and assaults! never was man so tempted as I am!

Sol. Temptation is one thing, and salvation is another; he bestirred himself
in tempting and we obeyed; he now tempts and we resist.

He frees us from him, 1. By making us to abhor his Kingdom. 2ly By translating
us out of his power into the Kingdom of Christ. 3ly By arming us with the
armor of God against his assaults. 4ly By stirring us up to resist him: Jam. 4
7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. And 5ly By strengthening us to
overcome him; 1 John 2. 13. Ye have overcome the wicked one.

Thirdly, From slavish fear, and a slavish spirit in working; in this respect
he makes us to serve God without fear, Luke 1. 74. that is, without servile
fear; for there is a twofold fear.

There is Timor filialis, which is grounded in the love of God as a Father; and
there is Timor servilis, which looks upon God only as a Judge, and has a
respect to fo wrath. Now when the Spirit of God is given unto us, we do not
serve God tor fear of wrath, and punishment, and damnation, but out of love,
and reverence, and ingenuity: Though there were no Law to curse us; though
there were no Conscience to terrify us; though there were no Hell to burn us;
yet the Lord our God and Father we will love, and him will we serve.

Fourthly, From slavish indispositions, as averseness to what is good, and
indelightfulness in it: They that are anointed by the Spirit and power of God,
it makes them ready, and willing out of love, and working out of love.

Fifthly, The Spirit of God is a Spirit of truth; Joh. 14. 16. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter. Ver. 17. even the Spirit of
truth. John 16. 13. When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide y^u into
all truth.

SECT. I.
THere are diverse sorts of truth* of which the Spirit is the Author, and
Diverse sorts of truth of which the spirit is the author. Truth of Doctrine.
which he works in all those who do partake of him.

First, The truth of Doctrine, in opposition to erroneous and false Doctrines:
Joh. 17. 17. Thy Word is truth. 1 Timothy 2. 4. Who would have all men to come to
the knowledge of the truth.

The truth of Doctrine consists principally in knowing and understanding those
points and ways which do teach and guide us certainly unto salvation; and this
is called the truth in Jesus: Epehs. 4. 21. And the truth which is after
godliness, Tit. 1. 1. This truth does the Spirit teach all unto whom he is
given; he makes them to know the Word of truth, and which is the way of life;
he builds them upon Christ, and roots them in Christ who is, Joh. 14. 6. The
way, and life, and truth; and makes them to be sound in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, The truth of judgment and understanding: Joh. 17. 17. Sanctify
Truth of judgment.
them with thy truth; by which some think is meant the true understanding of
all things necessary to salvation: This is called the Spirit of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7. a mind not tainted, not corrupted: Sound in the Faith, Titus 1. 13.
and Chap. 2. 2.

All who have the Spirit of God, have truth of judgment, they have the Spirit
of a sound mind in the matters of salvation, they are sound in the faith;
although they may mistake in other matters, and differ in their Opinions, yet
they are all of them of a sound judgment in the Essential Points of salvation;
they are sound in the faith, in the fundamentals.

Thirdly, The truth of heart: Psalm. 51. 6. Thou love truth in the inward
Truth of heart.
parts: This truth is that which we call uprightness and sincerity of heart, in
opposition to Hypocrisy; the Apostle calls it the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5. 8. This kind of truth also is the Spirit author
and worker of in all unto whom he is given; he gives them true hearts of truth,
sincere and upright hearts even in the judgment of God himself: Job 1. 8. Have
thou considered my servant Job that there is none like him in the earth, a
perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil! Isa. 58.
3. Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart.

Fourthly, The truth of speech, in opposition to lying, fraud, and falsehood;
The truth of speech.
as Psalm. 15. 2. He that speaks the truth in his heart. Ephesians. 4. 25. Put
away lying, and speak truth every man to his neighbor.

They that h^ve indeed the Spirit of God, dare not lie, dare not be guilty of
falsehoods, etc. the spirit of truth ever causes the lip of truth, Psalm. 119.
163. I hate and abhor lying.

Fifthly, The truth of faithful and righteous dealing between man and man, in
The truth of righteous dealing.
making and keeping just Covenants, Promises, and bargains; Jer. 5. 3. O Lord,
are not thine eyes upon the truth! (i. e. of just and righteous dealing;) this
also is in them who have the spirit: Psalm. 15. 4. He that swears to his own
hurt and changes not. But now what shall I say? to whom shall I speak? how few
have the Spirit of God which is the Spirit of truth!

1. How abundantly rife is the spirit of error! Few have the spirit of God.
2. How unsound are the judgments of men, who do err concerning the faith,
and contend to subvert it! 3. How rotten and hypocritical the hearts of men!
they profess God in words, and godliness in words, but they deny him in works;
and though they have that show, yet they do deny the power of godliness. 4. How
lying, and false, and fraudulent (...) are men in their speaking and dealings!
one hardly knows when many do speak truth, because we find that they do
constantly speak lies, with that boldness, and confidence, and impudency, etc.
Jer. 9. 5. They will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not speak the
truth; they have taught their tongue to speak lies, etc.
Sixthly, The Spirit of God is the Spirit of love: So Romans 15. 30. I beseech
you Gods spirit is the spirit of love.
brethren for the Lord Jesus sake, and for the love of the Spirit, etc. 2 Timothy
1. 7. God has given us the Spirit of love. Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the Spirit
is love; and he puts love in the first place; In whomsoever the Spirit of God
is, in them is a holy and precious love kindled by that spirit: A love

First, To God; O love the Lord all ye his Saints, Psalm. 31. 23. And I love the
Lord, says David, Psalm. 116. 1. We love him, because he loved us first, 1 John
4. 19. Love to God.
The Lord direct your heart to the love of God, 2 These. 3. 5. It cannot be but
that every one who has the Spirit of God, must love God. For

1. The Spirit renews all the affections, and carries them to their proper
object; God is the peculiar object of a renewed heart. Reasons of it.


2. The Spirit sets open unto us the precious thoughts of God toward us, and
the exceeding riches of his grace; yea and sheds abroad the love of God in our
hearts, Romans 5. 5. And makes us to know the things which are freely given us of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

Secondly, To Christ Jesus; Cant. 1. 4. The upright love thee. Cant. 3. 3. To
Christ Jesus.
Saw ye, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen, ye love. Joh. 21. 17. Lord,
thou know all things, thou know that I love thee: why, how can it be
otherwise, but that if one has the very Spirit of Christ, he must love Christ?
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be an Anathema Mran-atha, 1
Cor. 16. 22. Would you have this affirmed of any one to whom God gives his
Spirit? but it must if any of them should not love Christ: The Spirit makes the
match between Christ and us, causes that union, and can this be without a
mutual love? can any man give in his heart to Christ, and yet not love him?

Object. But every man will say that he loves God, and that he loves Christ,
etc.

Sol. It Is true, men generally say so; but there are few only that do so: To
love God, and to love Christ, is What it is to love God and Christ.


First, To have the heart entirely set upon them.

Secondly, To have the heart most set upon them.

Thirdly, To desire exceedingly their presence and communion.

Fourthly, To take special delight and satisfaction in that communion.

Fifthly, Not to love any thing that is contrary to this, against them, or
offensive unto them.

Sixthly, To take heed to walk before them in all well-pleasing; such a love as
this is in every one who has the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, To all the children of God; and servants of Jesus Christ: 1 These. 4.
9. Ye are taught of God to love one another. 1 John 5. 2. Every one that loves
him Love to Gods children.
that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. 1 Pet. 3. 8. Love as
brethren. Col. 2. 2. Being knit together in love.

If this be the fruit of the Spirit, then many men have not the Spirit for they
Who have not the spirit.
hate the people of God (The righeous are an abomination unto the wicked, Pro.
29. 27. Yea, and many who talk much of the Spirit, have great cause to suspect
their hearts, because they do not love the people of God; they do love men of
their particular Opinion, and men of their particular interest; but if in these
any of the people of God do differ from them, now they cannot love them, but
they have very hard and uncharitable Opinions of them, and speak evil of them,
and revile them, and utterly shun and decline them.

SECT. III.
THus have you the discoveries of the presence of the Spirit of God by the
qualities of the Spirit: Now follows the last way to know whether we have the
Spirit of God, and that is

3ly By the properties of such persons to whom indeed the The spirit is known
by the properties.
Spirit is given. e. g.

They that have the Spirit given unto them, are spiritually-minded: Romans 8. 5.
They that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that
are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. Here the Apostle gives a
different character Such as are Spiritually minded.
of two different sorts of persons: Here are some who are after the flesh, (i.
e.) who are carnal, unregenerate, in their natural condition; the character of
these persons is, that they do mind the things of the flesh, sinful, sensual,
vain things: And there are some who are after the Spirit (i. e.) who are born
of the Spirit, who are Regenerate, converted, sanctified by the Spirit; and the
character of them is, That they do mind the things of the Spirit: The things of
the Spirit (i. e.) the things which the Spirit of God commands, suggests, the
things which are agreeable to a spiritual nature, holy, and heavenly objects,
holy and heavenly ways, and works, the things which belong to the kngdom of
God, and the Righteousness thereof; the things which do conduce to the glory of
God, and the salvation of their souls: They do mind these things, they do
Cogitare, think much of them; they do Curare, lay out their greatest care for
them; they do Sapere, relish these things above all other, they are most sweet
and delightful unto them: Psalm. 4. 6. But Lord lift thou up the light, etc.
Psalm. 119. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea sweeter than honey
to my mouth! Cant. 2. 3. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and
his fruit was sweet unto my taste. O what a discovery does this one trial make:
They that are after the Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit: Many men
seldom or never think of the things of the Spirit; God is not in their
thoughts, they say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways, Job 21. 14. They mind not God, nor Christ, nor Word, nor Soul, nor
Heaven, nor Repentance, nor Faith, etc. If they do think of them, it is but
carelessly, and coldly, not with any care to get them, not with any affections
to desire them, or to delight in them; they are not suitable objects, etc. The
things of God, the things of Christ, the thin^s of salvation, the things of the
way to heaven they savor them not, they relish them not at all; but their
sinful lusts they do mind, on these do their thoughts run, and in these do they
take pleasure; and they do mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. on these are their
affections set; who will show us any good? any earthly bargain, any earthly
gain, and earthly discourse, these they savor and relish, etc.

Yea I doubt that many amongst us who presume their estates to be good, have
just cause to fear and suspect themselves, because spiritual Ordinances and
spiritual Communions, and spiritual Conferences, and spiritual Exercises and
Employments, and spiritual Meditations, and Cares, are no way favoury and
relishing, and delighting, but rather burdensome, irksome, and displeasing!

O where is a David to be found amongst us! who can say with him, Psalm. 119.
97. O how I love thy Law! it is my meditation all the day. And ver. 111. Thy
testimonies are the rejoicing of my heart. Where is a Paul to be found! 1 Cor.
2. 2. I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified.

Secondly, They that have the Spirit given unto them, they are presently in
They oppose their corruptions.
opposition or conflict with sinful corruptions abiding or dwelling in them:
the flesh against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these are
contrary the one to the other, etc.

Before we do partake of the Spirit, all is at rest and peace within us; the
flesh (i. e.) sin does reign and command, and we do willingly yield obedience
and service unto its lusts, in the approbation and delight, and execution of
them: But when the Spirit of God comes into our hearts, and renews them, now
begins the conflict and war, there being in us two natures contrary to each
other, and inclinations, and affections, contrary to each other, and motions
and services likewise contrary to each other. For the work of Renovation We are
renewed but in part.
from the Spirit, although it passes through the whole soul and every faculty
of it, yet it is an imperfect work; the whole soul is renewed, but not wholly;
not a faculty but it has renewing grace in it, yet so that there is not a
faculty but it has sin also abiding in it: And hence does arise the Spiritual
conflict from the presence and cohabitation of two such utterly different, and
irreconcilable adversaries as grace and sin, the Spirit and the flesh.

Paul found this within himself, Romans 7. and so does every regenerate person in
the world: The Spirit kindles such a war in a man, renewed self against his
sinful self, as will never be quenched nor ended until his course be finished,
and his life ended.

Thirdly, They that have the Spirit given unto them (for that very reason) Such
shall meet with great opposition.
shall meet with most deadly opposition from men destitute of the Spirit,
though we be civil, and courteous, and friendly, and helpful, if we be born of
the Spirit, etc. Gal. 4. 29. as then he that was born after the flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. Here is
Ishmael born after the flesh (i. e.) an ungodly and wicked wretch; and here is
Isaac born after the Spirit (i. e.) according to the promise of the Spirit, and
according to the powerful and gracious renewing of the Spirit, and presently he
is persecuted by Ishmael.

That must needs be good which Nero persecutes; so he must needs be good, he
must needs have the Spirit of God, against whom all the scoffings, and
mockings, and reproaches, and persecutions of the wicked are raised.

Fourthly, They that have the Spirit, do walk in the Spirit, and after the
Spirit; you read those expressions, Gal. 5. 25. and Romans 8. 4. We walk not
after Such walk in the Spirit.
the flesh, but after the Spirit: Now as to walk after the flesh, is to set an^
order the course of our life after our corrupt reason, and wills, and
affections, following them as our guides; so to walk after the Spirit is to
dispose and order our conversation according to the rules and motions of the
Spirit, so to lead our lives, and move on in our courses, as the the Spirit of
God does teach us in the Word, and stirs us up inwardly to follow.

Thus does every one who has the Spirit of God; he walks after the Spirit, his
conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3. 20. His course of life is the course of new
obedience, that newness of life which the Word sets forth: He walks not as the
men of this world walk, nor according to his own lusts in the times of his
ignorance, but before God in Holiness and Righteousness; for by the Spirit he
is sanctified to obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 2.

1. He prays with David, Psalm. 119. 133. Order my steps in thy Word. Ephesians. 5.
10. Proving what is acceptabe to the Lord. 2. For the paths: Psalm. 119. 101. I
have refrained my feet from every evil way. Ver. 8. I will walk in thy
statutes. Isa. 26. 7. The way of the just is uprightness. 3. For the end, so
as to advaace the Kingdom, and advance the Gospel: a living unto the Lord.
Fifthly, They that have the Spirit, are spiritual worshippers: The true
worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth; for the Father
seeks Such are spiritual worshipers.
such to worship him; God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship
him in Spirit and in truth, John 4. 23. 24. So Paul in Romans 1. 9. God is my
witness whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son. Phil 3. 3. We are
the circumcision which worship God in the Spirit.

Beloved, take these two things for certain truths. viz.

1. Carnal men are but carnal worshippers; a form of worship satisfies them,
bodily service, outward performance: Isa. 29. 13. This people draw near me with
Carnal men are carnal worshipers.
their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart
far from me, etc. Jer. 12. 2. Thou art near in their mouth, and far from
their reins.

2. But spiritual men (or men of the spirit) are spiritual worshippers, they do
worship God in spirit.

Object. But you will say, What is it to worship God in spirit?

Sol. I answer, to worship God in spirit, is

First, To have our inward man taken up, employed, and acting in all those
Religious duties which we do owe, and which we do present unto him. As when
What it is to worship God in Spirit.
we draw near to him in prayer, for power to repent, to believe, to obey, etc.
not only our mouths do pray, but our very hearts also do pray, and our prayers
are the lifting up of our hearts: Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul,
Psalm. 25. 1. (Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens,
Lam. 3. 41.) And the very desires of our souls, Isa. 26. 8. The desire of our
soul is to thy name. And when you come to him in confession of sins, not only
your lips do acknowledge them, and condemn you for them, but your very hearts
are ashamed of them, and bewail them, and judge them: And so when you come to
hear the Word, a bodily presence does not satisfy you, but your hearts do come
with your bodies, and your hearts do hear, and your hearts are ready to receive
the Word with gladness and fear.

Secondly, To have an edge upon our hearts in the services of God, a kind of
heavenly vigor and strenuousnesse, so that our souls do come in to it with all
the actual strength which they have for the present.

Indeed a Christan has sometimes a stronger and quicker keeness of spirit than
he has at other times, but still he puts forth (as least in his desires and
endeavors) what power he has in his communion with God: As he seeks God with
his mouth, so he seeks him with his whole heart: Psalm. 119. 10. With my whole
heart have I sought thee; he does not serve the Lord with a cold, formal,
indifferent spirit, but as the Apostle speaks, Romans 12. 11. He is fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord: He prays and hears fervently, and repents fervently,
and believes fervently: It Is true that he falls very short; yet what he does to
the Lord, he does the same in good earnest, it is his work, and his business;
and if he finds it otherwise with himse^f, if he finds a dullness and deadness
upon his spirit, this troubles him, and he strives to shake it off, by stirring
up himself (as the phrase is, Isa. 64. 7. and that of 2 Timothy 1. 6.) and by
awaking of his heart and graces (I my self will awake, says David, Psalm. 108.
2.) and beseeching of the Lord to quicken and to enlarge his heart: I will run
the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119. 32.

Sixthly, They who have the Spirit of God, are most pleased and delighted in
Such delight in spiritual ministrations.
spiritual and vigorous ministrations, which deal most with their spirits, and
do in a spiritual power most reach their hearts and spiritual condition.
Beloved, this you shall find in experience, that a profane heart cannot endure
but always hates and despises a spiritual and searching Ministry. A formal
heart has most satisfaction in a formal Ministry. A gracious heart is always
best pleased with a spiritual and powerful Ministry, with that Ministry which
does come in power, and in the demonstration of the Spirit, and makes it self
manifest unto the consciences of men, which is quick in operation and piercing
even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.
12. and which is mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor.
10. 1. Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts itself
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, ver. 5. This spiritual Ministry is that with which a
spiritual heart does and can most close. O a Ministry which does most dive into
the heart, and discovers the depth of sin, and the hidden things of the heart,
and the secret guiles and hypocrisies of our spirits! And that Ministry which
shames our sins most, and rents them out of our bosoms, and makes our souls to
loath them! And that Ministry which like a spiritual Adamant draws a heart to
Christ, breaking down all the powers of unbelief! And that Ministry which
discovers and dashes in pieces all our self-deceits, and all our
self-confideace! And that Ministry which presses and leads one to the power
of godliness, and to the practical expressing of the virtues of Jesus Christ,
and of him that calls us! And that Ministry which raises a drooping soul
with spiritual truth, and rules, though never so strict and contrary to flesh
and blood! This is a Spiritual Ministry, and this is a Ministry of the Spirit,
and this is the Ministry which every one (who indeed has the Spirit of God)
does highly prize, does cordially close with, and desires from his soul to live
under: Psalm. 139. 23. Search me O God, and know my heart, try me, and know my
thoughts. Ver. 24. And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting. Such are singularly tender as to the spirit.


Seventhly, They who have the Spirit, have this property also that they are
singularly tender as to that spirit; which appears in four things.

1. In no case will they part with the Spirit: Psalm. 6. 11. Take not thy holy
Spirit from me! 2. They are afraid by anything to grieve the Spirit: Ephesians. 4.
30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God by whom, etc. 3. If they have grieved him
so as to withdraw himself, they are not at rest until the Spirit returns again
in his gracious operations and manifestations: Psalm. 51, 10. Renew a right
Spirit within me. And Ver. 12. Uphold me with thy free Spirit. 4. They strive
more and more after purity of Spirit, that so that good Spirit may take more
and more delight to dwell in his temple.
Thus have I at length finished the Trials and Characters by which we may know
whether the Lord has given his own Spirit unto us.

SECT. III.
2. Use I Now proceed unto a second Use, which shall be of Comfort unto all and
every one unto whom the Spirit of God is given, who do find him in their hearts
in any of those works and saving effects beforementioned; Not without cause
does the Apostle Paul take pleasure in this, I have the Spirit of Christ, and
we have received the Spirit of God, and the Holy Ghost is given unto us: Yea
Christ himself looked upon the sending and giving of the Spirit to be the
Comforter unto his Disciples, as equivalent unto his own presence with them,
and as a sufficient cordial against all the troubles of their heart, and
against all the temptations of the world.

Quest. But will some say, What benefit and happiness is there by having the
Spirit of God given unto us?

Sol. I will answer you 1. In the general. 2ly In particular unto this Question.

1. In the General.

The presence of the Spirit of God within you, it is an infallible evidence of
The benefits which come by having the spirit. Such are assured of their
election.
your happiness in the whole estate of it from first to last, from eternity to
eternity, from the time past to the time present, and the time to come.

First, For the time past: Beloved, our happiness begins long before we do
begin; it begins in the eternal love of God, and in the election of God, before
the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. The Records of election are Records
of Eternity; that is the date of writing our names in heaven, and in the book
of life: And questionless this is a great part of our blessedness (it is the
first stone thereof which is said) that we are (out of a free and an immutable
love and purpose) set down and infallibly chosen and ordained for blessedness;
of which gracious act the presence of the Spirit is a sure evidence unto us: 2
These. 2. 13. God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit. Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy.

Secondly, For the time present; it is (you know) a common doubt and debate
among serious and solid Christians, whether their present spiritual condition
Such have the spirits presence to assure them that God is their Father.
be right and sound? whether or no they have a real relation to God as their
Father? and whether Christ be in them of a truth? and verily that estate is
really good, and sound, and sure in which there is such a relation and such a
profession. Now when the Spirit of God is given, his presence and work are
undoubted evidences of him: Romans 8. 15. We have received the Spirit of adoption
whereby we cry Abba Father. Ver. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with
our spirit that we are the children of God. 1 John 3. 24. Hereby we know that
he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.

Thirdly, For the time to come; there is reserved for all the people of God in
heaven, an incorruptible and undefiled inheritance that fades not away, 1 Pet.
1. 4. Assured of their salvation*
A Crown of life, Rev. 2. 10. An exceedingly exceeding, and eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. And of this also is the presence of the Spirit a sure
evidence unto us: Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. The holy Spirit is the earnest of our
inheritance; q. d. The Lord will hereafter give you full possession, he has
promised you no less than an heavenly kingdom, and a glorious inheritance; for
you are his Children and Heirs; and to satisfy and assure you of this, he has
given you a pledge or earnest, and that earnest is his own Spirit; in that you
have for the present the Spirit of God, this is your earnest that you shall
hereafter fully enjoy the kingdom of God.

And now I beseech you tell me, whether the enjoying of the Spirit of God be
not very happy and comfortable?

If you look back, by this you know that your names are written in heaven: If
you look on your present condition, by this you know that God is your Father,
and you are his children; Christ is yours, and you are Christ's: If you look
forward, by this also you know that heavenly glory is yours, and shortly you
shall perfectl^ an^ eternally possess it; and all this you may look on as most
sure, because God has given his Spirit unto you.

2ly In Particular:

But let us descend unto particulars, which if we do rightly understand and
consider of, we must confess that to have the Spirit given unto us, it is an
unspeakable blessing and mercy.

You read in Scripture of several Attributes (if I may so call them) given unto
the Spirit, and all of them in relation unto those to whom he is given; And
every one of them respecting their good and benefit all the days of their
life; He is called

1. A holy and sanctifying Spirit. What the spirit is called in Scripture.
2. A revealing and manifesting Spirit. 3. A strengthening and helping Spirit.
4. A restoring and recovering Spirit. 5. A comforting and quickening Spirit. 6.
A dwelling and an abiding Spirit.
1 Fifthly, The Spirit of God which is given unto you is a holy and sanctifying
He is a holy and sanctifying spirit.
Spirit: He is the holy Spirit of God; Ephesians. 4. 30. And the Spirit sanctifies,
1 Cor. 6. 11.

Now there are three comforts from this, that the Spirit of God (within you) is
a sanctifying Spirit.

1. He sanctifies you in truth, he renews your very hearts; it is not a formal
or Sanctifies in truth.
deceivable work, but a real and effectual work, which is indeen the new
Creation, 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18. the image of God, the life and glory of Christ
which shall certainly end in happiness* Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet.
1. 4.

2. He will go on with his sanctifying work, he will begin and make an end:
Causes growth in grace.
1 These. 5. 23. He will change you from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Though it
begins in weakness, he will carry it on in power: This sanctifying work of the
Spirit shall move on in the soul as the sun does in the firmament, from
strength to strength; the Spirit within will more and more mortify, and
weaken, and destroy the body of sin, and he will be renewing your inward man
day by day, 2 Cor. 4.

3. He will still maintain and preserve this sanctifying work against all the
rebellions Defends it against all its enemies.
of our corruptions, and against all the assaults of Satan, and will never
leave until he has crowned it with glory.

Secondly, The Spirit of God which is given unto you, is a revealing and
manifesting Spirit: He is expressly called the Spirit of revelation, in Ephesians.
1. 17. and He is a revealing spirit.
verily herein does lie most admirable comfort and joy; yea all our actual soul
joy in this life: If all the thoughts and works of grace were hid from us, we
should have but sad days all our life long, we should be in perpetual fears
and doubts, and complaints: But the discovery of them (which is by the light of
the Spirit) makes day with us, makes joy and rejoicing abound within us.

Now there are four things which the Spirit of God (given unto the people of
God) can and does reveal unto them.

First, The presence of Christ within us: Though Christ be in us (for he dwells
The spirit reveals Christ's presence within us.
in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17) yet we cannot see or discover his
presence but by the Spirit: Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit
which he has given us, ^ Joh. 3. 24. To know that Christ is mine, and in me,
and that I am Christ's, and in him, cannot be without the Spirit, and this
manifestation is from the Spirit; and is not this joy and comfort indeed to
know that Christ is in us? Know ye not that Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5.

Secondly, The love of God toward us: It Is true that God does love his people
with a most gracious love, and with a great love, and with a most kind love;
Gods love towa^ds us.
his love is called loving kindness, Hose. 2. 19. with a love that surpasses
all love: And it is also true, that the apprehension and experience of his love
is most sweet and transcendent, Thy loving kindness is better than life, Psalm.
63. 3. And if we could know his love unto us, this would pacify us; and how
should we come to taste how gracious the Lord is? by the holy Ghost; Romans 5. 5.
The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost:

Thirdly, The wonderful glory prepared for us; Mark what the Apostle says, The
glory prepared for us.
1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that love. Ver. 10 But
God has revealed them to us by his Spirit, for the Spirt searches all things,
yea the deep things of God; the quality and quantity of future happiness
prepared from eternity, and must answer the blood of Christ, etc.

Fourthly, All the precious works of the Spirit, himself with his finger has
The precious works of the spirit.
wrought in us: Though there be an aptitude in them to manifest and discover
themselves, yet we cannot see them without the Spirit: How often are we in
darkness? how often in doubts and enquiries, but have I faith? but have I
repentance? but have I godly sorrow? but have I the new heart? the tender
heart? the humble heart? In truth! We have received the Spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things which are freely given us of God.

O what happiness is all this! to enjoy the Spirit of God, by whom we come to
know Jesus Christ, and as present in my soul! to know the love of God, and taste
the sweetness of it in my heart! to know the future heavenly happiness that is
prepared from eternity, and prepared for my soul! and to know all that God has
freely given me in order unto my own eternal happiness!

Thirdly, The Spirit of God which is given unto us, is a strengthening and
helping He is a st^enthening spirit.
Spirit: Ephesians. 3. 16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his
glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man. Romans 8.
26. Likewise also the Spirit helps our infirmities, etc. Is it not a benefit
when one is weak and faint, to find a friend to relieve, to support, assist,
uphold, and help him? we are weak, we are fainting, we are oppressed,
distressed, burdened, ready to sink, to fail, many times; we know not what to
do, and cannot do any good that we would; and now the Spirit of God comes and
strengthens our feeble hands, and supports our fainting spirits, and puts out
his power upon our hearts, and carries us on in our ways and works: You do
find it thus in several cases. viz.

1. Frequently when we are to pray, we are at a loss and cannot go on with Gods
spirit helps us in prayer.
the heavenly work; our ignorance, our unbelief, Satan's temptations, and
distractions, all these hold us down, and bind us up, and we cannot help and
free our selves: But then the Spirit of God comes in with his strength and with
his help, and stirs up our hearts, and enlarges our hearts, and new desires
flow, and groans abound, and aff^^ctions work, and faith works with confidence
to the throne of grace, to find grace and mercy to help in time of need.

2. Always in our spiritual warfare with our own corruptions, with Satan's
temptations; In our spiritual warfare.
in these conflicts we feel our own weakness, and their power and violence, so
that we many times cry out, O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us!
Romans 7. 24. Or as Jehoshaphat in another case, We have no might against this
great company that comes against us; neither know we what to do, 2 Chronicles. 20.
12. And verily we may say concerning our own corruptions, what he spoke of his
enemies; If it had not been the Lord who was on our side; if it had not been
the Lord who was on our side when men rose up against us, then they had
swallowed us up quick, Psalm. 124. 1,2,3. so if the Spirit of the Lord had not
been with us, and if the Spirit of the Lord had not strengthened and helped us,
sin had been too hard for us* But in those conflicts the Spirit of God has
made us strong, still to pray, still to believe, still to wait, still to
resist, and at length to conquer.

4ly, The spirit of God which is given unto us, is a reconciling and a
restoring spirit; He is a restoring spirit.
he restores my soul, says David, Psalm. 23. 3. Even the people of God
sometimes are circumvented by Satan's temptations, and are overpowered by sin
that dwells in them (what I hate that do I, says Paul, Romans 7. 15.) They do
many times fall very grievously, and sadly, and are not able by their own
strength to rise again, but there they lie with their weakness, and losses, and
complaints, and tears: Now in this condition, the Spirit of God puts forth his
hand, and recovers, and raises them up again; he does not leave them when they
are fallen, but by the power of his assisting grace

1. He awakens them out of their sleep, by a quick conviction upon their
consciences, He awakens out of spiritual sleep.
to see the great evil which they have done: I have sinned, says David, as
soon as Nathan said, Thou art the man, 1 Samuel 12.

2. He melts their hearts into singular grief for that evil which they have
done: Melts their hearts into grief
David watered his couch with tears, Psalm. 6. 6. And Peter goes out and weeps
bitterly, Luke 22. 62. he makes them to mourn, and to be ashamed, and to loath
themselves.

3. He stirs up their hearts to confess and acknowledge their sinnings, and to
judge themselves before the Lord for their unfaithful dealings, and unworthy
walking, Stir them up to confess their sins.
and likewise earnest wrestlings, and strivings with the Lord by prayer for
pardoning mercy, and restoring grace, and a more steadfast spirit: Psalm. 51. 9.
Blot out all mine iniquities. Ver. 10. Renew a right spirit witbin me. Ver. 12.
Uphold me by thy free spirit.

4. He enables them by faith to lay hold on Christ to be their peace, and to
Enables by Faith to lay hold on Christ
make Reconciliation; and thus does the Spirit of God recover and restore their
fallen souls, and assures them that their sin is pardoned.

Fifthly, the Spirit of God which is given unto you, is a comforting Spirit:
Christ He is a comforting spirit.
himself calls him the Comforter, Joh. 14. 16. and you find him actually
comforting the people of God: Acts 9. 31. They walked in the comforts of the
Holy Gh^st. He is called the Comforter by way of Eminency and Excellency; there
is no such Comforter as the Siprit of God, Psalm. 77. 2. For

1. He can comfort your very souls with proper comfors and consolations: Thy
Comforts the soul.
comforts delight my soul, Psalm. 94. 19.

2. He can comfort you against all your discomforts; 2 Cor. 1. 4. Who
comfort Comforts against all discomforts.
us in all our tribulations.

1. From Conscience. 2. From the Devil and the world. 3. From Providence, when
it seems to be cross to us.
3. He can comfort you under all absences; when there is neither Father, nor In
all absence and wants.
Mother, nor Husband, nor Wife, nor Child, nor Friend, nor Land, nor House, yet
he can comfort you; he alone can show you the salvation of the Lord, speak
peace and joy, and assure you of mercy, and cause you to rejoice in believing;
Psalm. 27. 10. When my Father and my Mother for sake me, then the Lord will take
me up.

4. He can comfort you, and none can hinder him, nor men, nor Devils, nor
fears, nor doubts; for he can create you peace, and create you joy, and create
He cannot be hindered in comforting us*
you comfort; he himself alone is a sufficient cause of comfort.

Object. How so? how does the Spirit comfort?

Sol. 1. By opening all the springs of comfort unto you, the fountain of mercy
How the Spirit comforts. By opening the springs of comfort. By actuating our
Faith.
Zech. 13. 1. the Fountain of grace, the Fountain of the blood of Christ, and
of justification: 1 John 2. 1, 2. Romans 5. 11. We joy in God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement.

2. By actuating your faith, to behold all these fountains of joy, and to dig
water out of the wells of salvation, and making you to suck the breasts of
consolation.

3. By applying them to your very souls, clearing and witnessing your right
unto By opplying them to our souls.
them, your propriety in them, that Christ dyed for your sins, that God is
reconciled to your souls, that you are justified and accepted unto life, and
that you are the children of God, Romans 8.

4. By enabling conscience to testify; 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, By
enabling Conscience to testify.
the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we
have had our conversation.

Sixthly, The Spirit which is given unto you, is dwelling and an abiding spirit
He is a dwelling spirit.
in all the people of God: Romans 8. 11. By his Spirit that dwells in you. Joh.
14. 16. I will pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter that he
may abide with you for ever: He will be mortifying your sins, perfecting your
graces, conquering your temptations, subduing your corruptions, helping your
weaknesses, comforting your consciences, leading you on in your journey, until
you come to the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

As Jesus Christ accomplished all the works for which the Father sent him; he
gave not over until he had finished all of them: so does the Spirit of God,
who is sent and given unto us; he proceeds and goes on with all the works for
which he is given unto us, and that is to communicate and apply unto us all
which Christ has purchased for us, even grace and glory, even life, and
eternal life.

Thus have you heard 1. The Discoveries of the presence of the Spirit: 2ly The
Benefits and blessedness in the enjoyment of that Spirit.

SECT. IV.
3. Use I Now proceed unto a third Use which shall be of relief to tender and
Relief to weak Christians.
weak Christians, who are full of tears, and sadness, because they can find no
discoveries of the presence of Gods Spirit within them, or at most very weak
and feeble pulses and appearances thereof: That which I would say for the
support of those weak persons, I shall set down in five Conclusions.

First, One may have the real presence of the Spirit, and yet sometimes The
spirit may be really present, and yet not discovered, Its in desertions.
have no sensible discoveries of his presence, as to his own apprehension: As

1. In the time of desertions when the Lord hides himself from the soul, and
draws off, and leaves it a while to sit in darkness and in silence; in such a
case though there be actings of the Spirit, and puttings forth tears and
groans, and complaints (Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable
no more? Psalm. 77. 7.) yet the deserted soul discerns them not in a Relative
way, as working testimonies of the presence of the Spirit.

2. In time of great transgressions: Then the Spirit as is it were in a swoon,
and the light appears not, and confusion and darkness rise upon our graces;
David In great transgressions.
in his great transgressions looks upon all as lost, and therefore prays that
the Lord would not take his holy Spirit from him, Psalm. 51. 11.

Secondly, One may have the Spirit of God within him, and yet sometimes (as to
his own thinking) the discoveries may be rather that he has not the spirit,
than that he has; Job says of God, he holds me for his enemy, Job. 13. 24.
And David says, cast me not off, Psalm. 43. 2. And the Church says, my God
has forsaken me, Isa. 49. 14.

This is our condition in the times of vile temptation, and in the time of sad
melancholy, and there is no grace in me, no faith, no love, softness of heart,
no ability to pray,; all was but hypocrisy, there was never any thing in truth
wrought within my soul.

Thirdly, There are comforting discoveries of the presence of the Spirit; and
Other effects of the Spirit.
there are proper and respective discoveries of this presence as to our present
ways, and works, and needs: Perhaps you have not the manifestations of the
spirit in the effect of peace, and joy, and assurance, and yet you may have the
manifestations of the Spirit in the effects of mourning for sin, and
conflicting with it, and prayer against it, and to walk uprightly: Perhaps you
find not the presence of the Spirit discovering himself in strong and powerful
actings in your souls, and yet you may find the Spirit discovering himself in
making you to hunger after Christ: Perhaps you find not the Spirits presence in
raising your hearts with his testimony, and yet you find his presence in
humbling your hearts for the sins into which you are fallen. Perhaps you do not
find the presence of the Spirit in delivering you from temptations, but yet you
find his presence in up^olding of you against temptations.

Fourthly, There are many things which may befall us in our Christian race When
we may conclude our having of the Spirit not withstanding afflictions.
and course, which yet are not sufficient grounds to conclude that God has not
given unto us his Spirit. e. g.

1. Afflictions, losses, and crosses in outward things, you may not from these
conclude that God has not given you his Spirit; Because

1. The Lord does correct every son whom he loves. 2. The most holy persons
have been afflicted; Job was so, so was Jacob, so was David. 3. These are sent
for the trial of our faith and repentance, etc. and for the improvement of
them.
2. Oppositions from wicked men, by reproaches, and slanders, and threatenings,
and injuriousness, these are so far from aproving that we have not the And
opposition and reproaches.
Spirit, that they rather do demonstrate his presence and work in us: Gal. 4.
28. We brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise. Ver. 29. But as
then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit, even so it is now. 1 John 3. 12. As Cain who was of that wicked one,
and slew his brother; and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were
evil, and his brothers righteous. 1 Pet. 4. 4. They think it strange that you
run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you.

3, Inward motions of sin, and outward temptations from Satan: They have Inward
motions of sin, and outward temptations. Different temptations in our own hearts
and do befall the best of Saints; Paul found the one in Romans 7. and the other
in 2 Cor. 12. and who of the people of God is free from them?

4. Several diversities upon our own spirits; sometimes a lowliness, a dullness;
sometimes great confidence, and someties many doubtings; sometimes rejoycings,
sometimes mournings; sometimes an enlargedness of heart, and sometimes a
narrowness and restrainedness; sometimes an high elevation of heart, and
sometimes why art thou cast down O my soul? sometimes I do believe, and yet
sometimes O that I could believe! sometimes I will not fear what man can do
unto me? and sometimes I am afraid, and that I shall one day perish by the
hand of Saul.

5. Particular wanderings and sinnings, when yet the course of a Christian is
Particular wanderings.
holy and upright; in this case we may neither condemn another, nor yet our
selves as utterly destitute of the Spirit of grace, because as a course of
sinning arises from the want of grace; so the particular acts of sinning may
arise only from the weakness of grace.

Fifthly there may be but a very weak measure of grace in a person, who yet A
weak measure of grace where yet is the Spirit of grace.
has the Spirit of grace in truth: A Child that is newly born is a living
child, and yet he is very weak: Some Christians are but new born babes, as the
Apostle calls them, 1 Pet. 2. 2. The graces of the Spirit are sometimes in so
weak and so low a ebb, that they are compared to a bruised reed, and to
smoking flax, and to the dawning of of light in the morning, and to a grain of
mustardseed, and to a little leaven in the lump.

Now here I would show you three things.

1. How one may know that he has as yet but a very weak measure of the Spirit
of grace? 2. How one may know that the weak measure of grace is not false but
true grace? 3. That no Christian should discourage himself because his grace is
weak, but rather encourage himself because grace is sound, although it be weak.
How to know our grace to be weak.
1. Quest. How one may know that he has as yet but a very weak measure of the
Spirit of grace?

Sol. This may be known

In our first conversion.
First, By the time of the implantation of it; this is a truth, that grace
begins in weakness; if a man be but newly converted, his grace cannot be but
weak: from death to life, and yet his Spiritual strength of grace is very weak
in him.

Secondly, By the strength of corruptions: The stronger that any man's
corruptions By the strength of our corruptions.
are, this is a sign that his graces are but weak: I call those sinful
corruptions strong, which do often prevail upon us, and lead us captive, which
are able to hinder us from doing what is good, and to drive and force us to do
that which is evil; nor are we able to withstand this; why this, arises from
weakness of grace:

By the proportions of actings.
Thirdly, by the proportion of actings: Every true grace of the Spirit is of an
active nature, it is apt to put forth itself; Lord help my unbelief, answered
the father of child with tears. O that I could mourn, that I could obey! To
will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not, Romans
7. 18.

Fourthly, By the mixture of contrary workings; a little of grace, and much of
corruption; a little of faith, and much of doubtings; a little of hope, and By
the mixture of contrary workings
much of fear; a little of sorrow, and much of hardness; a little of prayer,
and much of distraction; a little of zeal, and much of flatness; a little that
is done, and much that is undone; a little of knowledge, and much of ignorance;
a little heavenly-mindedness, and much of earthliness; a little fire, and much
smoke; a little going, and much halting, etc.

Fifthly, By the aptness to live not by faith, but by sense; when God draws up
all our helps and hopes into his promises, and puts us now to fetch all our
supplies By aptness to live by sense.
and comforts from his good and faithful Word, Here is my Word that I will
pardon your sins; and here is my Word that I will subdue your iniquities; and
here is my Word that I will answer your prayers; and here is my Word that I
will supply your wants; and I will never leave you nor forsake you; O but
because we feel not the assurance of pardon, and because we find not victory
over our sins, and because we do not see the answet of our prayers, and because
we cannot discern the means and ways how our wants may be supplied, therefore
our hearts fail us, and we are troubled and perplexed, and sad thoughts do
arise in our hearts, and they are much cast down within us; If it be thus with
us, certainly our graces are weak, very weak; the less able are ye to trust an
All sufficient and faithful God in his promises, but you must have the portion
in your own hands, you must see or else you will not believe, you cannot so
steadfastly believe that Gods Bond is sufficient, etc.

Sixthly, By the prevailing of discouragements: If we be apt to be offended By
the prevailing of discouragements.
and discouraged, this shows weakness of grace; there are discouragements taken
from Gods dealing with us, as when he delays our suits, and denies some of the
requests, and tries, and exercises us with smart afflictions, and suffers
temptations to abide on us: From the ways of Christianity, the strictness of
them, and the danger by them, and the greatness of them: From men, that wicked
men do so vex and trouble us; that good men are so strange and unkind unto us:
From ou^ selves, that we go on so slowly, and exactly, and uncomfortably, and
others get so far before us, and attain so much: Discouragements from any of
these show that there is in us but small knowledge, little faith, much fear,
and weak grace.

Seventhly, By the presence of censoriousness, of strife, and contentions, and
envyings: 1 Cor. 3. 3. For ye are yet carnal; for whereas there is among By the
presence of censoriousness.
you envying, and strife, and division, are you not carnal, and walk as men?

2. Quest. How may one know that the weak measure of grace is not false, but
true grace, and the very effect of the Spirit of God?

Sol. One may know that there is a true work of grace, although very How a true
work of grace may be known though weak. By loving Gods image.
weak:

First, By his apprehension and love of the image of God, of this work of the
Spirit in whomsoever he finds it: His very soul values such a person, and does
close with him, and is knit unto him: 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed
from death to life, because we love the brethren. Every one that has truth of
grace, does highly prize all that have grace, counts them the excellent of the
earth, and is most delighted, Psalm. 16. 3. and satisfied in the society of such.

Secondly, By the choice of his heart; he chooses God to be his God, and the By
our choosing God to be our God.
ways of God to be his ways; I have chosen the ways of truth, Psalm. 119. 30.
I have chosen thy precepts. Ver. 173. Although he does not serve his God in
fullness, yet he does in sincerity; although he cannot walk in his ways
exactly, yet in these ways he will walk; he is a servant to none but his God,
and traveller in no ways but his.

Thirdly, By the desires of his soul: They are holy and heavenly, and
spiritual; though his work is little, yet his desires are great; though his
enjoyment ares By the desires of his soul.
small, yet his desires are high; and amongst others, there are these five
desires where there is truth of grace, viz.

1. An earnest desire of Gods love and favor: Psalm. 106. 4. Remember me Five
desires in the truth of Grace.
O Lord with the favor which thou bear unto thy people, O visit me with thy
salvation. 2. An earnest desire of Christ, a hungring and thirsting after him.
I will seek him whom my soul loves, Cant. 3. 3. O that God would give me
Christ! O that I could believe! Lord help my unbelief! Mark 9. 24. 3. An
earnest desire to walk in all well-pleasing before God; O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes! Psalm. 119. 5. they do not keep them, but they
desire to keep them; Lord, increase our faith. 4. An earnest desire for more
grace; as Paul, Phil. 3. 12. I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for
which I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Ver 14. I press toward the mark: A
desire of the Word that we may grow thereby, is a sign of the new birth, 1 Pet.
2. 2. 5. An earnest desire that he might not sin against his God: Psalm. 119.
10. With my whole heart have I sought thee, O let me not wander from thy
Commandments.
Fourthly, By the conflicts in himself: Though there be not a present victory,
By the conflicts in himself.
yet there is a present war in every one who has truth of grace: Truth of
grace will make a man

1. To love the Law of the Spirit of Christ, and to join and take part with his
good motions, and directions and commands: The good that I would do, says
Paul; and I delight in the law after the inward man, Romans 7. 19, 22.

2. To hate and oppose the Law of sin: Though he does evil, yet he hates it,
(what I hate, that I do) and though he cannot subdue his sins, yet he will
oppose them: He opp^seth and resists the pride, the filthiness, the passions,
the frowardness, the hardness, the unbelief of his heart.

Fifthly, By the griefs and complaints of his soul: He is grieved that yet sin
By the griefs and complaints o^ his soul.
has so much power in him, and cries out, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! and he is grieved that he is so low,
and weak, and short in obedience unto his loving Christ! that he can love him
no better, fear him no more, trust on him no stronger, and magnify him no
more: And he is grieved that he cannot grieve, that he cannot believe, that he
cannot walk up to the Rule of Christ, and unto the desires of his soul!

By the endeavors and actings of his soul
Sixthly, By the endeavors and actings of his soul: He that is weakest in
grace, is acting according to the proportion which he has received: Latymer
said to his fellow-sufferer, I am coming as fast as I can brother! So the
weakest in grace, he is stirring, and he is doing as well as he can, he is
doing his Masters will, and if he could do more, and better service, assuredly
God should have it from him; and glad he is if he can mend one.

3. Quest. Why no Christian should be discouraged, because of the weak measure
Why we should not be discouraged, because of our weakness in grace. All grace
is weak at first.
of grace wrought in him by the Spirit of God.

Sol. You should not be discouraged for these Reasons.

First All the graces of the Spirit do begin in weakness; we are at the first
but babes in Christ, and then young men, and strong, and then Fathers, 1 John
2. 12. 13 False grace is too sudden and too ripe; it begins where it should
end, and therefore it ends usually as soon as it begins: But true grace is
first but weak, nevertheless it shall increase.

Secondly, It will not rest so, but gets from weakness to strength, and from
Yet its growing.
strength to strength, as the Sun in the firmament: Prove. 4. 18. The path of
the just is as the shining light, that shines more and more to the perfect day.

Thirdly, The weakest grace does bring God some honor, it will make a It
brings God some honor.
man to honor God inwardly, and outwardly: Rev. 3. 8. Thou have a little
strength, and have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name.

1. Inwardly, by setting up his will and authority in the heart, by loving of
him, fearing of him, and trusting on him, though but weakly.

2. Outwardly, by abandoning every evil way, by exercis^ng our selves in
godliness, by countenancing the rules and ways of Christ, and walking before
God in truth: Even the Children in the Temple cried out Hosanna to the Son of
David, Matthew. 12. 15. whereupon Christ applied that of David, Out of the mouths
of babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise, ver. 16.

Fourthly, The weakest grace is the workmanship of the Spirit of God: Not Its
the workmanship of the spirit of God.
only our rejoicing, but our tears; not only our assurances, but our very
groans are from him: Romans 8. 26. The Spirit itself makes intercession for us
with groans which cannot be uttered. So Phil. 2. 13. It is God which works in
you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. To will any good, this comes
from the Spirit of God, as well as to do any good.

Fifthly, The weakest grace is able to unthrone sin, and dispossess Satan, and
to set up a throne in the heart for Christ, to hold forth his image, and to
conform us to christ, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

Its accepted with God.
Sixthly, The weakest graces, and breathings, and actings of it are accepted
with God; he owns it, not despise the day of small things, Zech. 4. 10. and he
will not only not only break the bruised reed, and not only not quench the
smoking flax, Matthew. 12. 20. but he will lovingly and graciously accept of the
weakest fruits of weakest graces: Psalm. 38. 9. All my desire is before thee,
and my groaning is not hid from thee. 2 King. 20. 5. Tell Hezekiah, thus says
the Lord God of David thy Father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy
tears. 2 Cor. 8. 12. If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

Seventhly, The Lord has a very tender respect unto persons who are weak in
grace: Isa. 40* ^1. He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather
the God has a tender respect to such.
lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those
that are with young: You may look up to Jesus Christ your High Priest, who is
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and by him you may come boldly to
the throne of grace to obtain mercy to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 15, 16.
Mal. 3. 17. I will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him.
Isa. 66. 13. As one whom his Mother comfort, so will I comfort you. 1 These.
5. 14. Comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak. Isa. 61. 1. The Lord has
anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, he has sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted. ver. 2. to comfort all that mourn.

Sixthly, The weakest grace of the Spirit is a sure evidence that you are in
Christ, and it is the earnest penny of your future glory: Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed
are Its an evidence that we are in Christ.
the poor in heart, for they shall see God. Ver. 6. Blessed are they which do
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

SECT. V.
4. Use. Does God give his own Spirit unto all his own people? Let them then
who have received the Spirit, remember the duties which do in a more special
manner concern them: These are first, Negative: secondly, Positive.

1. Negative duties are

First, Quench not the Spirit; this is the Exhortation of the Apostle: 1 These.
Duties of such as have received the spirit. Quench it not Why the spirit is
compared to fi^e.
5. 19. Quench not the Spirit: The Spirit (in this Metaphorical expression) is
compared to fire, because

1. Fire lightning upon any combustible matter, it does burn and consume it: So
when the Spirit of God enters into our hearts, he does waste and consume by
degrees all our noisome lusts, and vile affections, and sinful deeds. Romans 8.
13.

2. Fire does purge and purify the metals by burning up the d^oss, and by
making them more pure and bright: So does the Spirit of God when he comes into
our hearts, he purges the heart of sin, and makes us holy, and fit vessels of
honor.

3. Fire does mollify, and soften, and melt the hardest Iron: So does the
Spirit of God the hardest heart, and makes it melt into godly sorrow and fear.

4. Fire does give light and heat; So the Spirit of God does enlighten and
teach us, and heats us, and warms us, and inflames our hearts with the love of
God, and with a power to do his will.

5. Fire does ascend and mount upward; So the Spirit carries up our thoughts
and affections unto things which are above, Romans 8. 5.

6. Fire does revive, and as it were put a new life into us, when we are frozen
or benumbed: So does the Spirit quicken and enlarge our hearts when they are
oppressed with dullness and deadness.

In these and some other respects is the Spirit of God (with his graces)
compared to fire; which may be quenched either in part, as when you suffer it
to decay and slack, or in whole when it goes out all together.

There are four ways by which the fire is quenched.

First, By withdrawing and withholding the fuel which should nourish it: How
this fire is quenched.
So when we withdraw our ears from hearing the Word, and restrain Prayer, and
decline holy society and conference* we do now quench the Spirit in his gifts
and graces, they will decay, and fall, and dye with^n us.

Secondly, By casting on water; though you put much wood to the fire, yet if
you cast more water upon it, this will quench the fire: So although you should
hear, and pray, yet if you admit gross sins, these will quench the Spirit; they
will either totally extinguish, or else extremely dimin^sh the graces of the
Spirit. David found it so by his gross sins of adultery, and murder: And
Sampson found it so in his looseness with Dalilah.

Thirdly, By smothering of it: Though you do not withdraw fuel from the fire,
nor throw water upon it, yet if you heap upon it much cold earth, or green
wood, this will smother and put out the fire: though you do not decline
Ordinances and duties, you do not fall into gross sins, yet if you suffer your
heart to be overcloy'd with the things of the world, with the cares and
employments of it, these will choke the word, and these will smother and quench
the operations of the Spirit within you.

Fourth By neglecting of it: If we do not look unto the fire, and put the
Brands together, and stir and blow it up, it will decay and go out: So if we
neglect the graces of the Spirit, if we do not stir them up as Paul advises
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 6. shake off the contrary indisposition, and put them out in
daily exercise, they will decay, and will be ready to dye.

Object. But some will say, Quorsum haec? may a Christian lose the Spirit? fall
away from grace? can the work of the Spirit be wholly extinguished? where is
then the comfort and the happiness you lately spoke of?

Sol. I will not take up (by the by) that debate of total and final Apostaty;
only this I say for the present that there is such a latitude and compass in
the graces of the Spirit, that as the Christian may rise higher in them, so he
may fall and decay much in them. How the graces of the spirit may be considered
In their Root.


Take me briefly thus; the graces of the Spirit may be considered

First, In their Root which is Christ: And thus considered, as Christ lives for
ever, so do the graces of Christ, he dies not, neither shall any Branch Rooted
in him die.

Secondly, in their essential habit, or spiritual quality; thus likewise the,
are In their essential habits.
immortal seed, and abiding seed, and living, which shall never be cut off.

Thirdly, In their gradua^ measures, and quick operations; herein there may be
a decay and quickening: Rev. 2. 4. I have somewhat against thee, because thou In
their gradual measures.
have left thy first love. Ver. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and d^
thy first works. Rev. 3. 2. Strengthen the things which remain and are ready to
die.

Fourthly, In their sensible and comfortable manifestations; and here likewise
they may be extinguished, at least for a time; Psalm. 51. 12. Restore unto me In
their sensible manifestations.
the joy of thy salvation: He had lost it by his sinning, etc.

Now the people of God who have received the spirit, they should be careful not
to quench him at all, no not in the measures, no not in any degree of grace,
not in any one lively operation of grace, not in any one comfortable fruit or
effect of grace: O sirs!

1. It is an exceeding soily to weaken (may I so express it) the hands of the
Spirit, to shake your foundation, to wound your selves so near the heart: The
Spirit is the Spirit of your life and power. 2. It is an exceeding folly to
loose any of your precious treasures; why! a degree or measure of grace, one
dram of it is more than all the world for value? 3. It is an exceeding folly to
bereave your selves of your best comforts, and only joys, to turn your day
into night, your peace in^o trouble, your hope into fear, your confidence into
doubts. 4. It is an exceeding injury unto that good spirit and unto your own
happiness, etc.
Secondly, Grieve not the Spirit: This duty you have from the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.
30 Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption: Grieve not the spirit.
Do nothing which may offend and displease him, or make his abode in you
uncomfortable and undelightful: The Spirit has been the Comforter unto you,
you have tasted of his comforts and joys; do not grieve, and offend, and
displease him who has comforted and rejoiced your soul.

Quest. What will grieve the Spirit, that so we may take heed of grieving him?

Sol. There are (...) ways by which the Spirit is grieved.

First, When we do not hearken to his motions, and counsels, and commands: What
grieves the spirit. Not to hearken to his motions.
This does grieve a Father, and a friend when his counsels are disregarded and
despised: So when the Spirit of God puts us upon holy ways, and works, and we
regard not his motions and directions, this does grieve and offend him? Psalm.
95. 10. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation; and what was that
which grieved him? they would not hearken unto his voice, they erred in their
hearts, they would not know his ways.

2. Secondly, When we do hearken to the voice, motions, and counsels of Satan,
or our own corrupt hearts, which are contrary to him and his suggestions; When
we hearken to Satan.
as Christ spoke in Joh 5 43. I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye receive me
not; if another should come in his own name, him ye will receive. This grieved
Jesus Christ that the Jews would not receive him, coming in his Fathers Name,
and yet they would receive another coming in his own name. Esau went and
married the daughter of the Hittites against the mind of his Parents.

Gross sins.
Thirdly, When we do any notorious sinful work which is unworthy of men
enjoying the Spirit of God, and causes dishonor and reproach unto him: Ye
have troubled me (said Jacob to his sons, Simeon and Levi) to make me to stink
amongst the inhabitants of the land, amongst the Canaanites, and the
Perizzites, etc. Genesis 34. 30. So when men professing the Spirit, do yet walk
contrary to the nature and rule of the spirit, they do now trouble and grieve
the Spirit: e. g. The Spirit of God is a Spirit of truth, and if we pretending
Spirit, embrace or countenance doctrines of lies and falsehoods: ^he Spirit of
God is a Spirit of holiness, and if we pretending that Spirit, follow and
countenance practices of unholiness and profaneness: The Spirit of God is a
Spirit of love, and meekness, and peace; and if we pretending that Spirit, yet
live in discord, and wrath, and contention; these things are a grief and
trouble unto the Spirit of God: 2 Timothy 2. 19. Let every one that names the
name of Christ depart from iniquity: So say I, let every one that names the
Spirit of Christ, let every one that pretends to his presence, depart from
iniquity.

Fourthly, Especial do we grieve the spirit, when we do sin against the
present When we sin against the spirits workings.
works and workings of the spirit: As

1. The present illumination of the spirit which at such a time actually shines
upon that work we intend to do, (...) discovers it plainly to be evil and
offensive, and yet we do it.

2. The strange motions and operations of the spirit striving to withold us
from our purpose, by arguing and reasoning with our souls, propounding argument
upon argument not to do so wickedly: As when a man lies, or swears, or commits
uncleanness, or steals against the particular light and present strivings of
the spirit, sinful actions thus substantiated, do not only grieve, but do also
wound the spirit; these are bitter provocations; Ephraim provoked him to anger
most bitterly, Hose. 12. 14. and these are presumptuous sinnings which will
cost us bitter desertions, and bitter throws in Conscience, and bitter
lamentations, and bitter afflictions (perhaps) all our days, and bitter fears
and disputes and questionings in our hearts.

Thirdly, Neglect not the spirit; As Paul to Timothy, neglect not the gift that
is in thee, 1 Timothy 4. 14. So say I, neglect not the Spirit himself that is When
we neglect the spirit.
in thee.

And there are two things of the Spirit which we should not neglect. 1. His
movings. 2ly. His removings.

First, Neglect not the movings (or motions) of the Spirit, but take hold of
them, observe and follow them. You have many times sudden and secret
excitations to draw you off more from the world, to prepare for death, to make
sure work for your souls, to trust more on God, to walk more evenly and
profitably, to redeem the time, to pray and seek the face of God, to do more
good in your places, etc. Now do not neglect these motions, do not throw them
aside, and do not delay or defer to act them; remember it, you shall be able to
do much at that time when the Spirit of God stirs your hearts, if you presently
act upon his actings of you,

Object. But some will say, It is an hard thing to know what motions are the
motions How to know the motions of the Spirit.
of the Spirit; if we could certainly know them to be his, we would not neglect
them.

Sol. You may know the motions which are stirring of you, to be the motions of
the Spirit of God, by the conjunction of these Adjuncts.

First, They are holy and heavenly, they do resemble himself; he never moves
They are holy.
you to any evil, but only to what is good and spiritual; to get grace, to
increase it, to exercise it, to mortify your sins, to beware of all incentives
and provecation unto sin, etc.

Secondly, They are conformable to the written Word: All h^s motions are
Agreeable to the Word.
but the setting on of Gods commands upon your heart, and lives; he moves you
not, and stirs you not to do any thing but what the Word of God expressly
commands.

Thirdly, They are suitable to your place and condition: The spirit moves to
Suitable to our place and condition.
do that good work which belongs to us in our place: He did not move Vzza to
put forth his hand to hold the Ark, nor Uzziah to burn incense; It pertains
not to thee Uzziah to burn incense unto the Lord, but unto the Priests, the
sons of Aaron that are consecrated to burn incense, 2 Chronicles. 26. 18. He is the
Author of order, and not of confusion; he moves men to exercise the gifts which
he has given them, in the places and callings wherein he has set them.

Fourthly, They are seasonable: He puts in good motions, not to hinder a
present good work but to further it; when we are sometimes praying, or hearing,
you shall They are seasonable.
have many good things presented unto your minds which come not from the Spirit
of God, but from Satan; for they are put in as diversions and distractions from
that good work in hand; but when they are from the Spirit, they are seasonable
and helpful: As when you are hearing, and (...), and confessing your sins, all
those good motions which drop into you to humble your hearts, enlarge your
hearts to attend, to mark, and remember, and to yield consent and obedience,
and to take delight to raise heavenly resolutions to walk according to the will
of God revealed, these are motions from the Spirit.

Fifthly, They are gentle and spiritually rational* men talk of impulsives and
violent They are gentle.
motions upon their spirits for particular works for the doing of which they
can give no religious account or ground; Those are dangerous motions, and are
to be suspected and questioned; but the motions of the Spirit are not
turbulent, nor violent; though they be strong, yet they are gentle; they are
leadings, but not disquieting motions.

Secondly, Neglect not the removings of the Spirit: The Spirit of God (by
reason of our spiritual pride, and security, and formality, and other sins) may
remove from us (i. e.) you may not find that comfort from him, and you may not
find that strength, and assistance, and vigor from him, and you may discern a
general Hatness and lowness in your graces and services, they come not off with
that zeal, with that delight, with that care, with that love, with that
importunity, with that fervency, with that faith as formerly; and you are more
ready to fall under temptations, and sinful occasions; you cannot make that
resistance which you were wont to do! The Spirit in these cases is removing and
withdrawing: And it is a most dangerous folly now to sit still and to be
careless and regardless. If a Guard which preserves you, draw off, are you not
in danger? are you not exposed to enemies? why? all your strength, support,
sufficiency, safety is in the presence of Gods Spirit. Therefore take notice of
his removings or or withdrawings at any time, and do it quickly, and seriously;
for though his removes be not (usually) all at once, yet the oftener he removes,
he removes the farther from you; and the farther he removes the stronger will
hardness grow upon you.

Quest. Why! what is to be done in this case?

Sol. I will tell you. How to prevent the Spirits removoings.


First, Search your hearts, and enquire what is amiss, what cause you have
given unto the Spirit of God thus to withdraw from you, what harndness, what
offense; you may read in Scripture these causes.

1. Pride of heart, as in Hezekiah. 2. Self-confidence, as in Peter. 3.
Careless neglect, as in the Church Cant. 5. 6. I opened to my beloved, but my
beloved had withdrawn himself. See the cause of this in Ver. 3. I have put off
my coat, how shall I put it on? 4. Foul transgressions, as in David, Psalm. 51.
He had almost lost all. Secondly, Then repent; it is the counsel given to the
Church of Ephesus which lost her first love, Rev. 2. 4. 5.
Thirdly, Cry out with David, Psalm. 51. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence,
and take not thy holy Spirit from me. O Lord, I am willing to let my sin go,
but I cannot be willing let thy Spirit go! When the spirit is removing, move
after him, and lay hold on him with tears, and supplications, and faith, and
say, O forsake me not utterly, O return in mercy! revive thy work again in me,
and quicken, and restore, and establish me, etc.

Fourthly, Do not injure the Spirit.

Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, etc.
SECT. VI.
4. THe fourth Caution which concerns them that have the Spirit given unto
Injure not the Spirit. How the Spirit may be injured. By bearing false witness
against the spirit.
them, is this, Take heed you do not injure or wrong the Spirit. Injure the
Spirit? will some say; how can any man injure the Spirit of God? A man may
injure the Spirit of God four ways.

First, By bearing false witness against the Spirit: Wicked men do injure the
spirit by railing and by reviling his gifts and graces; and good men do injure
the spirit by denying and disowning of them upon every temptation, and every
weakness, and upon every failing: O they have no faith, and no love, and no
sincerity of heart, and the Spirit of God never wrought any Renewing work, or
saving work in their hearts! and they cannot attain unto those joys and
comforts which the people of God do meet with! But beloved! why do we charge
the Spirit of God thus foolishly? Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but
will you weary my God also? said the Prophet, Isa. 7. 13. So say I, Is it a
small thing that you injure another, but will you also injure the Spirit of
God? Spirit of God; disown him no more, and deny not any work of his any more;
though it be but little, yet do not disown it; though it be sometimes hidden
from thee, yet do not disown it; though it does many times work but weakly, do
not disown it; though it be put sometimes to a stand, though thou do not in
every particular answer the motions and rules of the Spirit, yet do not disown
the work of the Spirit; condemn every sinful work which is thine own, but do
not deny or dishonor any work that is his.

Secondly, By not crediting the testimony of the Spirit: Beloved, sometimes By
not crediting the spirit.
we do bear witness or give testimony for the Spirit, as when we humbly and
thankfully confess his workmanship in our hearts, saying, This is the Lords
doing, this he has done for my soul, etc. Sometimes the Spirit bears witness,
or gives in testimony unto our hearts; he bears witness, says the Apostle,
Romans 8. 16. that we are the children of God; and concerning this he gives in
his testimony, partly by his works of Faith and Regeneration which are to be
found in all and only the children of God: And partly by extraordinary
assurance, letting in such a lig^t, and evidence, and persuasion which
abundantly clears up our Relation, that without doubt God is our Father, and we
are his children: If now after both these testimonies in assurance of the
Spirit, in after times of darkness, and desertion, and temptation, we call the
testimony of the Spirit into question, and charge it for a false delusion, do
we not exceedingly injure the Spirit of God, in some sort to make bim a liar,
and a false witness?

Object. But we do not do so; and we dare not do so, his testimony is true;
only How to know the testimony of the Spirit.
we fear that the testimony which we have found, was not his testimony, but a
delusion either of Satan, or of our own hearts.

Sol. O but what if indeed that testimony was not the delusion of your hearts,
but the very testimony of the Spirit, which you have challenged and rejected as
a delusion, are you not then very guilty of great injuriousness unto the
Spirit? And that it was the very testimony of the Spirit of God, may thus
appear.

1. It was a testimony after deep humblings of the heart for sin. 2. It was a
testimony after importunate cries and wrestlings for mercy and assurance. 3. It
was a testimony after your believing, and closing which Christ offered and
accepted. 4. It was a testimony after the matching of the promises with your
souls condition. 5. It was a testimony that filled your heart with joy
unspeakable and glorious, and with a love most dear and superlative, and with
most humble and serious care and diligence how to walk more exactly and
cheerfully to the praise and honor of this most gracious God. If it was thus,
it was no delusion, it was indeed the testimony of the Spirit; and you have
dealt unkindly and unworthily thus to requite him, and thus to disgrace his
precious testimony.
Thirdly, By disregarding and slighting the Ordinances of Christ: Some people
do think, that because they have the Spirit, therefore there is no need of
Ordinances, By slighting Christ's Ordinances.
at least for them; perhaps they hold that the Ordinances may be useful for
others who as yet have not received the Spirit, but yet they are needless for
them who have received the Spirit: And three places of Scripture they allege
for this, Jer. 31. 34. They shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me from
the least to the greatest of them, says the Lord. 1 John 2. 27. The anointing
which ye have received of him, abides in you; and ye need not that any man
teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth,
and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. 2 Pet. 1.
19. We have also a most sure Word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place until the day dawne,
and the day star arise in your hearts.

With your favor, I will speak something in 1. Opposition to this Opinion; it
is the Opinion of the Libertines of old, and of some now amongst our selves,
The Libertines answered.
who desire and endeavor to subvert the Ministry and the Ordinances of
preaching. 2ly. In resolving the true meaning of those places of Scripture.

First, I affirm that Gods giving of his Spirit unto his people, was never
intended by him to put a period unto any Evangelical Ordinance, or to render
them useless unto any of his people: this may be demonstrated thus,

First, From the scope of the Scriptures: All Scripture, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 16. is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for I^struction in Righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, ver. 17.

If the Word of God be given for these ends, For Doctrine to teach us the
matter of faith; for Reproof to convince errors; for Correction to condemn sin;
for Instruction to show us our duties, and to make us perfect: To beget us:
Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us with the Word of truth: To build us up:
Acts 20. 33. I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace which is able
to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified: then certainly the presence of the Spirit; and the Ministry of the
Word are not inconsistent, nor are they to be dijoyned.

Secondly, If the Lord Jesus himself has instituted some men particularly for
his service, and the benefit of his Church, and has committed the dispensation
of Evangelical Ordinances unto them; then no man under pretense that he has
the Spirit, may slight and neglect the Ordinances; but Christ has instituted
some persons in the Church for Ministerial service, etc. Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
teachers. Ver. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, etc. Ver. 13. till we all
come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. What
need of these if the presence of the Spirit without these be sufficient? 1 Cor.
12. 28. God has set some in the Church, first, Apostles; secundarily,
Prophets; thirdly, Teachers. Ver. 29. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are
all Teachers? To these and not to all, has he committed the dispensation of
the Evangelical Ordinances: 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us as the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, etc. and has committed unto us the word of Reconciliation.

What, are all these Ordinances instruted, and fixed, and that by the will of
Christ, and yet useless for men that have the Spirit of Christ?

Thirdly, What mean those several passages in the Scriptures? Jam. 1. 19. Be
swift to hear. 1 Per. 2 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the
Word, that you may grow thereby. 1 These. 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit. Ver. 20.
Despise not Prephesying. Luke 10. 16. He that despises you, despises me, etc.
Isa. 59. 21. This is my Covenant with them says the Lord, my Spirit that is
upon them, and my Spirit which I have put within thy mouth, shall not depart
out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy
seeds seed, says the Lord hence forth for ever.

Fourthly, If the Spirit be given unto us to make the Ordinances effectual unto
us, then his presence should not take us off from Ordinances, but the Spirit is
given to make the Ordinances effectual, they are so far life unto us, as the
Spirit gives life unto them: 2 Cor. 3. 16. The Spirit gives life.

Secondly, Having spoken these things, I shall now look upon those
forementioned Scriptures, and see whether they conclude the needlesness of
Ordinances after the reception of the Spirit.

Object. Jer. 31. 34. They shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me, etc.
Hence the Anabaptists do conclude that there is no need of Teachers nor
Anabaptists answered.
Learning.

Sol. First, I would fain know Whether these people have among them a Church of
Christ, yea or no? if they have, then I would know Whether they have any The
Scriptures opened.
Teachers of the Word, and Laborers in the Word and Doctrine, any teaching
publicly in their Churches?

Secondly, But to the place of the Prophet, who sets out the difference between
the Old Testament and the New. 1. In respect of efficacy, this he lays down in
ver. 33. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after
these days says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, etc. 2ly, In respect of Clarity, that in the times of the
new Covenant there should be a more clear and plentiful effusion of knowledge
than in the old Covenant; for when Christ came, then did the Sun of
Righteousness arise, the light of which was sevensold to what the light was
before his coming: they before his coming had but a dark knowledge, those after
his coming had a more clear and full knowledge.

Object. True, and they had so much knowledge, that they needed not to be
taught, they shall no more teach.

Sol. That expression is not to be taken literally and absolutely, as if those
that live under the Gospel should need no teaching at all; for we read an
express promise (relating unto Gospel Times) to the contrary: Isa. 2. 3. Many
people shall go and say, Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will
walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go out the Law, and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. But the words are to be taken Restrictively and
Comparatively; therefore if you observe them, it is not said only they shall no
more teach every one his neighbor; but they shall no more teach every man his
neighbor, saying, know the Lord: So that God does promise under the Gospel
such a measure of knowledge, as that his people now shall not be Alphabetarii
any more; need to be taught the first Principles of the Doctrine of Faith any
more; these they should all of them clearly know, and much more clearly than
many or most living under the old Covenant or Testament.

Object. 1 John 2. 27. You need not that any man teach you, but as the same
anointing teaches you of all things, etc.

Sol. The Apostle having in the former words delivered many excellent and
comfortable truths, he concludes with a persuasion of their knowledge of, and
assent unto them, q. d. you are the people of God, you have received his
Spirit, you know these things to be true; I write them unto you not as to the
ignorant but knowing Christian; you know them assuredly, the Spirit given unto
you has enabled you to know, and to acknowledge them, so that no man needs to
teach you them, etc.

Object. 2. Pet. 1. 19. Unto which you do well to take heed as unto a light
that shines in darkness until the day dawn, and the day star^e arise in your
hearts.

Sol. Until the day dawn (i. e.) Pleniori and apertiori cognitione quam sub
legis umbris fuerit.

1. He commends the Jews for regarding the Prophetical writings. 2. He prefers
the Apostolical Writings which had more light in them. 3. Until is gradual and
not exclusive.
Fourthly, lastly, the Spirit is injured when any do Father upon him their odd
Opinions, and wild fancies, and delusions, and sometimes their abominable
blasphemies which are not to be named amongst Christians, but with detestation:
The Spirit of God is the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of holiness; and to
entitle him unto any errors or wickedness, it is no less then to blaspheme and
reproach him.

Fifthly, The fifth Caution which I would commend to you that have the Envy not
the gifts of the Spirit in others
Spirit, is this; Do not envy the gifts and graces of the Spirit in any man,
nor speak evil of them: Numb. 11. 29. And Moses said unto Joshua, Enviest thou
for my sake? Would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the
Lord would put his Spirit upon them. The Spirit of God gives different gifts
unto men to profit withal: 1 Cor. 12. 7. To one is given by the Spirit the
word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, Ver. 8. To
another Faith by the same Spirit, Ver. 9. And there are different measures of
his gifts; some do excel in one gift, and some in another; and this holds true
in public persons, and in private persons; and all of us should rejoice in all
these manifestations of the Spirit: It should not grieve us that any one is
good, nor that he can do good in his private way, or in his public way; nor
should it grieve and trouble us if any man has more grace, or that he can do
more good, bring more glory to Christ than we do or can. The end of every
Christian is Gods glory; now every one should mind that, and contribute toward
that; one man may contribute more, and every man should contribute his utmost
toward it; is it not enough if Christ be magnified, and thy soul saved?

Sixthly, You should not be discouraged for any work which God puts upon Be not
discouraged at hard tasks.
you, though never so great and difficult; for you have the Spirit of wisdom,
and power, and sufficiency to assist you; Zach. 4. 6. Not by might, not by
power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts.

2ly Now follows the Positive or affirmative duties for them that have received
the Spirit of God. The positive duties of such as have the spirit. They should
show ^orth the virtues of the spirit. As love.


First, You should express the virtue of the Spirit which abides in you; you
should walk like men of another spirit; especially you should hold out those
nine fruits or virtues of the spirit mentioned in Gal. 5. 22, 23. The fruit of
the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance; these you should strive to act in your convesations.

1. Love (i. e.) a loving behavior, especially toward the Godly, nay, and
toward all men; you should walk in love, without hatred, and emulation, and
envying, and rash suspicion, and censoriousness.

2. Joy (i. e.) such a behavior as sets out a contentedness, and
well-pleasedness Joy.
with our worldly portion; and a cheerfulness and comfortableness in our
spiritual relation unto, and portion in God and Christ.

3. Peace (i. e.) such a behavior as exempts us from meddling, and wrangling,
and quarrelling, and contentiousness, and turbulency, and tum^ltuousness, and
Peace.
variancies, and that frames us to a quiet, peaceable, and unprovoking
inoffensive carriage.

4. Long-suffering (i. e.) we should bear much of the weaknesses and
infirmities Long-suffering
of those with whom we do converse, and pass by slight injuries, and forgive
many a wrong done unto us, as God* for Christ's sake has forgiven us.

5. Gentleness (i. e.) we should behave our selves toward others in speaking,
Gentleness.
or looking, or dealing, without p^ide, austerity, insolency, scornfulness,
rigidness, in a soft, humble, affable, candid manner.

6. Goodness (i. e.) we should not be hard-hearted, and backward to do good
Goodness.
to the souls or bodies of others, but should be ready to distribute, full of
the fruits of mercy, and be helpful, and profitable, and merciful to them that
need, especially to the distressed members of the body of Christ.

7. Faith (i. e. fidelity, we should be just in our words, promises, and in all
our Faith.
dealing with men, by no means lie, or deceive, or overreach, or deal with
guile, deceitfully, or falsely, but squarely, plainly, and honestly, and
righteously.

8. Meekness (i. e.) we should suppress all rash, furious, immoderate, unlawful
anger, and frowardness, and perturbation, and passionateness, and strive to
Meekness.
manifest that we are in some measure able to deny our selves, and to bear
crosses, and afflictions, provocations, injuries, patiently and contentedly.

9. Temperance (i. e.) we should not excessively lay out our cares and labors
Temperance.
for any wordly thing, whether honor, or riches, or pleasures; but be soher in
the desire and use of all the earthly blessings which God has given unto us.

Secondly, you should be wonderful thankful unto the Lord for giving of his We
must be thankful for the spirit.
Spirit unto you: Paul takes special notice of this mercy, and often speaks of
it: We have received the Spirit of God, and he has given unto us his holy
Spirit, and his Spirit dwells in us, etc.

There are four things for which God is eternally to be blessed: viz. 1. For
his free grace and love. 2ly For his Christ. 3ly For his Gospel. And 4ly for
his Spirit.

Quest. And why for his Spirit?

Sol. Because, what you are in relation to God, you are by the Spirit.

First, Are you in Christ? this is by the Spirit; are you new creatures, born
Reasons of it.
again? this is by the Spirit: are you delivered from Satan and your sinful
corruptions? this is by the Spirit.

2. What you can do, this comes from the Spirit: Can you mourn for sin? can you
pour out your hearts in Prayer? can you at any time trust in the Name of the
Lord? can you look toward his holy place in times of desertion? can you deny
your selves? can you do the will of God? can you suffer the will of God? all
your spiritual strength is from the Spirit.

Thirdly, Have you any discoveries of the Love of God? have you any clearness
of the love of Christ? and of your propriety in him? have you any satisfying
evidences of your present relation to God? have you any sealings and assurances
of future blessedness? have you ever tasted of joy unspeakable and glorious? of
a peace that passes all understanding? of recoveries out of sin? of sweet
refreshings under troubles of conscience? then bless the Lord who has given
his own Spirit unto you?

Thirdly, you should improve the Spirit that is given unto you, and make
Improve the spirit.
use of him.

1. For works which he can do, but has not yet begun within you. 2. For works
which he has begun, but has not as yet perfected and finished within you.
First, For works which he can do, but (perhaps) has not yet begun within you.
He has begun the work of humiliation, and of vocation, and of union, and of
regeneration; but then (perhaps) there are other works wanting; you have found
him an healing Spirit, but did you ever find him a sealing Spirit? you have
felt the power of his grace, but did you ever taste the sweetness of his joys?
you have found him a regenerating Spirit, but did you ever find him a
witnesting Spirit? Now improve your interest in the Spirit for these
soul-renewing works which you long for, but never yet found; why, be^eech the
Lord to give you the Spirit of Joy as well as the Spirit of Faith; the Spirit
of Peace, as well as the Spirit of Holiness; the sealing and witnessing Spirit,
as well as the renewing and changing Spirit* The Spirit of gladness as well as
of mourning; Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation: Be of good comfort, go in
peace, thy sins are forgiven thee. Thy heart is ready to sink and break for
want of comfort, why! Go to the Lord, Lord comfort my soul; thou have promised
joy and comfort to thy people, and biddest thy Ministers to comfort them; O
comfort me with thine own Spirit! it is his work, it is his Office to be the
Comforter, etc.

Secondly, For the works which he has begun, but has not as yet perfected and
finished within you; as all the works of grace, of knowledge, of faith, of
love, etc. be not content with a little of these, but (as the Apostle exhorts
in Ephesians. 5. 18.) Be filled with the Spirit; labor to increase and abound in
all fruits of the Spirit: Psalm. 92. 13. Those that be planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the house of our God. Ver. 14. They shall still
bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing.

Here I will briefly answer two Questions.

1. Quest. One is, Why they that have the Spirit of grace, should strive to
increase Why such as have grace should labor to grow in it.
and to abound in grace?

Sol There are five Reasons for it.

First, This will testify the truth that is in them: That they have the graces
of the Spirit: indeed there are three things (amongst many others) which do
testify grace in truth. 1. One is Power. 2. The second is Growth. 3. The third
is Perseverance.

Dead things, and Artificial things have no growth, q. because they have no
life: Every branch in me that bears fruit, the Father purges that it may
bring forth more fruit, says Christ, Joh. 15. 2.

Secondly, Yea and this testifies that the Spirit is in you of a truth; for the
Spirit changes us from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. When the Spirit changes
us at the first from sinfulness to holiness, this is a glorious change (for as
the natural estate is vile and inglorious, so the renewed and sanctified estate
is an excellent and glorious estate) and when the Spirit begins a glorious
change, he proceeds and makes it still more glorious; the spirit changes us
from glory to glory: Grace makes us glorious, and more grace makes us more
glorious; the more grace, the more glory; and where the Spirit of God is, there
he carries on his work from glory to glory.

Thirdly, The more that ye do grow in the graces of the spirit, the greater and
fuller is your conformity unto Christ! Grace is in Christ as in a Fountain, and
perfection, as in a pattern: Now the more you have in answerableness to the
pattern, the fuller is your conformity; a little grace in us resembles that
grace which is in Christ;

Fourthly, The more you obtain in the proportion of grace, the greater Revenue
of honor will you be able to bring in to God: I told you that the weakest
grace can enable you to bring God some honor; why then much grace can help you
farther in that service, it can set up his Name on high: A little Faith can
honor God, but a strong Faith (such as Abraham's or Moses's) will bring more
honor to his goodness and faithfulness; a little love will make you to do
something for Christ, but much love will make you do much more: The more grace
that you attain, the more gloriously will you shine in your conversation, and
in all the fruits of Righteousness, with more fullness, evenness, and
stedfastness, and all this glorifies your Father which is in heaven.

Fifthly, You your selves would gain more, if your graces were increased more.
e. g. You would certainly find more peace in conscience, and more freedom from
slavish fears, and doubts, and more confidence in your accesses to God, and
more sweetness in the Ordinances of Christ, and more enlargement of heart in
all your communions with God, and more wisdom and strength against the
temptations of Satan.

2. How may one know that he has much of the Spirit of God in him? that How to
know that we have much of Gods spirit in us. If more humble.
grace is increased and raised, that he is more spiritual?

Sol. You may know it thus.

First, If you be more humble: The more pride, always either no grace, or very
little; but the more humility, still the more grace; mark the Records in
Scripture, and you shall find the most excellent in grace have been the most
eminent in humility, e. g. Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, Paul, etc. For much
grace, 1. Discovers most wants. 2ly Most failings. 3ly Most self-insufficiency.
4ly Most self-unworthiness. 5ly That all our receptions are from mere grace and
mercy.

Secondly, If you be more exact in your walking, giving no just occasion either
If more exact in our walking.
of offense to the weak, or of grief to the strong Christians, or of reproach
to them that are without. A man that can order his conversation, so as good men
are edified by him, and wicked men have their mouths stopped, or cannot speak
ill of him without lying, he has a great measure of grace.

Thirdly, If a man be able to drink of the cup which Christ did drink, and to
If able to suffer afflictions.
be baptized with the baptism wherewith Christ was baptized (Mat. 20. 22, 23.)
this man has got on far in the work of grace: The more able that you are to
suffer reproaches, and losses, yea death itself for Christ, the greater is your
faith, and the stronger is your love; when you can rejoice in tribulations,
bear the reproaches for Christ, taking the Cross as your Crown, and triumph
that ye are counted worthy to suffer for his Name.

Fourthly, If you be able to govern your tongues with wisdom, and meekness, If
we can wisely govern our tongues.
and grace, and truth, this is a sign that you are strong in grace: Jam. 3, 2.
If any offend not in word; the same is a perfect man.

Fifthly, The less careful we are for outward things, and the more able we are
to trust God, and to look on his Promises, with as much cheerfulness as others
do If able to trust God without carking cares.
only in their performances: If we can bless and praise God when he takes away,
as well as when he gives: Psalm. 56. 10. In God will I praise his word, in the
Lord will I praise his word.

Sixthly, The more compliance with, and contentedness in all the changes which
do befall us in our journey to heaven in these days of our pilgrimage,
certainly If contented in all changes.
this declares a presence of much grace: The Lord says of Job that there was
not a man like him in all the earth, he was eminently good and upright; and he
it was who blessed God in his great changes: Job 1. 21. The Lord gave, and the
Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Chap. 2. 10. Shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? See Paul that
strong Christian, Phil. 4 11. I have learned in whatsoever estate I am,
therewith to be content. Ver. 12. I know how to be abused, and I know how to
abound; everywhere, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to
be hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need.

Fourthly, A fourth duty which concerns you who have received the Spirit, is
Our hearts must be carried out to spiritual things.
this; your hearts should be more earnestly and fixedly, and entirely carried
unto, and laid out for spiritual things; spiritual objects, and treasures
should be of more value with you, and they should draw out your thoughts and
affections to the utmost: other things should be of small account with you: If
the Spirit be in you, then the things of the spirit should be in you: as
wickedness is in the wicked man, and the world is in the worldly man, so should
spiritual things be in a man of the Spirit: In him, i. e. his heart, still in
the mindings of his heart, and in the projects of his heart, and in the cares
of his heart, and in the desires and longings of his heart, and in the delights
and satisfactions of his heart; he should be wholly given up to them, and his
soul should be resolved into them: Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. The spiritual
man should be so addicted to spiritual things, that he should spiritualize all
things; he should spiritualize the world, and all his dealings in the world,
and he should spiritualize all the comforts of the world (look on them as from
his God, and raise his heart more to God, have much more delight and sweetness
in him) he should spiritualize all the afflictions and troubles of the world,
learn Righteousness, and more holiness by them, and more to live by faith: Nay,
he should spiritualize all his fails, grow more fearful, selfdenying, mournful,
watchful; fruitful; well, he should spiritualize his conference and converse
with all men; edifying the good, and admonishing the wicked, comforting the
weak, supporting the feeble: But to the main thing, his heart should lay out it
self for spiritual things: O more of the favor of God, and more of Jesus
Christ, and more of the fruits of the Spirit, etc.

1. The great Promises are of th^se. 2. And the Promises of them are only unto
you. 3. They are the best portion, and your best portion, and your only
portion. 4. These are eternity, or for eternity. 5. The Spirit is given unto
you to carry out your hearts for these. 6. These are most suitable to a
spiritual nature.
Now in the desires of spiritual things, remember to

1. Desire grace infinitely more than gifts. 2. Desire strength and power more
than joys and comfort. 3. Desire the means as well as the end. 4. Desire all
for the honor and glory of God.
SECT. VII.
5. Use. Does God promise to give his Spirit unto his people? Then let us all
be Let all look after the gift of the spirit.
persuaded to look after this great gift of God, not to content our selves
under the want of it, but by all means to obtain it: For the managing of this
Use I will present unto you 1. Some Motives to excite us. 2ly Some Means to
enjoy.

1. The Motives to look after the Spirit of God. e. g.

First, The Spirit and Christ come always together: If any man has Christ,
The Spirit and Christ come always together.
he has the Spirit; if any man has the Spirit, he has Christ; if any man
has not the Spirit, he has not Christ; Christ and the Spirit ever go
together: Should not this provoke us to strive with God for his Spirit; what
sinner on earth would not have Christ? what will become of us without Christ?
how happy is every soul in the enjoyment of him? how miserable in the want of
him? how longing are the hearts of some for Christ, and for the knowledge that
Christ is their Christ? But if the Spirit of God be yours, then the Son of
God is yours: Here is a double portion at once, a double gift at once, the
Spirit of God and Jesus Christ at once: If you mind not the Spirit for the
Spirits sake, yet mind the Spirit for Christ's sake; your desires after him,
must come from the spirit, and your union with him must come from the spirit,
and your knowledge of the person (...) propriety or interest in him must come
from the Spirit: A man may think he has Christ, but if he has not the Spirit,
Christ is none of his, Romans 8. 9. A man may fear that he has not Christ, but
if the Spirit be given unto him, then assuredly Christ is given unto him;
Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3. 4.

Secondly, Forgiveness of sins and the Spirit always are given together: Though
The Spirit and pardon of sin go together.
forgiveness of sin be one thing, and the Spirit in us another thing, yet they
are both given together: A man has not his sins pardoned, and yet he remains
unsatisfied without the Spirit; and a man is not sanctified by the Spirit, and
yet his sins remain unpardoned, but both are given together at the same time: 1 John 5. 6. This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by
water only, but by water and blood, and it is the Spirit that bears witness.
1 Cor. ^. 11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of of our
God.

It is true, that the blood of Christ is the only meritorious cause of the
forgiveness of sins; God forgives our sins for Christ's sake; but then it is as
true, that assurance of forgiveness and reconciliation of the Spirit are given
together: Has God sanctified thy heart by his Spirit? assuredly he has
forgiven thy sins. Has God indeed showed thee mercy in forgiving thy sins, he
has then assuredly given unto thee the Spirit of grace to change thy sinful
heart!

Now would you have your sins forgiven? do you look on forgiveness as a
desirable mercy? as a mercy of life, and of peace, and of hope; O then get the
Spirit of God; God never forgives a man his sins, but he gives his Spirit:
Forgiveness of sins is the great deed of mercy written in the blood of Christ,
and the giving of the Spirit is the seal of that deed.

Thirdly, The Spirit and excellency always go together: Can we find such a
one as this is? a man in whom the Spirit of God is; said Pharaoh concerning
Joseph, Genesis 41. 38.

Before we receive the Spirit of God, there is no excellency in us, we are but
The spirit and excellency go together.
low and vile, nothing of worth in our hearts; they are wicked, corrupt, and
dead in trespasses and sins, and short of the glory of God; nothing of worth in
our thoughts, All the imaginations of the thoughts of our hearts are only evil
continually: Nothing of worth in our affections, they are set upon evil, and
set upon the world; no love of God, nor fear of God, nor desire of God, nor
delight in God, nothing of worth in our conversations, they are unprofitable,
vile, vain, loose, and dishonouring of God: But when the Spirit of God come
into us, then comes an excellency into us, and a true excellency into us: The
Spirit of God is styled an excellent Spirit, Dan. 6. 3. And they that enjoy the
spirit; are men of an excellent Spirit, Prove. 17. 27. and to be more excellent
than other men, there is no way to attain unto it, but by getting the Spirit,
and this I shall show in particular; all that have the Spirit, they immediately
enjoy

1. An excellent Nature: They are made partakers of the Divine Nature, Such
enjoy an excellent nature. An excellent Relation.
2 Pet. 1. 4. They are changed into the glorious image of Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

2. An excellent Relation: They are born again of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 3. And
are made the sons of God, they receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4 5. And by
the Spirit given unto them, cry Abba Father, ver. 6.

3. Excellent Ornaments: Ezekiel. 16. 7. An excellent wisdom which excels
folly, Excellent Ornaments.
as far as light excels darkness, Eccless. 2. 13. An excellent knowledge,
even the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, Phil. 3. 8. An
excellent faith, which is precious, and more precious than gold. An excellent
love, even the love of Jesus Christ in sincerity. An excellent joy, which is
unspeakable and glorious. An excellent hope; which makes not ashamed, which is
as an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6. 19

4. Excellent Privileges; To come with boldness to the throne of grace; to
have Excellent Privileges.
the golden Scepter still held out unto them, to lay claim to all the purchases
of Christ, and to challenge their right in him, to make use of, and apply any
promise of God, respecting any condition of their souls or bodies, to appeal
from themselves to Christ, and from the sentence and severity of the Law, unto
the mercy and salvation of God in the Gospel: In a word, they that have the
Spirit, they are thereby made an eternal excellency, Isa. 60. 15.

5. Excellent conversation: Holiness, Uprightness, Righteousness, and
unblameableness Excellent conversation. The spirit and alsufficiency come
together.
of life, a life in Christ according to godliness.

Fourthly, The Spirit and Alsufficiency comes together: Whatsoever your
condition may be, whatsoever your ex^^^ences may be, whatsoever your troubles
and sorrows may be, whatsoever your wants may be, whatsoever your works and
services may be, if you had but the Spirit, you had enough for all; his
presence and efficacy can supply you with all.

1. Are you weak? he can strengthen you. 2. Are you ignorant? he can teach you.
3. Are you doubtful? he can counsel and guide you. 4. Are you fallen? he can
raise you. 5. Are you tempted? he can succor you, and make you to persist, and
conquer. 6. Are you brought low in wants? he can make you to live by Faith. 7.
Are you filled with sorrow? he can fill you with comfort. 8. Are you in
darkness, and can see no light? he can open your eyes to see the salvation of
God. 9. Are fears upon you? he can satifie and quiet you. 10. Is dullness on
you? he can quicken and enlarge you. 11. Are you doubtful of Gods love and
mercy? he can shed abroad the love of God in your hearts, and make mercy turn
unto you. 12. Are you to (...), to suffer, to live and dye? he can enable you
for every good work; and in your sufferings be a spirit of glory unto you;
while you live he can make you to live unto the Lord; and when you come to dye,
he can make you to dye unto the Lord: O who would not, who should not wrestle
with God for this Spirit! without whom no Christ, no life no, peace no joy, no
faith, no help, no hope; and with whom comes Christ, and Mercy, and Excellency,
and He^p, and all Spiritual tastes, Earnests, Sealings, Rejoycings, and Glory!
2ly The Means to get the Spirit. Means to get the spirit. Lay down prejudices
against the spirit.


First, If you would get the Spirit of God, you must then lay down all
prejudices against the Spirit: As men have prejudices against Christ, which
hinder them from the receiving of Christ; so men have prejudices against the
Spirit of Christ, which do hinder and withdraw them from desiring of the spirit.

There are four Prejudices especially, and Exceptions in this case, viz.

1. The humbling work of the Spirit. Prejudices against the spirit.
2. The mortif^ing work of the Spirit. 3. The sanctifying work of the Spirit.
4. The de^isions that befall men for the Spirits sake.
Object. We would be content to have the Spirit, but that he will show us our
sins, and trouble and humble us for our sins?

Sol. I answer.

First, Of a truth he will do so, for he is a Spirit of Conviction, and a
spirit of The first prejudice taken away.
bondage to fear.

Secondly, Nevertheless this should not take off our hearts from desiring the
presence of the spirit: For

1. The troubles from the Spirit are good troubles: Of necessity we must be
Troubles from the spirit are good troubles.
troubled for our sins, either in this life or in hell; the troubles for sins
in hell are unsufferable and remediless, but the troubles of this life for our
sins (especially) when they come from the Spirit they are good, they are
penitential troubles, and tend only to stir in us a loathing of our sins, and a
separation from our sins which have been so disp^easing and injurious to God,
and have been, and are the cause of all our troubles: The troubles which the
Spirit causes in us for sin, is a means to deliver us from sin, and the
eternal troubles for sin.

2. The troubles which the Spirit causes in us for sin, do end in much joy
They end in joy and peace.
and peace: The joy and peace of the Spirit are very precious, and they cannot
be delivered out unto us, unless we be first troubled for our sin: The Spirit
comforts mourners, and them that are cast down: Now the Spirit troubles us for
sin, 1. To make sin bitter to us. 2ly To make Christ sweet to us. As he
troubles us for our sins, so he leads and draws the trouble^ soul to Christ,
that in him he may find deliverance from those sins, and his peace made with
God, etc.

Trouble is not all the work of the Spirit; it is an inceptive work, and a
preparative work; he troubles you for sin that you may not be damned for sin,
and that you may make out for Christ to save you from your sins.

Object. We should be willing to have the Spirit, but that then we must bid
farewell to all our sins; the Spirit is a mortifying Spirit, he will not suffer
us to love our sins, nor to take pleasure in them as heretofore; we are afraid
of the sword of the Spirit.

Sol. I answer.

First, It is granted that the spirit will do this as you do speak, it will
cast sin The second prejudice removed. He dethrones sin. The death of sin is
our life.
out of the throne, it will take off love and service from sin, and it will be
more and more ^^ mortifying of it.

Secondly, But then, where is the hurt, the danger, the prejudice which you
have against this? (Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts.) Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall
dye, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body ye shall
live. Here is death and life; If you keep your sins alive ye shall dye; if you
through the spirit mortify your sins, you shall live: The life of sin is your
death, and the death of sin is your life: Saul spared Agag, but it was his
ruin; and Ahab spared Benhadad, but it was his ruin, etc.

Object. O but the Spirit will make us holy, and we must then live holily, and
not so l^osly and freely as heretofore!

Sol. First, Will the spirit of God make you holy? and should you not be The
third prejudice removed.
so? 1 Pet. 1. 16. Be holy, for I am holy; and should you not walk so! As he
who has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, 1
Pet. 1. 15.

Secondly, Consider only three places of Scripture for this.

1. Isa. 4. 3. He that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every
We should be holy.
one that is written amongst the living in Jerusalem. 2. Heb. 12. 14. Follow
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. 3. Matthew. 5. 8. Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Object. But I shall be a derision, and a mock if I should pretend to the
Spirit, etc.

Sol. 1. Who will mock you? those that are led by the Devil; wicked, graceless,
The fourth prejudice removed.
ungodly men.

2. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.

3. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of
glory and of Christ rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

Secondly, if you would come to partake of the Spirit, you must not then resist
We must not resist the spirit.
the Spirit: Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always
res^st the Holy Ghost, Acts 7. 51.

Men resist the Spirit two ways.

1. When they will not hearken unto, nor regard the counsel and commands of the
Spirit delivered in the Word, but set themselves against them, and oppose, and
How the spirit is resisted.
despise them.

2. When they will not receive the offers and motions of the Spirit, but harden
their hearts against them, and quench them, and will not give way or entrance
unto them. Now take heed of this, when the Spirit of God is knocking at your
hearts, and stirs your hearts to accept of him, and of his graces, (which he is
willing and ready to work in you) by no means neglect them, or slight them, but
lay hold of them presently, as one of the greatest mercies that God is
intending toward you; bless him, and cherish them, and beseech him to go on
with his work on your souls; do* not reject any work of the Spirit, neither
grieve him by neglecting his good motions: Prove. 1. 23. Turn you at my reproof,
behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my works unto
you, my Spirit shall not always strive with man.

Thirdly, If you would come to partake of the spirit, then you must pray the We
must pray for the spirit.
Lord to give you his spirit, you must thirst after him, and seek for him: Isa.
44. 3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy
offspring. Luke 11. 13. Your heavenly Father will give the spirit to them that
ask him. What a promise is this to encourage any man sensible of the want of
the spirit, to pray unto God! Jesus Christ assures him that if he will ask for
the Holy Spirit, he shall have him.

Object. But who can pray unless he has the Spirit first?

Sol. I grant that the spirit must make you sensible of the want of the spirit,
and he must stir up your hearts to pray for him; there is some degree of the
spirits presence in stirring us up to pray for these; but then if you would
fully enjoy the spirit, you must pour out you hearts, etc.

Fourthly, You must attend the Preaching of the Gospel; the Gospel is called
Attend upon the Ministry o^ the Word.
the Ministry of the Spirit 2 Cor. 3. 6. And you read that whiles Peter was
Preaching the Word un^o Cornelius and the rest, the Holy Ghost came upon them,
Act. 10 44. Whiles Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them
which heard the Word: So Gal. 3. 2. Received ye the Spirit by the works of the
Law, or by the hearing of faith! They received the spirit upon the hearing of
the Gospel which is the word of faith: You read that a^l the works of the
spirit, and all the graces of the spirit, and all the joys and comforts of the
spirit are let into us by the Word; by that the spirit is pleased to convey
himself.

First, His works: He enlightens our minds by the Word, he convinces us of He
enlightens our minds by the Word.
sin by the Word; I had not known sin, except, etc. Romans 7. He humbles our
hearts by the Word; When they heard these things they were pricked in their
hearts, etc. Acts 2 37.

Secondly, His graces: Faith is by hearing, Romans 10 17. so is Love, Patience,
Repentance, etc.

Thirdly, His comforts: Thy Word has quickened me, and thy Word has comforted
me.

By the Word men are Regenerated, brought into Christ, are made new creatures,
etc.

Quest. What is this walking, and keeping, and doing, concerning which you
speak A twofold walking, etc.
to us, which you say concerns Gods people in Covenant?

Sol. There is a twofold walking, keeping, doing etc.

First, One is Legal, which is the st^ict and exact, and punctual full
obedience unto, or observation of the Commandments of God in every part,
point, and Apex, and Jota as to all sorts of duties in all the measures of it,
without the least breach or defect, in the whole course of a man's life; a
continuance of all the things that are written to do them, as the Apostle
speaks, Gal. 3. Thus none can walk, none can keep, none can do them; For

1. Grace is imperfect in every man (We know but in part, etc.) and if grace be
imperfect, obedience cannot be exactly full. 2. No man but has sin in him, and
does sin; In many things we offend all; and every sin is transgression of the
Law; and where there is any transgression, there is not a perfect keeping. 3.
The best are justified in and by Christ; wherein 1. His Righteousness is
imputed. 2ly For his sake their sins are pardoned; which needed not, if any man
could perfectly fulfill and keep the Law.
Secondly, The other is Evangelical, whereunto four things do concur; What is
evangelical doing, etc.


1. A setting up of the Law and Will of God, as the Rule to instruct and guide
us in the whole course of the actions of our life: Thy Word is a lamp unto my
feet, and a light unto my paths, Psalm. 119. 105. marking what it commands to be
done, and to be observed by us.

2. An endeavor to conform all our Actions unto the Rule, making conscience of
all that is commanded us of God, an ordering of our conversations and steps
according to the Word: Psalm. 119. In precepts not to be careless and negligent,
though of the least duty. In Prohibitions, not to be venterous, though on the
least sin: Israelites followed the Cloud of fire, moved when it moved, stayed
when it satyed; so should we put on to answer every command of God, and refrain
upon every prohibition of God.

3. A walking and obeying in the Evangelical manner, or a performance of all
duties in that Gospel manner as is required we should perform them.

1. Cordially: Affections should come into our duties; not only do the will How
we should perform Gospel duties.
of God, but delight therein: I delight to do thy will O my God, Psalm. 40. 2.
Impartially without exception: There must be a respect unto all Gods commands,
and a hatred of every evil way. 3. Resolutely: I and my house will serve the
Lord, said Joshua. I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous judgments, said David. 4. Constantly: The statutes of God must be
our path in which we walk; we must not begin, and then grow weary and break
off, but hold on our course against all the temptations of the world, and of
Satan, and of our own flesh, though struggling, and backward. 5. Sincerely with
uprightness of heart: I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect
heart, said Hezekiah. This may be discovered thus.
1. If a man lose not the tenor of his desire and purpose, though in many
things he fails, yet he holds his purpose to walk in Gods statutes, and if at
any time Signs of sincerity.
we slip, or step aside, we must speedily return to the path of life, the old
and good way. 2. If real endeavors accompany and second his desires; I would
obey, and I strive to obey. 3. If he attends the means to strengthen both
desires and endeavors. 4. A right scope in all our duties: Not to merit
salvation, not to seek justification, not to make amends to God for our former
evil ways, not to set up our selves as to our own praise; But
1. For Gods glory; whatsoever we do, it must be done out of love to God, and
for the glory of God. 2. For our own salvation: work out your own salvation, as
a means, not as a cause. 3. For the good and benefit of others.
Ezekiel. 36. 27. And cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my
judgments and do them.
IN these words you have two parts considerable.

1. A work or duty laid out for all the people in Covenant with God. [They are
to walk in his statutes, and to keep his judgments, and to do them.]

2. A help promised unto them, to enable them for that work and service (I will
put my Spirit within you, and cause you (or according to the Original, Quo
faciam) by whom I will cause, or make you to walk in my statutes, etc.)

The work or duty which belongs to the people of God, is set forth in diverse
Metaphorical expressions, as walking in Gods statutes; which notes the path of
their steps, and the Rule of their conversation and work, likewise the
progressive course of their obedience, and keeping of his judgments; By the
judgments of God are meant his commands; and by the keeping of them, two
things are employed: 1. To make them dear unto us, to lay them up as our
treasure, as a precious part of the will of God: And then 2ly To conform our
selves unto them, to submit unto them as to our Rule, to live up unto them;
Servare, and observare, etc.

And doing of them; This expession I conceive to be the explication of the two
former, and it notes real and practical obedience unto Gods statutes and
judgments.

From all this, there are two Propositions, unto which I desire briefly to
speak unto. viz.

1. That an obediential observation of Gods statutes and judgments (or Laws,
or Commandments) is required of people in Covenant with God.

2. That the people of God are to make progress, to proceed on, to persevere
all their days, all their journey, in an obediential walking in Gods statutes.

CHAP. XIII.
1. Doctr. THat an obediential observation of the Law or Commandments of The
observation of Gods Laws belongs to all that are in Covenant with him.
God belongs to all people in Covenant with God: He says here of the people in
Covenant with himself, I will cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall
keep my judgments, and do them.

You read two things of the Saints or people of God.

1. One is, that they make a Covenant with God: Psalm. 50. 5. Gather my Gods
people make a Covenant with ^im.
Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice.

2. The other is, that they keep Covenant: Psalm. 103. 18. To such as keep They
keep Covenant with God.
his Covenant; and this he expounds in the following words, to those that
remember his Commandments to do them.

When we enter into Covenant with God, what is it that we do? I suppose (if we
do understand our selves) that we do then take him to be our God; 1. In his
Gracious Mercy. 2ly In his Righteous Society; that he, and he alone shall be
our Lord, our King to Rule and guide, and prescribe us laws, and we will be his
people to hearken unto him, to be at his command, to obey his voice and will.
Is any man so wild to make such a Covenant with God, or to think that God will
make such a Covenant as this with him? I will have mercy and blessing from God,
but I will not obey him; he shall be none of my Lord nor King. or that God will
yield to these terms, I will be yours for all blessings, but live as you list,
do what you please, walk how you will, serve your lusts, regard not my Law? Did
God ever make such a Covenant as this! Says God to Abraham, Genesis 15. 1. I am
tby shield and thy exceeding great reward. And Chap. 17. 1. I am the Almighty
God, I am able to do thee good, and will do so; but then he adds, walk before
me and be thou perfect, q. d. I will be a God to you for blessing, and also a
God over you for Ruling; I expect that you should walk uprightly before me (i.
e.) observe my ways, my Commandments, and act them with sincerity of heart,
not willingly disobey and prevaricate: So Exodus 19. 5. If ye will obey my voice
in doing and keeping my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me
above all people. And (Verse 6.) Ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and
an holy Nation.

But a little more to demonstrate this truth unto you, be pleased to consider
these five particulars.

First, Those several Relations which fall upon all people who come to be in
The relations betwixt God and his people in Covenant require obedience.
Covenant with God, and they are all such as lay obligations upon them to
obedience, to walking in his Statutes: They are the children of God, and have
God to be their Father: Now says God to them that pretend to stand in this
Relation, but walk disobediently, A son honors his Father, Mal. 1. 6. And if
I be a father, where is mine honor?

They are the servants of God, and God is their Lord and Master: Now says he
in the same place, a servant honors his Master; And if I be a Master, where
is my fear? should not a Lord and Master be feared? and what is it to fear God,
but to have an awful respect to his Commandments, and a tender care to do his
will? They are his subjects, and he is their King; he is the Lord that Reigns
over them, gives Laws unto them; and are not his Subjects a willing people in
the day of his power? Do not his Saints humble themselves, sit down at his
feet, and receive of his words? does not the fiery Law proceed from his right
hand for them whom he calls his Saints? Deuteronomy. 33. 2, 3.

Secondly, The Covenant mercies and blessings, as their scope is to express the
Rich bounty of God to his people; so likewise the end of them is to quicken
constrain, And so do the Covenant mercies
and indear them unto duty and obedience; Psalm. 86 12. I will praise thee O
Lord my God with all my heart, I will glorify thy Name for evermore. Ver. 13.
for great is thy mercy toward me. Psalm. 130. 4. There is forgiveness with thee
that thou may be feared. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now Israel, what does the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways,
and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul? Luke 1. 74. That we being delivered out of the hand of our
enemies, might serve him without fear. Ver. 75. In holiness and righteousness.
Romans 12. 1. I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrific^, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable service. Nothing more usual in the Scripture, than to press the
people in Covenant to obedience by and from the mercies of the Covenant: The
full and clear Revelation of the New Covenant takes in with it an express
institution of obedience: Tit. 2. 11. The grace of God which brings salvation
has appeared to all men. Ver. 12. Teaching us that denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this
present world. The full and clearest Revelation of the new Covenant, was when
Jesus Christ himself appeared in the world, and taught, and dyed, and rose
again, and ascended into heaven; and even thence is obedience chiefly urged:
the Gospel all along pressing duties upon the people of God, to love the Lord
their God, and to love their neighbor, and to walk as children of the light,
Ephesians. 5. And to be obedient children* 1 Pet. 1. 14. And to be holy in all
manner of conversation. Ver. 15. And to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith
they are called, with all lowliness and meekness, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2. And to put
off concerning the former conversation which is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts, Ver. 22. And to put on the new man which after God is created
in righteousness and true holiness. Ver. 24. And to walk circumspectly, Ephesians.
5. 15. or exactly unto the highest pitch of holiness and obedience.

Fourthly, The Mediator of the Covenant, concerning whom, you And the
Mediator of the Covenant.
find

1. That he professes that he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.
2. That he explicated the Law in the true and spiritual sense of it,
vindicating it from the false glosses of the Pharisees, and pressing it in many
branches upon us, as you may see in Matthew. 5. from ver. 21. to the end. 3.
Himself to be under the Law, and making special use of it in several parts
aginst the temptations of Satan: It is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God, Matthew. 4. 7. And it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve, ver. 10. 4. That he makes obedience the
discovery of our real love unto him: Joh. 14. 15. If you love me, keep my
Commandments. Ver. 21. He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it
is that loves me. Ver. 24. If a man love me, he will keep my words. 5. That it
was one end of the giving of himself to death for us: Tit. 2. 14. Who gave
himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own
self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead unto sin,
should live unto righteousness* 6. That his obedience unto the Law, is
propounded as a pattern for us to imitate: 1 John 2. 6. He that says he
abides in him, ought himsel to walk even as he walked.
Lastly, The Covenant-Faith which is in every one of the people of God, as it
And so does the Covenant faith.
carries them out to an election of God to be their God, so it carries them out
unto subjection to God, unto obedience: Heb. 11. 4. By faith Abel offered up a
more excellent sacrifice than Cain. Ver. 8. By faith Abraham obeyed God. Faith
eyes the Word of God for a Rule and warrant, and faith propounds unto us the
encouragements of the word to quicken our obedience, and faith fetches strength
from Christ to enable us in all our works of obedience. Having spoken these
things for the demonstration of the Assertion, I shall now speak unto three
Questions.

1. How this walking in Gods statutes, and keeping of his judgments, and doing
of them, may be fixed upon the people of Gods Covenant, seeing they are all of
them believers, and being so are no longer under the Law, but are freed and
delivered from it.

2. What manner of obedience, or kind of obedience that is which is required,
and to be performed by the people of Gods Covenant?

3. Why these are in such a special manner thus charged with walking in Gods
statutes, etc.

1. Quest. How this walking in Gods statutes, etc. may be forced upon the
people of Gods Covenant, seeing they are all under grace, and believers, and
not under How Gods people being not under the Law, are bound to obedience.
the Law, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans 6. 14. Ye are not under the Law,
but under Grace?

Sol. For a clear Answer unto this Question, I will briefly deliver my thoughts
in these distinctions.

First, Concerning the Law of God, you know there were some of them

1. Ceremonial, which consisted in Rites, and Ordinances, and Shadows,
typifying Jesus Christ in his sufferings, unto which there was a full period
put by the death of Christ.

2. Judicial, which respects the Jews as a peculiar Nation and Commonwealth,
being made and fitted for them, as in such a particular polity: And all those
Judicial Laws (especially these de jure particulari) are ceased by the
cessation of that Nation and polity.

3. Moral; which are these set down in the Decalogue, and are called the ten
words (or Commandments) which God spoke and delivered. Of the ten
Commandments (which we call the Moral Law) is the question to be understood,
whether believers, or the people in the New Covenant are bound unto them.

Secondly, This Moral Law may be considered either 1. In the Substance of it;
Or 2ly in the circumstances of it.

If you consider the Moral Law in the substance of it; so it is

1. An eternal manifestation of the mind and will of God, declaring what is
good, and what is evil; what we are to do, and what we are not to do; what
duties we How the Moral Law never cease.
do owe to God, and what duties we do owe to our neighbors; what worship God
requires, and what worship God forbids: In this consideration the Moral Law
never cease in respect of any person whasoever.

2. It discovers sin: For, Romans 3. 19. By the Law comes the knowledge of
sin: And the Apostle in Romans 7. 7. I had not known sin but by the Law; for I
had not known lust except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet.

In this respect likewise, the Law is still in force even unto the people of
God; it is the glass which shows them unto themselves, and the light which
manifests the hidden things and works of darkness in them.

3. The Rule of life: For as the Gospel is the Rule of faith, teaching us what
to believe; so the Moral Law is the Rule of manners, teaching us how to live;
and as to this directing power, it is still of force and use unto believers:
Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Ver.
133. Order my steps in thy Word.

But then secondly, the Law may be considered in respect of its circumstances,
not as it is a Rule of obedience, but as it is a condition of life; and as thus
considered, How it cease.


1. It requires a personal and perfect obedience, and that under a curse: Gal.
3. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all that is written to do it:
Here now it cease unto the people of God, the cursing and condemning power is
abrogated; Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us, Gal. 3. 13.

2. It requires an exact obedience as a reason of Justification: Do this and
live: Here likewise the people of God are freed from it; who (as Luther well
speaks) shall not be damned for their evil works, nor yet shall be justified
for their good works: but are justified by faith in Christ; and the matter of
their justification, being not inherent righteousness in themselves, but only
the imputed righteousness of Christ: Thus you see in what respects the people
of God are freed from, and in what respects they are still obliged by the Law:
The Law has not power to condem or justify them, and yet it has a power to
direct and instruct them.

And that it has such a power unto which we are to conform our selves in
obedience, may appear thus;

First, By that forementioned place in Matthew. 5. 17. Think not that I am come
to destroy the Law or the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill:
And in Why the Law has still a power to command us.
that Chapter he does both interpret the Law, and commend and command unto his
Disciples the duties of the Law. And surely it is no way probable that Christ
would by his own authority so have confirmed the Law, had it been his purpose
and business to have cancelled the Law.

Secondly, Paul in Romans 13. 8. that he might show and clear that in that one
precept of love, He that loves another, has fulfilled the Law; produces
several precepts of the Law in ver. 9. For this Thou shall not commit adultery;
Thou shall not kill; Thou shall not steal; Thou shall not bear false witness;
Thou shall not covet: And if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
All which were a fruitless proof, if the Law had nothing to do with the people
of God; but utterly ceased to them as to point of obedience. In like manner in
that place of James 2. 8. If ye fulfill the royal Law according to the
Scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, ye do well; but if the
Royal Law were abrogated, certainly they should not have done well to have
observed it.

Thirdly, If the Moral Precepts were ceased as to the people of God, then God
would have expressed in the delivery of them, a purpose after some time to have
revoked them, and to have exempted his people from further obedience unto them,
or else Jesus Christ would himself have abrogated them as now unuseful; but
neither of these do we find.

Object. Yes, Christ says in Luke 16. 16. The Law and the Prophets were until
John.

Sol. The Law here spoken of is not to be understood de Lege Morali, of the
direct and commanding Law of the Moral Law prescribing obedience, sed de lege
Prophetante per figur as, as Rivet well observes.

Fourthly, What shall we say to that of Paul? Romans 7. 22. I delight in the Law
of God after the inner man. And Ver. 25. So then with the mind I my self serve
the Law of God. And Chap. 8. 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. What shall
we say to that of David? Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled who walk in
the Law of the Lord?

Object. But the Apostle says, we are not under the Law, in Romans 6 14. etc.

Sol. First, One may be said to be under the Law in several respects. How we
are said to be under the law.


1. For justification by the Law. 2. For condemnation by the Law. 3. For
perfect and personal obedience to the Law. 4. For a slavish and servile
constraint: In these respects the people of God are not under the Law;
nevertheless for direction and instruction to frame their lives unto the
precepts of the Law, thus they are under the Law.
But secondly, the place to me expounds it self best of all: The Apostle there
says, We are not under the Law, but under grace; and this he gives as a reason
why sin should not have dominion over them. We are not under the Law (i. e.) in
such a state where there is only a command given against, but no power; but we
are under grace, which is such a condition or estate where besides a command
against sin, we have also a power given with that command which pulls down the
dominion of sin: And verily all that can be concluded here, is, the comfortab^e
estate of believers and regenerate persons, not in this, that they are utterly
freed from the commanding Law of God, but in that they are now under such a
gracious Covenant, where there is not only a Law to command, but grace also
given to obey.

2. Quest. The next Question is, what manner of obediential observation of God
commands that is which concerns the people of God in Covenant.

Sol. It is an Evangelical manner of obedience or observation, which has four
What obedience is required of Gods people. It comes from Gospel-Principles.
ingredients in it.

First, It must come from Gospel Principles, even from the life and strength of
Christ; no man can walk without a Principle of life within him: It is a living
work which poceeds from a living Principle: All the obediential work^ of the
people of God are performed in the virtue of their union and communion with
Christ; without me you can do nothing: Christ does not only give the Law unto
the people of God, but also he gives the Spirit unto them: Heb. 8. 10. I will
write my Law in their minds: He does by his Spirit write them in their hearts,
and makes them complying and willing to obey.

Secondly, It must come from Gospel motives, even from the mercy and love of
God; the people of God do obey him rather as a Father then as a Judge, looking
From Gospel-motives.
more at his goodness than at his severity: They shall fear the Lord and his
goodness, Hosea. 3. 5. And Psalm. 130. 5. There is mercy with thee that thou
may be feared. 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constrains them. And Ver.
15. He died for all, that they who live should not hence forth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them. The great love which God has
showed unto his people in Christ, inflames and swells their heart, and moves
cares and endeavors to walk before him in all well pleasing.

Thirdly, It must come from Gospel-affections, especially from love and
delight: From Gospel-affections.
O how love I thy Law! Psalm. 119. If a man love me, he will keep my
cemmand^ments, Joh. 14. 23. The love of God (which the people of God enjoy)
carries out their souls in all holy obedience unto the will of God; and so
likewise they serve him with delight: I delight to do thy will O God, Psalm. 40.
8. And thy Law is within my heart, Psalm. 101. 1. Serve the Lord with gladness:
The Commandments of God are not grievous unto his people; they say not What a
weariness it is to serve the Lord! no, but as David, I rejoice in thy
testimonies, and I will run the way of thy Commandments when thou shall
enlarge my heart. It was Christ's meat and drink to do the will of his Father: O
that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! etc. There is a servile
serving of God, which arises from a slavish Spirit, unwilling, backward,
constrained by threats and blows; and there is an ingenuous, free, cheerful,
delightful serving of God: As the people of God are volunteers, Psalm. 110. 3.
of a princely spirit, as the word signifies; their duties though as to the rule
are under a command, yet as to their hearts and manner of performance, they are
a free-will-offering, they find so much sweetness and happiness in communion
with God, and with a holy fervency of spirit; they are not indifferent, cold,
slothful, but fervent in Spirit, (boiling hot) serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11.
their hearts are conjoined, and united in the duties of obedience, intent and
intensive.

Fourthly, It looks at a Gospel-end, at the glory of God and Christ: Phil. It
looks at a Gospel-end.
1. 20. Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or death.
Ver. 21. For to me to live is Christ. Romans 14. 7. None of us lives unto
himself: for ver. 8. Whether we live we live unto the Lord. Natural men do act
from themselves, and for themselves; but the people of God do act from Christ,
and for Christ.

3. Quest. Why the people of Gods Covenant are in a more special manner charged
to walk in his statutes, keep his judgments, and do them?

Sol. I will not insist on this, but briefly thus; the people of God should
walk in his statutes, keep his judgments, and do them, Why Gods people should
walk in his statutes.


First, In respect of God; and here are three Reasons.

1. His Will: Psalm. 119. 4. Thou have commanded us to keep thy preceps
diligently. 1 These. 4. 3. It is the will of God, even your sanctification. 2.
His Glory: They are called to show forth his praises: 1 Pet. 2. 9 Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father, etc. Matthew. 5. 16. You are bought with a price to glorify God in, etc.
1 Cor. 6. 20. 3. His gracious disposition toward his servants and people,
which appears in four particulars.
First, In his concurrence; he passes by many a failing in the performance of
our duties: Micah 7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity,
and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage! Mal. 3. 17. I
will spate them as a man spares his own son that serves him.

Secondly, In his acceptance; he will accept of a willing mind, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has,
and not cording to that a man has not: The servant that gained two talents;
and the poor widow that cast in two farthings, were accepted.

Thirdly, In his assistance; as he commands us to walk in his statutes, so he
puts his Spirit within us, to cause us to walk in them; underneath are the
everlasting arms, said Moses: Deuteronomy. 33. 27. And I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me, said Paul, Phil. 4. 13.

Fourthly, In the recompense; Psalm. 19. 11. In keeping of thy Commandments
there is great reward. Isa. 1. 19. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat
the good of the Land. Romans 2. 10. Glory, honor, and peace unto every man that
works good.

Secondly, In respect of the Statutes themselves; they are holy, and righteous,
and good: The best way, and the safest way to walk in, are those which are
pleasant to us, well-pleasing to God. The walking in the statutes of God, is
the best way that any man can walk in, which appears thus.

First, It is the way which the only wise and good God has consecrated: It is
not a way of man's invention; it is not a way of Satan's delusion; it is the way
of God which he himself commands, commends, approves, and likes.

Secondly, It is the best way to walk in for our selves. The benefit which
comes by walking in Gods ways.


1. For a man's comfort and peace: Great peace have they which keep thy Law,
Psalm. 119. 165. To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the
salvation of God, Psalm 50. 23. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and sincerity we have ^ad our conversation, 2
Cor. 1. 12. The people of God do find his paths paths of pleasure and never
meet with sorrow, but when they are wandering from them: Prove. 19. 16. He that
keeps the Commandments, keeps his own soul, but he that despises his
ways shall dye.

2. For a man's safety; you are sure of Gods protection whiles you are in his
service, and in his ways: Genesis 17. 1. I am God Almighty, walk before me and ^e
thou perfect; q d. keep thou my ways, and I will keep thy safety.

3. For a man's honor: The service of God is our greatest liberty, and our It^
our honor.
greatest dignity: Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep therefore and do these statutes; for this
is your wisdom and understanding in the fight of the Nations which shall hear
of these statutes, and say, Surely this Nation is a wise and understanding
people.

3ly. In respect of the people of God themselves, which have so many
obligations In respect of Gods people
upon them from their God; 1. His Truth. 2ly His Mercy. 3ly Giving Christ for,
and to them. 4ly Giving his Spirit to them. 5ly Shedding his love in their
hearts. 6ly Daily and hourly blessings. 7ly The many sweet experiences found by
them in the ways of obedience. 8ly The bitterness met with when starting aside
and wandering, etc.

Fourthly, Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the way of the
Lord, Holy obedience.
blessed are they that keep his testimonies, Psalm. 119. 1, 2. Holy obedience or
walking in Gods statutes, is a testimony of our effectual calling to Christ, of
our salvation with him: Romans 6. 4. We are buried with him by baptism into
death, that as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father,
so we should walk in newness of Life. Ephesians. 4. 21. If so be that ye have heard
him, and have been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus. Ver. 22. Put off the
old man, etc. Ver. 24. And put on the new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness. Chap. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes dark, but now
are ye light in the Lord; walk as children of that light.

SECT. I.
1. Use. ARe the people of God charged and bound to walk in the statues of God,
and to keep his judgments, and to do them? O how few people then Few are Gods
people.
has God? where is the man that does obey his voice? who does indeed take any
heed to walk with God in his statutes? who orders his steps according to his
Word? Some there are that instead of giving an ear unto all the Scriptures, and
to all the Ordinances, and to all the Statutes and Commandments of God, they
are beyond the Scriptures, and beyond Ordinances, and beyond the Law, or
Statutes of God, and they cry out against men as Legalists who press obedience,
and as Antichristian and favoring of works: I do indeed believe that there are
many Antichrists, amongst us, and fear the (...) that great Antichrist is too
much amongst us, (...), The Apostle describing the great Antichrist, 2 These. 2
3. says that he is (...), an Exlex sine lege, one who does trample down the
Law of God, etc. Many others there are, who though they be not Antinomians in
opinion, yet are so in their practice; like those in Psalm. 2. 3. Let us break
their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us: Particular Libertines,
who will have no Lord over them, and will walk after the lusts of their own
hearts, and despise the statutes of God: Hose. 8. 12. I have written unto them
(concerning Ephraim) the great things of my Law, but they were counted a
strange thing. Beloved, take but a short view of Gods statutes, and of men's
walking, and we shall confess that few there are that walk in his statutes.

The statutes of God respect 1. Himself. 2ly Our Neighbor. Who they be that
walk not after Gods Commanments.


1. Himself, in the glory of his Nature, of his Worship, of his Name, and of
his Day; O but how few walk in these statutes!

1. The ignorant, that know not God. 2. The Atheists, that acknowledge not God.
3. Unbelievers, that trust not God. 4. The profane that love not God, nor fear
him. 5. The superstitious, and idolatrous worshippers. 6. The cursed swearers,
and forswearers. 7. The rabble of Sabbath Breakers, who make the day of God the
day of their idlest recreation, or profaness, etc.
2. Our Neighbor, requiring honor, and subjection, preservation of their
names, and goods, bodies, life's; who walk in these statutes?

We rail against those above us; and despise and oppress those beneath us: It
is the common trade to traduce, reproach, belly, and slander one another; and
for theft, and adulteries, and murders, etc.

Nay, step down to the Evangelical commands of Faith in Christ, of repentance
from dead works, of newness of obedience, of regeneration, who walks in the
paths of faith? etc. Nay look upon the paths that most men walk in, and we may
verily conjecture that men (generally) are turned Atheists. One walks in the
path of Blaspheming, another in the path of Heresy, another in the path of
idolatry, another in the path of Drunkenness, and Whoredom, etc. as if there
were no God that ever did appoint Laws and Statutes for the sons of men, or as
if it were at our pleasure to observe them or to reject them. Jeremiah, as for
the word which thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto it; why! certainly men are turned Atheists, they acknowledge not
God in his Sovereignty, nor in his Laws: Now what shall I say to these men?

Here two questions.

1. Whence is it that men (generally) walk not in Gods statutes? 2. What is the
misery of such?
First, they are wicked and ungodly; they have nothing of Christ, or grace,
Such as walk not in Gods statutes, are wicked.
or spiritual life in them; the Law of God was never witten in their hearts;
children of disobedience are children of wickedness; Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind
is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed
can be: They were the vilest of the Gentiles who walked in the vanity of their
mind, and were alienated from the life God, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18.

Secondly, They are children of wrath; they that walk according to the course
of the world, are children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. And of wrath, Ver. 3.
Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these things comes the
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5. 6. Consider that
passage in Amos 2. 4. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Judah
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they have
despised the Law of the Lord, and have not kept his Commandments, and their
lies caused them to err, after which their Fathers have walked. But Ver. 5. I
will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem.
Read at your leisure the dreadful judgments and plagues which God threatens
for disobedience: Levit. 26. from ver. 14. to ver. 40. But if you will not
hearken unto me, and will not do all these Commandments. And Ver. 15. If ye
shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, etc. I will,
ver. 26. appoint over you terror, and consumption, and the burning ague that
shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart, etc. And ver. 17. I will set
my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies; they that hate
you shall reign over you, etc. yea and the disobedient shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and they that forget God
shall be cast into hell.

Object. But you will say, this is dreadful indeed. God is righteous to punish
sinners.


Sol. I answer, be not deceived, God will not be mocked; he is righteous thus
to recompense the sinner and disobedient: For

First, They that refuse to walk in his ways, do go against the very light of
nature: A natural light will yield unto these Principles. What the light of
nature suggests.


1. That there is a God. 2. That a God may give Laws. 3. That the Laws of a God
are just and holy. 4. That just and holy Laws ought to be obeyed: God
challenges and requires nothing from his creatures which unbefits a God to
command, or beseems his creatures to regard.
Secondly, They that refuse to walk in his statutes, they are proud, and
scornful, and daring sinners; it is one of, the highest expressions of pride,
and affront done to God, to turn our backs from him, and to set our selves
against him, renouncing his authority over us, and denying all honor unto him.

Thirdly, It is an insufferable provocation for any creature to refuse to walk
in the statutes of God, and yet at the same time to walk after the commands of
the Devil, and his own wicked heart.

Object. But it is impossible for any man in the world to walk in the statutes
of God, and to keep them.

Sol. To this I answer.

Impossible is not the very reason why wicked men walk not in Gods statutes;
Why wicked men walk not in Gods statutes.
but the true reason in them, is, enmity against them; they have a nature which
cannot endure to be subjected to the Law of God, but is at defiance with it, q.
d. of the holiness and righteousness in it: Indeed in disputation, to cast a
blind, and to gainsay, and to flatter, upon an excuse for profaness or
slothfulness, this is pretended and urged; O it is impossible, and in many
things we sin all: But that is not a reason or ground, why wicked men walk not
in Gods statutes or ways, but in their sinful ways; the very reason indeed is
this, their wicked hearts do hate Gods holy and righteous statutes, and do love
darkness rather then light, Joh. 3.

Secondly, If it were absolutely impossible, how is it that we read of all the
people of God that they have walked in his statutes and ways? Enoch did so, so
did Noah, so did Abraham, so did David, so did Zacharias, and Elizabeth, so did
Hezekiah, so did Paul, Acts 23. 1. I have lived in all good conscience before
God until this day.

Thirdly, There is a twofold walking in Gods statutes; viz.

1. Legal; which is such an exactness of obediential conformity, that there is
What is legal obedience.
not the least deviation from the rule, not the least obliquity, or
transgression, or failing, or shortness, but the full tale of duty for matter
and for manner is performed; this I confess is actually impossible for any man,
yea for the best on earth.

2. Evangelical; which consists. 1. In the application of all the statutes of
God as holy and good. 2ly In the exaltation of them; as the Rule to guide our
lives, What is Evangelical obedience.
and the Paths wherein we will walk. 3ly In the love of them, delighting our
selves in them. 4ly In an humble and sincere endeavor to keep them all: This
walking in Gods statutes, and keeping of his judgments, is not impossible; and
there is not a godly man on earth who rises not to this: Heb. 13. 18. We trust
we have a good conscience in all things, willing to live honestly.

Fourthly, If this Evangelical walking in Gods statutes be impossible to any
man, this arises not from the nature of the statutes of God, but from the
wickedness of man's own nature, which he should beseech the Lord to heal, and
change, and renew by his grace, and then the statutes of God would not be
grievous unto him, much less would they be impossible; he should quickly find
that of Christ to be true: Math. 30. My yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

Ezekiel. 36. 27. And cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
Judgments, and do them.
SECT. II.
2. Use. THe second Use which I would make of this Point, that the people of
How to prove our selves to be of the number of Gods people.
God under the Covenant of grace, are to walk in his statutes, and to do them,
is this, That as we are to approve our selves to be the people of God, that we
make it our care and business to order our conversations according to his Word,
to walk in his Statutes, to conform our selves in all our ways to the
obedience of his will: And for the better carrying on of this Use, I desire to
speak unto three Questions.

1. How a man must be qualified, that so he may be willing, (...) and in some
measure able to walk in the statutes of God, and do them?

2. What mistakes a man must take heed of in the performances of duties of
obedience to Gods Laws and statutes?

3. What rules are to be observed in walking in Gods statutes, and how one may
perform acts of obedience, or spiritual duties in such a manner as God will
accept of them?

1. Quest. How a man must be qualified, that so he may be willing, and in some
measure able to walk in the statutes of God, and do them? How we may be enabled
to walk in Gods statutes.


Sol. There are six Qualifications as to this.

1. A Credence, that there is a God who has given Laws unto men, which every
man is enjoined to obey. 2. A Knowledge of the Laws of God which do concern him
to keep or obey. 3. A Sanctified will, or renewed heart. 4. An Evangelical
faith. 5. An Unfeigned love of God. 6. An Humble spirit.
1. A Credence that there is a God who has given Laws unto all the sons of
men, and they are bound to keep and obey them.

If this Principle (as I have expressed it) be not granted, it is in vain to
offer any thing concerning walking in Gods statutes, and keeping, and doing of
them. If a person denies

1. That there is a God, unquestionably he does therein deny all the Laws or
statutes of God, and likewise all obedience unto his laws: and hold Three
Atheistical Positions.


2. That God has no authority to prescribe Laws unto his creatures, or that he
never did constitute any Laws prescribing and limiting his creatures, but has
left every man to walk in the ways of his own heart.

3. Though he has set Laws and Rules of life, yet his creatures are at their
own liberty to obey them, or not obey them, if he obey them it is well; and if
they please not to obey them, there is no sin or danger.

I say such Atheistical Positions as these do utterly void all the sovereignty
of God, and obligations of man, and are the foundations of all wickedness and
disobedience; therefore of necessity if any person would walk in the statutes
of God, and do them, he must be really and fully convinced of these three
Principles.

1. That there is a God, a true and living God, the Maker and possessor of
Heaven and Earth, who is the Lord and Sovereign of all men; to whom the
authority of making laws for them does of right belong; for he indeed has the
Sovereignty and highest power.

2. That he has given Laws or statutes unto all the sons of men, in which he
reveals his mind, will, and pleasure concerning them, what he would have them
to do, and what he would have them to avoid.

3. That those Laws or statutes of his, are Obligations upon men; they do not
only teach what is good and evil, but bind us also to do that good, and to
decline that evil: The Lord God being bound to uphold his own will and glory,
and having threatened all transgressors of his Laws, and revealed his wrath
against them, and has punished them, and still has in readiness to avenge the
disobedience of men.

Secondly, When you do believe that there is a God who has authority to
prescribe Laws unto you, and that he has enacted and published them for all
men to take notice of them; then must you give diligence to know what his Laws
are concerning you, and to understand them, that you may be able to say
concerning your selves what the Apostle spoke of others, This is the will of
God concerning you. Psalm. 119. 27. Make me to understand the way of thy
precepts. Ver. 18. Open thou mine eyes that I may behold the wondrous things
out of thy Law. Ver. 12. Blessed art thou, O Lord, teach me thy statutes. Isa.
2. 3. Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the
God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways.

Now here briefly are two Questions.

1. Quest. What kind of knowledge of Gods statutes is requisite toward our A
threefold knowledge of Gods statutes.
walking in them?

There is a threefold knowledge of them.

First, A knowledge of apprehension, which is partly

1. Literal; this is the least and weakest part of our knowledge, when a man A
^iteral knowledge.
can say, or read, or hear the words of Gods Laws, and recite them word by
word, yet without understanding the hiddenness of the Laws themselves; as many
say the words of the Lords Prayer, who yet understand not the meaning of that
prayer: So do many say the words of Gods Laws or Commandments, who yet, etc.

2. Spiritual; and this is of that Law which is in the Law; it is a knowledge
of Spiritual knowledge
the true meaning and purpose of any Law or statute of God: Many know
literally, who yet know not spiritually, so a^ to dive into, and reach the
meaning of God. e. g. Thou shall have none other Gods but me, Exodus 20. 3.
These letters and words are known by many, and yet the sense of them is known
only to a few, namely that we must set up the true God only for our God, and
make him the only object of our trust, and love, and fear: Now look on this Law
in the true sense and spiritual interpretation thereof, as particularly binding
our souls.

Secondly, A knowledge of approbation: Though a man does know the spiritual
part and intent of Gods Laws, yet if his soul rises up against them as A
knowledge of approbation.
cruel, as unjust, as vain, and unprofitable, such a knowledge as this
(conjoined with dislike and exception) will never conduce to our obedience or
walking in them, but rather to disobedience; to the knowledge of apprehension
join the knowledge of approbation; our judgments must comply with, and
acknowledge that Divine Excellency and equity in the statutes of God: Romans 7.
12. The Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and good. Psalm. 119.
138. Thy testimonies which thou have commanded us are righteous, and very
faithful.

Thirdly, A knowledge of Application; we must know the statutes of God, A
knowledge of Application
and approve of them as righteous and good, and also we must apply the
righteousness and goodness of them to our selves (i. e.) that they do concern
every of us in particular, as obliging of us, and good for us.

As Eliphas spoke to Job; Job. 5. 27. Lo this we have searched, so it is, hear
thou i^, and know thou it for thy good: So say I, you must hear and know the
statutes of God, how righteous they are, how good they are, how blessed they
are, what a command and power they have, and this you must apply unto your
selves, not only as belonging to others, and speaking to others, but as
belonging also to your selves, to order your lives by them: Psalm. 119. 4. Thou
have commanded to keep thy precepts diligently. Ver. 5. O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes! When you know that Commandment, Thou shall not
take the Name of the Lord in vain; or that Commandment, Remember to keep holy
the Sabbath day, etc. You must know these Commandments as respecting you, and
obliging you, that you must not swear, and that you must not break the Sabbath,
but that you must know the Name of God, and sanctify the day of God, etc.

2. Quest. What can knowledge contribute toward a walking in Gods statutes,
etc? for many know them, and yet do not, etc.

Sol. To this, take briefly these Answers.

First, Though possibly a man may know the statutes of God, and yet not walk
How knowledge contributes to obedience.
in them, yet that knowledge is no cause of it: Knowledge is in itself a help
and furtherance to walking (as the light is to working) it is not any
hinderance at all; that which hinders knowing persons from obedience, is not
the light of their knowledge, but the lust of their corrupt affections which
bear down their knowledge.

Secondly, Without knowledge of the statutes of God, that which we call duty or
obedience, is neither practical nor acceptable.

1. It is not practical: Knowledge is a necessary previous quality unto acts
Without knowledge obedience is not practical.
of duty. It is impossible to obey the will of God, if we know not the will of
God: Can a servant do the will of his Master who knows not the will of his
Master? our obedience (in Romans 12. 1.) is called a reasonable service; and
rational it cannot be without knowledge; without knowledge it is rather brutish
than reasonable.

2. It cannot be acceptable: The Apostle says in Heb. 11. 6. That without Nor
acceptable.
Faith it is impossible to please God; for he that comes to God, must believe
that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him: But
faith there cannot be without knowledge, there cannot be Faith for the
acceptance of duty, unless first there be a knowledge of Gods Command of that
duty.

Thirdly, There is an aptitude of knowledge of things to be done, to put us
upon the doing of those things: For knowledge is a Spiritual light, and
spiritual light it is not only Representative, but also operative; it will work
upon the conscience, and will, and affections to draw them up to that
performance of what is known: This you see in enlightened sinners, who are made
to see the will or commands of God, that the light has an influence upon their
hearts and consciences and services, to excuse or condemn them, and so still it
does until they do imprison or extinguish that light.

4. At least knowledge may serve your thus far, to put you upon prayer, to seek
the Lord to give you an heart to walk in his statutes: If it be not able to
make you to walk in his statutes, yet it is in some measure conducing to lead
out your desires to the Lord to write his Laws in your hearts, and to cause you
to walk in his statutes.

Thirdly, As you must get the knowledge of Gods statutes if you would walk in
We must have our hearts and wills sanctified, if we will keep Gods Commandments.
them; so likewise you must get your hearts and wills sanctified. Our walking
in Gods statutes, is styled newness of life: Romans 6. 4. That we should walk in
newness of life; and a service in newness of Spirit, Romans 7. 6. implying the
necessity of a new spirit toward a new life: You know that to the walking in
Gods statutes, there must be 1. A subordination of our wills to Gods will; Gods
will must not go one way, and our wills run another way: If our wlls be
contrary to his, this is a plain disobedience: But now to reduce our will to
the way of God; this requires holiness or renovation in our wills, forasmuch as
the carnal will is enmity to the Law of God, Romans 8. 7. 2ly A conformity or
similitude; our walking and Gods* Precepts must agree; what is to be found in
Gods Commands, that must be found in our practice, else it is not a walking in
his stattutes; you do not set them up as your Rule, as your Copy, if you do not
commensurate your actions by them, and to both these, holiness of heart is
required: For the heart must be sanctified and renewed, or else it can neither
yield up it self, nor conform itself to that holy will of God; consider that
passage of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. ^. 2. Through sanctification of the Spirit
unto obedience: why does not the Apostle say, election to obedience, but
through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience? not that we are not
elected unto obedience, but that there can be no obedience without the
sanctification of the Spirit; As there can be no action of life without a
principle of life; so there can be no actions of Spiritual life, without the
great principle of holiness in the heart; and when God puts that holy
disposition into our hearts, this will as sweetly incline us to walk in the
statutes of God, as we were wont to be inclined to walk in ways of wickedness
when we were under the power of an unholy and sinful disposition.

Four things a man shall find when once his heart is indeed sanctified by the
Spirit of God. What we shall find when our hearts are sanctified.


1. An abhorring of every evil way contrary to Gods statutes: I hate all false
ways, says David, Psalm. 119. 104. A way of wickedness is no way for an holy
heart.

2. A Compliance with every good way, and path appointed by God for us to walk
in: I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, Psalm. 119.
128. And ver. 173. I have chosen thy precepts.

3. A singular propension of his heart to walk in the ways of God: I have
inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the end, Psalm.
119. 112.

4. A special delight in th^se statu^es of God, and in walking in them. My soul
has kept thy Testim^^^^s, and ^ love them exceedingly, Psalm. 119. 1^7. Thy
testimonies are my delig^t, and my counselors. Ver. 24 I will delight my self
in thy statutes. Ver. 16. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies as much
as in all riches, Ver. 14.

O sirs, the Law of God is against a wicked heart, and a wicked heart is
against the Law of God! that is holy, but his heart is unholy; for that there
is no agreement between them, but a perpetual enmity and contrariety; the Law
threatens his sinful lusts and ways, and his heart despises and opposes the
Law q. d. it is holy, and therefore contrary to his unholy heart. And therefore
of necessity this unholiness must be taken away (and no other way can it be
removed but by the sanctifying of the heart) before a man can or will walk in
Gods statutes.

Fourthly, If you would walk in the statutes of God, then you must get an
Evangelical says, as Christ spoke in another case unto that troubled man,
Mark. 19. 23. If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that
believes: that say I concerning walking in Gods statutes; if we could believe,
had we faith, and could we act it aright, our obedience would be possible to
us, and acceptable unto God.

That there is a necessity of this faith, and likewise an efficacy, for our
walking The necessity of faith, if we will walk in Gods ways.
in Gods statutes, may thus appear.

1. It is that grace which unites us unto Christ, in whom there is a fullness of
grace, and likewise a fullness of strength: As we have no grace but what comes
from Christ, so we have no strength but what comes from him; without me (says
Christ: Joh. 15. 5.) ye can do nothing; if we can do nothing without Christ,
then certainly we cannot obey, we cannot walk in Gods statutes without him; and
therefore faith is necessary for this obediential walking, because without
Christ we can do nothing, and because without faith we have nothing to do with
Christ.

2. It is the grace of life: I live (says Paul, Gal. 2. 20.) yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life that I now live, I live by the faith of the
Son of God: We never live (Spiritually) until we do believe; for Christ is our
life by faith; upon this account faith is necessary to our obediential walking,
because such a walking is impossible without a spiritually vital principle.

3. It is that grace by which we do receive the Spirit: We receive the promise
of the Spirit through Faith, Gal. 3. 14. But without the Spirit there is no
possible walking in God statutes; because all the power and might that we have
to do any good (as you may shortly hear) comes from the presence and assistance
of the Spirit, who is in a soul all in all, in all the good which we do
perform.

4. It is the grace which applies all the promises of help and strength, and
which brings in all your assistance from Christ: You know that God does promise
his help for our work: Zech. 10. 12. I will strengthen them in the Lord, and
they shall walk up and down in his Name, says the Lord; and so here in the
Text, I will cause you to walk in my statutes, Ezekiel. 36. What have you to draw
without of these wells but faith? here is your work, there is your help, and it
is yours upon believing: And so for the assisting power of Christ, you can do
nothing without it, as you have heard; and therefore Paul speaking of his
abundant labor in the Gospel, says, Yet not I, but the grace of God which is
with me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. this likewise becomes yours upon believing; it is faith
which engages Christ, and draws him in to assist and enable you for every work
which you are to do.

5. It is the grace which does encourage our hearts to walk in Gods statutes:
Genesis 4. 7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? Isa. 56. 7. Even them
will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer;
their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar.
What an encouragement is this to be walking in the statutes of God, to be
obeying of his will, to be much in duties, when we know by faith that our
prayers, and tears, and weak duties shall be accepted upon the altar for
Christ's sake! Mal. 3. 16. They that feared the Lord spoke often one to another,
and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name. By all
this you may see how necessary faith is for to enable us to walk in Gods
statutes; therefore pray much for faith.

If you would walk in Gods statutes, then you must get an unfeigned love of
God: Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of
thy seed to love the Lord thy God with all their heart, and with all their
soul. Ver. 8. And thou shall return and obey the voice of the Lord, and do all
his commandments which I command thee this day. Exodus 20. 6. Showing mercy
unto thousands of them that love me and keep my Commandments. Paul reduces
all obedience unto love, when he calls love the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.
8. And so does Jesus Christ, who reduces all the Commandments to love, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Joh. 14. 23. If a man love me, he will keep my words. Men grumble at the
keeping of God^ Laws, and at walking according to his statutes; they look at
them as grievo^s and burdensome to them, and undelightful; are weary of
praying, weary of reading and hearing the Word, weary of the Sabbath, when will
it be at an end* weary of every good work, though never weary of sinning. What
is the reason of this? the reason is, because they do not love the Lord, and
therefore they (...) weary of his statutes and obedience; whereas did they love
the Lord, all comm^nion with him, and all services done unto him, would be
pleasing and delightful; our works of duty would not seem unto us a servile
burden, but a gracious privilege, and special favor, that we might freely
approach to God, and be employed as servants unto him.

Object. Only here take heed of a mistake that you do not look on love to God
as the rule of your obedience, but only as a sweet inward spring or principle
of it?

Sol. Some (who would cancel the Law as to believers) would make our Love is
not the only rule of our obedience.
love to God the rule of all our obedience to God; but this is not sound
doctrine: For

1. That which is a part of our obedience, cannot be the rule of our obedience:
Now love is a part of a man's obedience as well as faith and fear, etc.
Antinomians confuted.


2. No rule of man's obedience must be imperfect, but perfect and full; now our
love is imperfect, and therefore it cannot be the rule of our obedience.

Get humble and tender hearts.
Sixthly, If you would walk in Gods statutes and do them, then you m^st g^^
humble hearts, and tender hearts: Exodus 5. 2. Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord
that I should obey his voice to le^ Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither
will I let Israel go. Psalm. 119. 21* Tho^ have rebuked the proud that are
cursed which do err from thy Commandments. Jer. 44. 16. The proud men (Chap.
43. 2.) spoke, As for the word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the
Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. But when the Lord gives unto men humble
and tender hearts, now they will close with, and submit unto Gods statutes, and
to a walking in them: Deuteronomy. 33. 3. All his Saints are in thy hand, and they
sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy word. Lord, said Paul
(when the pride and rage of his spirit was off, and himself himself) what will thou have me to do? Acts. 9. 6. You read in James 4. 6. that God gives grace to
the humble. And Psalm. 25. 9. The meek will he teach his way, etc. Hence says
Christ, Matthew. 11. 29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart; intimating unto us that there is no taking upon us the yoke
of obedience, until we first learn of him the lesson of lowliness of heart: An
humble and tender heart is wholly at Gods disposing, and ready for his service,
most afraid to offend and dishonor him, and most ready to give audience to
every part of his will, and to to do it, and to bring him honor and glory in
the whole course of a man's life: Beseech the Lord to give you this humble and
tender heart without which you will neither regard God nor his statutes.

2. Quest. What mistakes are we to take heed of in walking in Gods statutes? or
What we must take heed of in walking in Gods ways.
in the performance of our duties of obedience unto him?

Sol. There are these things which you must take heed of in your walking, and
in your performance of duties.

First, You must take heed of formality, and resting in the opus operatum, in
the mere doing of duties commanded. There are two parts of duties; there is Of
Formality.
the body of it, and there is the soul of it; there is the work, and there is
the manner of working. As in Prayer, there are the words of prayer, and there
is the Spirit of Prayer; and in hearing of the Word, there is the mere hearing,
and there is the right hearing, or the spiritual hearing of the Word. Now we
must take heed that we content not our selves with the mere outward doing of
any duty, because

1. God requires more then the mere outward work: My son (says he) give God
requires the heart
me thy heart, Prove. 23. 26. And Christ says that God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth, Joh. 4. 4*

2. God Abhors and rejects the mere outward service: Isa. 29. 13. Forasmuch as
this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me,
and have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear toward me is taught
by precepts of men: Ver. 14. therefore behold I will proceed to do a mavelous
work amongst this people, a mavelous work, and a wonder; for the wisdom of
the wise men shall perish, etc.

Now there are four things which demonstrate that men do perform duties in a
formal manner, and content themselves with the mere opus operatum. Why do men
rest in the work done. Its an easy service.


1. One is the facility of their obedience: To perform any one duty, to make
any one prayer in a spiritual manner, will cost us much care and watchfulness,
many workings of heart, many workings of faith, and fear; but to perform duties
in a carnal, formal way costs a man nothing; if he can but read, or say his
prayers, this is all, and there he rests.

2. A second is, the deadness of the services: It is a service without any
heart Its a dead service.
at all; the understanding acts not, and the will acts not, and the affections
act not in it; the man confesses sin without any grief of heart for sin, and
even prays for grace and mercy without any longing desires, or faith in Christ
or the promises to obtain it.

3. A carelessness of service: The formal man minds not God, nor any communion A
careless service.
with him, and minds not prayer, and minds nothing beyond prayer, whether his
own heart be right or no, and whether God regards him, and answers him, this he
minds not.

4. A fruitlesness of doing: Nothing comes of the formal work of duty; the man
says a prayer, but no good comes of it, and he hears, but no good comes of it,
A fruitless service.
still he prays, and still he hears, and still he reads, and still he is
drunk, and still he swears, etc.

Secondly, You must take heed of neutrality in walking in Gods statutes;
neutrality Take heed of neutrality.
is an indifferent participation of both extremes; it has something of the
one, and something of the other, as lukewarm water, has something of heat,
and something of cold: So the man who is guilty of neutrality in walking in
Gods statutes, he has one foot in the ways of God, and another foot in the
ways of wickedness, he halts between two Opinions; he is not only for God, nor
only for Baal, 1 King. 18. 21. he is not altogether for Gods commands, nor
altogether for sins commands, but he devides himself betwixt God and his sinful
lusts; he will pray, but withal he will swear; and he will hear the Word, but
withal he will be drunk; he will do many things that are good, but withal he
will do many things that are wicked. Now take heed of this; God cannot endure
it. If God be God, follow him: 1 King. 18. 21. You shall walk in my statutes,
says God here (i. e.) you shall set me up alone, and my commands alone, and my
ways alone. Zeph. 1. 5. I will cut off them that swear by the Lord, and that
swear by Malcham. Rev. 3. 16. Because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor
hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. Matthew. 4. 10. It is written thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Thirdly, You must take heed of partiality in walking in Gods statutes: We say
Take heed of partiality.
that Lex est copulativa; God does not say you shall do this, or do that, you
shall fear me, or you shall love me, you shall keep my Sabbath, or you shall
not take my Name in vain; no such matter, but the Law is conjunctive, and does
require obedience to every commandment of God: Jam. 2. 11. For he that said do
not commit adultery, said also do not kill; now if thou commit no adultery, yet
if thou kill, thou art become a transgresser of the Law. We read that Jehu did
many things which God commanded in order to the destruction of the house of
Ahab; but yet he disobeyed God in following the sin of Jeroboam, which tended
to the destruction of his own soul: And so Herod heard John Baptist, and did
many things, but yet he kept Herodias his brother Philips wife. Right obedience
is impartial obedience, and he who regards one Commandment of God out of
Conscience; he does likewise regard every Commandment of God; for there is the
same authority stamped on all the Commandments: Therefore it is but hypocrisy
to regard some of Gods statutes, and to disregard others: Some men stand much
for obedience or duties to the second Table, but they mind not the duties o^
the first Table; they seem to make conscience of lying, and stealing, and
killing, and adultery; but they make no conscience of swearing, and taking the
Name of God in vain, and breaking the sabb^th; some seem to make conscience of
lesser duties, but they make no conscience of greater duties, and so others and
^ contra: But God has not given unto us such a liberty to pick and choose our
work; if the Lord commands us the smallest or the greatest duties, we are to
yield obedience to the one and to the other, not neglecting the least, nor
laying aside the greatest: He that is unfaithful in the least, will be
unfaithful also in the greatest; and he that is faithful in the greatest, will
be also faithful in the least; it is a truth that sins of omission will damn a
man as well as sins of commission; therefore take heed of partiality in keeping
of Gods statutes.

Fourthly, You must take heed of resting or relying upon any of your works or
Take heed of resting upon duties.
duties; you must endeavor obedience unto Gods Law, but you must beware of
placing your confidence upon that obedience: You must pray, and read, and hear,
and mourn, and repent, and walk holily and humbly with your God; and you must
live soberly, and righteously, and godly, and fear the Lord, and love the Lord,
and obey his voice, and when you have done so to your utmost, and to your best,
then must you cast your Crowns to the ground, and weep that you have served
your God no more, and no better, and cry out with the Publican, God be merciful
to me a sinner! and with David, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for
in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143. 2. And with him,
Domine lava, quaes^, lachrymas meas! If you advance your duties or works of
obedience unto a condition of life, to be the matter and reason of your
justification before God, and say, Lord, these are my righteousnesses, and for
these I look to be justified and saved, why! now as Peter said to Simon Magus,
Thou and thy money perish with thee; So say I, now thou and all thy duties will
perish together: For

1. God commands not works of duty from his people, that they should Gods
Commands not duties that we should be justified thereby. To set up works, pulls
down Christ and faith in him.
thereby be justified, but that thereby himself might be glorified; not as
reasons of life, but as testimonies of love and thankfulness.

2. You pull down Jesus Christ* and faith in him, if you set up any works of
yours for life or justification; Christ is no Christ unto you and his
righteousness is no righteousness unto you, if you seek to set up your own
works and put confidence in them: Gal. 5. 4. Christ is become of n^ne effect
unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace.

3. It is fool^sh and damnable so to do: For when you have done all that you
can do, you are but unprofitable servants: The least duties that ever you have
performed I^s foolish and damnable.
have enough in them to damn you: There is much sinfulness, and much weakness,
and much shortness in them, which if God should mark, you could never stand
before him: Remember this for a certain truth, that he who would come to
heaven, must take heed of his good works, as well as of his evil works; they
will damn him; and if he place his confidence upon his good works, they will
destroy him: Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us.

Fifthly, You must take heed of performing duties, or obeying Gods statutes
Take heed of false ends.
for false ends; As 1. To recompense God. 2ly To give him satisfaction for the
evil that you have done. 3ly To offer them up as purchasers of mercies and
blessings. 4ly To look on them as your propitiation and peacemakers. 5ly Only
to quiet and still your consciences. 6ly Out of vainglory and to please men.

First, You must not perform duties, nor present them to God as compensations
Duties must not be performed by way of compensation.
or recompense unto God for the blessings and benefits which God has
vouchsafed unto you: There is a difference between thankfulness for blessings,
and requitals for blessings; we ought to be thankful unto God, and to return
praises and obedience after the receipt of his mercies; offer unto God
thansgiving, Psalm. 50. 14. And praise is comely for the upright, Psalm. 33. 1.
But to recompense God again by any good that we can do, for any good that he
has done, this may not be, and this cannot be: Job 35. 7. said Eliphaz to Job,
If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand?
v. 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may
profit the son of man. Psalm. 16. 2. My goodness extends not to thee; q. d.
Thou art not benefited by any good works of ours, etc. I cannot add any thing
thereby unto thee, we receive all from thee, but can give nothing unto thee by
which thou may be bettered; for thou art an infinite being, and therefore we
can add nothing to thee.

Secondly, You must not do any good work, thinking thereby to satisfy God for
your evil works: Many people when they have committed sin, and injured Nor to
satisfy God for our sins.
and dishonored God, then they fall a praying, and a reading, and a hearing,
and put on to works of piety, and charity, and their intention or end in doing
of these duties is to make God amends, and to make up the wrong which they have
done him, supposing that the good which now they do, will balance the evil
which they have done, and satisfy God: Now though this be true, that our
sinnings do injure God, and therefore its reason that after our sinnings we
should be much humbled, and be more circumspect in our walking, and more
diligent and upright: Yet to act all these as satisfactions to God for the
sinful injurious works which we have done against him, This is 1. Foolish. 2ly
Sinful.

First, It is foolish, forasmuch as nothing that we can do, can amount unto Its
foolish.
a satisfaction for the evil that we can do; Because

1. All the good which we now do, we ought still to have done; and that which
Reasons of it.
was still a duty, can never be a satisfaction.

2. There is more evil in the evil that we have done, than there is good in the
good which we do; our sinful evil is perfectly evil, and our best good is but
imperfect good: The evil that we do against God, deserves hell; and the good
which we do, deserves nothing; the evil which is done needs infinite mercies to
pardon it; and the good which we do, is so mixed with our sinfulness, that that
also needs mercy to pardon and accept it; and that which needs mercy cannot be
a satisfaction.

Secondly, It is sinful: For this is to take upon us the work of a Mediator,
to whom alone that work of satisfaction does pertain; and he must be both God
and Its sinful.
man, or else he could not have satisfied for our sins: Now to presume that our
own imperfect obedience is able to satisfy God for our sins, and to clear all
our accounts and reckonings between him and us, what is this but to lay aside
the perfect satisfactions of Christ the only Mediator, and to set up our own
weak righteousness as sufficient to compensate the Justice of God.

Thirdly, You must not offer up any performances of yours as causes of mercy
and Nor as causes of mercies and blessings.
blessings; you must pray, and you must mourn, and you must repent, and you
must obey the voice of the Lord your God, and you must walk in his statutes and
do them: and if you do so with upright hearts, God will meet you with mercy and
blessings: Nevertheless you may not look on any performance of yours as causes
meriting and purchasing any blessing unto you; remember that excellent passage
in Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as
keep his Commandments and his testimonies. Yet Ver. 11. For thy Name sake
pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. Here is mercy and truth for them that
keep his Commandments; and then here is not our obedience, but his Name the
cause of our mercy; not for my obedience sake, but for thy Name sake pardon
mine iniquity, etc. So when Daniel fasted and prayed in an extraordinary way
for mercy and for deliverance out of the Babylonian captivity, he impleads not
those works as causes of them, nay as so he rejects them: Dan. 9. 17. Now
therefore O our God, he^r the prayer of thy servant and his supplications, and
cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lords
sake. Ver. 18. O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes and
behold our desolations, and the City that is called by thy Name; for we do not
present our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy great
mercies.

There are four things to be observed about mercies and blessings. What is to
be observed about mercies and blessings.


1. The Efficient Cause; and that is only Gods own love, and grace, and mercy;
his own glorious love is the only efficient cause of all our blessings whether
spiritual or temporal.

2. The Final Cause; and that is only Gods own glory; all is from his mercy,
and all is for his glory; he is the first, and he is the last; out of the sea
of his mercy they come, and into the sea of his glory they do return.

3. The Meritorious Cause; and that is Jesus Christ, who by his blood has
purchased all things for us pertaining to life and godliness.

4. The means by which, not causes for which they are obtained and enjoyed,
They are means whereby blessings are obtained.
and such are our holy performances and walkings, unto which God has promised
abundance of mercies and blessings, and we shall enjoy them, not Ratione facti,
for the worthiness of our doings, but Ratione promissionis, for the goodness
and faithfulness of his promise unto our upright doing and walking.

Therefore take heed of looking on any doing, and walking as meritorious causes
of mercies and blessings: For

1. All the good we can do, is but what we ought to do; and no duty of man can
Why they cannot merit mercies.
be meritorious with God.

2. All the good we do, is done by the strength of Christ; therefore it cannot
merit, seeing it is done not by our own strength, but Christ's.

3. All the good we do, finds acceptance only in and for Christ; our prayers
are accepted in him, and our services are accepted in him; and therefore they
merit nothing of themselves.

4. All good services must be done in faith, or else they cannot be pleasing to
God, Heb. 11. 16. Now, Faith and the merit of man's works are utterly
inconsistent.

5. Lastly, All the blessings which you shall ever enjoy, you must take them
out of Gods promises, or Covenant of grace; and no gift flowing from that
Covenant of grace but it is freely given unto us.

Fourthly, You must not look upon any performances, services, acts of obedience
They cannot make peace with God.
done by you, as propitiations, as able to make peace with God for the sins
which you have committed against God. When we have sinned against God, we must
humble our souls, and repent, and pray unto the Lord to pardon us, and to be
reconciled unto us, and to take away iniquity, and to be at peace with us: But
these works done by us (though never so penitential and holy) they cannot take
off our sins, and they cannot be our peace. O no! the provocations raised by
our sins are too high, and too great for any work of ours to compass: Though
God will not pardon your sins, nor be reconciled unto you, unless you do
repent, pray, and seek his face, and believe; yet 'ti^ not rep^^tance, and it is
not prayer, and it is not faith, that takes up the differences, that reconciles
you to God. It is only Jesus Christ, He is our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. And he is
the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 2. The chastisement of our peace was
laid on him, Isa. 53. 5. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
2 Cor. 5. 19. We were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10.
And by him we receive the atonement, Ver. 11.

Object. But do we not read that God has pardoned the sins of his people,
and has spoken peace unto them upon their humblings, and returnings, a^^
prayers?

Sol. Yes, we do upon these works, but never for these works; these did no^
make peace, but Christ it was who made peace; these did not purchase
forgiveness of sins, but the blood of Christ it was which did purchase that;
therefore take heed you set up none of your obediential performances in the
pla^e of Christ; perform them you must if you would have mercy and peace; but
do not rely on them, but on the merits of Christ only to procure your peace.

Fifthly, You must not walk in Gods statutes, or perform holy duties only to We
must not perform duties to still our consciences. How men set up works to quiet
conscience.
still and quiet your conscience; you must perform them out of conscience, but
you must not perform them only to quiet conscience.

In two cases some men set upon works of obedience only to still and quiet
conscience.

1. One is the case of education and custom: They have been brought up
religiously, and have been accustomed to read, and pray; and if at any time
they do neglect and omit these duties, conscience is upon them and upbraids and
disquiets them; and they are afraid to neglect them, lest conscience will
question and trouble them.

2. Another is the case of transgression; when men have committed some great
sin against God, thereupon conscience becomes impatient, and accuses, and
condemns, and terrifies them; and now they fall a praying, and mourning, and
confessing, and reforming, but all this is to quiet conscience, and they do
find sometimes that under these performances, their consciences are a little
allayed and quieted, and for that end do those take them up as a charm to allay
their consciences; and when their consciences are quieted, then they lay aside
strictness of walking in Gods statutes, and all sincere care of obedience, and
are ready to transgress again. O take heed of this; this is but hypocrisy, and
this will end in hardness of heart at the last: He that performs duties only to
quiet conscience that it shall not accuse him for sin, will at length venture
upon a course of high transgressions against conscience, and will turn his
troubled conscience into a seared conscience.

Sixthly, You must not perform your duties for any self or vainglorious end;
We must not perform duties for self en^^.
It was Ephraims folly that he brought forth fruit unto himself, Hose. 10. 1*
It was Jehu's sin that he sought himself rather than God in what he did; and it
was the Pharisees hypocrisy that in their fasting and preaching and
abundances, they looked at the praise of men; verily says Christ, ye have your
reward, Matthew. 6 5. all that you look at is the praise of men; and all that
ever you shall receive, is but the praise of men; for their sakes you did these
things, and from them take your reward; you did them not with a respect to Gods
glory; for his sake, and therefore you shall have no acceptance, and no
recompense from him at all.

3. Quest. Now follows the third Question, viz. What Rules we must observe in
our walking in Gods statutes, so that we may please him, and our obedience may
be accepted of him?

Sol. Beloved! This question is of very great use unto us: It is not enough
that How to please God in our obedience.
we do the things which God requires, but we must have a care to do them so as
that God may be pleased, and so as what we do may be accepted: Col. 1. 10. Walk
worthy of the Lord in all ple^sing. Heb. 12. 28. Let us have grace that we may
serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. Chap. 13. 24. Make you
perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight. Chap. 15. 5. Enoch before his translation had this
testimony that he pleased God.

Remember (by the way) these three hints.

First, Many men do not mind the pleasing of God, nor his acceptance in what
Some mind not the pleasing of God.
they do; they bring their gift to the Altar and there they leave it, but
whether God accepts it at their hands, and be well-pleased with what they have
done, they mind it not.

Secondly, Many think that if a good work be done, God must needs be pleased
with it. What! God commands Prayer, and yet not accepts of it, nor be Others
think that God must needs be pleased with their works.
pleased with it!

I answer, God requires the manner as well as the matter; and the work done is
not accepted if it be not done aright; did not the Lord command sacrifice, and
did not Cain sacrifice? yet God had no respect to him nor his offering, Genesis 4.
5. Did not God command prayer unto the Jews? yet says, Isa. 1. 15. When you
spread forth your hearts I will hide mine eyes from you; yea when you make many
prayers I will not hear; why so? for your hands are full of blood; therefore
David says (Psalm. 66. 18.) If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me.

Thirdly, it is a great judgment, when neither a person nor his works are
accepted with God and please him not; when the Lord says, my soul has no Its
a great judgment not to be accepted with God.
pleasure in him, and I regard not his prayings, nor his fastings, nor
readings, nor hearings, nor any good he does: If God regards not thee nor thy
good works, how does he abhor thee and thy wicked works; if he will condemn
thee for them, what will he do unto thee for these? Many ignorant superstitious
creatures have high thoughts of their good meanings, and of their devout
serving of God, and place all their confidence upon them: But when they give up
their accounts, they will find that none of these were pleasing to God, nor
accepted of him: Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you, says
Christ.

These things being thus premised, I will now show unto you

1. How a man may so perform his obediential works, that he may please God, and
they may be accepted. How we may so perform duties as to please God.


2. How he is to walk in Gods Statutes, so, etc.

1. Case. How a man must perform obediential works, so that he may please God,
and that they may be accepted of God.

Sol. For this, take these answers.

First, He must be in Christ; It is a sure rule, That the person must be
accepted The person must be in Christ.
before his works can be accepted: Now no persons are accepted, but so far only
as they are in Christ: He has made us accepted in his beloved, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 6. If the Lord looks on any person as out of Christ, what
shall he find him? what shall he behold in him? nothing but a sinful cursed
enemy, an object of his justice and wrath; an offending and offensive,
displeasing and provoking creature, and he cannot but loath him, and what comes
from him; only in and by Christ does he look upon uw with grace and favor.

Secondly, He must have the Spirit of Christ: For, they that are in the flesh,
cannot He must have the Spirit of Christ.
please God, Romans 8. 8. The Apostle in the precedent verse says, That the
carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be: whence he instances in this verse, That they that are in
the flesh cannot please God: A wicked unregenerate man defiles every good work
which he takes in hand: Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?
says Christ, Matthew. 7. 16. Every good tree brings forth good fruit, but a
corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit, ver. 17. That of Solomon is pertinent
to our purpose, Prove. 15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to
the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight. And ver. 29. The Lord
is far from the wicked, but he hears prayer of the Righteous. By all which
you plainly see that a person must be sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, if he
would have services or performances pleasing to God, and accepted of him; if
God sees not something of his own work in our works, he accepts them not; but
that cannot be unless our work comes from his Spirit within us, etc.

Thirdly, He must worship God in Spirit and in truth; this our Savior delivers
He must worship God in spirit and in truth.
in Joh. 4. 23. The true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in
truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him. And ver. 24. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth. A
bare external bodily service the Lord utterly dislikes; if the soul and heart
come not within our duties, they are of no account to God; Spiritual service is
proper for God who is a Spirit, and this pleases him: Romans 1. 9. God is my
witness whom I serve with my spirit. Ephesians. 6. 18. Pray always with all prayer
and supplication in the Spirit.

Fourthly, He must perform all his duties of obedience in Faith; For without He
must perform them in faith.
Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. Now to perform our duties in
faith, implies

1. That we know and discern the will and command of God, concerning the duties
which we do perform unto him: This is a certain truth, That what God requires
not, that God accepts not: He appoints all the paths of obedience unto the sons
of men, and will not be obeyed according to our mind, but according to his own
mind; and whatsoever we do, if we do it not with faith (i. e.) being not
persuaded that this is that which God requires of us, it shall not be accepted;
For Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

2. That we rely upon the grace and strength of Christ, to walk and perform the
duties commanded: For without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. It was a good
speech of Bernard (upon that passage in Cant. 8. 5. Who is this that comes up
from the wilderness leaning upon his beloved?) Frustra nititur, qui non
innititur; no good can be done, but by leaning on Christ; from him is the
strength of your sufficiency, and not from your selves.

3. That we offer them up to God in the Name of Christ, resting on his merits,
and not on our own duties; on his doings, not on our own doings, and expecting
acceptance for his sake: Joh. 14. 13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that
will I do. Ver. 14. If ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it. Col. 3.
17. Whatsoever ye shall do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord
Jesus. The prayers that were offered up with the incense upon the Altar were
pleasing, Rev. 8. 3. and came up with acceptance, Ver. 4. The brethren were
kindly used for Benjamins sake; and David showed respect to lame Mephibosheth
for Jonathans sake:

4. That whatsoever we do in the way of obedience, let it be done to the glory
of God: 1 Cor. 10. 31. Do all to the glory of God. For Romans 11. 36. Of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

2. Case. Now I come to show you the choice Rules which do concern us Rules
concerning our walking in Gods statutes.
in walking in Gods statutes; or the manner how we must walk in them, if, etc.

Sol. The Rules which I will propound, all of them shall be taken from the
Word of God, and they are these.

First, We are to walk in them willingly: As Ephraim is said in a contrary We
must walk in them willingly.
sense to walk willingly after the command, he was not compelled o^ forced, but
freely of his own accord gave up himself un^o idolatrous worship: So should we
in a true spiritual sense, willingly walk after the commands of God: The
willingness of our hearts is all in all in the duties of obedience; and the
more of that, the more precious and acceptable is our obedience to Gods
statutes: 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; for the
Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the
thoughts. q. d. Look well to this, for God takes special notice of this, and
looks more at this than any thing else: Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power. This is the choice Character of the people of
Christ, they shall be a willing people; the word signifies they shall be
voluntaries, freely offering themselves, and freely serving without hire and
pay; people of a princely spirit, and magnificent, as if all their acts of
obedience were their own free willofferings. Carnal men are but so many
hirelings, they are coacti and serviles; not servi but serviles; men of a
slavish spirit, they are forced and driven to their duties out of fear of wrath
and punishment, and out of terror of conscience; their hearts like not God, nor
his statutes, nor doing of them, they look on spiritual duties as their
grievances and burdens: But the people of God are a willing people, they obey
and serve him with a willing mind, with a readiness and freeness of Spirit; and
well they may, for they do discern and find that in their duties and obedience
they have communion with God through Christ; they speak to their God, and their
God speaks to them.

Object. How may one know that he willingly walks in Gods statutes? When do we
willingly walk in Gods statutes? When we make them our choice.


Sol, Thus;

1. When he rather chooses them, than any other ways to walk in; election is
an act of the will: Josh. 2. 4, 15. Choose ye this day whom ye will serve; but I
and my house will serve the Lord. Psalm. 119. 173. I have chosen thy precepts.

2. When our obedience unto them springs from a love of them: Psalm. When our
obedience springs from love. When we find a sweetness in them.
119. 167. My soul has kept thy testimonies, and I love them exceedingly; all
the service of love is a will^ng service.

3. When we find a sweetness in them, and in our walking in them: Psalm. 119.
72. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver.
And ver. 127. I love thy Commandment above gold, yea above fine gold. And ver.
14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies as much as in all riches.

4. When the great desires and requests of his soul are, that God would enable
When we pray for ability to walk in them.
and enlarge his heart to walk in them: O that my ways were directed to keep
thy statutes! Psalm. 119. 5. And teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I
shall keep it unto the end, Ver. 33. And give me understanding and I shall keep
thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart, Ver. 24. Make me to go in
the paths of thy Commandments, Ver. 35. Incline my heart to thy testimonies,
Ver. 36. I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my
heart, Ver. 32. When we are not weary of well doing. We must walk in them
seriously.


5. When he is not weary of well-doing; but his heart still holds ^ut and is
in its element when walking with God, and accounts it a special favor and
happiness to main^ain commu^ion with God.

Secondly, We should walk in Gods statutes seriously, carefully marking what
they require of us, and conscientiously endeavoring to conform our lives and
actions unto them; David calls this an ordering of our conversations aright,
Psalm. 50. 23. And an ordering his steps in the word; Order my steps in thy
word, Psalm. 119. 133. As an Artificer puts every stone in the building
according to rule and line: Solomon calls this a pondering of our path; Ponder
the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established; turn not to the
right hand nor to the left, Pro. 4. 26, 27. To ponder, is to weigh and to
consider well of what we are about to do, whether it be agreeable or
disagreeable to the will of God; what the work or way is, for the nature of it,
and scope, and end of it. Thus should we ponder the path of our feet (i. e.)
the ways wherein we walk, and all the works we have to do; and have a care
that they be established (i. e.) set upon a good foundation, and really allowed
by God, and commanded in his Word; and then we should go on in those ways
without swerving to the right hand or to the left: A seriousness of
consideration how God would have us to walk, what his will is concerning us,
and then a seriousness of observation, conscientiously to do what God would
have us to do, and to walk as God would have us to walk; this is the right and
acceptable walking in Gods statutes.

Now there are four Reasons why we should thus seriously and conscientiously
Why we should be so serious. Because God has honor or dishonor by every
action.
consider the statutes of God, and every step of our walking;

1. Because there is not any step, not any one action or work which we do, but
God has either honor or dishonor by it; for either it is good, or it is
evil; either it is conformed unto his will, or it disagrees with his will; if
it agrees with his will, this conduces to his honor; if it does (...)
disagree, then it is evil, and brings dishonor upon him: And should we be
serious and conscientious in every thing wherein the honor or dishonor of God
are concerned?

2. Because there is not one moral work of ours, but it has our peace, or
comfort, It b^ings either comfort or discomfort.
or our trouble and discomfort in its hand: Let the good we are bound to do be
greater or lesser, if we do conscientiously observe and act it, there will
ensue peace of conscience upon the right acting of it; Great peace have they
that keep thy Law, says David, Psalm. 119. 165. And this is our rejoicing, ^^
the testimony of our conscience, that we have had our conversation in
simplicity and godly sincerity, says Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 12. And so on the
contrary, let our wandering or swerving from Gods statutes by sinning be never
so little, there is enough in that little to disquiet conscience, and to cause
trouble unto us: Ergo.

Every work is a step to eternity.
3. Because every individual work which we do, it is a step to eternity,
either to a blessed, or to ^ cursed eternity:

4. Because we must be accountable to God in the day of judgment, even for We
(...) accou^^ (...) every (...)
every work which we do. Eccles. 12. 13. Fear God and keep his Commandments.
Ver. 14. for God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Mark, every (...) work,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil, shall be brought to judgment; there
is not any one good work which a godly man does, but it shall be brought into
judgment, and God will recompense and requite it; even the giving of a cup of
cold water, shall not lose its reward: And there is not any one evil work which
the ungodly man does, but it shall be brought to judgment, and he shall be
punished for it; and God will execute judgment upon all, and convince all that
are ungodly, of all their ungodly deeds, Jude ver. 15. Therefore it does
exceedingly concern us, seriously to walk in Gods statutes; seriously to
consider what he would have us to do, and how we should walk, and
conscienciously to observe, and conform all and every one of our steps and
actions of life unto his Word.

Thirdly, We should walk in the statutes of God fully (i. e.) in all ways of
We must walk in them fully.
obedience commanded us of God; there should be a commensuration t'wixt our
walking and Gods commands: Deuteronomy. 5. 35. Ye shall walk in all the ways which
the Lord your God has commanded you, that you may live, and that it may be
well with you. Josh. 22. 5. Take diligent heed to do the commandments, and the
Law which Moses the servant of the Lord charged you, to love the Lord your God,
and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his Commandments, and to cleave unto
him, and to serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul. Jer. 7. 23.
But this thing commanded I them, saying, obey my voice, and I will be your God,
and ye shall be my people, and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded
you, that it may be well with you. Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed
when I have respect unto all thy Commandments. Luke 1. 6. Zechary and
Elizabeth walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless:
1 Timothy 2. 12. That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.

Object. But some will object, This is a hard saying; what, walk up to every
statute of God! they are very many, and do require so many duties to God and to
man; it would make our lives grievous unto us to be thus strictly bound; in
some things we could be content, but to walk in all is too strict.

Sol. I confess it is strict, especially to our corrupt hearts; nay any one
Commandment The carnal heart counts any one command burdensome.
of God, and any one part of obedience thereunto is too grievous and strict for
a carnal heart. Put the carnal man (who thus complains, and excepts against
full obedience unto all Gods statutes) I say put him upon walking in any one
statute or Law of God, and he will grumble against that one as much as against
all. e. g.

Put him upon the sanctifying of the Sabbath, tell him he must rest upon that
day from all his labors, and that he must set that day appart for God alone,
and wholly spend it in holy religious duties public and private; now he cries
out, O what a burden and wearisomness is this! what, no recreations, and no
visitings, and no worldly and vain discourse on that day! what, nothing but
praying, and hearing, and reading of the Word, and singing of Psalms, and
heavenly meditations, and discourses in our families! Flesh and blood cannot
bear this, indeed it cannot; nor shall flesh and blood ever inherit the kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. Again, put a man of a carnal heart but to exercise
religious duties in his family, to pray daily, and to read the Word, and to
instruct those that do belong to him, and for whom he must give an account to
God, the man's heart presently rises against this, and this is grievous, and he
shuffles; it should be done indeed, but I have no leisure, and I have no gifts,
or parts to do these works. Beloved, it is a sure truth, that whatsoever a
carnal man pretends against universal obedience to all Gods statutes, his heart
is for no obedience at all, but has an universal enmity unto all and every
Commandment of God.

But now more distinctly to answer the Cavil for partial obedience, and to
confirm the Truth for full and U^iversal obedience, consider these six
Particulars.

First, They that are for a partial obedience to Gods Commands, and for a
Partial obedience breaks the bond of all obedience.
walking in some of his statutes only, they do break asunder the Bond and
Reason of all obedience: All obedience is to be founded upon the Authority and
will of God, because God (who has authority over all his creatures) does will
and command us to obey his voice, to walk in his statutes; for this very reason
do we stand bound to obey him: And if we do obey him upon this reason, then
must we walk in all his statutes, for so has he commanded us; and if we will
not come up to this, but will walk in what statutes of his we please, then do
we renounce his will as the obliging reason of our obedience, and do set up our
own liking and pleasure as the reason thereof.

Secondly, Nay secondly it tends to plain Atheism: For by the same reason It
tends to Atheism.
that you slight the will of God in any Commandment; by the same reason you
may despise his will in every Commandment, for every Commandment of God is
his will, and it is holy and spiritual, and contrary to our sinful lusts, and
if this be the reason why such and such Commandments of God will not down with
you, then by the samereason none of them must be of authority with you.

Thirdly, It is an audacious charge against God himself, as to his wisdom, or
Its an audacious charge against God himself.
power, or goodness; those statutes of God which you will not come up unto,
either they are righteous as the rest, and are good as the rest, or they are
not: If they be also righteous and good, why should we not walk in them as in
the rest? If they be not righteous and good, O what a blasphemous charge is
given against God in prescribing unto him any thing that is not righteous and
good? and likewise in making his will (which is the rule of righteousness and
goodness) to be partly righteous, and partly unrighteous, to be partly good,
and partly bad?

Fourthly, There is not any one statute of God, but it is good, and for our All
the Commandments are good, and for our good.
good; Ergo we should walk in all his statutes: Deuteronomy. 5. 25. Ye shall walk in
all the ways which the Lord your God has commanded you, that you may live,
and that it may be well with you. What one path has the Lord commanded us to
walk in, but as it concerns his own glory, so likewise it concerns our good? Is
it not good for us to love and fear the Lord, and to put our trust in him, and
to worship and serve him after his own mind and will, and to honor his
glorious Name, and to sanctify his day? how many blessings has God promised
unto such? and to honor our Parents, and forsake all those sins mentioned in
the Negative Precepts, etc.

Fifthly, Our hearts must be perfect with the Lord our God: Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Our
hearts should be perfect with the Lord.
Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God. And Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me,
and be thou perfect. Now how can our hearts be said to be perfect with God, if
we do prevaricate with him? if in some things we will obey him, and in other
things we will not obey him; if we walk in some of his statutes, but will not
walk in all his statutes; if in some part we will be his servants, and in other
parts of our lives we will be the servants of sin.

Sixthly, Lastly, Either we must endeavor to walk in all the statutes of God,
or else we must find some dispensation and toleration from God, to free God
has exempted us from none.
us, and excuse us, and hold us indemnified, though we do not walk in all of
them; now what one Commandment is there from obedience whereunto God excuses
any man? or will not punish him for the neglect of obedience unto it: The
Apostle says, That whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all, Jam. 2. 10. (i. e.) If he prevaricates with God as
to any one particular Commandment of his, his heart is naught, he is guilty of
all, he has really no regard of any of the rest of Gods Laws. Therefore for
the Lords sake, consider of this all of you that hear me this day, and let your
souls be humbled within you for your loose and unfaithful walking in Gods
statutes: One will not pray, another will swear, another will not set up
religious duties in his family, another will not keep the Sabbath day holy,
another will cheat and overreach his neighbor, another will lie and speak
evil, and back-bite, etc. Is this to walk in all the statutes of God? is this
fully to walk in all his ways* etc.

Object. But it is impossible for any man on earth to walk in all Gods
statutes, Its impossible.
and fully to do his will.

Sol. I answer, there is a twofold walking in all the statutes of God;

First, One is Legal, when all is done which God requires; and all is done as
God requires; There is not any one path of duty, but we do walk in it A Legal
obedience is indeed impossible.
perfectly and continually; thus no man on earth does, or can walk in all Gods
statutes, or fully do what he commands; for in many things we offend all: it
was but a proud, vain self-delusion in that young man who said, All these
things have I kept from my youth.

Secondly, Another is Evangelical; which is such a walking in all the statutes
of God, and keeping of them, as is in Christ accepted of, and accounted of But
Evangelical is possible.
as if we did keep them all, (this walking in all Gods statutes, and keeping of
them all, and doing of them all, it is not only possible, but it is also actual
in every freely believing and repenting person) and it does consist in these
Particulars.

1. In the approbation of all the statutes and Commandments of God: A believer
approves of all.
Romans 7. 12. The Commandment is holy, and just, and good. Ver. 16. I consent
unto the Law that it is good. Psalm. 119. 128. I esteem all thy precepts
concerning all thinhs to be right.

2. In a conscientious submission unto the authority of all the statutes of
God: Every one of them has an authority within his heart, and over his heart,
he Conscientiously submits to all.
stands in awe of every one of them, and has a spiritual regard unto them all:
Psalm. 119. 6. I have respect unto all thy Commandments.

3. In a real delight in all the statutes or Commandments of God: Psalm. Really
delights in all.
119. 47. I will delight my self in thy Commandments which I have loved.

4. In a cordial desire to walk in them all: Psalm. 119. 8. I will keep thy
statutes; and O that my ways were, etc. the desire of our soul is to thy Name,
and Cordially desires to obey all.
to the remembrance of thee.

5. In a sincere endeavor to keep them all; a man does put out himself in all
the ways and parts of obedience; he does not willingly and wittingly slight or
Sincerely endeavors it.
neglect any Commandment, but is striving to conform himself thereunto:

Quest. But here it may be demanded, Whether we must show an equal respect unto
all Gods statutes and precepts; and do sin, if we do show more respect to some
Whether an equal respect must be showed unto all. It must not.
of Gods Commandments, than unto others of them?

Sol. This being granted that we must show respect unto all Gods statutes; I
answer, that it is not necessary, nor are we bound to express the same equal
respect to all Gods Commandments. For although all the Commandments of God be
equal in respect of authority and Sovereignty of the commands, yet in respect
of the things commanded or forbidden, and in respect of the strictness of the
charge laid upon us for the doing or not doing of them, some are greater than
others: Matthew. 22. 36. Master (said the Lawyer to Christ) which is the great
Commandment in the Law? Ver. 37. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. Ver.
38. This is the first and great Commandment. 1 Samuel 15. 22. And Samuel said,
Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying
the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than to sacrifice, and to
hearken than the fat of Rams. Matthew. 9. 13. Go ye and learn what this means,
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

Quest. Which of Gods Commandments should we have most special care to walk
Which are principally to be respected. Such as most respect Gods glory. As as
are most necessary to our salvation. As are the sinews of all Religion. As most
concern our selves and families. That concern righteousness and mercy. That
concern the avoiding of greater sins. We should do all affectionately.
in, or to observe?

Sol. I humbly conceive, that our special care should be

First, Of those which do principally and immediately respect Gods Glory: Summa
ratio in summo fine.

Secondly, Of those which do most absolutely and necessarily respect our own
salvation; as Regeneration, Repentance, Holiness, Faith.

Thirdly, Of those which are the bond and sinews of all Religion, upholding it
in the power and practice of it; as the sanctifying of the Sabbath.

Fourthly, Of those which do most concern our selves, and such as are under our
charge; as family duties.

Fifthly, Of those which do require and enjoin righteousness and mercy unto
others, and preserve public society.

Sixthly, Of those which do concern the greater sins which should be most
carefully avoided.

Fourthly, we should walk in Gods statutes, and keep, and do them
affectionately; we should affect the acts of obedience, and be affected in
them; Suppose that a man did walk up to every statute of God, yet if this were
not done affectionately, all were nothing. Now there are four affections with
which we should perform every service or duty that we do unto God.

1. Love and delight. 2ly Joy. 3ly Fear. 4ly Zeal.

First, With Love and Delight: We must love the Lord and his statutes, and the
With love and delight.
duties which he requires from us, and take delight in obeying, and doing his
will: Psalm. 119. 97. O how I love thy Law! Ver. 167. My soul has kept thy
testimonies, and I love them exceedingly. Psalm. 40 8. I delight to do thy will
O my God, yea thy Law is within my heart.

Secondly, With joy and alacrity: Psalm. 119. I have rejoiced in the way of With
joy and alacrity.
thy testimonies as much as in all riches. Psalm. 100. 2. Serve the Lord with
gladness. Our walking in Gods statutes should be our meat and drink; we should
find more satisfaction, and soul contentment, and refreshing when we are doing
the will of God, and are enjoying communion with him, than we do find or take
in any earthly enjoyment whatsoever.

Thirdly, With fear: Serve the Lord with fear, Psalm. 2. 11. when ye are a
performing With fear.
any duty to God, ye must do it with a

1. Reverential fear: Thou shall fear this glorious and fearful Name, the Lord
A reverential fear.
thy God, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the
Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him, Psalm. 89. 7.
Pray and hear with fear and trembling.

2. Humble fear of our own sufficiency, and of our own performance, left Humble
fear.
any thing should fall in with our duties by which God may be offended, and our
service of him may miscarry, etc.

Fourthly, With zeal, or fervor of spirit: The people of God must be zealous
With zeal.
of good works, and zealous in good works; fervent in spirit serving the Lord,
Romans 12. 11. It was said of Jehoshaphat, that his heart was lifted up in the
ways of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. And of Josiah that he made a Covenant before
the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, and his
testimonies, and his statutes with all his heart, and with all his soul, etc. 2 Chronicles. 34. 31. See also 2 King. 23. 25. Wrestling and striving in Prayer,
attend earnestly in hearing: We must not walk in Gods statutes with careless,
sloathful, indifferent spirits, but with heightened, and lively, and enlarged
spirits, doing his will with all our might and strength, bringing out all the
might and power that we have in his service, stir up our graces and our hearts.

Fifthly, We should walk in Gods statutes uprightly and sincerely: Genesis 17. 1.
Walk before me and be thou upright. And 1 Kin. 3. 6. David my Father walked
Walk in them uprightly.
before thee in truth and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with
thee. Isa. 38. 3. Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, etc. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
we have had our conversation in the world.

Quest. But here now is the great Question, how one may know that he walks
Signs of sincerity.
uprightly in Gods statutes?

Sol. There are (...) discoveries of this.

First, The prevalent motive which alone suffices to his obedience, and that
If we obey because God commands.
is the will or command of God; if a man be upright, and walk with an unright
heart, then he will, and does act and move upon the sole account of Gods
command; that alone is reason enough and will prevail with him for obedience.
There are several Motives which induce men to do good works; some do respect
our selves, and are drawn from a respect to our credit, and profit, as do such
a work, and perform such a duty, and you shall have honor amongst men by it,
and you shall gain much by it; these considerations are the prevailing Motives
which men of unsound hearts to some things which God requires, as it was with
Jehu, etc. And some are drawn from God himself, only from his Commandment, and
this is sufficient, and this prevails with men of upright heart: Psalm. 119. 4.
Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts dilgently. Ver. 5. O that my ways
were directed to keep thy statutes! Mark how his heart is drawn out to
obedience upon the mere command of God: Thou have commanded us, etc. Isa. 2. 3.
He will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Mark, there is no
more considered to move to walk in his paths than this, he will teach us of his
ways (i. e.) he will make us to know that this or that is his will and command
concerning us. Paul relates that it was the earnest prayer of Epaphras for the
Colossians, that they might stand perfect, and be filled with all the will of
God, Col. 4. 12. It is not Compleri, but Repleri, (...): Some look upon that
word as Metaphorical (to be filled with the will of God) as the sails of a ship
are filled with wind, which is enough to carry the ship in voyage; so it is
enough when the will of God fills our hearts, and that carries them out to
duty; and David has a singular expression in Psalm. 119. 6. When I have respect
unto all thy Commandments; you know that to have a respect unto a thing, is
this, when that of all other swayes most with us, as when a Master commands a
servant, he will do such a business, because he respects him, and at his
command he will go and come, though he will not at the command of any other;
this was David's temper, he had respect to Gods Commandments; they had
authority over him, he had a regard to them; therefore consider well what is
the Motive which induces you to pray, to hear, to do any other good duty; is it
Gods will or Commandment alone? if it be not so, you walk not, you act not
uprightly.

Object. But will some reply, This is something difficult to discern, forasmuch
How to know whether we act upon Gods command alone.
as Gods command and our own interests may meet, they may concur sometimes in
some actions to be done; and now it will be hard to know whether we act upon
the command of God alone.

Sol. There are two things which show that it is Gods command alone which sets
us on to our duties.

1. When there is no reward or external encouragement presented to set us on
When we are not set on by reward. When dangers discourage not.
to the performance of duties.

2. When our hearts hold on and set upon the duties amidst all dangers and
discouragements, and to our own external prejudice, as Moses was obedient with
afflictions.

Secondly, The simplicity of the end; when a man does sincerely serve the Lord,
or walk uprightly in his statutes, he does (in all the good actions done by
hi^) look If our ends be sincere.
at Gods glory; he does them not for self ends, to advance or exalt himself;
but he does them with a single respect to Gods glory, to exalt and lift ^^ his
Name: A^ Paul spoke, We preach not out our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, 2
Cor. 4. 5. we propound not, we intend not the honor of our gifts, and
abilities, and pains, but the honor of Jesus Christ; and as he spoke in Phil.
1. 20. That Christ may be magnified: Thus is it with every man who walks
uprightly, and does things with an upright heart; he does in all his ways seek
and intend the praise and honor of God, and not himself; I seek not my self
says the Apostle, I seek not my own profit: 1 Cor. 10 33. And none of us
lives to himself, and (...) of us dies unto himself; for whether we live, we
live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord, Romans 14. 7.

On the contrary, they that walk hypocritically with a false heart, they do set
up themselves and not God, Hose. 10. 1. Israel is an empty vine bringing sorth
fruit unto himself, Matthew. 6. 1. etc. They gave alms, prayed, fasted to be seen
of men. A carnal man, so that he may enjoy his own safety, liberty, ease,
profit, he cares not what becomes of Gods glory; let the Gospel sink or swim,
let the Ministry perish, let a Nation be brought to confusion, let the
Ordinances of Christ, and truth of Christ be contemned and destroyed, let all
wherein Gods honor or glory are concerned, be trod under foot, he cares not,
for he respects himself and not God, etc.

Thirdly, The singleness of the path: when a man walks in Gods statutes
uprightly, If the Word be your Ri^e.
his path of walking is only the way of Gods Commandments; he has no other
path but that, but one God, and but one mercy, and but one heart: Isa. 26. 7.
The way of the just is uprightness. Psalm. 139. 23. Search me O Lord, and know
my heart, try me, and know my thoughts* Ver. 24. and see if there be any way of
wickedness in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. The way or path of every
man is not that particular action or work, but it is his general and habitual
course of life, and that is (to him that walks uprightly) the course of
holiness and righteousness.

Fourthly, I might add other Characters, but I shall pass them over; only take
one more, and that is Diligence; He who walks uprightly in Gods statutes, If we
walk diligently.
does walk in them heartily and diligently; he gives up his heart, and life,
and desire, and care, and strength to do the will of God, to serve him, to obey
him: this is his great business, the main work that he has to do, and he does
it with all his heart, and with all his soul; not negligently, and carelessly,
as a servant does ey-service: he does not slubber over duties, as if any were
good enough for God; he knows that cursed is the man that does the work of the
Lord negligently, Jer. 47. 10. He is very intent, and taken up with the work
which God commands, not only to do, but so to do it, as may be most pleasing to
God, and conducing to his glory, when he prays, hears, receives the Sacrament,
etc.

Ezekiel. 36. 27. And cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments and do them.
I Have finished the first Proposition from these Words, viz. That even the
people of God within his Covenant of grace are to walk in Gods statutes, etc. I
now come unto the second Proposition, viz.

CHAP. XIV.
2. Doctr. THat the people of God are to make progress, to proceed on, to
continue, Gods people must persevere in their obedience to God.
and persevere all their days in an obediential observation of Gods statutes:
(Ye shall walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, etc.)

To walk in Gods statutes is a Metaphorical expression, taken from those who do
walk in a journey, who are still moving on in their path or way from place to
place, until they come to their journeys end: So the people of God, they are
not only to enter into the way of obedience, but they must hold on their whole
life, they must go from strength to strength, from step to step, until they
come unto the end of their life: Job 17. 9. The righteous shall hold on his
way; and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.

A threefold continuance is required of our obedience.

First, For the matter; still doing the work of our Master, ordering all For
the matter.
our steps by his Word; exalting his rule, keeping to his paths, not weary,
wandering or revolting.

Secondly, For the manner, not abating or decaying at any time; in

1. Our integrity of intention. For the manner.
2. Our loveliness of affection. 3. Our diligence of action. 4. Our
watchfulness of observation. 5. Our forwardness and delight. 6. Strictness in
our obedience. 7. In our valor and resolution.
Although we do (...) meet with

1. Much intrinsecal opposition.

2. Much extrinsecal discouragement and dangers, yet still to hold on; none of
these things move me, said Paul, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so
that I may finish my course with joy, Acts 20. 24. through the Red Sea, and
through the wilderness to Canaan.

Thirdly, In a further advancing, as to our graces, and as to our services,
being more zealous, more steadfast, more abound^ng in the work of the Lord; In a
farther progress.
bringing forth more fruit in our old age: Prove. 4. 18. The path of the just is
as the shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect day. The sun
rises in the morning, and it holds on its motion or course until it comes to
the height: And so the just man goes on in his course, further and further,
until he comes to perfection, which is his end and rest. The Apostle calls
this the running of a Race, 1 Cor. 9. 24. and Heb. 12. 1. Let us run the Race
which is set before us: when men do run a race they make no stop or stay, but
they are still passant in their motion, never rest until they come unto the
goal for, etc. Therefore he says of himself, that he was following after it,
Phil. 3. 12. And reaching forth, ver. 13. And pressing forward, ver. 14. So
David, Psalm. 119. 33. Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I will keep
it unto the end. And ver. 44. I will keep thy statutes continually, for ever
and ever. Ver. 112. I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes always
even unto the end. We read of Job, (that upright man, who feared God, and
eschewed evil) that he offered Sacrifice and Burnto-fferings for his sons, and
thus did Job continually, Job 1. 5. The same we say of our obedience to Gods
Statutes; it is not a transient work, but it is a continued course; it is not
the work of a day, or of a year, but it is the work of a life; we must serve
God in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our life, Luke ^^. 75.

Now I will give you some Reasons why they should do so, why they Reasons for
it*
should continue and persevere unto the end in doing the will God, in walking
in his statutes.

The Reasons are these.

First, The Bond of the Covenant twixt God and them, wherein there is, From the
mutual Covenant.
1. A mutual Agreement. 2. The date of the Agreement. The Agreement is that
God will be their God, And that they will be his people: God will be theirs,
and they will be his: They will serve him and he will bless them. The date of
this Agreement is Everlasting, I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, I
will never turn a way from them to do them good, and I will put my fear into
their hearts that they shall never depart from me: Jer. 32. 40. Psalm. 48. 14.
This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto death.

Hence I infer two things.

1. If the Relation 'twixt God and his people does still continue, then the
obligation The relation betwixt God and his People sti^l continue^. The
Covenant takes hold of God to bless them.
still continues; if they do still own him for their God, they must still obey
and serve him as their God.

2. If the Covenant takes hold of God to bless them and do them good, it does
by the same reason take hold on them still to serve and obey their God: It were
absurd to think that the obligation should be only on God's part, and not on
our part; or that it should be at all times on Gods part to do us good, and
only at some time on our part to do him service.

There are three things considerable in the Statutes or Commands of God. What
considerable in Gods Statutes. A Breadth in them. A Hight in them. A Length in
them.


1. There is a Breadth in them; for they are many and do require manifold
duties, and our hearts and lives must have a respect unto them all.

2. There is a Height in them. they are Laws of perfection, and we should
strive to come up fully unto them, to the utmost of them.

3. There is a Length in them, they extend in their Authority and power from
the first day of life to the last minute of breath; and our obedience unto them
should be constant unto them: says the Apostle Romans 7. 2. The woman that has
an husband* is bound by the Law to her husband so long as he lives: So say the
people of God who are in Covenant with him and take him for their Lord and
Husband, they are bound to obey his laws, and walk in his statutes prescribed
to them as long as the husband lives, at least as long as they shall live. Thus
you see that the people of God are to hold on and to continue unto the end in
the duties of obedience; it must be the work of their whole life to walk in
God's statutes.

Secondly, The force of Gods Law: The moral law of God (for of that ^ From the
force of Gods Law.
only speak) it is an Eternal law, it is not Temporary, and Cessant, set up to
be of force for a time only: No, it is a fixed and standing Rule, and has
authority over us, not for some part of our life, but for all the days of our
life: and we are to order not only some part of our conversations, but our
whole conversations according unto it; order my steps in thy word, Psalm. 119.
133. We do find that the laws or Commandments of God, some of them are
affirmative, and some of them are negative; the affirmative do bind us Semper,
and the negative do bind us Semper and ad Semper. There is no time dispensed
with to sin against God, no time to take the Name of God in vain, no time to
commit adultery, no time to kill or steal, etc.

And though the affirmative precepts do not bind us at all times as to
particular acts, yet they do still bind us to some acts of obedience: As though
God will at some times dispense with sacrifice, yet then it is in case of
mercy: As if a fire should break out on the Sabbath day, God suffers us to omit
his own worship; but this is that we might observe him in acts of mercy at this
time: Well then! the Law of God is never out of date, and therefore our
obedience should be never out of date. This Command lies upon us for our whole
life, and therefore obedience lies upon us for our whole life.

Thirdly, There is still an imperfection upon us, and therefore still there is
need Whilst we live we are imperfect.
of further obedience. Take me the best Christian on earth, there is still
imperfection upon him; and there is nothing which he does, but still he may do
it better. He does not so believe on God, but he needs still to believe, and
still to believe better. He does not so love his God, but he needs still to
love his God, and to love him more. He does not so sanctify a Sabbath, but he
needs still to keep the Sabbath day holy, and to keep it more holy. He does not
so pray and hear and mourn, but he needs still to pray and hear, and to pray
and hear better. He does not so mortify his sins, and reform his heart and
life, but he needs every day to be mortifying his sinful lusts, and reforming
and mending his heart more and more, further and further. Progressive obedience
is true obedience.
continued obedience, that is the true and right obedience; that is the
obedience.

1. Which comes indeed from love of God: A friend (says Solomon) loves at all
times: They who do truly love their God, will still obey their God:

2 Which comes from the Law written in the heart, set up there, and delighted
It proceeds from love to God.
in there.

3 Which as it agrees wholly with Gods will, so it tends altogether to Gods
From the Law written in the heart. It agrees to Gods will and tends to Gods
glory.
glory: God has more dishonor by the Apostate who turns away from the
Commandments, then ever he had honor by his temporary walking in the
Commandments. A faithful Christian who walks with God all his days, his
whole life brings glory to God.

4. Which God delights in: he takes pleasure in it; the upright are his
delight; And he loves the faithful, but if any man draw back, my Soul shall
have no pleasure God delights in it.
in him. Heb. 10. 38.

5. Which God will Reward, Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee a crown of life. Math. 10. 22. He that continues unto ^he end shall
be God will reward it.
saved. It is a pious expression of Chrysostom, Non cepisse, but perfecisse,
virtutis est; Nec incipientibus sed perseverantibus Corona tribuitur.

6. Which answers to the obedience of Christ; Christ's obedience was
Satisfactory, and herein we cannot imitate him: and his obedience was
exemplary, a It answers Christ's obedience.
pattern for our obedience, and herein we are to imitate him.

And there are three things in his obedience, to which our obedience should be
answerable. 1. Willingness and readiness. 2. Fullness. 3. Steadfastness until
Three things in Christ's ^bedience for our imitation.
he had finished the work which his father gave him to do: And thus should we
do, not only begin, but also finish and work to the end. 2. Tim. 4. 7. I have
finished my course, said Paul.

We should persevere or continue our obedience unto the end, still walk on in
Gods Statutes; because of that exceeding loss which will befall us, if we
should give over our obedience, and turn away from Gods Statutes.

There are three unspeakable losses which will follow to Apostates, who break
What Apostates lose.
off with God in duties of obedience.

First, A Loss of Honor: Says Christ to the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3.
Honor.
11. Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown: Intimating
that the Crown were lost (which is the greatest dignity, and honor, and
reputation) if she were not steadfast; Demas has forsaken us, and embraced
this present world; what a dishonor was this to Demas? The Apostle Peter
speaking of Apostates who turned away from the holy Commandments delivered
unto them. 2 Pet. 2. 21. That it is happened unto them according to the proverb,
the Dog is turned to his vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the mire: What a shame is it to be like a dog, or a sow? etc.

Secondly, A Loss of all the Duties and good works that hitherto they have All
their duties and good works.
done. Apostates make shipwrak, 1. Of Faith. 2. Of Conscience. 3. Of all their
former obedience: All the Prayers which they have made are lost; and all their
Hearings are lost; and all their Religious services and performances. Ezekiel. 18.
24. When the Righteous turns aw^y from his Righteousness and commits
iniquity, all his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, and
in his sins that he has sinned, in them shall he dye.

Thirdly, A Loss of their Souls and Happiness. Apostates lose all their ho^es,
Their souls and happiness.
of Heaven; there are dreadful places for the proof of this. Esa. 1. 28. They
that forsake the Lord shall be consumed. 2. Cron. 24. 20. Because ye have
forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. Heb. 10. 26. If we sin wilfully
after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin. Ver. 27. but a certain fearful looking for of judgment,
and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries.

Sixthly, We cannot be better imployd then in a constant and continued Its our
best impolyment to walk in Gods ways.
walking in Gods Statutes: It is an impolyment like that in Heaven. This is
indeed to live, and rightly to improve life; It is the Honor of life, and
Comfort and Safety of life.

First, Our Honor; says David, Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before
Its our honor.
me. And Psalm. 73. 23. I am continually with thee. Fidelity in service is an
honor to any man, much more in his service unto God.

Secondly, Our Comfort. Psalm. 106. 3. Blessed are they that keep judgment, Our
comfort.
and he that does righteousness at all times. Upright and constant obedience
brings in a revenue of constant peace in confidence thereof, and affords unto
us a constant confidence toward God. Psalm. 119. 165. Esa. 32. 17. The work of
righteousness shall be peace. 1 John 3. 21. If our hearts condemn us not, then
have we confidence toward God: Ver. 22. And whatsoever we ask we receive of
him, q. we keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his
sight.

Thirdly, Our Safety. You are never more safe then when you are in Gods Our
safety.
way: The path of obedience is the path of Safety. Prove. 13. 6. Righteousness
keeps him that is upright in the way, but wickedness overthrows the sinner.
16. 17. He that keeps his way preserves his soul: 19. 16. He that keeps
the Commandments, keeps his own soul: But he that despises his ways shall
dye. Eccle. 8. 5. Whose keeps the Commandments shall see no evil things. But
look on the very employment of life in the whole course of it, can it be better
employed or spent then in an obediential walking with God? There cannot be a
better master then God, nor a more choice employment of our life than in his
service: Communion with God is our happiness in this life, and in the life to
come. Psalm. 84. 1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of hosts! Ver. 2. My
soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord. Ver. 3. Blessed are
they that dwell in thy house, they will be still praising thee. Ver. 10. A day
in thy courts is better than a thousand; I had rather be a doorkeeper in the
house of my God, etc.

Seventhly, The further you proceed in walking in the paths of Gods
Commandments, The farther we go in these ways, they are the better. We shall
have the clearer knowledge of them.
the better you shall find it to walk in them.

There are four things which may demonstrate this:

1. Because the farther that you proceed in the ways of God, the clearer
knowledge you shall attain to, both of God and of his ways; the more we do
obey him, the better we shall know him, and love him, and be beloved of him.
Joh. 14. 21. He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that
loves me, and he that loves me shall be loved of my father; and I will love
him, and will manifest my self unto him.

2. Because the further we proceed in the ways of God, the further testimony
shall we have from conscience that our hearts are upright. There is (you know)
And fuller testimony from Conscience.
much of our happiness or unhappiness, in the testimony of conscience; and
upright walking gives a great advantage unto conscience to speak on our
behalf. Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the
way of the Lord, and ver. 2. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and
seek him with the whole heart. Now affectionate walking, and steadfast walking,
do show that our hearts are upright in walking.

3 Because the farther we do proceed in walking in Gods statutes, the more And
the more sweet experiences.
sweet and heavealy experiences shall our souls meet with. Still you meet with
promises, but if you make farther progress, you shall meet with the fruits and
effects of those promises. Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy
and truth unto such as keep his covenants and his testimonies.

4. Because the further that you do proceed to walk in Gods Statutes, the And
the nearer we are to our journeyes end.
nearer you are to the journies end, and to the crown of life: It is but one
style more, and then I am at my fathers house; but a few steps more, and then
Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.
Math. 25. 21.

Many of Gods children are sometimes out of the way.


True, will some say, thus they should do; but who of them ever did thus? There
are none of them but we find them some time or other out of the way.

I Answer.

Yet it should not be so. All that are sincere, do walk on.
ways of life.

But Secondly, All that are sincere, they do so, they are still walking on in
the Statutes of God. I told you lately, that particular actions do not
denominate any estate; it is the course of actions which does denominate our
walking. Though a wicked man does sometimes a particular good, yet this man
still walks in his iniquities, because the course of his life is spent in the
path of sin. So though a good man, does some times a particular evil, yet this
man may be said still to walk on in the Statutes of God, because that path
takes up his course of life. When Simil^.
a man is travailing a journey, though he does some times stumble and fall into
the dirt, yet he is said to be a travailer, and to go on in his journey,
because he lies not in the dirt, but gets up and away he goes; so etc.
Infirmities are passed by of God. How deviations are the fruits of weakness.


Thirdly, The aberrations of weakness do not nullify or evacuate a continued
progress in walking: Infirmities God passes by, and puts them not into the
account. Now therefore things which show that the deviations of Gods people are
the fruits only of weakness:

1. One is, that they do principally depend upon the subtilty and sudden power
of Satan's temptations. 2. A Second is, that they would not do any evil: The
evil that I would not do, I do, says Paul. 3. A Third is, their cries, and
tears, and complaints: They are in this particular like the lost Sheep, or a
lost Child. 4. A Fourth is, that they must and do return into the right way
again.
SECT. I.
(i. e.) make progress in them, and move forward and hold on, and persevere in
the obedience of them all the days of their life? Against this duty four
sorts of men deeply offend; e. g. 1. All Inconstant Professors. 2. All
Declining Professors. 3. All Non-Proficients. Who offend against this duty. All
inconstant Professors.
4. Especially all Revolters, and Apostates.

First, All Inconstant Professors; to whom that may be applied, spoken of in
Hosea 6. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee! O Judah, what shall I do unto
thee! for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes
away. You have many Professors like unto Ephraim and Judah, who in their
distresses enquired early after God; they take up duties, and then they will
pray and hear, and reform, and obey the voice of the Lord: O how many
hollow-hearted Christians are there who in their sickness and troubles of
Conscience, and outward straits and fears, will seek unto the Lord and serve
him, and walk in his ways; but as soon as fears, and straits, and sickness,
and dangers are off, they fall presently from God, and from his ways, and from
walking in his Satutes! The Simil^.
sun consumes the morning cloud, and dries up the early dew: So when ease and
prosperity and safety appears, then an end of praying, of mourning, of
repenting, of doing for God and walking in his ways.

Secondly, All Declining and luke warm Professors: Such I mean that have been
forward, and high and zealous in holy duties; but they are fallen low, and All
lukewarm Professors.
flat, and careless, and negligent of them. The time was that they were full of
cares and desires, and of spiritual fervor and vigor: O how they have prized
the ordinances! How did they abound in duties of obedience! How much of their
time did they lay out in meditation, in praying, in reading, in hearing in
reforming themselves, in instructing their families, in watching over
themselves and their ways! O they durst not neglect their duty, any
opportunity, nor come near any iniquity. But now the case is altered with them,
there is not that fear of God in them, nor tenderness of conscience, nor
forwardness of obedience; their wine is turned into water, and their fervor
into deadness; they have no regard, nor mind, nor heart to walk at all in Gods
Statutes and ways; they shut up the Church doors, and cast away Bibles, and
renounce all duties, regard not Scripture, regard not ordinances, regard not
duties: O the Lord work upon thine heart in time, for thou regardst not thine
owo soul.

Thirdly, All Formal Non-proficients; such I mean who keep still to their All
non proficients.
circle, and move like a horse in a mill; so much as they have taken upon them
of Religion, so much they will stick unto; they will neither abate nor rise,
neither go backward nor go forward, they know enough already: Some outward
duties they do: but if you will press them a jot higher, then you are precise;
you cannot possibly persuade them to proceed on to humble their heart, to
mortify their lusts, to yield to God in inward sanctity, etc.

Fourthly, But above all they offend most, who turn Apostates and Revolters;
All Apostates.
who like Hymeneus and Alexaender, make shipwreck of faith and a good
Conscience.

1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. Or like the Galatians, begin in the spirit, and end in the
flesh* Galatians 3. 3. Or like those in Peter, who after that they knew the way
of righteousness, did turn away from the holy Commandments delivered unto
them. 2 Pet. 2. 21. Beloved, there are three sorts of men in the world.

1. Some never would endure to look or walk in Gods Statutes, but resolve to
walk in their own sinful ways; these are profane Atheists. 2. Some will take
upon them to walk in Gods Statutes so far as consists with their own ways and
lusts; these are hypocrites. 3. Some make an entrance and a little progress,
but do after a while renounce them, and fall off to their own lusts.
Now here give me leave to open three things unto you.

1. The principal cause, why some men hold not on in walking in Gods Statutes,
The cause why some Apostatize.
but break off and turn Apostates. 2. Their great sin in so doing. 3. The great
danger and judgment.
1. The principal cause why, etc.

Because of the strictness of Gods Laws.
First, The Spiritual strictness which they do meet with in Gods Statutes,
which they did not preconsider, and which their loose hearts cannot bear. Joh.
6. This is a hard saying, and turn away from the Commandments, as too heavey a
yoke for them to bear, rather likeing their old ways of wickedness and
looseness.

Secondly, Secret Hypocrisy of heart, this is another cause why men do not
Secret Hypocrisy.
continue and persevere in the way of obedience, but do revolt and fall off.
Job 27. 10. Will the Hypocrite delight himself in the Almighty? will ^e always
call upon God? Some times he will call upon God, but always he will not, for
his delight is not in God.

There are four things in every Hypocrite: Four things in every Hypocrite.


1. His sinful heart was never changed by Grace. 2. His Soul was never
mortified to all sin. 3. His Heart could never comply with all which God
requires. 4. He never did Obey God out of love to God, intending only the Glory
of God, but still had an eye unto himself, seeking his own praise and advantage
in the world.
And every one of these is a sufficient ground of revolting; and what principle
is there of perseverance in the ways of God, where no grace at all ^s planted
in the heart? Is it possible that the Commandments of God should be sure of
us, when sin has the dominion over us? Or can he hold out in obedience, whose
heart did never like obedience? and of necessity his heart must break with God,
who does prefer himself before God.

Thirdly, External Difficulties and troubles: The Apostle says, that all who
External troubles.
will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3. 12. We
may say of walking in the way of Gods Statutes, what they spoke to Paul of the
way of Christianity, it is every where spoken against. Acts 28. 22. There is no
travailer in the way to Heaven, but shall meet with barking curs, with many
scoffs, reproaches, contempts, indignities, injuries, hazzards, losses: But
many men neither can, nor will suffer these things: they set a higher value
upon their own names, and ease, and liberty, and plenty and safety, than on
their Souls and Gods Commandments. When the young man heard of selling all,
and taking up the cross, and following of Christ, he took his leave of Christ,
and of the way to Heaven. etc.

Fourthly, Sordid unbelief; There are three things which some men do not Sordid
unbelief.
believe.

1. That the way of obedience is a necessary path to life. What some men do not
believe.


2 At least, that much obedience, and constant or continued obedience is that
path; some little service, for a little time (if men have any to spare) perhaps
is; but to spend a whole life in holy walking, etc.

3. That God is true in his promises of protection and benediction, in case of
conscientious and constant obedience; they do verily think that by this course
they shall be losers: If they did not some times work and sell on the Sabbath
day, why they should lose their custom; and if they should deny visits on that
day, they should displease their friends, etc.

O these unbelieving hearts of ours! Not without cause said the Apostle, Heb.
3. 12. Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God. Tell men seriously who is the God of blessings,
and God of mercies; in whose power is it to make great. Is it not God who
blesses, and the man shall be blessed? And who curses, and the man shall be
cursed? And read you not expressly of his blessings promised to the obedient,
and his curses to the disobedient? And is not God faithful in his promises, and
true in his threatenings? Had thou faith, God should have better obedience;
and did thou give to God more upright and steadfast obedience, God would give
unto thee more plentiful and abundant blessings: If thou could say that
latter part with David, I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever, then
may thou confidenly say with him, Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me
all the days o^ my life. Psalm. 23. 6.

2ly. Their great sin in Revolting, and giving over walking in Gods The great
sin of Revolters.
Statutes.

There is a Question which I have read somewhere of Infidels, and Heretics,
and Apostates, which of them do sin more heinously? And it is Resolved, that
the Apostate is the greatest sinner of them: defection is a greater sin, then
the negation of subjection; because in defection or Apostasy,

1. More of God is rejected, and the Apostate sins more against God; Why
Aposta^es are such great sinners.
2. Having received the knowledge of God and his ways. 3. And likewise breaks
asunder more bonds which lay upon him to continue his obedience.
And indeed the Apostle speaking of Apostates, delivers three things concerning
them, which do set out their sins unto amazment, Heb. 6. 6.

First, One is, that its impossible to renew them again unto repentance: How
great Its impossible to renew them.
is that sin which does so harden the hearts of men, that he does never repent
of it, nay can never repent of it, nay that it is impossible to renew him again
to repentance!

A Second is, that they crucify to themselves the Son of God; they deal with
They crucify to themselves Christ a f^esh.
Christ as the Jews did, who rejected and crucified him: O what a sin is this
to crucify the Son God, and to crucify him a fresh, to pierce his heart and to
shed his blood the second time!

The third is, that they put him to open shame; they themselves do put a
reproach They put him to open shame.
and contempt upon Christ, and cause others so to do; as if Christ were not a
master fit to be followed, and his ways were not worth our regarding, and that
the poor wo^ld and our base sins are rather to be regarded and emb^aced, and
followed then the Lord Jesus, and his precepts, and his ways. And take one
thing more; that never did any fall off, or turn away from walking in Gods
statutes, but he grew far more wicked then ever he was before, and likewise a
desperate enemies to the ways of God.

3ly Their great danger and judgment.

This I shall show unto you in three Particulars.

First, Revolters or Apostates are judicially given up to the great power of
Satan: The great danger and judgment of Apostates. They are given up to Satan.
The Lord does in his just judgment give them over unto Satan that he should
rule them, and that they should be his sworn servants who will break off with
God, and refuse to serve him any longer: Mat. 12. 44. That unclean spirit
returned unto his house from whence he came out. ver. 45. and takes with him
seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and enter they in and dwell
there, and the last estate of that man is worse than the first.

Secondly, They are judicially given up to the power of their sinful lusts,
they And to the power of their lusts.
grow worse and worse; they having cast away the cords, and all fear of God
there is no wickedness but they are ready to obey it, and they do now go on in
their daring ways of bold profaness with seared consciences.

Thirdly, They are judiciously given up to the powers of damnation; therefore
And to the power of damnation.
it is said that they draw back unto perdition, Heb. 10. 39. And the soul of
God has no pleasure in them, Ver. 38. O what a dreadful condition is this, to
forsake the path of life and heaven, and to turn back to walk in the path of
death and Hell!

Fourthly, They are many times (in their life) given up to exceeding terrors
They are often given up to terrors of conscience and despair.
of conscience and despair: You may read this in Judas, who turned back, and
what horror did that poor creature fall into? he forsook his Master, and left
the path of life for a few pieces of silver, but what got he by this! he lept
out of the ship into the Sea, he could never meet with rest or peace
afterward, but conscience brake in pieces, and did so pursue him with guilt
and terror, that thereupon he fell into absolute despair, and made an end of
himself: Spira, who revolted from the truth, and the path of Evangelical
obedience after clear convictions, and secret warnings of Conscience; but what
befell him? O he presently fell into terror of conscience and despair, and
never could recover the least hopes of mercy to his dying day.

Fifthly, They are many times punished by some extraordinary judgment here
They are often punished with extraordinary judgments.
on earth: Take an instance in Israel and Judah, they gave up to walk any
longer in Gods statutes and ways, they forsook God and his Laws, and what came
of this? why, God forsook them, and gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and
at last overthrew them with an utter destruction, and scattered them over the
face of the earth. So you read of Joash, who did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord all the days of Jehoiada the Priest, 2 Chronicles. 24. 2. But
afterward, Ver. 18. He left the house of the Lord and served Groves and Idols;
but what befell him for this? you read of two great judgments that did befall
him, one in verse 24. That the Syrians came in with a small company of men, and
the Lord delivered a great Host into their hand, because they had forsaken the
Lord; so they executed judgment against Joash: The other is in ver. 25. His
servants conspired against him, and slew him.

SECT. II.
2. Use SHould the people of God continue, proceed on, and persevere in walking
in Gods statutes? then you who are the people of God, give me leave to offer
unto you

1. A few Cautions about your walking. 2. A few exhortations concerning our
walking. 3. A few encouragements for your walking (continued walking) in Gods
statutes.
1. The Cautions about your walking.

You see that it is your duty to walk on, to proceed, to persevere in walking
in Gods statutes; therefore take heed unto your selves and beware of four
Cautions about our walking in Gods statutes Beware of slothfulness.
things.

First, Beware of slothfulness and carelessness at any time in doing the will of
God, or in walking in his ways: Romans 12. 11. Be not slothful in business, but
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. When a man does a business slothfully, he
does it with a slight spirit, he does not put out himself, not his strength, he
has no care in doing of it, he does it not with a serious and diligent spirit,
but remisly, and indifferently, as one not affected about what he does, nor
addicted unto it; says the Apostle, Heb. 6. 11. We desire that every one of
you do show the same diligence unto the end. And Ver. 12. That ye be not
slothful. Here he opposes diligence unto slothfulness, etc.

Now there are these Reasons why you should beware of slothfulness in any act
Reasons against slothfulness. Because it is Gods work, and his eye is upon us.
Its a work for God.
of obedience, or in any work which God commands you.

1. Because it is the work of God; a work that the great God enjoynes you, and
in which his eye is upon you; will not the servant eye and mind his work when
his master commands, and his Masters eye is upon him?

2. Because it is a work for God; it is to he done not only with a respect of
congruity as may best answer his will, but also with a respect of sincerity, as
may best advance his glory; should we be slothful, negligent, careless,
indifferent in any work of such a nature wherein we are employed of God? etc.

3. Because you do but lose time; little or nothing will be done if you be
slothful; Such do but lose time.
Solomon says in Prev. 18. 9. He that is slothful in his work, is brother to
him that is a great waster: the great waster brings a fair estate to nothing;
so a slothful person brings a good work to nothing; at best, your work can
never be well done if you do it with a slothful heart.

4. Because in all holy working and walking you still go forward: Psalm. 24. 3.
In all holy walking there is a going on.
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? sin still remains and works
strongly against us; so does the world, and Satan, and unbelief, and carnal
fear, and arguments against tide and wind; and you will be carried back if you
be remiss and slothful; any difficulty that you meet with will discourage you,
and take you off; difficulties and oppositions you will meet with, and they
will prevail if you be slothful: Prove. 15. 19. The way of a slothful man is as
an hedge of thorns, but the way of the righteous man is made plain: (i. e.)
when a slothful man is to do a work, there is still some rub or offense in the
way, and he cannot carry it on, but finds it too sharp and painful and
troublesome; whereas were his heart righteous, his way would be plain, it would
appear more free, and open, and easy: Prove. 22. 13. The slothful man says
There is a Lion without, I shall be slain in the streets.

5. Because you will never be able to held out in walking in Gods statutes, but
will The slothful is prone to Apostasy.
certainly revolt and apostate if you give way to slothfulness; indeed an
accidental slothfulness may befall the child of God in his way to heaven; but
if you give way to a willing and habitual slothfulness, it is a sign that your
hearts are wicked, that really you are not for God, and cord ally you have no
delight in him, or in his ways, but there is some other object which your
hearts do more mind and regard.

Secondly, Beware of slowness in vvalking on in Gods statutes; some of you
Beware of sloth in Gods ways.
need many arguments to avvaken and stir up your hearts unto duties; and others
do need many Goads to quicken their hearts unto a greater speed and
forvvardness in duties: The Apostle speaks of some, that when for the time they
ought to be teachers, yet they had need that one teach them again which be the
first Principles of the Oracles of God, these went on very slowly. Many
Christians are too blame in this, they move on but slowly.

1. In points of knowledge, they know but a very little more of the mysteries of
Some move slowly in point of knowledge. Some in point of practice.
salvation, (of Christ, of the Covenant of Grace, of regeneration, of the
objects of faith) after twenty or forty years hearing, then they did before.

2. In points of practice; after many years their sinful lusts are no more
mortified, and their graces are no more strengthened, and their ability (to
deny themselves, and to live by faith, and to suffer afflictions, and to be
more heavenly and profitable in their conversation) is little or nothing raised
and improved. I would have these to consider,

First, That this slow walking, is very disproportionable to the means which
Slow walking is very disproportionable to the means.
God vouchsafes unto them, and to the expectations of God; for to whom much is
given, of them much shall be required; the greater means and helps should be
answered with the greater fruits and returns.

Secondly, it is very uncomfortable unto your own souls; little fruit differs
but a little from no fruit: and it is a thousand to one, but your hearts will
be often Is very uncomfortable.
shaken and puzzled about the truth of your Spiritual condition, that you never
had grace in the truth and power of it, which works so weakly and so slowly,
that almost all your life long you have got so little ground over your sins,
and hardly advanced to one grace more then you had before.

Thirdly, It is very unanswerable to the course of humble, and solid and
serious Its unanswerable to the practice of sound Christians.
Christians; David made haste and delayed not. Psalm. 119. 60. And says he,
Ver. 32. I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my
heart: And Paul was pressing and reaching forward. Phil. 3. 13. And the kingdom
of God suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, said Christ. It is
shameful unto us, Math. 11. 12. Younger Christians will leave us behind them.


Fourthly, Nay look on many Christians behind us in time of their calling,
setting out after us, yet as Ahimaas out-went Cushy, or as John out-ran Peter
to the Sepulcher: so these of later standing than our selves in Christ and
grace, have left us far behind them, in Knowledge, in Faith, in Love, in
Tenderness, in Exactness, in Zeal, in Fruitfulness, etc. As the Apostle to the
Hebrews, lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees, Heb. 12. 12.
so say I unto you, stir up the heart, and drive not on so heavily, (as if this
were the way you had no pleasure in) but Motives to make more haste. We are in
the way to heaven.
put on with more life, and care and speed: For this purpose remember five
things.

First, Are you not in the way to Heaven? O how our souls should fly thither!
Indeed there is reason why we should be slow unto what is evil, because that
leads to Hell: And so on the contraty, there is all the reason in the world, to
be still setting forward and foremostly walking on in the Statutes of God, for
they are the way to Heaven, where all your happiness and all your treasure, and
your desires or hopes are laid up for ever.

Secondly, It was a long time before you set your foot in the path of Gods Its
long before we began.
Commandments, and therefore you had need to make haste.

How many years did you walk in the vanity of your minds, and in darkness, and
in wantonness and rioting? Why it is but of late days that God has changed
your hearts and turned your feet; you had a long time to dishonor God; and will
you not therefore improve the present time the more to honor him? In your times
of sin and death you laid out all your years with all greediness to damn your
souls; and should you not now be as quick, as enlarged in improving, and
contending, and striving, and hasting how to save your souls!

Thirdly, It may be but a very short time (yet a little while says Christ)
that We have but a short time to live.
you have to walk in Gods Statutes, and therefore serve him with all your
strength, and run the race that is set before you.

Quest. Some may put the Question, why God is pleased to conceal the length of
a Christians walk ^r journey to heaven, and never makes it known to any one
whether long or short?

Sol. Surely one reason thereof may be to stir up our care, to put on with all
our might, and to work and walk whiles we have day.

We have much work to do.
Fourthly, Especially considering that as the time is short, so we have much
work to do in that time. Ergo, we had need to double our diligence, and to mend
our pace; a slow pace will rid but little ground.

Fifthly, Make all the haste you can, you will hardly fulfill your work, and get
When we make most haste, we shall hardly finish all we have to do.
over all your ground: You shall find that the best Traveller of us all when he
comes to dye, he shall find very much work lying on him which he should have
done, but now cannot: O I should have been more watchful, more humble, more
believing, more zealous; redeeming more time, done more for God, done better
for my soul, done more good in my place.

Thirdly, Beware of unevenness in walking in Gods statutes. O let me not wander
from thy Commandments, said David, Psalm. 119. 10. And Ver. 117. Hold Beware of
uneven walking.
thou me up and I shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy statutes
continually: order my steps, and let no iniquity, etc. Ver. 133. So Solomon in
Prove. 4. 25. Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look strait
before thee. Ver. 26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
established. Ver. 27. Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy
foot from evil. A twofold unevenness.


Beloved, there is a twofold unevenness in our walking in Gods statutes.

1. One is habitual and general; and this is when a person pretends to walk in
Habitual, and general.
Gods statutes, and sometimes in some particular actions does walk therein, but
then, look on this man in the General course of his life; and so he walks not
in the ways of God, but in the ways of ungodliness; of this man I speak not.

2. Another is particular and actual, and this is when a person is even and
right Particular, and actual.
as to the course of his walking; but in this or that particular of life he
does step aside and wander; he breaks out into some great transgression or
other, as you read of David, and Lot, and Noah, etc. into lesser
irregularities: this is not a total revolting or Apostasy, but it is a
particular sinful deviation and aberration, from which they return again by
repentance: Nevertheless let all the people of God beware of all and every
particular unevenness in their walking; for this is not to proceed and hold on
in walking in Gods statutes.

There are three things contrary to our going on, etc. viz. 1. A standing
still. Three things contrary to our going on.
2ly A going over. 3ly A going aside, though it be but a step into another
contrary path, yet this one step is opposite to going, and it is a hinderance
to our going on; we loose so much of our progress, as we step aside from the
right path.

Secondly, There is not the least sin which a man commits, but first it is a
leaving The least sin puts us out of the way.
of the right way; and next it will cost him some time to get out of that wrong
way, and to return again into his right way: That one sinful aberration perhaps
may draw and entice him further out of the way, or if it does not, it must cost
him much humiliation of heart, and many tears and prayers to recover and reduce
him again.

Thirdly, It is a very folly to be at any time uneven in our walking: for
either you intend to go on in your error, or to come off from it; if you will
go on in your Its folly to walk unevenly.
sin, you will be damned; if you see reason to return from it, why did you at
all embrace it? Nay the folly appears yet more; for whiles you did steadfastly
walk on in the paths of God, you did unquestionably possess and enjoy peace,
and by stepping out of those paths, you lose your peace, and must pass through
much bitterness before you can possess that peace of which you by sinning have
dispossessed your souls.

Fourthly, The Christian Traveller has no sufficient cause to misplace one
step, We have no cause to step aside.
or to step aside to any unsinful action; and my reason is this, because he may
find enough in the paths of God: In my Fathers house there is bread enough,
etc. still to satisfy him, and much better than in any sinful or irregular way.

1. Here he has protection and safety enough; The Lord himself is his guide In
our way we have protection. And pleasure.
and shield.

2. Here he has pleasure enough, even the joys of the Holy Ghost, unto which
the pleasures of sin for a season are not to be compared.

3. He has profit and benefit enough; for in keeping Gods Commandments there
is great reward: No man gets any things by any sin, but as God loses by And
profit.
it much honor, so he himself loses much of his dignity, and of his comfort,
and of his safety, and of his integrity, etc.

Fourthly, Beware of weariness and faintiness in your walking in Gods statutes:
There is a twofold weariness as to a walking in the paths of God. Beware of
weariness in this way.


1. One arises from contrariety of Spirit and dislike of those ways: Mal. 1.
13. Ye said also, Behold what a weariness is it! and ye have snuffed at, it
says the Lord of Hosts. Isa. 43. 22. Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob;
thou have been weary of me O Israel.

2. Another arises from dispondency of spirit, by reason of the many
discouragements and troubles befalling us for our walking in Gods statutes, and
faithful keeping of them: As you read of Elijah when Jezebel threatened to take
away his life, 1 King. 19. 2. the good man hereupon did faint, and was
discouraged, and therefore says he, Ver. 4. It is enough O Lord, take way my
life, for I I am not better than my Fathers. Jer. 20. 8. The Word of the Lord
was made a reproach unto me, and a derison daily. Ver. 9. Then I said I will
not make mention of of him, nor speak any more in his name, but his words were
in my heart as a burning fire, etc. Now though this kind of weariness be apt to
put it self upon us, yet we should put it off by prayer, and by faith: we
should not be weary in well doing; the Apostle presses it twice, Gal. 6. 9.
and 2 These. 3. 13. And I will give you four Reasons why we should not be weary,
and faint, and discouraged, although we see little good of all the pains which
we take, and although Why we should not be weary.
we meet with evil for good, reproaches, scorns, and crosses, when we are most
careful to walk with God.

First, because the Lord does appoint these things; he will have them to befall
Because God appoints them.
us, to try our love, and faithfulness unto himself, and true zeal for him, and
to exercise our faith and patience, and to do us good: If evil men did know how
much good the people of God do get by their wicked words and carriages toward
them, I am persuaded that they would forbear much more in this kind; little do
they think that the people of God (upon these occasions) do more search their
hearts and ways, and do the more humble their souls, and are more in prayer,
and are more watchful over their ways, etc.

Secondly, Because nothing that you meet with from men can make the least
diminution of any true comfort unto you, e. g. They cannot diminish our comfort.


1. It cannot abate one jot of your happiness: Your happiness consists in the
fruition of God to be your God in Christ; and this sun does shine in the midst
of all storms; let men disgorge themselves and throw out all the filth they
can; yet God is your God and Father, and loves and owns you, Romans 8. 35. to 39.

2. It cannot hinder any peaceable testimony of your conscience: let men's
speeches and censures, and dealings be never so bitter and base, yet you have
still the Testimony of conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity you
have had your conversation, 2 Cor. 1. 12. all is well and cheerful here.

3. It cannot prejudice any acceptance of your holy walkings or workings with
your God at all; God does not accept of you, because men do approve and commend
you; nor does God disrespect and disapprove, because men do disapp^ove and
condemn you; but as Peter spoke in Acts 10 34. I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons. ver. 35. But in every Nation he that fears him and
works righteousness, is accepted of him.

4. It cannot deprive you of your reward of well-doing: whatsoever hard
entertainment you may find with men, regard it not, your reward is sure from
the Lord: 2 Timothy 4 7. Isa. 49. 4. Then said I, I have labored in vain, I have
spent my strength for naught, and in vain, yet surely my judgments is with the
Lord, and my work with my God. They all come from wicked persons.


Thirdly, Because all these discouragements come only from wicked persons, and
the basest sort of them, who watch for your halting, and would rejoice to see
you turn away from walking with your God; Observe and consider seriously who
they are that set themselves against you, and still strive to make your hearts
weary, and your hands faint, and would baffle you in your holy walking in Gods
statutes; why, they are either Papists, or Popishly affected, or Hypocrites, or
some Apostates, or a company of Whores, or Whoremongers, or drunkards, or
swearers; and should your hearts faint for these men whom God abhors, and a
civil person would scorn to be a companion unto them? Should such a man as I
flee? said Nehemiah, Chap. 6. 11. I will be yet more vile, said David, 2 Samuel
6. 22. They are the common ^ot of Gods people.


Fourthly, Because all these discouragements are the common lot and portion of
all the people of God, yea of Christ himself: Therefore seeing we are compassed
with so great a cloud of witnesses, etc. Heb. 12. 1. let us run with patience
the race that is set before us. Ver. 2. looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of
God.

SECT. III.
Secondly, NOw follows the Exhortation to the people of God concerning their
progressive walking in Gods statutes, to use all the means.

1. Of continuance and perseverance in walking in Gods statutes, that they may
How we may be enabled to persevere.
steadfastly hold out unto the end.

If you would hold out unto the end in a right walking in the paths of Gods
Commandments; then Get you hearts crucified. To every sin.


First, Be sure that you get your hearts to be really and soundly mortified and
crucified. But unto what will you say? I answer,

1. Unto every sin, that you hate it with a perfect hatred, with such a hatred
as will never admit of Reconciliation and friendship, with such a hatred as
will make you to contend against it, and delight in the destruction of it; Unto
the world


2. Unto all the world, you must be able to say with Paul, The world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world, Gal. 6. 14. or else you will never
continue and persevere in, etc. The Apostle Paul says that the love of money
is the root of all evil, which whiles some coveted after, they have erred from
the faith, 1 Timothy 6. 10. And the Apostle Peter speaks of some who forsook the
right way, and were gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Boser,
who loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 15. And Solomon speaking of
the man who makes haste to be rich, that man shall not be innocent, Prove. 28.
20. Unto self.


3. Unto self, self ends, self-delights, self-ease, self-advantages,
se^f-confidences, self-respects; or else believe me, that polity will prevail
with you above conscience; you will walk else only so as the sun shines.

Secondly, Lay in solid and effectual convictions concerning the paths of Gods
Commandments;

1. That it is certainly the way to life. 2. That there is a peremptory
necessity incumbent on us to walk in that way. 3. That to leave or desert that
path, is assuredly to desert our happiness. 4. That you your selves are at
present in that way of life. 5. That it had been better for you never to have
know the way of righteousness, than after that ye have known it, to turn from
the holy Commandment delivered unto you.
Thirdly, You must maintain an entire love of God, and of his ways: if Be
convinced of the paths of Gods Commandments. Get entire love to God.
your love be faithful, your walking with God will be constant and steadfast:
There are four effects of entire love.

1. It knits the heart very fast to God, makes us to cleave unto God. 2. It
finds sufficient satisfaction, and full delight in God alone, Psalm. 73. 25. 3.
It will strive to walk in all welpl-easing before God. 4. It can endure all and
part with all for God; and many waters cannot quench it, Cant. 1. 8. O get this
entire love of God, the love of God for God! you cannot be found sure until
you be held fast in the bonds of love; hold out in love, and you will hold out
in obedience.
Fourthly, Preserve a tender conscience; a tender conscience is a spring to
uprightness, Four effects of entire love.
and a guard unto stedfastness; when a man's conscience is kept tender, his foot
will be kept even: For

1. Whether the sin be great or small, open or secret, he dares not venture on
it: A tender conscience binds when God binds, and restrains when God forbids;
How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God, says Joseph!

2. A tender conscience looks at, and exalts the will of God above all outward
loss and gain; and outward safety and danger are no arguments to a tender
conscience. But does God command or forbid it? is this work pleasing or
displeasing to God? will it bring honor or dishonor to God? these are the only
prevailing Arguments and Motives to a tender conscience: Acts 20. 23. The Holy
Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me.
Ver. 24. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto
me, so that I might finish my course with joy.

3. A tender Conscience will preserve Gods favor, and its own peace: O the
favor of God, the manifestations of his love, the enjoyment of him in kindness
and peace; these are precious hours and days unto a person of a tender
conscience, he would not willingly part with them, nor forfeit them for all the
worlds profit, nor for all the pleasures of sin; and therefore he is very
serious, and very studious to walk in Gods statues always, even to the end,
knowing that any voluntary swerving, or sinful wandering will lose him the joy
of his salvation, etc.

Fifthly, Keep up a daily fear: Be in the fear of the Lord all the day long,
Preserve a tender conscience. Keep up daily fear. A twofold fear necessary.
Prove. 23. 17. Blessed is the man (says Solomon, Prove. 28. 14.) that fears
always.

There is a twofold fear necessary to make us continue steadfast in Gods
statutes.

1. A fear of our selves, of our own sufficiency to maintain our walking: O
Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps, says the Prophet. Jer. 10. 23. This humble fear
will make you to be much in Prayer, and be much in a watchful jealousy over
your hearts, and to be much at the Ordinances, and all these will make you more
constant and steadfast in walking, etc.

2. A fear of God, a reverential fear of his presence; O what care and
diligence will this work w^thin us? not to offend in any thing, not to neglect
his* will at any tim^: Job 31. 4. Does not he see my ways, and count all my
steps? Prove. 5. 20. Why will thou my son be ravished with a strange woman, and
embrace the bosom of a stranger? Ver. 21. For the ways of a man are before the
eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings? If we could keep up this
reverential fear of Gods continual presence with us, that his eyes are still
upon us, this would keep in us, 1. A real and cordial walking; we would act in
all our duties with our very hearts and souls. 2. A constant care to walk in
all well-pleasing before him.

Sixthly, Keep up a continual life of faith, and this would carry you on to
your journeys end: The Apostle says that we walk by faith, and that we stand
by Keep up the life of faith.
faith: you cannot step one step without faith (without me ye can do nothing,
Joh. 15. 5.) And could you exercise faith, you would finish the whole course of
obedience: Therefore every day set faith on work, still remember the Covenant
of your God, Jer. 32. 40. I will not turn from them to do them good, but I will
put my fear into their hearts, and they shall not depart from me: And Ezekiel. 36.
27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk, etc. Zech. 10. 12.
I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in his
name. Isa. 40. 31. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they
shall walk and not be faint; and your interest in Christ, who is your Head, and
is filled, that he may fill his Members with continual grace, and with
continual strength by his Spirit for all their works and services which they
are to perform.

7. Hold fast to your first choice and resolution: when you did choose God to
Hold to your first choice and resolution.
be your God, and his ways to be your ways, you did discern such a
superlative excellency and happiness in them, that you became fully resolved to
wlak in them, whatsoever danger and loss should befall you; yea you saw with
Moses that the very reproaches of Christ were greater riches than all the
treasures in Egypt, Heb. 11. And with Paul, that the sufferings of this present
time were not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in
us, Romans 8. 18. That there was enough in God, and in his service, and in his
reward, infinitely to recompense all your afflictions, losses, and sufferings
whatsoever. Hereupon you resolved (in the strength of Christ) to go through
thick and thin (come favor or dishonor, come good report or ill report, come
liberty or bondage, come life or death) to close with God and his ways, to
walk in them, to live and die in them: O keep up this resolution still, faint
not at all. God is the same God, his ways are the same for excellency,
necessity* and peace; his promise of reward the same; often think of these* and
they will quicken and strengthen your heart to walk on, and to hold out to the
end.

2. The second part of the Exhortation is not only to hold on with constancy in
walking in Gods statutes, but to move on with more exactness, and with more
fruitfulness, and more diligence and industry: Psalm. 92. 12. The Righteous Move
on in Gods ways with more exactness.
shall flourish like the Palm tree, he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. Ver.
13. Th^se that are planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the
courts of our God. Ver. 14. They shall bring forth fruit in old age, they shall
be fat and flourishing: This was the special commendation of the Church of
Thyatira, Rev. 2. 19. I know thy wor^s, and charity, and service, and faith,
and thy patience, and thy works, and the last to be more than the first. These
Christians are choice and precious Christians who walk more holily, more
humbly, and more accurately, and more vigorously in their course and journey to
heaven, who the nearer they come to the center, do move with more speed and
zeal, renewing and doubling ^^eir care, and pains, and services, shining more
and more unto the perfect day.

How we may attain to growth. Compare your ways with Gods Word.
Quest. But now the Question is, What should we do that we may attain to this?

Sol. I would propound some helps for this, viz.



O how much weakness? How many faylings? How many wanderings shall we then find
out? How little of prayer in praying? How little of hearing in hearing? How
little of Godly sorrow in mourning? How little of faith in believing? Enough
shall we find still to humble our souls; enough shall we find still to
provoke us to more integrity, to more affectionateness, to more exactness and
diligence.

Secondly, Often compare your present walking with your former progresses: So
many years a go (I took it) that God called me by his grace, and then I became
sensible, and mournful, and diligent, and watchful; so and so much I got
Compare your present walking with your former progress.
of Christ, and so much faith, and so much love; so and so did I put forth my
self in the several ways and services for Gods glory; such and such delight
did I take in himself, in his word, in his ordinances, in his people: so much
power against such a sin, and so much victory over the world, and so much
strength for such a duty. But O my soul! what is thy present standing? and what
is thy present growth? the time is gone much forward, art thou gone more
forward? It is a grief to be no more then thou wast; but it is a shame to be
less then thou wast. God has vouchsafed thee more helps to farther thee, more
opportunities to advance thee, more mercies to encourage thee, more experience
to quicken thee, more afflictions to mind thee; and yet, alas! thou art so
far from exceeding thy self, so far from out going thy self, so far below and
behind thy self, that I find thee more hampered with corrruptions, and more
entangled with the world, and more flat in thy affections, and more dull and
careless in thy services, and less circumspect and fruitful in thy walking.

Thy last works and walkings are so far from being more then thy first, that
indeed they are far less then they, Why? Here is less sense of sin; and less
sorrow; and less fear; and less desires after Christ; and less delight in the
ordinances of Christ; and less watchfulness over thy self; and less done for
God and for thy self, and for thy family; thou art now more dull, and more dead
and weak in grace; longer in time and less in growth. O Lord, pardon me, and
heal me; awaken and quicken me: I am ashamed; make me as good, nay make me
better then ever I was; O that I could go, that I could run, that I could out
run, that I could move faster, and better (for the time to come) in the ways
of thy Commandments, etc.

Thirdly, Be much in the remembrance of four things. Remember God in his
goodness.


1. Of your God in his goodness to you every way; He has been good unto your
souls; how much mercy and grace has he shown to them? of his great mercy they
are quickened, and they are pardoned, and they are upheld, and they are
comforted; think of these fruits of mercy, and then provoke your souls to more
love, to more obedience, to more cheerfulness, to more forwardness, to more
fullness of holy and heavenly walking: He has been good unto your bodies and
outward estates; your life is still preserved, your portion is still
maintained, your table is still spread and your cup runs over: O who would not,
and who should not be endeared and be enlarged in the service of such a God: he
is willing and ready, and delights to do men good; he is constant in love and
mercy, faithful in his promises, abounding in compassion, faints not nor is
weary, but rejoices over me to do me good with all his heart, and with all his
soul; will never leave me, will be my God and guide to death: And shall not I
answer much love with much love, infinite mercy with abundant duty, freest
kindness with exactest service; more blessings with more obedience! should I be
straightened when he is enlarged!

2. Of your selves as to your wants and imperfections: do not mind so much
Your selves a^ to your want and imperfections.
what you have attained, but what as yet you fall short in, and have not
attained; forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before (says Paul in Phil. 3. 13.) I press toward the
mark, ver. 14. O there are many miles yet more to go than ever yet thou have
gone; and much more to be done, than ever thou have done; and much more to be
attained, than ever yet thou have attained. How many measures in every grace
are yet wanting! how many corruptions need yet to be mortified! how much
strength, how much stability in knowledge and faith, how much evidence, and
certainty, and peace, do thou still need? how much is wanting in every duty,
in every service, in every work? Did you remember and consider these things,
your hearts would bestir themselves, would put forth themselves with more vigor
and activity, etc.

3. Of your great accounts; we are but stewards, and we must every one give
Your great accounts.
an account to God of our stewardship, of what we have received, and of what we
have done. If we have been standing all the day idle, if we should be found
unprofitable servants, what sad accounts should we give up? All the time that
God has given us, we must be accountable to God for; for the long time of
life, and for the long time of grace; and how we have redeemed time, and how we
have passed the time of our so journing here; what helps we have had, and what
progress we have made. Certainly we would give up a good account, and a full
account, and a comfortable account, our accounts with joy. Think much of this,
and this will make you more serious in all your walking; more watchful over
your words, more accurate in all your doings, more conscientious and complete
in all your duties. For we must give an account for every sermon, and for every
prayer, and for every ordinance, and for every work, and for every step of our
life; did we believingly remember this, we would be more faithful, and more
fruitful.

4. Of the great reward at last; of the exceeding and eternal weight of glory:
The great reward at last.
of that crown of life; O how would this put life and quickness, diligence and
forwardness into us! 2 Peter 3. 12. Looking for, and hasting unto the coming of
the day of God. 2 Cor. 4. 16. For which cause we faint not, but though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. Ver. 18. For we
look not at the things which are se^n, but at the things which are not seen;
for the things which are seen are t4mporal, but the things which are not seen
are eternal. 1 Cor. 9. 25. They strive to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an
incorruptible.

Fourthly, Look on the forerunners, on the people of God, set forth Look on
the forerunners:
for examples unto you in the Scriptures, what progress they made; how
laborious they have been, and how they have gone from strength to strength.
Psalm. 84. 7. What fruits they brought forth from the day that they hard and
knew the grace of God in truth. Collos. 1. 6. What carefulness, wh^ diligence,
what zeal, what exactness, what forwardness, what laboriousnes^ ^o you see in
them!

Set the example of a David before your eyes, and the example of a Paul before
your eyes! who did fulfill the whole Law of God, rejoiced to run their race,
etc. Yea and set the examples of your present Christians, who are also
forerunners as to you, many of whom you see to live with much faith, to walk
with much integrity, to act with much fear and zeal, to spend and to be spent
in the serv^ce of their God: Do not look on those that are behind you, but on
those that are before you. O what exactness is there in their obedience! O what
joy in conscience! O what joy in death! such examples will serve to quicken,
and enlarge, and encourage you.

Fifthly, Embrace and improve the society of persons truly godly: I am a
Improve the society of the godly.
companion (said David, Psalm. 119 63.) of all them that fear thee, and of them
that keep thy precepts. And says Solomon (Prove. 13. 20.) He that walks with
wise men, shall be wise.

There are three things in the society of godly persons which may advance us to
Benefits by good company. Good instructions.
a better walking in Gods statutes.

1. One is the goodness of their instructions and exhortations; the lips of the
wise disperse knowledge, Prove. 15. 7. Exhort one another daily, Heb. 3. 13. Let
us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good works, Heb. 10. 24.
And these are of great force to work upon us: See Eccles. 12. 11. The words of
the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies: And
they are edifying, they build us up in Knowledge, and Faith, and Fear, and
Love, and Zeal.

2. Another is the efficacy of their prayers; they do strive and wrestle for
one The efficacy of their prayers.
another with God in Prayer: Col. 4. 12. Epaphras who is one of you, a servant
of Christ, saluteth you, always laboring fervently for you in prayers, that
you may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.

A third is, the virtue and power of their conversations; as in wicked company
The virtue of their conversation.
there is ordinarily an infecting virtue to dead and poison our hearts, and to
corrupt our manners; so in godly company, there is ordinarily a perfecting
virtue to better our hearts and lives. One may see much humility, and see much
meekness, and see much tenderness of conscience, and see much love and fear of
God, and such a serious and careful ordering of every work and way of carriage,
such bewailing of their wants, such endeavourings after more perfection, as
leaves an impression upon our hearts to go home and do so likewise.

3ly The encouragements to walk on in the statutes of God, with uprightness
Encouragements to walk constantly in Gods ways.
and stedfastness all our lives.

First, As God requires a life of obedience, so he promises a reward of
eternity of blessedness: Romans 2. 7. To them who by patient continuance in well
doing seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life. Chap. 6. 22.
But n^w being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end ever lasting life. How should this encourage
all our hearts to abound and persevere in all the paths of obedience! never to
think of going back to Egypt, but to go strait on, still to walk in Gods
statutes, and to put forward with all our strength, seeing at the end of our
journey there waits for us no less than eternal life and blessedness.

The travelers to heaven do meet with a double blessedness. A double
blessedness. In their way.


1. One is in their way or journey: Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in
the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord. And ver. 2. Blessed are they that
keep his testimonies.

2. The other is as the end of their journey: Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead
At the end of their journey.
which dye in the Lord. Beloved! admit your lives to be long, and your duties
of obedience to be many and hard, yet two things may still encourage you, viz.

1. You are but doing still your Masters work.

2. You shall ^re long receive your Masters reward: A short time of life in the
date of your service, but eternity is the measure and date of your recompense:
We say that finis dat amabilitatem mediis; a corruptible crown makes men to run
a race that they may obtain it, 1 Cor. 9. 25. How much more should an
incorruptible Crown draw forth all our strength, and earnestness, and
perseverance ^o enjoy it? Fugi^^^tum (said Cicero) ad charissmam and patriam;
ibi pater, ibi omnia; we should even fly to our heavenly Country where our
Father is, and all blessedness: Aetorna requies Aeterno labor; Eternal
happiness is worth Eternal pains: And should we think much to take a little
more pains to be possessed of it! A right Christian will take a great deal of
pains to gain but a small glimpse, a sight of Gods gracious love and favor;
and should not we insist with all our power on all the ways of obedience, that
we may at length come to a full, and perfect, and eternal sight and fruition of
our God in heaven?

Secondly, Though your work be much, yet your helps for that work are more: 1
Cor. 15. 10. I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the Our
helps are more than our work.
grace of God which was with me. Here was more abundant labor, but here was
also more abundant grace which enabled him for that labor; the work which we
are to do, is for God, and the strength to do the work by, is from God. It
matters not how great, nor how long our duties of obedience must be, as long as
we have sufficiency of assistance still to aid us, and still to carry us on.

Object. Helps! will some say, what helps have we for our walking in the
statutes of God?

Sol. I will tell you what helps you have. Helps for our walking in Gods
statu^es. Helps of ^^l Christ's Ordinances.


1. You have all the helps of the Ordinances of Christ which are of power still
to direct, and still to quicken you, and still to resolve you, and still to
strength^n you, and still to comfort you, and still to uphold you, and still to
enlarge and perfect you, and still to root and establish you: How often are
your hearts refreshed by them? how often are your hands a^de strong by them?
how often have your souls been satiated and replenished, and restored, and as
(as it were) renewed and revived by them?

2. You have all the helps of all the people of God on earth; all their prayers
Helps of all the people of God.
every day are trading for you: Thou art still preparing for every one of the
people of God, and all the people of God are still wrestling for thee; Lord
help them! Lord keep them! Lord forsake him not! Lord strengthen and uphold
him! Lord carry him on to the end! Lord keep him by thy power, through faith
unto salvation! And let me tell you that the prayers of the righteous and
faithful are mighty and prevalent with God.

Thirdly, You have all the helps of Jesus Christ: I can do all things (says
Helps of Jesus Christ.
Paul) through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. You have the help of
his prayers, for he ever lives to make intercession for you, Heb. 7. 25. Of his
Spirit, who helps your infirmities, Romans 8. 26. Mortifies your sins, ver. 13.
Quickens your hearts, Joh. 6. 36. Vpholds your souls, Psalm. 51. 12. Guides and
teaches you, strengthens and enables you, as you have heard lately when I
discoursed of the works of the Spirit.

Fourthly, What shall I say more? you have the help of God himself: Zech. Helps
of God himself.
10. 12. I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in
his Name. Phil. 2. 13. It is God which works in you both to will and to do of
his good pleasure. And Phil. 1. 6. It is he that has begun a good work in you,
and will perform (or finish) it until the day of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, If you fail not in obedience on your part, you shall never fail of
If you fail not of obedience, you shall not fail of comfort
comfort on Gods part: A constant expense of obedience, will bring in a
constant revenue of joy and comfort: Acts 9. 31. The Churches walked in the
fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost. Psalm. 119. 165. Great
peace have they that keep thy Law. There is no man living, who has true
comfort, or who meets with more comfort, than he who walks closely and
steadfastly in the ways and statutes of God.

1. He has comfort in his God: Psalm. 50. 23. To him that orders his
conversation Comfort in God.
aright, will I show the salvation of God. And Isa. 64. 5. Thou meetest him
that rejoices and works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy
ways. And Psalm. 11. 7. The righteous Lord his Countenance does behold the
upright.

2. He has comfort in his conscience: 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing,
Comfort in Conscience.
the testimony of our conscience, that in godly sincerity we have had our
conversation. Isa. 38. 3. I have walked before thee in truth with a perfect
heart, etc. A loose disobedient person, though his mouth be filled with
laughter, yet his conscience is filled with gall and wormwood; but the
conscience of an upright and faithful person is filled with peace and joy.

3. He has comfort in the hardest and sharpest of all his services; Matthew. 5.
Comfort in all services.
11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you, falsely, for my sake. Ver. 12. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. 2 Cor. 1. 4. Who comfort
us in all our tribulations. Ver. 5. For as the suffering of Christ abounds in
us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ.

4. He has comfort in the worst of times; when troubles, and fears, and
desolations Comfort in the worst of times.
overspread the world, Jer. 16. 33. yet even then can he find peace and rest
in Christ, and can joy in the God of his salvation. Hab. 3. 18. Unto the
upright there arises light in darkness. Psalm. 112. 4. God is his sanctuary and
refuge, Psalm. 46. 1, 2.

5. He has comfort in death itself: The righteous has hope in his death,
says Solomon, Prove. 14. 32. Whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and
whether we Comfort in death.
dye, we dye unto the Lord; whether therefore we live or dye, we are the Lords,
Romans 14. 8.

Fourthly, though your weaknesses in obeying are many, yet sincerity of
obedience is still accepted, that which God principally looks at in our
services of him, is our Sincerity is ever accepted.
heart (My son give me thy heart, Prove. 23. 26.) and the uprightness of our
hearts; his eyes are upon the truth; and he is a God that takes pleasure in
uprightness, 1 Chronicles. 23. 19.

A man is sincere in obedience, when 1. He intends the glorifying of God Who
are sincere in obedience.
in what he does. 2ly, When he serves God with a willing heart. 3ly, When he
puts out all the present strength and might of his soul in doing the will of
God.

Now although this person falls very short of perfection in his works of
obedience, and many failings accompany his duties, yet God passes by them, and
God is the Father of such as are upright.
takes no notice of them, will not reject, but will accept of them, and of his
weak services. And there are three Demonstrations of this.

1. God (whom he serves with his spirit) is his Father, and of a very merciful
and gracious nature: Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father pities his children, so
the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Mal. 3. 17. I will spare them as a man
spares his own son that serves him.

2. He has made many indulgent promises to him: Isa. 30. 19. He will be God
has made many promises to such.
very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he
will answer thee. Chap. 56. 7. Even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and
make them joyful in my house of prayer, their burnt-offerings and their
sacrifice shall be accepted upon mine Altar, etc.

3. Jesus Christ bears away all the iniquities of our holy offerings, and by
his Christ bears away all the iniquities of such.
merits procures the acceptance of all our services: Rev. 8. 3. He is that
Angel that stood at the Altar having a golden censer, who had much incense
given unto him, that he should offer it with prayers of all Saints, upon the
golden Altar which is before the Throne. Ver. 4. And the smoke of the incense
which came with the prayers of the Saints ascended up before God out of the
Angels hand. Now this is a singular Encouragement unto us to hold on steadfast
in our walking in Gods statutes, never to be weary in well doing; For our
labor is not in vain in the Lord; not any work of obedience is lost, not a
Prayer, not a tear, not any one work performed with sincerity of heart, but it
is graciously accepted.

Fifthly, There is no safety in going back from walking in Gods stautes, and
there is no hazard in going forward, and holding on unto No safety in going
back.
^^e end.

First, There is no safety in going back from walking in Gods statutes: For
^^^s only is the path of life, and the path of salvation; he that turns from it
^^^iseth his own soul; he is lost, he is out of protection, out of blessings,
out (...) promised good, and shall be sure to meet with curse, and wrath, and
^^^^ction*

^^condly, There is no hazard in going forward, and holding out un to the (...)
end: You cannot hazard

1. Your souls by it; for he that keeps the Commandment keeps No hazard in
going forward.
his soul. 2. The recompense you expect by it; for he that continues to the
end shall be saved. 3. Your safety by it; for God is a Sun and a Shield unto
them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord is with you whiles you are
with him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. 4. Your honor by it: Those that honor me I will
honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30. 5. Any outwardly blessing by it: For Prove. 3. 23. The
curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked* but he blesses the habitation
of the just. Prove. 28. 10. The upright shall have good things in possession.
And ver. 20. A faithful man shall abound with blessings: There is no death, but
life; no curse, but blessing; no danger, but safety; no loss, but gain in
walking in, etc.
Sixthly, Though we meet with many oppositions in the steadfast walking, Many
higher encouragements.
yet you have higher and greater encouragements to the certainty of that way.

There are four things which do show that the walking on in Gods statutes is
the true way to heaven.

1. The holiness of it. 2. The warrantableness of it. 3. The aim of the
traveller. 4. The universal opposition made against it by Satan, by all ungodly
men, and by the remaining corruptions in every man's heart; it is the opposed
and discouraged way.
Nevertheless you have higher and greater Encouragements to hold on your
walking in the way of Gods statutes, e. g.

1. The excellency of the way itself, it is the way of God, and the way Its an
excellent way.
of life, and the way of holiness, the way of Christ, the way of peace and
rest.

2. The company of travelers: The best men that ever were upon earth, did The
company of travelers.
choose this way to walk in; Enoch walked with God, so did Noah, and so did
Abraham, and so did all the excellent Kings mentioned in Scripture, David,
Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah; and so did all the faithful Prophets of God, and
so did Christ, and all the faithful Disciples, and so do all the Saints of God
who are the excellent on earth, and so did all the souls which are now
glorified in heaven; should not this encourage you to hold on your course in
walking in Gods statutes! all that are now in heaven have gone on in this
course, and all that shall come to heaven do so: It is the path of the just,
still the living walk in it. The delight of God.


3. The delight of God: The Lord himself loves you, and owns you, and takes
pleasure in you, approves of you, and commends you; there was no King like
Josiah, etc. See thou my servant job? etc. Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord takes
pleasure in them that fear him. And 149 4. The Lord takes pleasure in his
people. And Prove, 11. 20. Such as are uprigh in their way are his delight.

4. The promise of God: O how many, and how choice, and how sweet! The promise
of God.
Isa. 41. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy
God; I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with
the right hand of my righteousness. Ver. 11. Behold, all they that were
incensed against thee, shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as
nothing, and they that strive with thee shall perish. Rev. 3. 8. Thou have a
little strength, and have kept my word. Ver. 9. Behold, I will make them of the
Synagogue of Satan, behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy
feet, and to know that I have loved thee.

5. The actual comforts, encouragings, and refreshings from the Lord, Acts
Actual comforts from God.
23. 11. And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good
cheer Paul, etc. Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy
comforts delight my soul. Ver. 18. When I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy O
Lord held me up.

Seventhly, You cannot serve a better Master than your God; therefore continue
steadfast, walking in his statutes, and doing of his wo^k: Mich. 7. 18. We
cannot serve a better Master than God. Four Masters.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, etc. Hose. 2. 7. I will
return to my first husband, for then it was better with me than now.

There are four Masters; and of necessity we must serve one of them: 1. Satan.
2ly The world. 3ly Our sin^ul lusts. And 4ly God himself: Are you not ashamed
to compare these Masters unto God? and their service unto his? God is the best
Master.

1. For authority. 2ly For dignity. 3ly For liberty. 4ly For the service God is
the best Master; and why.
commanded. 5ly For privil^dges. 6ly For present benefit. 7ly For future
reward. Other Masters are base and cruel, and their service is bondage, and
their pay is destruction; but God is a gracious Master, and helpful, and
beneficial, and blessed, and therefore, etc.

Eighthly, Although you do many times halt, and are drawn aside, and go astray,
yet your God (whom you serve) will be merciful unto you; he will God will
pardon our weaknesses.
not forsake you, nor cast you off, but will recover and pardon you.

There are three unspeakable mercies which the Lord shows unto all his people
in Covenant. Three mercies which the Lord shows his people in Covenant. He
pardons all their old sins. He looks after them when they wander.


1. One is, that he pardons all their old sins in which they walked before they
came into Covenant with him; he blots them all out, and will never remember
them any more, casts them all into the depth of the Sea.

2. A second is, that he will look after them, and seek, and find them, and
bring them home again, when they lose themselves by sinning, and wander from
him: Psalm. 119. 176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant.
And did not the Lord indeed seek and find David, when he exceedingly strayed in
the ma^ter of Vriah! he sends Nathan after him with such a message as
convinced* and humbled, and turned him again; and so when Peter went astray,
Christ looked back upon him; he did not leave him, but touched his heart and
turned him; as he in Luke 15. 4. that had an hundred sheep, when he had lost
one of them, he went after that which was lost, until he found it: Thus is it
with the Lord; if any of his servants should lose themselves, yet the Lord will
not lose him, he will not cast him him off (The Lord, says Samuel, will not
forsake his people for his great Name sake, 1 Samuel 12. 22.) but will send after
him such a message by his Word, or by afflictions, or by conscience, or by his
own Spirit, that he shall come back again: Hose. 2. 6. I will hedge up thy way
with thorns, etc. Ver. 7. Then shall she say, I will go and return to my first
husband, etc.

3. A third is, that he will accept of them again into love and favor: Hose.
14. 4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely; for m^ne anger
is God will accept of them.
turned away from him. Jet. 31. 19. Surely after that I was turned, I repeated;
etc. Ver. 20. Is Ephraim my dear son,! is he a pleasant child! for since I
spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

9. A ninth Encouragement for you is this; the Lord (in whose ways you walk)
God stands by us to strengthen us in his ways.
does stand by you, to strengthen you, his eyes are upon you for good, he does
behold all your works, and labors, and pains, and is sensible of all your
injuries, and sufferings, and troubles: 1 Pet. 3. 12. The eyes of the Lord are
over the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers. Ver. 13. Who is he
that will harm you, if you be followers of that which is good? 2 Pet. 2. 9. The
Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations. Rev. 2. 9. I know thy
works, and tribulation, and poverty; but thou art rich; and I know the
blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not. Ver. 10. Fear none of
those things which thou shall suffer, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory.

10. Lastly, Your time of walking, and working is almost at an end; your day
Our time of working is almost at an end.
is ending, and it is but a little time more, and then he that shall come will
come; your life is near expiring, and your reward is hastening: Rev. 22. 11. He
that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be
holy still. Ver. 12. And behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to
give to every man according as his work shall be.

SECT. IV.
3. Use THe last Use from this, That the people of God are to walk in his
statutes, and to hold on in that course all their days, shall be of persuasion
unto us all in general, unto three things.

1. To repent of, and to forsake our sinful walkings. 2. To approve of, and to
like of this walking in Gods statutes. 3. To yield up your hearts to God, and
to make some essays of walking in Gods ways.
First, To repent of, and to forsake all our former sinful walkings: It is high
Three things we are exhorted to. Repent of our former miswalking. Arguments to
persuade us hereto. Such shall have mercy.
time to awake out of sleep, Romans 13. 11. The time past of our life may suffice
us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles when we walked in lasciviousness,
lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquettings, and abominable idolatries, 1
Pet. 4. 3. I will present four Arguments to persuade you to harken unto this
counsel.

1. You may have mercy if you do so: Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pa^don.
So Ezekiel. 18. 21. If the wicked will turn from all his sins which he has
committed, and keep all my statutes, etc. Ver. 22. all his transgressions which
he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him; in his righteousness
which he has done he shall live.

2. You will certainly perish if you do not so: Prove. 1. 29. For they hated
knowledge, If they do it not, they shall perish.
and did not choose the fear of the Lord. Ver. 30. They would none of my
counsel, they despised all my reproof. Ver. 31. Therefore they shall eat of the
fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devises. Ver. 32. The
turning away of the simple shall slay them. Gal. 6. 7. Be not deceived, God is
not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. Ver. 8. He
that sows unto the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that
sow^th to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

3. You live under the Gospel, which teaches us to deny all ungodliness, and
We live under the Gospel which teaches it.
worldly lusts, and that we should live godly, soberly, and righteously in this
present world, Tit. 2. 11, 12. It is enough for Heathens to walk wickedly, and
profanely; This I say and testify in the Lord (says Paul, Ephesians. 4. 17.) that
ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their minds. O
how unworthy is this of the Gospel! and what an aggravation of guilt is this,
to walk in whoredom and drunkenness, in, etc.

4. The farther and the longer you walk in your sinful ways, the more do you
The longer we continue in sin, the more we dishonor God.
dishonor God, shame the Christian Religion, harden and fear your Conscience,
make way to be given up to a reprobate mind, and increase your own dreadful
damnation! Therefore remember your selves, and consider your ways; do not
venture your souls desperately, but take time to make a right judgment of the
ways wherein you walk.

1. Compare them with the Word of God; what God says of them, how he Compare
your ways with the Word of God. Observe whether they tend. Behold them in
their woeful effects.
forbids and theatens them.

2. Observe them in their proper tendencies, whether these sinful ways do
carry you; what will be the end and wa^es of them; Romans 6. 21. The end of all
these things is death.

3. Behold them in the woeful effects of them; in wicked men dying, what
horrors, and terrors, and despairs they have raised in their consciences! O
that we had never been born! O that we had never lived! O that we had never
lived thus! what will become of us! etc.

4. Take notice of their fruits in your own consciences; many times when Take
notice of their fruits.
you have been sick, when you have been alone, what bitter things have they
spoken unto you? what dangers? what fears? what presages of wrath? what
terrible condemnations? and thereupon fall down and beseech the Lord to turn
your hearts and feet from these paths of death.

Secondly, get a clearer knowledge, and better liking of the ways of God: Get
a clear knowledge of the ways of God.
Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem; if you knew God a right, you
could not but love him; and if you knew his statutes and ways a right, you
could not but approve of them. Do not take testimony from the enemies of God
and of his ways, nor from your own carnal and unregenerate heart which is at
enmity with the Law of God: But be so far persuaded as to believe God himself
who cannot lie, concerning those statutes of his, and our walking in them, how
he comm^nds, commends, approves, blesses, and rewards all that do walk in
them; yea give some credit unto those who have experimentally traveled in
them, what they have found of, and in them; whether ever they found the like
comfort, peace, delight, safety, blessing, and happiness: At least give credit
unto their death-bed-testimony (when men are most solemn, and serious, and
conscientious) how much sweetness they then do find; what rejoycings in
Conscience, and what hopes and confidences toward God, etc.

Thirdly, Resolve (at least) to make some assay and attempt, set a foot in this
way, lay aside sin, and take up holiness, reject wicked company, fall At least
attempt to walk in this way.
in with good society; leave off profaness and vanity in thy person and family,
and set up the practice of godliness in both, and try what will come of
mourning for sin, of forsaking of sin, of calling upon the Name of God, of
conscientious keeping of one Sabbath, of one days enjoyment of Christ, etc.
thou should find that of David to be true, one day in thy Courts is better
than a thousand, Psalm. 84. 10.

1. Object. But men say, that if we walk in Gods statutes, we shall meet with
This is an afflicted way.
many crosses, and afflictions; nay the Scriptures say so.

Sol. True; He that will be my Dis^iple (says Christ) must take up his cross
and follow me, Matthew. 16. 24. But

First, This is a part of the way to life: Strait is the gate, and narrow is
Yet its the way to honor. Christ bore the Cross for us. Its better to meet with
crosses in our way than with curses. They are but outward crosses. But then
farewell all mirth. They are but sinful pleasures that we lose.
the way that leads to life, Matthew. 7. 11. there is Heaven at the end of it.

Secondly, Christ himself endured the cross for you, why should you not bear it
for him?

Thirdly, It is better to meet with crosses in the ways of God than with
curses in the ways of sin, here, and hereafter; affliction is nothing to
malediction, and molestation is nothing to damnation.

Fourthly, They are but 1. Outward crosses and troubles. 2ly Temporary; not
inward in conscience, nor eternal in hell. 3ly Such as consist with peace in
Christ, Joh. 16. And joy in conscience, Romans 5. 3.

2. Object. But men say, We shall lose all delight, and mirth, and pleasure,
etc.

Sol. 1. Only sinful pleasures, which 1. Are unlawful. 2ly But for a season.
And 3ly Bitter in the latter end. And 4ly Many times mixed with terror in the
enjoyment.

2. You may still enjoy any outward lawful enjoyment, delight, and pleasure.

3. But you shall meet with better delights, and pleasures, and joys; with
divine pleasures, delights in God, comforts of the Holy Ghost, assurance of
mercy, experience of Gods loving kindness, joy unspeakable and glorious, and
peace that passes all understanding.

4. You shall meet with other delights, 1. More Prayers for your souls. 2ly
More powerful that enter into the Conscience. 3ly More safe and lasting.

3. Object. But we shall not enjoy that liberty which once we did, to do, and
But then we shall lose our liberties.
speak, and walk as we pleased?

Sol. 1. You mean, that you may not be so wicked as you were! no marvel!

2. That was not your liberty, but your bondage and slavishness to your own
lusts, and to the lusts of men; you are shrewdly hurt indeed that you are
forbidden and restrained, so that you may not be suffered to dishonor God, and
wound your consciences, and undo your souls, and run to hell.

3. If you would enjoy liberty indeed, then become the servants of God, and
walk in his ways: If the Son shall make you free, then are you free indeed,
Joh. 8. 36. Now your shackles, and fetters, and prison doors are broken open:
we are freemen in a spiritual sense, when we are freed from sin: Romans 6. 18.
Being then made free from sin, we became the servants of Righteousness: We are
freed from all slavish fears by reason of sin; when we receive the free
spirit of liberty, we become a voluntary people to serve the Lord with newness
of spirit, and freeness of spirit: Dsal. 116. 16. O Lord, truly I am thy
servant, thou have loosed my bonds.

4. Object. But men will disesteem us, neglect us, cast us out of their favor,
and But then we shall be disesteemed.
reproach us, if, etc.

Sol. 1. It is their sin to do so; but it is our duty to walk as God would have
us to walk.

2. What men will do so? none but ungodly men who speak evil of us, because 1.
we run not with them to the same excess of riot. 2. A goodly conversation is a
reproach to their ungodly life, and shames them.

3. Regard not the praises of men, but the praise of God; this you shall be
sure to meet with; he will own you, and honor you, though men do not: Psalm.
27. 10. When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord shall take me
up. The Pharisees reviled and cast out the blind man cured by Christ; but
Christ met with him, and owned, and saved him, Joh. 9. 35, 36, etc.

4. You will give a fair account to God that you feared man more than God:
Lord, I should have walked in thy ways, but, etc.

5. Object. Then I will walk in these statutes hereafter. Then I will do it
hereafter.


Sol. 1. Hereafter may be too late: Gods command is for all our days, and for
the set time whiles it is called to day, etc.

Secondly, Continuance in sinful ways will harden your hearts in them, keep up
the love of sin, and render the ways of God more distastful unto you.

Thirdly, And God may in judgment give you up to your own hearts lusts, to
walk in the counsels of them, because you do not hearken unto him: See Psalm.
81. 11, 12.

6. Object. But I have assayed, aad can make no work of it. But I find I cannot
do it.


Sol. First, Because you assayed slightly, and not with all your heart.

Secondly, And because you assayed in your own strength.

7. Object. But it is a great work however to walk in Gods statutes, and How
shall we get power to do it?
what shall I do for power to enable me to walk in them?

Sol. God who requires us to walk in his statutes, does promise to give us
power; I will cause you to walk, etc.

Ezekiel. 36. 27. And cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
Judgments, and do them.
THese words (as I have heretofore observed) contain in them two parts.

1. The work or duty which concerns the people of God; (viz. to walk in his
statutes, etc.) this Subject I finished the last Lords day.

2. The help or sufficiencies for all that work and duty (I will cause you to
walk in my statutes) whence observe.

CHAP. XV.
Doctr. TThat the people of God have the promise of God to enable them to God
will enable his people to walk in his ways.
walk in the statutes of God; I will cause you, etc. Zech. 10. 12. I will
strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in his Name, says
the Lord. Phil. 2. 13. It is God which works in you to will and to do of his
good pleasure. Isa. 26. 12. Thou have wrought all our works in us. Chap. 45.
24. Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength.

For the opening of this excellent and comfortable Truth, I will show unto you
five things.

1. The many parallels 'twixt Gods command of our duties, and Gods promise of
help for these duties. 2. The parallels 'twixt promises to, and instance^ in
Gods people. 3. The several ways how God does cause or enable his people to
walk in his statutes and do them. 4. How far the Lord does engage his strength
of grace to enable his people to walk in his statutes. 5. The Reasons both in
respect of God, and in respect of his people, why he will cause them to walk in
his ways, or statutes, etc.
1. The parallels 'twixt Gods commands and his promises, or 'twixt the
Parallels betwixt Gods commands and his preceps.
duties commanded by him, and the helps promised to enable his people.

First, The Lord commands his people to know him, and his ways: 1 Chronicles. 28.
9. Know thou the God of thy Father, etc. And God does promise to cause them to
know him: Jer. 24. 7. I will give them an heart to know me that I am the Lord.
And Jer. 31. 34. They shall all know me from the least of them to the greattest
of them, says the Lord.

Secondly, The Lord commands his people to trust upon him: Psalm. 62. 8. Trust
in him at all times. Isa. 26. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, etc. And God
does promise to enable his people to trust on him: Zeph. 3. 12. I will leave in
the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the
Name of the Lord.

3ly The Lord commands his people to fear him: Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the
Lord thy God and serve him. So Deuteronomy. 8. 6. Thou shall keep his Commandments,
and walk in his ways and fear him: This likewise has God promised unto his
people: Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear into their hearts that they shall not
depart from me.

Fourthly, The Lord commands his people to love him: Deuteronomy. 11. 1. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God. Psalm. 31. 23. O love the Lord all ye his Saints! and God
does promise to give them an heart to love him: Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God
will circumcise the heart, and the heart of thy seed to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.

Fifthly, The Lord commands his people to pray unto him, and to call upon his
Name: Call upon me, Psalm. 50. 15. Pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17. I will
that men pray everywhere, 1 Timothy 2. 8. And the Lord has promised to give unto
them a spirit of prayer: Zech. 12. 10. I will pour upon the house of David,
and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace, and the Spirit of
supplication.

Sixthly, The Lord commands his people to mourn for their sins, and to loath
their sins, and to turn from their sins: Isa. 22. 12. In that day did the Lord
call to weeping, and to mourning. Jam. 4. 10. Humble your selves in the sight
of the Lord: And this God does promise to give unto his people: Zech. 12. 10.
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him
as one that mourns for his only son, etc. Ezekiel. 7. 16. They shall be on the
mountains as the Doves of the valleys, all of them mourning every one for his
iniquity. Psalm. 97. 10. Ye that love the Lord hate evil. Romans 12. 9. Abhor that
which is evil: This also is promised: Ezekiel. 36. 13. Then shall ye remember your
own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves
in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your abominations: Ezekiel. 18. 30.
Turn your selves from your transgressions. Hose. 14. 1. Return unto the Lord:
All this is likewise promised to be given unto the people of God: Isa. 30. 22.
Ye shall defile the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornaments
of thy molten images of gold, thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth,
thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence. Jer. 24. 7. They shall return unto me
with their whole heart.

Seventhly, The Lord commands his people not to suffer sin to reign in them:
Romans 6. 12. Let not sin reign in your mortal body: And he promises that sin
shall not reign in them: Romans 6. ver. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over
you.

Eighthly, And he commands his people to make to themselves a new heart, and a
new spirit: Ezekiel. 18. 31. Make you a new heart, and a new spirit: and he
promises to give these: Chap. 36. 26. A new heart will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you.

Ninthly, What shall I say now? The Lord commands his people to walk in his
statutes, 1. Impartially. 2ly Willingly. 3ly Affectionately. 4ly Uprighlty. 5ly
Sedfastly: And all this he does promise to cause them to do.

1. Impartially: Deuteronomy. 30. 8. Thou shall return and obey the voice of the Lord,
and do all his Commandments.

2. Willingly: Psalm. 110. 3. They people shall be willing in the day of thy
power.

3. Affectionately: Isa. 60. 9. Who are these that flee as a cloud, and as the
Doves to their windows! Zech. 8. 21. The inhabitants of one City shall go to
another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of Hosts; I will go also.

4. Uprightly: Jer. 31. 9. I will cause them to walk by the Rivers of water, in
a strait way, wherein they shall not stumble; for I am a Father to Israel, etc.
Isa. 61. 8. I will direct their work in truth. Zech. 8. 3. Jerusalem shall be
called a city of truth. Isa. 30. 21. Their ear shall hear a word behind them,
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and
when ye turn to the left.

5. Progressively, and steadfastly: Job 17. 9. The righteous shall hold on in
his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. Isa. 40.
30. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount
up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and
not faint.

2ly The parallels 'twixt Gods promises, and experimental instances, Parallels
betwixt Gods promises, and the Saints experiences.
wherein you may find that God has enabled his people there to walk as he has
promised.

First, He has enabled them to know him: Gal. 4. 9. After that you have known
God, or rather are known of God. 1 John 5. 20. He has given us an
understanding that we may know him that is true. 1 John 2. 21. I have not
written unto you, because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it.

Secondly, They are enabled to trust upon him: Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy
Name will trust upon thee. Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress,
and my Deliverer, my God and my Strength, in whom I will trust. Psa. 22. 4. Our
Fathers trusted in thee. 25. 2. My God, I trust in thee. 31. 1. In thee O Lord,
do I put my trust. 52. 8. I trust in the mercy of God.

Thirdly, They are enabled to fear him: I fear God, said Joseph, Genesis 42. 18.
One that fears God, said God of Job, Job 1. 1. They that feared the Lord
spoke one to another, Mal. 3. 16. I fear the Lord thy God, said Jonah, Chap. 1.
9. The Churches walked in the fear of the Lord, Act. 9. 31.

Fourthly, They are enabled to love the Lord; so David, Psalm. 116. 1. I love
the Lord. And Psalm. 18. 1. I will love thee, O Lord my strength!

Fifthly, And they are enabled to pray unto him, and to call upon him: David,
Hezekiah, Daniel, Paul; and to mourn for their sins; David, Peter, and Mary
Magdalen; and to hate sin, David, Paul, Psalm. 119. 104. I hate every false way;
and to forsake sin, Hose. 14. 8. And 1 These. 1. 9. Ye turned to God from Idols,
to serve the living aad true God, and Romans 6. 22.

Seventhly, And so for all the rest of the Particulars, you have clear
instances that the people of God have been enabled to walk willingly,
constantly, affectionately, uprightly, and steadfastly in his ways.

3ly. The several ways how God does cause or enable his people to walk in his
Statutes, and to do them.

He does cause them to walk in his Statutes, How God enables his people to walk
in his statutes.


First, By giving unto them his Spirit, who does

1. Change their hearts, and infuseth into them all Holy and Heavenly Graces,
which are so many inward principles enabling them to acts or works of
obedience; as our sinful and corrupt principles make us willing and ready to
walk in the ways of sin; so holy and spiritual principles do make us willing
and ready to walk in paths of righteousness.

2. Excite and quicken their hearts, and stir them up to works of obedience by
secret motions and workings, and by setting the Commands and Promises of God
upon their hearts with strong impressions, by which they are led out unto a
willing, and cheerful, and upright performance of obedience.

3. Comes in with his Special and Immediate Assistance to all the works which
they are to do; he helps their infirmities, and guides their feet, and
strengthens their hands: The servants of the Lord are strengthened with might
by* his spirit in the inner man. Ephe. 3. 16. In the day when I cried unto
thee, thou heardest me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.

Secondly, By giving faith unto them, and enabling of them to live by faith in
all their particular walkings and workings: Beloved, there is a living by faith
for mercy, and there is a living by faith for duty.

A man lives by faith for duty when he goes out of himself, as insufficient to
afford him strength to perform it, and applies himself unto, and relies upon
Jesus Christ, and the promise to give him the ability, because this and that
duty o^ work of obedience the Lord requires of me, (suppose it be to mortify
sin, or to walk in some parts of new obedience) and I find my self
insufficient and without strength thereunto, hereupon I do by faith

1. Apply my self unto Jesus Christ, in whom is fullness, and who fills all:
Lord Jesus, without thee we can do nothing; and if thou be pleased to
strengthen me, I can do all things: O give strength unto thy servant;

2. Unto the Promise of God, wherein God has graciously engaged himself to be
an alsufficiency unto his people, and to be their strength, and to strengthen
them, and to work all their works in them and for them: Hereupon the weak
Christian goes to God when he is to perform any work of obedience, and he
relies upon him by faith; my God will help me, I have his promise to subdue
iniquity, and I have his promise to cause me to walk in his Statutes and to do
them. Lord! faithful art thou who have promised, and thou art able and willing
to perform whatsoever thou have promised: I have no might nor power to do this
which thou command, but in the Lord there is righteousness and strength. O
Lord, remember thy promise, Remember thy word upon which thou have caused thy
servant to hope: Be thou the help and strength of my soul; work in me to will
and to do of thy good pleasure. Psalm. 119. Upon this the Lord hears, and
answers his servants, and fulfills their desires, and becomes their strength
and alsufficiency.

Thirdly, By meeting them in their way and work with special Evidences and
Testimonies, and fruits of Love and Peace, and Acceptance and Joy. Isa. 64. 3.
Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness, those that remember
thee in thy ways. 56. 7. I will make them joyful in my house of prayer; their
burnt offerings and sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar. Joh. 14. 21.
He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he
that loves me shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self unto him. Now when the travailer in the ways of Gods
Statutes, meets with these sweet fruits, and tastes, and manifestations of love,
and peace, and joy, they do make a strong impression upon his heart; they do
contribute a special strength unto him to walk on in those good ways. Nehem.
8. 10. The joy of the Lord is your strength. Psalm. 116. 2. Because he has
inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.

Fourthly, By holding out unto them, and assuring them of the great reward of
happiness for all who do walk on in his Statutes.

Beloved, three things are certainly true.

1. That there is a Reward for the righteous; God will render eternal life to
them that continue patient in well-doing. Romans 2. 7.

2. That it is lawful for the Christian travailer to look at the great Reward:
Moses had respect unto the recompense of reward. Heb. 11. 26. What God does
promise freely to give unto his people, upon that they may lawfully look.

3. That great Reward propounded, and promised, and assured, has an influence
upon their hearts, it does work strongly upon their heart that they faint not,
that they give all diligence unto the end, that they take heed unto their
ways, that they keep on in the path of life; it makes them to run and to
strive that they may obtain an incorruptible crown. 1 Cor. 9. 25, 26. and that
eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4. 17.

Fifthly, By Revealing his Arm in his Ordinances, and blessing them with Power
and Strength unto his people; David speaking of the Ordinances, says, Psalm.
84. 5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are the
ways of them. Ver. 7. They go from strength to strength.

You find many Attributes given to the Ordinances of God, they teach and
direct us, they enlighten and convert us, they uphold and strengthen us, they
quicken and comfort us, they animate and encourage us, they raise and revive
us, they edify and build us up; all these effects they do produce, when the
Lord is pleased to accompany them with his presence and blessings: And
experimentally we find them unto our souls; God teaches us by his word,
heales us by his word, helps us by his word, revives, and quickens, and
enlarges, and strengthens us by his word; we walk in the light of it, and run
in the strength of it, and conquer in the power of it, and renew our might in
the comfort of it, and hold up by the promises of it; and are still more and
more able to do the work of God, by the several influences from the word of
God: The ordinances of God do weaken our corruptions, and strengthen our
graces, and comfort our consciences, and bear down all discouragements and
oppositions; they do enable faith in God, and inflame love to God, and preserve
fear of God, and kindle zeal for God, and increase our delight in God; and all
these do cause us to walk in the Statutes of God, and still to do them.

4ly. How far forth God does (in his promises) engage the strength How far God
engages himself to keep his people to walk in his ways.
of his grace, and help to cause his people to walk in his Statutes and do them.

To this I thus answer; When God does promise to cause his people to walk in
his Statutes, and to do them, he does thus far engage himself.

First, To show them his ways, and to teach them what they are to do, and how
they are to walk. Esa. 2. 3. Many people shall go and say, Come ye and let us
go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his ways. Psalm. 25. 8. Good
and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in their ways. Ver.
9. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. 32.
8. I will instruct the^, and teach thee in the way that thou shall go, I will
guide thee with mine eye. Esa. 30. 21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, This is the way walk, ye in it.

Nay he teaches in particular what they are to do. Titus 2. 11. The grace of
God that brings salvation has appeared to all men. Ver. 12. Teaching us that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and
Godly in this present world.

Nay, and he teaches them not only as to the matter, but also as to the manner
of their walkings. Ephe. 5. 8. Walk as children of light. 4. 1. Walk worthy of
the vocation wherewith ye are called.

Nay yet more particularly.

Walk in Love. Ephe. 5. 2.

Walk in Wisdom. Colos. 4. 5.

Walk Circumspectly. Ephe. 5. 15.

Walk Humbly with thy God. Micah 6. 8.

Walk in the Spirit. Gal. 5. 16.

Walk according to the Rule. Gal. 6. 16.

He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk even as he walked.
1 John 2. 6.

Secondly, To bring or enter them into his ways: The Lord does promise not
only to take them off from their old sinful ways, (Jer. 3. 17. They shall not
walk an^ more after the imaginations of their evil heart) but also to walk and
to know, and approve this way to walk in. Psalm. 143. 8. Cause me to know the
way wherein I should walk. 85. 13. Righteousness shall go before him, and shall
set us in the ways of his steps. 119. 30. I have chosen the way of truth, thy
judgments have I laid before me. Ver. 59. I thought upon my ways, and turned
my feet unto by Testimonies.

Thirdly, To enable them (as for the whole course of their life) to hold on
walking in his ways or Statutes. Esa. 26. 7. The way of the just is
uprightness. Psalm. 119. 102. I have not departed from thy judgments, for thou
have taught me. Ver. 112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy Statutes
always unto the end. Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear into their hearts that they
stall not depart from me.

Fourthly, He thus far also engages himself that if at any time they fall, he
will raise them up, and if they wander into bypath, he will bring them back
into the right way. (Psalm. 119. 176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek
thy servant.) Jer. 3. 22. Return ye backsliding children and I will heal your
backslidings; Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Ezekiel.
34. 16. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven
away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which
was sick.

Fifthly, He will establish them unto the end, in their walking in his
Statutes. 2 These. 2. 16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our
Father, etc. Ver. 17. comfort your hearts, and establish you in every good word
and work, 3. 3. The Lord is faithful who shall establish you, and keep you from
evil. 2 Tit. 4. 18. The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom. Prove. 2. 8. The Lord preserves the way
of his saints.

5ly. Why God makes his promise to cause his people to to walk in his Why God
promises to make his people to walk in his Statutes.
Statutes, etc.

First, Because they are (of themselves) insufficient and unable to do any
thing that is good. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. John 15. 5. I
am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing. Jer. 10. 23. O
Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps.

Secondly, Because if God leaves them unto themselves, tbey are not only unable
to walk in his Statutes, but will certainly wander from the way of his
Statutes. When God left David to himself, how woefully did he trespass against
God? When God left Hezekiah to himself, presently his heart was lifted up with
pride: When Peter was left unto himself, how fearfully did he deny his Master?

Thirdly, To show the difference twixt the Covenant of works and the Covenant
of Grace; that is the ministry of the Letter, and this is the ministry of the
Spirit. 2 Cor. 3. 6.

That Covenant of works is a Commanding Covenant, but it is not an Helping How
the Covenant of Works and of Grace differ.
Covenant; the Covenant of Grace is a helping Covenant, as well as a commanding
Covenant: God herein does show us what we are to do, and likewise inables us to
do.

Fourthly, Because God will have all the glory of all good to be ascribed unto
himself; therefore will he be the cause of all good. Romans 11. 36. Of him, and
through him, are all things; to him be glory for ever. If we could walk or work
by our own strength with out God, then we might boast in our selves, but God
will have no flesh to boast and glory in it self. 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee
to differ from another? and what have thou that thou did not receive? now if
thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou haste not received it?

Fifthly, To comfort and encourage his poor and weak servants, under the
breadth, and depth, and length of their obedience: When they consider how much
God requires at their hands, and for how long a time, even all the days of
their life; and then consider their own weakness, alas say they, who is
sufficient for these things? How shall we be able to perform all those services
which God requires?

But then when they find that God (the mighty God) is with them, and he
engages himself to be their strength and help, and that his grace shall be
sufficient, and he will put forth his own hand to their works, this raises and
encourages their hearts; why! I shall have Gods help to do all Gods work, etc.

Sixthly, To draw up their hearts unto himself, and to set their faith a work
upon him when they are to do any duty: O sirs, we should end all our services
in a promise of acceptance, and begin all our work in a promise of assistance;
we should end with glory to God, and begin with the grace of God. God has
promised to cause us to walk in his Statutes, and to do them. And why has he
made this promise? but because you should look up to your God by faith, and
rely on him for sufficiency of grace and strength, to carry you out to his Name
and power, etc.

SECT. I.
1 Use. Does God promise to cause his people to walk in his Statutes and to do
them? hence we may be informed of several things.

First, That then without all question, the natural and unregenerate man has A
natural man can of himself do no good.
no sufficiency in himself to do any spiritual good: For if the people of God
(who are called by grace, and are made alive by grace,) are not sufficient of
themselves, but do stand in need of the grace of God to cause them to walk in
Gods Statutes; much more insufficient is every natural man to the doing of
good, who is dead in trespasses and sins. Hear what the scriptures speak of the
natural man, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. Jer. 4. 22. Tbey are sottish children,
and they have no understanding; they are wise to do evil, but to do good they
have no knowledge. Hose. 8. 12. I have written to him the great things of my
Law, but they were counted a strange thing. Psalm. 14. 1. The fool has said in
his heart there is no God; they are corrupt, thy have done abominable works,
there is none that does good. Prove. 13. 19. It is abomination to fools to
depart from evil. Levit. 26. 43. Because they despised my judgments, and
because their soul abhorred my Statutes. Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change
his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are
accustomed to do evil. Tit. 1. 16. Being abominable, and disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate.

By all these places it does appear, that there is no power and sufficiency in
any natural man to any spiritual good, but a total want thereof, and a total
opposition unto it.

Secondly, That then God is no hard, cruel, or rigorous master unto his
servants, but very kind and gracious; we have no reason to complain at all,
but rather to bless him, and cheerfully to serve him.

There are seven things which do respect the people of God, etc.

1. Entrance, which takes in, 1. Union: Of him are ye in Christ Jesus. 1. Cor.
1. 3. 2. Regeneration. 3. Repentance: This God works in them of his own grace.
Jam. 1. 18. Of his own good will begat he us with the word of truth. Phil. 1.
29. Unto you it is given to believe. Acts 11. 18. Then has God also to the
Gentiles granted repentance unto life.

2. Performances; this likewise does God work in his people. Phil. 2. 13. It is
God which works in you, to will and to do of his good pleasure. God is no
hard master.


3. Sufferance. Phil. 1. 29. Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.

4. Resistance. 1. Of sinful works. 2 Timothy 4. 18. The Lord shall deliver me
from every evil work. 2. From sinful temptations. 1 Cor. 10. 13. God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able.

5. Perseverance. Phil. 1. 6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which
has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Christ. 1 Pet.
1. 5. We are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation.

6. Acceptance.

7. Recompense.

Thirdly, Then you see the same reason why, when the same truths of God Why
some receive the truth, and others do not. Why not all. God leaves some to
themselves, and not others. They which walk not in Gods ways, are none of his.
are preached, and the same ways of life are revealed, some do receive those
truths, but others do not; and some do walk in those ways, and some do not.

Quest. Why do they not all do so? The Reason is,

Sol. Because God leaves some unto themselves, and others he does not leave
unto themselves; they do both of them hear the way to heaven, but they have not
both the same grace and strength given to walk in the way to heaven.

Fourthly, Then they are none of Gods people, who never found any sufficiency,
any ability, any actual strength to walk in the ways which God has Commanded:
why so? because God promises to cause his people to walk in his Statutes, and
to do them. I grant that all the people of God do not walk alike in his
Statutes; some are more lively, some are more forward, some are more high, and
full, and vigorous, and exact then others are; nevertheless every one of them
has obtained grace and strength in his proportion to walk in Gods Statutes;
every one of them does pray, and every one of them does repent, and every one
of them does believe, does walk in newness of obedience, and every one of them
does fear the Lord, and makes conscience of his ways, and strives after
perfection.



Take it for a certain truth, that all persons actually in Covenant with God,
have a power given them (more or less) to walk as God would have them walk, and
to do what God would have them to do; therefore consider your selves and your
conditions, all of you who are still without strength to walk; assuredly you
are without life to quicken: all the children of God are alive, and are thus
far enabled by his grace to choose his way, and to walk in his way with upright
hearts.

Fifthly, Then the ways of God are possible and passable ways; why so? Gods
ways are possible and passable.
because the promise of God is annexed unto them.

There are two errors opposite unto this truth.

1. One is of the Papists, who make the ways of God concerning us so passable,
Papists confuted.
that a man may perfectly fulfill the Law of God; nay as if this were a poor
business, they teach that a man may do yet more then God requires, he may do
works of supererogation, by which he may merit for himself and for his friends;
this is a proud and false doctrine; for no man (except Christ) ever did or
could with a legal exactness fulfill the will of God: In many things we offend
all, says the Apostle, Jam. 3. 2. And what man is he that lives and sineth
not? there is no man that sins not. 1 Kin. 8. 46. And who can say My heart
is clean, or I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20. 9.

2. The other is of carnal and lazy Protestants, who when they are pressed to
Carnal Protestants confuted.
leave their sinful ways, and to walk in the ways of Gods Commandments, and
to hold on in their walking all their days: O say they, this is impossible,
and who can walk thus? But what Christ spoke to another purpose, may be safely
applied here, That which is impossible with men, is possible with God; or what
Chrysostom replied about the work of turning the heart from sin, that it was
impossible, Tu non potes, sed Dominus tuus potest, thou can not turn thy
heart, but yet the Lord can turn thy heart: that I say in this case, It is
impossible for any man by his own strength to walk in all Gods Statutes,
nevertheless it is possible so to do with Gods strength: I can do all through
Christ that strengthens me. says Paul. Phil. 4. 13. And Take my yoke upon you,
(says Christ,) Math. 11. 29. for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light,
ver. 30. How comes it to be easy and light? surely because you have Christ
help, as well as Christ's Command: And thus it is with all the ways of God;
they are possible, and passable; why so? because you have Gods Promise, as well
as Gods Command. Indeed if they were ways under a command, then there were no
possible walking in them, because then the acting of obedience unto them, would
rest upon our own strength, which is none at all; but being ways also under a
promise of God. who says that he will cause us to walk in them, now they are
possible: For beloved, what God promises to do for us, that rests not upon our
strength, but his strength to make us to do, and he is able to make all
strength to abound and increase within us.

Sixthly, Then it is nothing else but a foolish and proud conceit in men, to
delay Of such as defer walking in Gods ways.
and defer works of obedience until they 1. Have compassed so much of the
world. 2. Come to be old. 3. Come to be sick; then they will consider their
ways, and then they will humble their hearts, and then they will repent, and
then they will lay hold on Christ, and then they will lead new lives, and then
they will make their peace with God, etc. Not knowing that it is God only who
causes us to walk in his Statutes, and to do them; and not knowing that we are
not of our selves sufficient to think any thing; and not knowing that
supernatural power must be the foundation and cause of all supernatural works;
and not knowing that God justly may, and often times does deny his grace and
help to them who have refused it, and does leave the refusing sinner (forever)
to his own lusts and ways.

SECT. II.
2 Use. Does the Lord God himself undertake to cause his people to walk Take
heed of self-confidence.
in his Statutes, and to do them? This may serve for caution unto all the
people of God, (especially unto strong Christians) that they take heed of all
self-confidence. Beware of all self-confidence, when you are to do any duty, or
any work which the Lord requires from you; see that you do not attempt it, or
set upon it in the power of self.

There are many sorts of a man's self; there is

1. His Natural self, the strength of natural knowledge, and judgment, and
will, How many sorts of self there be.
and resolution. 2. His Learned self, the strength of acquired parts and
abilities, of understanding, of wisdom, of tongues, of utterance and of other
gifts. 3. His Gracious self, the strength of a renewed mind, and of a renewed
will, and of renewed affections.
Now hear my advice; When you are to do any work for God, beware that you rest
not on any of these self strengths. Jer. 9. 23. Let not the wise man glory in
his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, neither let the rich
man glory in his riches. So say I, let not the prudent Christian rest on his
wisdom, and let not the knowing Christian rest upon his parts, and let not the
renewed Christian rest upon his graces, and let not the forward Christian rest
on his resolutions, and let not the experienced Christian rest on his comforts,
as if those were able and enough to furnish and enable him to do the work or
works which God requires of him.

There are three Reasons why I would seriously press this caution upon you that
fear God.

First, The exceeding aptness and propension in the best, to be and to do
something All are prove to trust too much in self.
of themselves; there is scarce any thing concerns us, but self is inte^mixed
with it, and justles in it self; and we are hardly taken off from it, until by
woeful experience we find much mischief and misery in it. Take us in any
spiritual work, why something of self is appearing; in repentance, men will not
forsake their own strength; in the work of faith, men will undertake to believe
by their own strength; in the work of justification, men are apt to look upon
their own righteousness; in active duties, men are many times of their mind in
Jeremiah, The Lord be a faithful witness between us, if we do not according to
all things which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us. Jer. 42. 5. And in
passive duties, there also we presume many times too much upon our own self
strength; Lord (said Peter,) I am ready to go with thee, both into prison and
to death. Luke 22. 33. And although all shall be offended, yet will not I, Mar.
14. 29.

Secondly, The exceeding greatness of this sin: self-confidence, or a trusting
Trusting in self is a great sin.
and relying upon our own strength and sufficiency, it is a very great sin;
which thus appears.

1. It is the pride and unbelief in departing from God: that man who makes not
God his whole confidence, departs from him. P^ide of heart, and (which is
worse) the spiritual pride of heart, which God abhors, and is utterly contrary
unto; but humility of heart is that which God does much value and regard.

2. It is a kind of Atheism: the creature which would be a self-sufficiency
unto it self, denies God in his Al-sufficiency; it is proper to God as God to
be a being of himself, and to give being unto all besides himself; to be
independing on any for being and working.

3. At least you take the work of God out of the hand of God; his work it is to
make us good, by his preventing grace; and his work it is to enable us to good,
by his subsequent grace; and yet you will undertake by your own strength and by
your own arm to conquer sins, to resist temptations, to perform acts of
obedience.

4. You take the course to set up your selves, and to lay aside your God; to
magnify your selves, and to nullify him; to glory in your selves, and to take
glory from God; if you will be the efficient causes of doing good without God,
you will make your selves the final cause of good.

Thirdly, The exceeding great danger of self-confidence to do any good: and The
danger of self-confidence.
there are three dangers which will befall you.

1. You will be but poor and barren, and insufficient, so as to do nothing at
all: as the ship lies still if the wind stirs not; (without me you can do
nothing) you will be weaker then the weakest Christian; the weakest Christian
trusting on Christ, and the promise, will be able to do much, when you relying
on your self-ability, will be able to do nothing.

There are two sorts of being. Two sorts of being.


One is absolute and of it self, as God is who is of himself, and can work
alone by and from himself.

Another is depending; such a being is every creature, yea and every created
grace, which as it is by virtue of Gods grace, so it acts in virtue of his
assistance: As a beam of the sun is made alive by the sun, and it gives light
by the continued influence of the sun: part it and the sun; it is nothing so,
etc.

2 God will leave you (at least a while) unto your selves, that you may be
ashamed of your confidence, and see your selves to be but vanity, that you are
indeed without strength, and utterly insufficient of your selves; and that you
stand only, and work only in the presence of his might.

You read that God has left his servants in four cases. In what cases God
leaves his servants.


One when they have been idle and careless, and venturing upon the occasions of
sin; this was David's case:

A second, when they have not steadfastly believed his word, but have given
credit to Satan; upon this he left Adam and Eve unto themselves.

A third, when they have ventured upon evil company; in this case he left
Sampson.

A fourth when they have presumed upon their own strength and sufficiency; and
in this he left Peter.

3. And now you will not be able to do any good, nay not able to withstand the
greatest sins; Satan will be too hard for you, and so will sin; we shall
quickly hear you complaining of hardness of heart, and of deadness of heart,
and of unbelief of heart; and I wish these were the worst. God does some times
cure the proud self-confidence, and the proud self-sufficiencies of his people,
by leaving them to some gross and vile falls, as David, and Peter, etc.

Fourthly, There is indeed no self-sufficiency in you, although sometimes
Wherein our weakness appears.
you verily imagine and fancy it; and I would convince you of this by your own
experience.

1. You cannot pull down any one sin that troubles you by your own strength, it
will move, and strive, and tempt, and follow you; and do what you can, (by all
your own strength) it does many times captivate you.

2. You cannot rise out of any sinful fall, unless the Lord gives you his hand
to lift you up; there your feet stick in the mire, and every grace that you
have is nonplussed; repentance will not stir, and sorrow will not melt, and
faith will not take hold, unless the Lord himself comes in with new strength
and assistance, you cannot deliver your selves.

3. You cannot (many times) act any one grace when your desires are so to do;
you find your hearts many times hard, but you cannot soften them; dull, and
you cannot quicken them; straitened, and you cannot enlarge them; you would
mourn, but cannot fetch up your tears? you would believe, but you cannot
stretch forth one act of faith; all that comes from you, is, Lord help my
unbelief; you would pray, but are not able, etc.

4. If it were in your power and self-strength to act, and to do any good
works, and to walk in Gods Statutes, then

1. Why do you make your prayers to God for his help? 2. Why have the people of
God acknowledged their own inability? It is not in man that walks to direct
his steps. 3. Why do the works of obedience stick and go on so heavily, when
they rest on our hands? 4. Why is it that they go on so freely and easily, when
God is pleased to put out his assistance? I will run the way of thy
Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, says David. Psalm. 119. 32.
SECT. III.
3. Use. Does the Lord promise to cause his people to walk in his Statutes,
What duties it may teach us.
and to do them? this may instruct or teach us (especially the people of God,)
four necessary duties.

1. To be always sensible of their own weakness and infficiencie. 2. Not to
dispond or cast down their hearts, because of the greatness of any To be
always sensible of our weakness.
work or duty which God requires of them. 3. To depend on God, and to make him
their strength and help for all the works which they are to perform. 4. To give
the praise of all to God.
First, To be always sensible of their own weakness and insufficiency. Two
things are of great use unto every Christian; one is still to believe Gods
alsufficiencie, the other is still to acknowledge his own insufficiency. When
you are to do any work or duty, (suppose it be to repent, to believe, to pray,
to preach, to withstand a temptation, to cast out a sinful corruption) preserve
in your hearts a sense of your own weakness and insufficiency; as Paul spoke,
so do you, Lord, who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. I can do
nothing by my own strength; here is much work, but of my self I can do nothing,
I am not able to carry it on.

There are three Reasons why I offer this advice unto you, because many persons
Reasons of it.
are not sensible of their own weakness and insufficiency to spiritual acts of
obedience. e. g.

1. Such ^s make nothing of the most solemn duties of communion with God; they
feel not the weight of those services: It is all one with them to go to the
Lords, as to go to their own table; it is all one with them to repent of sin as
to commit sin; it is all one with them to believe on Christ, as to say that
they believe on Christ; it is all one with them to pray as to speak; are these
men sensible of their weakness and insufficiency unto any duty, unto whom the
performance of every duty is so easy?

2. Such as are seldom in prayer, when they are to do any work commanded them
of God; these men do not see their own weakness and insufficiency; they do
imagine that they are able to carry on their work in their own strength,
without the strength of God; else they would be much in prayer to God for his
help, and for his assistance.

3. Such as mind not the promises of God to enable them, and never make use of
them: Surely the child thinks himself able to go alone, who refuses the hand,
and help of the Nurse, etc.

Secondly, Because a right sensibleness of your own weakness is a special means
to make you strong for any work of God: That passage of Paul is observable, 2
Cor. 12. 10. When I am weak, then am I strong; this seems to be a
contradiction, but it is not so: It is as if he had said, When I find that I am
weak in my self, then am I made strong by the strength of Christ: How so, will
you say! How comes a man to be made strong by Christ, who finds himself to be
but weak? I will she^ ^ou how this comes to pass;

1. The sense of his own weakness is a means to put him upon much prayer to
(...) for strength.

2. The sense of his own weakness is an occasion to put him upon faith in
Christ, to rely on him, to make Christ his streng^h, and to draw more grace and
strength from him, in whose strength he shall be able to do all things.

Thirdly, Because the Lord has a special compassion, and a very tender regard
to persons truly sensible of their own weakness. The Lord has a tender regard
unto three sorts of men.

1. Unto those that are sensible of their sins; He binds up the broken To whom
God has a tender regard.
in heart.

2. Unto those that are sensible of their own unworthiness; The poor Publican
went home justified.

3. And unto those that are sensible of their own weakness and insufficiency
to do any good: Concerning these God gives command, Isa. 35. 3. Strengthen the
weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. And Zech. 12. 8. He that is f^eble
among, them shall be as David: And to these especially has the promise in the
Text a respect; I will cause, etc.

Secondly, Not to despond or cast down their hearts by reason of the greatness,
or by reason of the multiplicity, and by reason of the difficulty of the works
and duties which God requires from them; depth, and breadth, and length of men's
obedience are nothing, as long as there is depth, and breadth, and length o^
Gods assistance. I confess that these would be strong discouragements, were we
to traverse the ways and works of God by our strength; but they should not
make any discouraging impression, seeing our hands shall be made strong by the
Almighty arm of God.

Is any thing too hard for the Lord! (he is able to do exceeding abundantly
above all that w^ can ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. according to the power that
works in us) God is pleased to charge all the essential duties of obedience
upon the weakest of his people, and there is no severity or injustice in this,
because as the strongest cannot do the least duty by his own strength, so the
weakest Christian shall be made able also to do the greatest duty in the
strength of God.

Never say, If I were so strong as such or such a one, then I could do much,
but I am weak. I tell you that the strong Christian without the help of God, is
but weak; and the weak Christian with the help of his God is strong.

But to remove all dispondency of heart from weak Christians about their many,
What weak Christians should remember.
and great, and continual works of obedience, I would desire them carefully to
remember and lay up four singular Adjuncts or ingredients in that helping and
assisting grace which God does promise unto them.

1. Coextention as to all the parts and times of duty. 2. Sufficiency as to
enabling for these duties. 3. Redundancy or exuberancy; there is help enough
and to spare. 4. Infallibility or certainty of enjoying that assisting grace,
if they look up to God for it.
First, Coextention: The helping or assisting grace of God promised unto his
people, is not limited or restrained to this or that particular duty, not to
this or that particular time of life; but it extends to all our work, and for
all the days of our life.

First, It extends to all the duties which God requires of us; what the Apostle
Assisting grace extends to all our works, and at all times.
spoke in another case: 2 Cor. 1. 5. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us,
so our consolation also abounds by Christ; That may be said in this case, As
our duties and services abound, so the help and strength of Gods assisting
grace abounds toward us.

Our duties are sometimes summed up. 1. Into the love of God. And 2ly Into the
love of our neighbor; and the promise of assisting grace extends to both
these: For the one, see Deuteronomy. 30. 6. I will circumcise, etc. For the other, see
Isa. 11. 6. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down
with the Kid, etc. Ver. 9. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy
Mountain.

Our duties are sometimes summed up into 1. Affirmative. 2ly Negative; the one
is of the good which we are to do; the other is of the evil which we are to
forsake; and you have the promise of assisting grace as to both of them* For
these, see Romans 6. 14. And Ezekiel. 18. They shall come thither, and they shall
take away all the detestable things thereof, and all the abominations thereof.

Our duties are sometimes summed up, 1. Into active. And 2ly into passive; both
these have assisting grace promised; for the first, Ye shall keep my judgments
and do them: For the second, it is given unto you on the behalf of Christ to
suffer for his Name, Phil. 1. 39.

Secondly, It extends unto our duties for all the days of our life; assisting
grace is promised to come in as duties are to go on: Isa. 40. 31. They shall
renew their strength. Chap. 41. 1. Let the people renew their strength. Chap.
46. 3. Hearken unto me O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of
Israel, which are born by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb.
Ver. 4. And even to the old age I am he, and even to hoary hairs will I carry
you. I have made, and I will bear, even I wiill carry, and will deliver you.

Secondly, Sufficiency: There is a sufficiency in that assisting grace promised
to enable the people of God effectually for the greatest and hardest duties;
which I shall clear by a few instances.

Said God to Abraham (Genesis 22. 2.) Take thy son, thine only son Isaac There
is a sufficiency in assisting grace.
whom thou love, and get thee into the Land of Moriah, and offer him there
for a burnt burnt-offering, etc. Was not this a very hard and difficult work to
perform? against which all the strength of nature might rise, yea and grace
itself might have disputed the lawfulness of it; nevertheless Abraham was
enabled to obey this command, Heb. 11. 17.

Again, is it not a great work for a person to leave all that he has, and then
to submit himself unto a suffering condition? Yet the people of God have been
enabled unto this: Moses left all his honor, and riches, and pleasure, and
enjoyments in Egypt, and chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God. Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. And so did the Disciples; they forsook all and took
up the cross, and followed Christ.

Again, is it not a great and difficult work, for any man to pass through all
changes (incident to our conditions) with a composed, quiet and wel-pleased
spirit? Yet Paul was enabled to do this; to come up unto it. Phil. 4. 11. I
have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. Ver. 12. I know
both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, and in all
things, I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry; both to abound and
to suffer need.

Once more, when we are reduced to the extremest of outward straits, that no
visible mercy on earth appears for us, is it not then a very hard work to look
up to God, and to place our confidence upon him? Yet Jehoshaphat was enabled in
this case so to do. 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. We have no might, etc. neither know we
what to do, but our eyes are upon thee: Nay when the Lord himself withdraws and
hides his f^ce, and writes and speaks bitter things, it is now a most difficult
work to look up unto him, and to trust upon him: certainly it is one of the
hardest works in the world for any Christian to do it: Nevertheless the people
of God have found such a sufficiency of Gods assisting grace, that (in such a
case) they have been enabled to look up unto him, and to trust upon him. Esa.
8. 17. I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob,
and I will look for him. Job 13. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.

Thirdly, Redundancie: There is not only a sufficiency in Gods grace
effectually A redundancy of Grace.
to enable his servants, but there is also a redundancie. What Is that? That is,
the Lord has strength more then enough for the works which his people are to
perform. When you cast up all the duties which do concern you, and then think
of the greatness of that assistance necessary for the performing of them; and
do many times pray for, and find an assistance proportionable to your
services: why, God is able to communicate much more assistance and strength,
then ever you found or imagined. Ephe. 3. 20. He is able to do exceeding
abundantly, above all that we can ask or think according to the power that
works in us.

When you need power to trust on him, he does give that power, and he can
enable you more then only to trust in him; he can enable you to wait and to
rejoice in him.

When you need assistance to resist a sin or a temptation, God gives you
strength so to do, and yet he can give you much more power then that; he can
enable you also to conquer them, yea and to be more then conquerers through him
that loved you.

When you need a heart to pray unto him, he can give you that heart to pray; he
can help your infirmities; and more can God do than this; he can also
strengthen you to pray with confidence, and to strive and wrestle in prayer,
and to make your hearts joyful in his house of prayer.

When you need a heart to suffer, he can not only give you strength to suffer,
but enable you to suffer more then your adversaries can inflict.

Fourthly, Certainty of enjoying that assisting grace, if they do look up to
God Certainty of enjoying Gods assisting grace.
for it: Here briefly observe two things.

1. That Gods promise of assisting Grace, does not exclude our calling upon God
for the same; for even for this, as well as for the rest of the good things
promised by God, it holds, Ezekiel. 36. 37. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for
this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them.

2. That when we do rightly call upon God for his assistance, for his grace to
cause us to walk in his Statutes, the Lord will not deny it unto us, but will
assuredly give it unto us. James 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask
of God that gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be
given unto him: ver. 6. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering, etc. Psalm.
57. 2. I will cry unto God most high, unto God that performs all things for
me.

Object. But clear this by instances.

Sol. Psalm. 138. 3. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me, and
strengthenedst Cleared by instances.
me with strength in my soul. 2 Cor. 12. 8. For this I besought the Lord
thrice that it might depart from me: ver. 9. And he said unto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness.

Object. O but for all this, I find many times no help or strength from God,
although he says that he will cause us to walk in his Statutes, and to do
them; and this discourages me.

Sol. To this I would give these answers.

First, The imparting of promised help, is not by way of necessary or natural
dimanation, as the sun imparts light unto the earth, but by way of voluntary
and prudent dispensation, as a father imparts supplies unto his children; who
comes in with his helps in a time of need, and upon the humble addresses and
entreaties of his children.

Object. You want more help, but do you call upon the Lord for more help?

Sol. God expects to hear from you, as you desire to hear from him. Jer. 29.
12. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you: ver. 13. And ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall
search for me with all your art.

Secondly, Though you have prayed, yet did you pray in faith? He that comes to
God, must believe that God is; and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. Heb. 11. 6. I say unto you, what things soever ye desire
when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. Mar. 11. 24.

Thirdly, But do you with patience wait upon the Lord? The Prophet says, that
the Lord is a God of judgment; blessed are all they that wal^ for him. Esa. 30.
18. And the Church says, I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of
my salvation, my God will hear me. Micah* 7. 7. And David declares it upon
experience. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard
my cry. Psalm. 40 1.

Now I say unto you, put these three things together in practice, and then you
shall assuredly find that assisting grace which you need; whether it be for
resistance of temptations, or for victory over corruptions, or for ability
for performance of duties.

Object. But I would enjoy such a full power of assisting and helping grace at
once, But I would have full power of assisting grace.
that I might make a perfect riddance of all sin, and be always completely and
presently furnished for any acts of obedience.

Sol. Belike you would needs be in the Prodigals condition, to have all your
portion of goods in your own hands, thinking that you are more wise and more
able than your God, to manage the stock of grace! But,

First, It is not only fitter, but better that you should trust God, then that
God should trust you; your grace and strength are safer in his hands, than in
yours.

Secondly, God will not thus impart his strength unto you; as you imagine or
wish; but he will impart it succssively and gradually, according to your
continual necessities of it.

1. He would still keep you humble. 2. He would still keep you in dependence
Why God gives grace gradually.
upon himself. 3. He would give unto you manifold experiences of his
faithfulness in performing his promise unto you.

Thirdly, To depend on God, and to make him their strength for all the works
which they are to perform.

Now because this is the principal Use which can be made from the choice and
precious promise here in the Text, I shall therefore insist the more upon it
and show unto you,

1. Why you that are the people of God, should depend on God for his strength
to enable you for all your works and services? 2. When especially you should do
so? 3. Whether indeed you do so? 4. How you may be enabled so to do? 5. How one
may know that it is the very strength of God which is with us?
1. Quest. Why the people of God should depend on God, (yea only depend on Why
Gods people should depend on God for Grace.
God) for his strength to enable them for all their duties, for all their works
and services?

Sol. There are three reasons for it.

1. In respect of God. 2. In respect of our selves.
1. In respect of God.

First, It is his command and will concerning you, still to depend on him, and
It is Gods Command.
on him alone. Psalm. 62. 5. My soul, wait thou only upon God, for my
expectation is from him: ver. 6. He is my Rock, and my Salvation: ver. 7. In
God is my Salvation and my Glory, the Rock of my strength, and my refuge is in
God: ver. 8. Trust in him at all times, pour out your heart before him, etc.
Prove. 3. 5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding. Ver. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy
paths. Esa. 26. 4. Trust you in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength. God (you see) calls on us for our dependence on him, and
only upon him, and at all times, in all our occasions.

Secondly, It is his honor that you do depend on him, to help and strengthen It
is for Gods Honor.
your souls: you do now declare, and publish, and put unto your seal, that
power belongs to God; that he is the alsufficient and efficient God; and that
he is the faithful God, who will perform whatsoever promise he has made unto
you. Unquestionably God would have his people to honor him, (he forms them for
his praise,) and all the honor which God has by us, consists in this, that he
is acknowledged to be the only efficient, and the only end of all that we have
or do.

Thirdly, It is the end why he makes this promise of causing you to walk in his
It is the end for which he makes his promise.
Statutes: As the end of his threatenings is our repentance, and as the end of
his precepts is our obedience; so the end of this promise is our dependence.
Prove. 22. 19. That thy trust may be in the Lord, I have made known unto thee
this day. Ver. 29. Excellent things in counsels and konowledge.

Fourthly, It is his way of conveying or communicating his strength and help:
It is Gods way of communicating his strength.
all your sights of his mercy, all your taste of his love, all your experiences
of his goodness, and all the impartings of his help and strength are unto
faith; you must believe, if you will be established and strengthened: God will
give strength to his promise, but then his people must come and depend upon him
for it. Psalm. 27. 14. Wait on the Lord, and he shall strengthen thine heart.

Object. Indeed if you speak of the absolute power of God, he can let out and
convey sufficient help for our work without any praying of ours, and without
any beleiving of ours.

Sol. But God is pleased to set out this way of depending and believing to let
forth his help unto us as the best way to his own wisdom, both for the
conviction of our own weaknesses, and for the demonstration of his own graces
and fullness.

2. In respect of our selves.

First, Necessity: There is not bread enough at home, nor strength enough in
Our own necessity requires it.
our selves for any good; therefore go abroad, and look for it in God.

Quid es in te, and quid es de te! spoke Austin very well on Psalm. 42. Psalm.
119. 35. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments: ver. 36. Incline my
heart unto thy Testimonies: 1 Kings 8. 37. The Lord our God be with us; Let him
not leave us, nor forsake us; ver. 58. That he may incline our heart unto him,
to walk in his ways and to keep his Judgments! I confess, that there were no
necessity of our dependence of God for strength to cause, etc. if one of these
two things were true.

1. That we had power and sufficiency of our own. 2. Or, That any other
besides God could be a sufficiency unto us.
But neither of these are so: 1. No man, not the best, is or can be a
sufficiency unto himself, as I have formerly proved.

2. None besides God, can be a sufficiency unto us, or help unto us.

Object. We do find much help and strength many times by public Ordinances and
private Conferences.

Sol. The Reason is, because God makes them to be of help and strength unto
you: The conduit conveyes water into your houses, but water comes not from the
Conduit, but from the Spring: Therefore you find sometimes Ordinances and
Conferences can do nothing at all in any way of help, that you may know, that
not they, but God in and by them, was the help.

Secondly, Prevalency: Dependence on God for strength, will get you his
strength; Psalm. 84. 5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: ver. 7.
They go from strength to strength, Psalm. 28. 7. The Lord is my strength and my
shield, my Its the way to prevail.
heart trusted in him and I am helped.

Thirdly, Experience: They that know thy Name; will put their trust i^ thee;
Psalm. 9. 10. For thou Lord, have not forsaken them that seek thee; Isa. 11. 2.
Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength and my song, he also is become my salvation: Isa. 25. 4.
Thou have been a Experience proves it so.
strength to the poor, a strength unto the needy in his distress! God is your
God, and he is your strength, and you have found him to be so; when being
sensible of your own weakness, you have cast your selves upon him: How did his
strength beat down strength before you! and how did his power make it self
manifest in your weakness! O Christians, you have experience on all sides.

1. When you have trusted upon your selves, how barren and dead have your
hearts been! like Sampson, etc. 2. When you have trusted on your God, how able,
how full, quick, and enlarged has your heart been, and with what life and
alacrity has the work of God prospered in your hands! Its our privilege.

Fourthly, Privilege: It is not only your duty to go to God, and to trust on
him to help and enable you to walk in his Statutes, and to do them, but it is
also your privilege which you enjoy by virtue of the Covenant: Is it not a
privilege which a Son enjoys, and which a Wife enjoys, that the one may
confidently go to his Father, and the other may confidently go to her Husband,
to help them in their necessities!

Why! you who are in Covenant with God, you are the Sons of God, 2 Cor. 6. He
is your Father, you are married unto him; Thy Maker is thy Husband, Isa. 54. 5.
you may therefore go unto him, and rely on him.

1. Your God knew long ago all your necessities, and self-weaknesses, or
insufficiencies, and therefore at the very first, he engaged himself to be
yours in love and mercy, and help, and strength. 2. It is no more than he is
resolved for; he is resolved, and willing, and ready to help you, and do you
good with all his heart and with all his soul. 3. And it concerns his glory to
cause you to walk in his Statutes and to do them.
Quest. 2. When especially the People of God should by faith depend upon God
for his gracious help and strength to cause them, etc.

Sol. There is no duty or work which we are to do upon Gods Command at any
time, but we should by faith depend upon God for his strength to enable and
cause us to do it: Nevertheless we should in eight Cases, express a more
special care to depend upon him for his assisting and supplying strength. e. g.

1. When we are most apt to think that we stand in least need of his strength
In what cases we should depend upon him.
and presence. 2. When we find the greatest strength of opposition to the
performing of any work. 3. When we are most sensible of our own indisposition
and inability to the doing of such good works. 4. When any work we are called
to perform, has a greater Concernment and Respect to Gods Glory, his Churches
good, and our own salvation. 5. When the Work is extraordinary and universal.
6. When near, great, and sudden Changes do befall us. 7. When we have made
solemn vows to God in the days of our distress, for Reformation or better
walking. 8. When it is such a work, wherein we have miscarried, and have longer
stuck at it, and cannot get it forward.
1. When we are most apt to think, that we stand in least need of his strength
and presence: That our mountain is strong, that we are increased, that we can
go alone, and are now sufficient.

Object. But will some of you say, When are we thus apt to think, etc?

Sol. In three Cases.

1. When the works or duties seem unto us little, and common, and easy, not In
what cases we are apt to think well of our selves.
needing any singular presence of Gods Grace: As the Israelites thought about
the taking of Ai, it was but a small City, and a few men would serve the turn,
and there was no need to trouble all the host: But they found it otherwise,
etc. so when any duty seems but ordinary, a small work; and we need not call in
for the help of God, it is but to meditate, it is but to pray, it is but to
read the Word, but to hear a Sermon, but to resist a temptation, but to deny a
very light occasion of sinning, but to bear an ordinary Cross or affliction.

Now we are apt to think we can do these ordinary works, and we can pass these
ordinary crosses; and are not very importunate with God to assist and enable
us. But what comes of this? why! either we can do nothing at all! or else what
we do is but superficial and cold; or that little temptation or occasion of sin
is too hard for us, and that little Cross fil^ us with impatience, and
vexation, and discontent, etc. Therefore I beseech you who are the people of
God, Learn to go out of your selves. Learn to depend on Gods strength, even for
the least Duty that you are to perform: there is in the least duty (whether
Active or Passive) enough to exercise your Faith; Though the greatest work be
not above Gods strength, yet the least is above your strength. If you can do
nothing without Christ, then you cannot do the least good work without him. If
the Apostles were not sufficient of themselves to think any thing, much less
are we able of our selves do any thing! Nay, and you may observe it, That the
failings of the people of God are usually about ordinary duties: They do carry
on their difficult works, better than they do their ordinary works; what is the
Reason of this? because in them they look up more to God: but in these, they
look more at themselves.

Secondly, When we have found more than ordinary enlargments in Communion with
God, that our hearts have melted in the confession of our sins, and that our
hearts have wrestled with God in Prayer, and our resolutions have been
exceedingly strengthened and sharpened: O now beware of thy self; and now have a
special care to make God alone thy strength: why? because now thou shall
(through subtlety of temptation,) be inclined to think too highly of thy self,
and of thine own strength; and that this may last long; and the^eupon th^^^
wilt slack that earnestness of Communion; and thou will be venturing and
hazarding upon the account of thy own strength, and God will leave thee, and
humble thee.

Thirdly, When we have tasted of the wonderful goodness of God in high and rich
experiences, nay in the very healings and assurances of his own spirit, that we
have heard the voice of joy, all is pardoned, God is reconciled: Hereupon our
hearts ar exceedingly raised to God, in blessing and praising, and saying, What
shall I do for this good God? O but remember to raise your hearts in a careful
and watchful, depending on Gods strength and sufficiency, still to enable you
to walk with him, and to do for him: You think you can do much more, and I do
verily believe you would do much more; but all those gracious experiences
without any assistance and influence from God, will not be sufficient unto you

Secondly, We should especially depend upon God for his strength and
sufficiency then when we do meet with the greatest strength of opposition to
the performing of any good work or works: as David in another case, when the
people spoke of stoning him, he did then encourage himself in the Lord his God.
1 Samuel 30. 6. Or as Jehoshaphat when that great multitude came against him, and
God promised him deliverance, said he, Believe in the Lord your God, and ye
shall be established. 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.

So should we do when we meet with strong ^ppositions and hindrances; when we
are to work, or when we are working the work or works commanded us of God, we
should now by faith look up to God, and rest on his arm of gracious power to
uphold our hearts, and to carry us out unto our dutiful performances. How many
temptations do we many times meet with from Satan? and how many threatenings,
and scoffs, and reproaches, and incounters do we meet many times with from
ungodly men, and from carnal parents and friends, and from secret enemies of
^od and his ways? All which do tend to discourage our hearts, and to weaken
our hands, and to interrupt or divert our feet from walking in Gods ways, and
from doing of the works which God requirs of us in our places: Now this is the
time to look up to God and to trust on him, to encourage and enable the heart
to serve him, to hold on in walking before him with all faithfulness, wisdom,
zeal and patience: now make use of that promise in Esa. 41. 10. Fear thou not,
for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will strengthen thee;
yea I will help thee; yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness. Zech. 4. 6. This is the w^rd of the Lord unto Zorobabel saying,
Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts. Ver. 7.
Who art thou O great mountain! before Zorobabel thou shall become a plain, and
he shall bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace,
grace unto it.

Thirdly We should especially depend on God for his strength, when we are most
sensible of our own indispositions, weaknesses, streitghtened and insufficient
hearts: How often do we find these things upon us? how apt are we under them
to shrink, to complain, to give over? O but our work (when we are not able to
do our work,) is by faith to look up to God, to quicken and enable us to do his
work. Psalm. 119 159. Consider how I love thy precepts! quicken me (O Lord,)
according to thy loving kindness. Esa. 45. 24. Surely shall one say, In the
Lord have I righteousness and strength; even to him shall men come.

Object. But I have no might or power at all to do any thing.

Sol. Consider now that precious promise in Esa. 40. 29. He gives power to the
faint, and unto them that have no might he increases strength. Phil. 2. 13. He
works in us, etc.

Object. But I have looked up with such weak desires, and with such a weak faith
as I have, and yet find no more strength.

Sol. Read on ver. 31. They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their
strength, etc. So Psalm. 31. 24. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
your hearts, all ye that hope in the Lord.

Object. But did any servant of God ever find him coming in with strength,
when sensible of his own weakness, and calling upon him for help and strength?

Sol. See two places of Scripture instances for this:

Psalm. 73. 26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion fore ver. Psalm. 138. 3. In the day when I cried thou
answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.

Fourthly, We should especially depend on God for strength, when we are called
to do any work wherein the glory of God, and the good of his Church, and our
own salvation, are more singularly concerned.

First, These are services and works of the highest, and of the greatest
consequence: there is no work whatsoever (wherein we can deal) which is or can
be of a higher nature, for excellency necessity, felicity.

Secondly, Miscarriages under these, would prove very woeful and ruinous: that
Gods glory should fail in my hand, or the good and safety of the Church in my
hand, and my own soul should perish by my own neglect.

Thirdly, And of all works these do meet with the greatest opposition, from
without our selves, and from within our selves: the gates of hell are opened,
etc.

Yet for these has God most of all engaged his power, and presence, and
strength, as you may see in the variety of his promises, and in the glory of
his providence; therefore when you are called to do any work, which has a
near and special respect to these things, fall down and pray; look up and
depend: as he said, de deo nil sine deo; we can know nothing of God without
God: so say I, pro deo nil sine deo; we can do nothing for God without God;
nothing for his glory, without his assistance.

O Lord, the work which I am now endeavoring, thou know, that it concerns
thy name and glory; the good and welfare of thy Church, which is the apple of
thine eye, and the dearly beloved of thy soul; and it respects mine own eternal
salvation, which thou would have me work out with fear and trembling: good
Lord leave me not; hide not thy self, but appear in thy strength for the
carrying on of these works; come in with thy wisdom to direct me, and with thy
grace to quicken me, and with thy spirit to lead, and uphold, and prosper me.

Fifthly, When the work is extraordinary and universal, of much difficulty and
danger, and requires more then ordinary hight of spirit, and courage, and
resolution, now is your time not to consult with flesh and blood; not to
consider your own proportion of gifts and abilities; but by faith to look up to
him who commands the work, and promises his assistance and presence for the
work. Exodus 3. 10. I will send thee unto Pharaoh (says God to Moses,) that
thou may bring forth my people, the children of Israel out of Egypt: ver. 11.
And Moses said to God, Who am I that I should go unto Pharaoh? and that I
should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? Ver. 12. And he said,
Certainly I will be with thee. Josh. 1. 5. As I was with Moses, so I will be
with thee; I will not fail thee nor forsake thee.

Beloved, as the weakest duties are above our strength; so the greatest and
hardest are below Gods strength: it is not what you are, but what your God is
who commands you, and what he will be unto you, who has promised his own power
and strength.

Sixthly, When near, great, and sudden changes do befall us; as the loss of a
husband, wife, child, parent, friend, estate, etc. this is a time wherein
ordinarily we are weak, and do stand in need of more strength than our own, to
bear the hand of God with patient submission, and to make a sanctified use of
the same. And this is a time when we should in a special manner look up to God,
and trust on him for his help and assistance, who has promised to be with his
people in the fire, and in the water. Esa. 43. 2. And to debat^ with them in
measure. Esa. 27. 8. And to wipe off their tears; and to turn again in mercy;
and that all things shall work together for their good.

Seventhly, When we have made solemn vows in our distresses of particular
reformation, or of better walking with God: O if God will spare me, if God will
hear me, then this I will be, and thus I will walk, etc. Indeed the sin is
great to answer for such works, and God will certainly require them at your
hands: therefore when God has answered you, O beg for his grace, for his
strength to enable you. Esa. 10. 21. They shall make a vow unto the Lord and
perform it.

Eighthly, We should in a special manner depend upon God for his own strength
to be revealed unto us, when we have experimentally found any work or duty
sticking long upon our hands, and we cannot get it forward, and accomplish it
with our strength: as many times a man resolves to leave such and such a sin,
and is very serious in his resolution, and yet he finds himself hampered, and
captivated by it.

And many times a man resolves upon such or such a heavenly duty, which is of
an excellent nature; and yet he cannot get up his heart unto it, but he still
omits and neglects it, or is by carnal counsel and pleasures taken off from it.

In these and the like cases, we should go and weep before the Lord, and
confess, both the deceitfulness and insufficiency of our own hearts; and
earnestly beseech the Lord to take 1. our hearts, and 2. our works into his own
hands; that he would change our hearts, and that he would direct our steps; and
that he would mortify our sinful lusts, and by his strength tread down
strength, that he would lead captivity captive, that he would break our bonds
for us, and set us at liberty by the power of his own Spirit.

3. Quest. Now follows the third Question, How may one know, that he does How
we may know that we make God our strength.
indeed make God his strength; and does depend or rely only upon him for all
the works which he is to do; to cause him to walk in his statutes, and to do
them?

Sol. If one does indeed set up God for his strength, and does depend and rely
upon him, etc.

First, He will be much in prayer unto God; be will not take up, or set upon
any work without prayer: when any duty is to be performed by him, his first
work is with God; Lord, give thy strength unto thy servant: he will not first
venture upon the work, and then look up to God, but will first call in the help
of God, and then attempt the work. Beloved, remember this, that the more that
any man depends upon himself, the less he is in prayer to God: (for says he,)
I have wisdom enough; and I have strength enough to do this work; and the more
that any man depends upon God, the more will he pray unto God: he that believes
most, will pray most. Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in him at all times ye people, pour
out your hearts before him; God is a refuge for us. Because if you do indeed
trust on God; if you do indeed believe that God is your strength and refuge,
you will then pour out your heart in prayer before him. Psalm. 116. 10. I
believe, therefore have I spoken.

Secondly, He will be much in fear: Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling; for it is God that Works in you to will and to do, of his own good
pleasure. Phil. 2. 12, 13.

Quest. Of what is the man afraid, who acknowledges and relieth on God as his
strength for every good work?

Sol. He is afraid

1. Of himself, even in his best sufficiencies; for not by might and by power,
but by my spirit, says the Lord. Zech. 4. 6 As Johoshaphat, who had an army of
above eleven hundred thousand men; (2 Chronicles. 1^. from ver. 14. to 19.) yet when
the Moabites and the Ammonites came against him, he goes unto the Lord, and
says; 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. O our God, wilt not thou judge them? for we have no
might against this great company that comes against us, neither know we what
to do; but our eyes are upon thee. Why said he we have no might? Had he not
above eleven hundred thousand fighting men? Were these no might? No, they were
not; self-sufficiencie is no sufficiency, and self-might is no might, and
therefore he feared him self in the highest of his own sufficiencies; and his
eyes are upon God; in and from him was might and sufficiency indeed. The like
you read in a spiritual case of Paul; as able an Apostle, and as laborious, and
as powerful as any of them all, and one that relied as much upon the grace of
God in Christ, and one that had as choice and eminent abilities of knowledge
and grace; yet says he, 2 Cor. 3. 5. We are not sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God: Ver. 6. who
has made us able ministers of the new testament.

2. Of doing any thing which may offend his God, and provoke him to withdraw
himself from him. How jealous was Moses, when the two Tribes and an half
petitioned to have their portion on this side Jordan, lest they had been upon a
sinful design which might move the Lord to leave them! Numb. 32. 14. Behold
you are risen up in your fathers stead; an increase of sinful men, to augment
yet the fierce anger of the Lord toward Israel. Ver. 15. For if ye turn away
from him, he will yet again leave them in the wilderness, and ye shall destroy
all this people: See how afraid Moses was, lest any thing should be done which
might move the Lord to leave them. And so indeed it is with every one who knows
that God is his strength and sufficiency; he is afraid of every thing which
may move the Lord to depart from him, and to leave him unto himself; he is
afraid of every gross sin, and of going against the light of the word, and
against the working of the spirit, and against the checks and warnings of his
own conscience, as knowing that for these things God has left his people, and
has withdrawn his actual assistance from them, as you may read in Sampson, and
David, and Hezekiah, and Peter.

3. Of giving way to unbelief, and of sideing with it, and nourishing of it,
which makes us so ready to deny the power of Gods alsufficiency, and to
question the intention and purpose of it unto our selves, etc. against this he
wrestles much, and does pray much, lest having a promise of Gods helping grace,
he should fall short of it through unbelief.

Thirdly, If you do indeed look on God as your strength, that can and will
enable you to walk, etc. then his promise in relation unto your services of
obedience, will put life and courage into you, even under the greatest and
hardest of trials and duties; so that the greatest and hardest services will be
all one unto you with the weakest and smallest; for says the Church, The Lord
God will help me. Esa. 50. 7. 9. And as Asa said when he was going out against
an boast of a thousand thousand Ethiopians: Lord, it is nothing with thee to
help, whiether with many, or with them that have no power, 2 Chronicles. 14 11. So
it will be with us, when high and difficult works are to be done by us our
hearts faint not, but we set upon them cheerfully; for Gods strength is
sufficient for the greatest and for the smallest services. Zach. 4. 7. Who art
thou O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain. Sometimes
you meet with dreadful temptations; and if you do believe and rely on Gods
strength, you will resist them, and fight against them, and expect victory over
them; for God is on your side, and his strength will bear down all the strength
of Satan. Sometimes you meet with strong corruptions; why, the power of God will
subdue them, and sin shall not have, etc. Sometimes you meet with strong
afflictions, and you will bear them patiently; for the hand of God will
sustain you. Sometimes you meet with wonderful oppositions from the world; why,
your God is with you, and for you, and he will uphold and streng then you; and
fill you with love and zeal for his name. O when a man believes indeed on God,
he does then 1. Oppose strength to strength. 2. See all to be weakness which
oppseth God. 3. That Gods strength will carry all before it. 4. That works
which heretofore seemed impossible and unfeasible, and we did despair ever to
compass them: now we look upon them as possible to be done, and dare to set
upon them, and are confident to be successful in them: strong temptations and
corruptions will now appear to be vincible; and the greatest and hardest of
holy duties will now appear to be practicable* etc. Before we do by faith
apprehend and rely on Gods promised strength and asistance, we do measure all
our works, and duties, and trials by our own strength; but when we do indeed
rely on God, then we do measure them by Gods strength which is alsufficient.
When a poor soul lights upon a spiritual promise, respectively answerable unto
his particular work and occasion; and can indeed by faith rely upon God making
that promise: Come says he, the work will be done which I have often thought
would never be done: this sin will be mastered; and that temptation will be
conquered, for God, has promised his own strength, etc. We must look on God as
our strangth.


Fourthly, If you do indeed look on God as your strength, who can and will
enable you to walk in his statutes, etc. then your hearts will be perfect with
God, and sound and impartial in respect unto all his ways: you will not pick
and choose; you will not take up one duty which concerns, you and leave or omit
a weightyer duty which concerns you: you will not comply only with duties of
easiness, and neglect the duties of difficulty; you will not satisfy your
^elves with the external parts of duty, and lay aside the internal ingredients
of duty; but your hearts will comply with all the will of God; and you will
sincerely attempt the performance of all.

Why so? because* 1. The command of God takes on your souls for all; and 2. God
assures you by his promise, that he will enable you for all the works he
requires of you. Beloved, this is an undeniable truth, that so far as men are
believingly persuaded of Gods sufficiency and faithfulness in promise, so far
their hearts are carried out in evenness and uprightness of walking with God:
if a man believes that God will be present with him, and help and strengthen
him for all the duties and works commanded of God* this man shall find his
heart closing with God, enlarged unto all those works: And on the contrary, if
any man remains unperswaded of Gods ability and faithfulness, (either in
whole or in part) his heart will remain unsound, and his walking will for ever
be uneven with God: If he thinks that Gods help is sufficient against one sin,
but not against another sin, (unto which he has been accust^med,) why he will
now remain under the dominion of that sin: If he thinks that Gods help is
sufficient for one good work, but not for the performance of another good work,
(not to self-denial, not to contentedness, not to heavenlimindedness, not to
perseverance;) O how uneven will this man be? how full o^ carna^ reasonings? O
this cannot be done, and this can never be attained. And why is not that work
done by you, as well as by another? and attained by you, as well as another?
why can you not mourn for every sin, as well as another does? and why cannot
you repent and forsake every sin, as well as another? and why are not you so
even and upright in your ways, as well as another? I tell you the reason of
it; because you do not believe the promise of Gods sufficient grace; and you do
not rely upon it as another does: think you that he mortifies his sins, and
acts all those duties by his own strength, or by the strength of God? and how
comes he by that strength but by believing? And verily thus far might you have
attained as well as he, if your heart were sincere, and did your hearts desire
and trust on God in Christ for his alsufficient help.

Fifthly, if you do indeed trust upon God to be your strength, who can and We
must trust on God to be our strength.
will enable you to wa^k in his statutes and to do them; then you are and may
be found in the ways of his strength, in the ways wherein he reveals his arm
and power unto his servants. Beloved, there is a mavelous difference between
presumption and faith: presumption is a very bold, and boisterous, and
irregular confidence on God, both for pardoning mercy, and for assisting grace:
the man loves his sins and lives in them, and yet doubts not of Gods mercy to
pardon his sins; and the man exposes himself to the temptations of sins, and
presumes on Gods help to keep him from sin: and the man lives in the contempt
or in the neglect of Gods ordinances, and presumes of Gods help and strength
for all his works:

There are three ways wherein God reveals, or gives out strength unto us.

1. His word which begets and nourishes us; which conveys life unto us, and
Three ways wherein God gives out strength to us. The Word. Prayer.
strength; which brings us in, and builds us up: O how diligent and
conscientious does faith make us to attend it!

2. Prayer, when our requests are put up to God, and his answers come down to
help and strengthen us: O how does faith enable us to wrestle with God, to be
strengthened with all might by his spirit in the inner man I as the Apostle
speaks in Ephesians. 3. 16.

3. Heavenly conference, where we help to edify, and establish, and build up
one another in our holy profession. O how does faith make us to prize and
improve Heavenly Conference.
such opportunities?

Now consider your selves you who think you look up to God, and do acknowledge
him, and rely on him for strength to cause you, etc. where may a man find you
complaining of weakness, and in word extolling and desiring strength from God?
are you in the ways of strength? and are you seriously and conscientiously in
them? I doubt that some of you are in the ways of weakness, and not of
strength; not in Gods ways, but in Satan's ways; not attending the doctrins of
truths, but the doctrins of lies and errors; not keeping close to Gods
ordinances, but roving out after such teachers as distill into you scorns and
contempts of Gods Ordinances: Is this to rely on God for strength, when for
lying vanities you forsake the paths of God, and of his strength, and of your
own true peace?

Sixthly, What shall I say more? if you do indeed depend on God as your We must
depend on God as our strength.
strength to enable you to walk in his statutes, you shall then find a
spiritual rest or quietation in your hearts, joined with a spiritual liberty or
freedom. You cannot imagine how tumultuous and unsettled a man's heart is, and
how straightened it is, and backward his heart is unto duties, whilst he still
sees holy and heavenly work to be done, and no strength undertaking to enable
him for that work; or at least if he cannot believe that God will be his
strength: his thoughts are many times confounded and amazed, and his very heart
sometimes quakes and trembles. But on the contrary, when he can by faith see
the sufficiency of Gods strength, and is able to fix and rely himself upon it,
then these two things Two things follow our dependence upon God.
will presently follow and appear.

1. One is Quietation: his whole soul comes into a calm, and is cleared of all
those boisterous storms of unbelieving fears: my God is my strength: the work
is much, but he has help enough and will not fail me.

2. The other is a Liberty and enlargedness; he has now a heart ready and free
to set upon the work.

4. Quest. What one must be, and do, that so he may find God to be his
strength How to find God to be our strength.
enabling him, etc.

Sol. There are four things which I would answer to this.

First, If you would find God to be your enabling strength, then there must be
a relation twixt God and you; he must be your God, if you would find him to be
your strength. Psalm. 91. 2. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my
fortress, my God, in him will I trust. Micah 7. 7. I will look unto the Lord, I
will wait for the God of my salvation; my God will hear me. Psalm. 68. 28. Thy
God has commanded thy strength; strengthen O God that which thou have wrought
in us. Beloved, the Lord calls upon us to be his people; to take off our hearts
from all other objects, and to give them in unto himself, and to exalt him in
his soveraignity and authority; which if we do, he will be our God, and will
perform all the good of his Covenant unto us. Now if any man says, I do not
like to serve this God; I would rather serve my sins and the world; let not
that man think to find any good from God: neither love, nor mercy, nor grace,
nor strength: But if a man's heart does like and consent, choose the Lord to be
his God, and him he loves, and him he will serve; he is now come into the bond
of the Covenant, and God is bound to find him mercy to pardon him, and grace
to change him, and strength to enable him for all the duties or works which he
requires from him: and he may in the sense of his sufficiency go to God, and
trust on him, and wait on him; and shall assuredly receive strength and power
from his God, to walk in his Statutes and to do them.

Secondly, If you would find the Lords strength to cause you to walk, etc.
then you must get to him in the name of Christ; not in your own name or
worthiness or merit, or goodness for which the Lord should give out his help
unto you, but only in the name of Christ; that the Lord for his sake would make
his promise good unto you; for all the promises of God are yea and amen in
Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And Christ has assured you, that whatsoever you shall
ask the father in his name, he will give it you, Joh. 16. 23. I am weak, Lord,
strengthen me for Christ's sake: I am insufficient, without strength, able of my
self to do nothing, O Lord help me, O Lord, work all thy works in me for
Christ's sake; for Christ's sake pull down my sins, for Christ's sake enable me to
walk in all well-pleasing before thee, etc.

Thirdly, If you would find the strength of God, etc. then you must be sure to
keep your hearts upright with God, that it is indeed your souls desire, and
endeavor to walk in Gods ways, and to do his work.

Object. A man many times complains that he can get no power from God against
his sins, and no power to do such and such duties.

Sol. I will tell you the reason of it; because his heart secretly loves such a
sin, and is not willing to be parted from it; and his heart secretly dislikes
such a way of God, and therefore the Lord gives him no power or strength, and
regards not his prayers, nor his complaints, Psalm. 66. 18.

But if your hearts were resolved indeed to forsake your sins; they would be
your hatred, and burden, and grief, and you would set your selves against them;
but your strength is too weak and disproportionable; and hereupon you go and
cry unto the Lord; O Lord, those sins are too strong for me, I am not able to
subdue them; I beseech thee for Christ's sake, to send forth the word of thy
power, and lead captivity captive, and suffer me not to dishonor thee any
more.

I say if your hearts were drawn into this frame; that the business did not lie
upon the deceitfulness or falsness of your hearts, but only upon the weakness
and impotencie of your heart, (you would break down the power of sin, but
cannot do it; you would walk better with God, but you cannot do so) you may now
go confidently unto God for strength, and he will certainly hear you, and
answer you with strength in your soul.

Object. You will say, This does stay and encourage us; but how may one know
that it is only weakness, and not wickedness; only a want of power, and not a
want of will, etc.

Sol. Its only a weakness, and a want of more power against sin, if you find
these six things.

1. A constant conflict with sin. 2. A resolved unsubjection unto sin: I will
never serve sin, though I am often captivated by it. 3. Earnest desires to have
it mortified; longings when. 4. Avoiding all occasions and ways that do give
strength to sin. 5. Gladness of any preventing and assisting power against sin.
6. Extreme grief, when our weakness is borne cown by the strength of sin.
If you find these things in you, assuredly your hearts are willing to forsake
sin; and that you cannot get more riddance, does arise only from weakness; and
therefore in this case go to God for more of his strength, and he will not deny
it unto you.

And so for any good work that you would perform, but you cannot dispatch it as
you would, or as you should; you may know that this comes only from weakness
and defect of more strength; and nor from a secret dislike of it, or aversness
unto it, if you find these five qualities in you.

1. You dare not neglect or omit it, but you will be doing the will of God in
this and that particular duty, with such a weak power as you have, though it
be in sighs, and in tears, and in much weakness, and under many fears and
temptations. 2. You will be in the ways of strength; you will be creeping to
the pools of Gods Ordinances, there to receive of his strength. 3. Though you
cannot do much, yet you will find desires to do more; strong cries to help
weakness. 4. You will take a delight after the inward man in the law of God,
and consent unto it, that it is good and holy. 5. You will make much use of
Christ, until God shows his power in your weakness, and gives in more strength
to enable and perfect your works.
Fourthly, If you would find strength from God to enable you to walk in his
Statutes and to do them, then you must be an humble people, and you must sue
When the heart is humble.
unto him in forma pauperis. Psalm 40. 17. I am poor and needy, the Lord
thinks upon me; thou art my help, etc. Psalm. 10. 17. Lord, thou have heard
the desire of the humble; thou will prepare their heart; thou will incline
thine ear to hear. Jam. 4. 6. God resists the proud, but gives grace unto
the humble. By these places you see that we must not be proud, but humble; and
if we be so, and if we do seek the Lord with an humble heart, he will hear our
desire, and will give grace unto us.

Object. But perhaps you may desire to know when a man's heart is humble, and
when he seeks the Lord with an humble heart, to help and strengthen him?

Sol. I will speak a little to this: a man's heart is humble, and humbly
seeking, when*

First, He has no self-bottome to trust unto, but looks on himself as one
utterly destitute and insufficient; in me says Paul, there dwells no good; and
we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing.

Secondly, He is well contented to go abroad, and to beg, and to be beholding
unto another for all his supplies, and supports, and helps: The humble heart is
well content to go and stand at heaven gates for mercy, for grace, for wisdom,
for all spiritual power.

Thirdly, He judges himself unworthy of the least mercy and help from God; not
only which he has received, (as Jacob, Genesis 32, 10. I am not worthy of the
least of all thy mercies, and all the truth which thou have shown to thy
servant) but also which he does now request of God; there is no reason in me,
nor cause in me, nothing in me for which, etc.

Fourthly, He impleads and uses the name of Christ. Dan. 9. 18. We do not
present our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy great
mercies of another: Gods own reason, for Gods own grant; for his Name sake, for
his own Promise sake, for his Christ sake. Remember thy word, and remember thy
Covenant, and do it for the Lords sake.

Fifthly, He will wait Gods leisure, and Gods pleasure: I will hearken what God
the Lord will speak, Psalm. 85. 8. I will wait so the God of my salvation, my
God will hear me, Micah 7. 7.

5. Quest. The fifth and last Question is, How one may know that God has been
his strength to cause him to do any good work, or that he has done it in the
strength of God, and not in the strength of his own parts and gifts?

Sol. This is a choice and deep question, but I shall desire to speak a few
things unto it: One may know that he does act his duties or do his works, not
in the strength of his own parts, but in and by the strength of God;

First, By the Integrity or full frame of a holy working: when his work or duty
has still the requisities that do constitute or make a duty to be a right
duty; or a work to be a right work in a spiritual sense.

To make a work, or to set forth a work in a right and spiritual way, there
must be a concurrence or conjunction of five particulars.

1. There must be the rule of Gods word to command and warrant it. 2. There
must be a right end, even the glory of God alone intended and i^ed at. 3. There
must be a renewed and changed heart by the spirit of Christ: the tree must be
good, before the fruit be good. 4. There must be the breathing of those
heavenly affections of love, and delight, and joy, and inward working as well
as an outward work. 5. There must be faith to set it forth in the name of
Christ.
Now to work it, I say,

1. No man on earth can (by the sole strength of his parts) set forth any one
good work: indeed a man of much learning, and of great endowments, and of good
utterance, may in the virtue of these say and do many good works, which we call
good: he may make a Sermon, he may utter a Prayer, he may be much in the
outward part of duty; nevertheless this strength that is in him is nothing as
to the spiritual performing of any duty: he is not able with all the parts
which he has, to look only at Gods glory, nor to set out his duties with holy
and heavenly affections, nor with faith in Christ.

2. Therefore if you find this concurring frame (which! have mentioned) in any
of your works or duties, assuredly you have attained grace and strength from
God to enable you: the Spirit of God has been present with you to help you.

Secondly, By the Antecedents that go before any work or duty of yours, of
which the performance of it is a consequent or fruit: e. g. if it be the fruit
following

1. The sense and acknowledgment of your own insufficiency. 2. An earnest
desire of God to engage his help and assistance. 3. The actual and particular
application of the promise of God, resting on him, and expecting Gods
assistance: now the work that is done, is not done in any confidence of our
selves, but only upon the acc^unt of Gods strength; but to this I have hinted
already.
Th^rdly, By the Consequents of your duties performed in the strength of By the
consequents of our duties.
God, which are quite different from those that are performed in our own
strength, whether we look unto God, or unto our selves.

First, Unto God, there is acceptance and answer of all the duties or works
done by his strength and assistance; but not so of the works done in our
strength.

Secondly, Unto our selves, where we shall experimentally find four admirable
effects.

1. After all the duties or works performed by us in the strength of God, we
grow more humble, as David, in 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. But who am I, and who is my
people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee: But after works done
in the strength of our own parts, we grow more proud, as the Pharisees, and^.

2. After the duties performed in the strength of God, we do more exalt and
bless the grace of God, as Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more abundantly than
they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. And David, Psalm.
115. 1. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory for thy
me^cy, and for thy truths sake: Whereas when we do act in the strength of our
own parts, we will rob God of his glory, and give praise and blessing un^o our
selves; unto our own wisdom, and unto our own zeal, and unto our own dexterity
and learning.

3. When we have performed our work in the strength of God, and have indeed
discerned his presence with us, this will dr^w out our hearts to depend more
upon God for our future works and services: It will sweetly raise our hearts
unto him; O I will trust on him another time, for I relied on his power and
sufficiency, and he graciously helped and strengthened me. Psalm. 63. 7. Because
thou have been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I re^oy^e:
But it is not thus when we act in our own strength; for after such performances
we are still more apt to rely upon our selves.

4. When we have done our work by the strength of God, hereupon our hearts are
more endeared to God, and so are our resolutions more and more to pray unto
God. Psalm. 116. 1. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice, and my
supplication. Ver. 2. Because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore w^ll
I call upon him as long as I live.

Thus have I finished the third duty, which was to depend upon God for his
strength, seeing he does promise to cause us to walk in his Statutes and to do
them.

Fourthly, Now follows the fourth and last duty which concerns the people Give
the praise of all unto God.
of God, which is to give the praise of all the good which they do, unto God
alone: I may not slightly pass this; therefore I will enquire, first why,
secondly whither.

1. Quest. Why the people of God should be carful to give unto God alone, the
praise and glory of all the good which they do?

Sol. Reasons for it briefly are these.

First, His grace is the only cause of all the good which we do: it is true,
that we are the subjects who do repent, and who do believe, who do love, and
fear, and serve, and obey him, and walk in his Statutes: O but who is the cause
that we do all this, or any of this? from whom is all our fruit found?
Excellent is that passage of Austine, Certum est nos velle cum volumus, sed
Deus facit ut vellemus, certum est nos facere cum faciamus, Deu^ facit ut
faciamus, we do will good, but it is God that makes us to will that good; and
we do good, but it is God who makes us to do that good; it is God who works in
us to will and to do: And hereupon in another place he ingenuously confesses,
that his good works were rather Gods works then his own works; Quaecunque sunt
bona opera mea tua magis quam mea sunt.

Now if God works all our works for us, is it not just that he should have all
the glory from us?

Secondly, We should else be injurious unto God, who says, Glory is mine. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. And my glory will I not give unto another. Esa. 42. 8. Glory (if
I may so speak,) is the Lords portion and revenue out of all his works of power
and grace; and he is very tender of it, and therefore we cheat him when we
withhold any part of his glory from him; nay it is plain theft to take any
part of glory from God, unto whom all the glory does belong, Psalm. 96. 8. for
you lay hands of that which is none of your own, and without the consent of
another who is the true owner; and he professes that he will not part with it;
it being indeed so properly essential to the crown of his diety.

Thirdly, We do but proudly dishonor our selves, in a vainglorious boasting
of that which is none of our own, for which God will certainly abase us. 1 Cor.
4. 7. For who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou, that thou
did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory, as if
thou have not received it? Esa. 2. 17. The loftiness of men shall be bowed
down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low. Luke 18. 14. Every one that
exalts himself, shall be abased. Nebuchad^ezer was cast out among the beasts,
for arrogating to himself: Herod was smitten and eat up with worms, because he
gave not the glory to God: the Pharise rejected, because he gloried in himself.

Fourthly, Because it is an exceeding mercy, if God actually gives us his power
to do any good, or to walk in his Statutes and to do them; which may appear
thus.

First, It is a great mercy to enjoy the Spirit of God, and an unquestionable
Comfort to know that we do enjoy him: this I think no Christian will deny. But
when we find a power enabling us to walk in Gods Statutes, this power comes
from the Spirit of God dwelling in us: No man can walk in Gods Statut^s without
the presence and influence of the Spirit; and every one who does walk in them
and do them, has the Spirit of God: I will put my Spirit within you, and cause
you to walk, etc.

Secondly, It is a great mercy to be made a new creature, to be regenerated, to
partake of the life of Christ; whosoever is enabled to walk in Gods ways and to
do them, he is unquestionably a new creature, he is born again, he pertakes of
Christ, of the life of Christ, and has communion with Christ, he abides in
him: For without me (says Christ, John 15. 5.) ye can do nothing.

Thirdly, It is a great mercy to be kept from sin, and all sinful walkings by
which God is dishonored; (therefore David abundantly blessed God, who kept him
from sinning against him, when he rashly intended to destroy Nabal and all his
household. 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33.) but thus are we kept and presetved, when God
causes us to walk in his Statutes.

Fourthly, It is a great mercy that we are able to honor God, and to honor
our holy profession: it is one of the greatest favors which God shows to any
man on earth, when he makes, and when he uses him as a vessel of his glory.

And this honor God puts upon you, by causing you to walk in his Statutes; now
you are vessels fitted for his honor. In these ways you do live unto his
honor, and to your own honor, and to the honor of your heavenly calling and
profession.

Fifthly, It is a great mercy so to walk as to get peace in conscience, and
assurance of happiness: But when the Lord puts forth such a power upon you, as
enables you to walk in his Statutes, and to keep his judgments and to do them;
hereupon,

1. There comes peace of Conscience; great peace have they which keep thy law,
Psalm. 119. 165. And this is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience
that, etc. 2 Cor. 1. 12.

2. And Assurance and confidence of happiness; they go from strength to
strength, every one of them in Zion appears before God, Psalm. 44. 7.

Sixthly, It is a great judgment, (yea it is one of the greatest judgments)
when the Lord leaves any to themselves. Psalm. 81. 12. So I gave them up unto
their own hearts lust, and they walked in their own counsels. If so, then by
the rule of contraries, it is a very great mercy when the Lord gives unto any
man the power of his grace, enabling him to walk in his ways and Statutes. Now
if there be so many choice mercies bestowed and manifested in causing us to
walk in Gods Statutes, surely then there is great reason that we should give
God all the glory, etc.

2. Quest. Whether we do give God the glory of all the good which he causes us
How to know that we give God all the glory, and assume it not to our selves.
to do, and do not assert nor ascribe it unto our selves?

Sol This may be known thus;

First, When we make a right division of the work done by us; and accordingly
make our acknowlegment; in every good work done by us, there is aliquid Dei,
and aliquid mei; something which is of God, and something which is of our own.
The goodness or well-doing, that is of God; and there must come in an Agnosco;
O Lord, this was thine, this was wrought by thee. The evil-doing, the mixtures,
the imperfections, the distractions, these are ours; and here must come in our
Ignosce; O Lord own and accept what is thine, and O Lord mercifully pardon what
is mine. If after any good done by us we take the humbling part unto our
selves, and give the exalting part unto God, now we ascribe shame unto our
selves, and all the glory unto God.

Secondly, When after the best performances we set an higher value upon the
grace of God, and do not put a higher rate upon our selves: as Paul, Gal. 2.
20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more
abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.
When aftet our good-doings, we raise the grace God (in this work the good hand
of God was with me, and his power was manifested,) but we raise not our selves
a jot; but we are nothing, and still are nothing, and can do nothing without
his grace and presence: verily our posture is humble, and the glory of our
well-doing is returned to God alone.

Thirdly, When we are afraid of all self-glory, as Paul, Gal. 6. 14. God forbid
that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in the
secret temptations unto self-glory, our souls are distressed and exceedingly
humbled within us, and we wrestle with God to beat down, and cast out all high
self-challenging, and self-appropriating thoughts, and to set the crown of
praise only on his own glorious name: this also demonstrats that we acknowledge
God, and not our selves.

Fourthly, when after our well-doing our hearts do look upon the good which we
have done, as special mercy which we have received, and as a new obligation
binding and engageing us unto God, as for a new mercy received from the hand of
God: When bona nostra are dona sua; our good-doings are reckoned amongst Gods
favors and mercies to us; and when we look on bona nostra as debita nostra;
the good which we do as indebting us unto God for what he has made us to do*
and the more good we do, the more are we indebted for praises and
thanksgivings, and say as David, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? Psalm. 116. 12. So what shall I render unto the Lord for
all the good which he has done? and for all the good which I have done? (which
I have done by his power.) This shows that you desire to give all the glory
unto him.

Fifthly, When there is an after-work to be done, as well as a fore-work to be
done, and we are as serious, and careful, and watchful about this, as about
that* before we perform any duty, our fore-work is by faith to look up to God
for his strength; and therein we show our selves careful by the many prayers
which we do put up unto him: And after we have done the duty, there is another
work which does concern us, and that is immediate and solmne returns of
praise unto God, to give him praise who has given us strength, and this work
fills our hearts presently; we cannot come off from our work; we do not account
all our work done, until this be done: As when Naaman was cleansed, he
returned presently unto the Prophets house; or as when the Leper was healed, he
presently went back to Christ and gave thanks: So as soon as the Lord has
enabled us to do any work which he has commanded, we presently are filled with
the sense of his goodness, and our lips do praise him, etc. I have one work yet
more to do; one duty more, viz. to bless my God who has been my strength.

SECT. III.
3. Use. Does God himself undertake to cause his people to walk in his Statutes
and to do them? then here is comfort, and seasonable refreshing for all the
people of God: Behold your work, and behold your God, and behold your strength.
O what a God do you serve! who commands your obedience, and commands also his
own strength to enable you for that obedience* Use of Comfort.
this I command you to do, and this I will cause you to do; here is my precept,
and there is my promise; here is work, and there is strength. Beloved, stand
still a little and consider of the promise of God here made unto you.

First, It is a promise of that whereof every one of you do stand in need; and
What Promises God makes.
you do stand in need of that promised strength every day, and every hour; our
bodies do not stand more in need of daily food, than our souls do of daily
strength from God, to do the works which he requires of us.

Secondly, It is a promise which extends unto every one of you who are the
people of God; to the strong, and to the weak: some promises do only respect
the strong Christians, and some of them do respect only the weak Christians;
and some promises do respect us only for some particular times, and for some
particular conditions; but this promise respects every Christian, and every
Christian in every time, and in every condition, and for every work which he is
to do. Our whole life is a time of obedience; and although our conditions do
alter, yet still the works of obedience do continue and remain; and in all
those conditions, and for all our services in those conditions, does this
promise of help and strength remain for every Christian.

Thirdly, Because it is Gods promise, therefore God himself stands engaged unto
you, and endebted unto you: you are endebted unto God for obedience, and God is
endebted unto you for strength and help: Promittendo se fecit debitorem.

Now four things are observable in every promise of God. Four things
observable in every Promise of God.


1. The good of the promise is suitable, and answerable to our need. 2. The
performance of that promised good belongs to God. Mica. 7. 20. Thou will
perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, etc. 3. He is able to
accomplish it, for he is a natural alsufficiency, an infinite goodness, a
treasury full of grace and power; nothing is too hard for him. 4. He will
perform it, for he is faithful who has promised, and will not alter the word
that is come out of his lips, neither will he suffer his faithfulness to fail:
The heavens shall wax old as a garment, and the earth shall be changed, but his
word remains for ever: His counsel shall stand, and his truth for evermore: he
cannot lie nor deny himself.
Fourthly, This promise is a bond of present payment: all the promises cannot
be sued at one time, nor at all times; but this promise of causing us to walk
in his Statutes may be sued every day, and is to some performed every day. The
time or need is unquestionable the very fit time for payment, (for God to make
good his promise;) but every day is our time of need, every time that we are to
perform service unto God, is God bound to perform his promise of help and
strength unto us, because then we do need his presence and assistance. Now this
is a wonderful comfort unto all the people of God, whose hearts are made
willing to serve him; you have a God to go unto, and you may freely and boldly
go unto him, and he has engaged himself by special promise unto you to be your
help, and he is able and faithful, and will not miss his day nor fail to help
you in your time of need.

Fifthly, Nay let me add one word more so your comfort; though the strength
which God imparts unto you to do him service, be not so high and full as you do
desire, nevertheless

1. It is enough to enable you to serve him with uprightness, although perhaps
with much weakness. 2. It is enough to enable you to walk humbly with your God,
though not so strongly. 3. Whatsoever service you do perform by the strength of
God, (according to that proportion which you have received,) God will
graciously accept of it in Christ: if it be the work of his hands, it shall
receive acceptance at his Throne.
Object. But here it is objected; If God will cause his people (by giving them
How come Gods people sometimes to want his strength.
his strength) to walk in his Statutes and to do them; whence is it that his
people mamy times fail of this strength and power to enable them so to do?

Sol. The reason is not that God is not ready to make good his promise unto
them, but because they are not ready to make use of him to be their strength;
it does arise,

First, Sometimes from the carlesness of their spirits, as Esa. 64. 7. There is
no man that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of
thee: And Esa. 43. 22. But thou have not called upon me O Jacob! but thou have
been weary of me O Israel! And James 4. 2. Ye have not, because ye ask not.
Beloved, the Lord does promise to give us his strength, yet he will be enquired
of by us to do it for us. And how must he be enquired of by us? even with our
whole heart, not faintly, nor carelessly, but fervently, and seriously. Jer. 29.
13. Ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your
heart. Did any of you in the sense of your own weakness and insufficiency seek
the Lord with your heart, and with all your soul, but you found him to look
down upon you with health and strength?

Secondly, Sometimes from the unbelief of their hearts: He that comes to God,
must believe that God is; and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him, Heb. 11. 6. But here we have often failed. James 1. 5. If any of you
lack wisdom, let him ask of God who gives to all men liberally, etc. Ver. 6.
But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. Ver. 7. Else let not this man think
that he shall obtain any thing of the Lord. Why this is our way; either we
seek not to the Lord, or we do not seek to him in faith: we are usually so far
from believing, that we are plainly unbelieving, God will not hear, God will
not answer, God will not perform his promise unto us.

Thirdly, Sometimes from impatience of heart: they will not wait upon the Lord,
but will limit him, and leave him, and fling away without their answer, and
their help. Where now lies the fault? in Gods promise? no, but in your own
unbelief and impatience.

Fourthly, Sometimes from presumption of heart: they will be venturing upon the
occasions and ways of sins, for which God justly leaves them, as he did
Sampson.

Object. But why does God give out so little a measure of strength at a time?
Why God does not give out all strength at once.
why not enough at once to serve them all their lives, for all their duties?

Sol If you will have reasons and accounts given unto you for Gods dealings in
this kind; then thus;

1. He is no necessary agent which works ad extremum, to its utmost, but a
voluntary agent, working after the counsel of his own will: as a parent helps
his child as he sees occasion.

2. He is a wise God, as well as a faithful God, and therefore he imparts help
and strength unto his people in such a way, and by such proportion as does most
exalt his glory and respect their good.

Indeed God is able at once to fill us with strength, but he will not do so,
but chooses rather to give it out gradually, and successively, because

1. Thus we are kept in a continual dependence upon, and in a continual
exercise Why God gives out strength by degrees.
of our faith. 2. Thus he makes way for continual prayer and supplications. 3
Thus he gives us fresh experiences, and daily proofs or testimonies of his
fidelity in promising, which do endear our hearts the more unto him, and
quicken our hearts to perpetual thanksgiving. 4. Thus he keeps us in a more
humble frame, and sense of our own insufficiency and feat of our sins, etc.
Object. Whence is it that the people of God do find such a various
manifestation of the strength of God in them, as to their holy performances?
sometimes a mavelous enlargment, and at another time a meet presence of power,
no more then will well erve the work in hand: sometimes carried out with a full
gale, and at other times almost becalmed; scarcely able to do any thing?

Sol. This is a real case, and a very profitable Question, unto which I return
this answer.

First, It does sometimes arise from the distempers of melancholy, which does
dead and oppress their spirits, and renders them (for the time) as useless
vessels, binding up not only the power of reason, but also the power of grace:
yet when this winter is off, the spring of grace appears in strength again.

Secondly, It does sometimes arise from their own folly, in weakening their own
help and strength; either

1. From spiritual pride, after spiritual enlargments, which God ever punishes
with some measure of declining. 2. From spiritual neglects of strengthening
ordinances, or stirring up our selves to take hold of the strength of God: 3.
From worldly engagements in multitude of cares and businesses, which either
wholly takes us off from communion with God, or makes us but formal in it.
Thirdly, It does sometimes arise from the different actings of our faith:
sometimes we do believe more strongly and perfectly; and sometimes we do believe
more weakly and unstedfastly, and therefore we are able to do much, and
sometimes we are able to do little. Our proportion of obedience, is answerable
to the proportion of our believing: much faith brings in much strength, and
little faith brings in little strength:

As the larger vessels bring up the more water, and the narrower vessels but a
little, etc.

If you believe, you shall see the glory and the power of God; and as you
believe, so do you partake and receive of that power.

Fourthly, It does sometimes arise from the presence of soul-conflicts: we are
sometimes in sta^u libertatis, in an estate of liberty, exempted from the actual
temptations of Satan, and from violent rebellions and hurryings of our own
corruptions; and now our ship gos on more swiftly, and we can serve the Lord
with gladness: but sometimes we are in statu perturbationis; wind and tide are
against us; enemies without, and enemies within; and now (at least to our own
apprehensions,) our ship moves but heavily, and we serve the Lord in tears.

Fifthly, It does sometimes arise from divine wisdom, that we do not always
find the like measure of assistance: by this God does learn his people

1. That their strength is not in themselves, but only in their God.

2. That what they are, they are by his grace, and act in a proportion to his
grace given and received.

3. That they should not despair at the greatest services; for God can then
enlarge them; nor yet presume and make nothing of the least duties; for God can
withdraw himself, and then they can do nothing.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A. Assurance.
WHether assurance be of any spiritual advantage to him that has it, 331 The
adjuncts or properties of the Covenant, 116 Anabaptists answered, 631 Why
Apostates are such great sinners, 681 The great danger and judgment of
Apostates, 683 The slothful is prone to Apostasy, ibid. What Apostates lose,
677 The cause why some apostatize, 680 Arguments of the Arminians, 308 Whether
after this assurance he may ever doubt again, 232 How one may know his
assurance is true, 479 How one may know he has a false assurance, 475 What
faith precedes assurance, 481 What weak Christians should judge of their
estates, who could never get assurance, 484 A man may be in a pardoned state,
who is not assured, ibid.
B. Blessedness.
IT is a difficult matter to believe. 434 A Believer may know by a certainty of
faith, that Christ died for him, p. 212 Comfort and encouragement to Believers,
206 How far Believers may depend on God in Covenant. 217 Weak Believers must
remember they have an Advocate with the Father, 279 Comfort for distressed,
penitent, and believing persons, 242 Benefits by good company, 692 Three things
make up a Blessedness for us, 26 God and he only is our blessedness, 27
Spiritual Blessings are promised as well as temporal, 339 What course we should
take for this enjoyment of spiritual Blessings, 340 In the Covenant spiritual
Blessings are first promised, 242 They are to be blamed who look not after
spiritual Blessings, 343 Bless God who first blesses us with all spiritual
Blessings, 346 Whatsoever Blessings are dispensed, God is the giver of them,
ibid. God will have the glory of all our Blessings, 347 After what manner God
dispenses his Blessings, 349 Inordinate cares are your burdens, 97
C. Covenant.
SLight not Christ any longer, 13 Christ is yours as to his Person, 54 Comfort
from this that the Person of Christ is yours. p. 54 Alll is enjoyed by the
enjoyment of Christ, Equivalently, 55 Jesus Christ himself is the greatest and
choicest gift that God can give unto you, ibid. Christ is yours to all his
Offices, 56 Christ is yours as a Prophet, ibid. Comfort from this, that Christ
is ours, 57 All our sins are laid upon Christ, 58 Christ discharged all our
debts and bonds, ibid. Jesus Christ is a King, and your King; he makes Subjects
by his Word and Spirit, 59 Our Union with Christ, confers upon us an interest
in every good of the Covenant, 209 Christ will accomplish and perform all that
is good for us, 210 I fear I was never united to Christ, 211 The Covenant of
Grace considered in relation to Christ as Mediator, 224 Christ has a sevenfold
relation to the Covenant, 224 Of the exceeding love of Christ, 230 Of the great
obligations that lie upon us to look after Christ, 231 In Christ, two Natures,
232 The two Natures united in the person of Christ, were the Principles of all
the actions and works of Mediatorship, 233 Christ according to both these
Natures, is Mediator, ibid. Arguments to prove Christ laid down his life, and
raised it again according to both Natures: he is our Priest, Prophet and King
according to both Natures, 234 What did concern Christ to do and suffer for us
as a Mediator, 235 Christ did perform that active obedience to the Law of God
which we should, but could not perform, ibid. Conclusions concerning the
passive obedience of Christ. Christ's sufferings were voluntary, and not
constrained, 236 Christ suffered corporal punishments, 237 Christ's sufferings
in soul, were exceedingly high and great, ibid. Christ did feel and suffer the
torments of hell, 238 Christ was indeed made a curse for us, 239 There was
willingness on all sides for this passive work of Christ, 240 Behold your sins
what they will bring upon you, without a part in Christ, 241 Remember the
sufferings of Christ in all fears and conflicts, 243 The virtue and benefits
depending on, and flowing from Christ as Mediator, 244 Conclusions about the
satisfaction of Christ, 245 Christ by his death and sufferings did really make
satisfaction, 246 Christ suffered so much as fully discharged our debt, 247 The
sufferings of Christ, were more then mere sufferings, 248 Then rest in the
satisfaction of Christ, 249 Comfort that Christ shed his blood for our
remission; it loses our bonds, and discharges our debts. 252 Get into Jesus
Christ, 258 Accept of the Redemption by Christ, 264 Jesus Christ did step in
between God and us, to make up the breach, 254 Let trembling hearts make into
Christ, and trust on him to make their peace, 260 No peace with God, but by
Christ, ibid. He that lies in bondage and would be redeemed, let him by faith
look up to Jesus Christ, 265 Christ has purchased for all the Elect
everlasting life, 266 Strive to believe the sufferings of Christ to be a
purchase, 267 Why do you not go to Christ, and get from him all that is good,
268 Your estate is not full without the purchase of Christ, 269 The sufferings
of Christ, are the confirmation of the Covenant, 270 What Christ still does for
his people as Mediator, p. 272 Jesus Christ does act for his people at the
right hand of his Father, 273 What is the eminent work that Christ does in
heaven for us, 274 The benefits of Christ's Intercession, 273 Whether Christ
died for every man, 280 In what respect Christ may be said to die for all, 281
Jesus Christ did effectually die for all the Elect, ibid. There is such a
sufficiency in the death of Christ, that if any will come unto Christ, he shall
partake of redemption by him, 283 The Death of Christ was not effectual for
all, 285 Christ did not intend such a latitude for all by his death, 293
Whether any man can know that his particular salvation was intended in the
death of Christ, 312 How a person may know that Christ did die effectually for
him, ibid. Some may be in Christ, but do not know it, 316 One may certainly
know that Christ died for him, by the description of those for whom Christ
intentionally died, 317 How I may know my Faith does interest me in Christ, 220
How one may know he is deluded in his confidence of Christ's dying for him, 224
What a person should do, who as yet cannot certainly affirm that Christ died
for him, 325 Whether every one who is indeed redeemed by Christ, may know
sometime or other that Christ died for him, 328 What a heavy weight did lie
upon Christ, 432 How there can be such an efficacy in the blood of Christ, 459
How we should look after Christ, 462 Who hungers and thirsts for Christ, 463
What this sprinkling or application of Christ's blood is, 4 ^6 No benefit by the
blood of Christ without application, 468 There is a Covenant with Christ
personally and mystically considered, 4 The seals of the Covenant are given
unto his people ibid. Gods people plead this Covenant, 5 God is faithful in his
Covenant with us, ibid. Why God makes a Covenant betwixt himself and his
people, ibid. There is an absolute Covenant, 6 And an Hypothetical Covenant,
ibid. Differences of the Covenant of Grace from the Covenant of Works, 8 The
condition of man with whom God does covenant, 9 The Covenant of works was made
without a Mediator, ibid. The Covenant of Grace with a Mediator, ibid. Whether
faith were not required in the Covenant of Works, 10 Whether the Covenant of
grace requires works, 11 Admire the goodness of God in making this Covenant of
grace, 12 Support for troubled consciences, 13 The Covenant described and
opened, ibid. It is a new Covenant with man, 14 This Covenant springs from
the mercy and grace of God, ib. The Covenant of grace is a Covenant of promise,
15 What it is to be a people in Covenant, 17 How we come to be Gods people in
Covenant, 18 Try our selves whether we be in Covenant with God, 20 Characters
of a people not in Covenant, ibid. The evidences that God is our God in
^ovenant, 23 Make out your Covenant Relation, 90 Maintain and justify your
Covenant Relation, p. 91 Of the unchangeableness of our Covenant Relation,
ibid. The graciousnesse of your God in Covenant, 92 Walk and live like a people
in Covenant with God, ibid. How a people in Covenant should walk, ib. Of the
gifts of the Covenant, 335 God gives his people in Covenant spiritual blessings
as well as temporal, 336 How dreadful is the condition of such as refuse to be
in Covenant with God, 376 All uncovenanted people are unforgiven people, 377 If
you will not consent to a Covenant Relation, you cannot expect the
Covenant-advantages, 105 A sinner that has no worthiness at all, may be taken
into Covenant, 107 A personal worthiness is not expected for admission into
this Covenant, ibid. It is a giving Covenant, 120 God will refuse none from
this Covenant, who are willing to have him for their God, 109 Directions what
course a sinner should take to be brought into this Covenant, 110 Exhortation
to them that are not in Covenant with God, ibid. Get into Covenant Relation,
104 It is a new Covenant, 116 It is a free and gracious Covenant, 123 This
Covenant is a well-ordered Covenant, 128 Its a perfect and plentiful Covenant,
118 It is a holy Covenant, 131 It is a sure and steadfast Covenant, 138 It is
the last Covenant, 148 It is an everlasting Covenant, ibid. All the things of
the Covenant, are styled everlasting, 149 The certainty of the Covenant, is the
glory of it, 141 It is the best Covenant, 166 Whether faith only be the
condition of the Covenant, p. 187 Why faith is the only condition, ib. The
condition of the Covenant, 181 How any condition can be allowed in the Covenant
of grace, 182 There is a Covenant betwixt God and believers, 2 Of a Covenant in
general, ibid. Some Covenants are sinful, ibid. That there is a Covenant
betwixt God and Believers, 3 There is a Covenant betwixt God the Father and
Jesus Christ, ibid. Differences betwixt the conflicts in a regenerate and
unregenerate man, 514 How to know whether we act upon Gods command alone, 672
Parallels betwixt Gods commands and his precepts, 701 Twelve things in respect
of God to remove our cares, 98
D. Duties.
GOd Commands not duties that we should be justified thereby, 660 We must not
perform duties to still our consciences, 663 We must not perform duties to
self ends, ibid. How we may so perform duties, as to please God, 664
E. Eternity.
Every work is a step to Eternity, 667 What is Evangelical obedience, 652
F. Faith.
WHat is to be done to obtain the Faith which brings us into Covenant, 201
Consider the Author of this faith, ibid. God, and God only is the Author of
Faith, 202 Consider the means of working this faith, ib. The Gospel is the
means of Faith, ibid. Four things to be done to get Faith, 203 Faith is
possible and probable to be had, 207 No sinner to whom the Gospel is preached,
can conclude that God never intended to give him Faith, ib. God will never deny
Faith to them that cordially ask it, 208 Improve your Faith to a dependence
upon God, 216 Improve your Faith to a keeping Covenant with God, 220 A
necessity of the use and exercise of Faith, 405 All men have not Faith, 406 All
Faith does not bring us in remission of sins, ibid. What the Faith is, that
will certainly bring in remission of sins, 408 Who strives with God for Faith,
464 The necessity of Faith; is, we will walk in Gods ways, 657 Three degrees
of Faith, necessary, 114 How we may know whether our faith be a faith of union,
190 Walk without inordinate care before your faithful God, 97 Walk without
inordinate fears, 98 What is meant by Filthiness, 437 Upon forgiveness, all
displeasure cease, 364 Get a capacity of forgiveness, 380 Some put themselves
out of a capacity of of forgiveness, 385 Gods Promise of forgiveness extends to
all the sins of all his people. 422 Whose sins God forgives, he becomes their
friend, 424 The blood of Christ is the cause, and the only Meritorious cause of
Forgiveness, 458
G. Glorying.
A twofold Glorying, 12 The misery of such who have not God for their God, 22
The answerable and reciprocal acts betwixt God and us, 23 Of the
Loving Kindness of God, 27 Comfort in this, that God is our God, 26 The more or
less you enjoy of God, the more or less perfect, 27 In all other enjoyments,
our condition is low without God, ibid. God, and he only is our rest, 28 God is
the most desirable good, ibid. God unites himself to us by way of donation,
ibid. Every one who has God for his God, does enjoy all things, 29 If God be
our God, we are the Objects of Gods Eternal Love, 30 All the glorious
Attributes of God, are engaged for their good, 31 God is a merciful God, 33 Six
Comforts to those who have God for their merciful God: he will forgive you,
though not others, ibid. Comforts from this, that God will be a holy God to
you, he will make you holy, 34 God is an omniscient God, 35 The Omniscience of
God, is comfort against all our enemies, 36 God is a wise God, 37 Your wise God
will give you wisdom, 38 God is an infinite essence, and therefore of infinite
power, ibid. What comfort is this, that our God is omnipotent, 39 When God will
do you good, none can hinder him, 40 Gods faithfulness is engaged for you, 41
Four things in the faithfulness of God, 42 God is a gracious God, 43 What
comfort from hence, that our God is gracious, 44 The immutability or
unchangeableness of God, 45 Six comforts from hence, the unchangeable God will
never cast you off, 46 Gods Omnipresence, 47 God is at once, and wholly present
everywhere with his Essence and Attributes, 48 If God be ours, then all the
promises are ours, 76 Comfort from this, that Gods promises are ours, ibid. The
promises are sufficient encouragements to pray to God, and to depend on him, p.
78 If God be ours, then all the immunities and privileges annexed to the
Covenant are ours, 79 Ten immunities by the Covenant with God, ib. Privileges
by being in Covenant with God, 83 The privileges of the children of God, are
yours, ibid. Your Communions with God, are by the Mediator, 84 You may go to
your God when you will, ib. You may with confidence wrestle with God, ibid. You
may expect help from God in all your works, 85 The Angels of God are ministering
Spirits for you, ibid. God will be your God in life and death, 86 If God be
ours, all is ours, ibid. God makes a Covenant with the creature to be
serviceable for your good, 87 All creatures are in a subordination to the will
of your God, ib. As God has command of all good in the creatures, so he has
engaged to settle it upon you, 88 Instructions for the people of God in
Covenant: Thankfully bless your God for bringing you into Covenant, ibid. Make
use of your God in all your occasions, wants, troubles, 89 Encourage your
selves in the Lord your God, ibid. There is a near relation betwixt God and
you, 218 Make out to your God for all your souls do need, 271 God the Father
did never intend this latitude of Redemption for all, when he sent Christ into
the world, 289 Why God gives spiritual blessings as well as temporal, 337 God
will do more for his people in Covenant then for any, 338 Gods sovereignty
engaged for our good, p. 49 You can never be brought into any straits, but God
is able to help you, 50 Ten things concerning the goodness of God to his
people, ibid. Twelve things may assure you, that God will be kind to his
people, 51 Gods Eternity, 52 It gives confidence to live upon God, as long as
we live; 53 If God be your God, then Christ is your Christ, 54 Comfort to the
people of God in Covenant, 339 God would have the hearts of his people fixed on
him alone, 348 God does confine our prayers to himself alone, ibid. God gives
all needful good assuredly, 349 All the blessings which God promises to his
people in Covenant, he gives only upon account of his graciousness, 353 God
does not enjoin, nor expect any worthiness as a reason of his blessings, 354
God will have us acknowledge our selves unworthy, 356 Under the sense of
unworthiness, let us go to God, and trust in him, 358 Arguments to demonstrate
God is great in mercy, 441 God brings great sinners into Covenant, in a perfect
league of love and peace, ibid. God makes use of great sins to humble men, 442
They are no small matters that God does for us, ibid. God takes away the ground
of despair, 443 The people of God may be guilty of great sins, 444 God will be
praised for Christ, 469 God himself undertakes to sanctify his people, 493 God
does not expect that you should bring, but receive, 108 Difference betwixt
restraining and renewing grace, 506 Why such as have grace, should labor to
grow in it, p. 635 I but I am under much weakness of grace, and many wants,
Ans. 215
H. H^ness.
OF the kinds of hardness in men, 529 Some are sensible of their Hardness, 538
Remove what breeds this Hardness, ibid. God takes away hardness of Heart from
his people, 544 A difference betwixt the hardness remaining in the best, and
that in the wicked, 547 Resist hardness returning, ibid. They who partake of
this mercy, should beware of hardening themselves again, 550 Of the judgments
of God upon hardened sinners, ibid. Three sorts of hardened sinners, ibid. When
we make most Haste, we shall hardly finish all we have to do, 685 A new Heart
is a changed heart, 497 God gives a new Heart and a new Spirit to his people in
Covenant, 496 Ten Characters of a new Heart, 511 Why God gives a new Heart, 501
Then many are not Gods people, they have their old hearts still, 502
Exhortation to use the means to get a new Heart, 522 The misery of an old
Heart, ibid. The necessity of a new Heart, 523 Hearken not to the prejudices of
your old Heart, 524 The way to get a new Heart, 525 There is a stony Heart in
every man, 527 Why called a stony Heart, 528 Comfort to those, that have a new
Heart, 519 Of the evil of an hard Heart, 540 Why God takes away the stony
Heart, and that by promise, 546 The means how God takes hardness of heart away,
ibid. Labor to be cured of this hard Heart, 534 The effects and fruits of a
hard Heart, 536 Means to cure a hard Heart, ib. They are none of the people of
God, whose hard heart is not removed, 548 Keep up the tenderness of heart, 554
Search your Hearts often, ibid. All the people of God have a softened heart
given them, 555 What a heart of flesh is. A fourfold softness, 556 Characters
of a heart spiritually soft and tender, 567 This tenderness of Heart appears
toward ^od. 557 Why God gives a heart of flesh, 559 Trials, whether we have a
tender Heart, 560 Bless God for this Heart of flesh, 549 Convictions that many
deceive themselves in a false softness of Heart, 564 Get newness of Heart, 583
Cet Hearts to love the Lord, ib. How the tender Heart is affected in case of
Gods honor, 574 The workings of a tender Heart, in case of Gods dishonor, 575
The misery of persons destitute of softness of Heart, 566 The benefits of a
tender heart, 579 How to know which is true humiliation, 598 The carnal heart
counts any one common and burthensom, 668 Our helps are more then our work, 693
Six things affirmed of Holiness, 33 Why men look after mercy, and not holiness,
492 Be not discouraged in the sense of the want of holiness. 495 The nature of
holiness, 136 How true holiness may be known, ibid. The Author of this Covenant
commands holiness, 132 What the sin against the holy Ghost, is, 385 No creature
can make another holy, 494 What is to be done that we may be holy, 137
I. Jesus.
JEsus the Mediator of the Covenant, p. 222 Whilst we live we are imperfect,
676 A threefold intercession in Scripture, 274 How sad is their condition who
have no part in Christ's intercession, 276 The Popish Doctrine of other
Intercessors confuted, 275 Idolatry, the greatness of that sin, 440 Every
justified person has cause of rejoicing, 442 The difference between
Justification and Sanctification, 489 Wonder not to see little good done upon
many by private Instructors, 532 Its a great judgment not be accepted with
God, 664
K. Knowledge.
HOw Knowledge contributes to obedience, 655 Without Knowledge obedience is not
practical, ibid. Some more slow in point of Knowledge, some in point of
practice, 684 Get a clear Knowledge of the ways of God, 698
L. Laws.
THe observation of Gods Laws belongs to all that are in Covenant with him, 643
How Gods people being not under the Law, are bound to obedience, 646 How the
Moral Law never cease, ibid. How we are said to be under the Law, 647 What is
Legal obedience, 652 A Legal obedience is indeed impossible, 670 In what cases
God leaves his Servants, 710 Love is not the only rule of our obedience, 658
M. Mediator.
WE cannot serve a better Master then God, 696 God is the best Master, and why,
ibid. God is no hard Master, 707 Of the Mediator of the Covenant, 225 What is a
a Mediator, ibid. Christ the Mediator betwixt God and us, ib. There is a
necessity of a Mediator betwixt God and us, 226 There cannot be a New Covenant
without a Mediator, 227 Jesus Christ, and he only is the Mediator, ibid. Three
conditions in a Mediator agree only to Christ, 228 How Christ is to be
considered as being a Mediator as God-man. ibid. A Mediator must be a middle
person twixt differing parties, ibid. This Mediator undertakes all betwixt God
and us, 231 According to which Nature in Christ, he is a Mediator, 132 The
works of Christ's Mediation were such as no person could effect, except he were
both God and man, 229 There is in us an unworthiness of any mercy, 355 That God
is a God of infinite mercy, 431 Though your sins be great, yet there is hopes
of mercy, 445 What is to be observed about mercies and blessings, 662
N. Newness.
A Natural man can of himself do no good, 706 Try our selves what newness is in
us, 504
O. Obedience.
HOw to please God in our obedience, 664 Progressive Obedience is true
Obedience, 676 Three things in Christ's obedience for our imitation, 677
P. Pardon.
SOme plead for a capacity of pardon upon false grounds, 381 Who are in a right
capacity of pardon, 391 All who do truly believe in Jesus Christ, are within
the promise of pardon, 403 There is a necessity of Faith for pardon, ibid. Rest
not till you have got the assurance of your pardon, 420 God does sometimes
pardon sin, and not give the assurance of it, ibid. God calls us to repent of
great sins, and promises pardon, 441 God has great glory in the pardon of
great sins, 442 God would have his people to pray for pardon of great sins,
ibid. Christ's blood the only cause of pardon, 460 The happiness of a pardoned
condition, 411 Whether all sins be pardoned together at once, 426 A multitude
of sins is not inconsistent with pardoning mercy, 432 Gods people must
persevere in their obedience to God, 674 In our way we have protection, 686 How
we may be enabled to persevere, 687 Papists confuted, ibid. Carnal Protestants
confuted, ibid. The qualifications of penitential confession, 395 How to prove
our selves to be of the number of Gods people, 653 Popish Satisfactions
confuted, 249 Gods ways are possible and passable, 708 Six Antidotes against
presumption, 449 To discover the Presumption of many who plead their interest
in the promises without the penformance of the condition, 188 Parallels betwixt
Gods promises and the Saints experiences, 702
R. Repentance.
REpentance is required to the obtaining of forgiveness, 369. Though repentance
be not a cause, yet it is a means of pardon, ibid. Of the difference between
Legal and Evangelical Repentance, 429 How one may know he does truly repent,
391 God threatens eternal wrath to them that repent not, 450 Whether the first
work of a sinner be to repent or to believe, 454 What that sinner should do who
cannot find a heart to repent or believe, 454 Never was any great sinner
pardoned, but he repented, 449 The Relation betwixt God and his people, still
continues, 675 To whom God has a tender regard, 712
S. Sanctification.
SAnctification is promised as well as Justification, 488 We cannot glorify
God without Sanctification, 491 Reasons why God does sanctify as well as
justify, 490 What we shall find when our hearts are sanctified, 656 Why Gods
people should walk in his statutes, 849 What considerable in Gods statutes, 675
Why God promises to make his people to walk in his statutes, 705 Take heed of
self-confidence, 709 Trusting in self is a great sin, 710 The danger of
self-confidence, ibid. Of the hainousness of sin, 230 See whether to go under
the sense of sin, and what to trust to, 253 What it is in sin, the forgiveness
of sin does respect, 362 Whether God sees no sin in justified persons. 365 Gods
covering of sin, is not exclusive of his seeing sin, 367 Whether justified
persons may charge themselves with sin, p. 369 Pardon of sin does most of all
set forth the glory of God, 374 Mourning persons for sin, are in a capacity of
pardon, 392 They who turn from sin, are under the promise of pardon, 393 The
qualifications of penitential mourning for sin; It is a supernatural grief, 394
A sincere grief for sin, as sin, ibid. How we may know that we greive for sin
as sin, 395 The qualifications of a right turning from sin, 396 But no man
turns from every sin, 398 But we have often sinned since we have endeavored to
turn from sin, 401 A true penitent may sin again, ibid. The right stating the
penitents turning from sin, 402 The people of God may believe that he will
pardon all sin, 428 Forgiveness of sins, one of the first mercies promised by
God to all his people in Covenant, 359 Forgiveness of sins described, 360 How
Gods displeasure and anger against his people, is consistent with his
discharging of their sins, 367 God is displeased with the sins of his own
people, ibid. Whether there be any reason to repent of our sins that are
forgiven, 268 Penitent persons forsake their sins, 393 The duties of such whose
sins are forgiven, 416 Great sins are forgiven to the people of God in
Covenant, 437 Directions how to get the pardon of great sins, 445 Of the
wonderful goodness of God to sinners, 230 The sad condition of impenitent
sinners, 341 No man is a penitent sinner, but a mourning sinner, 391 Repenting
sinners confess their sins, ibid. What is meant by sinful flesh, p. 229 Slow
walking is very disproportionable to the means, 684 Look after your souls in
what condition they are, ibid. Conclusions laid down against the Socinians,
ibid. The Spirit of God is yours, 61 The Spirit of God is ours in respect of
his Titles and Attributes: the Spirit of God, of Christ, of Glory, ibid. It is
a holy Spirit, ibid. The Spirit is ours in respect of his gifts or fruits, 62
Six things concerning the graces of the Spirit, 62 The Spirit is theirs in
respect of his works and operations, 63 Five choice works which the Spirit does
for all Gods people, ib. The Spirit is ours in respect of his help and virtue,
65 The Spirit is a Comforter as he opens to us all the springs of Comfort, 67
Three offices of the Spirit to make all the Ordinances of Christ effectual to
us, 68 The absence of Christ is made up by the presence of the Spirit, 69 You
are safe and sure with whom the Spirit is, ibid. A twofold separation from sin,
212 I but I have not the Spirit, 213 In what posture a Christian must be, who
may judge of the presence or absence of the Spirit, 214 God will put his Spirit
within his people, 584 In what sense the Spirit is said to be put within us,
585 Many have the Spirit, yet come short of what they should have, 593 The
misery to be destitute of the Spirit, ibid. How the Spirit unites the
brokenhearted sinner to Christ, 596 In what measure he gives the Spirit, 589
There are different gifts of the Spirit, ib. Every one has a portion of the
Spirit, ibid. Every one of Gods people have so much of the Spirit as is
necessary to Salvation, 590 Many have not the Spirit of God, 591 Many have a
false and deluding Spirit, 592 How to know that we have the Spirit of God, 595
What are the works of Gods Spirit in them that shall be saved, ibid. How the
Spirit convinces of sin, 596 How the Spirit leads Gods children, 601 Having
the Spirit, may be known by the qualities of the Spirit, 603 Few have the
Spirit of God, 612 What it is to worship God in Spirit, 613 The benefits which
come by having the Spirit, 615 What the Spirit is called in Scripture, 616 Who
have, and have not the Spirit, 606 Whether the spirit of prayer be a sure sign
of a child of God, 607 What is the conviction of the Spirit in Gods children,
597 What is the spirit of bondage, ibid. Whether all the Godly have first the
spirit of bondage, 598 Gods Spirit helps us in prayer, 617 He is a restoring
Spirit, 618 How the Spirit comforts, 619 When we may conclude our having of the
Spirit notwithstanding afflictions, 620 Duties of such which have the Spirit,
625 How the Spirit may be quenched, ibid. What grieves the Spirit, 626 How to
know the motions of the Spirit, 627 How to prevent the Spirits removings, 628
Improve the Spirit, 634 Means to get the Spirit, 639 We must not resist the
Spirit, 640 How the Spirit may be injured, 629 How to know the testimony of the
Spirit, 630 How to know that we have much of Gods Spirit in us, 636 Let all
look after the gifts of the Spirit, 637 The Spirit and pardon of Sin go
together, 638
T. Trinity.
OF the Testator of the Covenant, 225 There is a conjunction of the whole
Trinity in all the businesses of our eternal blessedness, 69 A conjunction of
the Trinity in respect of Love, 70 Five Comforts in the love of the Trinity, 72
There is a conjunctive union in the will and purpose of the Trinity in the
matters of our salvation, 73 There is a common engagement of the whole Trinity
unto you, 75 There is a communion betwixt you, and every person of the Trinity,
ibid. We are to forgive all the Trespasses against us, ibid. Why some receive
the Truth, and others do not, 707
V. Unbelievers.
IN what a miserable Condition are all Unbelievers, 12 The dreadful condition
of an unforgiven people, 378 Beware of uneven walking, 685 Its folly to walk
unevenly, ibid. God is the Father of such as are upright, 694
W. Works.
WHo they be that walk not after Gods Commandments, 650 When do we willingly
walk in Gods statutes, ib. How we may be enabled to walk in Gods statutes, 653
God will enable his people to walk in his ways, 700 The benefit which comes by
walking in Gods ways, 849 Rules concerning our walking in Gods statutes, 666
Many of Gods children are sometimes out of the way, 678 Move on in Gods ways
with more exactness, 689 How far God engages himself to keep his people to walk
in his ways, 704 Why we should not be weary, 686 How we are strong in God,
when weak in our selves, 712 How deviations are the fruits of weakness, 678
Wherein our weakness appears, 711 We must have our hearts and wills sanctified,
if we will keep Gods Commandments, 656 Such as walk not in Gods statutes, are
wicked, 651 Why wicked men walk not in Gods statutes, 652 Rest not upon your
works, 13 How the Covenant of works and grace differ, 706 You are not able to
stand out and live under the Covenant of works, 105 We must be accountable for
every work, 667 We must worship God in spirit and in truth, 665
Books printed for, and sold by Joseph Cranford, at the Sign of the Castle and
Lion, in St. Pauls-Church-yard.
Books in Fol.
THe Works of Joseph Hall, Bishop of Norwich. Dubartas's Divine Weeks and
Works. Lexicon Anglo-Graeco-Latinum. Nov. Test. or a complete Alphabetical
Concordance of all the words contained in the New Testament, both English,
Greek, and Latin, in three distinct Tables, viz. The 1 English, whereby any
word may be rendered into Greek and Latin, 2 Greek, whereby any word may be
rendered into English and Latin, 3 Latin, whereby any word may be rendered into
Greek and English.
Together with the several significations, etymons derivations, force; and
emphasis, and diverse acceptations in Scripture of each word, as also the diverse
readings in English, Greek, and Latin, each annexed to their proper tables. By
Andrew Sympson, (...), or Divine Characters, in two parts, acutely
distinguishing the more secret and undiscerned differences, between 1. The
Hypoocrite in his best dress of seeming Virtues and formal duties, and the true
Christian in his real grace and sincere Obedience; as also between 2. The
blackest weeds of daily infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving
grace, and the reigning sins of the unregenerate; that pretend to that
godliness they never had. By Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of Wrington in
Somersetshire, The Author of The Guide to true Blessedness.
Remains of the Reverend Mr. William Fenner, Minister of Rochford in Essex,
being 1 A continuation of his Alarm to drowsy Saints. 2 A Treatise of
effectual calling. 3. The killing power of the Law. 4 The Spiritual Watch. 5
The new Birth. 6 A Christians ingrafting into Christ. 7 A Treatise of the
Sabbath.
An exposition with Notes Unfolded and Applied on John 17. delivered in Sermons
preached weekly on the Lord day to the Congregation in Taunton Magdalene, by
George Newton Minister of the Gospel there.
In Quarto.
Jus Divinum Ministeri Evangelici, or the Divine Right of the Gospel Ministry,
by the Provincial Assembly of London. Beshemesh clouded, or Animadversions on
the Rabinical Talmud of Rabbi John Rogers, wherein you have his Spirit
Anatomized, Principles examined, and reasons in some measure refuted. By
Zechariah Crofton, Minister of the Word at Buttolphs Algate, London. Refreshing
streams flowing from the fullness of Jesus Christ in several Sermons. By William
Colvil, Minister of Gods Word in Edinburgh. The Husbands Authority unveiled,
wherein is moderately discussed, whether or no it be lawful for a good man to
beat his bad Wife. The Crucifying of the world by the Cross of Christ. By
Richard Baxter. A Treatise of Self-denial. By Tho. Wilson. The Crown of
Righteousness, a Sermon at the Funeral of Tho. Hodges Esquire. By Tho. Watson,
Minister of Gods Word at Stephens Walbrook, London. A late great Shipwreck of
faith, a Sermon preached by Daniel Cawdry, of Great Billing in
Northamptonshire. Self-denial. A Sermon preached to the Assembly of Divines, By
Edward Reynolds D. D. Peace of Church, a Visitation Sermon, By Edward Reynolds
D. D. Animalis Homo, sive concio. lat. habita ad Academicos Oxonienses. Edvardo
Reynolds. The Quakers Jesus, or the unswadling of that Babe James Naylor, which
a wicked Toleration has Midwiv'd into the world, discovering the Principles of
the Quakers in general; a Narrative of the substance of his Examinations, and
his Disciples, as it was taken from his own mouth in their answer before the
Magistrates of the City of Bristol, also the management of it in Parliament. By
William Grigge, Citizen of Bristol. An Exposition with practical Observations
on the eighteenth, nineteenth; twentieth, and one and twentieth Chapters of the
Book of Job, being forty two Lectures delivered in Magnus Church near the
Bridge. By Jos. Caryl Preacher of the Word, and Pastor of the Congregation
there. A Dispute between Walter Roswel and Richard Coppin. The Agreement of the
Associated Ministers of Norfolk and Norwich concerning the public, and their
resolutions to revive it in their several Congregati^ns, together with some
Explanatory discourses, declaring the particular grounds moving to the
Agreement, expressed in the several Articles. An Exhortation to the members of
their respective Congregations, exciting them to a submission to, and mutual
assistance of their Ministers in this Method of Instruction, quarto. The first
General Epistle of St. John, the Apostle, Unfolded and Applied in 37 Sermons,
preached at Saint Dyonis Back-Church by Nath. Hardy D. D. The Second Part. A
Paraphrase on the Canticles. By George Sand. The Kings Cabinet opened. Armilla
Catechetica, A Chain of Principles, or an orderly Concatenation of Theological
Aphorisms and Exercitations, wherein the Chief Heads of Christian Religion are
asserted and improved. By John Arrowsmith D. D. late Master of both St. John's
and Trinity College successively, and Regius Professor of Divinity in the
University of Cambridge. Samariah's Downfall, or a Commentary (by way of
supplement) on the five last verses of the thirteenth Chapter of Hoseah, where
is set forth Ephraims Dignity, Duty, Impenitency and Downfall, very suitable
to, and seasonable for these present times; wherein you have the Text
explained, several Cases of Consciences cleared, many Practical Observations
raised, (with references to such Authors as clear any Point more fully) and a
Synopsis or brief Character of the twenty Kings of Israel, with some useful
Inferences from them. By Tho. Hall B. D. and Pastor of Kings-Norton. An Apology
for the Ministry and its maintenance, wherein is set forth the Necessity,
Dignity and Efficacy of the Gospel Ministry, against the Socinians,
Swenk-feldians, Weigelians, Anabaptists, Enthusiasts, Familists, Seekers,
Quakers, Levellers, Libertines, and the rest of that rout. By Tho. Hall B. D.
Pastor of Kings-Norton. Diatribae de Eterno Divini bene-placiti circa Creaturas
Intellectuales Decreto, ubi Patrum Consulta Scholasticorum scita and modernorum
placita ad sacrae Scripturae amussim and Orthodoxae Ecclesiae Tribunal
deferuntur Authore Thoma Aylesbury Presbytero Anglo S. S. Theologiae Bacca
laureo. Several Sermons preached upon solemn occasions, wherein Gods
retaliating Justice especially to Oppression, his preserving, proving,
delivering and rewarding Mercies. The Ministers both Dignity and Frailty, the
Saints particular and General Duty are delineated. By Nath. Hardy D. D. and
Chaplain to his Majesty King Charles the second, and Preacher to the Parish of
St Dionis Back-Church, London.
Large Octavo.
Enchiridion Medicum, containing the causes, signs, and cures of all those
Diseases, which do daily afflict the body of man, together with a Treatise De
facultatibus medicamentorum and dosibus. (...), or the sum of Practical
Divinity, preached in the Wilderness, and delivered by our Savior in his
Sermon on the Mount, being observations on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and
seventh Chapters of St. Matthew, to which is prefixed Prolegomena, or a Preface
by way of Dialogue, wherein the perfection and perspicuity of the Scriptures is
vindicated from the calumnies of Anabaptists and Papists. By Tho. White,
Preacher of Gods Word. Piscator in omes Pauli Epistolas. Gods Fearers are Gods
Favorites, several Sermons. by Antho. Tucker. A practical Discourse of Prayer.
By Tho. Cobbet. Records Arithmetic. The Drinking of the Bitter Cup, or the
hardest Lesson in Christ's School, learned and taught by himself, viz Passive
Obedience, wherein be^ides diverse Doctrinal Truths of great Importance, many
practical Truths are held forth for the teaching of Christians how to submit to
their heavenly Father in suffering his Will both in life and death patiently,
obediently and willingly. By John-Brinsly, Minister of greot Yarmouth.
Small Octavo.
A Treatise of the power of godliness, consisting of three parts. 1. Wherein it
consists. 2. Cautions against, and discovery of several mistakes and
hinderance, most common to the people of God. 3. Several means and helps for
the attaining of it. By Tho. White.
Directions and persuasions to a sound Conversion, for preventing of that
deceit and damnation of Souls, and of those Scandals, Heresies, and desperate
Apostacies, which are the consequents of a counterfeit and superficial change,
being the first of those Books mentioned in the Call to the unconverted. By
Richard Baxter. Confirmation and Restoration the necessary means of
Reformation and Reconciliation, for healing of the corruptions and divisions of
the Churches, submissively, but earnestly tendered to the consideration of the
Sovereign Powers, Magistrates, Ministers and People, that they may awake, and
be up and doing in the execution of so much as appears to be necessary, as they
are true to Christ, his Church, and Gospel, and to their own and others Souls,
and to the peace and welfare of these, and as they will answer the neglect to,
etc. at their peril. By Richard Baxter. A prospect of Eternity, or man's
everlasting condition, opened and applied. By John Wells, Minister of Olaves,
Jewry, London. Ovids Festivals. The Arcadian Princess, By Rich. Brathwait Esquire
Truths manifest. The Golden mean, or some serious considerations for a more
full and frequent administration of, though not free admission unto the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. By Stephen Geree, Minister of Abinger in Surrey.
Confessio fidei in Conventu Theologorum authoritate Parliamenti Anglicani
indicto, Elaborata eidem Parliamento post modum Exhibita, quin and ab eodem
deinde qui ab Ecclesia Scoticana cognita and approbata, una cum Catechismo
duplici majori minorique e Sermon Anglicano summa cum fide, in Latinum versa.
In large twelves.
Boccace's Tales, or the Quintessence of Wit, Mirth, Eloquence, and
conversation framed in ten days out of an hundred curious Pieces, by seven
Honorable Ladies, and three Noble Gentlemen, preserved to posterity by the
renowned John Boccacio, the first refiner of the Italian prose. A Pattern of
patience in the example of holy Job, being a Paraphrase on the whole Book, as
an expedient to sweeten the miseries of these never enough to be lamened times.
The Abridgement of Christian Divinity By Wolleb. Englished and enlarged by
Alexander Ross.
FINIS.

