SEJANUS: OR THE Popular Favorite, Now in his Solitude, and Sufferings.
Written for the Consolation of E. S. the Famous Bromigen Protestant, in Bonds,
and Imprisonment, for the Good Old Cause, and the Truths sake.
By TIMOTHY TORY.
-- Facit indignatio versus.
Difficile est hic Satyram non scribere.
Juv.
IS this thy Glory now? is this thy Pride,
Of sticking to the Saints, and Godly side?
Religious Bugbear words that fright from hence,
From Subject, all their Loyalty to Prince,
Make black Rebellion, seem white Innocence;
Entitle Heaven, to the vilest Crimes,
Make Deity, like Rabble, blame the Times.
Mad Zealots! so Atheistically civil,
Blaspheme the Gods, to Complement the Devil.
The mightiest of these inspired Saints, is come
To Crown himself with fancied Martyrdom:
Geneva Whig, that still cries out at Rome,
But raises still Domestic Broils at home.
How quietly Great Charles might end his Reign,
Which all in Troubles the poor Prince began,
Now vexed by Ghost, mere shadow of a Man:
The cunning Hypocrite, that still can spy
The smallest Mote in his kind Prince's eye,
By Zeal, and Nature, made so double blind,
That in his own the Beam he cannot find:
Some say but one vast Luminary stands
In's furrowed brow, and watches all the Land;
But sunk into its hole, crept out of sight,
As if it were afraid to see the Light,
His Skull's too narrow Circle cannot contain
His Towering thought, and vast Gygantick brain;
Blinded again with hopes of Reformation,
Poor little Polyphemus of the Nation;
That mighty Monster braved the rising Flood,
And this can wade through a whole Sea of Blood.
How has this wretched Isle been changed, and cursed,
Since thou were born, and since it knew thee first!
How did its Tributary Rivers pay
A bloody, dreadful Homage to the Sea!
Whilst on the Purpl'd Ocean thou did ride,
And Tack about still with the Wind and Tide:
This floating Bark, he now again would Steer,
Ah! treacherous Pilot, and false Mariner;
The Kingdom's yet scarce mended Hulk to save,
Would launch again into the Purple wave:
Religious Bully! that can cheat a Nation,
And make it perish, working out Salvation.
Three Kingdoms he o'relooks, and soon can count
The Tories all, from Barwick, to the Mount:
Sifts Cities, Shires, to find what each afford;
Calls this Tantivy, that Protesting Lord:
Sees what grave Noddle's for Caballing fit,
And who are Bromigens of Sense and Wit.
These are the Faculties of Soul and Mind,
And here his Body as complete you find;
From's liquid Corp, distills a fleeting gore,
And the whole Carcass, makes one putrid Sore.
The better to emit this flowing Sap,
His Belly carries still a Silver Tap,
Through which black Treason, all its Dregs does strein
At once, both Excrements, of Guts, and Brain;
But some will have his clear, thin Body pass,
For a refined sort of Optick-glass:
Some make the polisht Fabric of his Bone
A glittering Skeleton of Specular Stone.
Old Ovid's Muse from hence may take her flights,
Her Argus only had an hundred sights;
This little Monstrous Corpse, is Eye all over,
And the whole Body sees at every Pore;
Sees hatching Thought, meet Embrio of a Plot,
Nay sees it often before it be begot.
But to say truth, his Optics are but two,
Yet more than Ovid's Sentinel can do
With hundred Eyes, that many things could view;
But this sees many hundred ways with two:
So quick, so nimble, and such rolling Eyes,
They watch each other, like two cunning Spies,
Lest this declare for King, and that for People,
For The Citizens have made a great clutter of late about their Monument, as if
their Inscriptions there would keep out Popery better than all the Writings of
the Churchmen.
Cities Pyramid, or Churches Steeple.
Poor turning, winding, weathercock of State,
Set on the doubtful Pinnacle of Fate,
And now will turn again, if not too late.
If well corrected for his Insolence,
The little Spaniel fawns upon his Prince;
But once escaped the Ax, or fatal Loops,
Straight to the dull unthinking Rabble stoops,
Pufft up with the vain blast of Vulgar breath,
Thus small State-Urchins hurry to their death:
So the kind Air with an officious blast,
Tosses poor Bubbles, to the Clouds, at last;
Dances the little Globe about the Sky,
Then breaks the glittering Ball it fanned so high.
So Romes famed Sejanus.
Darling once that governed all,
With the inconstant Rout did stand or fall;
The obliged Camp, their General did crown,
Then dragged his ragged Carcass through the Town.
Weak Fools! that think they may securely flee
On the loose wings of wild Inconstancy,
Or on its Metaphor, the Mobile.
Digusted by the Rout, this cunning Wight
Runs cringeing to his injured Monarch straight,
Whose goodness is too ready to forgive,
Faulty alone in suffering him to live.
Advanced to follow Mace, and wear a Gown,
The Tony then saw Mutineers in Town,
But now they all True Protestants are grown.
Whilst he unto its Chambers can resort,
There Is naught, alas, of Popery at Court;
Clap the Prophetic Soul but in the Tower,
It straight Divines of Arbitrary Power.
Now leaves the Rout, and then as soon as able,
Leaves his good Prince, just as he left the Rabble.
Who e're before saw such a Little thing
Contend with Monarch, grapple with a King!
Of Giants often we read, that fought the Skies,
Cufft back the Thunder of the Deities;
But never of Pigmy Lord that did the same,
A Lord that is only fit to fight with Crane.
The Green-Ribband Club described, of which he is made the Head.
This busy Noddle of the Factious Crew,
Not now distinguished by the old Northern Blew,
(The Badge of upstart Whigs must still be new)
With his Green bob in this new Senate sits,
And round him all those Liv'ry-men of wits;
Some raze a name, and some insert a clause,
Order their Bills themselves, and Vote them Laws:
With awful care some Scriblers penning be
A Speech for Reported spoken by E. S.
Sister Scotlands Liberty,
Against L -- dale's unbounded Tyranny.
There a young Scribe is copying out a Cant,
Next morn for to be spoke in Parliament:
Upstarts an Hector, swears upon a Book,
The Oath common to one of the Club.
Gad you shall see we will exclude the Duke.
This brings a Bill against Arbitrary Power,
And that will send a Member to the Tower;
One Votes him to be Censured on his Knees,
This cries Discharge, that Let him pay his Fees:
And in the little Club you fairly see,
Of the Great Senate an Epitome.
But now the Mouth of this Young Rump is gone,
The dissolved Members scatter in the Town;
Poor Tony's now confined, and like to write
All that fierce Indignation can indite;
His second Volume quickly will appear,
The He writ a Pamphlet when last there.
Tower always made him Scribler.
As we below on some bright Meteor gaze,
Poor Panick Fools, admire a Little blaze,
Which once dropped down, regardless we pass by,
As too vile object for our scornful Eye.
The gazing Crowd thus him in Luster view,
Caress, admire, and adore him too;
But once Eclipsed, or shaded in a Cloud,
Away runs all the silly buzzing Crowd.
All thy past shifts will serve thee now no more,
Or there is scarce another left in store:
The Tempter his old Sore'ress does forsake,
When once h' has brought the withered Hag to Stake:
When the glib Proteus taken by Aristaeus.
changing Monster once was taken,
And fettered in the cunning Shepherds chain,
With all its wiles he never could escape,
Though changed to Fish, to Dragon, and to Ape,
And every minute put on other shape.
Our sad distracted Albion gazed around,
She saw no Foe, but still she felt a wound:
The bleeding Deer thus trembling stands at Bay,
But cannot find where the close hid Archer lay.
As on the winding Banks, and watery Maze,
Where famed Meander cuts his crooked ways,
The lost, confounded Traveller does gaze,
At last kind Fate, or Providence does bring
The poor despairing Soul unto the Spring:
So some kind Angel, Genius of this Isle,
Where Peace, alas! with thee could never smile,
Has taught us now to make her flourish still,
Shown us the hidden Source of all her Ill.
Reason the Plummet, Wit the Line shall be,
Both stretched to fathom, and to measure thee:
Lead through the Labyrinth of all thy Tricks,
All the wild Mazes of thy Politics.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Smith, Curtiss, Janeway, Baldwin, all
True-Ptotestant-Booksellers, near the sign of the Three-Legg'd Brand-Iron,
called Tyburn.


