THE HISTORY OF Passive Obedience Since the REFORMATION.

AMSTERDAM: Printed for Theodore Johnson in the Calver-Straet. 1689.

THE PREFACE.
HAving always thought, that the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, or
Non-resistance of our lawful Superiors, had been a Doctrine founded in the Holy
Scriptures, recommended to the Christian World by the Precepts and Example of
our Blessed Savior, and the Practices of his more immediate Followers; which
Copy the Church of England has exactly transcribed, to whose immortal Glory it
must be said, that She alone (in contra-distinction both to Papists and
Dissenters) has asserted the Principles of Obedience to Princes, as the best
Ages of Christianity owned, and practiced it; and having lived so long to see
that Doctrine ridiculed, and called the Doctrine of the Bow-string, and the
Assertors and Practisers of it exploded, as Old Lacrymists, and the matter of
fact, as to the first Ages of the Reformation, denied; while some affirm, that
the Tenet was no older than Archbishop Laud, and was introduced by a few Court
Bishops, Bishop Saunderson's Preface to Archbishop Usher, of The Power of the
Prince, and Obedience of the Subject. The Apostle says, put them in mind to be
subject to Principalities and Powers. Tit. 3.1. Though S. Paul was certainly no
Man-pleaser, far from seeking himself, or from making merchandise of the Word
of God, or handling it deceitfully for filthy Lucre sake, nor were there hopes
of Preferment, when the Church had no settled Revenue, nor was there any
Christian Prince in the Universal World; but he draws his Arguments from the
Ordinance of God, the discharge of Duty, and a good Conscience, the advancement
of the Gospel, and the honor of the Christian Religion. See more in that
admirable Preface.
the better to make way for the attainment, and establishing of their own
Grandeur; by reason of which, the Enemies of our Communion (both Romanists, and
others) have confidently averred, that our Obedience to our Sovereigns is
nothing but our Interest, and that we have vindicated the Rights of Kings,
because they have vindicated the Rights of our Church, and have prosecuted all
that disliked our Constitutions: I could no longer forbear writing in the
behalf of that truth which is eternal and unalterable (as are all the Doctrines
of Christianity, tho we must acknowledge to our shame, that they are more
illustrious in our Books, than in our Lives) and showing, that from the infancy
of the happy Reformation, the Church of England has always believed and
avowed, That it is the duty of every Christian, in things lawful, actively to
obey his Superior; in things unlawful, to suffer rather than obey, and in any
case, or upon any pretense whatsoever not to resist, because, whoever does so,
shall receive to themselves Damnation.

Nor can the Doctrine be unseasonable, since no Government can be safe without
it, Men's Passions naturally inclining them to think well of themselves, and to
make Complaints of hard Usage, even then when they are most gently treated;
what Instances have we in the Writings of the last Ages? When Parsons. in the
name of his Party, resolving to expose the admirable Reign of Q. Elizabeth,
renders her worse than the worst of Tyrants, and asks, Where are the Neroes and
Dioclesians, where are the Genserics and Hunnerics; As if neither Pagan nor
Arian Persecutors were as cruel as she? And when another Classis of Men
blackned one of the best of Men, and the best of Princes, the Martyr CHARLES I.
as the great Enemy of his Country, the Invader of the Religion and Liberties of
his Subjects; and have not former Ages labored under the same Discontents? When
the disaffected Jews could say, We have no portion in David, nor any
inheritance in the Son of Jesse, every man to his tents, O Israel: And yet that
Prince was of Gods own immediate designation, and a Man after Gods own heart.
Now if upon such Pretensions Subjects may right themselves by resisting their
lawful Superiors, how soon will a fruitful Land be turned into a barren
Wilderness, and Paradise it self become a Field of Blood? And I have with some
regret and confusion reflected heretofore, that in the Romish Communion,
Preston, Widdrington, and Barnes in England; VValsh and Caron in Ireland; and
in Scotland Barclay (to omit other Countries) all professed Papists (and all but
Barclay Priests, and consequently more obliged to uphold the Grandeur of the
Pontifical Chair) should honestly and stoutly appear to the Vindication of this
Truth, which we seem either weary or ashamed of. I never wondered to see the
Enemies of our Church make a Fasting-day of our Blessed Saviors Nativity (as
if they were sorry that he came into the World, and perhaps with reason,
because their Actions were so contrary both to his Precepts and Example) but I
stand amazed to see her Sons disown her Doctrine and Constitutions.

Did we seriously study the Laws of Providence, and consider the indispensible
Obligations laid on us of taking up the Cross; did we remember, that Affliction
is the Churches Portion, and that not the least Evil may be done to procure the
greatest Good; this Aug. de haeres. and Epiph.
Doctrine would be more easily believed and more readily embraced. They were
the Gnostics of the Primitive Church, who taught Men to swear and forswear,
and to sly from Persecution, when it was the Lot of Religion. And for these
among other Reasons, I conjecture, does Stillingfleet's Ser. Jan. 30. 168 ^/9.
p. 3. 4.
a learned Man of our Church, call Simon Magus (the Institutor of that vile
Sect) The Leviathan of the Primitive Church, who de stroyed all the differences
of good and evil: And that probably, because, as the Leviathan makes himself
sport in the waters, so the Gnostics played with Oaths, and all Laws divine
and human, Id. p. 4.
setting a mighty Value upon themselves, and having mean and contemptible
Thoughts of the Authority which God had established in the World; and it may
be, because he was the Hobbs of that Age, who gave being to Opinions
contradictory to the whole Tenor of the Gospel: For the Gnostics thought, Id.
p. 5.
all the Governments of the World to be nothing else but the contrivance of
some evil Spirits, to abridg Men of their Liberty, which God and Nature had
given them: and that this is the speaking evil of Dignities, which they are
charged with by S. Jude.

And the same great Man says Sermon Novem. 5. 1673. page 2, 3.
, that it was one of Machiavel 's Quarrels against Christianity, that by its
Precepts of Meekness and Patience, it rendered Men unfit for such great
Undertakings, as could not be accomplished without something of Cruelty and
Inhumanity; whereas the old Religions by the multitude of Sacrifices, did inure
Men to Blood and Destruction, and so made them fit for any Enterprise. And
Machiavel was certainly in the right, if Religion were intended only to make
Men Butchers, or to instruct them in the use of Swords and Gunpowder; nay, the
Religion of Mahomet is in this respect to be very much preferred before the
Christian, etc.

And having mentioned Hobbs, how am I ashamed to find, that his Authority and
the Reasons which he derived from Milton, and both from Doleman, i. e. Parsons
the Jesuit, are of a sudden so generally received, as if the Doctrine were
Apostolical, and ought to be preached in all the World, That Power is
originally in the Body of the People, that the Foundation of all Government is
laid in compact, and that the breach of Conditions by one Party dispenses with
the Duty of the other, tho confirmed by Sacraments, Oaths, B. Saunderson's Case
of a rash Vow.. 9. The several Duties, that by Gods Ordinance are to be
performed by Persons that stand in mutual relation either to other are not
pactional or conditional, as are the Leagues and Agreements made between
Princes; but are absolute and independent, wherein each Person is to look to
himself, and to the performance of the Duty that lies upon him, tho the other
Party should fail in the performance of his. Cons. Praelect. 5. de Juram.
and reiterated Promises; that a Prince may be opposed in his Politic, tho not
in his personal Capacity, that when Religion is a part of our Property it may
be defended, and that the Determinations of Providence are to be followed, or
that the Prosperity of a Cause is a Mark of its goodness. And what
encouragement has the owning and complying with such Principles given to many
weak and ignorant Persons (who cannot distinguish between the steady Doctrines
of a Church, and the Opinions and Practices of some of her Members) to embrace
the Roman Faith and Communion, I need not declare, the Matter of Fact is
visible; while we are accused, that all our former Declarations have been only
pretense and juggle, and that we have been Loyal no longer than we could get by
it. I speak this, God knows, not to upbraid, but to deplore, and if I could, to
confute the Calumny, and with the deepest sense of the Interests of a poor
despised Church, which is still, and will be the best, the most Orthodox, and
most Primitive of all Christendom.

Nor is this Account strange and new (any otherwise than as it concerns the
Church of England as distinct from other Protestants) since Exomologes. cap.
12. I confess, I wondered, that they could hope to make any Christians believe,
that their Reformation came from the Spirit of Christ, when instead of those
spiritual Arms of Charity, Humility, Patience, and most indispensible
Obedience, even to Nero himself, by which Christ enabled his Apostles to
conquer the World to the belief of the Gospel, Calvin and Luther put into the
hands of their Sectaries Malice, Pride, Hatred to suffer for Conscience sake,
active Resistance against all Authority; in a word, the very same Weapons which
the Devil suggested to Mahomet. After the best enquiry I could make, I could
not find or hear of (during our bloody Civil War) so much as one single Person
of the Presbyterian Calvinist Party, but did actively oppose his King, nor one
single Minister of that Party, but was a Trumpet to incite to war. Cons. Loc.
Cressy makes it one of the most cogent Reasons, why he (when he vainly thought
the Church of England quite destroyed, so as never to be restored) could not
communicate with other Protestant Churches, because they, (tho in that
Accusation he falsifies and calumniates, as I shall make it appear in the
following Discourse) taught men, That it was lawful to take Arms in defense of
Religion, and that when Princes persecuted the Truth, their Subjects were no
longer bound to obey them. Nor is Cressy the only Person of the Popish
Communion who has laid this Imputation at the door of the Protestants, tho
without Reason or Justice, while the Romish Church in one of her General
Councils determins the Deposition of Princes, who are not in all things
obedient to her Injunctions. And I hope no man can imagine that I intend to
promote any disturbance by this Writing: 1. Because I only do the office of an
Historian (not wilfully misquoting any Passage, nor citing it contrary to the
Authors intention and meaning, as far as I understand it; and this also must
excuse me from being obliged to make good every Argument from Authority or
Reason, which my Authors use; for that Province those of my Authors which are
alive, are obliged to manage, or to acknowledge their Mistakes) I intending only
to show the concurrent Testimony of our greatest Men in this momentous Point.
2. Because I am told, Dr. Burnet's Royal Martyr, page 6.
that the Incendiary and Incendiarism were among the much abused words of the
late times, yet those were the great Incendiaries who kindled God's wrath; and
that it is from such that we may justly fear the like, or rather severer
Judgments, if our Sins be greater than they were then. i. e. When under the
specious Pretexts of Liberty and Religion they first opposed, and then murdered
the Lord's Anointed. 3. Because he who preaches up the Necessity of Suffering,
and the Unlawfulness of Resisting Superiors, and who avers, that the Gospel
teaches the followers of our Blessed Savior to dye, but not to fight for
Religion, is little likely to be a Disturber of Government, whose Original he
acknowledges to be only from Heaven, and accountable only to that Tribunal.

For at last it will be found true, that no Government can be safe, while those
who live under it, do not own this Principle, That it is not lawful upon any
Pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against our Lawful Sovereign; since he, who
is Obedient and Loyal only because his Compliance advances his Designs (either
of Profit, Pleasure, Honor, Revenge, or any other Lust) as soon as his Point is
gained, his Duty ceases; but he who is obedient to his Sovereign, Dr. Tennison,
Hobbs's Creed. p. 159. Except a Man obey for Conscience sake, all the Cords of
outward Pacts and Covenants will not hold him, when he dreams that the
Philistines are upon him, and that he can deliver himself by force from the
power of his Enemies, in which number the Prince himself is reckoned by
ambitious Subjects out of favor. -- Mr. Pelling's Sermon, Jan. 30. 1683. p. 43.
Some are for the King, as long as he is rich, powerful, able to maintain their
Interest; this is the Loyalty of the Leviathan, etc.
because he is God's Vicegerent, and because God has obliged him to be
subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake, can never be shook from
his good resolutions, and will be unalterably true to his Oaths and his Duty.

And when so many Men eminent for their Piety, Learning and Station have
unanimously agreed in delivering their Sentiments in this Point, to say, that
whatever they said or did, was to gratify or advance their ambitious or
covetous Appetites (as if their Honesty, like Quicksilver in a Weatherglass,
rose higher or sunk lower, as the day proved clear or cloudy) is to bring an
unjust Scandal on the Church and her most illustrious Champions, Men of great
Probity and Wisdom, as the greatest Hypocrites and Time-servers in the World,
who sacrificed their Consciences to their Desires of growing rich and powerful,
while had the Times been contrary to them, they would have owned other
Principles: This Imputation I shall wipe off, and show, that even in the worst
of times, in the Marian Persecution, this Doctrine was publicly owned and
asserted, when contrary to the Laws of Nature and Humanity, and the Rules of
Christian Equity, the Protestants were most cruelly harras'd: It Is true, the
Devil said to God of Job, Turn thy hand against him, and he will curse thee to
thy face; but it was the Devil that said it, and he was a Liar from the
beginning, and so it proved in the Case of Job; for when God altered his
Methods, and treated the good Man, as if he had been his Enemy, Job was always
the same, perfect, and upright, one that feared God, and eschewed evil.

In this Catalogue I purposely omit Bishop Manwaring and Sibthorp in the Reign
of CHARLES I. and Bish. Parker, Cartwright, etc. in the Reign of JAMES II.
because their Authorities were in their own times excepted against, as of Men
that did not write soberly on the Subject, resolving for the most part, to
appeal to the Writings of such Men, who have been, and are esteemed the
unquestionable true and orthodox Defenders of the Protestant Religion against
her Romish Adversaries; and if such Authorities will not incline, and the
Reasons of such eminent Authors persuade the Reader to be of my Opinion, I
shall only say, I am sorry that I have lost my labor.

THE AUTHORS.
THE Articles Page 3 Injunctions and Canons Page 4 The Homilies Page 7 The
Liturgy Page 10 The Orders of Bishops Page 12 University Censures Page 13 The
Institution of a Christan Man Page 19 Bishops, Tonstal, Stokesly, and Bonner
Page 20 Tyndal the Martyr ibid. Bishop Latimer Page 21 Archbishop Cranmer
ibid. Sir John Cheek Page 22 Martyrs and Confessors in Queen Marys Reign Page
23 Archbishop Sandys Page 26 Bishop Jewel ibid. Bishop Bison Page 27 Mr.
Perkins Page 29 Mr. Hooker ibid. Archbishop Bancroft Page 30 Adrian Saravia
ibid. King James I. Page 32 Bishop Buckeridge Page 33 Mr. Tho. Cartwright ibid.
Archbishop Whitgift Page 34 Dr. Fulke ibid. Bishop Carlton Page 34 Bishop
Andrews Page 35 Bishop King ibid. Dr. Jackson Page 36 Dr. Hakewil Page 37 Dr.
Bois Page 38 Dr. Done Page 40 Archbishop of Spalata Page 41 Archbishop
Montagu Page 42 Bishop Lake ibid. Mr. Dod Page 43 Bishop Hall ibid. Bishop
Davenant Page 47 Archbishop Usher Page 48 Archbishop Bramhal Page 50 Bishop
Brownrig Page 52 King Charles I. Page 53 Dr. Hammond ibid. Bishop Fern Page 54
Mr. Chillingworth Page 55 Dudley Diggs ibid. Sir Edw. Coke Page 58 Dr. Gerhard
Longbaine ibid. Ric. Overton Page 59 Bishop Saunderson Page 60 Dr. Bernard Page
63 Mr. Symmons Page 64 Bishop Tailor Page 65 Bishop Kenn Page 66 Dr. Seth Ward,
B. of Sarum ib. Dr. Lamplu, Bishop of Exon Page 70 Bishop Hacket Page 71 Dr.
Sharp Page 72 Bishop of Lincoln ibid. Dr. Burnet Page 73 Bishop of S. Asaph
Page 78 Dr. Sprat, B. of Rochester ib. Mr. Thorndyke Page 79 Dr. Spencer, Dean
of Ely ib. Dr. Tillotson Page 80 Dr. Stillingfleet Page 81 Dr. Patrick Page 84
Dr. Towerson Page 86 Mr. Scrivener Page 88 Mr. Glanvil Page 91 Dr. Horneck Page
93 Dr. Tennison ib. Dr. Hooper Page 94 Dr. Hascard Page 95 Dr. Falkner ib. Dr.
Hicks Page 97 Dr. South ib. Dr. John Moor Page 98 Jeremiah in Baca; or a
Fast-days Work, etc. Page 99 Mr. Wake Page 100 Dr. Beveridge Page 102 Dr.
Ironside ib. Dr. Isaac Barrow Page 103 Dr. Cave ib. Dr. Dove Page 104 D. Puller
ib. Dr. Scott Page 105 University Address presented by Dr. Gower Page 108 Dr.
Grove Page 109 Mr. Hesketh Page 110 Dr. Freeman Page 111 Dr. Littleton Page 112
Dr. Morris ib. Dr. Lake ib. Mr. Lynford Page 113 Mr. Long Page 115 Dr. Fowler
Page 116 The Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man Page 117 Mr. Pain
Page 118 J. Kettlewell Page 119 Mr. Belling Page 121 Dr. Calamy Page 122 The
whole Duty of Man Page 125 Erasmus ib. Grotius Page 126 Beza ib. Luther ib.
Calvin ib. Camero Page 127 Is. Casaubon ib. Peter du Moulin Page 128 Mons.
Bochart Page 129 David Blondel ib. Sam. Petit Page 130 Mons Allix ib. Dr.
Bourdieu ib. Le droit Souverain, etc. ib.
THE HISTORY OF Passive Obedience Since the REFORMATION.
INTRODUCTION.
WHen Judicious Men undertake to determine what are the Doctrines of any
Church, they do not guide themselves by the Practices, nor the Writings of some
of her Members, but by the Positions which she has publicly owned and
asserted, and the Practices that are consonant thereunto; this being agreeable
to the Counsel of our holy Savior, who when he bids us Mat. 7.15, 16.
To beware of false Prophets, who came in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly are
ravening Wolves, cautions us, that we shall know them by their fruits, i.e. Not
by the Fruits of their Lives, but of their Doctrines. So does Sermon.
Bishop Sanderson interpret the Words, and so also does the Dean Sermon. on Nov.
5.1673. p. 28, 29.
of S. Paul 's: We think it most convenient to follow our Savior's Rules to
judge of Men's Pretenses, how great, and haughty soever, by the Fruits they
produce, which Rule is not to be understood concerning the particular Actions
of Men, which have no respect to their Doctrines; for as S. Chrysostom
observes, many Heretics have been Men of excellent Lives,' and so on the
contrary -- but we are to understand it of those Fruits which their Doctrines
have a direct influence upon; and therefore the Rule has a particular respect
to two things, by which we are to examine the fairest Pretenses: 1. The Design
they end to. 2. The Means made use of for the accomplishing this Design. If
therefore the Design be quite of another Nature from that of the Gospel, if the
means be such as are directly contrary to it, we may from thence justly infer,
that how plausible soever the pretenses are, how fine and soft soever the
Sheeps clothing be, that inwardly they are ravening wolves. Thus that great
Man determines it against the Jesuits in the very case of resisting,
excommunicating, deposing and murdering Princes; and so do we all judge
concerning the Church of Rome, many of her Members are doubtless loyal and
peaceable, but their Church teaches them otherwise in the famous Lateran
Council; M. Payn's Sermon, Sept. 9.1683. page 20. Treason in Papists is like
original sin to mankind, they all have it in their Natures, tho many may deny
it, or not know it. -- But in Protestants it is like the Italian Distemper, it
was first brought from another Country, and is no way natural to our own, tho
the Infection has been taken by too many, who had an ill Temper prepared for
it. Cons. Dr. Jackson's Works, Tom. 3. l. 12. chapter 8. p. 978.
their Loyalty and Peaceableness may be the Fruits of their Education, or their
good temper, but not of their Faith, or as Dr. Sherlock says, they may be
loyal, as Englishmen, but they cannot be so, as Papists.

Would we therefore judge of the Doctrine of our Church, we must consult her
Articles, Canons, public Homilies, public Offices of Devotion, General Orders
of her Bishops, Censures of her Universities, and Writings of her greatest Men,
who have vindicated her Doctrine, and explained her Belief; and this Method I
shall use to discover what has been owned by the Church of England, as to the
Doctrine of Non-resistance, or Passive Obedience.

CHAP. I. The Doctrine of the Thirty nine Articles.
THE Articles of our Church have been always looked upon as the stated Doctrine
of our whole Church, to which all her Priests are obliged to make their
Subscriptions, they are allowed a place in the Body of the Confessions of the
Protestant Churches, and are highly commended by Foreigners, as well as by our
own Writers; for Bishop Ridley's Farewell Letter apud Fox, tom. 3. p. 506.
this Church has in matters of Controversy Articles so penned and framed
after the Holy Scriptures, and grounded upon the true understanding of God's
Word, that in short time, if they had been universally received, says Bishop
Ridley the Martyr, they should have been able to have set in Christ's Church
much concord and unity in Christ's true Religion, and to have expelled many
false Errors and Heresies, wherewith this Church, alas! was almost overgone.
Nor is this that excellent Prelate's peculiar Opinion, but of the whole Church,
which ordains, Can. 3. an. 1604.
That whosoever shall affirm, that the Church of England by Law established
under the King's Majesty is not a true and Apostolical Church, teaching and
maintaining the Doctrine of the Apostles, let him be excommunicated ipso facto.
And Can. 5. Whosoever shall affirm, that any of the thirty nine Articles agreed
in the Synod, 1562 -- are in any part superstitious, or erroneous, let him be
excommunicate ipso facto.

Anno 1552. In the Convocation held at London, Articles of Religion were agreed
upon, of which the Thirty sixth runs thus,

The Civil Magistrate is ordained, and allowed of God -- and therefore is to be
obeyed not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake -- And expressly
asserts, That the Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

In the Articles of our Church under Queen Elisabeth, anno. 1562. it runs thus,
and so continues to this day.

The Queens Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Civil, in all Cases does appertain, and is
not, nor ought to be subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction.

And it is remarkable, Rogers's Praef. to the 39th. Artic.
that these Articles of 1562. were published in the same year, in which the
Massacre at Vassey in France was committed by the Duke of Guise, and when all
the Protestants in the Country were sentenced to Death by the Parliament of
Paris.

It is true, this Doctrine is not limited to the particular Case of Subjects
taking up Arms, but it seems to me by two necessary Consequences to be deduced
from it. 1. Because if the Pope, who pretended by a Divine Right, had no power
over Kings, much less have the People any power, who pretend to an inferior
Right, that of Compact. 2. Because the Article makes no distinction, but
excludes all other Power, as well as that of the Pope. And in truth, the Plea
is the same on either side; the Pope says, as long as the Prince governs
according to the Laws of God, and the Church (of which he is the Interpreter)
so long the Censures of the Church do not reach him; and say the People, as
long as the Prince governs according to the Laws of the Land (and of the
meaning of those Laws themselves are the Interpreters) so long are they bound
to be obedient; but as soon as the King does any thing that may contradict the
Pope, then he is (deservedly, say the Romanists) excommunicate, deposed and
murdered; and when he usurps upon the Peoples Liberties, then he ought to be
deposed by the Peoples; the Arguments on either side are the same, and for the
most part the Authorities; for (as Moderat. of the Church of England, ann. 17..
19. p. 481.
Dr. Puller well observes) both Papists and Dissenters deny the Supremacy of
the King, one attributes it to the Pope originally; the other to the People:
and the same Arguments that the Pope uses for his Supremacy over Kings, the
Disciplinarians use for establishing their Sovereignty.

CHAP. II. The Doctrine of the Injunctions and Canons.
IN the Infancy of the Reformation under Henry the Eighth, (for there I begin
the Restoration of Religion to her Purity in this Kingdom, as Dr. Burnet does.)
Burnet hist. Reform. l. 3. p. 226. tom. 1. And Fox. tom. 2. p. 387.
Anno 1536. Injunctions were issued out, the first of which is, That every Man
that has Cure of Souls, shall for the Establishment and Confirmation of the
King's Authority and Jurisdiction -- sincerely declare, manifest, and open for
the space of one quarter of a year next ensuing once every Sunday, and after
that at the least wise twice every Quarter in their Sermons and other
Collations, that the Bishop of Rome 's usurped Power and Jurisdiction having no
Establishment or Ground in the Law of God, was of most just Causes taken away
and abolished, -- and that the King's Power is in his Dominions the highest
Power and Potentate under God, to whom all men within the same Dominions, by
God's Commandment, owe most Loyalty and Obedience, before and above all other
Potentates in Earth. Now if a King be above all other Powers, then he cannot be
accountable to any other Power, and so ought not to be resisted.

Anno Burnet's Collect. of Records, p. 181.
1538. came out the Lord Cromwell's Injunctions, as they were called, wherein
the same Duty is enjoined in the same Words. This also is the first of the
Injunctions of Edw. the Sixth Sparr. Collect. p. 1, 2.
An. 1547. (the Preface to which Injunctions acknowledges that part of them
were formerly set out by Henry the Eighth, and the rest added by King Edward
the Sixth.) This also was the first of the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, with
a very little variation: and accordingly in the Articles of Enquiry of
Archbishop Cranmer in the Diocese of Canterbury, under Edward the Sixth, the
first is, Whether all Persons, etc. have preached against the usurped Power of
the Bishop of Rome? Secondly, Whether they have preached, and declared at the
least four times in the year, That the King's Majesty's Power, Authority, and
Pre-eminence within his Realms and Dominions is the highest Power under God?
Here the Injunction plainly distinguishes the claim of the Pope from other
claims, implying, that our Church always believed that her Prince's Power was
derived immediately from God, and that they were superior to all their
Subjects, either singly or collectively, and so were not accountable to them,
but only to God: and among Bishop Ridley's Articles of Visitation An. 1550. one
is, Whether any do preach, or defend, that private persons may make
Insurrection, stir Sedition, or compel Men to give them their Goods? Anno 1564.
being the seventh Year of Queen Elizabeth, in the Sparr. Collect. p. 123.
Articles for Preaching it is enjoined, That the Minister move all People to
Obedience, as well in observation of the Orders appointed in the Book of Common
Service, as in the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions; as also of all other civil
Duties due for Subjects to do: and that all Preachers, Preaching Matters
tending to Dissension, etc. shall be complained.

At last the Injunctions were called Canons, and the first Canon An. 1603. in
the first Year of King James, is the same in substance with the Injunction of
Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth; and for this reason,
Can. 55. it is ordained, That every Minister should before his Sermon
acknowledge the King to be in all Causes, and over all Persons, supreme Head
and Governor, in more express terms than were formerly used.

But particularly I look upon the Canons of the Year 1640. to be a full
Explanation of the belief of our Church in this point. Now Can. 1. injoyns all
former Laws, Ordinances, and Constitutions formerly made for the acknowledgment
and profession of the most lawful and independent Authority of our dread
Sovereign Lord the King's most excellent Majesty, to be carefully observed, and
then descends to give an Explanation of the Royal Power and Authority; That the
most sacred Order of Kings is of divine Right, being the Ordinance of God
himself, founded in the prime Laws of Nature, and clearly established by
express Texts both of the Old and New Testament: and for any Person or Persons
to set up, maintain, or allow, in any their said Realms or Territories
respectively, under any pretense whatsoever, any independent coactive Power,
either Papal or Popular, (whether directly or indirectly) is to undermine their
great Royal Office, and cunningly to overthrow that most Sacred Offfice, which
God himself has established, and so is treasonable against God, as well as
against the King. For Subjects to bear Arms against their Kings, See the
Doctrine of these Canons vindicated in Dr. Puller's Moderat. of the Chapter of
Engl. c. 12.. 6. p. 34.
offensive or defensive, upon any Pretense whatsoever, is at least to resist
the Powers which are ordained of God; and though they do not invade, but only
resist, St. Paul tells them plainly, They shall receive to themselves
Damnation: while in the next Paragraph they show, that this Doctrine does not
entitle the King to every Man's Estate.

But against the Synod, that made these Canons, lies a great Objection (tho I
should have thought, that the hard Censures of it might have been spared,
because no Synod of our Church, and perhaps none of any other Protestant Church
has so expressly condemned Popery, and Socinianism, the great Enemies of true
Reformed Christianity, as this Synod has done V. Art. 3.4.
that it was not a Lawful Synod, because it was continued, and sat after the
Parliament was Dissolved, and was by another Parliament Condemned; not to
answer, that that very Parliament, that first Condemned this Synod, ruined even
the Monarchy it self, nor that the Synods of old Provincial, or General were
not dependent on the meeting of the States at the same time. I answer; First,
that these Canons were made, and confirmed in full Convocation of both
Provinces of Canterbury, and York, and the making of Canons being a work
properly Ecclesiastical, these Canons were made by the Representatives of the
whole Clergy of this Kingdom. 2. The Canons were confirmed by the King (which
was all that was of old required in such Cases) and tho the Convocation sat
after the Dissolution of the Parliament, yet, 1. This is not without President
even in the happy Days of Queen Elizabeth, not to look back into Henry VIII. or
the primitive Times. And 2. the Persons, who condemned this Synod are well
known to have done it to justify their own Proceedings, being resolved to
ruin Episcopacy (and with it the Monarchy) and afterward by their own power
they called an Assembly of Divines, and What a Confession of Faith, what
Discipline, Rites, and Methods did they Establish? a Directory among other
things, out of which they left the Lord's Prayer (perhaps because it 'twas a
Form) the Apostles Creed (because themselves thought they could make a better)
and the Ten Commandments (because the fifth plainly accused them of Rebellion
against their Lawful Prince). And it is worth the observing that Sr. Edward
Deering's Speeches that were spoken with so much Virulence against this Synod
(and afterward Printed) were by the Order of the same House, who first
applauded them, decreed to be Burnt by the hand of the Common Hangman. And if
it be still objected, that the Canons were Reprobated since the Restitution of
Charles II. I say, that I quote them, not as a Law, that obliges the Church,
but as the known Sense of the Church of England at that time.

CHAP. III. The Doctrine of the Homilies.
THough the name of Homily has been looked upon, and censured by unthinking
People, as ridiculous, yet those admirable Sermons made by our first Reformers,
as a body of practical Divinity, and a Confutation of the Errors and Idolatries
of the Church of Rome, are, as Bishop Ridley said of the first Tome of them,
Apud Fox To. 3. p. 506.
Holy and wholesome Homilies, Recommendations of the principal Virtues, which
are commended in Scripture, and against the most pernicious and capital Vices,
that so, alas! do reign in this Realm of England. These we subscribe to, as
containing wholesome Doctrine; Dr. Stanley's Faith and Pract. c. 7. p. 192.
and every Man hereby sees what Opinions the Clergy are of, for they subscribe
and assent to the Book of Articles and Homilies, and to the Book of Common
Prayer. Many also have some regard to the Articles of An: 1640. They take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Test, etc. and Johnson says, That
the Book of Homilies is the best Book in the World, next the Bible. And since a
D. Welw. Letter to M. March, p. 10.
late Author is so bold to say, that Passive Obedience, in the narrow sense we
take it in, was not so much as thought on at the time of the publishing the
Homilies, I must first ask him, How he came to be so well acquainted with the
Thoughts of those venerable Men who wrote the Homilies, at this distance of
time? What Communication has he with the other World? or what peculiar
Memoirs, that have escaped all the wise Men of our Church, who have been
conversant with her Records, have fallen into his hands? And then I will show,
that the Expressions of the Homilies are very full and plain, and exclusive of
all Pretenses to take up Arms against our lawful Superiors.

The Homily or Exhortation to Obedience, Burnet's Hist. Ref. part 2. l. 1. c. 6.
was made An. 1547. in the Reign of K. Edward the Sixth; in the second part of
which Sermon of Obedience we are told, that it is the calling of God's People
to be patient, and on the suffering side, and to render Obedience to Governors,
although they be wicked, and wrong doers, and in no case to resist, and stand
against them. Subjects are bound to obey them (i. e. Governors) as God's
Ministers, although they be evil, not only for fear, but also for conscience
sake: and here, good People, let us mark diligently, that it is not lawful for
Inferiors and Subjects in any case to resist, and stand against the superior
Powers; for St. Paul 's words be plain, That whosoever withstandeth shall get to
themselves Damnation. Our Savior Christ and his Apostles received many and
diverse Injuries of the unfaithful and wicked men in Authority; yet we never
read, that they, or any of them, caused any Sedition or Rebellion against
Authority: we read oftne, that they patiently suffered all Troubles, Vexations,
Slanders, Pangs, Pains, and Death it self obediently, without Tumult or
Resistance. Christ taught us plainly, that even the wicked Rulers have their
Power and Authority from God; and therefore it is not lawful for their Subjects
to withstand them, although they abuse their Power. Let us believe undoubtedly
(good Christian People) that we may not obey Kings, -- if they command us to do
any thing contrary to God's Commandments, in such a case we ought to say with
the Apostle, We must rather obey God than Man; but nevertheless, in that case
we may not in any wise withstand violently, or rebel against Rulers, or make
any Insurrection, Sedition, or Tumults, either by force of Arms, or otherwise,
against the Anointed of the Lord, or any of his appointed Officers; but we must
in such case patiently suffer all wrongs and injuries, referring the judgment
of our Cause only to God: and Part 3. of the same Homily. Ye have heard before
of this Sermon of good Order and Obedience, manifestly proved both by
Scriptures and Examples, that all Subjects are bound to obey their Magistrates,
and for no cause to resist, or withstand, or rebel, or make any Sedition
against them, yea, although they be wicked men.

The second Book of Homilies was compiled in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and
among them, the Homily against Disobedience and wilful Rebellion, is full to
this purpose; Part. 1.
In reading the holy Scriptures we shall find in very many, and almost infinite
places, as well of the Old Testament as of the New, that Kings and Princes, as
well the evil as the good, do reign by God's Ordinance, and that Subjects are
bounden to obey them. The further and further any Earthly Prince does swerve
from the Example of the Heavenly Government, the greater plague he is of God's
Wrath and Punishment, by God's Justice unto the Country and People over whom
God for their Sins has placed such a Prince and Governor. What shall Subjects
do then? What a perilous thing were it to commit to Subjects the Judgment,
which Prince is wise and godly, and his Government good, and which otherwise?
as though the Foot must judge of the Head; an Enterprise very heinous, and
which must needs breed Rebellion; -- and is not Rebellion the greatest of all
mischiefs? -- A Rebel is worse than the worst Prince, and Rebellion worse than
the worst Government of the worst Prince that hitherto has been. -- If we will
have an evil Prince, when God shall send such a one, taken away, and a good one
in his place, let us take away our Wickedness, which provokes God to place
such a one over us. -- Shall the Subjects both by their Wickedness provoke God
for their deserved punishment to give them an undiscreet and evil Prince, and
also rebel against him, and withal against God, who for the punishment of their
Sins did give them such a Prince. And this Doctrine is excellently enforced in
the second part of that Homily from the Example of King David in his Carriage
toward Saul. And one reason perhaps why these old plain Sermons are by some
men despised, and evil spoken of, is, because they so heartily recommend this
Doctrine of Non-resistance.

CHAP. IV. The Doctrine of the Liturgy.
TO our Homilies I subjoin the Liturgy of our Church, the most excellent body
of public Prayers that the World owns. In the Morning and Evening Service for
every day, God is said to be the only Ruler of Princes, exclusive of both Pope
and People. To the understanding of which Collect, I shall give you the
Paraphrase of Dr. Cumber. Compan. to the Temple, part 1. 23. p. 171. Ed. Fol.
The Church of England is famous above all other Churches for her entire
Loyalty to the King; which may be seen not only in the Lives of the true Sons
thereof, but in their Prayers, etc. Id. p. 173.
God is the only Judge of the Actions of Princes, since they are his Servants
and Substitutes; to their own Master they must stand or fall, and are only
accountable to his Tribunal: and therefore we have so much the more need to
pray for them to their great Lord, that he would direct them to do well, and
guide them who are to rule us, that this their mighty Prince may be in safety
and in peace: for if it should be otherwise (which God forbid) we neither will
nor can oppose them, having no other Arms against our Prince but Prayers and
Tears. Id. p. 174.
If he were a Saul or a Nero, we should sin in ceasing to pray for him. Id. p.
176. v. p. 225.
It is natural to the true Sons of the Church of England to love the King. --
If a foreign Prince opposes our King, he is a Robber; if P. 177.
he be a Subject who rises against his Sovereign, he has renounced
Christianity with his Allegiance,
and is to be esteemed a Troubler of our Israel. Therefore whosoever they be
that are Enemies to the King, and whatsoever the pretense be, we wish they may
never prosper.

In the Litany we pray God to deliver us from all Sedition, privy Conspiracy,
and Rebellion; and Dr. Cumber Part 2. 2. p. 225.
says, That the Words Rebellion and Schism were put into the Litany since our
late unhappy Civil Wars, that have given us reason to pray, From all Sedition,
etc.

In the Greek Liturgies he says it is thus expressed, From Civil Wars, etc.
but not one Word of this could he ever find in the Roman Missals that have
come to his hands; it being the peculiar Glory of the Church of England, that
her Prayers and Practices have always been eminently loyal, and Enemies to
Treason and Rebellion. And he says farther, Ib. p. 226, 227.
That Rebellion is a sin so contrary to Christianity, that though the Primitive
Christians had all the Provocations imaginable, and Force sufficient, they
never offered to rebel. -- So that they who do rebel have divested themselves
of the Christian Principles, and almost of their Humanity too.

In the Prayer for the Parliament, We may say of our Princes as Pliny said of
the good Emperor Trajan, they have freely yielded to rule by those Laws to
which nothing but their own goodness could oblige them; and doubtless the
People of England ought to take it as an Act of Grace that their Kings have
consented to govern them on this manner.

In the Prayer after the Commandments the King is said to be God's Minister,
and we beg God, that all his Subjects duly considering that he has God's
Authority, may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him according to God's
blessed Word and Ordinance. And this is admirably commented; Id. part 3.. 4. p.
20.
We are to consider that Kings bear God's Name, and act by his Power; and such
as rebel, do fight against God, oppose his Word, and resist his Ordinance, etc.

In the occasional Office for Nov. 5. we pray God, That the King may cut off
all such workers of Iniquity, as turn Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into
Faction. And in the Office for May 29. when we thank God for the Restoration of
the Royal Family, we beseech God to accept of our unfeigned Oblation of our
selves, vowing all holy Obedience in Thought, Word, and Work, unto the Divine
Majesty, and promising in him, and for him, all dutiful Allegiance to his
anointed Servant, and to his Heirs for ever. And it is also observable, the
Proclamations relating to those solemn times are appointed to be read, which
are as full to this purpose as any thing can be: and by our Canons, when the
Minister bids Prayer before his Sermon, to continue the belief of this Truth,
he is bound to exhort the People, when they pray, to acknowledge the King to be
in all Causes and over all Persons, next and immediately under God supreme, etc.

CHAP. V. The Orders of our Bishops.
BY the Orders of our Bishops I mean not so much the particular Injunctions, or
Enquiries of our Prelates within their own particular Dioceses (though of such
instances there is no want, as I have shown Chap. 2. from the Articles of
Inquiry of Archbishop Cranmer, and the Articles of Visitation of Bishop Ridley,
and could prove from many other such Instances) but the general Orders which
have been sent from the Metropolitan to the whole Church; such Injunctions,
when obeyed, ought to be looked on as the sense of the whole Church, unless we
shall impeach either the Makers, or the Complyers, of dishonest Practices;
especially when the Adversaries of the Church have given occasion to such
Injunctions: thus when Knight (of whom I shall treat in the next Chapter) was
censured at Oxford, the same Year some Cautions concerning Preachers and
Preaching, were by the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, with the King's
Consent, as the Law required, sent to the several Bishops of their Provinces to
be put in execution in their several Dioceses. The Directions are dated Aug. 4.
1622. of which the first requires, That no Preacher, etc. shall fall into any
set course, or common place, otherwise than by opening the Coherence, and
division of his Text, which shall not be comprehended and warranted in essence,
substance, effect, or natural inference, within some one of the Articles of
Religion set forth Ann. 1562. or in some one of the Homilies set forth by
Authority, etc. The fourth is, That no Preacher, of what Title or Denomination
soever, shall presume from henceforth in any Auditory within this Kingdom, to
declare, limit, or bound out by way of positive Doctrine, in any Lecture or
Sermon, the Power, Prerogative, Jurisdiction, Authority, or duty of Sovereign
Princes, or therein meddle with Matters of State, and Reference between Princes
and People, than as they are instructed in the Homily of Obedience, and in the
rest of the Homilies, and Articles of Religion, set forth by Public Authority.

These Injunctions were again renewed and reinforced in the days of King
Charles the Second, and in the next Reign: and in the Articles of the present
Archbishop of Canterbury, July 16. 1638. Art. 7.
the Clergy are expressly enjoined, That in their Sermons they should four times
in the Year, at least, teach the People, That the Kings Power being in his
Dominions highest under God, all Priests should upon all occasions persuade the
People to Loyalty and Obedience to his Majesty in all things lawful, and to
patient Submission in the rest, promoting, as far as in them lies, the public
Peace, and Quiet of the World.

And agreeably to this Doctrine were the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
especially the later, framed, which though particularly made against the
Papists, yet as Bishop Sanderson well observes, where the Reason of making and
imposing an Oath is particular, Praelect. 7. de juram.
but the words of the Oath are general, there the Oath obliges according to the
sense of the words in their utmost latitude; as, says he, for Example, in the
Oath of Supremacy, to the making of which the Usurpation of the Pope gave
occasion; the words being all general, do exclude all Persons from exercising
that Supreme Power in this Kingdom. And every Clergyman especially ought to
reflect, how often he has solemnly professed and averred; That it is not
lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King, or any
commissioned by him, etc. and to remember, that that Declaration was enjoined
in opposition to the Doctrines of the year 1641, the Men of which age asserted,
That the Power of Kings, was given them by the People, and might be resumed by
the Donors; that the King was coordinate with the States, and that his
Politic differed from his personal Capacity. Now the occasion of the making a
Law, and the preamble of it are looked on, as the best Interpreters of the
words of a Law.

CHAP. VI. The Censures of our Universities.
NOR are the Censures of our most famous Universities in this case to be
neglected, or looked on slightly; it is well known, what a Repute the Judgment
of the single College of the Sorbone has at Paris, and how much the Authority
of the Foreign Universities, together with our own, swayed with King Henry the
Eighth, and persuaded the Christian World to credit the Justice of his Divorce.

Now I shall not mention the Censure of the Mill manus Petition, as it was
called, in which both the Universities most amicably agreed, resolving only to
give an account of the Proceedings at Oxford in the Years 1^22, 1647, and 1683;
the Decree of 1622, was made the 25th of June in full Convocation on this
occasion. Antiqu. Oxon. l. 1. p. 326, 327, etc.
Mr. Knight of Broadgate Hall, (now Pembroke College) preaching at S. Peter's
in the East on Palm Sunday upon 1 Kings 19.9. What do thou here Elijah?
started this Question, Whether it were lawful for Subjects in the defense of
themselves, when persecuted for Religion, to take Arms against their Prince?
which he held in the Affirmative; for which Doctrine, when he was convened by
the Vice Chancellor, he pleaded the Authority of Paraeus, in his Commentary on
the xiii. to the Romans, and the Example of King James, who assisted the
Rochellers against their King; and was for that reason sent to Prison, the
Vice Chancellor making the Bishop of St. David's ( Laud, who in May of the same
Year had his Conference with Fisher the Jesuit) acquainted with it, from whom
the King was informed; who ordered Knight and his Sermon to be sent up, the
Author being committed a Prisoner to the Gate House in Westminster, where he
lay two Years; and at last, by the intercession of one of his Fellow Prisoners
with Bishop Williams, was released; and having asked the King's Pardon, went
into Holland, where in a short time he died.

When Knight was complained of, the King sent to the Vice Chancellor, to injoin
the Students of Divinity to lay the Foundation of their Studies (next to the
holy Scriptures) in the Fathers and Councils, and to abstain from the Writings
of either Jesuits or Puritans: and accordingly, the Heads of Colleges, the
Professors, etc. met in Convocation (the Bishops, that were then about the
Court, having condemned the Doctrine (and the Books that contained it) as
seditious, and contrary to the holy Scriptures, the Decrees of Councils, and
Dictates of the Fathers, and to the Doctrine and Constitutions of the Church of
England) and censured among others this Proposition, Proposit. 2. v. Antiqu.
Oxon. p. 327.
That Subjects, not private Persons, but inferior Magistrates, may take Arms to
defend themselves, the Commonwealth, the Church, and true Religion, against
their Sovereign, or the superior Magistrate, upon these Conditions; If 1. The
Prince turn Tyrant. 2. If he compel his Subjects to commit Idolatry, or to
blaspheme. 3. When any great injury is done. 4. If they cannot otherwise be
safe in their Fortunes, their Lives, and Consciences: upon condition also, 5.
That under the pretext of Religion, or Justice, they do not seek their own
advantage; and 6. That their Arms be managed with much moderation, Moderamine
inculpatae tutelae. These are the Terms of the Proposition; and the Censure of
the University runs thus, This Proposition is false and seditious, and so
craftily restrained under such Conditions annexed, as every seditious Person
may make use of to vindicate himself. And the third Proposition, which is of
the same kind, is alike condemned: so that it is no wonder that Gillespy, in
the Preface to his Sermon, calls this Doctrine the new Oxford Divinity; and I
wish no worse had been ever broached or owned there.

Nor did the University rest here, but withal decreed and declared, That
according to the Canon of the holy Scriptures, Subjects ought by no means
forcibly to resist their Prince; and that it is not lawful to take Arms either
offensive or defensive against the King upon the account of Religion, or any
other Pretense; requiring all the Members of the Convocation to subscribe the
Censures, and enjoining all that should be admitted to any Degrees, to take an
Oath to consent to the determinations of that Convocation; while the Commentary
of Paraeus was burned in the Churchyard of St. Mary's at Oxford, at Paul's
Cross in London; as it was likewise burned at Cambridge; that University
joining with her Sister of Oxford in the Condemnation of those seditious
Doctrines.

For as a Doublet. Ep. ad Gerh. Voss.
learned Foreigner, who at that time was upon the spot, informs, that Knight
citing for his Opinion the Authority not only of Paraeus, but also of Bucanus
and Junius Brutus, affirming further, that it was the Opinion of all the
Reformed Divines, and illustrating it by this instance, that If the King of
France should (while his Army laid Siege to any Town of the Protestants his
Subjects) happen to fall by the hand of any of the besieged, he was justly
slain, nor was he that killed him guilty of any crime; both the Universities
condemned the Doctrine: and though at Oxford only Paraeus's Book was burned,
yet at Cambridge they also burned Bucanus's Common places, and Junius Brutus
(or Hubert Languet's) Vindiciae, and damned the Authors to perpetual Infamy; my
Author adding, that the Cambridge Doctors were the more fierce of the two,
whether because they hated the Puritans, or were the Majority of them at least,
Remonstrants; the Censure of that University Doublet saw, when he was at the
Commencement, it being put into his Hands by him who drew it up, upon his
promise not to transcribe it. What hindered it is publication, I know not, while
the same year Dr. David Owen published his Anti-Paraeus seu Determinat. de Jure
Regio adv. David. Paraeum at Cambridge, anno sc. 1622. Octavo, in which the
Doctrine of Resistance is thoroughly confuted. This Censure, and the Execution
done upon his Book much troubled the old Paraeus. And his Son Append. in
Comment. ad Rom 13.5 vit. Paraei.
says, that his Father meant, what he wrote, not of Kings endowed with an
absolute power, but of such as were admitted to their Crowns upon condition;
while the illustrious Hugo Grotius thought so well of it, that he has inserted
it at large in his Works Vot. pro pace ad Art. 16. p. 661.
with a high commendation, affirming, That the Reverend Memory of King James
the first, the wisest King of Great Britain, and the honor which he owed to the
University of Oxford, which at that time foresaw the Calamities which England
afterward suffered, and a just fear lest the pernicious Doctrine might do more
mischief, engaged him to reprint the Censure. To which Determination Dr.
Prideaux, Dr. Abbot, and the other eminent Men of that time gave their suffrage.

Anno 1647, June 1. The same famous Academy met in Convocation, and declared
their Judgment concerning the Solemn League and Covenant, and a few of their
Reasons, why they could not take that Covenant I shall transcribe, Ad calc.
vit. Sanderson. p. 174.
as they were drawn up by Bishop Sanderson.

1. We cannot take the Oath without acknowledging in the Imposers a greater
power, than for ought appears to us, has been in former times challenged --
P. 181.
3. We cannot take the Oath without manifest danger of Perjury, P. 182.
the Oath being contrary to the Oath of Supremacy by us taken. P. 201, 202.
We are not satified in being obliged to preserve the King's person, and
Authority in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and the
Liberties of the Kingdom, forasmuch as 1. No such limitation of our Duty in
that behalf is to be found either in the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
(which no Papist would refuse to take with such a Limitation) nor in the
Protestation, nor in the Word of God. 3. Such a Limitation leaves the Duty of
the Subject at so much looseness, and the safety of the King at so great
uncertainty,
that whenever the People shall have a mind to withdraw their Obedience, they
cannot want a pretense from the same for so doing. 4. Hereby we make our selves
guilty of an actual and real diminution of his Majesty's Power and Greatness,
which in the same Breath we call the World to witness with our Consciences,
that we had no thought to diminish, etc. P. 210, 211.
The Tyranny and Yoke of Antichrist, if laid upon the Necks of Subjects by
their lawful Sovereigns,
is to be thrown off by Christian Boldness in confessing the truth, and patient
suffering for it, not by taking up Arms, or violent resisting the higher
Powers. Page 217
-- Because some have inferred from the very Order, that the Defense of the
King's Person, and Authority ought to be with subordination to the preservation
of the Rights, and Privileges of Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdom,
therefore we cannot take this Oath. -- Especially being told in a late
Pamphlet, P. 219.
that the King, not having preserved the Liberties of the Kingdom, etc. as of
duty he ought, is thereby become a Tyrant, and so cease to be a King, and
consequently that his Subjects cease to be Subjects, and ow him no longer
Subjection; which Assertion since we heartily detest as false and scandalous in
the Supposition, and in the Inference seditious and devilish, we dare not by
subscribing this Article give the least countenance thereto. -- And that we may
take the Covenant in our own sense is contrary to the nature and end of an
Oath, which must be full of simplicity, P. 223.
contrary to the end of Speech, etc. and will bring a scandal upon our
Religion, that we practice that our selves that we condemn in the Paqists, viz.
Swearing with Jesuitical Equivocations, and mental Reservations, that we play
fast and loose with God, in as much as what we swear to day in one sense, we
may swear the direct contrary to morrow in another. P. 225.
-- And if this would fatisfie the Conscience, we might with a good Conscience
not only take the Covenant, but even subscribe to the Council of Trent also,
yea, and to the Turkish Alcoran: P. 229.
if the King should not protect us, but neglect his part too, having power and
ability to perform it, his voluntary neglect ought not to free us from the
faithful performance of what is to be done on our part.

Ann. 1683. July. 21. in a full Convocation many opinions were condemned that
had been published in diverse Books, and writings in English, and also in the
Latin tongue, P. 2.
repugnant to the holy Scriptures, decrees of Councils, writings of the
Fathers, the Faith, and profession of the Primitive Church: and also
destructive of the Kingly Government, the safety of his Majesty's Person, the
public Peace, the Laws of Nature, and Bonds of Humane Society, as

Proposition 1. All civil Authority is derived originally from the People.

Proposition 2. There is a mutual compact tacit, or express, between a Prince,
and his Subjects: and if he perform not his Duty, they are discharged from
theirs.

Proposition 3. P. 3.
that if Lawful Governors become Tyrants, or Govern otherwise, than by the
Laws of God and Man they ought to do, they forfeit the Right they had unto
their Government.

Prop. 7. Self-preservation is the Fundamental Law of Nature, and supersedes
the Obligation of all others, when they stand in competition with it.

Prop. 8. The Doctrine of the Gospel concerning patient suffering of Injuries,
is not inconsistent with violent resisting of the higher Powers in case of
Persecution for Religion.

Pr. 9. P. 4.
There lies no obligation upon Christians to Passive Obedience, when the Prince
commands any thing against the Laws of our Country: and the Primitive
Christians chose rather to die than to resist, because Christianity was not yet
settled by the Laws of the Empire. And besides the Condemnation of the
Doctrines, the Books of Milton, P. 7.
Baxter, Goodwin, Owen, Johnson, etc. were ordered to be publicly burnt by the
Hand of the Marshal in the Court of the Schools, as Books that were fitted to
deprave Men's Manners, stir up Seditions and Tumults, overthrow States and
Kingdoms, and lead to Rebellion, Murder of Princes, and Atheism it self: And a
Prohibition issued, forbidding the Reading any of the said Books under great
Penalties.

This Decree was drawn up by Dr. Jane, Dean of Gloucester, and the King's
Professor of Divinity at Oxon, and subscribed by the Vicechancellor, other
Professors, and the whole Convocation. And pursuant to this Decree Parkinson, a
Fellow of Lincoln-College, for maintaining, that the Right and Foundation of
all Power was in the People, that Kings are accountable for their
Maleadministration, etc. And particularly, that King Charles the First was
justly put to death, for making War upon his Subjects, was an. 1684. expelled
the University.

And it is observable, that our excellent Homilies, that so expressly require
Obedience to Princes, and condemn Rebellion and Resistance upon any pretense
whatsoever, were Printed at the Theater the same year that the abovementioned
Decree was made.

CHAP. VII. The Opinions of Learned Men.
WHen Men would know what are the Sentiments of any Church in her Articles or
Sanctions, the most rational Course is to make inquiry among those who were
concerned in making them, or those who may be presumed best to understand them,
by reason of their nearness to the time, their acquaintance with the Compilers,
or their extraordinary Sagacity and Honesty; and of suchpersons in the Church
of England must we make Inquiry concerning the Doctrine of Obedience and
Non-resistance. In Burn. hist. Ref. part. 1. l. 3. p. 245.
the Days of Henry the Eighth, when the Reformation began to dawn, an. 1537. a
Convocation was held, upon the Conclusion of which there was Printed an
Explanation of the chief Points of Religion, signed by nineteen Bishops, eight
Archdeacons, and seventeen Doctors of Divinity and Law, in which there was an
Exposition of the Creed, the Ten Commandments, etc: But this was but a rude
Draught, the beauteous Strokes were given it Id. p. 286.
anno 1540. when a select number of Bishops sat by Virtue of a Commission from
the King confirmed in Parliament (among which were Cranmer, Ridley, Redman, and
other extraordinary men) their first work was to draw up a Declaration of the
Christian Doctrine for the necessary Erudition of a Christian Man, in which the
Commentary on the fifth Commandment thus instructs us: Subjects be bound not to
withdraw their Fealty, Truth, Love and Obedience toward their Prince for any
Cause whatsoever it be, nor for any cause they may conspire against his person,
nor do any thing toward the hinderance or hurt thereof, or of his Estate. And
this they prove out of Romans 13. Whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God; and they that resist the ordinance of God, shall get to
themselves damnation. And ^n the sixth Commandment, No Subjects may draw their
Swords against their Prince for any Cause whatsoever it be. So that hereby we
see, that the Declaration made in the Reign of Charles the Second, ( That it is
not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, etc. (is no Novel Doctrine, but the
old Doctrine of the Church of England even in the infancy of its Reformation.
-- And again, Although Princes, which be the Supreme Heads of their Realm, do
otherwise than they ought to do, yet God has assigned no Judges over them in
this World, but will have the Judgment of them reserved to himself, and will
punish them when he sees his time. And Ann. 1542. Id. Coll. of Record. n. 26.
p. 252. V. Fox to. 2 p. 346, 347.
it is expressly enjoined by the Bishop of London to his Clergy, Item, That
every of you do procure and provide of your own a Book called The Institution
of a Christian Man, otherwise called the Bishop's Book, and that you and every
of you do exercise your selves in the same according to such Precepts as has
been given heretofore, or hereafter to be given. So that I suppose the Book to
have been the whole duty of Man of those days.

SECT. I.
The Popish Bishops, Tonstal and Stokesly, in their Letter to Cardinal Pool,
Apud Fox to. 2. p. 351, 352.
prove out of St. Austin, St. Chrysostom, and other Fathers, That a King is
accountable to God only for his Faults; that he has no Peer upon Earth, being
greater than all Men, and inferior but to God alone, etc. and from hence they
show, That the Pope's Power (and by parity of Argument the Power of the People)
to depose Kings is a Doctrine that will be to his own Damnation, if he repent
not; whereas he ought to obey his Prince according to the Doctrine of St. Peter
and St. Paul: nay Bonner himself, Ap. eund. p. 673.
as he wrote the Preface to the Book of true Obedience, so in his Sermon at
Paul's Cross, Ann. 1549. in the beginning of the Reign of Edward the Sixth,
declares, That all such as rebel against their Prince, get to themselves
Damnation; and those that resist the higher Power, resist the Ordinance of God;
and he that dies in Rebellion is utterly damned, and so loses both Body and
Soul, -- what pretenses soever they have; as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for
Rebellion against Moses, were swallowed down alive into Hell, although they
pretended to sacrifice to God. So much of the Doctrine of the Reformation did
even Bonner himself at that time own* and this also was the Opinion of the
Protestants of that Age; for Ap. eund. to. 2. p. 592
among the Heresies and Errors collected by the Popish Bishops out of the
Martyr Tyndal's Book, called the Obedience of a Christian Man, this is the
fourth, he faith, fol. 113. that a Christian Man may not resist a Prince being
an Infidel, and an Ethnic, and that this takes away free will; or as it is in
the Inter addend.
Latin, Non licere Christiano resistere Principi Infideli, and Ethnico. Tollit
libertatem arbitrii. Where observe, that the Papists looked upon it as if
Tindal had said, that it was impossible to do so; whereas he only means, that a
Christian ought not to resist, etc. for the Words are thus explained; Ibid.
St. Peter wills us to be subject to our Princes, 1 Pet. ii. St. Paul also
does the like, Romans xiii. who was also himself subject to the Power of Nero:
and although every Commandment of Nero against God he did not follow, yet he never
made resistance against the Authority and State of Nero, as the Pope uses to
do against the State not only of Infidels but also of Christian Princes.

SECT. II.
In the Reign of Edward the Sixth the true Religion began to flourish, and at
that time old Father Latimer was famous for a plain and honest Preacher; Fol.
56.
he in his fourth Sermon before the King telling the Audience what Conference
he had with my Lord Darsey in the Tower, subjoins, that when that Lord pleaded
that he had been always faithful, and had he seen the King in the Field he
would have yielded his Sword to him on his Knees, he replied, Marry, but in the
mean season you played not the part of a faithful Subject in holding with the
People in a Commotion and Disturbance: it has been the cast of all Traitors to
pretend nothing against the King's Person; they never pretend the matter to the
King, but to others; Subjects may not resist any Magistrates, nor ought to do
any thing contrary to the King's Laws. And to put the matter out of all doubt,
in his Afternoon Matthew. xxii. 21.
Sermon at Stamford he says, If the King should require of thee an unjust
Request, yet art thou bound to pay it, and not to resist, nor rebel against the
King. The King indeed is in peril of his Soul for asking an unjust Request, and
God will in his due time reckon with him for it; but thou must obey the King,
and not take upon thee to judge him, for God is the King's Judge, etc. and know
this, that whenever there is an unjust Exaction laid upon thee, it is a
plague and punishment for thy Sin. We marvel that we are plagued as we be, and
I think verily, this unjust and unfaithful dealing with our Princes is one
great cause of our plague: look therefore every Man upon his Conscience; ye
shall not be judged by worldly Policy at the latter day.

Archbishop Cranmer, in his Letter to Queen Mary (whatever his fear might
otherwise betray him to do) confesses, Ap. Fox, to. 3. p. 672.
That the Imperial Crown, and Jurisdiction of this Realm, is taken immediately
from God to be used under him only, and is subject unto none but God alone; p.
674.
and afterward averrs, That as the Pope takes upon him to give the Temporal
Sword to Kings and Princes, so does he likewise take upon him to depose them
from their imperial States, if they be disobedient to him; and commands the
Subjects to disobey their Princes, assoiling the Subjects as well of their
Obedience as of their lawful Oaths made unto their true Kings and Princes
contrary to God's Commandment, who commands all Subjects to obey their Kings,
or their Rulers over them. It is not to be denied that this great Man was for
the Lady Jane; but besides his Temper, I have this to say for him, that the
several and contrary Acts of Parliament, limiting and changing the Succession
according to the King's Pleasure in the latter end of Henry the Eighth's Reign,
might very well in such a juncture of Affairs as happened on the Death of
Edward the Sixth, stagger a wise Man, and incline him to believe, that the Son
had the same Right that his Father had (as unquestionably he had, if it were a
Right of the Crown) especially while that Right was recognized and confirmed in
Parliament.

To this excellent Prince was Sir John Cheek a Tutor, as he also was the
Restorer of the Greek Tongue in England: he in his Advice of the True Subject
to the Rebel, Ed. Oxon. 1641. p. 2, 3, 4.
or the hurt of Sedition, thus bespeaks the Rebels of that Age; For our selves,
we have great cause to thank God, by whose Religion, and holy Word daily taught
us, we learn not only to fear him truly, but also to obey our King faithfully,
and to serve in our own Vocation like Subjects honestly -- ye, which be bound
by God's Word not to obey for fear, like Men-pleasers, but for conscience sake,
like Christians, have contrary to God's holy will, whose Offense is everlasting
Death, and contrary to the godly Order of Quietness set out by the King's
Majesty's Laws, the breach whereof is not unknown to you, taken in hand,
uncalled of God, unsent by Men, unfit by reason, to cast away your bounden
Duties of Obedience, etc. -- yet ye pretend, that partly for God's sake, partly
for the Commonwealth's sake, ye do rise. -- How do you take in hand to reform?
Be you Kings, by what Authority, or by what Succession? Be you the King's
Officers, by what Commission? Be you called by God, by what Tokens declare you
that? -- Ye rise for Religion, what Religion taught you that? If you were
offered Persecution for Religion, you ought to fly, so Christ teaches you; and
yet you intend to fight: if you would stand in the truth, you ought to suffer
like Martyrs, and you slay like Tyrants, thus for Religion you keep no
Religion, and neither will follow the Counsel of Christ, nor the constancy of
Martyrs: whatever the Causes be, that have moved your wicked Affections herein,
Page 11.
(as they be unjust Causes, and increase your Faults much) the thing it self,
the Rising, I mean, must needs be wicked and horrible before God; and the
usurping of Authority, and taking in hand rule, which is the sitting in God's
Seat of Justice, a proud climbing up into God's high Throne, must needs be not
only cursed newly by him, but also has been often punished before of him, and
that which is done to God's Officers, Page 12.
God accounts it done to him. -- Ye be bound in God's Word to obey your King,
and is it no Breach of Duty to withstand your King? See also Bishop Hooper's
Comment on the Fifth Commandment.

SECT. III.
But the outward Felicity of the Church, as it was very great under Edward the
Sixth, so it was short-lived; a black Storm gathering under Queen Mary, and at
last falling severely upon her Protestant Subjects, who dealt with her as they
were in duty bound; they assisted her cheerfully till she got her Crown, and
when contrary to her Duty, and her Promises she persecuted them, some of them
resolutely suffered Martyrdom, others, as our Savior advises, fled into
Foreign Countries for Protection, the great Men of that Party solemnly
disowning the Principle of taking up Arms against their Sovereign, even when
she had falsified her promises to them. And this is attested by more than a few
of the greatest Men of that Reign, Burn. Hist. Res. part. l. 2. p. 285.
the Bishops of Exeter, S. David's, and Gloucester, Tailor, Philpot, Bradford,
Crome, Sanders, Rogers, Laurence and others, who having given an account of
their Principles conclude thus, as the Historian says, These things they
declared, that they were ready to defend, as they often had before offered, and
concluded, charging all People to enter into no Rebellion against the Queen,
but to obey her in all points, except where her Commands were contrary to the
Law of God. But their own words will most properly give us their meaning, as
Tom. 3. p. 100, etc.
Fox records. Because we hear, that it is determined to send us speedily out of
the Prisons of the King's Bench, etc. (where at present we are, and of a long
time some of us have been, not as Rebels, Traitors, seditious persons, Thieves,
or Transgressors of any Laws of this Realm, Inhibitions, Proclamations, or
Commandments of the Queen's Highness, or of any of the Councils, God's Name be
praised therefore, but only for the Conscience we have to God, and to his most
holy Word and Truth) to one of the Universities there to dispute -- We write
and send abroad this our Faith -- humbly requiring, and in the Bowels of our
Savior Christ, beseeching all that fear God to behave themselves as obedient
Subjects to the Queen's Highness, and the superior Powers which are ordained of
God under her; rather after our Example to give their Heads to the Block, than
in any point to rebel, or once to mutter against the Lord's anointed, we mean
our Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, into whose Heart we beseech the Lord of Mercy
plentifully to pour the Wisdom, and Grace of his Holy Spirit now, and for ever.
Amen. First, we confess, and believe all the Canonical Books of the Old
Testament, etc. And having reckoned up what Doctrines they owned, and what they
condemned, they go on thus -- And we doubt not, but we shall be able to prove
all our Confessions here to be most true, by the Verity of God's Word, and
Consent of the Catholic Church -- In the mean season, as obedient Subjects, we
shall behave our selves toward all that be in Authority, and not cease to pray
to God for them, that he would govern them all generally, and particularly with
the Spirit of Wisdom and Grace; and so we heartily desire, and humbly pray all
Men to do,
in no point consenting to any kind of Rebellion or Sedition against our
Sovereign Lady the Queen's Highness; but where they cannot obey, but they must
disobey God, then to submit themselves with all patience and humility to
suffer, as the will and pleasure of the highest powers shall adjudge, as we are
ready through the goodness of the Lord to suffer whatsoever they shall adjudge
us unto, rather than we will consent to any Doctrine contrary to this, which we
here confess, unless we shall be convinced thereof either by Writing, or by
Word, etc. and the Lord of Mercy endue us all with the Spirit of his Truth, and
Grace of Perseverance, therein unto the end. Amen. May 8, Anno Dom. 1554.

This Letter was subscribed by Bishop Ferrar, Bishop Hooper, and Bishop
Coverdale, and by nine others, who were the Flower of Confessors at that time.
And if it be objected, that Wyat's Rebellion happened the same year, and that
he took Arms upon the Account of Religion, I answer, 1. Were it so, this was
the fault of but a few discontented Protestants, not the fault of their
Religion and Principles, but of their Passions. 2. Nor did those Discontents
take Arms for Religion, as the Historian says expressly: Burn. ubi supra. p. 269.
For when Wyat made his Proclamation at Maidstone, he professed, that he
intended nothing but to preserve the Liberty of the Nation, and keep it from
coming under the Yoke of Strangers, which he said all the Council except one or
two were against, and assured the People, that all the Nobility and chief Men
of England would concur with him. (Now the Generality of the Nation was then
Papist, the Nobility and Gentry especially, and so could not be presumed to
take Arms for the Protestant Religion.) He said nothing of Religion, but in
private assured those that were for the Reformation, that he would declare for
them. -- And his Demands P. 270.
have no relation to Religion, but to the Command of the Tower, and that the
Queen should be under his Guard, etc. The same Ibid.
Historian affirming, that the Rebellion was not at all raised upon the
pretense of Religion, which according to the Printed Account set out by the
Queen's Order was not so much as once named, and that Poynet Bishop of
Winchester was not in it, P. 171.
etc. and that Christopherson's Book on this Subject was but a Flourish of his
Wit, and no decisive proof. And I cannot learn but that Wyat as well as Dudley
died a Papist. It Is true, some of his Adherents pretended Religion (as there
are, and will be wicked Men of all Persuasions) but they did but pretend
Religion as Mr. Bradford (one of the Writers of the aforementioned Letter) said
of them in his Exhortation to the Professors of the Gospel in England: but,
as he adds, they were Hypocrites, and under the Cloak of the Gospel would have
debarred the Queen's Highness of her Right, but God would not so cloak them.

This therefore was the Sentiment of our Confessors at home, during the Reign
of Queen Mary, and I doubt not, but it was the Sense of their Brethren the
Confessors abroad (as I shall make it appear from the Writings of the Bishops
Jewel and Sandys) whatever the Author of the History of the Troubles at
Francfort says to the contrary, who was well known to be a party, and for that
reason not fit to give such evidence P. 195.
as he does, that the greatest Traitors and Rebels King Edward had in the West
Parts were Priests, and such as had subscribed to the Book, or whatsoever by
Law was then in force -- But in all the Stirs which have happened either since
the Queen's Majesty came to the Crown, or before, I have not heard of so much
as one (Minister, or other) that has lifted up his hand against her Majesty,
or State, whom it pleases the malicious Man to term Precisian and Puritan,
Traitor and Rebel. While this Author has forgot what before he recorded, Page
44, 45.
That Knox their Patriarch was banished from Francfort for High Treason against
the Emperor of Germany. And not long after the History was written, Hacket and
his Companions would have convinced him, that the Men of his Party can be
Rebels.

SECT. IV.
Under Queen Elisabeth the Truth broke from behind the Cloud, and shone
triumphantly; and as Truth is always the same, so it appeared in this
particular Doctrine: Archbishop Sandys was one of the Confessors of that Age,
and from him we learn, Sermon. 3. p. 51.
That if we despise Government, and speak evil of them that be in Authority, if
we mutter and murmur against the Principality of Moses and Aaron, if we loath
the present State, and seek after Alterations, then shall the Blessings of God
turn into Cursings. Id. Ser. 4. p. 67.
As we should pray for all Men, so chiefly for Kings (and undoubtedly it is
unlawful to rebel against those whom we are bound to pray for.) In Paul 's time
the Kings and Rulers of the People were Ethnicks, Tyrants, Enemies to Christ,
and cruel Persecutors of the Gospel, whereupon some thought it not convenient
for the Church to pray for them, who sought to destroy it, S. Paul abateth this
Opinion, teaching them, that they should chiefly pray for such, as for Men in
greatest danger, and most needing the help of their Prayers, pray for him that
prays not for himself, -- We must pray for ill Princes, because the King's
Heart is in God's Hand, that he may turn their minds, and stay their
Persecutions, etc. to pour out Supplications, Page 68.
that God would grant them a long life, a safe Government, a sure dwelling,
Tertull.
valiant Soldiers, faithful Counselors, a good People, and a quiet world, and
whatsoever the Hearts of Men or Kings do desire, (and I am sure such a Prayer
is not reconcilable with resistance) and let all such as will not say Amen to
this Prayer, assure themselves, that they are neither dutiful Christians, nor
faithful Subjects.

Thus also speaks Bishop Jewel, Def. of the Apol p. 15.
We teach the People as S. Paul does, to be subject to the highest Powers, not
only for fear, but also for conscience; we teach them, that whosoever strikes
with the Sword by private Authority, shall perish with the Sword; if the Prince
happen to be wicked, or cruel, or burdensome, we teach them to say with S.
Ambrose, Tears and Prayers be our Weapons.


Anno 1586. Bishop Bilson Printed his Book of the true difference between
Christian Subjection, and unchristian Rebellion. And therein says, P. 260.
Deliverance if you would have, obtain it by prayer, and expect it in peace, P.
262.
these be Weapons for Christians -- the Subject has no refuge against his
Sovereign, but only to God by prayer and patience. -- Christ fore-teaching his
Disciples, P. 256.
that they should be brought before Kings and Rulers, and put to death, and
hated of all Men for his Names sake, adds not, as you would have it, he that
first rebels, but he that endures to the end shall be saved. P. 278.
-- Your Spanish Inquisitions and French Massacres are able to set grave and
good Men at their wits end, and to make them justly doubt, since you refuse the
course of all divine and human Laws, with them, whether by the Law of Nature
they may not defend themselves from such barbarous Blood-suckers -- if the Laws
of the Land where they do converse, do permit them, etc.

This last Quotation I have transcribed, that I might answer the Authority,
which some Men use to prove, that it is lawful in some Cases for Subjects to
resist. For were this true: yet 1. This is but one Doctor's Opinion, contrary
to the Doctrine of the Church (and that with a limitation which concerns not
us) nor do we pretend, that any Man is infallible. 2. Bishop Bilson had been in
other things very much deceived, tho a wise Man, and a good Scholar, for even
upon such Men their Passions do many times impose; witness the Nullity. 3. For
this very Opinion Bishop Bilson is censured by the Third Paper to Henderson, p.
85. op. 2d. Edit. ann. 1687.
Martyr Charles; For Bilson, I remember well what Opinion the King my Father
had of him for these Opinions, and how he showed him some favor in hope of his
Recantation (as his good nature made him do many things of that kind) but
whether he did or not, I cannot say. 4. At the time when Bilson's Book was
written, the Queen was assisting the Dutch against their, and her common Enemy,
the Crown of Spain: now if in the Low Countries the Government was founded in
Compact, as many Learned Men say, and that all their Privileges, Sacred and
Civil, contrary to that Agreement, were invaded, and the Inquisition
introduced, all their Petitions slighted, and some hundred thousands
barbarously murdered, this alters the Case, while it can no way hold good in
Governments, where there is no such Compact. 5. Ductor. dubitant. l. 3 chapter 3.
rule 3. n. 19.
Bishop Tailor quotes Bilson, with Barclay and others, as an Assertor of the
Doctrine of Non-resistance, and Loyalty. If the Opinion of Bishop Bilson (were
he never so venerable for his Learning and other Accomplishments) be contrary
to that of our Blessed Savior, and his holy Apostles, we ought to renounce
them; and I have with a mixture of sorrow and shame reflected upon Cressy's
Censure of that Book, Exomolog. c. 12.
Queen Elisabeth conceived it convenient for her wordly Designs to take on her
the Protection of the Low Countries against the King of Spain, she employed Dr.
Bilson, Bishop of Winchester, to write his Book of Christian Subjection, in
which, to justify the Revolt of Holland, he gave strange Liberty in many
Cases, especially concerning Religion, for Subjects to cast off their
Obedience; but that Book which served Queen Elisabeth's wordly Designs, by the
just Judgment of God has contributed much to the Ruin of her Successor King
Charles; for there is not any Book, that the Presbyterians have made more
dangerous use of against their present Prince, than that which his Predecessor
commanded to be written to justify her against the King of Spain. Howel's Life
of Lewis 13.
And it was a smart Observation of Lewis the Thirteenth of France, when that
good King Charles was involved in a Civil War, that perhaps God punished him
for assisting the French Protestants at Rochel, when in Arms against their
Sovereign.

But after all, let us hear this Reverend Prelate, where he determines, rather
than disputes upon this Case, and none shall need to speak for him.

The Jesuit after long arguing with him about the Magistrate's being
accountable for his Faults to the People, The true Difference between Christian
Subject. etc. part 3. p. 97, 98. Ed. Land. 1586. Id. p. 252, 253.
as well as the People to him, comes at last to this Issue: Then Princes, (says
he) have impunity to do what they list without fear of Laws. To which he
replies; Princes appoint penalties for others, not for themselves; they bear
the Sword over others, not others over them: Subjects must be punished by them,
and they by none, but by God, whose place they supply. And in another place, We
deny, that Princes have any superior and ordinary Judge to hear and determine
the Right of their Crowns: We deny that God has Licensed any Man to depose
them, and pronounce them no Princes -- Princes have far greater honor and power
over Subjects, than any Man can have over Sons and Servants; they have power
over Goods, Lands, Bodies and Lives, which no private Man may challenge. They
be Fathers of our Country, to the which we be nearerbound, by the very
Confession of Ethnicks, than to the Fathers of our Flesh: how then by God's Law
should Subjects depose their Princes, to whom, in most evident words, they must
be subject for conscience sake, tho they be Tyrants and Infidels. Page 277.
And lastly, in Answer to the Jesuit's Objection of the German Princes
resisting the Emperor, which was the Hinge on which all the difference in their
Arguments did hang. They were Magistrates, (says he) and bare the Sword in
their own Dominions; you are private Men, and want lawful Authority to use the
Sword: their States be free, and may resist any wrong by the Law of the Empire.
You be Subjects, and simply bound by the Laws of the Country to obey the
Prince, or abide the pain which the public State of this Realm has prefixed
-- The Queen of England inheriteth, and has one and the same right over all
her Subjects, be they Nobles or others.

So Mr. Perkins on the Fifth Commandment: The Duties to Superiors in Authority
are, 1. Obedience to their Commandments, Romans 13.1. -- because every higher
power is the Ordinance of God, and the Obedience which we perform to him, God
accepts it, as tho it were done to himself, Romans 13.2. -- Qu. What if our
Superiors be cruel and wicked? Answ. Yet we must yield Obedience to them, but
not in wickedness, 1 Pet. 2.18. Act. 4.19. -- 2. Subjection in suffering the
Punishments inflicted by our Superiors. Qu. What if the punishment should be
unjust? Answ. Yet must we suffer it, till we can get some lawful Remedy for the
same, 1 Pet. 2.19, 20. -- And among the Sins against this Commandment he
reckons the sixth to resist the lawful Authority of Superiors: and the seventh
to obey them in things unlawful.

In this Reign Mr. Hooker published his judicious Books of Ecclesiastical
Polity, from the first of which it must be confessed, it is observed, that he
lays the Foundation of Government in Agreement, Spalatens. de Rep. Eccl. lib.
6. c. 2. n. 19. p. 526. Opinionem vero jam factam communem nostrorum
Scholasticorum, etc. That the common Opinion of the Schoolmen, and most other
Divines, which place the power of Government in the Body of the People, as if
it were given to them by God, and the People might dispose of it to whom they
pleased, is false, and altogether to be rejected.
he herein following the Schoolmen too strictly, who had brought in the Terms
and Notions of the Aristotelean Philosophy into the Christian Church, while
Aristotle is known to be a great Lover of a Democracy: but whatever he laid
down in Thesi, I am sure he hated the Deductions, that some Men make from him,
that because Government arose out of Compact, therefore the People may call
their Princes to an account; for in those Fragments of his Eighth Book of
Ecclesiastical Polity, which were happily preserved by Archbishop Usher, and
published by Dr. Bernard in his Clavi Trabales, (who professes, Page 49, 50.
that by what art, and upon what design, so much was expunged, he knows not) he
fully declares his mind. Page 93, 94.
In the mighty upon earth (which are not always so virtuous and holy, that
their own good minds will bridle them) what may we look for, considering the
Frailty of Man's Nature, if the World do once hold it for a Maxim, that Kings
ought to live in no Subjection, that how grievous disorder soever they fall
into, none may have coercive power over them. Yet so it is, that this we must
necessarily admit, as a number of right well learned Men are persuaded, etc.
Inducements leading Men to think, the highest Magistrate should not be judged
of any saving God alone, are especially these: 1. As in natural Bodies there
could be no motion, unless there were something that moves all things, and it
self continues immovable, so there must be a supreme Head of Justice,
whereunto all are subject, but it self in subjection to none, which kind of
pre-eminence, if some ought to have in a Kingdom,
who but the King shall have it? Kings therefore no Man can have lawful power
and authority to judge; if private Men offend, there is the Magistrate over
them, which judges; if Magistrates, they have their Prince; if Princes, there
is Heaven, a Tribunal before which they shall appear, on earth they are not
accountable to any. And here this admirable Discourse breaks off abruptly,
which is a great pity.

There is no need to give Archbishop Bancroft a place in this Catalogue, the
naming of his Books of dangerous Positions etc, and the Survey of the pretended
holy Discipline are a sufficient Proof of his Sentiments; and by his Directions
(if I mistake not) was the account of Hacket, Coppinger, and Arthington drawn
up, called, Conspiracy for Pretended Reformation; the Design of which Books is
expressly against the Doctrine of taking up Arms against the Lords Anointed,
especially on the account of Religion.

Near Mr. Hooker therefore I shall place his dear Friend Adrian Saravia (as the
Ancients frequently quote St Basil, and St Gregory of Nazianzen together) who
tho a Forreiner, better understood both the Civil, and Ecclesiastical Polity of
these Kingdoms, than some Natives. And he thus pronounces in the behalf of
truth. Epist. ante libr. de Imperandi autorit. and Christiana obedient.
. At this time the Authority of Kings is called in Question, and many men
Dispute, that the Authority of the People, or of the Senate (the States) is
above the King, and that from Reasons of Humane, not of Christian, and Divine
Philosophy; and what is much to be lamented not without great Scandal of the
Church of Christ, they having got by reading the Roman, and Greek Historians,
Philosophers, and Orators an Admiration, and liking of their Manners, and Laws,
so as to think, that all other Governments ought to be Modeled like them --
Many Books are written by our own, Men, and by the Papists on this Subject,
which incite the Nobility and Commons to take Arms, whenever Kings turn
Tyrants; which Doctrine, since it is contrary to the Principles of
Christianity, which our Savior and his Apostles delivered to the Church, and
brings ruin, and desolation to Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, I have thought my
self bound to confute -- And see the Madness of these People, who write on this
Subject; the Papists oblige all Subjects to take Arms against an Heretical
Prince i. e. one whom they call so; and others they oblige Subjects to take
Arms against a Prince, that is a Papist, and therefore refuses to Establish or
Defend the Pretestant Religion; so that of whatsoever persuasion a Prince be,
by some part of his Subjects he must be accounted a Tyrant, while a true
Christian is a Good Subject, let his Prince be of what Religion he pleases. --
It is Intolerable Impiety to abuse the Testimony of Holy Scripture to the
Confirmation of so Pestilent an error, while no Pagan Laws, no institutes of
the Philosophers can enjoin Subjects a more perfect and strict Obedience, than
the Doctrine of the Gospel, etc, after this in the Book, he shows, that the
Original of Government is from God, and not from the People; that the People,
when they have chosen a King, have no Authority over him afterward; that a
King is as much a King before his Coronation Oath, as after it, and many other
such things: he concludes his fourth Book. p. 314. Ed. 1610.
(and it is great pity, the other three Books are lost) with this excellent
passage. Since God is the preserver of Mankind, he cannot suffer a Tyrant
longer to Reign, than it is necessary for the punishment of the Sins of Men,
wherefore the best remedy against a Tyrant is the amendment of our Lives, and
constant Prayers to God. -- A serious Meditation upon the precepts of our Lord
and Master Jesus Christ will easily teach us, what is the Duty of Good Men
toward evil Kings, and Princes; he, who shall revolve with himself the precepts
of loving Enemies, can be no Man's Enemy, much less his Kings; he who is
prepared to Bless them, that Curse him, and is resolved not to return railing
for railing, nor to pursue revenge of injuries, will never speak irreverently,
nor Curse Crowned Heads, nor lie in wait for their Life; he, who has learnt,
that we must not resist evil, but overcome evil with Good, with Forbearance,
and Patience, can never be a Rebel, never be a Traitor. These things the
Apostles taught us, these things the Fathers have delivered down to us, and
being bred up under these institutions they patiently suffered the most cruel
Torments, and by suffering overcame; and to us their Posterity they have left
this Example, in whose steps it is much safer for us to tread, than to give
credit to the Authors of the new Doctrine, that is contrary to it.

SECT. V.
King James, when he came to the Crown, brought learning enough with him to
Vindicate his own Right, and the Rights of other Princes, and without vanity it
may be Affirmed, that he has managed that subject to Admiration in his
Writings; the greatest part of which were opposed to the Doctrines of the
Romanists, tho his Basilicon Doron smartly chastises the Disciplinarains. This
King in the Hampton Court p. 47, 48.
Conference severely Condemned some of the notes of the Geneva Bible, as
partial, untrue, seditious, and savoring too much of dangerous, and Traiterous
Conceits; as for Example, the Marginal Note on 1. Exodus 19. allows
disobedience to Kings, -- on 2. Chron. 15.16. the Note taxes Asa for deposing
his Mother only, and not killing her; And to show the agreement between Papists
P. 49 50.
, and some others in these Doctrines, wereas Dr. Reynolds complained of a
seditious Book written by one Ficlerus a Papist in behalf of the Pope against
Queen Elizabeth called De jure Magistratus in subditos, the Bishop of London
said, that the Author of that Book was a great Disciplinarian, whereby it did
appear, what advantage that sort of People gave unto the Papists, who mutatis
mutandis could apply their own arguments against Princes of the Religion p. 7^.
. In that Book it is asserted, that if Kings observe not those compacts, to
which they were Sworn, Subordinate Magistrates have powet to oppose them, --
and to punish them, till all things be restored to their former State, that
what Power a General Council has to Depose a Pope for Haeresie, the same the
People over Kings, that are turned Tyrants.

And it is worth the notice, that King James, when the Prince Palatine his son
in law had axcepted of the Crown of Bohemia, did not only dissuade him from
Rushus. Collect. p. 12.
it (it being an usurpation upon the Rights of the Emperor) but disavowed the
Act, and would never style him himself by that Title, nor suffer his Chaplains
so to do. And the defeat of that unhappy Prince near Prague is very remarkable,
it happening on Sunday November. 8. Anno 1620. when part of the Gospel for the
Day was, Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's.

SECT. VI.
Under a learned King the Arts flourish, and therefore many eminent Authorities
appear in this Reign to the vindication of the truth. Dr. Buckeridge Bishop of
Rochester in his Sermon on Romans 13.5. before the King Sept. 23.1606. says p. 16.
, there is no resistance, either thou must obey good Princes willingly, or
endure evil Tyrants patiently p. 3.
. If they command any thing against God, their Authority comes too short; in
such cases it is better to obey God, than Men; and yet in these things, tho we
may not obey, yet we may not resist, but suffer. -- p. 13.
Subjection to higher Powers is necessary in Christians Necessitate praecepti,
and Finis, by the necessity of the end, Peace, and Tranquillity, and Religion
in this Life, and Life Everlasting after Death. And by necessity of the
Precept, Honor thy Father, and Mother; in which number all Kings, and Fathers
of Countries, and Princes must have the Honor of Reverence to their Persons, of
obedience to their Laws, of patience to their Punishments, of maintenance to
their Estates, and of fidelity to their Crowns; thus says Archbishop Laud's
Tutor, for so was Bishop Buckeridge.

Tho. Cartwright also, notwithstanding his other heterodox Opinions, and
Practcies, seems in this to be Orthodox; Confut. of the Rhem. Test. in Romans
13.4. p. 968. V. p. 58. V. Archbishop Bramhal.
We praise God, that our sworn Enemies are constrained to give us the testimony
of sound Doctrine in all duties toward Princes, both good, and bad, Fathers,
and Tyrants; for our practice accordingly we are content to rest in equal and
indifferent judgment, this one thing we may boldly say, that we seek not to
betray our native Princes, nor to lie in wait for their Lives, as the Jesuits
most wickedly, and unnaturally do. These were Mr. Cartwright's cool thoughts in
his old age, whatever his former Sentiments might have been.

Archbishop Whitgift also herein agrees with T. C. for when he says, Def. of
the Admonit. p. 4. Ibid.
Indeed the Doctrine of the Gospel, 'which is the Doctrine of Salvation, has
been, is, and will be a friend to Princes and Magistrates, yea tho they
persecute the same. T.C. re-joins: If it be asked of the Obedience due unto the
Prince, and unto the Magistrate; it answers, that all obedience in the Lord
is to be rendered: and if it come to pass, that any other be asked, it so
refuses, that it disobeyeth not, in preferring obedience to the great God
before that which is to be given to mortal man. It so resists, that it
submits the body, and goods of those that profess it, to abide that, which
God will have them suffer in that case. And to this the Archbishop subjoins,
All this is truly spoken of the Doctrine of the Gospel.

Dr. Fulke, In 1 Pet. 2.18.
on the Rhemish Testament. It is a lewd Slander against Wicklif, (that
Magistrates lost their Authority, if once they were in deadly sin) -- he
obeyed, and taught obedience to the Kings Edw. III. and Rich. II. in whose time
he lived, which two Princes all men know to have committed deadly sin, yea some
heinous and notorious sins. So it is a detestable slander against us, whom you
call followers of Wicklif; for none of us ever held, or taught any such
Seditious, or traitorous Opinions: but your Heresy comes nearest to this
Opinion, which holds, that the Pope has Authority to depose lawful Kings
from their Thrones at his pleasure, etc.

Anno 1610. Bishop Carlton printed his Book of the Jurisdiction of Princes,
wherein he affirms, Chapter 1. p. 4.
That in external, coactive jurisdiction the King has Supreme Authority in all
Causes, and over all Persons, Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, and that this is
that, that has been published by diverse Writings and Ordinances -- P. 12. Chapter
2.
Some of the Pope's Flatterers of late, as also others, to open a wide gap to
Rebellion, have written, That the power of Government by the Law of Nature is
in the multitude -- but the first Government was in a Family, it is absurd to
think, and impossible to prove, that the power of Government was in the
Multitude. -- and what is a King by nature, but a Father of a great Family?

SECT. VII.
I am now entered into a vast Ocean, where Writers are every where to be found,
and I resolve to examine them as they occur, without adjusting with a too
curious niceness the exact Chronology Ser. 1. on Gowrey's Conspir. p. 781.
; And I begin with Bishop Andrews, the smartest Adversary that ever the great
Card. Bellarmine met with, A King is Al Rum, no rising against him, or, if any
man rise, they had better sit still -- for Kings begin from God, we cannot set
our selves against them (says Gamaliel) but we must be found to fight against
God; being ordained of God (says S. Paul, Gamaliel's Scholar) to resist them
is to resist the Ordinance of God; none might better say it than he, it was
told him from Heaven, when he was about such another business, persecuting
Christ in his Church, Ser. 2. p. 791.
and having quoted the example of David toward Saul, he adds, I verily think,
God in this first Example of his first King over his own people has purposely
suffered them all (i.e. all the faults of Governors) to fall out, and to be
found in him, even all that should fall out in any King after him. 1. His
Government was tyrannical. 2. He usurped a Power in things spiritual, taking
upon him to sacrifice in person. 3. He dipped his hands in the blood of God's
Priests. 4. Was possessed by God with an evil spirit, a case beyond all other
cases, and yet destroy him not Abishai. Ser. 3. on the 5. August. p. 800.
Kings are God's Anointed to the superseding of two Claims, meos, says the
Pope -- another Claim has of late begun to be buzzed as if they were Christi
populi (the anointed of the People) and held of them; but this Claim also
falls to the ground by the Text -- God help if the people fall to make Gods
-- to say that Princes may be lawfully slain -- is to make men believe, P. 801.
P. 808.
that they go to Heaven for breaking God's Commandments. Ser. 3. on Gunpowder
Treas. p. 938, 939. V. Appen. p. 91.
What if Kings take too much upon them (Corah's exception) then it is, dedi
vobis Regem in ira, says God by the Prophet, Angry was I, when I gave him, but
I gave him tho. -- but this onus Principis, how may webe rid of it? Is there
any other per me to go to? to deprive, or depose them sure, where the worst is
reckoned that can be of them, clamabunt ad Dominum, is all I find: in nature,
every thing is dissolved by the same means it came together; in the Law,
institution and destitution belong both to one, etc.

Sermon on the Queen's day at the end of his Lectures on Jonah. p. 695.
Bishop King. It is the greatest dishonor to Religion to put down Princes, a
thing which neither Moses in the Old, nor Christ in the New Testament, etc.
ever has taught, counseled, and much less practiced, I say not against lawful
Magistrates, but not against heathenish infidel Idolaters, tyrannous Rulers,
though by the manifest and express sentence of God reprobated, and cast off. P.
696. V. p. 697.
I never could suspect, that in the Commission of Christ given to his Disciples
there is one word of encouragement to these lawless attempts, unless to go into
the World be to go, and overturn the World, to shake the Pillars, and
foundations thereof with Mutinies, and Seditions, and unless preaching may be
interpreted proclaiming of War, and Hostility -- unless to baptize be to wash
the people of the World in their own blood, unless binding and loosing be meant
of Fetters and Shackles, retaining and remitting of Prisons, and Wards, and
receiving the Holy Ghost be receiving the fiery and turbulent Spirit, which our
Savior liked not. Id. Lect. 35. in John. p. 472, 473, etc. Cons. Loc.
If such were the King, as Darius was, and such his Rulers and Officers, as
would make a Decree to defraud God of his Worship (as Dan. 6.) be thou also as
Daniel was, enter into thy House, and open thy Windows toward Jerusalem, and
pray, etc. stay not till the King, or his Council release thee thereto, and if
every hair of thy head were a life, redeem thy duty to God (...) adventure, and
loss thereof rather than neglect it, and if ^^ou happen to be alone in that
action, yet forego it not -- I like not in any case that the least advantage,
and slip in the Earth be given to the People against his lawful, and Christian
Governor, it is as fire to Flax, an easy, a welcome persuasion to busy, and
catching natures, the least exception once taken against their want of
Religion, Piety, Justice, or the like is so far followed, that not only the
Prince in the end, but the whole People rueth it.

Doctor Jackson To. 3. Treat. of Christian obed. p. 903.
yield but once, That dominion over the Creature is founded in Grace, and then
tempt the precious Saints to muster December legiones, and if God suffer them to
prosper, they will be the godly party, whether men will, or no. P. 933, 934.
Let every Soul be subject, is not the same as let every Soul be obedient to
the higher Powers, no, no, albeit there can be no obedience without subjection,
yet may there be subjection without obedience; and oftentimes when obedience to
humane Powers is dangerous, subjection is due, and cannot be denied without the
just censure of disobedience, Act. 4.18, 19. the Apostles were commanded not to
speak in the name of Christ, so far were they from doing what was commanded,
that they refuse to hearken to such a proposal, yet were they still subject to
their Power, whom they refused to obey, for they suffer themselves to be
imprisoned by them without resistance, and yet withal they obey the Angel of
the Lord, which opened the Prison doors, Acts 5.18. but being the second time
convened, without violence offered they subject themselves to their Power, and
do not appeal to the Angel, which had delivered them out of Prison, or implore
his aid to resist their Power -- with this flat denial of obedience to their
injunctions they do not deny, or question subjection to their coercive Power,
nor do they repine at the exercise of it, or rail upon the actors; and the true
reason of the subjection of their bodies without subjection of their
Consciences was that Commandment of our Savior, Luke 12.4, etc. fear not them
that can kill the body, etc. Id. p. 941.
the Rule is General, that unto the penalty, or sanction of every humane Law,
or Ordinance passive obedience,
or subjection of the outward man is due, whether the Law be just, or unjust P.
963.
-- and this Rule holds as punctually of the Magistrate, as of the Magistracy:
P. 965.
he, that is a King, or supreme Magistrate by just, and lawful Title, may not
be resisted, albeit he exercise his Power tyrannically. P. 967.
The power which the High Priest exercised in apprehending our Savior was
unjust, and satanical, was it therefore lawful for Christ's Disciples to resist
it; to oppose violence to it was unlawful, and if Peter had continued to do, as
he began, he had fallen under the Sanction of this Law, They that resist, shall
receive damnation.

SECT. VIII.
Doctor Hakewil was thought fit by King James to be entrusted with the
instruction of his eldest Son Prince Henry, the delight of the English Nation,
and to vindicate the just rights of Princes he set forth Ann. 1613. his Scutum
regium, in which Chap. 1. Lib. 1, he shows, What a horrid sin Murder is,
especially (Chapter 2.) of Princes, who are God's immediate Vicegerents, and sit in
the place of God, and are accountable only to him -- against whom to make
insurrections is with the Giants to make War against God -- and Chapter 6.
discoursing of that Text, 1 Samuel 8. that their King should seize their
Vineyards, etc. he subjoins, not that this was lawful for their King to do (for
the King's duty is otherwise described Deuteronomy. 17.) but that if he did so, they
ought not to resist him, and therefore the Prophet subjoins, ver. 18. not that
they were to shake off his Yoke, or to disturb his Reign, or to murder his
Person, but to call upon God for redress -- and Chapter 7. the Prophet David shall
rise in judgment against those that do otherwise, and shall condemn them, who
had this excellent Lesson not only in his mouth, but in his heart, and I could
wish engraven on all men's tongues, and hearts, and hands in great Letters,
Nolite tangere Christos meos. In the subsequent Chapters he considers the other
Examples of Rebellion, and resistance in the old Testament, and Chapter 14. the
Example of our Savior, who patiently submitted to all injustice, though he
could have called for more than twelve Legions of Angels. And when Pilate was a
most profligate Man, and no one could be worse than the Pharisees, and
Highpriests, and Tiberius the Emperor was infamous for his perjuries, his
lusts, and murders, yet even then so did our Savior demean himself (and every
action of his is our instruction) toward the Magistrates of his time, who were
Infidels, Barbarians and Tyrants. And in the second Book he considers the
obedience of the ancient Christians to Nero and other Persecutors, under
Julian, and the Arian Emperors, when they were punished contrary to Law,
deriving the History down to the times of Pope Gregory the Great, and the
Emperor Focas, from whence we date the Papal Tyranny. On Epist. for the fourth
Sunday after Epiph.


Dr. Bois the Dean of Canterbury, says the same on those Words, Let every Soul
be subject, etc. The Proposition is peremptory, delivered not narratively, what
others hold meet, but positively, importing what God would have done, not
advised only by Paul, but devised also by Christ as a Command in imperative
terms expressly, Let every Soul be subject -- Every Soul is every Man, and this
universal Note confutes as well the seditious Papist as the tumultuous
Anabaptist. -- To be subject is to suffer the Prince's Will to be done, aut a
nobis, aut de nobis, either of us, or on us; of us, when he commands for Truth,
on us, when he commands against the Truth: either we must be Patients or
Agents; Agents, when he is good and godly, Patients, when he is tyrannous and
wicked: we must not use a Sword, but a Buckler, against a bad Prince. St. Paul
does not here say, Let every soul be subject to Virtuous and Christian
Governors,
but indefinitely to Potentates. -- I have read and heard, that the Jesuits are
desirous to purge St. Paul's Epistles, especially this to the Romans, as being
herein more Lutheran than Catholic. This Text of all other ( Let every Soul be
subject, etc.) is much against their humor and honor.

The exempting Clergymen from the Obedience to secular Powers, Ep. Romans 13.1.
is a Doctrine not heard in the Church a thousand years after Christ, p. 159.
[Bishop Bilson against the Jesuits, p. 128.]

Whosoever therefore resists.] If there be no power but of God, and nothing
done by God but in order, he that resists Authority, resists God's
Ordinance: so the Lord himself said to Samuel: 1 Samuel 8.7.
They have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not
reign over them. -- As God is a great King, so a King is as it were a little
God: he therefore that resists the Prince, resists him that sent him;
Almighty God is King of kings, and Lord of lords: 1 Timothy 6.15. (page 161.)

He is the Minister of God for thy wealth.] D. Buckeridg. Sermon upon the fifth
Verse of this Chap.
If he be a good Prince, causa est, he is the Cause of thy Good, temporal and
eternal; if an evil Prince, he is an occasion of thy eternal Good, by thy
temporal evil. August. Sermon. 6. de verbis Dom. secundum Matt.
Si bonus, nutritor est tuus; si malus, tentator tuus est: If a good King, he
is thy Nurse; receive thy nourishment with obedience: if evil, he is thy
tempter; receive thy trial with patience. So there is no resistance; either
thou must obey good Governors willingly, or endure bad Tyrants patiently. (page
162.)

As all power is from God, so for God: and therefore when the Prince commands
against truth, it is our Duty to be patient, and not agent. (Ib. 162.)

23 d. Sunday after Trin. Mat. 25.15.
Zepper. Aretius. Aquin. 22. quaest. 10.4. Art. 6.
This Scripture shows evidently, that the Kingdom of Christ abrogateth not
the Kingdom of Caesar, but that the Gospel is a good Friend unto Common-weals,
in teaching Princes how to govern, and the People how to be subject unto the
higher Powers. It is not Christ and his Word, but Antichrist and the Pope, who
deny to Caesar the things which are Caesar 's, absolving the Subject from his
Allegiance to his Sovereign -- This Intrusion upon the things of Caesar is
thought unjust and uncouth even by the Sorbon and Parliament of Paris in
France, by the Commonwealth of Venice, by the Seminary Priests in England; in a
word, distasted of all Popelings in the world, except the Serpentine Brood
hatched of the Spanish Egg Ignatius Loyola. Read the Books of Watson,
especially Quodlibet 8. Art. 7, 8. Barclai, of the Authority of the Pope;
Roger. Widdrington Apolog. pro Jure Principum: Sheldon's general Reasons
proving the Lawfulness of the Oath of Allegiance. The ready Pens of our
accurately learned Caesar and his judicious Divines have foiled in this
Argument the Popes Bull-beggar Cardinal Bellarmine. (p. 550.)

As for the Tributes of Caesar, if they be just and reasonable, we must pay
them as his Wages; if unjust and unreasonable, we must bear them as rur
punishment. We may rofel his Arguments in Parliament, and repel his Oppression
according to courses of Law, but we may not in any case rebel with the Sword.
(Ib.)

On S. Peter's Day: Act. 12.1. (p. 725.)
Prayer was made without ceasing of the Congregation.] Prayers and Tears are
the Churches Armor, and therefore when Peter was imprisoned by cruel Herod, the
Congregation comes unto prayer, and not unto powder for his deliverance: they
did not assault the Prison, nor kill the Soldiers, ^ Salmeron tract. 35. in Act.
nor break the Chains; only prayer and patience were their Weapons: Arma
Christianorum in adversis alia esse non debent quam patientia and precatio.

Dr. Done, the Dean of S. Paul's: Pseudomart. chapter 6. 10. p. 172.
Tho some ancient Greek States, which are called Regna Laconica, because they
were shortened, and limited to certain Laws, and some States in our time seem
to have conditional and provisional Princes, between whom and Subjects there
are mutual and reciprocal Obligations, which if one side break, they fall on
the other, yet that Sovereignty, which is a power to do all things available to
the main ends, resides somewhere, which, if it be in the Hands of one Man,
erects and perfects that Pambasilia, of which we speak. -- Id. 11.
God inanimates every State with one power, as every Man with one Soul, when
therefore People concur in the desire of such a King, they cannot contract, nor
limit his power, no more than Parents can condition with God,
or preclude, or withdraw any Faculty from that Soul, with God has infused
into the Body, which they prepared and presented to him, etc. -- And upon this
Principle of the Sovereignty, and unaccountableness of Kings, he shows, that
those who suffer for asserting any other power over Kings, are not Martyrs, but
Traitors.

Id. Sermon. 39. p. 391, 392.
We sin against the Father, the Root of Power, in conceiving amiss of the Power
of the Civil Magistrate, -- when God says, By me Kings reign, there the Per is
not a Permission, but a Commission; it is not that they reign by my Sufferance,
but they reign by my Ordinance; a King is not a King, because he is a good
King, nor leaves being a King, as soon as he leaves being good; all is well
summed up by the Apostle, Romans 13.5. Ye must needs be subject, not only for
wrath, but also for conscience sake. -- The Law of the Prince is rooted in the
power of God, Ser. 69. p. 698.
the Root of all is Order, and the Orderer of all is the King.

SECT. IX.
The Archbishop of Spalato came a Stranger into this Kingdom, but in a little
time became well acquainted with the Estate of our Church, and spoke her Sense
in his Books, which were well received both here and abroad; nor does his
Apostasy afterward concern the Merit of the Cause; for if we may believe a
Bishop Cosens of Transub.
Reverend Prelate of our Communion, the Archbishop of Spalato did make good
what he promised here, when he came to Rome, that he would own and defend the
English Church to be a true Church of Christ. And that among other her
Doctrines he very well understood this of Non-resistance, (or rather he
understood it to be a Doctrine of the true Catholic Church; for his Books were
written, tho not completed, before he left Italy) will easily appear, when it
is remembered, that Lib. de Rep. Eccles. cap. 1.
he shows to the confutation of all that can be said to the contrary, That our
blessed Savior, while he lived on earth, had no temporal Kingdom: Cap. 2.
That the Power of Princes is immmediately from God, proving it from Romans 13.1.
That thus God ordained the Affairs of the old World, that God himself was the
King of Israel, till the Days of Saul, that he transferred his power, not to
the people, but to Saul, -- that this Opinion, that Kings were of God's
Institution, and not the peoples, was the Belief of the ancient Christians,
which he proves from the Writings of Irenaeus, Tertull. Christ. Optat. Didymus,
Hosius, Ambrose, Austin, etc. And from the Assertions of the elder Popes and
Councils, that the common opinion of the Schoolmen, and other Divines, that
Government is in the Body of the People is false; that there is no Revelation
has confirmed this Assertion, that all, that the Light of Nature says, is,
that Men must be governed, and that if the Government were originally in the
Hands of the People, all Governments ought to have been Democratical, which,
says he, is the worst, and most imperfect Form of Government; he proving also,
that if the People do elect, they cannot call the Prince, whom they elect, to
account; after which Cap. 10. n. 82.
he proposes an Objection; If Princes be so unaccountable, then there is no
Remedy against evil Princes, no not tho they are Enemies to the true Faith, and
are guilty of Maleadministration of the Government, and vex their Subjects both
in their Civil and Sacred Properties; for while Deposition is the only Remedy,
if they cannot be deposed, there is no Remedy. To which he answers: 1. That we
are to enquire after such a State, not what is free from all Inconveniences,
but what is subject to the least, and the least dangerous; but much more
pernicious and destructive of human Society are those Confusions, which are
wont to arise from the Rebellions of Subjects, and from Civil Wars, than those
which happen from the Cruelty of an ungovernable King exercised upon his
Subjects. 2. That this is proper and peculiar to a supreme temporal Prince,
that he cannot lawfully be deposed, for such Kings are only inferior to God,
and are his immediate Vicegerents, etc. And in his Confutation of the Errors of
Suarez, C. 3. n. 6.
he shows the mistakes of that Jesuit, that there is no Revelation that God
has given Princes such a power, proving from S. Paul, that there is no power,
but what is of God. -- And N. 16.
if a Crown happen to fall to an Infidel, his Subjects are bound to obey him,
in which case, says he, we ought to acknowledge, and reverence the Equity of
the English,
who when they had freed themselves from the Papal Yoke, and embraced the
Reformed Religion under Edward the Sixth, did notwithstanding after his Death
set the Crown on the Head of his Sister Mary, whom they knew to be a Papist,
and zealously affected toward the Pope, which Succession the Peers did not
only allow of, but the Prelates also, who expected nothing from her, but
Executions and Martyrdoms; for they knew, that Religion ought not to hinder the
Admission of the lawful Heir to his Right. -- N. 17.
For the Power of a King is given him by divine positive Law, and therefore
there is no other but God, who can take his power from him.

To this Archbishop I will join his bitter Adversary, Bishop Montagu, Not. in
Invect. 2. Naz. in Jul.
because herein they were both agreed; When the Christians in Julian 's time
betook themselves only to their Prayers, and not to Force, it was not because
they could not, but because they would not; for they had sufficient force to
subdue the Tyrant, as both Greg. Naz. and S. Austin aver; but they had learned
patience in the School of their Master Christ, who had recommended it to them,
both by his Words, and by his Example, not to confound Heaven and Earth, etc.

Bishop Lake 's Sermon Preached in Trinity-Church in Winchester at An Assizes.
1610.

A false Religion does not hinder him from being a lawful Sovereign. To resolve
the Conscience of such as doubt, Whether a different Religion does evacuate the
Power of a lawful Sovereign. It does not, (says he) tho it be a false Religion.

SECT X.
Old Mr. Ded has been censured, as a Puritan, but I am sure, neither he, nor
his Copartner Clever were so in this point; for in their The 5th. Commandment,
p. 216, 217.
Comment on the Commandments, they thus declare themselves. The first Duty of
the Subject is Submission both inward and outward; in heart to reverence, and
outwardly to obey the Magistrate, and this is commanded, Romans 13. Let every
soul be subject, etc. He commands not only a bodily Subjection, which may be in
many rebellious persons, that resist Authority, and lie open to the Curse of
God for this sin, but an inward submission of the Soul, as unto a spark of
God's Authority,
and an appointment of his. For if this inward be not first, this outward will
fail upon every occasion; there must be also an outward subjection in obeying
their Commands, as far as they command lawful things; but if it so fall out,
that the Prince, or any in Authority under him command things unlawful against
the Commandment of God, then it is better to obey God than Man, yet so, that we
be content to bear any punishment that shall be laid upon us, even to death it
self, as Daniel, when the King made a wicked Edict, would not yield unto it,
but yet was content to yield unto the punishment with patience, and never went
about to gather a Power against the King in his own Defense, etc. so that if
the Magistrates Command be lawful, the Subject must obey; if he require an
unlawful Obedience, he must not rebel, but suffer the punishment without
grudging,
even in heart, Eccl. 10.20. If the King be unjust and wicked, we must pray God
to convert him, that as our Sins have brought an ill Governor over us, so our
Prayers may either remove, or better him.

Bishop Hall's Contemplations.
The Inauguration of Saul. 1 Vol. fol. p. 1029.
Earthly Monarchs must walk by a Rule, which if they transgress, they shall be
accountable to him, that is higher than the highest, who has deputed them: Not
out of care of Civility, so much as Conscience, must every Samuel labor to
keep eaven terms betwixt Kings and Subjects, prescribing just moderation to the
one, to the other Obedience and Loyalty; which whoever endeavors to trouble,
is none of the Friends of God, or his Church.

The Death of Saul. Lib. 14. p. 1084.
Saul was none of the best Kings, yet so impatient are his Subjects of the
Indignity offered to his dead Corpse, that they will rather leave their own
bones amongst the Philistines, than the Carcass of Saul. Such a close Relation
there is betwixt a Prince and Subject, that the dishonor of either is
inseparable from both. -- but how unnatural is the Villainy of those Miscreants
that can be content to be Actors in the Capital Wrong offered to Sovereign
Authority?

Page 1085.
Every drop of Royal Blood is Sacred; for a Man to say that he has shed it, is
mortal.

The Death of Absalom. Lib. 16. 1128.
Strangers shall relieve him, whom his own Son persecutes. --

Page 1129.
O holy David, what means this ill-placed love, this unjust mercy, deal gently
with a Traitor? but of all Trayors with a Son?

Who can want courage to fight for a righteous Sovereign, and Father, against
the Conspiracy of a wicked Son? The God of Hosts with whom it is all one to
save with many or with few, takes part with Justice, and lets Israel feel what
it is to bear Arms for a traitorous Usurper.

Let no Man look to prosper by Rebellion; the very thickets and stakes and
pits, and wild Beasts of the Wood shall conspire to the punishment of Traitors.

Page 1131.
-- Even at this day very Pagans and Pilgrims that pass that way, cast each man
a stone into that heap, and are wont to say in a solemn Execution, Cursed be
the Parricide Absalom, and cursed be all unjust persecutors of their Parents,
for ever:

Fasten your Eyes upon this woeful Spectacle, O all ye rebellious and ungracious
Children, which rise up against the loins and thighs from which you fell, and
know that it is the least part of your punishment, that your Carcasses rot on
the Earth, and your Name in Ignominy: these do but shadow out those Eternal
sufferings of your Souls, for your full and unnatural disobedience.

Sheba's Rebellion. Page 1132.
That a lewd Conspirator should breath Treason is no wonder, but is it not
wonder and shame, that upon every mutinous blast, Israel should turn Traitor to
God's anointed?

Contemplations. Lib. 18. p. 1171.
In the Case of Succession into Kingdoms we may not look into the Qualities of
the Person, but into the Right.

-- No Bond can be surer than the natural Allegiance of Subjects: I do not find
that the following Kings stood upon the Confirmation of the People; but as
those that knew the way to their Throne, ascended their steps without aid.

Page 1174.
How durst these seditious Mouths mention David in defiance? One would have
thought that very Name had been bale to have tempered their fury, and to have
contained them within the limits off Obedience: --

Blessed be God for lawful Government: Even a mutinous Body cannot want a Head:
If the Rebellious Israelites have cast of their true Sovereign, they must choose
a false.

Jeroboam. Page 1175.
The Civil defection was soon followed by the Spiritual. As there are near
respects betwixt God and his Anointed, so there is great Affinity betwixt
Treason and Idolatry. --

They cannot return to God and hold off from their lawful Sovereign; They
cannot return to Jerusalem and keep off from God, from their Loyalty. How can
they be mine -- whiles -- the Priests and Levites shall preach to them the
necessity of their due obedience, and the abomination of their Sacrifices in
their wilful disobedience.

Bishop Hall's second Vol. Christ and Caesar. p. 416.
It is Religion that teaches us that God has ordained Kingly Sovereignty,
Romans 13.1. ordained it immediately; That Position was worthy of a Red-hat,
Potestas Principis dimanavit a Populo, Pontificis a Deo. (Bellar. Recog.) What
need I persuade Christian Kings and Princes, that they hold their Crowns and
Scepters as in fee from the God of Heaven? Cyrus himself had so much Divinity,
Ezra 1.2. It is Religion that teaches us that the same Power which ordained
Caesar enjoins all faithful subjection to Caesar; Not for fear, but for
Conscience.

Bishop Hall's third Vol. Page 118.
3. A promissory Oath, which is to the certain prejudice of another Man's Right
cannot be attended with Justice.

4. No prejudice of another Man's right can be so dangerous and sinful as that
prejudice which is done to the right of public and Sovereign Authority.

5. The right of Sovereign Authority is highly prejudiced, when private
Subjects encroach upon it; and shall upon suspicion of the diavowed intentions,
or actions of their Princes, combine and bind themselves to enact, establish,
or alter any matters concerning Religion without (and therefore much more if
against) the Authority of their Lawful Sovereign.

6. A Man is bound in Conscience to reverse and disclaim that which he was
induced unlawfully to engage himself by Oath to perform.

7. No Oath is or can be of force that is made against a lawful Oath formerly
taken; so that he that has sworn Allegiance to his Sovereign, and thereby
bound himself to maintain the Right, Power, and Authority of his said
Sovereign, cannot by any second Oath be tied to do ought that may tend to the
infringement thereof; and if he have so tied himself, the Obligation is ipso
facto void and frustrate.

And according to this Doctrine was Mr. Dod's practice; Sir H. Yelverton's
Pref. to Bishop Moreton of Episc.
for a little before Naseby fight King Charles of blessed memory sent the Earl
of Lindsey to Mr. Dod to know his opinion of the War; his Lordship found him
ill, nevertheless he sat up, and dictated his sense of it; but the Earl was on
a sudden by reason of the fight hurried away, and whether the King had the
Paper or no, I cannot learn; but the original (or a Copy of it) was by some
zealous Man suppressed; no doubt, because it condemned taking up Arms on the
specious pretenses of Religion, and Liberty. And according to his Sentiments
was his usage, he being plundered by the Parliament Army, as well as the other
(so called) Malignants.

SECT. XI.
There was no little Clash between Archbishop Laud, and Bishop Davenant about
other points, but in this they agreed Davenant deter. qu. 4. p. 22.
He that takes the sword, shall perish by the sword, i. e. He that usurps the
Sword, he that uses it without permission from the King, who by God's Ordinance
bears the Sword; now who can believe, that a Prince will give leave to draw his
own Sword against himself -- all others ought to abstain from laying hands on
him, whose punishment God has by a certain special privilege reserved to
himself. -- the ancient Christians, being harassed with most grievous
persecutions, never fled to these indirect means, Page 23.
but defended the Church by those means, which God has appointed, viz. by the
tears of her Christians, the preachings of her Priests, and the sufferings of
her Martyrs; and what Suarez say, V. p. 24.
That there is no need of a Superior Power to keep the Pope in order, because
Christ will in an especial manner in this case provide for his Church, may be
with much greater reason said of Kings -- Christ himself will in a more Eminent
manner defend his Church, not only against the cruelty of persecutors, but
also against the gates of Hell. -- Resistance is unlawful, and contrary to
God's Ordinance; for St. Paul says it is a sin, and worthy of eternal damnation
to resist the Powers ordained of God. Put the case, that Princes will not only
not purge the Church of Heresies, and false worship, but what is worse, Id. qu.
12. p. 58.
will defend those corruptions by their Authority, yet in this case the people
ought not to reform; 1. Because God requires from Subjects -- to suffer
whatsoever the Magistrate can inflict rather than desert the true Religion; but
not to compel the Magistrate -- for Religion is to be defended not by killing
others, but by dying for it our selves, not by cruelty, but by patience, not by
wickedness, but by fidelity, says Lactantius. 2. When the people undertake such
an action without the Prince's consent, it is Rebellion; now evil is not to be
done, that good may come thereof -- let such Men take to themselves whatever
Names they please, they are Traitors, not Christians; L. there will be great
danger in so doing -- for should they get the Power, they cannot make Laws --
Qu. 17.
What shall be able to keep a Man within the duty of a good Subject, who will
not be bound by Oaths. -- Qu. 30.
Criminals of the Superior Order ( i.e. Kings, etc.) God has reserved to his
own Court, and Judgment.

SECT. XII.
I will not quote Archbishop Laud, because the Adversaries to this Doctrine
aver, that it was of his inventing; but instead of him I will call for an
unquestionable witness Archbishop Usher, who expressly ordered, Clavi Trabales.
p. 52.
That Loyalty should according to the Canon be four times every year preached
to the people, while his actions were a plain Comment upon his Opinions. I need
not mention the regard the foreign Protestant Divines had to him (and the
Romanists too, especially Cardinal Richelieu) as well as those of our own
Country; Apud eund. and Sanders pref. to the Bishop's Book.
While I inform the Reader, that in the beginning of our most unhappy
Commotions the Lord Deputy of Ireland Strafford desired the Primate Usher to
declare his judgment publicly concerning those Tumults, which he did in two
Sermons at Christ-Church in Dublin on Eccles. 7.2. Whereupon the Deputy
signified, it would be acceptable to the King to print the Sermons, or to write
a Treatise on the Subject; the latter the Archbishop made choice of, and sent
it into England with an intent to have it printed; as the Martyr Charles
designed, that his Subjects might receive the satisfaction from the same, as
himself had done. In the time of the Usurper Cromwell it was not thought fit to
be printed, lest it might have been perverted to the support of his Power. For
by this time the flatterers of that great Tyrant had learned by a new device
upon the bare account of Providence without respect to the justice of the Title
(the only right, and proper foundation) to interpret, and apply to his
advantage whatsoever they found either in the Scriptures, or in other Writings
concerning the Power of Princes, or the duty of Subjects, profanely, and
sacrilegiously taking the Name of that holy Providence of God in vain, and
using it only as a stalking Horse to serve the lusts and interests of
ambitious Men.

In the first part of that learned Treatise the Bishop proves, that the Power
of the Prince is from God, and that Part. 1.. vi. p. vi.
Our Government is a free Monarchy, because the Authority rests solely in the
person of the King, whereupon it is declared, that the King is the only
Supreme Governor of these Realms in all Causes whatsoever; which could not
stand, if either the Court (of Parliament) it self, or any other power upon
Earth might in any cause overruled him; I say any Power, whither foreign, or
domestic, and then. 28.
He discourses at large as of the original of Regal power from Heaven, so of
the Law of the King proceeding in the second part to treat of the Obedience of
the Subject V. p. 109. 111, 134, etc.
In which he plainly shows, that whither the Power be good, or bad, whosoever
does resist it (by withdrawing his service from it, or denying Tribute, or not
giving that honor to it, which he ought to give) resists the Ordinance, and
disposition of God, by whose appointment they bear Rule. P. 145. 146.
Quest. But how are Subjects to carry themselves, when such things are
enjoined, as cannot, or ought not to be done; R. surely not to accuse the
Commander, but humbly to avoid the command -- and when nothing else will serve
the turn, as in things that may be done, we are to express our subjection by
active; so in things, that cannot be done, we are to declare the same by
passive obedience without resistance, and repugnancy; such a kind of suffering
being as sure a sign of subjection as any thing else whatsoever. -- He, P. 147,
etc.
that consults with flesh and blood, will hardly be induced to admit this
Doctrine of passive Obedience, and therefore, if he will learn this Lesson, he
must make choice of better Masters, and listen in the first place to Solomon,
Prove. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding. And to that Oracle of the Son of God himself, Matthew. 16.24. If
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, etc. then must he raise up
his thoughts to the height of that beatitude, which our Savior's own mouth
has given assurance of to all such, as will be ruled by him herein. Matthew.
5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake, etc.
and to look on the recompense of Reward -- and to encourage himself with the
precedent of the Apostles and Prophets, the innumerable company of Martyrs, and
Confessors: -- and above all to look unto Christ himself. Obj. P. 150,
But suppose the King should command us to worship the Devil, would you not
give us leave to stand upon our Guard, -- and if not, what will become of God's
Church, and his Religion? R. As if this had been a new Case never heard of
before; when the Devil-Worship, i. e. that of Idols, (called Devils, 1 Cor. x.
20.) was so vehemently urged by the cruel Edicts of the persecuting Emperors,
did the Christians ever take Arms against them for the matter, or betake
themselves to any other Refuge, but fervent Prayers unto Almighty God, and
patient suffering of what disgrace or punishment soever should be put upon
them, Page 152.
etc. -- But if Men's Hands be tied, no Man's Estate will be secure, etc. I
answer, God's Word is clear, Whosoever resists, resists the Ordinance of
God, and thereby a necessity is imposed upon us of being subject, not only for
wrath, but for conscience sake, which may not be avoided by the pretext of any
ensuing mischiefs whatsoever -- it becomes us in obedience to perform our part,
and leave the ordering of Events to God, Page 177.
whose part that is. -- And so much both of active Obedience, which in all
things that may be done, we are bound to perform unto our Sovereigns, and of
the passive, which in other Cases with all Christian Fortitude we are tied to
undergo,
without the least carnal thought either of resisting their Authority, or
conspiring against their Persons, State and Dignity. And then he closes his
Discourse with an account of the Obligation of Oaths, etc. and the methods of
the ancient Church, when persecuted, viz. 'Patient Sufferings, and Prayers to
God.

Nor need I mention Dr. Heylin, whose Opinions are well known, and are
remarkably to be seen in his Stumbling Block of Disobedience discovered,
censured, and removed, etc. Of which the Arguments are cogent, and the
Authorities good, tho I do not like the sharpness of his Language, nor the
severity of his Reflections.

SECT. XIII.
Archbishop Oper. to: 1. disc. 2. The Serpentine-Salve, p. 525, 526.
Bramhal who succeeded Usher both in his See, and his Loyalty, says there were
Nonconformists in the Days of Queen Elisabeth, and King James, who severely
protested in Print, That no Christians gave more to the Royal Supremacy, than
they, without limitation or qualification -- that for the King not to assume
such a power, or for the People to deny it, is a damnable sin, nay, although the
States of the Kingdom should deny it him; and if the King command any thing
contrary to the Word of God, yet we ought not to resist, but peaceably to
forbear Obedience, and sue for Grace, and when that cannot be obtained, meekly
to submit our selves to punishment -- abjuring all Doctrines repugnant to this
as Anabaptistical, and Antichristian, they condemn all Practices contrary to
this as seditious and sinful. And then proceeds to give his own Opinion: That
Dominion is not from the Grant or Consent of the People, but from God. Page
527, 528.
-- That absolute Power may be limited by Statutes, etc. without communicating
Sovereign Power to subordinate or inferior Subjects, or subjecting Majesty to
Censure, which Limitations do not proceed from mutual Pactions, but from Acts
of Grace and Bounty. Page 531.
-- If the People be greater than the King, it is no more a Monarchy, but a
Democracy. Our Oath binds us to acknowledge the King to be supreme in all
Causes, and over all persons; to defend him against all Conspiracies, and if to
defend him, much more not to offend him. -- That Oath which binds us to defend
him against all Attempts whatsoever, presupposes, that no Attempt against him
can be justified by Law -- against such evident Light of Truth to ground a
contrary Assertion derogatory to his Majesty, Page 532.
upon the private Authority of Bracton and Fleta (no authentic Authors) were a
strange degree of weakness or wilfulness -- that Subjects who have not the
Power of the Sword committed to them -- may use force to recover their former
liberty, or raise Arms to change the Laws established, Page 537.
is without all contradiction both false and rebellious. -- Surely, Page 538.
if any Liberty might warrant such force, it is the Liberty of Religion, but
Christ never planted his Religion in Blood, he cooled his Disciples Heat with a
sharp Redargution, Ye know not what spirit ye are of. It is better to die
innocent, than to live nocent, as the Thebean Legion, all Christians of
approved Valor, answered the Emperor Maximian. Page 542.
-- If a Sovereign shall persecute his Subjects for not doing his unjust
Commands, yet it is not lawful to resist by raising Arms against him, they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. But they ask, Is there no Limits?
I answer, where the Law does not distinguish, neither ought we to distinguish;
how shall we limit what God has not limited? Obj. But is there no Remedy for a
Christian in this Case. Yes, three Remedies. 1. To cease from sin, remove our
sin, and God will take away his Rod.
2. Prayers and Tears. S. Naz. lived under five Persecutions, and never knew
other Remedy. The third Remedy is flight; this is the uttermost which our
Master has allowed; nor is this way so hard for Subjects: this way has ever
proved successful to the Christian Religion.

SECT. XIV.
With Archbishop Usher I will also join Bishop Brownrig, a Man much of his
primitive temper, and approved Moderation (even by the Enemies of our Church,
notwithstanding his Episcopal Character:) Sermon. to. 1. Sermon. 2. p. 26, 28.
The Writ, by which Princes are made, issues from Heaven, Kings reign by God's
Election, not by his Permission only, that is too weak and sandy a Foundation,
permission falls short of approbation, etc. Sermon. 3. p. 33.
Darius was an Enemy to the Church, one that kept the Church of God in Bondage
and Captivity, used them not as Subjects, but as Slaves, enthralled them to his
Tyranny; yet still acknowledged and honored by the Prophet as their rightful
Sovereign, -- the primitive Saints submitted to Julian, that hateful Apostate;
S. Peter requires Subjection not only to the good and gentle, but to the
froward Governors. -- Darius made a wicked Law, forbidding Religion, and
enforcing to Idolatry, assumed all Religious Worship to himself, yet the
Prophet acknowledges and honors him, as his King and Sovereign: observe,
Religion requires Subjection to those Kings that deface the Worship of God, and
would compel to Idolatry. Now if it be said, that Idolatry was the Worship
enjoined by the Laws of the Land: We answer, that Idolatry is against the Law
of God, and so the Jews were under a superior Obligation; and I think, if Men
may take Arms, when any thing is done to them contrary to human Laws, there
seems to be more reason, that they should do so, when any thing is done
contrary to the Laws of the great King of Heaven and Earth; but the latter is
by our Adversaries disallowed, therefore with much more reason the former. But
it is time to return to Bishop Brownrig, who avers, That active and actual
Obedience to ungodly Laws we may not, we must not yield, and perform; thus to
submit to Men were to rebel against God; but yet protestation of Subjection
must continue, tho our particular active Obedience be denied, or restrained --
tho we dare not perform our active Obedience in doing what they command, Page
34.
yet we must perform our passive Obedience in submitting to their punishments
-- Papists teach, that Heretical Kings forfeit their Crowns and Lives, if they
command against God. No, we must here with Daniel honor their Persons and
Calling, when Conscience forbids us to fulfill their Commandments. -- Darius
also was now the Author of Daniel's destruction, his Law ensnared him, his
Power condemned him, his Seal shut him up in the Den of Lions, yet for all this
the holy Prophet honors him as his King. Observe, No worng or injury can exempt
or discharge our persons from our Lawful Sovereign.
-- He upbraids not the King with Tyranny and Impiety, charges him not with the
cruelty of his usage, threatens him not with Vengeance and Judgments from God,
much less, as a Prophet, does he denounce sentence of deprivation against him;
but fergetting his wrongs, forgiving his Injuries, sends up a devout Prayer for
his life and welfare, etc.

SECT. XV.
In Justice I ought to have given King Charles the First the Preference to some
of the forecited Authors; but I have reserved him to lead the Van of the
remaining Writers, who were particularly engaged in the Service of that Truth,
for which that great Prince became a Martyr; and when I have mentioned this, I
have said enough to those who consider what he suffered by the Men who were
Enemies to the Doctrine of Nonresistance, and what he unanswerably wrote in
Defense of that Doctrine, being resolved at present to quote no more of him,
than that one Sentence in his Second Paper to Henderson, that to reform (as
Grosthead said) in ore gladii cruentandi, is a wicked and ungodly saying.

This Prince shall be attended (as he ought) by his Chaplains, and Dr. Hammond
comes first, of whom it were enough to say, that he was a Member of the
Convocation, anno 1640, for that discovers his Sentiments, since he gave his
consent to those Canons. But he has more particularly declared his Opinion,
especially in his L. 2. 5. p. 53.
Practical Catechism: Some Wars are unjust, as that of Subjects seditiously
raised against the Supreme Power in a State. Sect. 9. p. 69, 70.
But what may we fight for, if we may not fight for Religion? Resp. It is the
most precious thing indeed, and that to be preserved by all lawful, proper,
proportionable means; but then War, or unlawful resistance being of all things
most improper to defend, or secure, or plant this, and it being acknowledged
unlawful for Peter to use the Sword for the Defense of Christ himself, to do it
merely for Religion must needs be very unlawful; Religion has still been
spread, and propagated by suffering, and not by resisting; and indeed it being
not in the power of Force to constrain my Soul, or change my Religion, or keep
me from the Profession of it, Arms, or Resistance must needs be very improper
for that purpose. And the same Author in his Section of Meekness, says, if they
be our lawful Magistrates, then our Meekness consists in Obedience, active or
passive, acting all their legal Commands, and submitting so far at least, as
not to make violent resistance to the punishment, which they shall inflict upon
us. I shall put you in mind of this great Truth, that Christ and his Disciples
were, Id. sect. 11. p. 79, 80.
of all the Doctors that ever were in the World, the most careful to preserve
the Doctrine, and Practice of Allegiance, even when the Emperors were the
greatest Opposers of the Christian Religion; and if ever you mean to be
accounted a Follower of them, you must go, and do likewise.

S. But was not Tiberius an Usurper, and yet Christ says, Render to Caesar the
things that are Cesars? C. Julius Caesar wrested the Power out of the Hand of
the Senate, but before the time of Tiberius the Business was accorded between
the Senate and the Emperors, that the Emperor now reigned unquestioned without
any competition from the Senate. -- Which Case, how distant it is from other
forcible Usurpations (where the Legal Sovereign does still claim his Right to
his Kingdoms, and to the Allegiance of his Subjects, no way acquitting them
from their Oaths, or laying down his Pretensions, tho for the present he be
overpowered) is easily discernable to any who has the Courage and Fidelity to
consider it, and is not by his own Interests bribed, or frighted from the
performance of his Christian duty. And this Doctrine he ex professo maintains
against S. Marshal, Godwin, and others, in his Treatise of resisting the lawful
Magistrate under the color of Religion, etc. in which he condemns Subjects
taking Arms against their Prince p. 54. etc.
by Arguments taken, 1. From the nature of Religion. 2. From the Examples of
Christ and Christians. 3. From the making of Christianity, and particularly of
the Protestant Doctrine. 4. From the Constitution of the Kingdom; affirming,
that in the New Testament there is no one Christian Virtue or Article of Faith
more clearly delivered, more effectually enforced upon our Understandings and
Affections, than that of Obedience to Kings.

Bishop Fern has written purposely on this Subject, his Resolution of
Conscience, whether upon supposition, the King will not discharge his Trust,
but is bent or seduced to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties, Subjects may
take Arms and resist. -- Resolved, That no Conscience upon such a Supposition
or Case can find a clear ground for such Resistance. -- whence it follows, that
the Resistance made against the higher Powers is unwarrantable, and according
to the Apostle, damnable, Romans xiii. You are told, says Dr. Fern, the Gospel,
and your Liberties, Epist.
and all you have are in most eminent danger, and without taking Arms for the
defense irrecoverably lost, and that it is lawful by the fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom. You must take all this upon trust without any express and
particular warrant to rule, and secure your Conscience against the express
Words of the Apostle forbidding Resistance, Romans xiii.. 3. and 4.
and then disproves that Tenet, That Power is originally in and from the
People, and that if a Prince discharge not his Trust, the Power devolves again
upon the People,. 5.
showing, that most of their Weapons for Resistance were sharpened at the
Philistines Forge, their Arguments being borrowed from the Roman Schools; and 6.
does Religion stand in need of a Defense which it self condemns, and which
would be a perpetual Scandal to it? But should I transcribe all that is to the
purpose, I should offer to the Reader the whole Book, to which I must refer, as
I also refer him to the excellent Treatise of the Archbishop of Tuam (Maxwell)
called Sacrosancta Regum Majestas, written upon this very Subject.

Chillingworth. Religion of Protestants a safe way, etc. p. 360.

If I follow the Scripture, I may, nay I must obey my Sovereign in lawful
things, though an Heretic, though a Tyrant; and though, I do not say the Pope,
but the Apostles themselves, nay an Angel from Heaven, should teach any thing
against the Gospel of Christ, I may, nay I must denounce Anathema to him.

SECT. XVI.
I might also only name Dudley Diggs's Book of the Unlawfulness of Subjects
taking up Arms against their Sovereign in what case soever, but then I should
do wrong to my Subject and the Truth. Page 2.
In the Service of which the Author shows, That that one main Principle by
which the seduced Multitude has been tempted to catch at empty Happiness, and
thereby have pulled upon themselves Misery and Destruction, That every Man
being born free, the Law of Nature does justify any Attempts to shake off
those Bonds imposed upon him by Superiors, if inconvenient and destructive of
native Freedom, is false, since every Man is not born free, all being by Nature
subject to paternal Power, and consequently to the Supreme Magistrate, to whom
divine Law confers the several Powers, which Fathers resigned up; and p. 7.
that those that will allow any Power to Subjects against their Ruler, do
thereby dissolve the Sinews of Government, by which they were compacted into
one, and which made a Multitude a People; for there cannot be two Powers, and
yet the Kingdom remain one: Afterward he proves p. 13.
by what Arts and Persuasives People are moved to Rebellion, particularly p.
30, 31.
by being brought to believe, That we are a mixed State, and that our Kings are
accountable, etc. and then p. 34, 41, 42. etc.
proceeds to prove the Doctrine of Nonresistance from Scripture, proving, that
the same Obedience which God required from the Jews under the Law to be shown
to their Judges and Kings, is now required, and that Christ enjoins his
Followers under the Gospel as high a degree of Patience toward the higher
Powers, and that there is great reason that we should perform this duty more
cheerfully, because our Savior has commended Persecution to all those that
will live godly, and that both by Precept and Example -- Rebellion in
Christians being most prodigious -- The Jews wanted not some Colors of Reason
to rebel; their Blessings were temporal, but a Christian cannot have any shadow
of Scruple. St. Peter failing in this Duty by resisting the Magistrate in
defense of his innocent Master, has taken special care not to be imitated, and
therefore informs us largely with the full extent of Christian Patience. Then
p. 45. etc.
he makes an excellent Comment on St. Paul's Words, Let every Soul be subject,
etc. Here is a fair warning, take heed what you do, you have a terrible Enemy
to encounter with, it is a Fight against God; you cannot flatter your selves
with a prosperous issue, for those that resist, shall receive to themselves
Damnation. -- You have God's Word for it, you are damned if you resist.

This same Year came out a Pamphlet called, The late Covenant asserted, printed
on the day of Trouble, Rebuke, and Blasphemies, for Thomas Underhil, Ann. 1643.
undertaking to prove, That there is a sweet Agreement between the Protestation
and Covenant, and Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; that the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy did bind to the taking of the Covenant -- to take up
Arms against their Sovereign, etc. and out of it I shall give an Instance how
conscientious those Republican Reformers were, and how obliged by Oaths. p. 5.
etc.
We have, says he, sworn, that the King ruling by Law is the Supreme Power, and
so we have sworn Obedience to him; we abjure any foreign Power; we have sworn
that neither Pope, nor Cardinal, nor the most Catholic King, nor the most
Christian, shall overruled our King and Kingdom, if we can help it: we have
sworn, and we do not repent;
for in pursuance of this Oath to repel foreign Power we are in Arms at this
day. To whom have we sworn Allegiance but to God, and the King in reference to
him? -- We have sworn, and will not repent to obey the King,
while he obeys God, ruling his People by his Law and Book. We have not sworn
our selves Servants to Men, their private Wills, their Lusts, etc. and we will
maintain the King the higher Power with our Lives and Fortunes. We will obey
all his lawful, not personal Commands. -- Look into these Oaths,
and you shall not there find a Word soberly understood contradicting the
Covenant: God forbid that we should vow our selves Servants to Men, and Rebels
to God. -- The Queen and the King are notoriously faulty touching both these
Oaths, the one doing her utmost to bring in and establish a foreign Power, the
other denying Allegiance to the most supreme. Qu. But where have you any
warrant to take up Arms against the King? Answ. We will never allow those
Words, against the King; they are taken up for the King, and for the defense of
all that should be dearest to him; but let it go, against the King, we have
warrant for it, when he bends all his force, all his might, sets open the Gates
of Hell against the Parliament, against Religion, against our Laws, etc. we vow
and covenant to take Arms against King, Queen, both, setting themselves against
God, and the power of Godliness, and we have as good Warrant as can be desired
for so doing. -- p. 19.
Obj. But I cannot think it a lawful Vow, for we vow to fight against our
lawful Prince. Answ. It is not against him, but for him, to deliver his sacred
Person out of the hands of Murderers, our Land from out of the hand of
Spoilers, and the Laws of God and Men from Sons of Belial, who would make all
void, null, and of none effect. Obj. But we have taken the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy already. Answ. You have vowed Allegiance to the King to obey him
ruling by Law, according to the Law of Heaven; you have not vowed to obey his
private Will, for that is to obey the Lusts of Men, breaking and making void
the Laws of God, the Rights and Privileges of a free People. Obj. But the King
has promised to maintain the true Religion. Answ. p. 20.
So did the Lady Mary to the Men of Suffolk, etc. To all which venomous
Doctrine I will apply this Antidote: Sir Edw. Coke in Calvin's Case says, This
damnable Opinion, That Allegiance was due to the King upon the account of his
politic Capacity, more than his natural Person, was invented by the two
Spencers to cover their Treason; and from thence they deduced these execrable
Consequents; 1. That if the King did not demean himself by reason in the Right
of his Crown, his Lieges were bound to remove him. 2. That when the King could
not be reformed by Suit of Law, it ought to be done by the Sword. 3. That his
Lieges be bound to govern in aid of him, and in defect of him. -- All which
Positions were condemned in two succeeding Parliaments.

SECT. XVII.
The Year after this the learned Dr. Gerhard Longbaine set out his Review of
the Covenant, Chap. 9. p. 56.
and therein tells us, That to labor the Advancement of Religion by way of
force, contrary to established Laws, and the Prince's Will, has no warrant by
way of Command, or Approbation from God's Word, must be taken for granted, till
those who are otherwise minded can show the contrary, and will be needless to
persuade, if we show in the second place, that it is against the express
Testimony of Scripture. Our Savior professes, My Kingdom is not of this
World, and adds, for then would my Servants fight: which words, as they evince
that it is lawful for Subjects to fight at the Command of their temporal King
for the maintenance of his worldly Estate; so they do insinuate, that Christ's
Kingdom, being spiritual, must not be advanced by temporal Arms. We have always
deprecated the Aspersion which our Adversaries would cast upon us, P. 60.
professing, we do not punish any Heretics with Death, but Seminaries for
Sedition and Rebellion. Here I must observe, that the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, 1 Eliz. confess, they had no means to free the Kingdom from the
usurped Power and Authority of the Pope, but with the assent of the Queen's
Majesty; so far were they from thinking it lawful to raise Arms for the
Extirpation of Popery, when it was established by the Law of the Land. And lest
this distinction might seem to invalidate his Objection, he adds, It is utterly
destructive to all civil Government; P. 61.
for if any be allowed to take up Arms for Propagation or defense of their true
Religion, against the civil Laws and Will of their Prince, whosoever has a
mind to rebel, may do it upon the same pretense, and ought not to be questioned
by any humane Authority: for tho they do but pretend Religion, yet it is
impossible for any Judge to convince them of such Pretenses; nor can any thing
be urged in defense of the true Religion, which may not be made use of by a
false.

SECT. XVIII.
Anno 1646. Richard Overton (the famous Leveller) decked with many fantastic
Titles, printed a Pamphlet, entitled, An Arrow against all Tyrants and
Tyranny; wherein the Original, Rise, Extent, and End of Magisterial Power, the
Natural and National Rights, Freedoms, and Properties of Mankind, are
discovered, and undeniably maintained, and the late Encroachments of the Lords
over the Commons legally condemned. Out of which, that the Principles of such
Men may be made known, I shall transcribe a few passages. To every individual
in Nature is given an individual Property by Nature, not to be invaded or
usurped by any; for every one as he is himself, so he has a self-propriety,
else he could not be himself. -- No Man has Power over my Rights, and
Liberties, and I over no Man's. -- If I presume any farther, I am an
Encroacher, and an Invader upon another Man's Right, to which I have no Right;
for by natural Birth all Men are equal and alike, born to like Property,
Liberty, and Freedom. -- No Man naturally would be fooled of his Liberty by his
Neighbor's Craft, or enslaved by his Neighbor's Might; for it is Nature's
Instinct to preserve it self from all things hurtful and obnoxious. -- And from
this fountain or root all just humane Powers take their Original, not
immediately from God (as Kings usually plead their Prerogative) but mediately
by the hand of Nature, as from the Represented to the Representers -- no more
may be communicated than is conducive to a better Being, more Safety and
Freedom: he that gives more sins against his own Flesh; and he that takes more
is a Thief, and a Robber to his kind, every Man being by nature a King, Priest,
and Prophet in his own natural Circuit and Compass, whereof no second may
partake but by Deputation, Commission, and free Consent from him whose natural
Right and freedom it is. -- As by Nature no Man can abuse, beat, torment or
afflict himself; so by Nature no Man can give that Power to another. -- So that
such so deputed are to the general no otherwise than as a Schoolman to a
particular, his Mastership is by deputation; and that ad beneplacitum, and may
be removed at the Parents pleasure upon neglect or abuse thereof, and it may be
conferred on another. And speaking to the Parliament, he continues: If you
think you have power over us to save, or destroy us at your pleasure -- the
edge of your own Arguments against the King in this kind may be turned upon
your selves; for if for the safety of the people he might in equity be opposed
by you in his Tyrannies, Oppressions and Cruelties; even so may you by the same
rule of right Reason be opposed by the people in general in the like cases of
destruction and ruin by you upon them; for the safety of the people is the
Sovereign Law, to which all must be subject, and for which all powers humane
are ordained by them. And at last applies all to the pulling down of the House
of Lords, as Usurpers. The Pamphlet is said to be printed at the backside of
the Cyclopian Mountains by Martin Clawclergy Printer to the Reverend Assembly
of Divines, and are to be sold at the sign of the Subject's Liberty right
opposite to persecuting Court.

SECT. XIX.
As a Preservative against the infection of such dangerous Principles Bishop
Sanderson gives us his Advice. Pref. to Arch-Bi. Usher's Book of the Power of
Kings, etc.
Some say, it is not for Divines to meddle in these matters, nor do they come
within the compass of their Sphere, that they ought to be left to the
cognizance and determination of Statesmen, and Lawyers, who are to be presumed
most able to judge; the one (by the constitution) in whom the Sovereignty
resides; the other (by the Laws) how that Sovereignty is bounded, and limited
in the exercise of it -- while another sort of Men say, that the original of
Government is from the people, that the Power which Kings and Princes have is
derived unto them from the people by way of pact, or Contract -- that this
Power the people may enlarge, or restrain at their pleasure -- while the known
Laws of the Land have declared the Sovereignty so fully and particularly, and
the Oath of Supremacy has expressed it so clearly, that any Man of an ordinary
capacity may understand it as well as the deepest Statesman in the World. That
which some talk of a mixed Monarchy (which by the by is an arrant Bull, a
contradiction in adjecto, and destroys it self) and others dream of a
co-ordination in the Government, as was hatched amidst the heat of our late
troubles, but never before heard of in our Land,
are in truth no better than senseless, and ridiculous fancies -- which must
fall down before the Oath Vid. Usher of the Power of the Prince. Sect. 6. page
6.
(that the King's Highness is the only Supreme Governor, etc.) as Dagon
before the Ark; which Oath is sworn according to the plain, and common sense
and understanding of the words. -- After this he disproves the Position: That
the original of Government is from Compact -- for the Power of the sword is by
the Ordinance of God given to Kings; and for the Contract it self it would
trouble the ablest of them that hold the Opinion; to give a direct satisfactory
answer to these following Interrogatories: 1. Of the Persons contracting; Were
all without difference of Age, Sex, Condition or other respect promiscuously
admitted to drive the bargain or not, etc. if any excluded; who excluded them,
and by whose Order, and by what Authority was it done, and who gave them that
Authority? -- Shall the Majority of Votes conclude all Dissenters, etc? God
gave Adam the Government of all the inferior World, and the properties of Cain
and Abel were held of him; so that it is undoubtedly true, that Government was
before Property -- and after the Flood the like Government was in Noah, etc.
Id. de juram. praelect. 4.
An Oath imposed by one that has not a just Authority, is to be declined as
much as we can; if it be forcibly imposed, it is to be taken with reluctance,
upon this Condition, that the words imply nothing unlawful, or prejudicial to
the rights of a third Person; for, if so, we must refuse the Oath at the peril
of our lives. Id. praelect. 6.
But what shall we do when the Oath is ambiguous, and we are left to take it in
our own sense? R. In this Case we are to suspect a Cheat; and therefore a wise
and good Man will reject such an Oath, for which Assertion he there gives his
Reasons. -- These Lectures of this great Casuist were put into English by the
Order, and corrected with the hand of the Martyr Charles. But I must leave the
Martyr to return to the Bishop, who in his Lectures of Conscience preaches the
same Doctrine. Praelect. 2. Sect. 7. de Conscient.
We must do nothing that is evil for the promoting of the glory of God, and he
instances in the zeal of the Jews: the fury of the German Anabaptists and our
English Rebellion; he further says Sect. 19.
That it is the plea of all seditious persons to pretend the glory of God, the
reformation of Religion, etc. while he that proposes the glory of God for his
end, ought to take the word of God as the rule of his Actions. Sect. 21.
Nor do those err less, perhaps more grievously, who drive out one evil by
another, as Tyranny by Sedition, Superstition by Sacrilege, etc. Sect. 22.
Object. But rather than destroy the Commonwealth, may we not violate Laws,
etc? Resp. I remember, that Christ was thought fit by Caiaphas to be crucified,
though innocent, because it was expedient, etc. but this is to make the
Scriptures a nose of Wax; but away with such Divinity from our Schools, from
our Pulpits, from our minds; the Apostles of our holy Savior have taught us
otherwise; nay the honest Heathens had better thoughts, we must not do evil,
that good may come thereof. Sect. 23.
He also avers, that he heard it once said, that those words of the Apostle
were meant only of private persons; but that it was lawful, notwithstanding
this Command, for the great Council of a Nation to do evil, if the public
necessity required it. -- Praelect. 6. Sect. 3.
All Laws made by a lawful Power do oblige to subjection, so that it is not
lawful for a Subject to resist the Supreme Authority, let it require things
just or unjust.
This was the perpetual Sentiment and practice of the primitive Christians, who
lived under the severest tyranny; in Romans 13. the Apostle presses the necessity
of subjection with many arguments, but gives no Man liberty to resist in any
case, or upon any pretense whatsoever. It Is always necessary to submit, though
not always necessary (actively) to obey. After which he proceeds Praelect. 7.
to prove, that Power is from God; and that the people have no right to resume
it, etc. and that that Maxim, Praelect. 10.
That the safety of the people is the supreme Law, must include the King in it,
and that especially; and that it supposes, there must be an unaccountable
Authority in the Prince above all positive humane Law, to whom it belongs to
foresee, and Order, that the Commonwealth receive no damage, either through
defect of a Law, or through the too superstitious observation of it.

Sanderson's Twelfth Sermon, ad Aulam.
No Conjuncture of Circumstances whatsoever can make that expedient to be done
at any time that is of it self and in the kind unlawful; for a Man to take up
Arms (offensive or defensive) against a lawful Sovereign, may not be done by
any Man at any time, in any case, upon any color or pretension whatsoever; Not
for the maintenance of the Lives or Liberties either of our selves or others,
nor for the defense of Religion, nor the preservation of a Church or State; no
nor yet if that could be imagined possible for the salvation of a Soul, no not
for the redemption of the whole World. p. 166.

Ad Magistratum.
Both Wrath and Conscience bind us to our duties, so that if we withdraw our
subjection, we both wound our own Consciences and incur your just Wrath, but
only Conscience binds you to yours, and not Wrath; so that if ye withdraw
your help we may not use Wrath, but must suffer it with Patience, and permit
all to the judgment of your own Consciences and God the Judge of all men's
Consciences. p. 86.

Ad Aulam.
As for our Accsuers (Papists I mean, and Disciplinarians) If there were no
more to be instanced in but that one cursed Position alone, wherein
(notwithstanding their disagreements otherwise) they both consent; That lawful
Sovereigns may be by their Subjects resisted, and Arms taken up against them
for the Cause of Religion, it were enough to make good the Charge against them
both, which is such a notorious piece of ungodliness as no Man that either
fears God or the King as he ought to do, can speak of, or think of without
detestation. page 134.

Ad Aulam.
It were good if we did remember that they are to give up that account to God
only, and not to us. page 177.

SECT. XX.
Doctor Bernard Ser. on Romans 13.2. in the Clavi Trabalea. p. 21.
affirms, that some Expositors conceived one cause of the Apostle's Exhortation
to be the Rumor then falsely raised upon them, as if they had been seditious,
etc. And that the Kingdom of Christ tended to the absolving of Subjects from
their obedience to any other -- And then shows, p. 28, 29.
That it is a Popish Assertion, that a people can never so far transfer their
right over to a King, but they retain the habit of it still within themselves
-- averring p. 30.
That whoever have, or shall resist, do tread under their feet the holy
Scriptures -- p. 35.
That as Kings receive their Power from God, so are we to leave them only to
God, if they shall abuse it; not but that they may, and ought to be prudently
and humbly reminded of their duties; but yet without lifting up our Hands
against them in the least resistance of them -- God wants not means whereby
he can, when he pleases, remove or amend them. Page 40.
The Arms of the Primitive Christians were nothing but Prayers to God,
Petitions to the Emperor, or Flight, when persecuted, etc.

To this purpose does Mr. Symmons in his Vindication of King Charles aver, That
Sect. 8. p. 84.
Rebels as for God, they believe him as little as they do the King; for they
dare not trust him for protection, they have more confidence in the Militia a
great deal, and stand more upon it; beside if they did believe God, they would
also fear him (Faith and Fear go together) they would regard his Word more, and
not be so opposite in all their ways, or endeavor to make it of none effect by
their sinful Ordinances and Traditions; besides Faith in God discovers it self
by their doing the Works of God; and they are not Hatred, Strife, Sedition,
Rebellion, Murder, Lying, Slandering and speaking evil of Dignities, Sect. 14.
p. 146.
etc. Tell us, (O ye pretenders to Piety) where is that Subjection to the King
for conscience sake, which S. Paul calls for, and that Obedience for the Lords
sake, which S. Peter requires, Page 257.
etc. -- Consider, and call to mind, whether those Teachers,
who have been most active, and busy in drawing you into this way, have not
hereby contradicted their own former Doctrines? As it was said of Stephen
Gardener, that no Man in the Days of Henry the Eighth had spoken better for the
King's Authority, than he had done in his Book De vera obedientid, and yet no
Man more violent in Queen Mary's Time, in persecuting those that held fast to
the same Truth and Doctrine; may not the like be affirmed of many of your
Preachers, that no Men taught the Duty of Obedience better, or inveighed more
against Rebellion, Page 258, 259.
and sheedin of Blood, than they heretofore have done, but now none more
violent. -- Observe that Note out of Mr. Fox, how Henry the Fourth that deposed
Richard the Second, was the first of all English Kings that began the burning
of God's Saints for their standing against the Papists. Page 260, 261, 262.
As the Doctrine of Infallibility is the Root of all Error among the Papists,
so it is now among them that are the Worshipers of a Parliament; for when it
was believed, that the Pope could not err, then he might oppose Princes,
excommunicate Kings, absolve Subjects from their Obedience, etc. so now, this
being swallowed, that the Parliament cannot err, they may raise Rebellion too,
absolve People from their Loyalty, persecute the King, etc. -- Consider,
whether in any thing these Men have performed what at first they promised,
whether Religion be better settled, the Church better reformed, and united, or
the Commonwealth more flourishing, etc.

SECT. XXI.
Thus that good Man asserted the Rights of Princes, and the Duty of Subjects in
those evil Days, Bishop of Land. 2d. Letter ab. the neglect of the Lord's
Supper.
when under an usurped Power Sin was the Law, and Transgression the
Commandment. When three once happy Nations wore the heavy Yoke of Slavery, and
Men felt to their cost what the power of the People could do, till God of his
infinite Mercy restored our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at
the beginning, under whom Truth appeared in its true Colors, and the Mask of
Hypocrisy would no longer hide the Deformities of the Traitor; and here I will
not mention the Acts of Parliament made just after the Restoration, that
condemn the Power of the People, that assert their Authority, Superiority and
Unaccountableness of Princes, and the Unlawfulness of taking Arms against them
upon any pretense whatsoever; and confine my self to the Writings of the
eminent Divines of the Age; and I will begin with the Bishop of Down and
Conner, Dr. Tailor, Ductor dubitant. B. 3. c. 3. Rule 1.
who proves, That the supreme Power in every Republic is universal, absolute,
and unlimited. -- Rule 3. n. 1.
That it is not lawful for Subjects to rebel, or take up Arms against the
Supreme Power of the Nation upon any pretext whatsoever. -- He that lifts up
his Hand against the Supreme Power or Authority that God has appointed over
him, is impious against God, and fights against him, Romans 13. The Apostle does
not say, he that does not obey is disobedient to God; for that is not true: in
some Cases it is lawful not to obey, but in all Cases it is necessary not to
resist. Id. n. 2.
I do not know any Proposition in the World clearer,
and more certain in Christianity than this Rule. And in the fifteenth Number
he answers at large that wild Question, as he calls it, If a King went about to
destroy his People, is resistance then lawful? And concludes all, N. 15, 17.
We have nothing dearer to us than our Lives and our Religion, but in both
these Cases we find whole Armies of Christians dying quietly, and suffering
Persecution without murmur -- if the Prince does not do his Duty, that is no
Warrant for me not to do mine.

To this pious Prelate, now in Heaven, I will join a pious Brother of his as
yet on Earth Bishop Kenn's Expos. Chapter Cat. V. Comman.
Who thus addresses to God in the behalf of his Sovereign: Thou, O Lord, have
set our most Gracious King over us, as our Political Parent, as the Supreme
Minister, to govern and protect us, and to be a terror to them that do evil. --
O my God, give Grace to me, and to all my Fellow Subjects, next to thine own
infinite self, to love and honor, to fear and obey our Sovereign Lord the King
thy own Vicegerent for Conscience sake, and for thy own sake, who have placed
him over us; O may we ever faithfully render him his due Tribute; O may we ever
pray for his Prosperity, sacrifice our Fortunes, and our Lives in his defense,
and be always ready rather to suffer than to resist. So also say the Bishops of
Sarum and Exon.

Seth, Lord Bishop of Sarum 's Sermon Preached before the King at White Hall,
November 5. 1661.
Romans 13.2. And they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
If within the Compass of those Foundations which I have mentioned, Page 9.
be found any color or shadow of License for any person whatsoever, upon any
pretense whatsoever, to entrench upon the power of lawful Magistracy, if any
warrant at all for open Rebellion, or privy Conspiracies, for murdering or
deposing of Princes, or absolving Subjects from their Allegiance; then let
Kings cease to be our Nursing Fathers, and Queens to be our Nursing Mothers.

The Act of Resistance is set down -- absolutely without any restraint, Page 19.
in respect of any Pretenses, or Causes whatsoever. So that the sense of the
words resolved by the Scriptures, is this; every Soul which upon any pretense
whatsoever, in any manner whatsoever, shall resist the lawful Authority that is
over him, shall receive to himself damnation, that is, he puts himself thereby
into a state of damnation.

If Erroneous, Page 25.
heretical, or Idolatrous Magistrates may be resisted, (because they are so, or
because they join oppression of godly Men unto their Error in Religion) how can
any Kingdom stand?

Supposing this Tenet to be true, it is indeed evident, Page 26.
no Government can be. But now what color can there be to charge this Tenet
upon Christianity? Does the Old or New Testament give any occasion to this
Doctrine? Is it countenanced, 1. By Moses? Or 2. By the Prophets? Or 3. By our
Savior? Or 4. By the Apostles? 5. That Cloud of Witnesses, (the Noble Army of
Martyrs) did they give testimony to this Assertion, or to the contrary?

1. Moses was so far from the Doctrine of Resistance, Page 27.
that notwithstanding the Hardness of Pharaoh's Heart, the Cruelty of the
Bondage, the Weakness of the Egyptians by Plagues, the Number of Israel six
hundred thousand, and three thousand five hundred and fifty fighting Men above
twenty years old, besides the Tribe of Levi; yet he would not lead them unto
the promised Land, without Pharaoh's positive and express consent to their
Departure.

2. As for the Prophets; in the third Chapter of Daniel we find three of God's
Children put to the Trial (the fiery Trial) of this Doctrine, by
Nebuchadnezzar, an Idolater, and a Tyrant, acting highly under both those
Capacities together. They were cast into the fiery Furnace, because they would
not worship the Golden Image which he had set up. And in the sixth we find
Daniel thrown into the Lions Den, only for praying to the God of Israel. Let us
consider their Behavior, did they resist or mutiny, or labor to alienate or
discontent, or (by denouncing Threats and Terrors) to discourage Subjects from
Obedience? How had they been instructed by their Prophets? Jeremy (2 Chronicles.
36.13.) had taught them that Zedekiah had turned from the Lord God of Israel,
in rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God; and that
they ought to seek the peace of the city whither they were carried captives,
and to pray unto the Lord for it -- Jer. 29.7. And therefore the three Children
in the Third of Daniel only refer themselves to God for Deliverance; and Daniel
in the midst of the Lions Den prays heartily for Darius: O king live for ever:
Dan. 6.21.

3. In the next place let us consider the Case of Christ and his Apostles, and
see whether any such Tenet may be collected from their Doctrine or Practice,
their Speeches, or their Actions. As for what concerns our Lord Christ, I have
had the Honor formerly in this place more at large to vindicate him from such
Aspersions. He paid Tribute at the expense of a Miracle, Matthew. 17.27. He
submitted himself to all the Powers that were over him; to the Sanhedrim and
their Delegates, to Herod, and to Pontius Pilate: he submitted himself to death
by an unjust Sentence, even to the bitter and accursed Death upon the Cross,
Phil. 2.8. This was his Practice. As for his Doctrine, he taught Men to render
to Caesar the things that were Cesars, Matt. 22.21. He acknowledged Pilate 's
Power to be from above, John 19.11. He rebuked Peter for smiting with the
Sword; and told him, that those that take the sword shall perish by the sword,
Matthew. 26.52. He taught his Disciples to pray for them which should persecute
them, Matthew. 5.44. And the utmost permission which he gave them, was, when they
were persecuted in one city to flee unto another, Matthew. 10.23.

4. As for the Apostles, they taught Men to obey them that have the rule over
them, Heb. 13.17. To submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man, 1 Pet. 2.13.
To do all things without murmuring or disputing, Phil. 2.14. To pray for Kings,
and all that are in authority, 1 Timothy 2.2. Saint Peter has told us, that such
as despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities are (in an especial manner)
reserved to Judgment, 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. And Saint Paul, in my Text, that they
shall receive damnation.

This Doctrine they sealed with their Blood. Saint Peter (according to
Ecclesiastical Tradition) was crucified, and S. Paul beheaded, James, the Son
of Zebedeus, slain with the Sword, etc.

Now, as for the Powers, to which all these Instructions and Behaviors did
refer, they were for Idolatry and Tyranny and Persecution -- Humani generis
portenta. If it be objected, that all these submitted because they were not
able to resist: the Answer upon Christian Principles might be, That he which
restrained the Flames, and stopped the mouths of Lions, could have given his
Servants power to resist; that Christ could have prayed his Father who would
have given him more than twelve Legions of Angels for his relief; that the
Apostles, who wrought mighty Signs and Wonders, could have rescued themselves,
had it not rather pleased the great Ordainer of Powers, by their submission to
ratify and establish the Doctrine of Obedience.

5. But the Belief and Practice of the Primitive Christians will satisfy this
Objection even to common Sense and Reason.

The Instances in this kind are infinite, where Christians, abounding in
numbers, being in Arms, and abundantly able to make resistance, have chosen,
with the expense of their lives, to yield obedience to Idolaters, persecuting
them for their Religion. I shall name but two Examples.

Tertullian tells the Emperor, that his Cities, Islands, Castles, Councils,
Armies, Regiments and Companies, the Palace, the Senate, the Courts of
Judicature were filled with Christians; and yet they submitted to Persecution.

And we read, that the Thebean Legion consisted of six thousand, six hundred,
sixty and six persons, every Man Christian, when they submitted to the
Decimation of Maximinian for Religion.

MISHPAT HAMELEK, Page 63.
(the Jus Regium) the Fundamental Law of the Kings of Israel.

What then is the meaning of Mishpat hamelsk? Surely it imports thus much, that
if all this hard usage should come upon them, they might cry unto the Lord (1 Samuel viii. 18.) but that it would not dissolve Jus Regium (the Right of
Sovereignty) or enable them to resist their Kings, or rebel against them.

That -- Pretense, Page 67.
that after a lawful Sovereign is established -- the Power still remains in the
People (in the diffused Body of them or their Representatives) to alter the
Government as they please; it is in respect of Policy and Government, what the
Sin of the Holy Ghost is to Religion.

These were their secret Griefs; Page 69.
for a Redress whereof they make a party in the Parliament, they gain to them
two hundred and fifty Men, famous in the Parliament, Men of Renown; and in
order to their ambitious Designs, they remonstrate against Moses, Numb. xvi.
13. and their Declaration was this Pretense which we are upon; that all the
Congregation (...) were holy, and that Moses and Aaron had lifted up themselves
above them, that is, that their power was a contrivance of themselves, not an
Ordinance of God; that notwithstanding what God had done to settle the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Power, it remained still in the People, or their
Representatives assembled together. Now the Scripture tells us, that since the
World began God was never more highly provoked, than upon this occasion, Numb.
xvi. 32. When he heard this, he was wrath, and greatly abhorred them; he
invented a new thing in the World for their sakes; for the Earth opened, and
swallowed up Dathan, and covered the congregation of Abiram.

It tells us, Page 71.
in effect, that Might is Right; that every thing is just or unjust; good or
evil, according to the pleasure of the prevailing Force, whom we are to obey
till a stronger than he comes, or we be able to go through with Resistance.

That in reference to this Life, Page 71.
Obedience is a matter of Wit and Prudence; and after Life there remain for us
no Concernments.

How stramineous is this Theory compared with the Christian Theory, which
speaks in this wise, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers?

It is but a little while since the Anointed of the Lord, Page 74.
the holiest, the wisest, the best of Kings, was taken in the Snares of Men
pretending to Reformation, and sacrificed to the fury of Men possessed by an
evil Spirit from the Lord.

It is but a very little while since the Lamentation of Jeremy was in the mouth
of all the Faithful in the Land, Page 74.
Lam. ii. 9. Our Kings and our Princes were amongst the Gentiles.

It may be all these things have been done, Page 75.
that the Sayings of our Savior might be fulfilled, Matthew. 18.7. ibid. 6. It
cannot be but that Offenses will come, but woe be to them by whom they come; it
were better that a Mill stone, etc.

It may be God suffered the late Rebellion to prevail, Page 76.
that he might not leave himself without witness, but show forth his Wonders in
our days, in the miraculous Restitution of our gracious Sovereign and the
Church.

Surely these things were suffered, Page 77.
that the Faith, and Patience and Loyalty of the Church of England might be
made bright and glorious by the Flames of Persecution; and that in the day when
God shall have given our most gracious Sovereign the hearts or necks of all his
Enemies, it may not repent him of the kindness he has shown to Religion and
Government, in lifting out of the Dust the despised Head of that only Church
(for ought I know) which makes Obedience, without base Restrictions and
Limitations, an Article of its Religion.

Bish. of Exeter's Sermon. before the House of Lords, Nov. 5. 1678.

Certainly their Authority who lived in the Primitive Light (and who bear
witness to their own disadvantage, teaching Submission to Magigrates, though
absolute Tyrants, and who never took up any Arms against them, but Prayers and
Tears) ought to beget in us a conformity to those innocent times, when
Christianity gained as much by Patience as it is now like to lose by Rebellion.

The Emperors for the first three hundred years after Christ, for the
generality were very bad, but especially to the Christians they were bloody and
cruel; and yet we never read of any Insurrection of the Christians against
them, tho they were in a condition to do it. The Thebean Legion were all
Christians; when the Emperor commanded the whole Army to offer Sacrifice to
false Gods, they removed their Quarters, that they might, if possible, avoid
the occasion of displeasing the Emperor. He summons them a second time to
perform that Worship; they return an humble denial. The Emperor not content
with that Answer, puts them to a Decimation; to which they submit with much
cheerfulness, and dye praying for their Persecutors.

Not to trouble you with many Witnesses of this Truth, take one for all.
Tertullian, who wrote his Apologetick as the sense of the whole Church, he
makes there a bold Challenge, and desires them to produce, if they can, any one
Example of any Christian taking part with Rebels, such as Cassius Niger and
others were: No, he tells them the Christians were better instructed than to
hold Resistance lawful: Nos judicium Dei suspicimus, etc. We with patience
submit, and kiss the Rod that scourges us. Though they have no just cause to
torment us, yet there is too much cause why we should suffer. We must
acknowledge our Sins against God, and he may punish us in what way he thinks
fit; however, resist we must not.

And again, in his thirty seventh Paragraph of that Apologetick, he tells the
Emperor, That his Cities, Istands, Castles, Councils, Armies, his Palace and
Courts of Judicature, were filled with Christians; Sic non deesset nobis vis
Copiarum: If we had a mind, we could not want force to resist; but we dare not
save our Bodies to the eternal loss and perdition of our Souls. We wish to the
Emperor a long Life, an happy Reign, a valiant Army, a faithful Council, a
sober People and a quiet World. Such as these were their Wishes toward their
Emperors, tho Heathens and Persecutors.

Thus you see the Minds of Christ, his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians
in that great Point of Obedience to Magistrates. Therefore they who raise
Tumults, abett Rebellions, set on foot Plots and Conspiracies, teach Doctrines
to murder Princes, are not of the Gospel Spirit.

Bishop Hacket's Sermons: on Psalm. xli. 9. on the Gowry's Conspiracy, p. 740.
741.
Surely above all Men, if the Clergy be not careful to set forth the honor of
this day with great Honor and Solemnity, it is their Ignorance or their
Negligence. -- Had these furious Swordmen that laid their Weapons to his
Throat, found an austere Master, nay a Tyrant, they must have born with it, and
not touch the Man that bears the Character of the Lord's Anointed.

Dr. Sharp before the House of Commons, Apr. 11. 1679. p. 35.
O may God so inspire you, That by your means the Person of his sacred Majesty,
and the Rights of his Crown, may be secured against all wicked Attempts. And p.
39. Let us hate all Tricks, and Devices, and Equivocations, both in our Words
and in Carriage. Let us be constantly and inflexibly loyal to our Prince, and
let no consideration in the World make us violate our Allegiance to him. And in
his Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, 1680. speaking of the upright Man,
He is one -- studiously endeavoring to preserve his Allegiance to his Prince.
Page 19. He is a Man -- that honors the King, that is observant of the Laws,
that is true to the Government, and meddles not with them that are given to
change. In his Sermon preached at the Yorkshire Feast Feb. 17. 16 79/80. p. 17.
We may do a great deal of good by our good Examples of Loyalty.

SECT. XXII.
And to evince, that this has been the unquestioned Doctrine of all the
Members of this Church, I shall subjoin many other Testimonies. Bish. of
Lincoln Principl. and Posit. p. 7.
That England is a Monarchy, the Crown Imperial, and our Kings supreme
Governors, and sole supreme Governors of this Realm, and all other their
Dominions, will (I believe, I am sure it should) be granted, seeing our
Authentic Laws and Statutes do so expressly, and so often say it. In our Oath
of Supremacy we swear, That the King is the only supreme Governor; supreme, so
none (not the Pope) above him; and only supreme, so none coordinate, or equal
to him; so that by our known Laws our King is solo Deo minor, invested with
such a Supremacy, as excludes both Pope and People (and all the World, God
Almighty only excepted by whom Kings do reign) from having any Power,
Jurisdiction, or Authority over him. -- This Book has its Imprimatur, not from
any mean hand, but from my Lord Bishop of London himself, which is to me a
plain implication, that his Lordship did then own the Doctrine; and so we have
another Testimony to the Truth.

Burnet's Vind. etc. printed at Glascow, p. 7. etc.
The Vindication of the Authority, etc. of the Church, is full to this purpose.
Obj. May not Subjects, when oppressed in their established Religion, defend
themselves, and resist the Magistrate? does not the Law of Nature direct Men to
defend themselves when unjustly assaulted? Answ. We must distinguish between
the Laws of Nature, and the Rights and Permissions of Nature; now self-defence
cannot be a Law of Nature,
for then it could never be dispensed with without a Sin; nay were a man never
so criminal, he ought not to suffer himself to be killed, neither should any
Malefactor submit to the sentence of the Judge, but stand to his defense by all
the force he could raise; and it will not serve turn to say, for the good of
Society he ought to submit, for no Man must violate the Laws of Nature, were it
on never so good a design. -- Christ's dying for us shows that selfdefence can
be no Law of Nature, otherwise Christ, who fulfilled all Righteousness, had
contradicted the Laws of Nature. -- Page 10.
He then proceeds to demonstrate, that Magistrates derive not their Power from
the Surrender of the People -- for none can surrender what they have not.
Take then a multitude of People not yet associated, none of them has power of
his own Life, neither has he power of his Neighbor's, since no Man out of
Society may kill another, be his Crime never so great, much less be his own
Murderer. -- A multitude of People not yet associated are but so many
individual Persons, therefore the Power of the Sword is not from the People,
nor is any of their Delegation, but is from God. -- Page 35.
Consider, that Christ was to fulfill all Righteousness; if then the Laws of
Nature exact our Defense in case of unjust Persecution for Religion,
he was bound to that Law as well as we, for he came not to destroy, but to
fulfill the Law, both by his Example and Precepts: if then you charge the
Doctrine of Absolute Submission as brutish or stupid (or as contrary to the Law
of Nature) see you do not run into Blasphemy by charging that Holy One
foolishly; for whatever he knew of the secret Will of God, he was to follow his
revealed Will in his Actions. -- Page 39.
If fighting at that time (when Saint Peter drew his Sword) for preserving
Christ from the Jews, were contrary to the Nature of his Kingdom, so, the Rule
of the Gospel binding all the succeeding Ages of the Church no less than those
to whom it was first delivered, what was then contrary to the nature of
Christ's Kingdom, will be so still. -- P. 42.
I shall add one thing, which all Casuists hold a safe Rule in matters that are
doubtful; viz. That we ought to follow that side of the doubt that is freest
from hazard;
here then damnation is at least the seeming hazard of resistance, therefore
except upon as clear evidence you prove the danger of absolute submission to be
of the same nature that it may balance the other, then absolute submission, as
being the securest is to be followed. P. 41.
-- Obj. But he is the Minister of God to thee for good, and if they swerve
from this, they forsake the end for which they were raised up, and so fall from
the Power and right to our Obedience. Answ. It is true, the Sovereign is a
Minister of God for good, so that he corrupts his power grossly, when he pursues
not that design; but in that he is only accountable to God, whose Minister he
is, etc. -- The same Author continued steadfast to this Doctrine, when he left
Scotland, and came into England; Ser. on Jan. 30. 1674/5. p. 7. 9.
David, when Saul was most unjustly hunting his life, would not stretch forth
his hand against him, seeing he was the anointed of the Lord -- from Almighty
God the King had his Power, and to him he knew he was to give an account of his
Administration. -- Affirming, that the Enemies of that Royal Martyr, P. 38.
by Oaths and Counter-Oaths which they often took, had their Consciences so
seared as to be past feeling -- till they threw off all sense of God and
Religion, and set up professedly for Atheism; Id. Ser. on Romans 13.5. -- p. 5,
6. etc.
The real causes of Commotions are seldom the same with those that are
pretended for training in, and engaging a multitude; they are truly an
ungrounded, and aspiring Ambition, the heat and fury of Men's passions, etc. --
But P. 19. 20, etc.
Natural and revealed Religion do offer us these reasons for obliging us to
subjection to the higher Powers; 1. We are taught that those Powers are of God,
nay that they are Gods; a strain of speech, that if divine Authority did not
warrant it, would pass for impudent, and blasphemous flattery -- Deputed Powers
are only accountable to those from whom they derive their Authority -- and L.
P. 25.
the Example and practice of our Great Master -- My kingdom is not of this
World; this does so expressly discharge all bustling and fighting on the
pretense of Religion,
that we must either set up for another Gospel, or utterly reject what is so
formally condemned by the Author of this we profess to believe. -- Never cause
of Religion was of so great concern as the preserving the Head and Author of
it. P. 27.
-- If we examine the nature and design of that holy Religion our Savior
delivered, we shall find nothing more diametrically opposite to all its Rules
than the distempered fury of these misguided Zealots. -- Otherwise does St.
Paul teach the Romans, though then groaning under the severest rigours of
bondage and tyranny; and St. Peter does at full length once and again call on
all Christians to prepare for sufferings, and to bear them patiently.
-- And though the bondage of the Slaves was heavy, and highly contrary to all
the freedoms of the humane nature; yet he exhorts them to bear the severities
even of their froward and unjust Masters. P. 29.
-- With this Argument, that Christ suffered for them, leaving them an Example;
from these unerring practices and principles, must all true Christians take the
measures of their actions and the rules of their Life; and indeed the first
converts to Christianity embraced the Cross, and bore it not only with
patience, but with joy. Neither the cruelty of their unrelenting persecutors,
nor the continued tract of their miseries which did not end but with their
days, prevailed on them, either to renounce the faith, or do that which is next
degree to it, throw off the Cross, and betake themselves to seditious practices
for their preservation.
-- In twenty years persecution the Martyrs of one Province (Egypt) were
reckoned to be betwixt eight or nine hundred thousand, P. 31.32,
and yet no tumults were raised against all this tyranny and injustice; and
though after that the Emperors turned Christian, and established the Faith by
Law; yet neither did the subtle attempts of Julian the Apostate, nor the open
persecutions of some Arian Emperors, who did with great violence persecute the
Orthodox, occasion any seditious Combinations against Authority. -- And though
Religion suffered great decays in the succession of many Ages, yet for the
first ten Centuries no Father,
or Doctor of the Church, or any Assembly of Churchmen did ever teach, maintain
or justify any Religion, or seditious Doctrines or practices. It is true,
about the end of the Eleventh Century this pestiferous Doctrine took its rise
and was first broached, and vented by Pope Gregory VII. Hildebrand. P. 36.
-- The same equality of Justice and freedom that obliged me to lay open this,
ties me to tax also those who pretend a great hate against Rome, and value
themselves on the abhorring all the Doctrines and practices of that Church, and
yet have carried along with them one of their most pestiferous Opinions;
pretending Reformation when they would bring all under confusion, and vouching
the Cause and Word of God, when they were disturbing that Authority he had set
up, and opposing those empowered by him; and the more Piety and devotion such
daring pretenders put on, it still brings the greater stain and imputation on
Religion, as if it gave a patrociny to those practices it so plainly condemns.
-- But blessed be God, our Church hates and condemns this Doctrine from what
hand soever it comes,
and has established the Rights and Authority of Princes on sure and
unalterable foundations; enjoining an entire Obedience to all the lawful
Commands of Authority, and an absolute submission to that supreme Power God
has put in our Sovereign's hands; this Doctrine we justly glory in; and if any
that had their Baptism and Education in our Church, have turned Renegado's from
this, they proved no less Enemies to the Church her self, than to the Civil
Authority, so that their Apostasy leaves no blame on our Church.

The same learned Man P. 446.
in a marginal Note on Bishop Bedel's Letter to Wadsworth (when the Bishop was
representing the common Principles of those Papists and Protestants, who
asserted a right of taking up Arms against their Sovereign, whenever their
Lives, Properties or Religion were invaded) says, This passage above is to be
considered as a Relation, not as the Author's Opinion; but yet for fear of
taking it by the wrong handle, the Reader is desired to take notice, that a
Subject's resisting his Prince in any cause whatsoever is unlawful and impious.
Which passage I have lately seen in some Copies of the same Edition (for I
never heard but of one) thus altered: This passage above is to be considered as
a Relation, not as the Author's Opinion, lest it should mislead the Reader into
a dangerous mistake. And when he makes his own Apology Pres. to the Ser. Nov.
5. at the Rolls. 1684.
He professes, I am sure that the last part of the Sermon that presses Loyalty
and Obedience, is not at all enlarged beyond what I not only preached in that
Sermon, but on many other occasions, in which I appeal to all my Hearers; but I
leave the Sermon to speak for it self and me both; and will refer it to every
Man's Conscience that reads it to judge, whether or not I can be concluded from
it to be a Person disaffected to his Majesty's Government.

Id. first Letter to the E. of Middl. collect. of pap. p. 284.
Few have written more, and preached oftener against all sort of treasonable
Doctrines and practices, and particularly against the lawfulness of rising in
Arms upon the account of Religion -- I have preached a whole Sermon in the
Hague against all treasonable Doctrines and practices; and in particular
against the lawfulness of Subjects rising in Arms against their Sovereign upon
the account of Religion. -- And I have maintained this, both in public and
private; that I could, if I thought t^ convenient, give proofs of it, that
would make all my Enemies be ashamed of their injustice and malice. P. 159.
-- As often as I have talked with Sir John Cochran of some things that were
complained of in Scotland, I took occasion to repeat my Opinion of the duty of
Subjects to submit,
and bear all the ill administration that might be in the Government, but never
to rise in Arms upon that account. Id. third Letter to the E. of Middl. p. 168.
I will do that which I think fit for me to do to day, though I were sure to be
assassinated for it to morrow; but to the last moment of my life, I will pay
all duty and fidelity to his Majesty. Ans. to the New Test, etc. p. 48, 49.
The Church of England may justly expostulate, when she is treated as seditious
after she has rendered the highest Services to the Civil Authority, that any
Church now on Earth has done; she has beaten down all the principles of
Rebellion with more force and learning,
than any body of Men has ever yet done, and has run the hazards of enraging
her Enemies, and losing her Friends even for those, from whom the most learned
of her Members knew what they might expect. -- We are the only Church in the
World, that carries these principles to the highest. -- We acknowledge, that
some of our Clergy miscarried in it upon King Edward's death, yet at the same
time others of our Communion adhered more steadily to their Loyalty in favor
of Queen Mary, than she did to the promises that she made to them. -- The Laws
of Nature are perpetual, P. 51.
and can never be cancelled by any special Law; so that if these Gent. own so
freely, that this is a Law of Nature (that every individual might fight in his
own defense) they had best take care not to provoke Nature too much. P. 52.
-- As we cannot be charged for having preached any seditious Doctrine, so we
are not wanting in the preaching of the duties of Loyalty, P. 55.
even when we see what they are like to cost us. -- Of all the Maxims in the
World, there is none hurtful to the Government in our present circumstances,
than the saying, That the King's promises and the people's fidelity ought to be
reciprocal, and that a failure in the one cuts off the other; for by a very
natural consequence the Subject may likewise say, that their Oaths of
Allegiance being founded on the assurance of his Majesty's protection, the one
binds no longer than the other is observed; and the Inferences that may be
drawn from hence, will be very terrible, if the Loyalty of the so much decryed
Church of England does not put a stop to them.

But for that we may cite the Testimony of the Right Reverend Bishop of S.
Asaph, in his Seasonable Discourse, etc.

We are Members of a Church, Page 4.
which above all other Constitutions in the Christian World, enforces the great
Duties of Obedience and Submission to the Magistrate, and teaches to be subject
not only for Truth, but Conscience sake.

And among other Motives which he mentions in the behalf of the Established
Religion: The fourth (says he) is this, The Safety of the King's Person, and
the Prerogative of the Crown, which has no higher or more necessary Appendent
than his Supremacy in his Dominion in all Causes Ecclesiastical and Secular,
according to the Powers invested in the Jewish Kings under the Law,
and exercised by the first Christian Emperors.

To whom we may add the Right Reverend Doctor Sprat, in his Sermon before the
House of Commons, Jan. 30. 1677/8. by them ordered to be Printed: Where
speaking of King Chalres the Martyr -- Who (says he) not only by his Birth had
a Successive Right to the Crown, which he could not forfeit; but also by his
Personal Vittues, might have deserved another Title to it, if his Crown had
been elective, and as his Murderers impudently pretended, at the Disposal of
his Subjects, page 3. So that he terms him the Vicegerent of God's Power, ibid.
and page 44. -- He pleaded and prayed for his Enemies at the Bar of Heaven,
which only was above him. And page 47. May all of us be most industriously
watchful, that the same Schismatical Designs, and Antimonarchical Principles,
which then inspired so many ill Men, misled some good Men, and cost our good
King so dear, may not once more revive, and insinuate themselves again under
the same or newer and craftier Disguises, and find an opportunity to attempt
the like mischiefs.

And in another Sermon of his at White Hall, Page 44, 45.
December 22. 1678.

Let us withdraw our thoughts, and lift up our minds to the imitation of the
most Christian Examples -- As of our Savior himself, so of his Apostles and
Disciples, in the first, and therefore the best Ages. -- How were they zealous
for the Glory of God? Not by violence, or malice, or revenge against any, not
eve nagainst their Oppressors; but only by their own Labors, and Prayers, and
Patience, and Magnanimity in suffering. How were they zealous in respect to
their Temporal Governors? Not to resist for conscience sake, but rather to be
subject for that very reason: not by open Rebellion, not by private
Machinations, but in blessing, and serving, and submitting to their Emperors,
tho they were Idolaters; and obeying them in all things except their Idolatry.
-- Whom to imitate is our Duty.

SECT XXIII.
Mr. Thorndyke Apud Falkner's Christian Loyalty, p. 429.
from the Instance of the Maccabees avers, that it was lawful for Subjects to
take Arms in Defense of their Religion under the Jewish State (tho in that he
be mistaken) but expressly condemns taking Arms upon that, or any other pretext
under the Christian State.

Dr. Spencer, Sermon. at S. Mary's Cambr. Jun. 28. 1660 p. 4.
(the now Dean of Ely) The Gospel does very sparingly meddle with State
matters, but when it does, it engages to Obedience by as obliging Principles
as it does to Religion, even a Principle of Conscience, we must be subject for
conscience sake (not barely for safety's sake) and a principle of highest fear,
They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. A Doctrine taught the
World in the Type long before by that Fire and Earthquake which destroyed the
Opposers of lawful Authority, Numb. xvi. 33, 34. P. 11, 12.
-- God has attested unto Sovereignty by suffering none of his Servants in
Scripture, few, or none in story to be guilty of willful opposing lawful
Authority, -- We find many a wicked Man guilty of this Sin -- but as Reverence
to other Divine Commands wore off in time [as the power that exalts it self
above all that is called God obtained in the world] so to this among the rest
of Obedience, to lawful Authority. P. 14.
-- The Heathens used to reproach the Gospel on this account, -- but the Pulpit
was never intended to be a Circle, in which to raise up the evil Spirits of
Sedition, and State-Commotions; no Religion in the Doctrine of it so greatly
secures the Power of Kings, and the Peace of States,
as the Christian does; we are bound by the Gospel to be obedient (...), 1 Pet.
ii. 18. to the crookedest and frowardest Masters God sets over us. So that
Religion can never be pretended against Loyalty; and therefore when I take a
sad review of the Evil of our late Disturbances, It ache not so much notice of
the Loss of King, Liberty, Property, Parliaments, Blood (tho very great) as of
impairing so far the Credit of Religion, in the Violences offered to the person
of his Sacred Majesty, and that by persons so highly pretending to it; I am
sorry, the Papists seem to have now a thirtieth of January, Page 18.
to return us for a fifth of November. -- Christianity disowns all consecrated
Daggers, in Heathen Writers indeed nothing of more familiar occurrence, than
Panegyricks in commendation of the Assertors of public Liberty by the
assassinating of a Tyrant; a thing easily pardonable in them, being able by the
dim Light of Nature to discover no more in a King, than a Head of Gold
supported by the Clayie Toes of popular Election and Acceptance; but Scripture
shows a higher Charter than so, Page 19.
by which Kings hold their Crowns, Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign, etc. the
taking Arms to redress some Evils in the Government of a Nation, proves
generally, but as the cutting off of the Hand to get rid of a cut Finger. Page
23.
-- It is a Truth of everlasting Faithfulness, That can never be brought about
(safely) by bad means, which could not be by good.

SECT. XXIV.
Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury, Letter to the Lord Russel, Jun. 20. 1683.
In tender compassion of your Lordship's Case, and from all the good will that
one man can bear to another, I do humbly offer to your Lordships deliberate
thoughts these following Considerations concerning the Point of Resistance, if
our Religion and Rights should be invaded.
-- 1. That the Christian Religion does plainly forbid the resistance of
Authority. 2. That tho our Religion be established by Law (which your Lordship
urges as a Difference between our Case, and that of the Primitive Christians)
yet in the same Law, which establishes our Religian, 14 Car. 2. c. 4. 14 Car.
2. c. 3.
it is declared, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up
Arms, etc. Besides that there is a particular Law, declaring the Power of the
Militia to be solely in the King; and this ties the Hands of Subjects, tho the
Law of Nature, and the general Rules of Scripture had left us at liberty, which
I believe they do not, because the Government, and Peace of human Society could
not well subsist upon these Terms. 3. Your Lordship's Opinion is contrary to
the declared Doctrine of all Protestant Churches,
and tho some particular persons have taught otherwise, that have been
contradicted herein, and condemned for it by the generality of Protestants. --
I beg of your Lordship to consider, how it will agree with an avowed asserting
of the Protestant Religion, to go contrary to the general Doctrine of the
Protestants: my end in this is to convince your Lordship, that you are in a
very dangerous and great Mistake; and being so convinced, that which before was
a sin of Ignorance, will appear of a much more heinous nature, as in truth it
is, (...) calls for a very particular and deep repentance, which if your
Lordship exercise by a particular acknowledgment of it to God and Man, you will
not only obtain forgiveness of God, but prevent a mighty scandal to the
Reformed Religion. I am very loath to give your Lordship and disquiet in the
distress you are in -- but am much more concerned, that you do leave the world
in a delusion, and false peace to the hinderance of your eternal happiness.

And in his Prayer on the Scaffold with the same Lord he has this expression
-- Grant, O Lord, that all we, who survive, by this and other instances of thy
Providence may learn our Duty to God, and the King.

Dr. Stillingfleet, Dean of S. Paul's: Sermon. on Jan. 30. 166 8/9, on Jude 11.
p. 2, 3.
The Christian Religion above all others has taken care to preserve the Right
sof Sovereignty, by giving unto Caesar the things that are Cesar's. And to make
resistance unlawful by declaring, that those who are guilty of it shall receive
to themselves; damnation. Of such men we have a description in this short, but
smart Epistle, who believed it a part of their Saintship to despise Dominions,
etc. P. 7, 8.
Whose design like that of Corah, was the sharing the Government among
themselves, which it was impossible for them to hope for, as long as Moses
continued a King in Jeshurun; nor were they awed by the solemn Vows and
Promises they had made of Obedience to him; for factious men know, they must
address themselves to the people, and in the first place persuade them, that
they manage their interests against the usurpations of their Governors, while
the people take a strange pride in hearing and telling all the Faults of their
Governors. P. 11, 12.
-- The common grounds of all Seditions being usurpations upon the Peoples
Rights,
arbitrary Government, and ill management of Affairs, as if they had said, we
appear only in the behalf of the Fundamental Liberties of the People, both
Civil and Spiritual. -- That Moses was guilty of the Breach of the Trust
committed to him, so that now by the ill management of his Trust the Power was
again devolved into the Hands of the People, and they ought to take account of
his Actions. Page 21. Cons. p. 22, 23, etc.
There were then two great Principles among them, by which they thought to
defend themselves: 1. That Liberty and a Right to Power is so inherent in the
People, that it cannot be taken from them. 2. That in case of Usurpation upon
that Liberty of the People they may resume the Exercise of Power b^ punishing
those who are guilty of it. And I believe they will be found to be the first
Assertors of this kind of Liberty that ever were in the world;
and happy had it been for this Nation, if Corah had never found any Disciples
in it. -- Of the later of the two Propositions, Page 26, 27, 28, 29.
it is said, that there can be no Principle imagined more destructive to Civil
Societies, and repugnant to the very nature of Government; for it destroys all
the Obligations of Oaths and Compacts, it makes the solemnest Bonds of
Obedience signify nothing, -- it makes every prosperous Rebellion just, etc.
and if Corah, Dathan and Abiram had succeeded in their Rebellion against Moses,
no doubt they would have been called the Keepers of the Liberties of ISRAEL. --
The Supposition of this Principle will unavoidably keep up a constant Jealousy
between the Prince and his People, and there can be no such way to bring in an
arbitrary Government into a Nation. -- Besides, this must necessarily engage a
Nation in endless Disputes about the forfeiture of Power, into whose Hands it
falls, whether into the People in common, or some persons particularly chosen
by the People, etc. -- but on the other side what mighty danger can there be in
suppossing the persons of Princes to be so sacred, that no Sons of Violence
ought to come near to hurt them? Have not all the ancient Kingdoms and Empires
of the World flourished under the Supposition of an unaccountable power in
Princes? -- No inconvenience can be possibly so great on the supposition of
this unaccountable power in Sovereign Princes, as the unavoidable Mischiefs of
that Hypothesis, which places all power originally in the People, and
notwithstanding all Oaths and Bonds whatsoever to Obedience,
gives them the Liberty to resume it when they please, which will always be
when a Spirit of Faction and Sedition shall prevail among them. God, Page 34.
Numb. 26.9. interprets striving against the Authority appointed by him, to be
a striving against himself -- they who resist, resist an Ordinance of God, and
they who do so, shall in the mildest sense receive a severe punishment from
him, let the Pretenses be never so popular, the persons never so great and
famous; nay tho they were of the great Council of the Nation, yet we see, God
does not abate of his severity upon any of these Considerations -- nor has the
Christian Doctrine made any Alteration in these things. P. 39.
-- It would take up too much time to examine the frivolous Evasions and
ridiculous Distinctions, by which they would make the case of the Primitive
Christians in not resisting Authority so much different from theirs, who have
not only done it, but in spite of Christianity have pleaded for it; either they
wanted Strength or Courage, or the Countenance of the Senate, or did not
understand their own Liberty. P. 40.
-- When all their Obedience was only due to those Principles of the Gospel,
which made it so great a part of Christianity to be subject to Principalities
and Powers, and which the Teachers of the Gospel had particularly given them in
charge, to put the People in mind of, Tit. iii. 1. And happy had it been for
us, if this Doctrine had been more sincerely preached and duly practiced in
this Nation. -- Id. Ser. on Nov. 5. 1673. p. 39.
It is the Honor of our Church of England, that it asserts the Rights of
Princes so clearly and fully without Tricks and Reservations; and all that mean
honestly love to speak plainly. Id. Ser. on Mat. x. 16. at Whitchall March 7.
167 8/9.
That there might be no color for any such Cavil against Christianity (as if
it gave occasion to many Disturbances of the Civil Government) no Religion that
ever was did so much enforce the duty of Obedience, as Christ and his Apostles
did, and that upon the greatest and most weighty Considerations, for Conscience
sake, for the Lord's sake, for their Religion's sake: for consider, I pray, if
the Doctrine of Christ had given encouragement to Faction and Rebellion under
pretense of it; if S. Peter himself had taken upon him to dispose of Crowns and
Scepters, or had absolved Christians from their Allegiance even to their
greatest Persecutors; what Blot had this been even upon the whole Religion?
such as all the Blood of the Martyrs could never have washed out. P. 50.
-- It is an intolerable Reproach to Christianity to impute their patient
Submission to Authority to their Weakness and want of force, which is all one
as to say, they would have resisted if they durst.

And the same Author, in his Grand Question, etc. p. 180, 181. says, That every
new Modeller of Government has something to offer that looks like Reason, at
least to those whose interest it is to carry it on: and if no Precedents can be
found, then they appeal to a certain invisible thing called the Fundamental
Contract of the Nation, which being a thing no where to be found, may signify
what any one pleases. -- And page 75. I am of Opinion, That if he ( i.e. the
Author of the Letter, etc.) could be persuaded to produce this Fundamental
Contract of the Nation, which I perceive he has lying by him, it would not
amount to so much as a blind Manuscript.

Thus also he says in his Book called The Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome truly stated, p. 106. The Principles of our Church are directly
contrary to them ( i. e. deposing Principles) and our Houses of Convocation
would as readily condemn any such damnable Doctrines as the University of
Oxford: and all the World knows how repugnant such Principles are to those of
the Church of England; and none can be Rebels to their Prince, but they must be
false to our Church.

SECT. XXV.
Dr. Patrick, Dean of Peterborough, Paraphr. on Prove. 24 21.
Take care therefore, my dear Child, that thy Religion, which teaches thee in
the first place to worship, reverence, and obey the great Lord and Governor of
all the World, make thee humbly obedient to the King, as God's Vicegerent here
on Earth; and have nothing to do with those whose discontent with the present
state of things, or their love of Novelty, makes them affect a change of
Government, and depart from their duty both to God and Man. Id. Pref. to the
Paraphr. on Eccles. p. 16.
To this purpose the Preface to the Paraphrase on Ecclesiastes cites, and
confirms the Opinion of Antonius Corranus, an excellent Person, a learned
Spaniard, as the Paraphrast justly styles him, concerning that Book of
Solomon's. This Tractate is truly royal, and worthy to be read perpetually, in
this most turbulent Age, both by high and low; that from hence Subjects may
learn to perform Obedience and the greatest Observance both in word and deed
toward their Princes, choosing rather to bear and suffer any thing than to
attempt Rebellion against them. -- Id. Per. and Annot. on Eccl. 8.2 p 216.
It is much safer and easier, as well as more honest, to submit and be quiet,
than to contend and unsettle the Peace of Kingdoms, tho Princes do not govern
as they ought. -- The Verse, says Melancthon, is a Sentence exceeding worthy of
Consideration and Remembrance: and then gives the different Interpretations of
it, and closes all thus. P. 219.220.
Some may think, that I have dilated too much upon this Verse, but they may be
pleased to consider, how useful, if not necessary it is at this time, when men
begin again to plead the lawfulness of Resistance: which is so plainly
condemned in this place, that the most learned Assertors of the Old Cause were
extremely puzzled to make it agree with their Principles in the late Times of
Rebellion. There is one, who (in his Book called Natures Dowry, chap. 21.)
calls in the Assistance of a great many Hebrew Doctors to help him to another
Translation of the Words; and yet after all is forced to acknowledge, that our
English is right enough, and is content to admit it with this Proviso, That the
King manage well the Affairs of the Commonwealth; as much as to say, do what
they would have him. -- Id. on v. 4. p. 221.
Who may say unto the King, What do thou? i. e. first, who has any Authority
to call him to an Account? As much as to say, none has but God alone:
according to that of an eminent Rabbi, No Creature may judge the King but the
holy and blessed God alone. To allow the People (either collective or
representative) to have Power to do it, is to make them Accusers, Judges, and
Executioners also in their own Cause, and that against their Sovereign: nor
secondly, can any Man safely attempt it, but he shall meet with Punishment
either here or hereafter; which is no new Doctrine, but the same with that of
S. Paul (as Luther here honestly notes,) They that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation, which none shall be able to avoid. Thus much the Author
of Nature's Dowry is forced to acknowledge from the evident Light he saw in
this place. It is Wisdom (says he out of Elisha Gallico, an Hebrew
Interpreter) in a private man, when the Magistrate enjoins what is repugnant to
God's Will, to remove out of his Dominions rather than contest with him. Id. p.
223.
The wisest thing we can do when Princes require any thing grievous unto us, is
not to rebel, but to watch the fittest opportunities to petition for redress,
and that after such a manner as may not give offense. V. 7. P. 224.
Luther refers wholly to the miserable Condition of a Rebel in this manner; He
desires various things, and hopes for mighty matters by his Disobedience, but
is mightily deceived; for of the very impunity which he promised himself he
cannot be secure, etc. Id. in Eccles. x. 20. Paraph. p. 277.
Curse not the King, etc. but notwithstanding all this, ( viz. consuming the
public Treasure, etc.) as I advised thee before not to rise in Rebellion
against thy Sovereign; so now let me add, that it is very foolish, as well as
wicked, to be provoked by this ill management, so much as to speak an
opprobrious Word of him or his Ministers, etc. Annot. in loc. p. 302.
But whatsoever negligence or profuseness and waste there be, it should not
provoke any wise or good man, to speak contemptuously of his Sovereign, or of
his Ministers. P. 306.
It will not be unuseful, much less unseasonable, in such an unruly Age as
this, to let the Reader understand how deeply the first Reformers of Religion
laid this Precept to heart, by transcribing some of Luther's Admonitions in his
Annotations on this Verse: The worse and the more malignant (says he) the World
is, the more studious and laborious Solomon teaches us to be in the doing of
our duty, particularly in honoring Magistracy, because it is a divine
Ordinance, and the better part of the World, by which God manages all things
under the Sun. But the Ungodly begin their Wickedness chiefly in the Contempt
of Magistrates, when they hear how God blames and reproves them in the holy
Scriptures; but it belongs to the divine Office to find fault with Magistrates,
and to rebuke them; and therefore tho thou hear it, yet do not imitate it,
for thou art not God, nor the Ordainer, no nor the Reformer, nor the Restorer
of the divine Ordinance: but as God reproves them, so thee also in the holy
Scriptures, that thou may do thy duty, and not meddle with what belongs to
them. -- The meaning therefore of Solomon is, I have spoken much of Princes,
how they undo the World, but do thou reverence them notwithstanding that, for
they are not an humane Ordinance, but a divine. St. Peter indeed calls the King
an Humane Creature, because he is assumed from among men, but his Authority is
divine: and tho Princes be bad, they are to be honored, because of this
Ordinance of God. Why then will thou speak evil of those who are vexed with so
many and great cares and labors for thy Peace, if they be good? And if they be
bad and foolish, their own Impiety is mischief enough to them, and brings them
into sufficient danger. Bear with them then, and compassionate them, rather
than rail upon them and revile them, etc.

Dr. Towerson on the fifth Commandment.
Those Powers are to be looked upon as ordained by God, which came to that
Power they have, as without any fraud or violence, so by the ordinary Course of
God's Providence. -- Upon which account, all those Powers must be looked upon
as ordained by God, that either come to the Throne by a lineal Descent from
former Kings, where the Kingdom is Hereditary; or by a free and unconstrained
choice, where it is Elective. Part 5. p. 241.

Page 251. There is no doubt it is in the Power of the Subject, who conceives
himself not to have deserved it, so (by flight) to avoid, if he can, the
falling under the Power of it (the Sword;) Our Savior having expressly given
leave, that if we be persecuted in one City, we should to save our selves flee
from that to another. As little difficulty should I find if that were the thing
in question, to license the avoiding the Prince's Severity, by appealing to his
own Courts of Judicature, where that is by Law so allowed, as it is in several
Cases here, that being not to be looked upon as a Resistance, much less an
injurious one, which is with the leave of him against whom it is directed. But
if the Question be concerning resisting by force of Arms, and so avoiding the
severity of the Prince; so it is as certain both from the Scripture and Reason,
that we ought not to avoid it, but rather with all readiness submit to the
strokes of it.

Page 253. For tho it be true, that a Prince has no Authority to inflict an
unjust Punishment, yet he is privileged by the place he holds under God, from
being subjected unto Man, and ought not therefore, by any force, to be brought
into Subjection to him.

Page 254. Whosoever resists evil Powers must be thought in a particular
manner to fight against God. -- What a disappointment must needs have been to
the Counsels of the Almighty, if it had been permitted Christians to resist.

Part 7. An Answer to several Pleas which are made in behalf of Resistance, etc.
Page 257, 258. That which generally draws Princes to the persecuting of those
that are of a different Religion from themselves, being not so much any hatred
of their Religion, as the Jealousy they have lest under the Pretenses of that,
and the Assemblies which are made for it, some secret Design against the State
should lurk; which Jealousy must needs be taken away, when it appears to them
from undoubted Experiments, that they who do profess it, will not attempt any
thing against them, how severely soever they may be handled by them.

To all which if we add the story of primitive Times too, we shall not need to
doubt of Religion's being more than secured by a patient submitting to
persecuting Princes; it being manifest from thence, that Christianity was so
far from being destroyed by the Blood of its many Martyrs, that on the contrary
it thrived and propagated it self by it.

Page 260. From that second Plea pass we to a third, which is taken from those
Oaths which Kings do commonly make (before they are solemnly crowned) of
governing the People by the Laws; the Government (as some think) seeming
thereby to arise from a Compact between them and their Subjects; upon the
breach whereof on the King's part, it may be lawful for the Subject to depart
from their Allegiance, and resist him in the Execution of his Power. For Answer
to which, not to tell you what intolerable Mischiefs would ensue from such a
Tenet, as often as any seditious Man should go about to persuade the People
they were not so well governed as they ought; I will allege in behalf of our
own Princes (farther than which we shall not need to look) that which will cut
the Throat of this Objection; to wit, That our Kings are to as full purpose
such before their Coronation as after; witness, not only their performing all
the Acts of a King, but that known Maxim in our Laws, that the King of England
never dies. From whence as it will follow, that as the Kings of this Nation owe
not their being such to any compact between them and their People, that upon
any supposed breach thereof it might be lawful for the Subject to resist them;
so also that the Oaths taken by them at their Coronation, are not to procure
them that Power which otherwise they could not have: but for the encouraging
the People to yield the more ready Obedience to them, which they may very well
do, when they who are to govern plight their Faith and Reputation to govern
them according to their own Laws.

Mr. Scrivener, Book I. Part I. Of the Original Government. p. 93.

The Arguments to affirm that the grosser Body of the People did first of all
agree upon Government and constitute their Ruler, are 1. Ridiculous, 2.
Sacrilegious and impious. 3. Impossible. 4. Pestilential and pernicious to all
Government.

It Is a true Saying, It is more to make a King than to be a King. Still I
hold-this, which I have not found shaken by the many Attempts of innovating
Wits, That there is a real Paternal Power in lawful Princes. -- For it is not
Choice but Power that makes a King: and in this case no power at all is given,
or can be given, nor in truth ought to be taken away, as the manner is, from
Princes entering through the Populacy into the Throne; for God only is the
proper and immediate Author of Right and Power, which he has inserted into
Parents over their Children, and has proportionably prescribed to Kings and
Princes, without ever advising with the People or expecting their Consent or
Confirmation. This the Scripture it self calls Jus Imperii, or l^ss
significantly with us, The manner of the King, 1 Samuel viii. 9. Not from the
People but from God.

Page 94. The most therefore that the People do when they act most in creating
Kings, is, under God, to apply the Person to the Place or Office of Governing.

Page 95. Grant that all Men were once, (but no body could ever tell when) and
in a certain place, (but no body could ever tell where) equally free, or at
least all of years of Discretion, which is most uncertain, it would be known
first, how Men dare to be so presumptuous as to make such a breach of the Law
of Nature as this must be? viz. To part with their Birth right, and to imbezzle
that which God had given them concomitantly with their own Lives. And this is
further confirmed from the impossibility as well as impiety of making any such
Translation of Power from its natural Subject the People; because it cannot
ever fairly or justly be brought about, seeing that the People cannot
unanimously, much less ever did concur to the Election of any one Government or
Governor. They cannot all give in their Votes to such an end; always some were
dissenting; and if they did not enter their Protest against the proceeding of
their Fellows, it must be because they were deterred, curbed, and oppressed by
a more prevalent Faction, obliging them and constraining them most unjustly to
comply with their Opinions and Decrees: for there appears no sound reason why a
more numerous and powerful Faction may not as well take away my Estate, because
they are stronger than I, as take away my Birthright, which Liberty is here
asserted to be. So that the very first step to Liberty must be founded in
Injustice, in taking away that from me which I might no less in natural reason
spoil them of; and in Servitude too, in bringing me, whom they acknowledge
naturally free, into unwilling Subjection. Neither is the difficulty solved in
saying, That Reason and Nature also require that for order sake and regulating
humane Society, the minor part must yield to the major: for upon this
Supposition indeed that Power is so absurdly and inconveniently posited, there
does presently appear such a necessity; but my Argument is taken from the
absurdity of any such necessity of Natures creating, that the Supposition is
very false: and if it were true, yet were not that Maxim true which is here
brought to control and correct the same; for Nature does not teach us, much
less necessitate us, in any case to follow the most numerous; but rather Reason
and Experience, and the Judgment of diligent and wise Discussers of this Point
inform us, That the Multitude are more inconsiderate, undiscerning, and
injudicious than the fewer in number many times; the World being generally
thicker set with Fools than wise Men, and Fools being commonly more apt to be
led by Fools than with deeper and sounder Reasons of the Wise.

Page 96, 97. The Right of Rule in the People is looked upon as by Nature and
Divine Ordinance belonging to them, and therefore cannot [de jure] be
transferred; or, if attempted, must needs, by the same Right be revocable. --
Finding themselves most commonly destitute of that advantage, they proceed to
expound it more to their purpose tyrannical, and boldly affirm, That by the
People is not meant necessarily the most, but the best, and soberest, and
godliest, and such only that study really the Good of Religion and the
Liberties of the People. And are not these sine Doings? Do not these popular
Tenets hang well together, and end well, which in process of their own Reason
and Practices, confute the very first Principle of all, viz. That People have
an absolute supreme Power to frame Governments, when before they can bring
matters to their intended conclusion, they are forced to deny them?

Of the Obligations between the Governors and Governed, p. 103.

It cannot either consist with the Law of God or Nations, to inflict
Punishments on Princes Sovereign. Not but that, for instance, Murder, Adultery,
unjust Spoil, and Robbery of the Subjects, may no less (considering the nature
of the Crime) deserve such Punishment of Princes as they do (...) People. But
because there is none in such Cases that can or ought duly and regularly to
execute such Laws, because there can be no such Execution without the Power of
the Sword; and there can be but one proper Subject of that Power in any
Republic. -- And of all guilt, I know not whether any be greater than the
assuming of such a Power, which no ways belongs to a Man: for better it were to
take away ones Horse, or to ravish another Man's Wife, or to extort unjustly
another Estate, than to divest a Prince of his Right of Rule, and usurp it to
himself; and that, first, because no Man's Estate, or any thing that is his,
does descend to him, or otherways become his, by the like divine Title as the
Supreme Power rightly posited and possessed, does to the Owner thereof; and
therefore this being more sacred, the Invasion of this Right is much more
wicked and unjust. Secondly, because a public mischief, and of general
influence upon all, is much more intolerable than a private. But such a
Violation of Princely Rights must of necessity draw a public mischief on the
whole civil Body; I mean all the Subjects in such a Nation, who shall be
distracted between the sense of Obedience known otherwise to be due, and the
terror of usurped Power, threatening ruin to such as comply not with their
Injustice.

Page 104. Some late Demagogues have written, for the promotion of Religion,
forsooth, as well as Civil Liberty, that to kill Tyrants (and here I will not
show who they call Tyrants) is as good an act as to slay Wolves, Lions and
Bears. But I would fain know whence such a Law proceeded, if not from Tyranny
it self? Even such persons, who under color of natural Law of returning evil
for evil, and self-preservation, have done the greatest injustice imaginable,
not only against the person persecuted, but the people, who never at any time
had power so to deliver themselves, nor, if they had, did generally and
unanimously, or could confer the same on the new Pretenders to it. That Law
therefore of killing Tyrants invented by Tyrants, takes place on the Authors
of it as much as any body else; and where the like Power can be snatched up,
may have the same event on popular Statesmen as well as Kings and Princes: For
they are Tyrants too.

Mr. Jos. Glanvil's Sermon of Christian Loyalty, published by Anth. Horneck. D.
D. on Romans 13.2. They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.
Page 153, 154. Which words were spoken in the days of Nero, who besides that
he was an Heathen, was a Persecutor and a Tyrant, and the most infamous
instance in Nature; and yet this Monster is not excepted as to the tribute of
Obedience. Whereas had this been said in the days of such a Prince as our
Charles the First, it might have been supposed that the virtue of the Person
claimed the reverence and subjection, and not the Character of the Prince. And
that 'twas damnable to resist because he was good; not because he was supreme:
because he was a Nursing-father of the Church, not because the ruling Father of
his Country. 'Twas an happy Coincidence therefore to secure the Authority of
the Magistrate, which answers the greatest pretensions of Rebellion. If
Religion be pretended, an Heathen must not be resisted: If Tyranny, it is
damnation to oppose a Nero.

Page 156. Kings wear God's Image and Authority -- but besides there is
evidence enough in the nature of the thing to prove, that Kings have their
Power and Authority from God, and are no Substitutes of the People.

Page 157, 158, 159. They that Rule are God's Substitutes, and no Creatures of
the People: for the People have no power to govern themselves, and consequently
cannot devolve any upon another.

Resistance is opposite to the Spirit of Religion: Religion is of a calm and
pacifick temper, like that of its Author whose voice was not heard in the
street. -- He commands the payment of all Duties to Caesar: He acknowledges
Pilates Power to be from above: He commands his Disciples to pray for their
Persecutors: He permits them to fly, not to oppose. He rebukes Peter 's
violence to the High Priests Servant; and the revenge of the Disciples when
they called for fire from Heaven.

He paid Tribute, submitted to the Laws of the Sanhedrim, and to that unjust
sentence against his life.

This was his temper: and the Apostles who lived among his Enemies and theirs,
and met with severity enough to have soured their spirits, and exasperated
their Pens to contrary resolutions and instructions; yet as true followers of
their dear Lord, they faithfully transmit to us what they had learned from him,
viz. That we should obey those that have the rule over us: submit to every
Ordinance of Man: pray for Kings and all in Authority: submit to Principalities
and Powers, and to obey Magistrates. --

And those Noble Spirits of the first Ages after, who began to be Martyrs as
soon as to be Christians, who lived in the Fire, and went to Heaven wrapped in
those flames that had less arder than their love: These, I say, amidst the
greatest and fiercest fires that cruelty and barbarism had kindled, paid the
tribute of a peaceable and quiet subjection to their Murderers, and made
unforced acknowledgments of the right they had to their obedience.

Page 157, 158, 159. Nor do we ever read of any attempts they made to free
themselves by resistance, though ( as Tertullian says) they were in powerful
numbers mingled in their Villages, and in their Cities, yea in their Castles
and in their Armies: Yea, there is an illustrious instance of Passive Obedience
in the Thebean Legion, whose tenth Man being executed for not offering
sacrifice to Idols, they quietly submitted to the Cruelty. And a second
Dicimation being commanded by Maximinian, the Author of the first, one of their
great Commanders, (an excellent Christian) persuades them to suffer it with the
same patience: because it was not with their Swords they could make their way
to the Kingdom of Heaven, but by another kind of Warfare. --

Page 163. By a dear experience we have learned, that it is better to endure any
inconveniences in a settled Government than to endeavor violent alterations.

Doctor Anth. The Letter he makes his own, p. 478. and advises others to follow
the Example of these Primitive Christians. p. 541.
Horneck's Letter to a Person of quality at the end of his best Exercise;
speaking of the heavenly Lives of the Primitive Christians: he says, Page 496.
They looked upon Christianity as a Religion that taught them to suffer
valiantly. --

Page 534. 535. To their Princes and Magistrates, they were ever very
submissive, and in all lawful things obedient to a tittle. In their Prayers
they always remembered them, and though they persecuted and afflicted them, yet
that did not abate their Zeal and Vows for their welfare and prosperity:
Rebellion against their Governors they hated as Witchcaft, and ever thought it
safer to suffer than to resist. Hence they paid Tribute without marmuring; for
their opinion was, that no Man could have that Power, except it were given him
from above. His Tyranny could not make them neglect their duty, nor his ill
Government tempt them to forget their Allegiance; Where the Man was rough and
hard-hearted that was over them, they looked upon the Providence as a means to
try their faith, and even then when they might have resisted and conquered,
they would not, because they thought it was unsuitable to their Religion. --

SECT. XXVI.
Doctor Tennison says the same Mr. Hobbs's Creed examined p. 149, 15, 151.
-- This then is the Doctrine of Politics, that Rebellion is not Iniquity, if
upon probable grounds it becomes prosperous. -- It is blamed as an opinion of
Mr. White, That part-boil'd Romanist, as he is called, that a dispossessed
Prince ought neither to be desired, nor to endeavor to return, if the people
think themselves to be well, and their Trade and Employment be undisturbed. And
he adds, Who can answer, they shall be better by the return of the dispossessed
party; surely in common presumption the gainer is like to defend them better
than he, who lost it.
-- Certainly for this Sentence published at such a time to this Nation, if for
any other cause, those Books ought to be burnt in England, as well as some of
them have been burnt at Rome; there is no tie so strong as that of Religion, p.
158, 159.
which eternally binds a conscientious Subject in Allegiance to his Sovereign,
and Wars arise from men's self-interests and lusts; and true goodness is both
the Creator and preserver of peace: unless a Man obeys for Conscience Sake, all
the Cords of outward Pacts and Covenants will not hold him V. pref. p. 7.
etc. -- Neither will such Covenants hold the people that pretend to Religion,
if they be mis-taught, that God is glorified in their private good, and that
their private good is to be valued before the life of a Prince, if they can
safely deprive him of it. -- What Hobbs has written three times over in his de
Cive, p. 161.
de Corpore Politico, and his Leviathan ought rather to be esteemed seeds of
Sedition, than Elements of Government and Society; and I am sure among those
Principles one is, that Government is founded in compact -- The people, p. 167.
if they believed, that a company of Delinquents joining together to defend
themselves by Arms do not at all unjustly, but may lawfully repel lawful force
by force, they would soon be stirred up, and suffer none for whom they have
respect, to be brought to justice.

SECT. XXVII.
Thus Doctor Hooper. Sermon. at Whitehal on Math. 22.21. p. 11.
Is he not the Vicegerent of God? Wherever therefore his Sovereign the Almighty
has not prevented him by any precedent Commands, there he has right and
liberty to put forth his, and in those cases to expect an active cheerful
Obedience;
and that we should in no case, and for no reason resist. -- Be this Civil
Government heretic, or Infidel, we are not discharged of our Allegiance, we
are obliged by the same divine Authority to preserve our Religion under it, and
to continue to it our subjection, p. 18, 19.
-- the Church, of which we have the blessing to be Members, has restored to
Princes, and those that are in Authority the full exercise of their lawful
Power, their Countries and their people; no place priviledg'd, nor person
exempted; no foreign Potentate sharing the Authority, nor dividing their
Revenue,
their Subjects bound in an Allegiance not to be withdrawn on any pretense of
Schism, or Heresy, in the power of no Consistory to discharge. And here we see
no politic reserve, that our Church has not provided for it self any other
refuge but in the providence of God, and the piety of the Civil Power. What was
not her own, she has given out of her hands; where she cannot communicate, yet
there she will obey, and where she cannot obey, she is ready to endure,
expecting her reward in Heaven;
not ignorant how much she suffers now from the contradiction of disloyal Men
for the truth of this Doctrine, and how much by its meekness she stands exposed
to future persecution; yet she professes to know too, that her Savior's
Kingdom is not of this World; that the rendezvous against a Prince is not
protected by being in a Church, turns not her Congregations into Armies, etc.
-- And though Parties seemingly opposite agree in the contrary Opinion, we take
not that for an argument of its truth, equally detesting the holy League of the
one, and the solemn League of the other.

Doctor Harscard, Dean of Windsor. Sermon. before L. Mayor, 1680. p. 13.
Contempt of Government springs from that lewd Opinion, that Dominion is
nothing else but strength and might; that Philosophy that resolves all Beings
and Actions into matter and motion, lays the foundation too of all Obedience,
not Conscience and divine Commands,
but the strongest Arm and longest Sword, only Subjects, because they are
overpowered. -- What does vilify our Governors more than this Principle. --
Whom we beautified before with the Titles of sacred and divine, but now are
made a common lump only of strength and power, and are really weaker, because
their Subjects too, like them, are only Arms, but no heart or Conscience, no
internal Principle to oblige unto Obedience. -- For if no inward persuasion or
dread of an higher power, but only fear and interest, weakness and convenience
are the bottom and reason of our Obedience; where these shall change, and the
Man has swelled his Coffers, procured firm Alliances, and mustered up his
Armies and Confederates and other instruments of Rebellion, he may then by the
Title of Power lay claim to Dominion, and set up for himself. -- What signifies
religious Oaths and solemn Vows to engage us unto Obedience, which is only an
acknowledgment of weakness, if only external power must, be their keeper? --

SECT. XXVIII.
Doctor Falkner's Christian Loyalty is written wholly upon this Subject,
proving, that Government is appointed by God, and is of divine Institution,
owned so by the Christians who were persecuted by the Civil Powers; and his
whole second Book is employed in showing the unlawfulness of Subjects taking
Arms against the King upon any account; and this he proves from the obligation
of Oaths, and solemn declarations from the Laws of Nature and humane policy,
from the prohibitions of both the Old and New Testament, especially the New;
proving that this resistance is not only sinful in private persons, but in the
whole body of the people, and in subordinate Magistrates; and I would willingly
see a sober Answer to that discourse, instead of puzling the World with little
distinctions of persecuting according to, or against Law.

And in his Treatise of Reproach and Censure, he shows how careful our blessed
Savior was to pay all due respects to any person invested with Authority; and
that St. Peter recommends a meek behavior even toward them, from whom we
receive hard measure; P. 94.
-- That such a continued respect, and practice of duty to Governors, even
under hard usage is that, which Conscience to God will oblige to perform. --
This duty of respectful submission is not founded upon the good temper of our
Superiors, but upon the Authority they receive from God, and the Precepts
which God has thereupon given to us. P. 97.
-- Obj. But if Religion be concerned and in danger, does it not behove every
good Man to be zealous, etc. Ans. 1. It is requisite he should be zealous in
the diligent exercise of a holy Life, and in frequent and devout prayer, etc.
But he must not be active as an evil doer in giving himself the liberty to
behave himself undutifully toward his Superiors. -- 2. Religion can never be
so in danger, that God can need any sinful practices of Men to uphold his
interest; his Kingdom is not so weak that it cannot stand without the
affistance of the works of the Devil. P. 99.
-- 3. Religion can never be opposed with greater enmity and malicious designs,
than it was when our Savior suffered, and yet then he reviled not, P. 100.
nor allowed St. Peter's rashness. The Jews aimed utterly to root out the
Christian Name; and there were great oppositions against Religion, even fiery
Trials, 1 Pet. 4.12. When yet Saint Peter requires Christians to follow the
Example of our Lord's patience and meekness, and to reverence Superiors. 4.
True zeal for Religion consists in pious and holy living, not in passionate and
sinful speaking. --

To Dr. Falkner I should join his Pupil Dr. Sherlock, but his Book of Non
resistance is so strong, and his arguments from Scripture so cogent, that it is
needless to make any extracts out of it; and till his Adversary writes both a
more becoming, and a more demonstrative Answer, it will be still by all wise
Men looked upon as unanswerable.

SECT. XXIX.
Among the unanswerable Treatises I also reckon Dr. Hicks, the Dean of
Worcester's Jovian; for unless scurrility, confidence, and a desertion of the
main Argument may pass for an Answer, the Reply, that is yet extant, deserves
no Rejoinder. Out of that Elaborate Commentary on the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, I shall only quote one passage, because it is a History of the
Author's Principles, and Resolution. I had rather dye a Martyr than a Rebel; P.
259:
and I resolve by God's assistance neither to turn Papist, nor Resist: but if I
cannot escape, I will suffer according to the Gospel, and the Church of
England; and I will Preach and Practice Passive Obedience, after the example of
the Prophets, and Martyrs, who suffered against Law: and in my most melancholy
prospect of things, I can comfort my self with the hopes of a reward for dying
at a Stake, which he shall never have for dying in the Field. To this purpose
also the Sermon at Bow-Church, Jan. 30. 1681/2. Together with the same Author's
Artillery Sermon: are worth the perusing.

Dr. South. I have read heretofore of some, Sermon. 2. p. 80, 81.
that having conceived an irreconcilable hatred of the Civil Magistrate,
prevailed with Men so far, that they went to resist him, even out of
Conscience, and a full persuasion, and dread upon their spirits,
that not to do it were to desert God, and consequently to incur Damnation. Now
when Men's rage is both heightened, and sanctified by Conscience, the War will
be fierce: for what is done out of Conscience, is done with the utmost
activity, and then Campanella 's Speech to the King of Spain will be found
true, Religio semper vicit, praesertim armata, which sentence deserves
seriously to be considered by all Governors, and timely understood, lest it
come to be felt. P. 212. P. 236.
We have seen Rebellion commented out of Romans xiii. He that makes his Prince
despised, and undervalued, blows a Trumpet against him in Men's Hearts, etc. See
Dr. Freeman's Ser. before the L. Mayor. 1682. p. 8. P. 242, 243.
To imagine a King without Majesty, a Supreme without Sovereignty, is a
Paradox, and direct contradiction. -- The Church of England glories in nothing
more, than that she is the truest friend to Kings, and to Kingly Government, of
any other Church in the World. -- It is the happiness of some Professions, and
Callings, that they can equally square themselves to, and thrive under all
Revolutions of Government: but the Clergy of England neither know, nor affect
that happiness, and are willing to be despised for not doing so. -- And so far
is our Church from encroaching upon the Civil Power, as some who are
back-friends to both would maliciously insinuate, that were it stripped of the
very remainder of its privileges, and made as like the Primitive Church for its
bareness, as it is already for its Purity, it could cheerfully, and what is
more, Loyally, want all such Privileges, and in the want of them pray, that the
Civil Power may flourish as much, and stand as secure from the assaults of
Fanatic Anti-Monarchical Principles, grown to such a dreadful height during
the Churches late confusions, as it stood while the Church enjoyed those
Privileges.

Dr. Sermon. on Heb x. 36. p. 2.
John Moor. Our Savior was the first, that did effectually recommend this
Passive Virtue to the World, and furnished Men with such true Arguments to bear
their Cross, as made the most afflicted state not only supportable, but to be
preferred before the happiness of this life. P. 16, 17.
-- A good Man, when he is persecuted for his Religion, neither deserts it, nor
by any unlawful means defends it. He will not renounce his Faith to escape
Persecution, and yet he dreads by resisting of Authority to promote the cause
of Religion; P. 19.
it being a blasphemy against the Divine Wisdom and Power, to suppose God can
stand in need of our sins to bring to pass his most glorious designs; and this
he says of those, who under pretense of defending their Rights, or Religion,
resist lawful Authority. -- He then, in whom this virtue of Patience dwells,
keeps a due regard to the commands laid upon him to submit himself to the
Supreme Powers, and he dares not lift up his Hand against the Lords Anointed,
nor Levy War upon the most plausible account whatsoever: nay to him it cannot
but seem a wonder, that the Doctrine of Resistance should have gone down so
glibly with any, who have read the New Testament, and are baptized into the
Christian Faith. -- All Resistance to the Supreme Authority is unlawful -- The
Popes of Rome being the first pretenders from Scripture to a right to resist
the Civil Power, P. 20, 21.
etc. -- And it is most certain, that by the same Argument, they would take off
their obligation to this plain Christian Duty, they may excuse themselves from
their obligations to all the rest. Will they plead, that the Gospel is not a
perfect Rule of Duty, and that the inspired Writers did not foresee, and
provide for all cases, etc. Upon the same ground they dispense with one Law of
Christ, they may dispense with as many as they please. P. 29.
-- If the Magistrates be Ordained of God, then it is no more lawful for an
hundred thousand Men to resist him, than for twelve; and if we are bound to
submit for Conscience sake, no increase of our numbers, or strength, can alter
the Rule of our Duty, or take off the Obligation of Conscience.
So that had the Primitive Christians had more potent Arms than Nero, or
Julian, yet no right ever could have accured to them thereby to oppose Gods
Ordinance, or to proceed against their Conscience. P. 30.
-- The Popes of Rome were the first pretenders from Scripture to a right not
only of Resisting, etc. but of Deposing Kings. Knox, Milton, Rutherford, etc.
P. 40.
could not have spit ranker venom at Kings, or spoke with greater contempt of
their Authority, than Hildebrand.

And in another place thus, P. 15.
It always holds true with respect to the Sovereign Power in any Country, what
was said by Judge Creshald (Legacy p. 5.) both like a pious Christian, and an
able Lawyer, concerning the Royal Authority of our Nation: that the Jura
Regalia of our Kings are holden of Heaven, and cannot for any Cause Escheat to
their Subjects; nor they for any Cause make any positive or actual forcible
resistance against them: but that we ought to yield to them Passive Obedience,
by suffering the punishment, albeit their commands should be against the Divine
Law, and that in such Case Arma nostra sunt preces nostrae, nec possumus nec
debemus aliter resistere, for who can lift up his hand against the Lords
Anointed and be guiltless?

And thus the Author of Jeremiah in Baca, or a Fast-days Work; Published for
the Devout Members of the Church of England, as a Preservative for all them
against Perjury and Rebellion speaks. Rebellious Perjuries, page 40, 41, 42,
43, 44.

A further branch of Perjury there is, which in the late Rebellious days
involved a great part of the three Nations, over and over. Some Popular wicked
Men, Sons of Belial, contrary to the Oath of the Lord upon them, rose up
against the Lords Anointed, drew in (against their Allegiance also) many, and
many thousands of the People into that Rebellion and bloody War; and when
through thy just judgment upon the three Kingdoms for former sins, those
Perjured Rebellious Men had very far prevailed, and imbrued their Hands not
only in the common blood of their fellow Subjects, but also in the sacred blood
of their Sovereign, and driven all the Royal Family into Foreign parts; the
daily practice was making and taking new Oaths, and imposing them upon the
People, and then both breaking them themselves, and compelling others to break
them. -- O God!
how many Rebellious Oaths were there framed contrary to that one rightful Oath
of Allegiance, every of which later Oaths were direct and solemn Perjury.

The dreadful effects of that Rebellion, and those Perjuries we now see: and we
have all reason to fear the guilt of them will not cease operating to further
vengeance upon the Nations, for that there are still left therein Men of like
wicked Principles.

But O God! when thou make inquisition for blood, shut not up the innocent
with the guilty. The Established Church thou know all along abhorred, and
withstood unanimously as one Man, those false, Treasonable and bloody
practices, and chose the utmost sufferings rather than join therein, or in the
least comply therewith.

Notwithstanding we acknowledge the multitude of the Offenders was so great,
that both the Rebellion, and the Perjuries may affect the whole Body of the
Nation. For if thou will by no means hold them guiltless, who take thy name in
vain, what may we all expect?

SECT. XXX.
Mr. Wake, Sermon. at Paris, Jan. 30. 1684/5. p. 3.
Speaking of the Murder of Charles the Marty^; Had an Infidel Nation risen up
against him, or the chance of War cut him off, -- we should soon have turned
our sorrow into joy. -- But that we, who were obliged by all the ties of God
and Men to obey him, should destroy that life, for which we ought not to have
refused any hazard of our own: that we, who were certainly his Subjects, and
pretend to be Christians too, should violate all the Rights of Majesty, trample
under feet all the Laws of the Gospel, -- this raises those Clouds, that
obscure so bright a Day. P. 10.
-- Long had the Trumpet been blown to War, and to Rebellion, the Church become
Militant, and our Pulpits instead of setting forth the Gospel of Peace, spoke
nothing but Wars, and Seditions, and Tumults to the People. Is there any one
among us, that by the malignity of his Nature, the desperateness of his
Fortunes, or a misguided Zeal, has been actually concerned in this guilt? P.
17, 18.
-- Is there any one now present, who though unconcerned in that black
Parricide, is yet involved in any of those Principles that lead to it,
has assisted, approved, or encouraged those new Rebels, the Progeny of the
same Old Cause, that have again so lately endeavored to Crown the Son with the
like Glory their Ancestors did the Father, -- let me beseech them, either to
sanctify the Fast with us, or not to join in the Celebration. -- A Crime, Page
22.
which I should doubt, had exceeded the Power of any Repentance to expiate, had
not the Apostles left us an Example, by exhorting the Jews to labor for a
Forgiveness, Page 29.
even of their crucifying the Lord of Glory. -- Was there ever Villainy like
this, that a Christian Kingdom should break through all those Bonds of Duty and
Obedience, which the more righteous Heathens have reverenced as sacred and
inviolable;
that so many Oaths and Vows repeated with that frequency, taken with that
solemnity, should all be insufficient to preserve our Fidelity; that Religion
and Reformation, two things, than which none can be more excellent in
themselves, nor are any more easily, and more dangerously abused, should be
able to cheat us into wickedness, which the barbarous Scythians never heard of.

Wake's Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England
against the Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, etc. Licensed by C. Alston. The
Peace and Liberty which we enjoy, Page 88. The Close.
we do not ascribe to their (i. e. the Papists) Civility: it is God's
Providence and our Sovereign's Bounty, whom the Church of England has ever so
Loyally served: whose Rights she asserted in the worst of times, When, to use
our Author's own words, Perjury and Faction for this very cause, loaded her
with all the Injuries Hell it self could invent. But we gloried to suffer for
our Duty to him then,
and shall not fail, should there ever be occasion to do it again. And we have
this Testimony from our King, which no time nor malice shall be able to
obliterate: That the Church of England is by Principle a Friend to Monarchy;
and I think cannot be charged to have ever been defective in any thing that
might serve to strengthen and support it.

And in the Tract.

It is said in the Gospel, Page 72.
that Michael the Archangel disputing with the Devil, would not bring any
railing Accusation against him, but was content to say to him only, The Lord
rebuke thee. Because he looked upon God, as him to whom Judgment and Vengeance
belonged, and yet we see that the Sons of Adam are bold and desperate enough,
not only to condemn, but to destroy Dignities, which they ought to reverence,
and to ruin them together with whole States, as their fancy leads them.

Agreeable to what Dr. Dr. Beveridge's Sermon concerning the Excellency and
Usefulness of the Common Prayer. Nov. 27. 1681. Page 34. l
Beveridge has upon the like occasion.

What our grand Adversary had done before by the Papists, he afterward brought
about again by other means in the Reign of King Charles the First. For by what
kind of Spirit the Common Prayer was then cast out, you all know, and some of
you found by woeful experience. All that I shall say of it is only this, That
the same Spirit that then stirred up them so violently against the Common
Prayer, stirred them up at the same time to rebel against their King --
contrary to all Law and Justice. -- And whether that was the Spirit of Christ
or Antichrist, God or the Devil, judge you.

Dr. Ironside. Sermon. at Court, Nov. 23. on 1 Pet. 4.15. -- p. 1, 6. P. 8, 9.
S. Peter gives this Injunction as an Apostle, not as a Statesman. -- Of all
Principles, Obedience to Magistrates (the great Eyesore) and the Execution of
Justice (the Support of the World) will be always necessary to be taught, and
pressed upon the Conscience: -- We are forbidden all kind of Revenge, when
others injure us in our Names, Goods or Persons. This was the Doctrine of our
Savior, and this was the Practice of our Savior. -- Revenge is God's, and he
executes it. 1. Immediately by himself, and that sometime; in this World,
always in the next. 2. Mediately by the Power deputed to Men, and the
Magistrates are called Gods in that respect. page 21.
-- Suffer we must for Truth, not defend, or propagate it by violence, and in
this agree the Harmony of Confessions in all Reformed Churches, whatsoever some
turbulent Spirits of Scotland have written to the contrary. page 27.
-- Inferiors have no Right to meddle with Superiors at all, unless it be to
defend, and obey; nothing else, no not so much as to counsel, unless called to
it, much less to reprove sawcily, page 32.
or contumeliously to expose, etc. -- It is very observable, how particular the
Apostles are in laying out the respective Duties of Inferiors (Obedience in
this World is the great thing) the Sins of Superiors are remitted to the other
World,
and then great Men shall be greatly tormented. p. 35, 36, 37, 38.
-- The Acts of the Apostles, and the Life and Death of Christ are perfect
submission to the Imperial Laws. -- It is therefore a true and wise saying,
Sedition is worse than Murder: and it is pity the Saying is found so often in
the Alcoran, and so seldom to be met with in the Practice of Christians. --
There be three sins in the New Testament, which are threatened with signal
Judgments in this Life. 1. The first is doing evil that good may come thereof,
such men's damnation, says the Apostle, is just. 2. Profaning the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper. 3. Profaning the Supreme Powers, they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation. That is, these three sins make men liable, not
only to the Divine Wrath hereafter (for so all sins without repentance expose
to damnation) but usually they are also attended with signal Judgments in this
life -- and so let it be upon all the Troublers of the Earth, that our Kings
may be at rest, and that we may lead a quiet life in all Godliness and Honesty.

SECT. XXXI.
Dr. Isaac Barrow: Vol. 1. Sermon. 10. p. 135.
Are Princes bad, or do they misdemean themselves in their Administration of
Government, or Justice? We may not by any violent or rough way attempt to
reclaim them, for they are not accountable to us, or liable to our Correction.
-- Do they oppress us, or abuse us; do they treat us harshly, or cruelly
persecute us? We must not kick against them, nor strive to right our selves by
resistance -- We must not so much as rail, or inveigh against them, we must not
be bold, or free in taxing their Actions, we must forbear even complaining and
murmuring against them,
we must not so much as curse them in our thoughts. To do these things is flat
impiety against God, and an invasion of his Authority, who is the King of
Kings, and has reserved to himself the prerogative of judging, of rebuking, of
punishing Kings, when he finds Cause. These were the Misdemeanors of those in
the late times -- discovering therein great profaneness of mind, and distrust
of God's Providence; as if God being implored by Prayer could not, or would
not, had it been needful, without such irregular Courses have redressed those
Evils in Church or State, which they pretended to feel, or fear. Page 136.
-- In the primitive times prayers and tears were the only Arms of the Church,
whereby they long defended it from ruin, and at last advanced it to a most
glorious prosperity.

So Dr. Cave: Primitive Christian. part. 3. chapter 4. p. 321.
There is scarce any particular instance, wherein the primitive Christianity
did more triumph in the World, than in their exemplary Obedience to the Powers
and Magistrates under which they lived, honoring their persons, revering their
power, paying their Tribute, obeying their Laws, wherein they were not
evidently contrary to the Laws of Christ; and when they were, submitting to the
most cruel Penalties they laid upon them with the greatest calmness and
serenity of Soul, Page 329, 330.
etc. -- They were not patient for want of Power, and because they knew not how
to help it -- Julian's Army, which was almost wholly made up of Christians,
withstood him only with prayers and tears, accounting this (says S. Greg.
Naz.) to be the only Remedy against Persecution. Page 351.
I verily believe, that had the Primitive Christians been no better Subjects
than their Emperors were Princes, had they practiced on them those bloody
Artifices, which have been common among those that call themselves the only
Catholics, that barbarous Dealing would have been a greater Curb to the
flourishing of the Gospel,
than all the ten Persecutions; for how could an impartial Heathen ever have
believed their Doctrine to have been of God, had their Actions been so contrary
to all the Precepts of Natural Divinity.

And in this matter does the Learned Dr. Dr. Dove's Sermon. before the Sons of
the Clergy. 1687.
Dove vindicate the Integrity of our Church in a few, but as significant Words
as any of his Brethren, when speaking of some who suffered much for their
Constancy to the Faith, and their Fidelity to the Crown, he terms them, Two
inseparable Notes of a genuine Son of the Church of England.

Dr. Puller: Moderat. of the Chapter of Engl. chapter 12. 5.
Other Sects deny the King's Supremacy in Matters Ecclesiastical, either
claiming a Power of Jurisdiction over him, or pleading a Privilege of Exemption
from under him, where as the Clergy of the Church of England, like good
Christians, and good Subjects, neither pretend to any Jurisdiction over the
Kings of England, nor withdraw their Subjection from them. Sect. 6, 7.
And then he vindicates that Expression of Can. 1. of the Synod 1640. That the
Order of Kings is most high and sacred. -- The Moderation of our Church does
not favor any Doctrines, or Practices which are prejudicial to the safety of
human Society in general -- It does no where pretend to remit the Divine Laws,
or dispense with Oaths, or transfer the Rights of Kingdoms, etc. --
Contrariwise it requires of all of its Communion to give the King such Security
of their Allegiance and Fealty, as may be a sufficient Security to his
Government. -- Chap. 17.
The Romanists and Separatists extremely agree in their Principles against the
Civil Magistrate, according to that of Bishop Lany, Bishop Lany's Sermon. on 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
The Papists and Presbyterians hunt in Couples against the King's Power and
Supremacy. It is admirable to see how the Commonwealths Men in the times of the
late Rebellion received their Principles from the ancient and modern Writers of
the Jesuits, and other Papists, and still agree with them in most of the
Republican Doctrines, and Tendencies of them to the like Practices. -- Both
deny the Supremacy of the King; one attributes it to the Pope originally, the
other to the People; and the same Arguments, which the Pope uses for his
Supremacy over Kings, the Disciplinarians use for establishing their
Sovereignty. The Pretense of the King's Authority against his Person was
hatched under the Roman Territories, and was made use of in the Holy League of
France. The Rules for making a King to be a Tyrant, and then ceasing to be a
King; that it may be lawful to attempt any thing against his Person and Life,
are so much the same,. 20.
that they cannot be more. -- I need not here relate, how many Doctrines of the
Romanists tend to dissolve the very Bonds of relative Duty one toward another,
-- absolving People from their Oaths and Allegiance, No Faith to be kept with
Heretics, etc. How do many Principles of our Enthusiasts and Separatists tend
to destroy the Relations of King and Subject, Bishop and People, etc.

SECT. XXXII.
Dr. Scott. Sermon. July 26. 1685. p. 2. P. 13, 14.
Absalom accomplished his design, partly by declaiming against the
Maleadministrations of his Father's Government, partly by promising them a
thorough Reformation, if ever he arrived to be a Judge in Israel. -- Every Man
knows, or might easily know, if he were not extremely wanting to himself, that
his King is the Vicegerent of his God, and that being so, he is indispensibly
obliged by all the ties of Reason and Religion to submit to his Will, and
reverence his Person, and bow to his Authority, and that he cannot lift up his
hand against him without fighting against God himself; the Truth of which is as
obvious to our natural Reason, and as plainly asserted in holy Scripture, as of
any Proposition in Religion:
so that I dare boldly affirm, a Man may find as many Pretexts for any Vice
whatsoever, even for Drunkenness, Whoredom, or Perjury, as ever were made for
Rebellion; and were I to set up for a public Patron of Wickedness, I hardly
know a Villainy in nature so black and monstrous, which I could not more
plausibly recommend to Men's Reason and Consciences, than this of Resistance
against lawful Authority; which is such a complication of Villainies, such a
loathsome mixture of hellish Ingredients, as is enough to nauseate any
Conscience but a Devil's. And tho Conscience and Religion are the Colors it
usually marches under, yet is the imposture of this Pretense so fulsome and
barefaced, that no Man in his Wits can be innocently abused by it; for
certainly that Man must have a great mind to rebel, his Will must have a strong
Bias of Pride, or Discontent, Faction, or Ambition in it, that in despite of
all the evidence from Reason and Scripture to the contrary, can persuade
himself that it is lawful for him, and much less, P. 15, 16.
that it is his duty, to lift up his hand against his Sovereign. And therefore
for Men to appeal to God in a Cause so apparently wicked, is not submissively
to refer themselves to him, but openly to mock and affront him, and to make a
vexatious Appeal to God's Judgment again in a Case which he has so often and
so expressly judged already, is a common Barretry; it is not to consult, but to
tempt him, and under pretense of submitting to his determinations, openly to
defy his Authority; in effect, it is to appeal from his Will to his
Providence, and to bespeak him to declare himself against his own Declarations.
-- In the case of Rebellion there is not only a peremptory Disobedience to
those Laws of God which require our dutiful Submission to our lawful Superiors,
but also a direct Renuntiation of the divine Authority it self; for all
Sovereign Power is immediately founded in the Dominion of God, who being the
supreme Lord of the World, no person can have right to govern in his Kingdom
under him, but by Commission from him. Kings therefore are only accountable to
him; P. 17.18.
and if so, then for any of their Subjects to presume to call them to account
by a public formed resistance, is to arraign God's own Authority, and invade
his peculiar; it is to thrust him out of his Throne, and set themselves down in
it; and then to summon his Authority before them, and require it to submit its
awful Head to their imperious doom and sentence. While therefore we behave our
selves factiously and rebelliously toward those whom God has set over us, we
live as Outlaws in the Kingdom of God, without any respect to that visible
Authority by which he governs the World: and if this be so, then for Subjects
to rebel against their Prince, is neither better nor worse than to appeal to
God against his own Authority, and to put this impious Case to him, Whether it
be he or they that have the Right of Governing the World.

I profess, Id. Sermon. on Prove. xxiv. 21. Ep. ded. P. 17, 19, 20, etc.
with the same sincerity as I would confess my Soul to God, that my design in
this Discourse was only to promote the Peace and Happiness of Men. -- These are
the ways of knowing Men when they are given to change: 1. When Men who have
actually changed the Government already, begin to readvance their old Methods
and Principles, it is a certain sign they are given to change. 2. When Men make
that a pretense for public Clamor and Bustle, which themselves have little or
no claim to, or regard for, that is, Religion; it is a certain sign they are
given to change. 3. When Men pretend Religion or public Reformation, but
pursue it by sinful and indirect means, it is a certain sign, etc. Now Religion
is as great an Enemy to Lying and Rebellion, as it is to Popery. 4. When under
pretext of reforming the Government,
Men reproach and vilify the Persons of their Governors. 5. When Men shift
their Principles with their Interests, and to serve a turn can comply at one
time with that which they condemn at another. Tho in following our Principles
we may sometimes endanger our worldly Interest, and fall under the disgrace of
a Rabble and the Persecutions of a prevailing Faction, yet our very Enemies
will be forced to revere and honor us, to acknowledge that we are constant, and
brave, and honest, and resigned to our own Principles. 6. and lastly, When Men,
who in the ordinary course of their Conversation are proud and quarrelsome, and
impatient of Contradiction, set up Pretenses of Religion against the
Government. Id. Sermon. on Romans xiii. 1. p. 25, 26.
Consider, that upon our faithful Subjection to our Prince, the safety of our
Religion depends; for there is nothing in the World can more endanger our
Religion, than our making it a pretense for Rebellion; for hereby we inevitably
expose it to the hatred of Princes, and do what lies in us to arm their Power
against it. Id. Artillery Sermon. p. 31.
If you be courageous from a Principle of Righteousness, you will honor the
King as well as fear God, and obey his Ordinances for God's sake; you will
never conduct a rebellious design under the sacred Banner of Religion, nor
pretend Loyalty to God to cover your Disloyalty to his Vicegerent; you will
never press the Scriptures to fight against the King, Page 32.
nor arm his political against his personal Capacity, nor assume his Authority
to cut off his Head; nor on the other hand will you ever allow him to be
unking'd by the sentence of a domineering Prelate, etc. In a word, you will
never confront those loyal Admonitions of S. Peter and S. Paul, with the
treasonous Canons of the Councils of the Ungodly, nor levy Arms against your
Prince upon that counterfeit Commission of his being pronounced a Heretic by a
Congregation of Impostors -- who would fain fetch Pretenses for their Treasons
and Rebellions from the most loyal and peaceable Religion that ever was.

The ADDRESS of the University of Cambridge, presented by Dr. Gower then
Vicechancellor, Sept. 18. 1681. to the King at Newmarket.
Sacred SIR,
WE your Majesty's most faithful and obedient Subjects of the University of
Cambridge, have long, with the greatest and sincerest joy, beheld what we hope
is in some measure the effect of our own Prayers, the generous Emulation of our
Fellow Subjects, contending who should first and best express their Duty and
Gratitude to their Sovereign; at this time especially, when the seditious
Endeavors of unreasonable Men have made it necessary to assert the ancient
Loyalty of the English Nation, and make the World sensible that we do not
degenerate from those prime Glories of our Ancestors, Love and Allegiance to
our Prince.

That we were not seen in those loyal Crowds, but chose rather to stand by and
applaud their honest and religious Zeal, we humbly presume will not be imputed
to the want of it in our selves, either by your Majesty or your People: for,
Sir, it is (at present) the great honor of this your University, not only to be
steadfast and constant in our Duty, but to be eminently so, and to suffer for
it, as much as the Calumnies and Reproaches of factious and malicious Men can
inflict upon us: And that they have been hitherto able to do no more than vent
the venom of their Tongues; that they have not proceeded to Plunder and
Sequestration, to violate our Chapels, rifle our Libraries, and empty our
Colleges, as once they did, next to the overruling Providence of Almighty God,
is only due to the Royal Care and Prudence of your most sacred Majesty, who
gave so seasonable a check to the arbitrary and insolent Undertakings.

But no earthly Power, we hope, no Menaces or Misery, shall ever be able to
make us renounce or forget our Duty. We will still believe and maintain, That
our Kings derive not their Titles from the People, but from God; that to him
only they are accountable; that it belongs not to Subjects, either to create or
censure, but to honor and obey their Sovereign, who comes to be so by a
fundamental hereditary Right of Succession, which no Religion, no Law, no Fault
or Forfeiture can alter or diminish.

Nor will we ever abate of our well-instructed Zeal for our most holy Religion,
as it is professed and established by Law in the Church of England; that Church
which has so long stood, and still is the envy and terror of her Adversaries,
as well as the beauty and strength of the Reformation.

It is thus, Dread Sir, that we have learned our own, and thus we teach others
their Duty to God and the King: in the conscientious discharge of both which we
have been so long protected and encouraged by your Majesty's most just and
gracious Government, that we neither need nor desire any other Declaration than
that Experience, for our assurance and security for the future.

In all which Grace and Goodness, Great Sir, we have nothing to return; we
bring no Names and Seals, no Lives and Fortunes, well capable of your Majesty's
Service, or at all worthy of your Acceptance; nothing but Hearts and Prayers,
Vows of a zealous and lasting Loyalty; Our Selves and Studies, all that we can
or ever shall be able to perform, which we here most sincerely promise and most
humbly tender at your Majesty's feet, a mean and worthless Present; but such a
one as we hope will not be disdained by the most gracious and indulgent Prince
that Heaven ever bestowed upon a People.

SECT. XXXIII.
Dr. Grove. Short def. of the Church and Clerg. of Engl. p. 81. p. 84.
This is the main occasion for which so many of the Conformists are clamor'd
against; they are presently branded for meddling with matters of State, if they
do but teach their Hearers to be obedient to Magistrates, and are not furnished
with Jesuitical Distinctions to show in what Cases it may be lawful to take up
Arms against the King. -- They are not enamored with every fine Project that
may be set on foot, neither do they admire those for the wisest of all that
think themselves excellent at new modelling of States. -- They suppose the
King's Title may be good enough, tho they do not know exactly how many Acres of
Land may be held sufficient to confer a Right to the Sovereign Power. They
understand very well, that there will be some casual Miscarriages in the
administration of all humane Affairs, but they esteem it more becoming wise and
good Christians to bear with those we are acquainted with, than to hazard the
infinite mischiefs and inconveniences of a change, which it is impossible
either to foresee or prevent: and therefore among the great Uncertainties and
Vicissitudes of these earthly Concerns, they are verily persuaded, that our
common Safety will be best preserved by a pious dependence upon the divine
Providence, which they are not ashamed to own, tho they should be laughed at
for it by a few conceited scoffing Politicians.

Mr. Hesketh. Sermon. on Jan. 30. bef. Lord Mayor 167^/^. p. 10. Cons. also his
Sermon. on 1 Pet. 2.15. p. 10, 11, etc. An. 1684. P. 13, 14.
Subjects are as equally obliged to assist their Kings in all straights and
dangers, as not to resist, or rise up against them to bring them into the same,
and their failure in the first is as criminal as their doing the second, and
only differs from it as the Cause from the Effect; for therefore some Men are
encouraged to attempt the latter, because others are negligent and failing in
the former. -- Some Men are apt to claim the honor of Loyalty, if they do not
actually resist their King, as others, that venture their Lives and Fortunes to
assist and vindicate them against those that do resist them. -- But how
pernicious this is to the Safety of Kings, and how contrary to the true notion
of Loyalty, will soon be made appear. -- All Nations have ever held the Persons
of Kings to be sacred -- and he that considers those Oaths, that Subjects bind
themselves in to Princes, will clearly see, that thereby they are obliged, not
only not to do violence to them themselves, but to do all that in them lies,
that others also may not do it. -- And when Duty is tied on men by Oaths, there
to fail in it is not only common guilt, P. 17.
but died with a Perjury. -- Tho much may be said for David's being actually in
Arms against Saul, considering some Circumstances, yet considering the whole
matter, we may safely pronounce of it, that it was certainly unjustifiable; for
there were safer ways of avoiding the Displeasure and Anger of Saul, than by
raisng an Army of Outlaws and vicious Persons, and appearing in actual
Rebellion against him. -- But if none of this were true, yet the least Evil
that can be said, is, that he yielded not that Assistance unto Saul which he
might have done, and by which possibly he might have averted Readiness sad Fate,
etc. P. 22.
I think it neither difficult nor injurious -- to show the Doctrines of the
late Usurpers to be but the Transcripts of what the later Jews do fabulously
report of the Power of their Sanhedrim over Kings. P. 22.

P. 35.37.
-- The Parricide of Charles I. was committed by Men who must first offer
Violence to their own Consciences, chase all remains of Justice and Compassion
out of their own Breasts, before they could do this Murder, and cease wholly
to be Men, that they might commence Devils: for truly I do not know how they
can expect a better Name, whom no ties of Laws, no Bands of Conscience, no
Obligations of Oaths can hold. -- Were our Religion chargeable with this Fact,
there needed no other thing to be pleaded against it; this alone could bar all
its pretenses of being a Christian for ever: for it is most certain, the
Religion of the Blessed Jesus can be chargeable with no such thing; nay it is
most obvious, that it takes all possible care to prevent them, that it secures
Subjection and cheerful Obedience to Kings by the strongest ties possible, and
makes it impossible for a true Christian to become Rebel upon any pretense
whatsoever. Whatever Religion does contrary to this, P. 37, 38.
is by that only Argument detected to be perfectly Antichristian. -- I could
easily make manifest how very unsafe all of them make the condition of things,
and upon what weak and slippery grounds they found Subjection to them. It is
the honor of the Church of England, that her Doctrines in this case are truly
Christian and Primitive. -- And it is certain when she fails to be so ( i. e.
loyal) she ceases to be, degenerates from her self, and does justly forfeit
their ( i. e. Prince's) Protection.

Dr. Freeman. Sermon before L. Mayor, 1682. on Psalm 34.12, 13, 14. P. 8.
He that makes his Prince to be undervalued and despised, raises a Rebellion
against him in men's breasts, beats him out of his Subjects hearts, and fights
him out of their Affections; and having once dispossessed him of this his
strongest Hold, 'twill be no hard matter to strip him of all his other
Garrisons; neither his Person nor his Government can hope to be long in safety,
when once they have wounded his Honor, and put his Reputation to flight; but
in the Name of God! What do people of this temper propose to themselves? Do
they think that their Governors are not Men of passion and infirmities as well
as others? Do they not know, that the Employments they are engaged in are so
infinitely various and difficult, that they are scarce capable to be managed
with that evenness and exactness, as may exclude all inconveniences? And is it
not certain, that how ill soever the administration of public Affairs may at
any time be under lawful Governors, it is yet far more tolerable, than even the
reformation of an usurping Populacy?

Dr. Littleton's Sermon at a Solemn meeting of the Natives of the City and
County of Worcester. p. 17.
Blessed Jesu! -- This Evangelium Armatum, this Sanguinary Doctrine, was no
Gospel of thy making, no Doctrine of thy teaching. Thy Doctrine was sealed with
no blood but that of thy own, who wast the teacher of it, and that of thy
Apostles and Martyrs, who were the propagators of it; and though thou said
thou came not to send peace, but a Sword; yet that Sword was not designed to
fight with, but to suffer by; it was a Sword of a passive, not of an active
persecution as to thy Disciples, by which they were to fall victims themselves,
and not to sacrifice the lives of others. And p. 18. May God ever preserve his
gracious Majesty and Us the sinful People of this Land from such villainous
Attempts of his and our Enemies -- I am heartily sorry, that any who delight to
wear the name of Protestants -- should give a just occasion for such a Charge.

D. Morris, Chaplain to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury in his
Sermon on the 30. of Jan. 1682.
The English Nation had been long held in singular Reputation; P. 24.
for good Natured and Loyal Courage, and not only the neighboring Nations,
but the more remote parts of the Earth have been witnesses of their Dutiful
Affection to their Kings. -- And p. 30. speaking of the Authors of that days
wickedness, says, Doubtless we have great reason to own the kindness of their
Separation. They went out from Us, and would not be of Us; because our Doctrine
was too Loyal and Passive for Men of so fiery Temper; and the greatest Tyranny
they found in our Religion, was the Restraint that it laid on the Conscience of
Men from resisting against the Higher Powers, etc. Page 33. -- He who has no
due Conscience of his Duty to his Prince, and obeys not for Gods sake, but his
own, is a Servant but during his own pleasure or Advantage. -- Now let us learn
the Necessity of joining Religion to Loyalty, to Fear God and the King
together. It is the same Power that is to be Reverenced in both, they cannot be
separated, but to the manifest disadvantage of all humane Authority. -- Learn
to detect all the plausible beginnings and Witchcrafts of Rebellion, and
confirm our selves with steadfast Resolutions of perpetual Obedience to our
Sovereign.

Dr. Lake's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, etc. Jan. 30. 1684.
Tells us, It was a usual saying among the Rabbis, that no one can judge the
King but he who is over all, God blessed for ever; and p. 22. -- The Reformed
Religion of our Church, gives no Rules, prefers no Examples, but what are
obedient and Loyal ones. If any will convince our Church as accessory to any
others, let them impeach our authentic Constitutions, her Doctrine, Worship or
Discipline. Her Doctrine is contained in the 39 Articles, and Book of Homilies,
which are of Age, and can speak for themselves. p. 22. -- What our Articles do
more concisely speak, the Homilies do more fully teach; -- With an exact
agreement to this Doctrine, is her Liturgy composed. p. 23. -- Nor has the
practice of the Children of this Church, ever run Counter to those excellent
Rules. -- And speaking concerning the villainy of that day, He adds, Shall we
Curse, shall we detest the Men who acted or encouraged this Murder? No, p. 24.
-- But we will execrate those damnable Positions which gave occasion to it;
those Positions which fix the Government in the people, and transfer to them a
power to Curb, to Correct, to depose their Princes. You bloody, you
Antichristian, you Hellish Doctrines, let there be no more Dew nor Rain upon
you! let them not be diffused, nor propagate any farther, but wither and die.
p. 29. -- What remains, but that we ever detest and accurse their villainous
suggestions, beware of the Witchcraft of Rebellion, and not suffer our selves
to be again charmed and tricked out of our Loyalty.

Mr. Lynford. Sermon 1679. bef. L. Mayor on 2 Chr. 20.17. p. 12, 13. etc.
Our great mistake is, that we dote too much upon these present Enjoyments, and
are too fond of the things of this World, by which means it comes to pass that
we stretch the Principle of preservation too far, and are often apt to
conclude, that whatsoever seems fit and proper to work our present security,
this we may lawfully and with a safe Conscience do. Now although our present
danger may seem great enough, although Life, Fortune, Religion, all should appear
to be at stake, and we can imagine within our selves, that if such and such
courses were made use of, we might escape. Yet that we ought nevertheless to
stand still and make use of no means but such as are honest and lawful, I shall
endeavor to evince from these following Considerations. First, Consider, that
by doing any unlawful action we deprive our selves of God's care and
protection, etc. 2. Nothing can bring a greater scandal upon the Religion we
profess, than for us to do any thing which is unlawful, although it be for our
own preservation. All Sects and Parties do in all their undertakings pretend
Piety, etc. -- But our Savior has given us a Caution not to judge of Men by
their pretenses, but by their actions etc. -- Wheresoever therefore we observe
Men to be covetous, and full of ambition, to allow Superstition and Idolatry,
to be Factors for Schism and Rebellion, etc. Let them talk as much as they
please of the Glory of God, by their Fruits we know them, they are ravenous
Wolves in Sheeps clothing, etc. -- We see how the Papists have misrepresented
all our Actions, -- And therefore nothing could be a greater gratification to
them at this time, than to see us act any thing, which is either contrary to
that duty which we owe to God, or that Allegiance which is due to our
Soyereign: what pleasure would they reap from an Insurrection, Page 17.
or popular Tumults, etc. -- In vain do we call our selves Protestants, if we
live otherwise than becomes true Christians, neither shall we be ever able to
excuse our selves either to God or Man, if to keep out Popery we are not afraid
wilfully to commit any sin, or wickedness: such a way of proceeding, as it
would on the one Hand confirm the Proselytes of Popery, and hinder them from
renouncing their gross absurdities, so would it on the other Hand harden the
Atheist in his loose, and debaucht Principles, who with more boldneses than
formerly would assert, that Religion was a trick of State, since the most
Zealous Professors of it took so little care to observe its Precepts, and that
Heaven, and the pleasures of another World were only Fable and Romance, since
they who talked so much of them (whether Papists or Protestants) had
nevertheless such a tender regard to the comforts of this life, and so kind a
respect to their present Estates, and Fortunes, that for the preservation of
these later, they did not scruple venturing the forfeiture of the former. -- If
therefore we have any kindness for that Religion we profess, if we would not
make the name of Protestants as despicable as that of Papists, etc. Let us keep
within those bounds of Duty which are set us, and although our condition may
appear desperate,
let us resolve not to uphold it by any other means than what are allowed by
God himself: his glory will be sooner advanced, and true Religion better
propagated by suffering wrong, than doing wickedly. And therefore it was the
constant practice of the Primitive Christians to submit to the most cruel
Tortures, rather than by any unwarrantable action strive to avoid them: neither
were there any more severely censured among them, than such who at any time for
fear of Persecution warpt from their Duty, by tamely complying with any
Heathenish Custom. Nothing being more scandalous, than for Religious Professors
to be guilty of such practices, as are most manifestly repugnant to their own
Principles. 3. Consider, that to do evil, though for our own preservation,
instead of procuring our peace, and settlement, would be most likely to
unsettle, and ruin us; for having once broken down the fences of Duty, which
are placed about us, who can tell where we shall stop or abide? Having allowed
our selves the liberty of doing one sinful action, we may easily be prompted on
to commit a thousand; for the same pretenses will justify all sins alike, and
if for the sake of Religion a Tumult may lawfully be raised, a Rebellion also
may be promoted, etc.

SECT. XXXIV.
Mr. Long is so well known for his Zeal in this good Cause, to all that have
seen his answer to Johnson and Hunt, his no Protestant, but a Dissenters Plot,
and other such Treatises, that it is wondered, that of late he should own
himself the Author of the Solution of the Popular Objections, etc. In which he
musters up for unanswerable Arguments the very same Objections of Julian, ( of
Persecuting according to, and against Law, etc.) which himself had formerly so
luckily both answered, and exploded. But he tells us, that St. Austin wrote his
Retractations, in which he corrected his errors: and he might have told the
World too, that Bellarmine wrote his Recognitions, in which he multiplies, and
confirms his Heterodoxies. I shall therefore briefly represent his former
Judgment, out of one of his Printed Sermons. On Sept. 9. 1683. p. 13.
Rebels should show so much of ingenuity, and serious Penitence, as the
Sorcerers did Act. xix. 19. Who burnt their Books, -- for I dare aver, that
there are more Arguments for Resisting of Lawful Princes, which they cannot but
know is threatened with damnation, Romans xiii. 2. in the Books of some, who term
themselves true Protestants, than are in all those, which are written by such
as they justly condemn for Idolatrous, and Traiterous Papists. P. 19.
What greater encouragement can be given Men pretending to Religion and
Conscience, than when their Guides,
to whom they have committed the Conduct of their Souls, shall Prophecy lies
in the name of God, and urge them to Rebellion by Scripture, and Examples. --
They are like them in the Gospel, whom no Bonds, or Chains could restrain from
practicing the mischief they had imagined. No Obligation of Laws, of
Conscience, of Fear, or Favor, no Oaths or Promises could hold them, but they
mock God himself, that they may the more unsuspectedly destroy his Vicegerent.
Page 22.
-- If the Principles allowed of in any Community of Men,
do countenance the Resisting, Deposing, and Mur hering of Princes, be it on
pretense of Heresy, or Tyranny, or for the good of the Kirk, reforming Abuses,
or redressing Grievances, though there be but a few Actors, yet all are
Criminals. When Absalom was Sacrificing at Hebron, P. 25, 26.
the Conspiracy was strengthened, says the Text. -- It seems, that Absalom had
his Levites, -- and these were they that strengthened the Rebellion. By him the
People were instructed in their great Privileges, and Power, that there is
Idolatry, and Superstition in the Church; Oppression and Tyranny in the State:
that they ought to shake off these Yoaks of Bondage, and vindicate themselves
into the glorious liberty of the Sons and Daughters of God. P. 27, 28.
One tells the People, That they are the Original of Authority.
-- That it is not against Scripture, or the practice of the Primitive
Christians, violently to resist the Higher Powers, when they Persecute them for
Religion, and when the Prince commands against the Laws of the Country; that
Success justifies a good Cause, and to pursue it is to comply with the Will of
God, and the Conduct of Providence. Under such Doctrines as these the Presses
have sweat, the Church has groaned, the Peoples souls been led Captive in
Chains of darkness, and under these this horrid Conspiracy has been hatched.
The Devil himself, when he appeared in the Mantle of Samuel never did, nor
could teach Saul more pernicious Doctrine than this. -- Philostratus says,
that the murder of Domitian was more owing to the Doctrine of Appollonius,
than the Hands of Stephanus, and Parthenius, who slew him. --

Dr. Fowler. Design of Christianity, chap. 16.
The most calm, meek, peaceable, gentle, and submissive temper recommended in
the Gospel, did mightily declare it self in the Primitive Christians, that
though they were for the most part sorely Persecuted, yet (says Tertull) there
was never any uproar, or hurlyburly among them, nor was this owing to
necessity, as is plain from Tertullian, and the History of the Thebaean Legion.
Chap. 24. p. 346.
-- It is the most strange, and unaccountable thing, for Men in defense or
favor of that way of Religion, which they take to be most truly the Christian,
to do that which is essentially, and in its own nature evil; for these things
are quite contrary to the design of Christian Religion. Page 248, 249.
-- What Villainies are there, which the Pope and his Proselytes have stuck at
committing for the propagation of their Religion? Such as exciting Subjects to
take Arms against their lawful Sovereigns, to whom they are obliged in the
Bonds of most solemn Oaths, etc. -- I would I could say that of all that are
called Christians, the Papists only are liable to this charge: but alas! It is
too manifest to be denied, or yet dissembled, that not a few of those that
profess enmity to Popery are sadly guilty, though not equally with the Papists
in this particular.

SECT. XXXV.
The Author of The Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man. I pay all Men
their dues, all Officers, Chap. 3. p. 63, 64.
and Offices in Church and State, according to St. Paul's command, Romans xiii.
-- I pay all Honor and Service to the King, as God's Vicegerent, and I cannot
endure to hear him evil spoken of. P. 66.
-- I consider my self as to all the Capacities and Relations, that I am in the
World, and endeavor to behave my self suitably to them -- Which Duties are
fully expressed in the excellent Book of the Whole Duty of Man, (and I am sure
that excellent Book plainly asserts the Doctrine of Non-resistance) -- I look
upon Government and Magistracy as one of the most sacred things in the World,
Chap. 6. p. 137, 138, 139. 140.
for it is of God's Appointment. -- Of all kinds of Government I like Monarchy,
which seems naturally to derive it self from paternal Authority. -- And if
there be any Right on Earth, surely Monarchy has Right with us; and has at
least as good a Title to all its Powers, Rights, and Privileges, as any of its
Subjects can have to their Honors, Properties, and Estates. The Monarchy of
England being always esteemed as truly an hereditary and successive a Monarchy
as any in the World, not liable to be disposed, alienated, or sold, nor
depending on any Election, Choice, or Approbation of the People. -- And
according to this method our present King enjoys the Crown, who has, as I
believe, the truest and most ancient Right to his Crowns that any King in the
known Parts of the World has. P. 178.
-- Where Government in general (in Scripture) is established, and Obedience to
Governors enjoined, it ought to be reckoned as spoken of our Governors and
Government Ecclesiastical and Civil, as well as of any other in the World. Chapter
7. p. 198.
-- Whatever discouragement the Clergy of England have found, they still preach
up and persuade Loyalty to the King, and by the Doctrine of Passive Obedience
to temporal Authority keep People from Rebellion, notwithstanding they have so
often been jeered and abused with it.

Sermon. 2. of the unlawfulness of resist. Ep. Ded.
Mr. Pain. I think it my duty, as a Minister of that Church and Religion which
has been often the Mark, but never the Author of any Treason, to publish these
Sermons. -- And that none may be so malicious as to think we calculate our
Sermons merely for the present Circumstances, as if the Pulpit were but a kind
of a Weather-glass, wherein the Doctrine of Obedience to Governors is higher or
lower to the temperature or variation of outward Affairs, I have put out a
plain Sermon without any Addition, that was preached long before the Plot, etc.
-- When the ancient Christians were persecuted, P. 7, 8, 9.
they endured unheard of cruelties from their Governors,
and this often, as they complained of in their Apologies, against Law too, --
Such as would have stirred up those, who had power to defend themselves, had
they not learnt such Principles from their Religion, as forbad it. -- we are
under the obligation of Oaths, though there have been some, who have forgot all
Oaths, and could as easily unloose them as Sampson did his Withs, and then set
themselves free from the Precepts,
and Examples of Christ and his Apostles, by this color and pretense, that the
Government, under which they lived, was of another Nature, than ours in
England, and that such is our Constitution, as makes all this impertinent, and
of very little regard here. And by the same way might they not discharge Wives,
and Children, and Servants, from those Duties the Gospel requires from each of
them, because there was a great difference between the State and condition of
those among the Jews, the Romans, and the Grecians formerly, and with us now.
-- And afterward he shows, Sermon. 2. p. 22.
That neither in the Case of Religion, nor of Legal Rights, nor in the case of
Natural Defense, and the otherwise remediless case of Mankind by the
encroachments of Princes, P. 27.
it is any way lawful to take Arms. -- And proves, that the Law of Nature, or of
Self-preservation, does not allow of resistance, etc. And closes all with these
good Prayers; God preserve Christianity from that reproach, P. 37.
and blasphemy, which these wicked Men have brought upon it. God preserve the
Protestant Religion from that advantage, which is hereby given to our Enemies
to destroy it.

J. Kettlewell 's Measures of Christian Obedience.
Book 2. c. 4. A Duty to Kings and Princes -- being God's Vicegerents here on
Earth -- is a readiness and resolved industry to maintain and support them in
their Persons and Government -- not plotting and endeavoring our selves to
give away their Lives and Kingdoms unto others, or consenting to them that do
so -- not submitting and subjecting our selves to them, but violently resisting
and opposing them, is called by S. Paul resisting of Power, or standing up
against it, Romans 13.2. And this when it is made by great numbers, and goes on
to extremities, when men are, as the Apostle there says, set in array and
posture of Defense against it,
and ready by force of Arms to wage War with it, is Rebellion.

Book 3. c. 6. The first pretense whereby men justify to their own thoughts
the indulgent Transgression of several Laws -- is because those Transgressions
wherein they allow themselves are necessary for the preservation of their
Religion and of themselves in those times of danger and persecution wherein
God's Providence has placed them.

Religion is in danger, and like to be undermined by the close and subtle Arts,
or overborn by the more open and powerful violence of strong and witty Enemies.
And this is God's Cause, and Christ our Lord and Savior's Interest. So that
whatever is done here, we think is in Service of our Maker. If we fight it is
his Battles. -- Some on one Hand that call us Heretics -- think no means
sinful whereby they can weaken and divide. And others again even of our own
selves, who justly abhor these damnable Instances of Disobedience, upon
pretense of preserving or propagating Religion, in some furious and fiery
spirited sort of Papists (for God forbid, that we should think them all to be
of this temper) do yet run into the same extravagance, which upon so great
reason they condemn in them.

For if we look into our zeal for the common Religion of Protestants, we shall
find, that we transgress many, and those most material and weighty Laws of it,
whilst we express our affection and concern to defend and preserve it.

For does not this pretense of preserving our Religion, carry us beyond all the
Bounds of Peaceableness and good Subjection?

Yea, I add further, that these same Fears for our endangered Religion
transport us into the Transgression of sundry weighty Laws, which oblige us
toward our very Enemies, who have contrived to destroy us.

Thus full of Sin and Disobedience is this sanctified pretense. It is the Cover
for every Offense,
and the common shelter for all Transgressions; for we boggle not at an^ sin so
long as it tends to preserve us in the prosperous Profession of our endangered
or oppressed Religion.

But if Men would consider calmly, and have patience to look beyond the surface
and bare outsides of things, they would soon discern the vanity of this
pretense, and how far it will be from excusing any such sinful and disobedient
Practices, as they think to justify and warrant by it.

For as for true and substantial Religion, for protection whereof they would be
thought to venture upon all these Transgressions, it stands in no need of their
help to preserve it in persecuting times, although they should use innocent and
just means, not such as are sinful and disobedient; it would live then without
their care, and whether they went about by any politic means to preserve it or
no. For Religion is not lost when Religious Men are persecuted; it does not
suffer when they do that profess it, seeing it is not one jot impaired when Men
are buffeted and imprisoned, nay, when they bleed and die for it.
Could the violence of Persecution have oppressed our Religion, it had been
stifled in the Birth. For it entered in a persecuting Age, and yet was not
overborn by the pressure of its Sufferings, but bravely overcame them. It
begun, grew up, and conquered all the World in the very Heat of Affliction and
Opposition; the more it was burdened, the more still it spread.

And indeed what should hinder Religion from thriving in evil Times? For the
same Religious Duties which are practiced with more ease in prosperous, are
exercised also, but with greater honor in an afflicted state of things.

Nay, some of its more eminent Parts and noble Instances are not capable of
being exercised at other times.

It is not Religion then, whatever Men may vainly pretend, that makes them run
into the Breach of Laws, and Contempt of Duty, lest they should suffer in the
profession of it. For God and Religion owe them no thanks for such a Course,
because he is not honored,
nor is strengthened and preserved but ruined and destroyed by it. But the true
and real Cause of such Disobedience, whereof God and Religion are only the
Color and false Pretense, is plainly a great want of Religion, and of the Love
of God, and too great a love of the World, and of Men's own selves.

Mr. Pelling: Ser. on 30. Jan. 1683. on Romans 13.2. p. 2, 3, 4.
Had not this Duty been a prime part of the Christian Religion, we cannot
conceive, why such great care should have been taken to inform the whole World
of it, especially in times which afforded not any common encouragement
thereunto: Were it not a sad Truth, that some will believe no more of the
Scripture, than will serve the present turn, we might wonder how it is possible
for a Christian to be an undutiful Subject; so that it is not either ignorance
that can excuse, or any allowable Principle of Christianity that can encourage
Resistance; nor is it Zeal or Conscience that does it, tho that has been
pretended, but it is either a haughty and unmanageable Spirit, or an hankering
after Spoil, etc. that have been the true Causes of those Riots, which have
been so vexatious, so fatal to Sovereign Princes. It being otherwise
impossible, that Men, whose Consciences are so enlightened by God's own Word,
should be so blind, wicked and foolhardy as to rise up against their Prince at
the manifest hazard of the greatest and most intolerable of all Evils, for that
is the Rebel's portion, Damnation. -- By Resistance is meant all undutiful,
disobedient, and contumacious Behavior, and in particular, all open, forcible,
and violent Opposition, and by the Power is meant not only the Governor's
Authority, but the Governor himself. Shall I take leave to give you a
Paraphrase upon my Text. Why!
you shall have it not out of any single Commentator, -- But out of an honest
Statute of this Realm, which makes S. Paul's Divinity to be Law too -- The Act
declares, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, etc. After that
he proceeds upon the common Topics, that Power is God's Ordinance, etc. -- and
how reproachful Rebellion is to the Gospel, etc. Page 25.
-- Usurping and pretending Powers Men may be forced sometimes to be subject
unto upon pain of Plunder and Sequestration, but the Supreme Power, the King,
is he whom we must not refist, upon pain of Damnation. -- Such was the
Authority of Claudius, Page 27.
and such were his Ministers,
that they would not allow Christians either the Exercise of their Religion, or
the Liberty of their Native Countries, or the protection of their own Houses;
Page 29.30, 31.
and yet both Claudius and his deputies must be submitted to. -- Obj. But when
Religion is established by Law, then Resistance is not unlawful. Answ. 1.
Religion was established among the Jews by the municipal Laws of that Country
-- And yet tho several Kings introduced Idolatry among them, they did not
resist; or if they (...) rational; and it is my Resolution -- to part with all
that this World calls dear, even Life it self, rather than ever own their ( i.
e. the Papists) novel Doctrines for true, or submit to their Usurpations, or
communicate in their idolatrous Worship: but yet for all this, neither for the
Preservation of this our most holy and excellent Religion professed here in
England, nor for the keeping out of Popery it self (and then I have named the
worst thing that I can) will I ever by the Grace of God go beyond the Duty of
my Calling, and that Station divine Providence has placed me in; nor will I
ever lift up my finger, or open my mouth, against the Lord's Anointed, whatever
his Religion be, whether he has any or none, whether he be a Nero or a
Constantine, whether he rules by Law or against it; we must not wish him evil,
no not so much as in our secret Thoughts, whatever hard things we suffer from
him; we must not affront, disturb, or oppose his Government, or resist his
Authority; and if we have not opportunity of flying from such a Persecution (as
I now suppose, because I would put the worst Case that can happen) or cannot by
prudence decline it, I know no other remedy the Gospel allows us, but meek and
patient Suffering for our Religion after the example of our blessed Lord and
Master. -- This is the plain loyal Doctrine of the Church of England, which her
Ministers have always preached and defended both against Papists, and Fanatics
of all sorts, and for which such an Outcry and Clamor of late years has been
raised against the Clergy; and whenever we teach you otherwise, give me leave
in God's Name to charge you all to forsake us, and despise us at as high a rate
as our greatest Enemies can do; P. 31.
nay, if an Angel from Heaven preach any other Doctrine, let him be accursed.
-- Zeal for the best and the greatest things in the World will not excuse
private Men's taking upon themselves to reform public Abuses either against or
without the consent of the supreme Magistrate; nor will it hallow any Action,
for which we have not sufficient Warrant and Authority from God's Word. -- For
conclusion of all, Would we engage God's favor and protection -- let us at all
times adhere close to our duty, as well when it is against our temporal
Interest, as when it is for it; let us inviolably in all things observe the
Commands of our Religion, not only propose good ends, but be as careful to
choose lawful means.

SECT. XXXVII.
I shall conclude this Chapter with the Doctrine of the Whole Duty of Man,
which Book I look upon as a body of practical Divinity owned by our Church, and
well spoken of even by our very Adversaries. Sund. 14.. 5.
The Civil Parent is he whom God has established the supreme Magistrate, who
by a just Right possesses the Throne in a Nation; this is the common Father of
all those that are under his Authority; and therefore we owe him Honor and
Reverence, etc. and Obedience (according to the Apostles, 1 Pet. ii. 13. Romans
xiii. 1.) and it is observable, that these Precepts were given at a time when
those Powers were Heathens, and cruel Persecutors of Christianity, to show us,
That no pretense of the Wickedness of our Rulers can free us of this duty: an
Obedience we must pay, either Active or Passive; the active in the Case of all
lawful Commands -- But when the Prince commands any thing contrary to what God
has commanded, we are not then to pay him this active Obedience; we may, nay
we must refuse thus to act -- but even this is a Season for the Passive
Obedience; we must patiently suffer what he inflicts on us for such refusal,
and not to secure our selves rise up against him -- St. Paul's Sentence in this
Case is most heavy, Romans xiii. 2. They that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation. Here is very small encouragement to any to rise against the lawful
Magistrate, for tho they should so far prosper here as to secure themselves
from him by this means, yet there is a King of Kings from whom no Power can
shelter them, and this Damnation in the close will prove a sad prize for their
Victories. -- Whatsoever the Duty of the Prince is,
or howsoever performed, he is accountable to none but God; and no failing of
his part can warrant his Subjects to fail of theirs.

CHAP. VIII.
TO these eminent Divines of our own Church I shall add a few of the most
eminent of the Reformed Divines beyond Sea, to show herein the Harmony of the
Confessions, as in other things between us and them, against the Papists. In
Romans xiii. 1.
Erasmus I look upon to be one of the first Reformers, and he plainly asserts,
That Christians ought to obey a Tyrant; if he says, Go to a Goal, they ought to
go; if, Lay their Head on a Block, they ought to obey, etc. And to him I will
join the other Writers, (whom Pool in In loc.
his Synopsis has quoted, viz. Grotius, Beza, etc.) Every man ought to be
subject, i. e. to obey in things which are not against the Law of God. -- But
if Princes shall punish those that so obey the Law of God, they ought not to
resist, but to suffer patiently.

As to the Opinion of Luther, I refer the Reader to what Dr. Patrick has cited
out of him, p. 92, 93. And whereas it is objected against this, that Luther
wrote a Book contra duo mandata Caesaris, and approved of the League at
Smalcald, we must consider, that the Empire was Elective, and the Government
upon condition, as appears from the Bulla aurea Apud Goldast. to. 3. p. 429.
, where it is said, Quod si nos ipsi, quod absit, etc. But if we our selves,
which God forbid, or any of our Successors, which we hope will not happen,
should in process of time contradict this Ordinance, retract it, or presume to
violate it, we ordain, That it may be lawful for all the Electors, Princes
Ecclesiastical and Secular, Prelates, Earls, Barons, Gentry, and Commons of our
sacred Empire, without imputation of Rebellion or Infidelity, to resist, or
contradict us and our Successors, etc. -- And till the German Lawyers convinced
Luther Sleid. lib. 8. an. 1531.
of this, he refused to enter into the League, and taught, That Magistrates
ought not to be resisted, and wrote a Book on that Subject. Nay, the Elector of
Saxony himself, who was the Head of the League against Charles V. did openly
declare, that if Charles V. were a proper Sovereign in their Principalities,
then that it was unlawful to make a War against him. But whatever was done by
the German Princes in that Conjuncture, I am sure it no way concerns us, whose
Government is hereditary, and who have no such Authority to take Arms.

Calvin himself, tho so much censured for the Passage in the end of his
Institutes, yet elsewhere Ep. ded. ad Fran. I. Reg. Fran. ante Instit.
answers the Objection made against the Reformation, That it was the cause of
many Tumults and Seditions, by showing, that the best of Men had been so
accused, and that the Accusation was an ungrounded Calumny, etc. -- If any
under the pretense of Religion, do raise Tumults, if any Man make the free
Grace of God a Pretext for their Licentiousness, let the Laws compel such Men
to be quiet; let not the Truth be evil spoken of for the Id. l. 17. an. 1546.
Wickedness of some profligate Men. -- And if at last the Whispers of
ill-minded Men shall fill your ears, so that we still must be inured to Bonds
and Whips, and Tortures, and Manglings, and Burnings, that like Sheep appointed
to the Slaughter we must be reduced to the utmost extremity, we will with
patience possess our Souls, and wait till the Lord will deliver us. And in that
very Chapter of his Institutes, wherein he seems to make Kings accountable to
their Subjects, as the Lacedaemonian Princes were; yet there he avers, Inst. l.
4. c. 20. 25.29.
That we ought to obey, not only good Princes, but those who do not their Duty,
and that as to the point of Obedience of Subjects, there is no difference
between the just King and the unjust. -- That if we are severely tormented by a
cruel Prince, if we are robbed by a covetous or a luxurious Prince, if we are
slighted, and neglected to be protected by a slothful one, nay, if we are vexed
by an impious and sacrilegious Prince for the sake of Piety and Religion, let
us remember, that our Sins have deserved such Scourges from God; then let
humility check our Impatience, and let us afterward consider, that we cannot
help all this Evil; that there is nothing left, but to implore the help of God,
in whose hands are the Hearts of Kings, etc. -- When Princes do command any
thing against God's Law, we are to obey God, and must in such Cases comfort our
selves, that we have obeyed God as we ought, while we suffer every thing rather
than desert our Religion.

Camero In Romans xiii. 1. Vot. pro pace, p. 662
, says Grotius, is of the same mind, and was much harrass'd for owning the
Opinion: for when he asks the Question, What shall we do with a Tyrant when
he swerves from this rule of being a Minister for good? He answers, That it is
our duty to submit.

Is. Casaubon, Epist. ad Front. Ducaeum, p. 732. Ed. ult. P. 749.
(Though no professed Divine, yet to be reckoned here) May God never permit, the
God by whom Kings Reign, may he never permit, that those Men, who are not well
inclined toward their Prince, may light upon the Book of Mariana, or take
Counsel from him, or any other such Writer. There are many at this day, acted
by a preposterous Zeal, who under the pretense of Religion and Piety, dare
engage in Rebellions, Treasons, most cruel Murders of the Innocent, subversion
of lawful Governments, and the blackest Parricides of their Princes. St. Paul
the Apostle, whom no Man will deny to have been acted by a most holy and
fervent Zeal for Faith in the Son of God; being admonished, that there were
some, who boasted that they approved of that old saying, Let us do evil that
good may come thereof, cries out, that they speak Blasphemy, and that such men's
damnation is just: as if he were pronouncing an Anathema Maranatha against such
profane Men. -- But our modern Zelots, how contrary are they to St. Paul? --
They seem to have minded that one thing, that they might exclude the King from
his rightful Succession, due to him by Inheritance, and by the Laws of the
Land, etc.

Peter du Moulin, Vit. Molinaei. Land. 4^. p. 707.
When he returned into France from England, with much grief saw the Protestants
engaged in the Party of the Prince of Conde against the Queen Mother, which War
was indeed raised against the King himself: and endeavored both by his
Sermons, and his Letters to remove them from so unlawful a design; V. Du Moulin
answ. to Philan. Angl. p. 37.
and the King's Party owes it to him, that not one Protestant Town on this side
the Loire joined it self to the Prince of Conde. And when he was forced to
leave France, and fix at Sedan, the first Letter that he wrote was to the
Commonwealth of Rochel, as it was then called. ' To persuade them to Peace, to
dissolve their Covnention, and to throw themselves, as they ought, on the Kings
Mercy; advising them to obey the King, and thereby to take away all pretense
from their Enemies. -- And, if God saw fit, that they should suffer extremity;
for every one that feared God, would be sure to suffer for no other cause, but
for the Profession of the Gospel, etc. Nay du Moulin the Son says, Ubi Supr. p.
45.
that the actions of the Men of Rochel were disallowed by the best, and the
most of their Church. -- That they were exhorted to their Duty by their
Divines. -- And that this was the Sense of the National Synod, of which du
Moulin was the President but two months before he wrote his Letter.

This also is du Moulin's Doctrine P. 795, etc. Ed. Genev. 1635.
in his Buckler of Faith, That the Government of Kings is by Divine Right, and
founded upon the Ordinance of God, and that God has required Obedience to
Magistrates, as to those whom he has established: and that whosoever resists
them resists God, and that those who affirm, that the Authority of Kings is
of Human Institution, put Kings upon maintaining their Interests by force, etc.
That that Allegiance of Subjects is firm which is incorporated in Piety, and is
esteemed a part of Religion, and of the service which we owe to God.

And whatever the learned Hugo Grotius might have said in his Books de Jure
Belli, Grot. in Mat. xxvi. 52.
and Pacis, in his later Works (wherein it may presumed he speaks his truest
Sense) he asserts this Doctrine, which it appears, he had well studied, as if
he had been a Member of the English Church, whose Articles and Polity he so
well understood, and in whose Communion he resolved to have lived, had not God
in his Providence ordered it otherwise. If it be once admitted, says he, that
private Men, when they are injured by the Magistrate, may forceably resist him,
all places would be full of Tumults, and no Laws, or Judicatures would have any
Authority, since there is no Man, who is not inclined to favor himself. To
this purpose Vot. pro pace ad art. 16. page 66 (...), 662.
he censures the Practices, and Writings of many of the French Church, still
excepting Camero: confirming his Opinion by the Authority of King James, and
the Reasons of the University of Oxford, that condemned Paraeus's Book.
Animadver. in animadv. Riveti. art. 16. p. 644.
For both Christ, and his Apostles Peter and Paul, have Preached the Doctrine,
that no force is to be opposed to the Supreme Power: and that we ought to own,
and retain the Doctrine to be of Divine Right and Institution.

The Opinion of Monsieur Bochart, the glory of the French Church sis fully
seen in his Epistle to Bishop Morley; who among other reasons refused to
Communicate with the Reformed Church in France, because he thought, they
asserted the Doctrine of Resisting, and Deposing Kings; but Bochart expressly
avers, That the King is Gods Anointed, and Lieutenant, and so not in any case
to be Resisted, since he is accountable to none but God. That he who rises
against his Prince, is one of those Giants that fight against God. That David
could not take away the Wife of Uriah. Nor Ahab seize Naboth's Vineyard without
being guilty of great sin: but that when Samuel, 1 Samuel viii. 9. says of the
King, He shall take your sons, and your daughters, etc. He means, that when
Kings commit such transgressions, they are as uncontrolable, as if the Actions
had been lawful. That in such cases a Nation ought to call upon God, since
there are no Human remedies against the force of a King; for if a King may be
resisted, he cannot be a Sovereign, for where Subjects may Resist, they may
Judge, and consequently the Sovereignty is in them. That when Julian Persecuted
contrary to Law, none of his Soldiers rose up against him, though nothing was
more easy, would they have undertaken it, since at his death it was plain,
that almost the whole Army was Christian.

David Blondel De Formula Regnante Christo. Sect. 2.. 16. p. 172. p. 184.
chastises Pope Gregory VII. as for many other Usurpations upon Princes, so for
this among the rest, for saying, That a Prince has his Power from the People,
contrary to what S. Paul says expressly of Nero, that he was ordained of God;
affirming further, that lawful Kings, being guilty of ill management of their
Power, are accountable to, and shall be punished by God, who gave them that
Power, Page 187,
but not to Men. -- That this Opinion, that Kings were subject to any human
Authority, was brought into the Church near 1100 years after our Savior came
into the World, when the Church could not be presumed to be in a better
condition than it was, when it flourished in the former Ages of Christianity.
And that no Man before Greg. VII. ever owned the Power of any Man over Kings.
And this he proves from the Testimonies of Tertullian, Page 188.
Hosius of Corduba, Basil, Ambrose, Hierom, Arnobius junior, Cassiodore and
others, who say, That King David was above the coercive power of the Law, nor
could be called to account for his Faults. And therefore says in his Confession
to God, Against thee only have I sinned. If Subjects offend against the Laws of
Justice, the King corrects them: but if the King offends, who shall correct
him? None but he who is Justice it self; all other persons are under the
Restraint of Laws, but Kings only are reserved to the Tribunal of God; and
therefore, while, according to the Apostle, it is a terrible thing to fall into
the Hands of the Living God, it will be more terrible to Kings, who have none
on earth their Superior, that may awe them, if they sin more licentiously, and
heinously than others.

He that will read the Sentiments of Sam. Petit on this Doctrine, let him
consult his Treatise set out by his Nephew Sorbiere, called Diatriba de Jure,
Principum edictis, Ecclesiae quaesito, etc. while Monsieur Allix says, Praefat.
ad Determ. Joh. Paris. p. 61.
That the Determination that Kings may be deposed, is much worse than the most
Heresies. And Dr. Bourdieu Sermon. on 29. May. 1684.
having asserted, That Religion teaches men to give Obedience to Pagan,
Tyrannical, Persecuting, Heretical Princes; in his Epistle to the King avers,
That it was reasonable, that he should publish to the World the Opinion of
their disconsolate Churches upon the Doctrine of Obedience, which ought to be
given to higher Powers. Thus he was instructed in his Infancy and Youth; thus
he saw it practiced in their Congregations and Assemblies; thus for many years
himself had taught it, as he had read and found it contained in the Holy
Scriptures.

And to mention one unblassed Authority out of that suffering Church, instead
of all the rest, take a few words of a pious Minister of theirs, smarting at
the very time when he wrote, under the Severity of his Sovereign, and (as
himself testifies) enjoying then the Protection of a Commonwealth. Le Droit
Souv. du Prince, etc. p. 15, 16.
No good man, (says he) ought to resist a Prince for any earthly Interest
whatsoever; nay, nor for Religion neither, etc. -- It may be objected, that the
Doctrine of such absolute Power in Princes should give occasion to the increase
of misery in such passive Churches. To which I answer, 1. That were it so, that
such temporal misery should be increased by it, yet that countervailed not the
necessity of recovering so many Souls without number from death temporal first,
and afterward from eternal. And again, speaking of the Authority of a Prince,
as to the Essentials of Religion. Page 33.
If a Prince will use force and violence there, all that we have to do, is to
suffer with humility and patience both his threats and the worst he can do, not
suffering his rigor to raise the least motion to Rebellion in us, and transport
us to the least degree of outward resistance, any more than refusing to wound
our Consciences with such Acts of Religion, as are contrary to the Faith we
profess; and never had the Church of Christ had so many holy Champions as
deserved the Name of Martyrs and Confessors, if they had not thought this Rule
inviolably true. Page 36.
We must suffer all their displeasure even in case of these Essentials without
murmuring, and sacrifice our Resentments to the Authority that afflicts us,
according to the Commandment of God, which we keep in suffering so. -- As for
the things of this life, Page 40.
there is not one of them exempted from the Power of Princes; for as the
Judgment of Conscience upon the Account of being peculiar to God alone, was the
reason why the Essence of Religion was exempted from it; so the Cognizance of
these things belonging to Princes, they are all of them capable to receive the
impressions of their Power, page 53, 54. And again having described the Nature
and Original of the most Sovereign and Absolute Power upon Earth, he adds, That
in all States, where that Power is either already established, or where it is
about to establish it self by such means, as nothing but an unjust Rebellion of
Subjects can prevent, the Hand of God ought to be acknowledged in it, and the
Secrets of his Providence adored, and our Sins forsaken, which provoke the King
of Kings to permit such an Increase of Power, and try to obtain that Liberty of
the Divine Mercy, which it is not lawful for us to give our selves; and if it
please not God to take off that Yoke from them that bear it, or to help them
escape it that fly from it, it is matter of Conscience to undergo it, as a
Chastisement of God's sending, and against which we cannot struggle, without
opposing him who sends it. In a word, this Power is a Power of Impunity which
Sovereigns have in respect of their People.

The CONCLUSION.
IT were easy to sum up the Arguments of these eminent Men, That Power is only
from God, and therefore only accountable to him; that suffering for
Righteousness sake is the Glory of Religion; that Resistance is a damnable Sin,
that no Evil is to be done, that the greatest good may come of it; and that
true Religion is tender of the Rights of Princes, and teaches Obedience to them
for Conscience sake; and that the Devil of Rebellion does commonly transform
himself into an Angel of Reformation. But these things are so plainly affirmed
in the foregoing Discourse, that the Reader must be very weak, or very
negligent that does not observe them.

FINIS.
Omitted by the Printer, Page 84. Line 15.
Dr. Stillingfleet, In his Preface to the Jesuits Loyalty.
THE same Learned Author, exposing the absurd, and inconsistent pretenses of
Loyalty in the Jesuits, makes choice of this method. "To run the Parallel
between the Deposing Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and the Commonwealth
Principles, which he undertakes to prove, and effectually makes out to agree in
these three particulars. 1. Page 4.
In setting up a Court of Judicature over Sovereign Princes. 2. In breaking the
Oaths and Bonds of Allegiance Men had entered into. 3. In justifying Rebellion
on the account of Religion. As to the first, The setting up a Court of
Judicature over Sovereign Princes. The Jesuit, he observes, had endeavored to
come off by the idle distinction of a direct and indirect Power. And the
Commonwealthsmen (says he) do herein agree with them: For they do not say that
the People have a direct power over their Prince, (which were a contradiction
in its self, for Subjects to command their Sovereigns,) but only breach of
Trust, the People have an indirect Power to call their Princes to an account,
and to deprive them of their Authority. Page 5.
-- The main thing to be debated is (says he) whether Sovereign Princes have a
Supreme and Independent Authority inherent in their Persons or no: or whether
they are to be accountable to others. That upon Maladministration they may be
deprived of their Government. This is the first and chief Point, and the
Republicans, and Asserters of the Pope's Deposing Power, are perfectly agreed
in the Affirmative of the latter Question, and only differ as to the Persons in
whom the Power of calling Princes to an account does lie; whether in the Pope
or in the People.

And even as to this, they do not differ so much as Men may at first imagine.
For however the Primitive Christians thought it no flattery to Princes, to
derive their Power immediately from God, and to make them accountable to him
alone, as being Superior to all below him, (as might be easily proved by
multitudes of Testimonies:) Yet after the Popes Deposing Power came into
request, the Commonwealth Principles did so too; and the Power of Princes was
said to be of another Original, and therefore they were accountable to the
People. And having shown the Affinity of such Doctrines and Principles in both,
by some Tragical effects of them, as well at home as abroad, he proceeds thus.
Page 12.
-- If we enquire farther into the Reasons of these Pretenses, we shall find
them alike on both sides The Commonwealthsmen, when they are asked how the
People having once parted with their Power, come to resume it: They presently
run to an implicit Contract between the Prince and the People, by virtue
whereof the People have a Fundamental Power left in themselves, which they are
not to exercise, but upon Princes violating the Trust committed to them. The
very same Ground is made the Foundation of the Popes Deposing Power, viz. An
Implicit Contract, that all Princes made when they were Christians, to submit
their Scepters to the Popes Authority, etc.

And where he reasons against these Principles from the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles. Page 15.
The Religion they taught (says he) never meddled with Crowns and Scepters, but
left to Caesar the things that were Cesar's, and never gave the least intimation
to Princes of any Forfeiture of their Authority, if they did not render to God
the things that are God's. Concluding that Head with this Reflection upon the
whole. In my (...) there is very little difference between Dominion being
founded in Grace, and being forfeited for want of it.

But then secondly, as to the breaking of Oaths and Bonds of Allegiance; he
first lays down, That the Duty betwixt Princes and Subjects is natural and
antecedent to their embracing the Christian Religion. And therefore secondly,
the absolving Subjects from that, is in plain terms nulling the Obligation to a
natural Duty, and taking away the Force of Oaths and Promises. And thirdly,
That all Mankind are agreed, that it is a sin to break a lawful Oath, and the
more solemn and weighty the Oath is, the greater is the Perjury.

And then proceeds to show, that the Power which absolves from such Oaths is a
Power of turning Evil into Good, and Good into Evil, of making civil Obedience
to Princes to be a Crime, and Perjury to be none, and such as from the
Schoolmen he proves to be greater than they allow of in God himself, Page 18.
where there is intrinsic Goodness in the Nature of the thing, and inseparable
Evil from the contrary to it, As in the Case (says he) of Disobedience to
Parents, and Violation of Oaths lawfully made; and after a clear Confutation of
the Sophistry of Popish Casuists in this matter he concludes: Woe be to them
that make good evil, Page 24.
and evil good, when it serves their turn. For this is plainly setting up a
particular Interest under the Name of the Good of the Church, and violating the
Laws of Righteousness to advance it. If Men break through Oaths and the most
solemn Engagements and Promises, and regard no Bonds of Justice and Honesty to
compass their Ends, let them call them by what specious Names they please, The
Good Old Cause, or The Good of the Church, (it matters not which) there can be
no greater sign of Hypocrisy and real Wickedness than this, etc. And lastly,
as for the justifying Rebellion upon the account of Religion, having cited the
Boucher. de justa abdicat. Hen. 3
Sorbon Doctor, who not only called it lawful to resist Authority on the
Account of Religion, but folly and Impiety not to do it, where there is any
probability of Success. And said, that the Martyrs were only to be commended
for suffering, because they wanted Power to resist. With a Note of Admiration,
(says he) Most Catholic and Primitive Doctrine! And a little after, page 28.
Cardinal Bellarmin having given his Reason, amongst others, for the Pope's
deposing Power, Because it is not lawful for Christians to suffer an Heretical
Prince, if he seeks to draw his Subjects to his Belief. The Learned Dean makes
this Reflection upon it; And what Prince, that believes his own Religion does
it not? And what then is this, but to raise Rebellion against a Prince,
wherever he and they happen to be of different Religions. With a great deal
more to the same purpose, which it would be much more profitable for the Reader
to learn from the ingenious Preface it self than from this imperfect Transcript
of it.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF Passive Obedience Since the REFORMATION.

AMSTERDAM: Printed for Theodore Johnson in the Calver-Straet. 1690.

A PREFATORY EPISTLE TO THE AUTHOR Of the First Part of the History of Passive
Obedience.
SIR,
THE first part of the History of Passive Obedience, having been favorably
received by the generality of Readers, tho unjustly censured, and undeservedly
reproached by some Men, who think themselves injured thereby; I have thought
fit to publish a second Part of the same History, not doubting your leave for
my so doing; wherein the Reader may find that Doctrine carefully, and at large
deduced through the first Ages of our Reformation, down to the times of
Archbishop Laud, (and from thence to the present time) to show the World, that
the Opinion was not first hatched, and brought up in that great Man's days, who
dyed a Martyr to the constitutions of our most excellent Church, and among them
to the true Principles of Loyalty: Nor do I believe, that any one Primitive
Doctrine, wherein we differ from the Papists can show ( even in that Age, when
the whole drift of our Writers was to expose and confute, the Romish Synagogue)
more Authors, that uniformly assert it, than this of Non-Resistance, as if God
in his wise and good Providence had so ordered it, to stifle an Objection,
which he foresaw would afterward be made against it in the degenerate Ages of
the same Church; nor is there need of any other Apology to you or the Reader,
for my meddling with this Province (for my adding some Passages to what has
been already published, and illustrating, and enlarging others) since if the
interest of truth be promoted, See the History unmasked.
it matters not how many are engaged in that service; nor that whether they are
called Papists, Atheists, and Hobbists for their pains.

I have often heretofore wondered at the assurance of the Romish Authors, who
wrote against our Church a little after the Reformation, that they could so
confidently accuse the whole Body of Pretestants, as the Preachers, and
Practisers of Rebellion; ( for so says Stapleton Counterblast p. 20.
, that Protestants obey no longer, than till they have power to resist: And
Card. Allen Answ. to the Just. of Gr. Bri. cap. 4.
, that the Protestants are desperate and Factious, that as long as the Laws are
favorable to them, they are obedient; but when the Laws are against them, and
their Princes their Enemies, they break all the Bonds of Allegiance, despise
Majesty, fill all places with Slaughters, Burnings of Towns, and Robberies, and
run headlong into the contempt of all things Civil and Sacred; to omit other
Writers) when I seriously reflected upon the tumultuary reformations in many
Countries, and the seditious Writings of Buchanan, Knox, Goodman, Whittingham,
Junius Brutus, and others; I saw reason to cease my wonder at the accusation,
tho I can never enough admire the forehead of the Accusers, who at the same
time, that they impeached the Protestants, were themselves guilty of Writing
most Traitorous Libels, and promoting Sedition and Rebellion, as much as in
them lay, against their lawful Sovereign. But whomsoever this accusation might
concern in those days, I am sure, it did not touch the Church of England, of
whose Loyalty her adversary Christopher Goodman gives a fair testimony, Of
Obed. chapter 3. p. 30. Prat Genesis 1558.
even when he complains of it; The most part of Men (says he) yea and of those,
who have been both Learned and Godly, and have given worthy testimony of their
Profession to the Glory of God, have thought and taught (by the permission of
God for our Sins) that it is not lawful in any case to resist, and disobey the
Superior Powers, but rather to lay down their Heads, and submit themselves to
all kinds of Punishment, and Tyranny; -- and in the Margin he sets this note,
this is dangerous Doctrine.

And tho it may be expected, that every Age will produce such Boutefeau 's, yet
the Doctrine of the Cross, and the benefits of a patient suffering of injuries
will, I hope, be always so well understood in the World, that all the attempts
of the Jesuits, and their Journeymen (for it is from their shop that these
Wares come) will prove vain, and the true Catholic Doctrine of Passive
Obedience will be still owned, still honored, and when God calls to the
performance of is practiced; -- the Christian Religion is soft and gentle, its
Foundation was laid in the blood of its institutor, and our Holy Savior, the
superstructure cemented with the blood of an innumerable Army of Martyrs, and
adorned with the patience of the Saints; and the more truly reformed
Christianity is, the more like it grows to those admirable examples, the more
meek and humble it is, and the better prepared for a state of suffering; but
when Mammon finds a way into the House of God, and the Baptismal Vow is
forgotten, when Men depend on their own Arts, and distrust Gods Providence,
when they dare fight for Religion, because they are afraid to dye for it, and
can allow themselves to do evil, that good may come thereof; it is no wonder,
if Christianity be blended with the World, and made a pretense to serve the
ends of pride and covetousness, of ambition and revenge; Sir Will. Temple's
Obs. on the Netherl. c. 1. p. 57.
according to the observation of a wise Statesman, with respect to the
Netherlands, that whereas the Spanish, and Italian Writers, attribute the
Revolutions in the Low Countries to the change of Religion, etc. That Religion
without mixtures of ambition and interest, works no such violent effects, and
produces rather the examples of constant sufferings, than of desperate actions.

How truly Ancient, and Primitive the Doctrine of Passive Obedience is, comes
not within the limits of this present History, but may be hereafter considered,
by deducing it through the Writings and Practices of the earliest Christians
down to the days of King Henry VIII. But those times in the esteem of John
Goodwin were times of ignorance, and the truth was but in its dawn, and by a
glimmering light Men were easily led out of their way; for he says, that the
Primitive Christians (and among them he must include the Apostles,
Anti-Cavalerism. Sect. 6.
tho guided by the Spirit of God, which led them into all truth) knew nothing
of this useful Doctrine of Resistance, that God had hid this liberty from the
Primitive Christians, of the Subjects Power, and right to resist their
Superiors, which he has manifested to us; the commonalty of Christians, doing
contrary to the will of their Superiors, being the Men, that must have the
Principal hand in executing God's judgments upon the Whore. Rev. 18, 4, 5. and
as John Goodwin slanders the Ancient Fathers, as a company of ignorant Men, so
John Milton accuses the first Reformers, as the genuine assertors of the
Doctrine of Resistance; for Salmasius having truly alleged, that the Doctrine of
the Sacred, and Inviolable Authority of Princes was preserved pure, and
incorrupt in the Church; till the Bishops of Rome attempted to set up a Kingdom
in this World Paramount to all Kings and Emperors; Milton replies, Defens. pro
pop. Angli. p. 33.
that Salmasius strove in vain to transfer the guilt upon the Pope, which all
free Nations, every Religion, all the Orthodox take upon themselves, and that
he had as many Adversaries in this point, as there were most excellent Doctors
of the Reformed Church: While a third Writer boldly affirms, Author of plain
English. p. 7.
that the Doctrine of Non-Resistance is contrary to the Fundamental Liberties of
the Nation, and that they undid the Kingdom, who required the Oath contrary to
the Fundamental Liberty of the Nation, whereby they would make the King, and
them, who are commissioned by him to be as irresistible, as there severity
against Dissenters would argue the imposers infallible.

Thus in the Opinion of such Writers, Passive Obedience was the weakness of the
Ancient Christians, and a sign, they were under a lower dispensation, and that
to assert it necessary in this more enlightened Age is to contradict the most
eminent Reformers, and the Fundamental Liberties of Nature; and if after all
this some Men should be so resty, as to quote St. Paul to the Romans for their
submission to Princes, Ubi sup. p. 38.
Goodman says, that Men are deceived into this submission by misunderstanding
this place of St. Paul, and such like, It behooves every Soul to be subject to
superior Powers, because there is no Power but of God, for the Powers that be,
are ordained of God, and therefore he, that resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God; which words he elsewhere thus comments, Chapter 9. p. 410, etc.
that they require Obedience only to such Magistrates, whom God has ordained
over us lawfully according to his word, which rule in his fear according to
their Office, as God has appointed; and that Tyrants, Idolaters, Papists, and
Oppressors are not God's Ordinance; if so, Satan must be obeyed, and his
Infernal Powers; for they are Powers, and have their Powers also from God, and
yet we must resist the Devil, for the Magistrate is ordained for good, and to
such only must every Person be subject and Obedient. Such unhappy Commentaries
do some Men write, even on Holy Scripture it self, when their Interests incline
their minds to wrest the Sacred Oracles; it were easy to prove this from Pope
Hildebrand down through the Schoolmen, to the present time; as also to show,
how Men by degrees came to despise, then to speak evil, and at last with
violence to oppose Kings, but that it would swell this Preface to too great a
bulk. While I must profess, I have met with an honester, and more Christian
account of our duty in the Heathen Epictetus, whose words will serve for an
excellent Commentary on St. Peter (not only to the good and gentle, Enchirid.
c. 3^. p. 29, 30. ed. Ox.
but also to the froward) we must suit our duties to our respective relations;
Have we a Father? we are commanded to take care of him, to yield to him in
every thing; if he gives us ill Language, if he beats us, we must bear with
him; but our Father is an ill Man? did nature give thee a relation to him as he
is good, or rather as he is a Father? -- no other Man can hurt thee, unless
thou will thy self.

Nor shall I mention, how dissonant to our Laws the resisting of Kings is (that
is an undertaking recommended to the Gentlemen of the long Robe) while I
further observe, that many of the Sermons, that recommend Non-Resistance were
Printed at the desire of the Two Houses of Parliament, others at the request of
the Lord Mayor, etc. and all with License, which gives us the suffrages of all
concerned in the publishing the discourses, as well as the Preacher; to which
if we join the multitude of Addresses ( I mean not of the life and fortune of
Dissenters, who never cried Hosannah one day, but when they intended to cry,
Crucify the next; but of those, who professed themselves true Sons of the
Church) we cannot wish for a more full and particular Evidence; I have not
always tied my self to the very words of the Authors, I cite (especially not to
a literal translation, which savors of a mean pedantry) but I have no where
wilfully falsified their meaning, or lessened their force; and having thus
accounted for the equity, seasonableness, and integrity of this second Part, I
conclude with that Passage of Mr. Philpot 's Letter; Apud Coverdale's collect.
p. 217.
that every good Man ought not to hide his Faith, but to edify the Church of
God by a true confession: for as St. Paul writes to the Romans, the belief of
the heart justifies; to acknowledge with the mouth makes a Man safe; (so he
renders the Passage,) and he that walks uprightly, walks safely: For while
the little policies of crafty Men, will at last expose and ruin them, integrity
will be its own security.

I have taken care, Sir, to correct the Errata of your first part, as of this
second, while I hope, you, or some Friend for you will give speedily due
correction to your many answerers (as one of them has been already silenced)
who by a Method peculiar to this Age, undertake to confute a History, not by
proving the falsifications of the Author, or disproving the matter of fact, but
by showing reasons, why what was said by some Men seven years ago ought to be
unsaid, and retracted in this present juncture; as if the change of Men's
circumstances necessarily brought with it a change of that truth, which I
thought eternal, and unchangable. I am,

Yours, etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Historical and Miscellaneous Tracts of the Reverend and Learned Dr. Peter
Heylyn, containing, I. Ecclesia Vindicata: Or, the Church of England justified,
1. In the Way and Manner of her Reformation. 2. In Officiating by a Public
Liturgy. 3. In prescribing a set Form of Prayer to be used by Preachers before
their Sermons. 4. In her Right and Patrimony of Tithes. 5. In retaining the
Episcopal Government. 6. And the Canonical Ordination of Priests and Deacons.
II. The History of the Sabbath; in two Parts. III. Historia Quinquarticularis:
Or, an Historical Declaration of the Judgment of the western Churches, and more
particularly of the Church of England, in the five Controverted Points
reproached in these last times with the Name of Arminianism. IV. The
Stumbling Block of Disobedience and Rebellion, proving the Kingly Power to be
neither Coordinate nor Subordinate to any other upon Earth. To which are
added, V. A Treatise de jure Paritatis Episcoporum: Or, a Defense of the Right
of Peerage of the English Bishops: And an account of the Life of the Author. To
be Sold by the Booksellers.

A Catalogue of Author's.
STephen Gardener, and Bonner. P. 2 Dr. R^bert Barnes the Martyr. P. 5
Necessary Frudition of a Christian Man P. 9 William Tr^da^e the Martyr. P. 11
The Postil set out an. 1550. P. 15 Bernard Gilpin. P. 17 Bishop H^^per the
Martyr. P. 18 Bishop Coverdale. P. 22 Bishop Latymer the Martyr. P. 23
Archbishop Cranmer the Martyr. P. 25 Judge Montague. P. 29 Sir James Hales. P.
30 The Norfolk and Suffolk Protestants. P. 31 The Lady Jane Gray, and the D. of
Suf. P. 32 Bishop Rilley the Martyr. P. 33 Bradford the Martyr. P. 34 Laurence
Saunders the Martyr. P. 35 George Marsh the Martyr. P. 36 Mr. Philipet the
Martyr. ibid. The Fran^furt Confessors, viz. S^ory, Barlow, Cox, Becon, Bale,
Parl^^urst, Grindal, Sandys, N^wel, W^^m, Jewel, etc. ibid. Thomas Be^on. P. 39
The Homily against R^bellion. P. 43 Bishop Jewel. ibid. Alexander N^wel. P. 45
The exhortation to the North. Reb. P. 46 Antonius Corranus. P. 47 D^. ^^ng. P.
49 Barthol. Clerk. P. 50 Bishop Babington. ibid. Dr. Laurence Humfreys. P. 53
Archbishop Baner^^t. P. 37, 54 Dr. E^des. P. 55 Bishop M^reton. P. 50 Mr.
Greenham. P. 60 Archbishop Ab^^t. P. 61 Bishop Barlow. ibid. Francis Merbury.
P. 62 Dr. John Do^e. P. 63 King James. P. 64 Sir John Hayward. P. 65 Bishop
Bilson. P. 71 G^dman's Recantation. P. 74 Oxf. answ. to the mill manus
petition. P. 75 Bishop Rudd. ibid. Doctor Field. P. 76 Bishop Overal's
Convocation Book. P. 77 Deus, and Rex. P. 82 Gabriel Powel. P. 84 Oliver
Ormerod. ibid. Albericus Gentrlis. P. 85 Bishop Andrews. P. 88 Rich. Thomson.
P. 90 Dr. Collins. ibid. Isaac Casaubon. P. 92 Bishop Prideaux. P. 95 Bishop
Buckeridge. P. 98 Bishop Godwin. P. 100 Dr. David Owen P. 101 Dr. John Downham.
P. 104 (...) Dawes. ibid. Dr. Bois. P. 105 Bishop Ablet. ibid. Bishop Bailey. P.
107 Dr. Crackemherp. ibid. Dr. Featly. P. 108 Pet. du Moulin, Sen. P. 109 Pet.
du Moulin, Jun. P. 111 Bishop Mountain. P. 115 Mr. Hayes. ibid. Mr. Adams.
ibid. Author of a Discourse of Supreme Power, and Common Right. P. 117 Sam.
Oats. ibid. Mr. Robert Bolton. ibid. Mr. Faringdon. P. 119 Mr. Chillingworth.
ibid. Bishop Lake. P. 120 Dr. Stephens. ibid. P. H. P. 121 Dr. Swadlyn. P. 122
Dr. Holyday. ibid. Mr. Berk^n^ead. P. 123 Bishop Henry King. ibid. Dr.
Gardener. P. 124 Dr. Main. P. 125 Dr. Heylin. P. 126 Sir Jo. Spelman. P. 127
Sir Tho. Ashton. ibid. An Appeal to thy Conscience. P. 128 Mr. Symmons. P. 129
Bishop Rainbowe. ibid. Mr. Sheringham. P. 130 Mr. Allington. ibid. Mr. Jane. P.
131 Bishop Sanderson. P. 132 Judge Jenkins. P. 134 Dr. Stewart. ibid. Bishop
Brownrig. ibid. Bishop Hacket. P. 135 Dr. Plume. ibid. Archbishop Sandcroft. P.
136 Bishop Morley. ibid. Bishop Wren. P. 140 Bishop Laney. ibid. Bishop
Pearson. ibid. Bishop Turner. P. 141 Bishop Fell. P. 144 Bishop Thomas. ibid.
Earl of Clarendon. ibid. Sir Robert Filmer. P. 146 Sir Wid. Dugdale. ibid. Dr.
Lake Bishop of Chichester. ibid. Dr. Allestrey. P. 147 Dr. Sherlock. ibid. Dr.
H. B^^shaw. P. 148 Dr. Falkner. P. 149 Bishop Crofts. P. 150 Dr. Griffith.
ibid. Dr. Jane. P. 151 Dr. Outrant. ibid. Sir Orlando Bridgman. ibid. Sir
Hencage Finch. P. 152 The Harmony of Divinity, and Law. ibid. Mr. Foulit. ibid.
Bishop Spratt. ibid. Dr. P^^^ck. ibid. Dr. Fitz-Williams. P. 153 Mr. Wagstaffe.
P. 154 Dr. Bisby. ibid. Dr. Bernard. ibid. Oxford notes on Josephus. ibid. Dr.
South. P. 155 Several Addresses. P. 156 Dr. Stillingfleet. P. 157 Dr. Tennison.
P. 163 Dr. Patrick. P. 166 Dr. Tillotson. P. 167 Dr. Meggot. P. 168 Dr. Hardy.
ibid. Dr. Goodman. ibid. Dr. Burnet. P. 169 Dr. Littleton. P. 172 Dr. Will.
Saywell, ibid. Dr. Dove. P. 174 Dr. Maurice. P. 175 Dr. Williams. P. 176 Dr.
Grove. P. 177 Dr. Staince. ibid. Dr. Wake. P. 180 Dr. Fowler. P. 181 Mr. Evans.
ibid. Dr. Comber. ibid. Dr. Pelling. P. 182 Dr. Pierce. P. 184 Dr. Whitby.
ibid. Mr. L^ng. P. 185 Dr. Fuller. ibid. Dr. Sclater. ibid. Dr. Hickman. P. 186
Mr. Jos. Pleydall. ibid. Mr. Jemmat. ibid. Mr. Stainforth. ibid. Mr. David
Jenner. P. 187 Mr. Hancock. ibid. John Goodwin. P. 188 Mr. Smalridge. ibid. Mr.
Graile. ibid. Mr. Pomfret. P. 189 Mr. Nicholas Claget. ibid. Dr. Carswell, Vic.
of Bray. P. 190
CHAP. I. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience in the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, when the Reformation of Religion was begun.
SECT. I.
THe two Hinges upon which the Papal Grandeur moves, are the Supremacy, and the
Infallibility of S. Peter's Successor; by the first they affright Princes from
attempting a Reformation, (since no Man ought to control his Superior, who
could excommunicate, and depose him:) and by the second they exclude all
complaints of inferior persons [for what alterations ought to be made in a
Church that cannot err?] Hereby they formerly kept the world in ignorance, and
a blind subjection for many Ages, till it pleased God in great mercy to
instruct the world, that Princes were accountable to God alone, whose
Vicegerents they were, and that all Bishops were in spiritual matters equally
the Successors of our holy Savior, and his Apostles; that no Man was free
either from Vice or Error, and that the Popes in a more especial manner had
been guilty of both Idolatry and Heresy, as well as gross and notorious
Immoralities. Among the Princes of Christendom, King Henry the Eighth of
England begun very early to assert his Rights; and the he made not a complete
Reformation, himself dying in the Romish Communion, (as great Designs cannot be
perfected in a moment) yet the present Age owes to that great Prince its thanks
for his abandoning the Peope, his allowing the holy Scriptures in the English
Tongue, his abolishing many Shrines and Images, to which the common People paid
Idolatrous Worship, and many other such Blessings.

In his days Ann. 1536.
Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, wrote his Book De Vera Obedientia, to
which Bonner wrote a Preface (a Book so well thought of by the eminent
Protestants beyond Sea, Printed in (...).
that Melchior Gold^s^us has given it a place in his accurate Collection of
Writers for the Power of Kings against the Papal Usurpations) which Book was
translated into English, anno 1553. and therein we are taught this Doctrine. In
that place God has set Princes, whom as Representers of his Image unto men, he
would have to be reputed in the supreme, and most high room, and to excel among
all other human Creatures, as S. Peter writes, and that the same Princes reign
by his Authority, as the holy Proverbs make report; By me (says God) Kings
reign, insomuch that after Paul 's saying, Whosoever resists the power
resists the Ordinance of God. Which Paul opening that plainly unto Titus,
which he speaks here generally, commanded him to warn all men to obey their
Princes. -- Paul without difference bids men obey those Princes that bear
the Sword. S. Peter speaks of Kings by name. Christ himself commands
tribute to be paid unto Caesar, and checked his Disciples for striving who
should be the greatest. Kings of the Nations (quoth he) bear rule over them;
declaring plainly in so great variety of Degrees and Orders which God does
garnish this world withal, that the Dominion and Authority pertains to none
but to Princes.

But here some man will say to me, you travail about that, that no man is in
doubt of; for who ever denied that the Prince ought to be obeyed? It is most
certain, that he, that will not obey the Prince, is worthy to die for it, as it
is comprehended in the Old Law, and also confirmed in the New Law.
as tho there must be an Arbiter for the ordering of his Limits: for it is
certain that Obedience is due; but how far the Limits of requiring Obedience
extend, that is all the whole Question that can be demanded.

What manner of Limits are those that ye tell me of?
that we should not hearken unto any man's word in all the world against God;
else the Sentences that command Obedience are indefinite, or without exception,
but are of indifferent force universally, so that it is but lost labor for you
to tell me of Limits, which cannot be proved by any Testimony of Scripture.

We are commanded doubtless to obey; in that consists our Office, which if we
mind to go about with the favor of God and man, we must needs show humbleness
of heart in obeying authority, how grievous soever it be, for God's sake, not
questioning, nor enquiring what the King, what the Master, or what the Husband
ought, or may command others to do; and if they take upon them either of their
own head, or when it is offered them, more than right and reason is, they have
a Lord unto whom they either stand or fall, and that shall one day sit in
Judgment even of them.

-- We have by testimony of God's Word shown, that a Prince's mighty Power is
not gotten by flattery, or by privilege of the people, but given of God.

-- Christ sought not an earthly Kingdom -- but (the state of Orders remaining
still) he set forth, and taught the Form of Heavenly Conversation -- which he
by his own doings declared to consist in humility, and contempt of worldly
things, when he suffered the most bitter, and cruel kind of Death for our
sakes: and the points of Office of him that is his Vicar, are -- to be in
subjection, not to command Princes, but to acknowledge himself to be under
their power, and commandment, not only when they command things indifferent,
and easily to be done, but also when they command things not indifferent, so
they be not wicked, in checks, in scourgings, and beatings unto death, yea,
even unto the death of the Cross. Indeed these are Christ's footsteps.

Now if it be objected against what has been said, that the Author of the
Treatise, Gardener, was a virulent Papist; I answer, this strengthens the
Authority; for the Testimony of an Enemy to the Truth of Religion is worth an
hundred other Witnesses; and it is very remarkable, that a Romish Bishop should
assert the Divine Right, and unaccountableness of Kings, when his Church
teaches him to believe, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and many
of their eminent Writers affirm, that all power is originally in, and derived
from the people.

And if it be further objected, that Gardener retracted, and disowned this
Doctrine in the Reign of Queen Mary, I grant it, and I wish, that he and Bonner
had been the only men in the world, who had altered their Opinions for the
worse, being prevailed upon by the love of the world, which is the root of all
evil. But Truth is never the less venerable, because some Professors of it have
turned Apostates; Gardener 's and Bonner 's Reasons Vide Cranmer's Translat. in
praef. before his Book of unwritten Verities.
being so pithy, and Arguments so strong, as neither they themselves, nor any
other after them, shall be able at any time rightly to assoil and answer. And
it must be observed. that before they condemned these their Orthodox Tenets,
they wilfully broke the Oaths which they had taken in the Days of Henry the
Eighth; and the venerable Dean Reproof of Dorman. p. 1.6. Land. 1565.
Nowel thus urges the Argument. Ask your forsworn Fathers, with what face they
did give to the King the Title of Supreme Head, did swear it to him, and so
long time continued so calling him. If they did not so think, as they said, and
had sworn, but dissembled deeply, ask of them with what face they played so
false dissembling Hypocrites with their Sovereign Lord? Ask of them, what
manner of Subjects they were all that while, feigning in face, in word, in
writing, yea, and taking a Solemn Oath to be with their Prince therein, and
being in heart, and deed on his sworn Enemy his side? But if they thought
indeed, as they pretended in words, then ask of them with what face they did
change their Copy,
and forswear the same, and themselves withal so easily afterward, yea, and
compelled all others to be forsworn with them for company? -- Then you shall
find who they were that changed their Copy, and turned with the Wind, as the
Weathercock -- that so falsely swear, reswear, trieswear, and forswear
themselves, and not content therewith, did by all most terrible Torments, and
dreadful Deaths compel others to Perjury with them.

And whosoever considers Bonner's juggling, Fox Martyrs, To. 2. p. 1192, 1193.
Edit. 1610.
anno 1547. with King Edward the Sixth's Commissioners, about the Injunctions;
at one time protesting against them, at another recanting that his
Protestation, swearing Obedience to the King, receiving his Injunctions, giving
his assent and consent to the State of Religion then established, to the
abolishing Images, abrogation of the Mass, setting up of Bibles in Churches,
giving the Sacrament in both kinds, and such like. And then two years
afterward, anno 1549. on the Death of the Lord High Admiral, and the many
tumultuous Insurrections of the King's Subjects, neglecting to be present, or
to officiate in his Cathedral at Divine Service, and permitting others to
frequent the Mass, may see his temper thoroughly, and be convinced that his
Authority is of no worth, while his Reasonings are unanswerable, it being
unjust that his personal Faults should make void the weight of his Arguments;
especially when he spoke not his own sense, but the sense of the whole Church
of England; which will undeniably appear by the continuation of his story.

For when Bonner was for his prevarication suspected, and complained of, and
convened before the King's Council, among other Injunctions then given him, one
was, that he should personally preach within three weeks after at Paul's Cross.
And among the special points and Articles that were to be treated of by him in
his Sermon, this was the first.

1. That all such, as rebel against their Prince, get unto them damnation; and
those that resist the higher Powers, resist the Ordinance of God; and he that
dies therefore in Rebellion, by the word of God is utterly damned, and so
loses both body and soul; and therefore those Rebels in Devonshire and
Cornwall, in Norfolk, or elsewhere, who take upon them to assemble a Power and
Force against their King, and Prince, against the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm, and go about to subvert the State, and Order of the Commonwealth, not
only to deserve therefore death, as Traitors and Rebels, but do accumulate to
themselves eternal damnation, even to be in the burning Fire of Hell with
Lucifer, the Father, and first Author of Pride, Disobedience and Rebellion,
what pretense soever they have, -- as Corah, Dathan and Abirom for Rebellion
against Moses were swallowed down alive into Hell, although they pretended to
sacrifice unto God. And 4. That our Authority of Royal Power is (as of truth it
is) of no less authority and force in this our young Age, than is, or was of
any of our Predecessors, tho the same were much elder; as may appear by example
of Josias, etc. How Bonner discharged his Obedience to these Injunctions, is
not my present Province, the Martyrology will inform the Reader: but what is
already related undeniably proves what was the Doctrine of the Church of
England in those Days.

Anno 1541. was Dr. Robert Barnes martyred, Vide his Life prefixed to his Works.
and at the stake he professed; That he never to his knowledge taught any
erroneous Doctrine, but only those things which the Scripture led him unto; and
that in his Sermons he never maintained any Error, nor gave occasion of any
Insurrection, -- but with all diligence did study evermore to set forth the
Glory of God, the Obedience to our Sovereign Lord the King, and the true and
sincere Religion of Christ -- desiring the People to bear witness, that he
detested and abhorred all evil Opinions, and Doctrines against the Word of God.
-- And his Writings are agreeable to his dying Protestation. In his
Supplication to King Henry the Eighth, when condemned to die, treating of the
Cruelties of the Popish Clergy, among other things, he says, If they cannot
make a Man a Heretic, P. 183.
to color and maintain their Oppression, they add Treason against your Grace,
tho he be never so true a Subject, and all unlikely to make any resistance, or
to think any evil unto your Grace. P. 184.
-- Whereas it is they that go about to make Insurrection to the maintaining of
their worldly pomp and pride, and not the true Preacher -- Who is he that would
be a Traitor, or maintain a Traitor against your most excellent and noble
Grace? I think, no Man; yea, and I know surely, that no Man can do it without
the great displeasure of the eternal God. For S. Paul commands straightly unto
all Christians to be obedient in all things, Romans 13.
on this manner; Let every man submit himself to the authority of the higher
power, for whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; and
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. 1 Pet. 2.
Also S. Peter confirms this saying, Submit your selves unto all manner of
ordinance of man, etc. Wherefore, if every man had the Scriptures (as I would
to God they had) to judge every Man's Doctrine,
then were it out of question, that the Preachers thereof either would, or
could make, or cause to be made any Insurrection against their Prince, seeing
the self same Scripture straightly commands all Subjects to be obedient unto
their Princes, as Paul witnesses, saying, Warn them, (says he) that they
submit themselves to princes, and to powers, and to obey the officers.

Now how can they that preach, and exhort all Men to this Doctrine, cause any
Insurrection, or Disobedience against their Prince. -- Call to mind the old
Prophets, and with a single eye judge, if any of them either privily, or
apertly stirred up the People against their Princes. P. 185.
Look on Christ, if he submitted not himself to the high powers; paid he not
Tribute, for all he was free, and caused Peter likewise to pay? Suffered not he
with all patience the punishments of the Princes? Yea, Death most cruel, although
they did him open wrong, and could find him guilty in no Cause. Look also on
the Apostles -- and if ever they stirred, by any occasion, the People against
their Princes; yea, if they themselves obeyed not to all Princes, although the
most part of them were Tyrants and Infidels. Consider likewise those Doctors,
which purely and sincerely have handled the Word of God, either in Preaching or
Writing; if ever by their means any Insurrection, or Disobedience rise among
the People against their Princes: but you shall rather find, that they have
been rather ready to lay down their own Heads, to suffer with all patience
whatsoever Tyranny any Power would minister unto them, giving all People
example to do the same.

Now to conclude, if neither the Scripture, neither the Practice of the
Preachers thereof teaches, nor affirms, that the People may disobey their
Princes, or their Ordinances, but contrariwise teaches all Obedience to be
done unto them, it is plain, that those Bishops, or rather Papists do falsely
accuse those true Preachers and Subjects: which thing would appear in every
Man's sight, if by their violence the Word of God were not kept under.

Now is this the Doctrine, that I do Preach and Teach,
and none other as concerning this matter, God I take to record, and all my
Books and Writings, that ever I wrote or made; and only I allow and favor them,
which further this Doctrine of Christ; and of this I am sure, mine Adversaries,
or rather Adversaries to Christ's Doctrine must bear me witness. After this he
proceeds to demonstrate, that the Pope and the Papistical Bishops are they, who
Preach to the People the contrary Doctrine; as that St. Peter exempts himself,
and his Successors from being subject to Superiors, that Subjects may be
disobedient to their own Lords, and that the Pope may Depose Kings, that he
has authority to break all Oaths, Bonds, and Obligations; and other such like
positions, and then adds, -- there is no Officer, that has need to be afraid
of Christ's Gospel, nor yet of the Preachers thereof;
but of those privy Traitors can no Man be too wary, -- the Scripture
commands us to obey to wicked Princes, and gives us none authority to Depose
them, -- who was more wicked than Herod? and yet St. John suffered Death under
him: Who was wickeder than Pilate? and yet Christ did not put him down, but was
Crucified under him. Briefly, which of all the Princes were good in the
Apostles days? and yet they deposed none: So that God's word, and their own
learning, and the Practice of our Master Christ, and his Holy Apostles are
openly against them; p. 190.
there is no People under Heaven, that more abhors, and with earnester heart
resists, and more diligently does Preach against Disobedience than we do:
Yea, I dare say boldly, let all your Books be searched that were written this
500 Years; and all they shall not declare the authority of a Prince, and the
true obedience toward him, as one of our little Books shall do, that be
condemned by you for Heresy. p. 202. 204.
And then he impeacheth them of denying, that the King's Power is immediately of
God; while it can never be proved, that ever we spoke against God, or our King.

The same Learned and Holy Martyr in his Discourse, that Men's Constitutions not
grounded in Scripture, bind not the Conscience, is of the same mind. -- If the
power command any thing of Tyranny against Right, and Law, (always provided
that it repugn not against the Gospel, p. 292. 293. 294.
nor destroy our Faith) our Charity must needs suffer it; for as St. Paul
says, Charity suffers all things: also our Master Christ, If a man strike
thee on the one Cheek, turn him the other: For if he does exercise Tyranny, if
he command thee any thing against right, or do thee any wrong, (as for an
example, cast thee in Prison wrongfully) if thou can by any reasonable and
quiet means without Sedition, Insurrection, or breaking of the common Peace
save thy self, or avoid his Tyranny, thou may do it with a good Conscience,
-- but in no wise,
be it right or wrong, may thou make any resistance with a Sword or with
Hand; but obey, except thou can avoid as I have showed thee; but if the Cause
be right, lawful, or profitable to the Commonwealth; thou must obey, and thou
must not sly without sin. -- But suppose the King should condemn the New
Testament in England; and command, that none of his Subjects should have it; is
he to be obeyed or not? -- this will be a great Scourge, and an intolerable
plague. -- My Lords, the Popish Bishops, would depose him with short
deliberation, and make no Conscience of it; they have Deposed Princes for
lesser Causes than this is a great deal. But against them will I always lay
Christ's Fact, and his Holy Apostles, and the Word of God. If the King forbid
the New Testament, etc. under a temporal pain, or else under the pain of Death;
Men shall first make faithful Prayers to God, and then diligent Intercession
unto the King's Grace with all due Subjection, that his Grace would release
that commandment; if he will not do it, they shall keep their Testament, with
all other Ordinances of Christ, and let the King exercise his Tyranny (if they
cannot fly) and in no wise under the pain of Damnation shall they withstand him
with violence, but suffer patiently all the Tyranny, that he lays on them
both in their bodies and goods; and leave the vengeance of it unto their
Heavenly Father: -- But in no wise shall they resist violently, neither shall
they deny Christ's verity, nor yet forsake it before the Prince; -- neither
shall they go about to Depose their Prince, p. 295.
as my Lords the Bishops were wont to do; but they shall boldly confess, that
they have the verity, and will thereby abide. And this he proves by the
examples of Peter, and John, and of Christ, of the three Children, and Daniel,
and then adds; so that Christian Men are bound to obey in suffering the King's
Tyranny, but not in consenting to his unlawful commandment; always having
before their eyes the comfortable saying of Christ, Fear not them that can kill
the body, which when they have done, they can no more do, etc.

The Weapons used by the Martyrs in those Days were Patience and Prayers, and
by those Arms they conquered their Adversaries. So when the Martyr Bilney,
going to his death, was upbraided, Vid. Answer to Stephen Gardiner's Devilish
Detection, fol. 203. b. edit. an. 1547.
that he, being accounted an holy Man, wrought no Miracles. He answered with a
mild voice and countenance; God only works Miracles and Wonders, and he it is
that has wrought this one Wonder in your Eyes, that I being wrongfully
accused, falsely belied, opprobriously and despitefully handled, buffeted and
condemned to the fire; yet hitherto have I not once opened my mouth against any
of you: this passes the work of nature, and is therefore the manifest miracle
of God, who will by my death, and suffering be glorified, and have his Truth
enhaunced. This was the true way to get the Crown of Martyrdom; and here you
see the Patience of the Saints.

SECT. II.
The necessary Erudition of a Christian Man, tho compiled anno Domini 1540,
received not its Approbation in Parliament till ann. 154^, being Printed in May
following by the King, Henry the Eighth's Order (who thought it so useful, that
himself writes a Preface to it directed to all his faithful, and loving
Subjects) with the Advice of his Clergy, as a Doctrine, and Declaration of the
true Knowledge of God, and his Word, with the principal Articles of Religion;
allowed also by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Nether House of
Parliament. In which, says our Historian, Lord Herbert's Henry VIII. p. 495.
they handled all things with much moderation, the King having labored first to
make Tenants understood, then to have them observed. And tho there be in it
Accounts given of the seven Sacraments, the Doctrine of Purgatory, etc. yet the
Ruin of the Popish Religion is unquestionably, under the Providence of God,
much owing to the seasonable publishing, and dispersing of this Book (which
came out both in Latin, for the Instruction of Foreigners, and English for the
use of the Natives) nor was it to be expected, that Heterodoxies of so long
continuance should all in a moment be condemned.

In this Book the Exposition of the Fifth Commandment teaches us thus: In this
Commandment, by these words Father and Mother, is understood not only the
natural Father and Mother, which did carnally beget us, and brought us up, but
also Princes, and all other Governors, Rulers and Pastors, under whom we be
nourished, brought up, ordered and guided. And by this word Honor, in this
Commandment is not only meant a Reverence, and lowliness in words and outward
gesture -- but also a prompt and ready obedience to their lawful Commandments,
a regard to their Words, a forbearing and suffering of them, an inward love and
veneration toward them, etc. this is the very Honor and Duty, which not only
the Children do owe unto their Parents, but also all Subjects and Inferiors to
their Heads and Rulers. -- And after this having fully shown the Duties of
Children to their Parents, and Parents to their Children, from the Precepts and
Examples of holy Scripture, it proceeds -- This Commandment also contains the
Honor and Obedience which Subjects owe unto their Princes; for Scripture takes
Princes to be as it were Fathers and Nurses toward their Subjects. Then
reckoning up the several Duties of Princes, it adds -- And all their Subjects
must again on their parts, and be bound by this Commandment, not only to honor
and obey the said Princes, according as Subjects be bound to do; and to owe
their truth and fidelity unto them, as unto their natural Lords, but they must
also love them, as Children do love their Fathers; yea, they must more tender
the Surety of their Prince's Person, and his Estate, than their own, or any
others, even like as the Health of the Head is more to be tendered than the
Health of any other Member. And by this Commandment also Subjects be bound not
to withdraw their said Fealty, Truth, Love and Obedience toward their Princes
for any cause,
whatsoever it be; ne in any cause may they conspire against his person, ne do
any thing toward the hinderance, or hurt thereof, nor of his Estate. And
furthermore by this Commandment they be bound to obey also all the Laws, etc.
made by their Princes and Governors, except they be against the Commandment of
God. -- They must also give unto their Prince aid,
help and assistance, whenever he shall require the same, either for surety,
preservation, or maintenance of his Person and Estate, or of the Realm. -- And
further, if any Subject shall know of any thing, which is, or may be to the
noyance, or damage of his Prince's Person, or Estate; he is bound by this
Commandment to disclose the same with all speed to the Prince himself, or to
some of his Council; for it is the very Law of Nature, that every Member should
employ himself to preserve an defend the Head. -- And that all Subjects do owe
unto their Princes and Governors such Honor and Obedience, as is aforesaid, it
appears evidently in sundry places of Scripture, but especially in the
Epistle of S. Paul (Romans 13.) and S. Peter (1 Pet. 2.) and there be many
Examples in Scripture of the great Vengeance of God, that has fallen upon such
as have been disobedient unto their Princes; But one principal Example to be
noted, is of the Rebellion, which Chore, Dathan, and Abiron made against their
Governors Moses and Aaron: For punishment of which Rebels, God not only caused
the Earth to open, and to swallow them down, -- but caused also the Fire to
descend from Heaven, and to burn up 250 Captains, which conspired with them in
the same Rebellion.

And the Explanation of the Sixth Commandment says thus;
Moreover no Subjects may draw their Swords against their Prince for any Cause
whatsoever it be; nor against any other (saving for lawful defense) without
their Prince's license; and it is their Duty to draw their Swords in defense of
their Prince and Realm, whenever the Prince shall command them so to do. And
although Princes, which be the Chief and Supreme Heads of their Realms, do
otherwise than they ought to do,
yet God has assigned no Judges over them in this World, but will have the
Judgment of them reserved to himself, and will punish them when he sees his
time, and for amendment of such Princes that do otherwise than they should do,
the Subjects may not rebel, but must pray to God, which has the Hearts of
Princes in his Hands, that he so turn their Hearts to him, that they may use
the Sword, which he has given them, unto his pleasure.

SECT. III.
viz. Oct. 2. A. 1528. as Jo. Fox informs us in his Edition of the Works of
Tindal, Berns, and Frith, An. 1573. p. 97.
Long before this time did the Martyr, William Tyndale, otherwise (as he says
himself) called William Hychins, or Hitchins, publish his Book of the Obedience
of a Christian Man, and in it asserts the same Doctrine, notwithstanding his
many personal Sufferings, the Censure of his Books, and the public
Condemnation of his Translation of the Holy Bible ( viz. Oct. 2. A. 1528. as
Jo. Fox informs us in his Edition of the Works of Tindal, Berns, and Frith, An.
1573. p. 97.
and it is worth nothing, that the Doctrine of this Book relating to Non
resistance was censured by the Romish Priests of that time). In his Epistle to
the Reader he says, Vid. 1st. Part of Hist. of Pas. Obed. p. 20.
Let us therefore look diligently whereunto we are called, -- we are called,
not to dispute as the Pope's Disciples do, but to dye with Christ, that we may
live with him; and to suffer with him, that we may reign with him. We be called
to a Kingdom that must be won with Suffering only, as a sick Man wins
Health. -- Tribulation is our right Baptism, and is signified by plunging into
the water; we, p. 98, 99, 100.
that are baptized into the Name of Christ ( says S. Paul) are baptized to dye
with him. ^om. 6.
-- And this is the difference between the Children of God and of Salvation,
and between the Children of the Devil and Damnation, that the Children of God
have power in their Hearts to suffer for God's Word, which is their life and
salvation, their hope and trust: -- And the Children of the Devil in time of
adversity flee from Christ, whom they followed feignedly. -- God is ever at
hand in time of need to help us. -- Tyrants and Persecutors are but God's
Scourge to chastise us, -- and he lets them do, not whatsoever they would, but
as much only as he appoints them to do, and as far forth as is necessary for
us; let us therefore arm our selves with the promises both of help and
assistance, and also of the glorious reward that follows.

The same Martyr in his Prologue unto the Book says; page 104, 105, 106.
I have made this little Treatise that follows, containing all Obedience that
is of God. -- Now (as ever) the most part seek Liberty; they be glad, when they
hear the unsatiable Covetousness of the Spirituality rebuked; -- When Tyranny
and and Oppression is preached against: -- And therefore, because the Heads
will not so rule, will they also no longer obey, but resist and rise against
their evil Heads? And one wicked destroys another; yet is God's Word not the
cause of this, neither yet the Preachers; for tho that Christ himself taught
all Obedience, how that it is not lawful to resist wrong (but for the Officer
that is appointed thereto), and how a Man must love his Enemy, and pray for
them that persecute him, -- and how that all Vengeance must be remitted to God;
-- Yet the People, for the most part, received it not,
they were ever ready to rise and to fight. -- Thus see thou, that it is the
bloody Doctrine of the Pope that causes Disobedience, Rebellion, and
Insurrection; for he teaches to fight and to defend his Traditions, -- and to
disobey Father, Mother, Master, Lord, King, and Emperor, -- where the peaceable
Doctrine of Christ teaches to obey, and to suffer for the Word of God, and to
remit the Vengeance, and defense of the Word to God, which is mighty and able
to defend it.

And in the Treatise it self, Tyndale having first treated of the Duties of
Children, Wives, and Servants, proceeds to discourse of the Obedience of
Subjects unto Kings, page 109, 110.
Princes, and Rulers, out of Romans 13. averring, That as a Father over his
Children is both Lord, and Judge, forbidding that one Brother revenge himself of
another; but if any cause of Strife be between them, will have it brought to
himself, or his Assigns: So God forbids all men to avenge themselves, and
takes the Authority of avenging to himself, saying, Vengeance is mine, I will
reward. -- For it is impossible, that a Man should be a righteous, an equal, or
indifferent Judge in his own Cause, Lusts and Appetites so blind us. -- God
therefore has given Laws to all Nations, and in all Lands has put Kings,
Governors, and Rulers in his own stead to rule the World through them; and
has commanded all Causes to be brought before them, as thou read, Exodus 22.
where the Judges are called Gods, because they are in God's room, and execute
the Commandments of God: And in another place of the said Chapter, Moses
charge, saying, See that thou rail not on the Gods, -- c. -- Whosoever
therefore resists them, resists God, (for they are in the room of God) and
they that resist shall receive their damnation. -- Tho no man punish the
breakers of the Law, yet shall God send his Curses upon them, till they be
utterly brought to naught.

Neither may the inferior person avenge himself upon the superior, or violently
resist him, for whatsoever wrong it be;
if he do, he is condemned in the deed doing, in as much as he takes upon him
that which belongs to God only, when he says, Vengeance is mine, etc. and
Christ says, All they that take the Sword shall perish by the sword. Take
thou a Sword to avenge thy self? So give thou not room to God to avenge thee,
but robb'st him of his most high Honor, in that thou willt not let him be Judge
over thee. If any man might have avenged himself upon his Superior, that might
David most righteously have done upon King Saul, which so wrongfully persecuted
David, even for no other cause, than that God anointed him King. Yet 1 Reg. 24.
when God had delivered Saul into the hands of David, -- and his Men encouraged
him to slay him, he answered, The Lord forbid it me, that I should lay my hand
on him: And Cap. 26.
when Abishat would have nailed Saul with his Spear to the ground, David forbad
him, saying, Kill him not, for who shall lay his hands on the Lord's anointed,
and not be guilty? etc. -- Page 111.
Why did not David slay Saul, seeing he was so wicked, not in persecuting David
only, but in disobeying God's Commandments, and in that he had slain Eighty
five of the Priests wrongfully? Verily for it was not lawful; for if he had
done it, he must have sinned against God; for God has made the King in every
Realm Judge over all, and over him is there no Judge: He that judges the King,
judges God, and he that lays hands on the King, lays hands on God, and he
that resists the King, resists God, and damneth God's Laws and Ordinance.
If the Subjects sin, they must be brought to the King's Judgment; if the King
sin, he must be reserved to the Judgment, Wrath, and Vengeance of God: And as
it is to resist the King, so is it to resist his Officer, which is set or sent
to execute the King's Commandment.

When Luke 13.
they showed Christ of the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate mingled with their own
Sacrifice; he answered, Suppose ye, that those Galileans were greater Sinners,
etc. this was told Christ no doubt of such an intent, as they asked him Matt.
22. Whether it were lawful to give Tribute to Caesar? For they thought it was no
sin to resist a Heathen Prince, as few of us would think if we were under the
Turk, that it were Sin to rise against him, and to rid our selves from under
his Dominion, so sore have our Bishops robbed us of the true Doctrine of
Christ: But Christ condemned their Deeds, and also the secret Thoughts of all
others, that consented thereto, saying, Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish; as who should say, I know, that you are within your Hearts such they
were outward in their Deeds, and under the same Damnation; except therefore ye
repent betimes, ye shall break out at the last into like Deeds, and likewise
perish, as it came afterward to pass.

Hereby see thou, that the King is in this World without Law; and may at his
lust do right or wrong, and shall give Accounts but to God only.

The same Martyr in his Preface to the Practice of Popish Prelates, set forth
An. Dom. 1530. Unto all Subjects be it said, if they profess the Law of God,
Page 342.
and Faith of the Lord Jesus, and will be Christ's Disciples; then let them
remember, that there was never any Man so great a Subject as Christ was: There
was never Creature that suffered so great Unright so patiently and so meekly as
he: Therefore whatsoever they have been in times past, let them now think, that
it is their parts to be subject in the lowest kind of Subjection, and to suffer
all things patiently. If the High Powers be cruel unto you with natural
Cruelty; then with softness and patience ye shall either win them, or mitigate
their fierceness: If they join them unto the Pope, and persecute you for your
Faith, then call to mind, that ye be chosen to suffer here with Christ, that
you may joy with him in the Life to come. -- If they command that God
forbids, or forbid that God commands, then answer as the Apostles did,
That God must be obeyed more than man. Act. 5.
If they compel you to suffer unright, then Christ shall help you to bear, and
his Spirit shall comfort you: But only see,
that neither they put you from God's Word, nor ye resist them with bodily
Violence, but abide patiently, etc. -- And as for Wickedness, whence it
springs, and who is the cause of all Insurrection, and of the fall of
Princes, and of the shortning of their days upon the Earth, -- thou shall see
in the Glass following.

CHAP. II. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience in the Reign of King Edward the
Sixth.
SECT. I.
IN the beginning of this pious Prince's Reign the Homily of Obedience was
published; and in his Second Year, Ann. 1548. the King, Chapter Hist. Cent. 16.
lib. 7. page 38 8/9.
says Fuller, by his Proclamation did for a while prohibit all sort of
Preaching, that the Clergy might apply themselves to Prayer, and the Layity to
Prayer,and hearing the Homilies: So venerable an esteem had the wise and good
Men of that Age of the now so much despised Homilies; and I am enclinable to
believe, one great reason why they have since fallen into Contempt is, because
they so earnestly press Subjection to Authority, and forbid Sedition and
Resistance.

Ann. 1550. Because of the scarcity of Preachers, it was ordained, Heyl. Hist.
of the Reform. An. 1550. page 94.
That of the King's Six Chaplains, two should be always about the Court, the
other four traveling abroad; the first Year two in Wales, and two in
Lincolnshire; the second Year, two in the Marches of Scotland, and two in
Yorkshire; the third Year, two in Devonshire, and two in Hamshire; the fourth
Year, two in Norfolk, and two in Essex, etc. and so till they had gone through
the whole Kingdom: so rare was Preaching in those days. To supply the want of
which, the same Year a Postil, or Collection of most godly Doctrine upon every
Gospel through the Year, was printed cum privilegio; and in the Sermon on the
Gospel for the Twenty third Sunday after Trinity, the People are thus
instructed in their Duty. -- Here is to be noted the Difference that Christ
makes between the Kingdom of God, and this World; for he does not only approve
and allow this high Power and politic Life, but also confirms it; for the
Kingdom of God or of Christ is spiritual, -- and contrariwise, the Kingdom of
the Emperor is worldly, it is visible, in which the Emperor himself governs,
and bears rule mightily with his Lords, and Princes, Luc. 22.
as the Scripture witnesses in another place, The Kings of the World have
dominion over the People, and they that bear rule over them are called Gracious
Lords. Nevertheless that Kingdom is of God, and established by God's Ordinance
in such wise, that he that resists this Ordinance, Romans 13.
resists God himself. Think thou that Princes and great Lords in the
Scripture are called God's in vain, and without a cause? Psalm 81.
For if they be Gods, and are made by God Partakers of his Magnificence, then
must they needs be in God's stead, whose room they bear; therefore seeing they
rule in God's stead, it is both meet and convenient to give them that we are
bound to give them; but what are those things? S. Paul sets them forth, Romans
13.
and says, Give unto every Man his Duty, Tribute to whom Tribute belongs,
etc. Here thou hear what thou art bound to give to high Powers: But
peradventure thou will say, Shall I give Obedience unto a Tyrant,
or to an ungracious Prince or Lord? Yea truly, thou art bound both to give and
obey him; for what have thou to do with his Tyranny? If the Magistrate does
naught, and contrary to Equity, he has a Judge, whom he must answer in that
appointed day: Judgment is not here granted unto thee, except he constrains
thee to do any thing against God; then thou may say with the Apostles, We
ought more to obey God than men: But if he constrains thee to nothing against
God, then have thou here the Sentence of Christ, Act. 5.
Give to Caesar that belongs to him, and to God that is Gods: Which Answer is
so good and godly, that they that were sent of the Pharisees marvelled at it,
and for because they could say nothing against it, they went their ways. God
grant us his Grace.

The Kings (says Christ) of the Heathen bear rule over them; Sermon. on S.
Barthol. day.
and those that use Power over them, are called Gracious Lords. In which words
Christ confirms the Civil Empires and Dominions of this World, but he
approves it not in the Apostles, -- Doubtless unto Kings is the Sword given
and committed, Romans 13.
as S. Paul says, to punish the evil, and defend the good and virtuous; and
forasmuch as they have the Sword committed to them of God, and not of
themselves; therefore we the residue of People must obey, and be subject to
this Ordinance of God for Conscience sake. -- Christ in this place
acknowledges, that Kings and Princes and other Magistrates must have the
Dominion, and that their Dominions and Regiments are God's own Ordinance.

And having discoursed of Herod's Cruelty, Sermon. on the Innocents day.
and that there were doubtless many in that Age, that would be ready to destroy
and root out, whom the World counts Heretics, he never thought of Resistance
as a Remedy in such a case, but only of patience. This, I know, that we (with
the Grace of God) shall be ready not only to suffer all Adversity for the
Gospel's sake, but also to dye for it; be Herod and all his ungodly Members
never so mad with it. -- Sermon. on S. Simon and Jude's day.
Christ in his Persecution, which surely is ever annexed to the Gospel in this
World, commands us to take sure hold of his Word, as that only Comfort,
whereby Christians in all Tribulations solace themselves. -- For what shall
hinder or hurt him that takes hold upon the Word, and by Faith printeth it in
his Heart. -- Sermon. on All Saints day.
Here in this life they shall be comforted by his Word, and in the World to
come by his Bliss and eternal Life.

On the first Sunday after the Epiphany, Ann. 1552. Bernard Gilpin the Father
of the Northern Churches, and nominated to the Bishopric of Carlisle, though
he declined it, preached before King Edward, and in his Sermon, Printed An.
1636. p. 31 2/1. 312.
as he freely reproved many other Vices, so did he also censure the Sin of
Disobedience to Rulers. God's Word plainly tells us, that evil and dumb
Pastors, and wicked Rulers and Magistrates are sent of God, as a Plague and
Punishment for the Sins of the People. -- Concerning the Civil Magistrates, it
is plain in Job 34.30. that for the sins of the people God raises Hypocrites
to reign over them; that is to say, such as have the bare Names of Governors
and Protectors, and are indeed Destroyers, Opprestors of the People,
Subverters of the Law, and of all Equity; and seeing it is so, so many as feel
the grief and smart of this Plague, ought not to murmur, but patiently suffer,
and be offended with their own Sins, which have deserved this Scourge and much
more, and study for amendment, that God may take it away; -- for if they
continue, as they do, p. 313.
to murmur against God and their Rulers, -- he shall for their punishment so
multiply the number of evil Governors, unjust Judges, Justices, and Officers,
that as it was spoken by a Jester in the Emperor Claudius's time, the Images of
good Magistrates may be all graven in one Ring. And it is remarkable, that the
good Man closed his Sermon with these words, God save the King. p. 335.


SECT. II.
In the days of this good King the Godly Martyr Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester,
Printed at Land. 1583. first published, as I conjecture, an. 1549. when the
Rebels were up in the West.
wrote a short commentary on the 13th. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans,
which he dedicated to the Dean, Chancellor, and other Dignitaries of his
Cathedral, as also to all Parsons, Vicars, and Curates within his Diocese, whom
he exhorts to see, that the People know their commandments, and the works
thereof appertaining to God in the first Table, that they honor no wrong or
false God, nor yet the true God a wrong way; -- and also that they avoid all
such sins, as be contrary to the Commandments of God in the second Table;
telling them, that for a help to them, and also to the People, he had set forth
the 13th. Chapter to the Romans, which entreats of all the second Table;
praying, and in the King's name commanding all Curates in his Diocese, that
could not Preach, every day to read to the People that 13th. Chapter, as he had
set it forth; and those, that could Preach, in their Sermons oftentimes to
inculcate, and persuade this rule of obedience to the People; further enjoining
his whole Clergy (that he might keep the People from the displeasure of God and
the King, and himself from everlasting damnation) most diligently to teach the
People this Chapter every week; one part of it the Saturday at Evensong, the
other the Sunday at the Morning Prayer, and the third part the Sunday at
Evensong.

This Reverend Martyr on verse the first says, that St. Paul pronounces
generally, that every Soul, i. e. every Man, should be obedient unto the higher
power, -- of what condition, state, and degree soever, he be -- to the powers
St. Paul commands obedience, honor, reverence, and love to be born; and this
is especially to be noted in St. Paul, that he says simply and plainly, we
should obey the higher powers, to confute, argue, and reprehend those, that
cloak and excuse their inobedience, either for the age of the Rulers, or else
for the conditions and manners of the Rulers: -- the manners and conditions of
the Magistrates do not excuse our inobedience, tho they be naught; for Paul
bids us to look upon the Power and Authority of the Higher Powers, 1 Pet. 2.
and not upon their Manners; and St. Peter commands the Servants to obey
their Masters, tho they be evil; so Joseph obeyed Pharaoh, and Christ our
Savior Pilate, St. Paul the Emperors of Rome, Caligula and Nero; and when St.
Paul commands us to be obedient, he means, not only we should speak
reverently and honorably of the Higher Power, -- but to obey the Laws set forth
by the Power, except they command things against God's Laws; then must we obey
more God than Men;
and yet not to strive and fight with the Magistrates, but suffer patiently
death, rather than to offend God, or else our obedience is nothing but
hypocrisy and dissimulation. Who would accept his own Child's making of
Courtesy, when all his facts be contrary to his commandment? What Masler would
be content, or think his Servant does his duty in putting off his cap, and in
his doing contemns all his Master's Laws and Commandments? the Laws of a
Magistrate, if they be repugnant to the Word of God, they should not be obeyed;
yet rather should a Man suffer death, than to defend himself by force,
and violent resisting of the Superior Powers; as Christ, his Apostles, and the
Prophets did.

On verse 2. Because that naturally there is in every Man a certain desire of
liberty, and to live without subjection and all manner of Laws, except such as
please himself, St. Paul is not content generally to exhort, and command all
Men to obedience of the Higher Powers, but gives many great and weighty
causes, wherefore Men should be obedient, and in subjection to them. The first
is, because the Office of a Magistrate is the Ordinance of God, -- and
therefore the Magistrate must be obeyed, except we will say, in some respects
God is not to be obeyed; -- therefore the Magistrates be called Gods in
Scripture: -- ungodly Princes God suffers, and appoints for the sins of the
People; but let the King and Magistrate be as wicked as can be devised and
thought,
yet is his place and office the Ordinance and Appointment of God, and
therefore to be obeyed. -- and in case they do any thing in their Offices
contrary to the Word of God, although the Subjects may not, nor upon pain of
eternal Damnation, ought not by force nor violence to resist the Officer in his
High Power; yet they are bound to think, that God can, and will as well revenge
the abuse of his Office in them, as punish the Subject for the disobedience of
his ordinance toward the Higher Power. If it be true, that St. Paul says, the
higher power to be the Ordinance of God, it is very damnable iniquity, that for
any private affection, or other unjust oppressions, for any Man to depose the
Magistrates from their Places and Honors appointed by God; or else privily, or
openly, craftily or violently to go about to change, or alter the State and
Ordinance of God, etc. The second cause is, the great peril and danger it is to
resist and disobey God's Ordinances; They that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation; as tho he had said, lest ye should think it a light
thing, but a trifling matter to withstand, and disobey the Magistrates;
understand ye, that in so doing ye stand and fight against God, and therefore
ye provoke Judgment and Vengeance against your selves, and be culpable and
guilty of God's everlasting displeasure, if ye repent not. Here St. Paul has
set forth the End, and success of Sedition,
Treason, Conspiracy, and Rebellion; that is to say, destruction both of Body
and Soul; and who is able to contend and fight with God?

On verse 5. One cause, wherefore we must obey, is the fear of pain and
punishment, which the Magistrate must minister by the commandment of God, unto
all such as disobey and contemn the Ordinance of God: the other is conscience;
for although the Magistrate do not see nor know, how thou do disobey and
break the Order of God; or else, if thou could by power and strength
overcome the Magistrates, yet thy conscience is bound to obey, -- there be some
so indurate and past grace, that think themselves not bound to obey this order,
and Higher Power appointed and commanded of God; but doubtless those shall
perish with their Captains, as Achitophel did with his Absalom; if the Higher
Power command any thing contrary to God's Word, they should not be obeyed;
notwithstanding there should be such modesty and soberness used, as should be
without all violence, force, rebellion, as Peter and John used,
saying. God is more to be obeyed than Man; and so in saying of truth, they
continued in the truth, without moving of Sedition, and suffered death for the
truth, etc.

Nor was this only this excellent Bishop's Opinion, while his King was of his
Religion, and friend to his Person and Principles; but (as Truth is eternal and
unalterable, so he persevered in this belief) when Queen Mary persecuted the
Church of God, and this worthy Prelate in a particular manner; The Martyrs
Letters Land. 1564. 4to. p. 120.
for in his Letters just before his death set out, by Miles Coverdale Bishop of
Exon his fellow Confessor, he frequently inculcates this Doctrine. -- Remember
ye be the workmen of the Lord, and called into his Vineyard, there to labor
till eventide, that ye may receive your penny, which is more worth than all the
Kings of the Earth; but he, that calls us into his vineyard, has not told
us, how sore, or how fervently the Sun shall trouble us in our labor; but has
bid us labor, and commit the bitterness thereof unto him, who can, and will so
moderate all afflictions, that no man shall have more laid upon him, than in
Christ he shall be able to bear; -- these days be dangerous and full of peril,
p. 136.
but yet let us comfort our selves in calling to remembrance the days of our
forefathers, upon whom the Lord sent such troubles, that many hundreds, yea
many thousands died for the testimony of Jesus Christ, both men and women,
suffering with patience and constancy, as much cruelty as Tyrants could devise,
and so departed out of this miserable World to the Bliss everlasting. p. 139.
-- Who would not now rather than to offend so merciful a God, fly this wicked
Realm, as your most Christian Brother, and many other have done; or else with
boldness of heart, and patience of the Spirit bear manfully the Cross, even
unto the death? -- Albeit I know, p. 141/2
that all those which seek God's honor, and the furtherance of his Gospel be
accounted the Queens Enemies, although we daily pray for her Grace, and never
think her harm; but we must be content to suffer slander, and patiently to bear
all such injuries. Nevertheless this is out of doubt, that the Queens Highness
has no authority to compel any man to believe any thing contrary to God's
word; neither may the Subject give her Grace that Obedience; in case he do, his
Soul is lost for ever. Our bodies,
goods, and lives be at her Highness commandment, and she shall have them, as
of true Subjects; but the Soul of man for Religion is bound to none, but unto
God and his holy Word. p. 148, 149
-- Seeing therefore we live for this life among so many, and great perils and
dangers, we must be well assured by God's word how to bear them, and how
patiently to take them, as they be sent to us from God; we must also assure our
selves, that there is no other remedy for Christians in the time of trouble,
than Christ himself has appointed us. In St. Luke he gives us this
commandment, ye shall possess your lives in patience, says he; in the which
words he gives us both commandment, what to do, and also great consolation and
comfort in all troubles; he shows also what is to be done, and what is to be
hoped for in troubles; and when troubles happen, he bids us be patient, and
in no case violently,
nor seditiously to resist our persecutors, because God has such care and
charge of us, that he will keep in the midst of all troubles the very hairs of
our heads, so that not one of them shall fall away without the will, and
pleasure of our Heavenly Father. -- Wherefore the Christian Man's Faith must be
always upon the Resurrection of Christ, p. 150.
when he is in trouble; and in that glorious Resurrection he shall not only see
continual and perpetual joy and consolation, but also the victory and triumph
of all persecution, trouble, sin, death, hell, etc. -- the pains also they vex
us withal for the time, if they tarry with us as long as we live; p. 153.
yet, when death comes, they shall avoid and give place to such joys, as be
prepared for us in Christ; for no pains of the World be perpetual, and whether
they shall afflict us for all the time of our mortal life, we know not; for
they be the Servants of God to go, and to come as he commands them. But we
must take heed, we meddle not forcibly, nor seditiously to put away the
persecution appointed unto us by God;
but remember Christ's saying, possess your lives by your patience; and in this
commandment God requires in every Man and Woman this patient obedience. He
says not, it is sufficient that other Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, and Martyrs continued their lives in patience, and patient
suffering the troubles of this World; but Christ says to every one of his
People, by your own patience ye shall continue your life. -- Now therefore as
our Profession and Religion requires patience outwardly without resistance and
force; so requires it patience of the mind, and not to be angry with God,
although he use us, that be his own creatures, as him lists, etc.

Nor is it to be pretermitted, that Miles Coverdale Bishop of Exon, who
published the Letters of Bishop Hooper, and other the Martyrs, in his Epistle
to the Christian Reader praises God for these and such other Monuments, which
he had preserved and brought to light by his singular great providence; because
the more nigh that men's words, and works approach unto the most wholesome
sayings, and fruitful doings of the old ancient Saints and chosen Children of
God (which loved not only to hear his word, but also to live thereafter) the
more worthy are they to be esteemed, embraced, and followed; -- and we have
just cause to rejoice, that we have been familiar, and acquainted with some of
those, which walked in the trade of their footsteps; for the which cause it
does us good to read, and hear not the lying Legends of feigned, false,
counterfeited, and Popish Canonized Saints; -- but such true, holy, and
approved Histories, Monuments, Orations, Epistles, and Letters, as do set forth
unto us the blessed behavior of God's dear Servants. By which it appears, that
he was of their opinion in this, as well as other Primitive Doctrins of the
Reformed Church of England, in opposition to the Novel, and false assertions of
the Church of Rome; and so we have another eminent Confessor of those early
days of the Reformation, attesting the truth in the point of Nonresistance.

It is also remarkable, that at that time the Protestants were no contemptible
party of Men in the Nation, that Queen Mary had been disinherited by Act of
Parliament ( a Bill of Exclusion past into the formality of a Law) and that for
illegitimacy, as it is their declared; that the Crown was given to another by
the Will of Edward VI. that Queen Mary was both a Papist and a Persecutor, and
turned the Protestant Bishops out of their Sees, even before a Parliament made
it Law; and yet the Holy Men of those days in their Letters to their Friends
and Followers, treat only of Patience and Submission to Providence, of looking
to our Blessed Savior, and suffering without Murmuring, as he did, and that to
resist even the Queen was a damnable sin; when they wanted not abettors, nor
opportunities of conveying their thoughts privately to them, and I am sure they
were not to seek for courage and resolution, who so frankly and undauntedly
condemned the Popish Superstitions and Idolatries, when they had nothing in
prospect, but Prisons and Executions; nay those Protestants, who had given
their Votes for her Exclusion repented of their crimes, while others of the
same belief stood by her in her distress, and placed her on her Throne.

SECT. III.
In the Reign of this Pious, and Learned Prince Edward VI. Old Father Latimer
In Coverdale's Collect. of Letters. p. 56.
, ( that Old True Apostle of our English Nation and of Christ, as Bishop
Ridley, his Fellow Prisoner, and Companion in Martyrdom calls him, that
generous and honest Man; who when the Parliament Anno 1539. had confirmed the
Six Articles (the Whip with Six Cords, as they were justly called) voluntarily
chose to abandon his Bishopric, Godwin's Annals p. 172, 173. 229.
rather than conform to so unjust a Law, and abstained Ten years from
Preaching, till after the death of Henry VIII. he was restored;) did
notwithstanding his great plainness, dominari in concionibus, filling the
Pulpit with a mighty Grace, nor was he wanting in those days to bear witness to
this Doctrine; for in his explanation of that Petition of Our Holy Saviors
Prayer, Thy will be done, he says, Our Rebels, 4th. Sermon. on the Lord's Prayer.
p. 142. Land. 1635.
which rose about two years ago in Norfolk and Devonshire, they consider not
this Petition; they said it with their lips only, but not with their hearts.
Almighty God has revealed his will, as concerning Magistrates, how he will
have them to be honored and obeyed; they were utterly against it; he revealed
this his will in many places of the Scripture, but especially by St. Peter,
where he says, 1 Pet. 2.13.
subditi estote omni humanae creaturae -- that is to say in effect, be subject
to all the common Laws made by Men of Authority, by the King's Majesty, etc. be
subject unto them, and obey them, says God -- and here is but one exception,
that is, against God; when Laws are made against God and his word, then I ought
more to obey God than Man;
then I may refuse to obey with a good Conscience; yet for all that, I may not
rise up against the Magistrates, nor make any uproar; for if I do so, I sin
damnably. I must be content to suffer whatsoever God shall lay upon me, yet I
may not obey their wicked Laws to do them; only in such a case Men may refuse
to obey, else in all other matters we ought to obey, what Laws soever they make
as concerning outward things we ought to obey, and in no wise to rebel, though
they be never so hard, noysom, and hurtful. Our duty is to obey, and to commit
all the matters to God, not doubting, but that God will punish them, when they
do contrary to their office and calling; therefore tarry till God correct them,
we may not take upon us to reform them,
for it is no part of our duty: If the Robels, I say, had considered this;
think you, they would have preferred their own will before God's will? for
doing as they did, they prayed against themselves.

Id. Sermon. on Ep 21. Sund after Trinity p. 196, 197
Subjects may not of their own private authority take the sword, or rebel
against their King; for when they rebel, they serve the Devil, for they have no
commission of God so to do, but of their own head they rise against God, that
is, against the King, to whom they owe obedience, and so worthily be punished:
therefore, good Christian People, beware of rebelling against our Sovereign
Lord the King. Id. 24. Sund after Trin. p. 216.
-- The calling of the Subjects is to be obedient unto the Magistrates, not to
rebel against them; for if they do, they strive against God himself, and shall
be punished of him.

Another cause (why Christ was circumcised) is, Id. Sermon. on the Twelfth day p.
291.
to be obedient unto common orders; therefore he would suffer rather to be
circumcised, than to give occasion of hurly burly or uproar; for the will of
the Father was, that Subjects should obey Magistrates, and keep orders;
Subjecti estote cuivis potestati, be obedient unto them, etc. look what Laws
and Ordinances are made by the Magistrates, we ought to obey them; -- and this
is to be understood as well in spiritual matters, as temporal matters; so far
forth as the Laws be not against God and his Word: When they will move us to do
any thing against God, then we must say, Oportet magis obedire Deo, quam
hominibus, we must be more obedient unto God than Man;
yet we may not withstand them with stoutness, or rise up against them, but
suffer whatsoever they shall do unto us; for we may for nothing in the World
rebel against the Office of God, that is to say, against the Magistrate.

CHAP. III. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience in the Reign of Queen Mary.
SECT. I.
UPon the Death of King Edward VI. so prevalent were the two Families of
Northumberland and Suffolk; that they made a great Party to oppose the legal
Succession of the Right Heir, their abettors being countenanced, and encouraged
by the last Testament of King Edward; but, as Cent. 16. p. 1.
Fuller rightly observes, the Will of the Duke of Northumberland; but whatever
was done in defense of the Lady Jane Gray, was contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church of England; which taught her Children better, and more wholesome Doctrine;
and though Archbishop Cranmer were one of the Subscribers to that Will, and to
the Letter sent after Edward the sixth's Death to Queen Mary; yet there is much
to be said in Apology for him. For first, Cranmer Heyl. Hist. of the Refor. p.
152. Fox, Burnet, and Godwin, etc.
of all the Privy Council was the last that stood out, having at first
positively refused to sign the Will; and after much reasoning, and many
arguments urged for the Queens Illegitimation, required a longer time of
deliberation; and at last, could be overcome by nothing, but the King's own
restless importunity: To whom the Archbishop had (as he ought) a great regard,
and this his resolution so prevailed upon his Judges, that, though at first
they committed him to the Tower with the Lady Jane, Fox. tom. 2. p. 1289.
and the Duke of Northumberland's Sons for High Treason; yet, though they
prosecuted his Fellow Prisoners on that Statute, they let fall their Action
against him, and prosecuted him only for Heresy, to his great joy, as Fox
relates it. The same p School.
Author assuring us, that Dr. Heath, afterward Archbishop of York, did affirm,
to one of Archbishop Cranmer's Friends; that notwithstanding his Attainder of
Treason, the Queens Determination at that time was, that Cranmer should only
have been deprived of his Archbishopric, and had a sufficient Living assigned
him -- with commandment to keep his House without meddling in matters of
Religion. Secondly, that the Archbishop was encouraged so to do, Id. ibid.
by the Example of all the Nobles of the Realm, and the States and Judges (Sir
James Hales only excepted, for the Lord Chief Justice Mountague had, after much
ado, subscribed) the Lawyers especially assuring him, that it was no breach of
his former Oath so to do. And it is well known, that if any thing exasperated
Queen Mary against him, it was not the signing of King Edward's Will, but her
Mother's Divorce, which Cranmer so actively promoted.

Thirdly, The Reasons were specious, both from H^yl. Hist. Reform. ann. 1553.
p. 151, 152. Burn. par. 2. p 223.
Law and Policy, as they were then styled that both the Sisters were declared
illegitimate, and that by Act of Parliament; and that were they not so, yet
being but of the half Blood to the King, by the Law they could not succeed: nor
could any Foreigner by the same Law. And that the Duchess of Suffolk had waved
her Title, and then the Right was in the Lady Jane: that this was the only way
to preserve the Nation from the Vassalage and Servitude of the Bishop of Rome;
and from subjecting the Realm to Foreigners, if the Sisters should marry out of
it.

Fourthly, Par 2 hist. l. 1. p. 224.
Dr. Burnet affirms, that as nothing, but the King's own importunities could
prevail on the Archbishop, so it is probable, that he signed it only as a
Witness, and not as Counselor, according to a Distinction then found out by
Sir William Cecil, Secretary of State.

But lastly, This act was no Declaration of the Archbishop's Judgment in the
Case of the Deprivation, Deposition, or resisting of Kings; against which he
protested through the whole tenor of his life. He it was that was, if not the
Author, Fox. p. 1697.
yet the main Contriver, Approver and Publisher of the Book of the Reformation,
the Catechism, with the Book of Homilies, as also of the Necessary Erudition of
a Christian Man. In which Books the Power of Kings, and the Necessity of
Obedience, together with the wretched Estate of Rebels, and such as resist
Authority is plainly set forth. He calls the Insurrection against Vide Herbert
H^^^. 3. p. 457
King John (as much as others magnify it, and what followed it) plain
Rebellion. And having contrary to that Truth suffered himself to be
over-persuaded in this one particular, he publicly acknowledges to the World
his Crime; and begs God's, and the Queen's pardon for what he had done; as
appears by more than one of his Letters, which are preserved to this day, being
set out by Miles Coverdale, Bishop of Exon, and some of them by John Fox; and
by this in particular.

Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, to Queen Mary.
Most lamentably mourning, Coverd. Collect. fol. 1, 2, etc.
and moaning himself unto your Highness, Thomas Cranmer, although unworthy either
to write, or speak unto your Highness, yet having no person, that I know, to be
Mediator for me, and knowing your pitiful Ears ready to hear all pitiful
Complaints, and seeing so many before to have felt your abundant clemency in
like case, and now constrained most lamentably, and with most penitent and
sorrowful heart, to ask mercy and pardon for my heinous Folly and Offense, in
consenting, and following the last Will of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the
Sixth, your Grace's Brother, which Will, God knows,
God he knows, I never liked, nor never any thing grieved me so much, as that
your Grace's Brother did; and if by any means it had been in me to have let
the making of that Will, I would have done it; and what I said therein, as well
to his Council, as to himself, diverse of your Majesty's Council can report, but
none so well as the Marquess of Northampton, and the Lord Darcy -- which two
were then present at the Communication between the King's Majesty and me. I
desired to talk with the King's Majesty alone, but I could not be suffered, and
so I failed of my purpose; for if I might have communed with the King alone,
and at good leisure, my trust was, that I should have altered him from that
purpose; but they being present, my labor was in vain. Then, when I could not
dissuade him from the said Will, and both he and his Privy Council also
informed me, that the Judges, and his Learned Council, said, That the Act of
entailing the Crown, made by his Father, could not be prejudicial to him, but
that he being in possession of the Crown might make his Will thereof; this
seemed very strange to me; but being the Sentence of the Judges, and other his
Learned Council in the Laws of this Realm (as both he and his Council informed
me) methought it became not me, being unlearned to the Law, to stand against my
Prince therein; and so at length I was required by the King's Majesty himself
to set my hand to his Will, saying, that he trusted, that I alone would not be
more repugnant to his Will, than the rest of the Council were (which words
surely grieved my heart very sore) and so I granted him to subscribe his Will,
and to follow the same; which, when I had set my hand unto, I did it
unfeignedly, and without dissimulation: for the which I submit my self most
humbly unto your Majesty, acknowledging mine Offense with most grievous and
sorrowful Heart, and beseeching your mercy and pardon; which, my Heart gives
me, shall not be denied unto me, being granted before to so many, which
traveled not so much to dissuade both the King and his Council, as I did. And
whereas it is containad in two Acts of Parliament, as I understand, that I with
the Duke of Northumberland should devise, and compass the Deprivation of your
Majesty from your Royal Crown, surely it is untrue; for the Duke never opened
his mouth unto me to move me any such matter, nor I him; nor his Heart was not
such toward me (seeking long time my Destruction) that he would either trust
me in such a matter, or think that I would be persuaded by him. It was other of
the Council that moved me, and the King himself, the Duke of Northumberland not
being present. Neither before, neither after had I any privy communication with
the Duke about that matter, saving, that openly, at the Council Table, the Duke
said unto me, that it became not me to say to the King, as I did, when I went
about to dissuade him from the said Will.

Now as concerning the State of Religion, as it is used in this Realm of
England at this present; if it please your Higness to license me, I would
gladly write my mind unto your Majesty. I will never,
God willing, be Author of Sedition, to move Subjects from the Obedience of
their Heads and Rulers, which is an Offense most detestable. If I have uttered
my mind to your Majesty, being a Christian Queen, and Governor of this Realm
(of whom I am most assuredly persuaded, that your Gracious Intent, is above all
other things, to prefer God's true Word, his Honor and Glory) if I have
uttered, I say, my mind unto your Majesty, then I shall think my self
discharged; for it lies not in me, but in your Grace only, to see the
Reformation of things that be amiss. To private Subjects it appertains not to
reform things, but quietly to suffer that they cannot amend; yet nevertheless
to show your Majesty my mind in things appertaining unto God, methink it my
Duty, knowing that I do, and considering the place which in times past I have
occupied. Yet will I not presume thereunto without your Grace's Pleasure first
known, and your License obtained, whereof I, most humbly prostrate to the
ground, do beseech your Majesty, and I shall not cease daily to pray to
Almighty God for the good preservation of your Majesty from all Enemies, bodily
and ghostly, and for the increase of all Goodness, Heavenly and Earthly, during
my life; as I do, and will do, whatsoever come of me.

From Oxford, Apr. 23.

And in his Letter to the Lords of the Council, Ibid. Fol. 16. and apud Fox.
tom. 2. p. 1331.
a little before his Martyrdom, sent by Dr. Weston, and by him opened, and
kept, he expresses himself after the same manner: In most humble wise sueth
unto your Right Honorable Lordships, Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury,
beseeching the same to be a means for me unto the Queen's Highness for her
mercy and pardon. Some of you know, by what means I was brought and trained
unto the Will of our late Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth, and what I
spoke against the same; wherein I refer me to the Reports of your Honors.

And if still this particular Act of the Archbishop be urged, as an Argument
what his persuasion was as to the Rights of Monarchs, it may as well be argued,
that Popery was then the true Religion, because he once signed the Articles of
it; whereas his Recantation, and his voluntary burning of his Right Hand were a
true Discovery of his disowning the one, as this his reiterated Application to
the Queen for her pardon, is a demonstration of his renouncing the other.

SECT. II.
And as the Archbishop refused a long time to sign this Will; so the Lord Chief
Justice Heylin. ubi supr. p. 152. and Fuller. Chapter hist. l. 8. p. 2, 3, etc.
Montague refused for a long time to draw it up, nor would at last be brought
to a compliance, till he had his pardon signed for so doing, and had been
called Traitor by the Duke of Northumberland for his refusal; his own
Narrative, which Fuller has published, declares, That being an old weak man,
and without comfort, in great fear and dread, as were his Brethren, with
weeping eyes and sorrowful hearts they devised the said Book according to such
Articles as were devised with the King's proper hand above and beneath, and on
every side, (he thinking in his Conscience, that the King never invented this
matter of himself, but by some wonderful false compass) Montague determining
with himself to be no Executor of the said Device, whatsoever should chance of
it. -- Nor did he ever execute any Commission, Proclamation, or other
Commandment from the Lady Jane, or her Council, but commanded his Son, and
Heir, with twenty Men, to join himself with the Buckinghamshire Men for the
Defense of Queen Mary.

By this it appears, that it was fear that swayed the greatest part of the
Council, and Judges at that time; I say, the greatest part of the Judges,
because * Sir James Hales, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, Heyl. ubi
supr. ann. 1553. p. 192, 193. Fuller ubi supr. p. 6. B^unet. par. ^. l. 1. p.
223. Fox. tom. 2. p. 1392.
carried the Honor of a resolute and constant Man; a Man both religious and
upright, whom no importunity could prevail upon to subscribe contrary to both
Law and Conscience, and tho he was afterward most unworthily requited by Queen
Mary for it, yet the Council would not find a Bill against him for High Treason
upon this very account. He was a Man, Tom. 2. p. 1278, 1282.
says Fox, both favoring true Religion, and also an upright Judge, as any has
been noted in this Realm. Of both which excellent Qualifications he gave a
public demonstration, in that after the Queen's countenancing and establishing
of the Mass, he at a public Assize in Kent gave Charge upon the Statutes made
in the time of Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, for the Supremacy, and
Religion: for which, notwithstanding he had adventured his Life in Queen Mary's
Cause, in that he would not subscribe to the disheriting of her by the King's
Will, he was imprisoned in the Marshalsea, Counter and Fleet, and cruelly
handled.

It is true, the Severities of his Usage in Prison, and the frightful Accounts,
which the Warden of the Fleet gave him, of the Tortures appointed for
Heretics, made him very melancholy, in as much as he was, as Fox continues his
Story, being perverted by Dr. Day, Bishop of Chichester, Fox. tom. 2. p. 1331,
1393.
etc. contented to say as they willed him (or as Bishop Ridley, in his Letter
to Archbishop Cranmer, words it, he recanted, perverted by Dr. Moreman.) And so
just sometimes are God's proceedings with even a good man, when he forsakes the
ways of Truth, as to leave him to walk in the paths of his own choosing to his
ruin: Cons. Bradfords Letter in Coverdale's Collect. p. 312.
for the Consideration of this Apostasy so wrought upon him, that he attempted
in Prison to dispatch himself with a Penknife, and after his Releasement was
found drowned in a small River.

SECT. III.
And having entered into this Story, I shall proceed a little further to show,
how the Protestants of Id. ibid. p. 1279, 1280. Heyl. Bar. Full. ubi supra.
Suffolk were the Men, who first resorted to Queen Mary, when she was at
Fremlingham Castle, and gave her such aid and assistance, as dispirited
Northumberland and his Army, and baffled all the Designs of her Adversaries.
And that it may be fully known, what Principles swayed those good Men to assist
their lawful Prince, tho a known Papist (and of a severe temper) against an
Usurper (a professed Protestant, and of other most amiable Qualifications) it is
worth the considering, Fox tom. 2. p. 1726, 1727.
that when about the latter end of 1555, or the beginning of 1556,
Commissioners were sent by Queen Mary and the Council into Norfolk and Suffolk,
(among other Counties) to enquire of matters of Religion, an humble
Supplication was exhibited by certain Inhabitants of the County of Norfolk,
wherein they profess, ' That they were poor men, but true, faithful and
obedient Subjects, who as we have ever heretofore, so intend we with God's
Grace, to continue in Christian Obedience unto the end; and (according to the
word of God) with all reverend fear of God to do our bounden duty to all those
superior Powers, whom God has appointed over us, doing as S. Paul says, Romans
13.
Let every soul be subject, etc. -- These Lessons (right honorable
Commissioners) we have learned of the holy Word of God in our Mother Tongue, 1.
That the Authority of a King, Queen, etc. is no tyrannical Usurpation, but a
just, holy, lawful and necessary Estate for man to be g^verned by; and that the
same is of God, the Fountain and Author of Righteousness. 2. That to obey the
some in all things (not against God) is to obey God; and to resist them, is to
resist God:
therefore as to obey God in his Ministers and Magistrates brings life; so to
resist God in them brings punishment and death. The same Lesson have we
learned of S. Peter, saying, Be ye subject to all human Ordinances, etc. 1 Pet.
2.
-- After which, with the Resolution and Courage of true Christian Confessors,
they profess, That the Religion lately set forth by King Edward, is such, in
our Consciences, as every Christian Man is bound to confess to be the Truth of
God to embrace the same in heart, to confess it with mouth, and (if need
require) lose and forsake, not only House and Land, etc. but also (if God will
so call them) gladly to suffer all manner of Persecution, and to lose their
Lives in the Defense of God's Word and Truth. -- We have learned the holy
Prayer made for the Queen's Majesty, wherein we learn, that her Power and
Authority is of God, therefore we pray to God for her, that she, and all
Magistrates under her, may rule according to God's Word. -- We think, at
present, the unquiet multitude had more need to have these things more often,
and earnestly beaten and driven into them (especially given in many places to
stir, and trouble) than to take from them that blessed Doctrine; whereby only
they may to their Salvation be kept in quiet. -- After which, reflecting upon
the Assistance which they and the Suffolk Men gave the Queen against the Lady
Jane Gray, they subjoin, We protest before God, we think, P. 1728.
if the holy Word of God had not taken some root among us,
we could not in times past have done that poor Duty of ours, which we did, in
assisting the Queen, our most dear Sovereign, against her Grace's mortal Foe,
that then sought her Destruction. It was our bounden Duty, and we thank God for
his Word and Grace, that we then did some part of our bounden service -- all
our Bodies, P. 1729.
Goods, Lands and Lives are ready to do her Grace faithful Obedience, and true
service of all Commandments, that are not against God and his Word. But in
things that import denial of Christ, and refusal of his Word and Communion, we
cannot consent or agree unto it; for we have bound our selves in Baptism to be
Christ's Disciples, etc. -- We learn that true Obedience is to obey God, King
of all Kings, and Lord of all Lords; and for him, in him, and not against him
and his Word, to obey the Princes and Magistrates of this World, who are not
truly obeyed,
when God is disobeyed, nor yet disobeyed, when God is faithfully obeyed. We
think not good by any unlawful Stir or Commotion to seek remedy; but intend, by
God's Grace, to obey her Majesty in all things not against God and his holy
Word. -- If Persecution shall ensue (which some threaten us with) we desire the
Heavenly Father (according to his promise) to look from Heaven, to hear our
cry, to judge between us and our Adversaries, and to give us faith, strength
and patience, to continue faithfully unto the end, and to shorten these evil
days for his chosen's sake.

It is also remarkable, that the Generality of the common People stood firm to
their Duty in those days, and that the Council themselves at last repented of
what they had done, and proclaimed the Queen (as did also Northumberland at
Cambridge) and when Sir Thomas Palmer, Fox. page 1280.
who was condemned to die (with the Duke and Sir John Gates) was to be
beheaded, and he professed his Faith, that he had learned in the Gospel, (which
Dudley shamefully had renounced, if he ever sincerely professed it) so he
lamented, that he had not lived more Gospel-like; and I doubt not but he meant
it of his Rebellion.

Nay, the Lady Letter to her Father, in Fox. p. 1291. See Godwin's Annals, ann.
1553. Id. p. 1334.
Jane her self averrs, that her death was hastened by her Father: That she was
innocent of the fact, being constrained, and continually assayed, that she only
seemed to consent, and therein grievously offended the Queen, and her Laws, (as
did also her Father, the Duke of Suffolk, at his death, acknowledging, That he
had offended the Queen, and her Laws, and thereby was justly condemned to die,
desiring all men to be obedient, and praying God, that his death might be an
example to all men.) Having, as she says, out of Obedience to her Father and
Mother, grievously sinned, and offered violence to her self. Averring further,
that her enforced Honor never blended with her innocent Heart. P. 1293.
-- For as Fox observes, she and her Husband did but ignorantly accept that,
which the others had willingly devised, and by open Proclamation consented to
take from others, and give to them. By which last passage, page 1289.
and by his calling Sir Thomas Wyatt's Conspiracy a Rebellion (as it truly was,
tho he be mistaken in saying it was entered into for Religion, as the first
part of this History makes appear, Wyatt himself condemning it on the Scaffold,
l. 8. p. 14.
says Fuller) I am inclined to reckon that industrious Martyrologist among the
other assertors of this truth; and having thus occasionally mentioned Sir
Thomas Wyatt, I cannot but subjoyn my conjecture, that he was much swayed in
his Undertaking, by a Book written by Theodore Basil, and published Ann. 1543.
dedicated to Wyatt, called The true Defense of Peace; wherein he magnifies the
Love that every one owes to his Country, and how honorable it is to fight and
dye for it.

And it is further observable, Id. p. 1893.
that when he and his Army came into Southwark, and sent word to Dr. Sands (Mr.
Saunders, and other Preachers Prisoners there) that the Gates should be set
open for them all, Dr. Sands answered, I was committed hither by Order, I will
be discharged by like Order, or I will never depart hence; and so answered the
rest, despising even Liberty it self from an unjust imprisonment, to which they
were confined by their lawful Prince, when it was offered them by a Rebel. Id.
p. 1896.
-- And when Sir William Saintloe was accused by the Council, that he knew of
Wyatt's Rebellion; he protested he was a true man both to God and his Prince,
defying all Traitors and Rebels: And the Lady Elizabeth (afterward Queen)
acquitted herself with a becoming bravery of the same Accusation.

SECT. IV.
As Cranmer and Ridley were always dear Friends, Colleagues in the holy
Episcopal Office and Dignity, and Fellow-Confessors and Martyrs; so did their
Opinions exactly conspire in this Point. For in his In Coverdale's Collect. f.
56. and apud Fox. tom. 2. page 1570.
Letter to Dr. Grindal, then at Francfort (afterward Archbishop of Canterbury)
Ann. 1555. he prays heartily for the happy Delivery of Queen Mary (when it was
generally believed she was with Child) tho he knew it would bring him the
sooner to the Stake; -- Post partum Reginae, quem jam quotidie expectamus,
quemque Deus pro sui nominis gloria dignetur been illi fortunare, etc. i. e.
After the lying in of the Queen, which we every day expect, and which may God
for the glory of his Name vouchsafe to make happy to her; we shall then
immediately look for nothing else, but a triumphant Crown of our Confession in
the Lord against our ancient Adversary: And by this he made amends for his
preaching up the Lady Janes Title at S. Paul's Cross, in which matter, as
Bishop Godwin Annal. An. 1553.
says, I wish, he had not erred.

To what has been said of Saunders, Bradford, and others, in the first part of
the History, may be added, that such as was their belief, when they were
admitted to a Conference one with another, such also was their Faith in this
Point, when they singly gave their Judgment. Mr. Bradford in his Letter to the
City of London, Ap. Fox. tom. 2. page 1477. and in Coverd. Coll. p. 25 4/^.
Feb. 11. 1555. My right dearly beloved, let us heartily bewail our Sins,
repent us of our former evil life, heartily and earnestly purpose to amend our
Lives in all things, continually watch in Prayer, diligently and reverently
attend, hear, and read the holy Scriptures, labor after our Vocation to amend
our Brethren; let us reprove the Works of Darkness, let us fly from all
Idolatry, let us abhor the Antichristian and Romish rotten Service, detest the
Popish Mass, forsake their Romish God, prepare our selves to the Cross, be
obedient to all that be in authority in all things, that be not against God and
his word; for then answer with the Apostles,
It is more meet to obey God than man; howbeit, never for any thing resist, or
rise against the Magistrates; avenge not your selves, but commit your Cause to
the Lord, to whom Vengeance pertains, and he in his time will reward it.

And when Weston told Bradford how the People were by him procured to withstand
the Queen, Ap. Fox. tom. 2. page 1471. Ap. eund. p. 1476. and Cover. p. 294.
Bradford answering again, bad him Hang him up as a Traitor and a Thief, if
ever he encouraged any to Rebellion. -- And in the Postscript to his Mother,
Brethren, and Sisters, he exhorts them to be obedient to the higher Powers,
that is, In no Point, either in hand, or tongue, rebel, but rather, if they
command that, which with good Conscience you cannot obey, lay your Head on the
Block, and suffer whatsoever they shall do or say; by Patience possess your
Souls. And of the Will of King Edward the Sixth, Ap. eund. p. 148 6/7. and
Cover. p. 287.
he gives his opinion in his Letter to Sir J. Hales, wherein after he had given
him excellent Advice, and set forth the Advantages of Persecution for a good
Cause, and commended him, that he judged after Faith's fetch (as he styles it)
and the effects or ends of things, looking not on the things which are seen,
but on the things which are not seen; he adds, Let the Worldlings weigh things,
and look upon the Affairs of Men with their worldly and corporal Eyes, as did
many in subscription of the King's last Will; and therefore they did that, for
the which they beshrew'd themselves: But let us look on things with other
manner of Eyes, as (God be praised) you did, in not doing that which you were
desired, and driven at to have done: You then beheld things, not as a man, but
as a man of God, etc. Ap. Fox. p. 1494. Coverd. page 282, 283.
-- And in his Admonition to certain professors and lovers of the Gospel, to
beware they fall not from it, in consenting to the Romish Religion: Among other
holy Exhortations and Cautions, my dearly beloved repent, be sober, and watch
in Prayer, be obedient, and after your Vocations show your Obedience to the
higher Powers in all things that are not against God's Word, therein acknowledge
the sovereign Power of the Lord; howbeit, so that ye be no Rebels, nor
Rebellers for no Cause,
but because with good Conscience you cannot obey, be patient Sufferers, and
the Glory and good Spirit of God shall dwell upon us.

In his Meditation on the Fifth Commandment, v. Meditat. on the Lord's Pr. and
Com. printed London, 1622. page 117.
written in the days of Edward the Sixth, ( See page 123.) he thus devoutly
expresses himself; In this Commandment thou (O good Lord) set before mine
Eyes them, whom thou for Order sake, and the more commodity of man in this life
have set in degree and authority before me, comprehending them under the name
of Father and Mother, that I might know, that -- I am of thee commanded to do
that which is most equal and just (as the very Brute Beasts do teach us) that
with childly Affection and Duty, I should behave my self toward them, i. e. I
should honor them; which comprehends in it Love, Thankfulness, and
Obedience, and that,
not so much because they be my Parents (for it may be they will neglect the
doing of their Duties toward me), but because thou command me so to do,
whatsoever they do. page 118, 119.
-- And whereas thou addest a Promise of long Life, we may gather, that a civil
Life does much please thee, and receives here Rewards, especially if we lead
it for Conscience to thy Law: And on the contrary part, a disobedient Life to
them that be in authority, will bring the sooner thy Wrath and Vengeance in
this Life. Thus speaks the holiest and devoutest of all Queen Mary 's Martyrs,
as Chapter Hist. l. 8. p. 21.
Fuller styles him.

SECT. V.
To the holy Bradford it is requisite to join his dear Friend the zealous
Lawrence Saunders, the man of God, who, said he, was in Prison, Ap. Fox. tom.
2. p. 1358.
till he was in Prison, so fervently did he covet Martyrdom) they both being
entrusted at the same time with the Cure of Souls in the City of London; he in
his Letter to the Professors of the Gospel in the Town of Litchfield, thus
exhorts them to stedfastness in the Faith, and Patience; And now dearly
beloved, Coverd. Coll. Page 188.
we be taught by that heavenly Spirit, which our God has given unto us, to
seek Comfort in these times of Affliction, not in hope of Rebellion, or
fulfilling unprofitable, yea, pestilent Welsh Prophecies; but in the most
comfortable and glad tidings of the heavenly Promises assured in his dear
Christ. -- Let us most obediently kiss the Rod of our heavenly Father, by
obedient Submission to avoid all extremity, that man may do unto us, rather
than to forgo Faith and a good Conscience.

When the good Bishop of Rome was hurried to Martyrdom in the Decian
Persecution, his Deacon S. Lawrence would not be left behind: Nor is it fit
that Lawrence Saunders should appear without his Curate (and Brother in
Sufferings) George Marsh, Ap Fox. tom. 2. p. 1426. Coverd. page 671.
who in his Ex^^rtatory Letter to the Professors of God's Word and true
Religion in Langhton, after much Discourse about Martyrdom, Patience, and
Resolution, says, Give your selves continually to all manner of good Works,
amongst the which the chiefest are to be obedient to the Magistrates,
since they are the Ordinance of God, whether they be good or evil, unless they
command Idolatry and Ungodliness, that is to say, things contrary unto true
Religion; for then ought we to say with Peter, We ought more to obey God than
man; but in any wise we must beware of Tumult, Insurrection, Rebellion, or
Resistance. The Weapon of a Christian Man in this matter ought to be the Sword
of the Spirit, which is God's Word, and Prayer coupled with Humility and due
Submission, with readiness of Heart, rather to dye than to do any Ungodliness.
Christ also teaches us, that all Power is of God, yea even the Power of the
wicked, which God causes oftentimes to reign for our Sins and Disobedience
toward him and his Word. Whosoever then does resist any Power, does resist the
Ordinance of God, and so purchase to himself utter Destruction and Undoing. --
We must honor and reverence Princes, and all that be in authority, and pray
for them, and be diligent to set forth their Profit and Commodity. -- And thus
I commend you, Brethren, unto God, Fox. page 1428.
and the word of his Grace, etc. And in another Letter of his to several of his
Friends, he exhorts them, Obey with Reverence all your Superiors, unless they
command Idolatry or Ungodliness.

Thus also that hearty and zealous man of God, Mr. Philpot, Archdeacon of
Winchester, Coverd. page 222.
in his Letter to the Christian Congregation, discoursing of the Excuses men
make use of to hide their Sins, says, Another sort of Persons do make
themselves a Cloak for the Rain, under the pretense of Obedience to the
Magistrates, whom we ought to obey, although they be wicked: But such much
learn of Christ, to give to Caesar that that is Cesar's, and to God, that that
is due to God: And with S. Peter, to obey the higher Powers in the Lord, albeit
they be evil, if they command nothing contrary to God's Word, otherwise we
ought not to obey their Commandments, although we should suffer death
therefore; as we have the Apostles for our Examples herein to follow, who
answered the Magistrates, as we ought to do in this case, not obeying their
wicked Precepts, saying, Judge ye, whether it be more righteous, that we should
obey men rather than God.

Nor was this Doctrine peculiar to these few Confessors in that general
Persecution; for Rogers, the Proto-Martyr of that Reign; Dr. Tailor of Hadley,
Crome, Laurence, and others, as appears by the first page 23.
Part of this History, were of the same mind; the contrary Doctrine among
those, who called themselves Protestants, being then hardly hatched, or but
just out of the Shell. Thus the Primitive Martyrs, who never declined going to
a Stake, unanimously declared, that no man of their Society was imprisoned, or
brought to suffer, as a Traitor against the Government, for they had learnt to
dye, not to fight for Religion.

SECT. VI.
It cannot be denied, that John Knox was an early Opposer of this truly
Christian, Apostolical, and Primitive Practice, as the account of the Troubles
of v. first part of Hist. page 25/6.
Francfort declares: But we ought withal to consider, what our most worthy
Primate, Archbishop Bancroft well observes Danger. Posit. etc. lib. 2. c. 1.
; that whereas such dangerous Doctrines as these [ The Authority which Princes
have, is given them from the People, and upon occasion the People may take it
away again. -- That evil Princes, by the Law of God, ought to be deposed. --
That when Magistrates cease to do their Duties (in deposing evil Princes) then
God gives the Sword into the Peoples hands; and such other like dangerous
Positions, as he truly calls them] were owned by the Genevians, and many of the
English that were fled to Geneva in the Reign of Queen Mary; 'that the rest of
the learned Men, that fled in that Queens Reign, as John Scory, William Barlow,
Richard Cox, Thomas Becon, John Bale, John Parkhurst, Edmond Grindal, Edwin
Sandys, Alexander Nowel, Robert Wisdom, John Jewel, and very many more, having
no great affection to Geneva, bestowed themselves in Germany, especially at
Zurich, Basil, and Francfort; and maintained the Reformation of the Church of
England in King Edward 's time;
they used in their holy Assemblies the form of Service, and order of
Ceremonies, which were then established; and they utterly misliked and
condemned the aforesaid Propositions, as very seditious and rebellious,
according to the judgment of all the Reformed Churches (for ought I can learn)
both in Germany and elsewhere, except Geneva, and her Offspring; besides they
of Francfort (as it appears) notwithstanding their grief, that they were
constrained to leave their Country for their Conscience; yet in the midst of
all their Afflictions they retained so dutiful Hearts to Queen Mary (imitating
therein the Apostles and Disciples of our Master) as that they could not endure
to hear her so traduced into all Hatred and Obloquy, as she was by the other
sort. Mr. Knox coming upon occasion from Geneva to Francfort, was by these
grave Men accused of Treason (as he himself confesses) for Matters that he had
published in print against their Sovereign and the Emperor, and was fain
thereupon to fly thence to Geneva: -- So that by this and the former Letter of
Bradford, etc. we may plainly see, what was the uniform Belief of the English
Confessors in those days of Persecution, both those who were in England, and
those who had fled thence for Righteousness sake, and for a good Conscience.

Nor can I find any true Son of our Church, that asserted the contrary
Doctrine, unless we must except Bishop Poinet in his short Treatise of Politic
power and true obedience, in which it is Thetically laid down, that it is
lawful to depose an evil Governor, and to kill a Tyrant. But I cannot believe
the Book to be his. 1. Because Printed (as I think) after his death Anno 1556.
he dying at Strasburg April 11. of the same year, and the Preface to his Book
seems to acknowledge it. 2. Because (if I conjecture aright, by the character)
Printed at Geneva, (where two years afterward) Anno sc. 1558. both Knox's first
blast of the Trumpet against the Regiment of Women, and Goodman's Book of
Obedience first saw the light, and Ant. Gilbie's admonition to England and
Scotland to call them to repentance; and thirdly, because it wants that
learning and acumen, that discover themselves illustriously in his other
Writings; and the Doctrine is contrary to that Bishop's Practices, l. 2. hist.
Reform. p. 271.
Dr. Burnet acquitting Bishop Poinet of having any hand (as he was accused) in
Sir Thomas Wyatt's Rebellion; and how easy is it in a disturbed Age, for
Zealots to Father on a dead Bishop such Tenets, as he neither owned nor
defended? but if after all this, Bishop Poinet be the genuine Author of that
Treatise, it is but the example of one, and that no Old Man, (for he died
before he was forty) maintaining a Paradox against all the other the venerable
Martyrs, and Confessors of that time.

SECT. VII.
Among those pious Exiles, Thomas Beacon was one; who having been in the
beginning of Queen Fox. tom 2. p. 1281.
Mary's Reign, committed to the charge of the Lieutenant of the Tower, with
Bradford and Vernon, went afterward into Germany, whence upon Queen
Elizabeth's advancement to the Crown, he with many other Exiles returned into
this Kingdom. I shall at present omit, what he in his Anthology out of the
Works of Lactantius has cited out of that Father, and give an account of what
he declares to be his own Sentiments: In his Governance of Virtue, Sect. Tom 1.
oper. f. 263. Land 1564.
against Rebellion and Disobedience, he thus instructs us. If the Devil, that
old Enemy of Mankind, and troubler of all good orders, go about to put in thy
head, that the Magistrates, and High Powers do not their duty in the right
Government of a Commonwealth,
but too much cruelly oppress their Subjects, and that therefore they may
justly rise and rebel against them; and take upon thee of thy own private
authority to redress things, that are amiss in the Commonwealth, take heed
that thou by no means consentest to his most subtle and wicked temptation,
whereby he goes about to throw thee into everlasting damnation both of Body
and Soul, besides the shameful death, that thou shall have in this World, and
the loss of all that ever thou have; but content thy self with thy vocation,
labor diligently and quietly for thy living to maintain peace, pray for the
High Powers, think that cross to be laid upon thee for thy Deserts, amend thy
life, humbly lament thy cause to God, who will not leave thee succorless, and
defend thy self against Satan, and all his crafty suggestions with these
Scriptures following, f. 264.
-- after which he cites very many places of the Holy Writ to confirm what he
had said, both Precepts and Examples, out of the Old and New Testament.

Catech. p. 343.
Did not Christ teach Obedience toward the Higher Powers, did he not pay
Tribute, etc? Did not the Apostles of Christ in like manner, both teach and do?
-- neither lack we in the Holy Scriptures Histories, which do manifestly
declare what a great Sin Disobedience is, and how grievously God has punished
it, -- the Histories of Dathan, and Abiron, Zimri, and Baasa, etc. confirm
this, -- it is good to follow the example of David,
which showed such honor and reverence unto King Saul, being both a Wicked
Ruler, and also his mortal Enemy; that he would not once hurt him, nor yet
suffer any other to do it, although he had sufficient opportunity, and occasion
at diverse times to have slain him if he had been minded; The Lord forbid, said
he, that I should lay my hand on him; again, kill him not, for who, says he,
shall lay hands on the Lord's Anointed, 2. Reg. 1.
and not be guilty? as the Lord lives, he dies not, except the Lord smite
him, etc. -- and this Doctrine he confirms by many other examples, both under
the Law and the Gospel, Id. Tom.
and closes all with the example of the Thebaean Legion; so vigorously did our
Forefathers thunder with it. Is the Magistrate appointed of God an Officer, 1.
f. 437. Obj.
or is he rather a Tyrant Usurping Power and Authority over other Persons
against all Right and Law? Ans. He is ordained of God to be a Ruler over his
People, and no Man has justly Rule and Authority in any Commonwealth, which
is not ordained of God. Obj. But what if the Magistrates be evil, wicked,
ungodly, tyrants, haters of the truth, oppressors of the poor, etc. are they
also appointed of God? Ans. In Job it is thus written, for the sins of the
People does God make an Hypocrite to Reign over them; and God himself says by
the Prophet, I shall give them Children to be their Princes, and Babes shall
have Rule over them; the People also shall be pilled and polled, etc. -- Our
Savior Christ confessed, that the Authority which Pilate had, although a wicked
and ungodly Person, was from God,
and he willingly suffered death under that Tyrant; neither do we read, that
the Apostles at any time did reject, and cast away the Regiment of the Heathen
Rulers, as a thing unlawful, but they rather exhorted the Subjects to obey
them, so far as they commanded nothing contrary to God's word, to honor them,
to pray for them, to give them tribute, etc. -- Thus we see, that not only
Godly, but also ungodly Princes; not only righteous, but also unrighteous and
wicked Rulers are given us of God: the one, I mean the good, for the favor
which God bears toward us; the other, I mean the evil for the anger and
displeasure, that he has toward us, when he sees us disobedient to his Laws
and Ordinances. -- f. 504.
Subjects from the very heart must love, and reverence the civil Magistrates,
as the Ministers and Vicars of God. -- and if it be their duty to love and
reverence, and honor the Higher Powers with a true and inward affection of the
heart, then may they not hate them, and unworthily speak of them. -- 2. f. 505.
Their next duty is to pray for them, that God may be with them, assist them,
and defend them, etc. -- 3. They must humbly obey them, and that not for fear
of punishment, but for conscience sake; for as God has commanded the
Magistrate to rule, so he has commanded to obey; this commandment of God may
by no means be disobeyed; for to disobey the Magistrate is none other thing,
than to disobey God, whose Minister the Magistrate is, and whose Office he
executes. And having proved this by several places of Holy Scripture, he
subjoins: If this Obedience were thoroughly grafted in the hearts of Subjects,
all murmurings, tumults, commotions, seditions, insurrections, etc. should soon
cease in the Commonwealth. -- they should soon cease, for they should never be
attempted; but whosoever through the motion of the Devil, enterprise such
things against the Magistrates,
they always come to a miserable end; so far is it off, that they have good
success in their wicked and damnable attempts, as Histories of all Ages do
evidently declare, etc. -- 4. The Office of Subjects is willingly, and without
grudging to bear such burdens, and pay such charges, as the Magistrates shall
reasonably require of them, etc. but Qu. f. 506.
But may the Magistrate take away the Subject's goods at his pleasure? Answ.
Nothing less, for there is a propriety of goods and possessions, as well in the
Subject, as in the Magistrate; so that if the Magistrate do unjustly take away
his Subjects goods, he is a Tyrant, and shall not escape the terrible
indignation, and fierce Plagues of God, as we may see in the History of King
Ahab, and Naboth the Jesreelite, etc. -- 5. and finally, it is required of
Subjects, that they do not blaze nor publish abroad, but rather conceal and
hide the faults, oversights, and negligences of the Magistrates, etc. This was
the Doctrine, which the Catechists of those days taught the People.

And as Men were taught to believe in those days, Id. tom. 2. op. f. 211. in
the pomander of Prayer.
so were they also taught to pray. As it is thy Godly appointment, O Lord God,
that some should bear rule in this World to see thy Glory set forth, and the
common peace kept; so it is thy pleasure again, that some should be Subjects
and inferiors to others in their vocation, although before thee there is no
respect of Persons, and forasmuch as it is thy good will to appoint me in the
number of Subjects, I beseech thee to give me a faithful, and an obedient heart
unto the High Powers, that there may be found in me no disobedience, no
unfaithfulness, no treason, no falsehood, no dissimulation,
no insurrection, no commotion, no conspiracy, nor any kind of Rebellion in
word, or in deed against the Civil Magistrates; but all faithfulness,
obedience, quietness, subjection, humility; and whatsoever else becomes a
Subject, that I living here in all lowliness of mind, may at the last day
through thy favor be lifted up unto everlasting Glory, where thou with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost live, and reignest very God for ever. Amen.

The same Author in his Treatise, Tom. 3. f. 499, 500.
called the Glorious Triumph of God's most Blessed Word, introduces the Holy
Scriptures thus vindicating themselves. Now as touching that mine adversaries
say, that I and my Preachers teach disobedience unto the High Powers, and
encourage their Subjects rather to make Insurrection against them, than they
should lose any thing at all of their sensual pleasures; I know not, if mine
Enemies in any point have uttered their maliciousness against us, than in this
one thing; that ye may know, how they shame nothing at all to lie, hear, I pray
you, the sum of our Doctrine concerning this matter; Romans 13.1 Pet. 2.
Let every Soul be obedient to the Powers, that bear rule, etc. again, be ye
obedient to every humane creature, etc. -- here have I given you a taste of
Doctrine concerning the duty of Subjects unto the High Powers; what
disobedience do ye perceive by these words, that we teach? do we move the
Inferiors, and the base commonalty, or any other unto such carnal liberty; that
for defense of the same, they should either show disobedience, or make
Insurrection against the head Rulers, as our adversaries falsely report of us?
-- who brought the Higher Powers again unto the true Authority, which God from
the beginning gave them, but I, and my Ministers? contrariwise, who usurped
this Power, and brought the Magistrates in Subjection, but these Enemies of
God's Word? who goes about to maintain it still, but they only? -- I alone,
and my Ministers have set the Princes again in their Authority, and valiantly
delivered them from the Tyranny of the Papists, as ye may perceive not only in
our Sermons, but also in our Writings.

CHAP. IV. The History of Passive Obedience in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
SECT. I.
THE Jews say, that before one Prophetic light was by death extinguished,
another was set up to illuminate a degenerate World; and thus did God in his
mercy order it in our Church; tho many eminent Confessors commenced Martyr's
under Queen Mary, yet the divine goodness did not leave it self, and the truth
without Witnesses, who for a while sung the Songs of Sion in a strange Land,
but upon the advancement of Queen Elizabeth to the Throne of these Nations,
they returned to vindicate that faith, which was once delivered to the Saints,
and for which they had earnestly contended, being ready to resist unto blood;
and because the Churches most eminent, and most envied Advocate, was Bishop
Jewel, I shall begin the History of this Reign, with an account of his
Sentiments. When I have recited a Passage or two out of the Homily against
Rebellion, which are omitted in the first part of this History. -- The first
Author of Rebellion, the root of all vices, p 4th.
and the Mother of all mischief was Lucifer, first God's most excellent
creature, and most bounden Subject, who by rebelling against the Majesty of
God, of the brightest and most Glorious Angel, became the blackest and most
foul Fiend and Devil, and from the height of Heaven is fallen into the Pit,
and bottom of Hell; -- tho not only great multitudes of the rude and rascal
Commons, but sometimes also Men of great Wit, Nobility, and Authority; have
moved Rebellion against their lawful Princes; tho they should pretend sundry
causes, as the redress of the Commonwealth, or Reformation of Religion,
tho they have made a great show of Holy meaning, by beginning their Rebellion
with the counterfeit Service of God, and by displaying and bearing about diverse
Ensigns and Banners; which are acceptable unto the rude ignorant common People
(great multitudes of whom by such false pretenses, and shows they do deceive
and draw unto them) yet were the multitudes of the Rebels never so huge and
great, the Captains never so noble, politic, and witty, the pretenses feigned
to be never so good and holy, yet the speedy overthrow of all Rebels, of what
number, state, or condition soever they were, or what color or cause soever
they pretended, is, and ever has been such,
that God does thereby show, that he allows neither the dignity of any
Person, nor the multitude of any People, nor the weight of any cause, as
sufficient, for which Subjects may move Rebellion against their Princes: -- and
how severely the same Homilies censure, p. 6.
and condemn the Barons, who broke their Oath of Fidelity to their natural Lord
King John, is acknowledged by all Men.

Bishop Jewel in his justly admired Apology taking notice, p. 34. etc. edit.
Land 1581.
that among many other false accusations then laid to the Charge of the Church,
this was one, that its members were turbulent, snatching Scepters out of the
Hands of Princes, Arming their Subje^^ against them, rescinding their Laws, and
changing Monarchies into popular Government; whereby the minds of Princes were
exasperated to believe, that every Protestant in their Jurisdiction was their
Enemy and a Rebel; subjoins, that it would have been most troublesome to those
good Men, to be so odiously accused of so grievous a crime as Treason, had they
not known, that Christ himself, and his Apostles, and an infinite number of
pious Christians had been accused of the same crime; for tho Christ had taught
the World, to render to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, yet he was accused
of Sedition, and the desire of reigning, and it was loudly cried at the
Tribunal, If thou let this man go, thou art no friend to Caesar; and tho the
Apostles constantly taught Men to obey Magistrates, that every Soul ought to be
Subject to the higher powers, and that not only for wrath, but for conscience
sake, yet they were said to stir up the People, and to invite the multitude to
Rebellion. So did Haman accuse the Jews, Ahab accuse Elias, and Amasias the
Priest accuse the honest Prophet Amos; in short, Tertullian says all the
Christians of his time were so accused. -- as also did the ancient Enemies of
Christianity, Symmachus, Celsus, Julian, Porphyry accuse the Christians of
their Ages; -- so that the charge is not new, nor can it seem strange, -- tho
our very Enemies cannot deny, that in all our discourses and writings, we
diligently admonish the People of their duty, to be obedient to Princes and
Magistrates, tho they are wicked, p. 84, etc.
etc. -- If we are Traitors, who honor our Princes, who pay them deference and
obedience in all things, as much as is lawful for us to do by the Word of God,
who pray for them, etc. what are they, who have not only done all that we speak
of, but also have approved of such proceedings? -- We neither throw off the
Yoke, nor disturb Kingdoms, we neither set up Kings,
nor dethrone them, nor transfer their Empires, nor give them Poison, nor make
them to kiss our Feet, nor tread on their Necks. This rather is our Profession,
this is our Doctrine, that every Soul, whosoever it be, whether a Monk, or
Evangelist, or Prophet, or Apostle, ought to be subject to Kings and
Magistrates. -- we teach publicly, that obedience ought to be paid to Princes,
as to Men sent by God; and that whosoever resists them, resists the
Ordinance of God. These are our Institutions, these Doctrins are illustrious in
our Books, in our Sermons, and in the manners, and modesty of our People.

The same admirable Prelate in his Epistle Dedicatory to Queen Elizabeth,
before his defense of the Apology is still of the same mind; blaming his
Adversary Harding for debasing the Majesty of Kings. sol. 318.6.
Mr. Harding concerning the Majesty and Right of Kings tells us; they have
their first authority by the positive Law of Nations, and can have no more
power, than the People has, of whom they take their Temporal Jurisdiction; as
if he would say, Emperors and Kings have none other Right of Government, than
it has pleased their Subjects by composition to allow unto them; thus he says,
and says it boldly, as if God himself had never said, per me Reges regnant, by
me and mine authority Kings bear rule over their Subjects; or as if Christ our
Savior had never said unto Pilate the Lord Lieutenant, thou should have no
power over me, were it not given thee from above; or as if St. Paul had not
said, there is no power but only from God, -- they also hold, that the Pope is
the Head, and Kings and Emperors the Feet. -- If this Doctrine may once take
root,
and be freely received amongst the Subjects, it shall be hard for any Prince
to hold his Right.

And in his Defense he declares himself to be of the same mind. part. 1. p. 15.
Mr. Harding knows right well we never Armed the People,
nor taught them to rebel for Religion against the Prince; if any thing have at
any time happened otherwise, it was either some wilful rage, or some fatal
fury, it was not our counsel, it was not our Doctrine; we teach the People, as
St. Paul does, To be subject to the higher powers, not only for fear, but also
for conscience; we teach them, that whosoever strikes with the sword, (by private
authority) shall perish with the sword; if the Prince happen to be wicked, or
cruel, or burthenous, we teach them to say with St. Ambrose, Arma nostra sunt
preces, and lacrymae, tears, and prayers be our weapons; and when p. 16.
Harding himself had said, that he condemned all such attempts, that any
Subject or Subjects whatsoever of their own private authority, should take Arms
against their Prince for matters of Religion. -- why, (replies Jewel) except
you only the case of Religion? Is it lawful by your Grant for the Subject in
any other case, either of Life, or of Government, to Arm himself against his
Prince? and would you thus persuade the People? Is this your Religion? Is this
your Doctrine?

Anno 1565. Alexander Nowel, Dean of St. Paul's, set forth his reproof of Mr.
Dorman 's proof; and in it vindicates the Church of England from the scandalous
imputation, pr. at Land. 4 to. p. 94, 95.
that it taught Men to be Rebels. Corah, Dathan, and Abyron, rebelled against
Moses and Aaron, who were specially by God appointed to be their Governors and
his Ministers; but what appertains that to us, who do obey our natural Prince
appointed by God to be our Governor, and all, as well Civil Magistrates, as
Ecclesiastical Ministers of God under our Prince? And therefore do we, as we
must needs, renounce the authority of that foreign Usurper of Rome, -- it is
you Papists, that are the Successors of the Rebels Corah, etc. who leaving the
Obedience due to your own natural Princes, for the serving of a Foreign false
Usurper of Rome, do rebel, not only against Moses, that is to say, your
Governor by God appointed, but against God himself also; -- we acknowledge, that
as Moses and Aaron were Gods Ministers by him appointed to govern his peculiar
People Israel; so has God likewise appointed to every several Country their
Moses and Aaron, their Princes and Pastors or Bishops; which ought likewise to
be obeyed, as Moses and Aaron were to be obeyed of the Israelites; and that
those, who do disobey them, do sin by Rebellion, p. 96.
as did Corah, etc -- as we are most far from Rebelling against our natural
Sovereign, and other of God's Ministers appointed to govern us, and therefore
no partakers of Corah, and his fellows Rebellion; so trust we in God to be most
far from their most horrible destruction, and we give warning to Mr. Dorman,
etc. who for maintenance of a Foreign Pharaoh against their conscience (as is to
be feared) do disobey their own natural Prince, and that upon a pretense of
holiness and spirituality, and are therein most like to Corah, etc. (rebelling
against their own special Governors by God appointed, as they did) that they
make speed by unfeigned repentance to mollify God's most just wrath, that they
follow not Corah, etc. in horrible damnation, as they have followed them in
damnable Rebellion.

Anno 1569. an exhortation to the Queens Majesty's poor deceived Subjects of
the North, drawn into Rebellion by the Earls of Northumberland, and Westmorland
was printed by allowance, and in it they are thus accosted. Christians I cannot
term you, that have defaced the Communion of Christians, and in destroying the
Book of Christ's most Holy Testament, renounced your parts by his Testament
bequeathed unto you; -- their pretenses were, the foul disorder of the Realm,
much impoverished, far indebted, the defrauding of due execution of Justice,
that no Subject can have his Right by Law, but falsely, whereas they are better
taught, far does the proportion of duty of Subjects to the Prince, exceed the
duty of Servants to Masters, or Children to Parents, yea, or of Wives to their
Husbands; the very nearest conjoyning in humane fellowship, even so far as a
Realm exceeds a private Family; but if one of your own Servants, Children, or
Wives, should do that without your will, nay against your will and express
commandment, that your Captains and you have attempted without, and against the
Queens Highness pleasure, would you account them good Servants, good Children,
or good Wives? -- if they shall put on armor and weapon, and become terrible,
or threaten force to the Master, Father, Husband, or the rest of the Family, if
the case were your own, you would more mislike it. -- The Prince is the Husband
of the Common wealth married to the Realm, and the same by ceremony of a ring;
-- shall you resist her authority, and refuse her blessing, and say you be her
good children? Shall your Captains forsake her Service, and say they are good
Servants? -- note withal, how likely they are to profess a true Religion, that
hold this Principle,
to keep no faith, use no loyalty, regard no oaths and promises made with
attestation of God, and avowing themselves to renouncing of Heaven, and to
eternal damnation; -- they regard no Religion, that go so irreligiously to
work, all is but show and hypocrisy. -- Reed, I beseech you, the excellent
Treatise of Sir John Cheek Knight of the hurt of Sedition; there see, as in a
glass, the deformity of your fault, etc. -- an unnatural hope it is, and a
beastly to join with any strangers to the spoil of their own Country; but such
is the nature of that false Religion, to regard no Country, faith, nature, or
common honesty.

SECT. II.
Antonius Corranus of Sevil, a Learned Spaniard (an excellent Person, as Dr.
Patrick with reason calls him) spent much of his time in England; and, as
appears by his Writings, very well understood our Doctrine; after he left his
Country for the sake of a good Conscience, he Preached ten years in France (as
he did also for some time in Flanders) still reserving himself (when God should
give him an opportunity) to Preach to his own Countrymen, which he afterward
did for two years in London, till that Congregation of Exiled Spaniards was
dissolved; after which an 1571. he was chosen by the Templers to read his
Lectures among them (and their choice was confirmed by Edwin Lord Bishop of
London.) In the first year of his Ministry, he expounded the Epistle to the
Romans, and out of that larger Commentary, he Printed an. 1574. a Theological
Dialogue (between St. Paul, and one of his Roman auditors) for this, among
other reasons, that it might witness the purity of his Doctrine, and how much
he abhorred the Opinions of the Sectaries, that then disturbed the Church.

In this Dialogue, having shown from the close of the 12th Chap. that we ought
to overcome our Enemies perverseness, and malign temper by our goodness and
patience, he continues to Paraphrase the 13th Chapter thus,

Romans I could wish from my Soul, that this Doctrine so useful, and necessary to
our quiet were embraced by all Men; but (O horrid wickedness!) many of our
Church begin not only to revenge themselves on their Persecutors, but dare take
Arms, and resist the Magistrates and Judges, that hinder the Preaching of the
Gospel.

Paul, They who think, that the sufferings of Christians hinder the propagation
of the Gospel, are extremely deceived, for the blood of the Martyrs waters the
Garden of the Church; -- but do you, who love Religion mind this Precept, that
every one that has given up his name to Christ, be subject to the higher
Powers; for why are they placed in a superior Station, but that their inferiors
may be subject unto them?

Romans But what if Princes, either Hereditary or Elective, be evil or cruel,
must we obey them?

Paul, What should hinder? for we are not to consider our Rulers as private
Men, but to reverence them as constituted by God, for there is no power, but
what is of God: -- if they, inclined by the fear of God, promote piety, their
example does great good; but if they do otherwise, we ought to consider, the
Vengeance of God, who for the Sins of a Nation sets over them Hypocrites and
Dissemblers: But even this Dispensation of God brings with it advantage to the
godly.

Romans Then you, S. Paul, are of that opinion, that it is not lawful to take
Arms against Princes and Magistrates, tho they hinder the Gospel, and would
Murder and destroy us?

Paul, That is my opinion; and this I add, as a conclusion, Whosoever resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive
to themselves Damnation, and that justly; for since God is the Author of this
Order, they who rebel against the Magistrates, wage War against God himself,
and shall bring upon themselves great Calamities.

Romans O the deplorable state of this Age! In which we see so many civil Wars,
popular Seditions, Treasons, cruel Murders of Princes, and more than barbarous
Massacres perpetrated on Subjects.

Paul, All these things probably fall out for the Sins both of the People and
Rulers: The People forgetting their Duty, despise the Authority of the Prince;
and the King on the contrary forgets his Obligations, and rages like a cruel
Tyrant. -- Would then therefore (and when I speak to you, I speak to all
Men) not dread the Power, do that which is good, and thou shall have praise,
and a reward from it; so far ought thou to be from opposing it.

Romans A most excellent method of bearing this Yoke, which would otherwise be
insupportable; -- but men are wise too late: Would to God this Doctrine were as
much engraven on Men's Hearts, as it finds a place on their Tongues; for by this
means it would soon come to pass, that the Minds of Christians would enjoy much
inward Peace, and the Commonweal much Advantage.

Paul, Wheresoever you are, inculcate this Sentence in season, out of season,
beseech, reprove, and teach, that the Magistrate is God's chosen Minister,
appointed and preferred by him to the Office of governing, for the punishment
of them that do evil, and for the comfort of them that do well: If therefore
thou do evil, fear, for he bears not the Sword in vain; for God, who has
advanced those Powers, has armed them with the Sword of Justice. -- That I may
sum up all in a few words, we ought to be subject to the Powers, not only for
wrath but for Conscience sake; for it is the Duty of a Christian to be subject
to his Superiors.

Romans You therefore believe, that we must obey Magistrates, not only for fear
of Punishment, but for greater Reasons; because, tho the Magistrate have no
power over Conscience, yet, because he is the Minister of God, no one with a
good Conscience can resist him.

Paul, That is my Opinion; and for this Reason, to show the inward Obedience of
your Mind, do you pay Tribute, etc. So that learned and pious Paraphrast in
opposition to the many false Glosses put upon the Words of the holy Apostle.

John Young, Doctor of Divinity, preached before the Queen, the Second of
March, 1575. on Psalm. 131. Lord, I am not high minded, and he tells us, the
occasion of writing the Psalm was, That there were certain Parasites and
Flatterers attending upon King Saul; who, maligning David, because that by
Almighty God's special appointment he was anointed King over Israel, and
seeking to bring him into discredit, and into hatred with his Prince, did
insinuate, that he did secretly practice the Deposing him from the Kingdom, and
the Advanceing of himself ambitiously to the same: Therefore the Prophet
declares their Suggestions to be most false and slanderous, and himself to be
innocent from that great Offense. -- S. Austin says, He that will go about to
satifie and fulfill (as all other) so that ambitious and arrogant desire, shall
find it a Toil of all Toyls, such a Labor, as Samson or Hercules, never
achieved. -- This desire of Honor, Rule, Principality, worldly Glory, and
Renown, is in the Heart of Man (if it be once possessed therewithal) a Worm
that dies not, etc. -- Now David, when he says, He did not exercise himself
in such great matters, etc. his meaning was, that he did never seek (as he was
most falsely and unjustly charged by some) to advance himself ambitiously to the
Kingdom, King Saul, his Master, being alive; because he knew well enough, that
it was too great for him to wield, and too high also for him to aspire unto. --
Such was the Humility of this excellent Man, the Friend of God, to the utter
Condemnation and Confusion of all those, whose whole study and endeavor
evermore has been, and is at this day, to undermine those which be in
authority, to invade and occupy other men's Kingdoms, to wring the Scepter and
Sword out of Princes hands. -- This is a Vice never enough to be detested,
considering the manifold and great Mischiefs which have come thereby to Heaven,
to Earth, to Angels, to Men, to all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, to the whole
World. -- This ambitious Man is a Thief, is a Homicide, if it lie in his power,
he is a Regicide, he is the Parricide of his Country. -- I will only put you
in mind of one only Lesson, which we are taught by this Verse, which is this,
that it is much better for us sperare, quam aspirare, to trust in Almighty God,
than to aspire; for in aspiring there be many Inconveniences, -- but the
anchor-hold of Hope is firm and sure, etc.

Bartholomew Clerk, Fidelis servi subdito inside'i responsie. Land. 1573.
anno 1573, writing against that virulent, tho learned Rebel Saunders, avers,
That the Majesty of Princes is by no means to be violated; if they are good, we
are to thank God, who has blessed his People with so divine a Benefit; but if
they are evil, we are to submit our Necks to their Tyranny, or to fly to
another City; we must at no time make resistance by Force and Arms, by Tumult
and Slaughter: For this we ought to believe, that evil Kings are appointed by
God for the punishment of our Sins, and are sent into the World as God's
Scourges.

SECT. III.
Anno 1590. Dr. Babington printed his Questions and Answers upon the
Commandments (he being the Year after made B. of Landaffe, and saccessively of
Exon and Worcester) and on the Fifth Commandment he says, p. 2^2.
That by Parents are meant such, as are so by Dignity and Office; such as are
Magistrates over the People, Masters over their Servants, p. 203.
etc. -- Magistrates are only to be obeyed in the Lord; p. 208.
contrary to Pretty and Charity must neither they command nor we do. -- Many
Servants take their Masters Unkindness for an excuse of their Disobedience or
Infidelity in their Services, which indeed must not be so, says S. Peter, but
be they never so froward, yet we must do all Duty, if we be Servants, and even
joy heartily in that Cross, that notwithstanding our faithful and painful Duty,
we suffer; -- for we serve not them, but God in them. And whereas some may be
apt to limit this Doctrine to Servants, and to exempt Subjects, who are by
parity of reason obliged; the same Bishop in his Notes on Exodus 18. says, p.
27. ^. ed. Land. fol. 1637.
The Duty of Subjects toward their Governors is 1. To think most reverently of
their Places, as an Authority appointed of God for our good; and, not as some
Men do, outwardly to obey them, and inwardly to think them but necessary Evils:
For S. Peter's words teach more, when he says, Honor the King; and Solomon,
when he bids, Fear God and the King; for in the word Honor, Peter includes
sinceram and candidam existimationem, a sincere and unfeigned reverence of
them; and Solomon, joining the King with God, shows a holy and reverent
regard of him to be due to him from men subject to him: that also in S. Paul
has great efficacy in it, not for fear, but for Conscience sake; as if he
should say, even what duty is done,
or left undone to him, is done or left undone to God himself, from whom their
Authority and Power is; whosoever therefore the person is, the calling is of
God. -- Agian, after this inward reverend Conceit must follow outward Obedience
to their Laws, in paying Tribute, etc. Let every Soul be subject to the high
Powers, says the Apostle, because, he that resists,
resists to his own damnation. The Magistrate may sometime be weak, but God
will ever be strong to punish any Contempt of his Ordinance: In no case
therefore may we intrude our selves into their Offices, and meddle with public
matters, without a calling: For this is not to obey them, but to rule with
them; what is amiss, to them must be signified, and their help expected, unless
they appoint us; and then we are not private Persons any more, but public for
such business; -- be they never so evil, yet their place is of God, by whom
only Kings do rule, Dan. 2.23.37.
either to our good in his Mercy, or to our punishment in his Justice; Tyrants
are suffered sometimes to rule for the punishment of the evil, and the reward
of the good, says S. Ambrose; but how, will you think, l. 2. de Cain and Abel,
c. ^.
for the reard of the good? The same Ambrose notably says for answer, Never
did the Gentiles more for the Church, than when they commanded the Christians
to be beaten, proscribed, and killed, for than did Religion make that a Reward,
an Honor, and a Crown, which infidelity reputed a Punishment. S. Austin says,
There is no Power but of God; and therefore our Savior told Pilate, He could
have no Power at all over him, except it were given him from the Father; but
God does suffer the Hypocrite to rule for the Sin of the People, and therefore
that Sin must be taken away, that the Plague of having a Tyrant Ruler may
cease. -- What manner of King was Nez buchadnezzar, etc. if a King shall do, as
it is said, 1 Samuel 8.11. etc. he is God's Instrument thus to chasten us; and
tho things do not show what he ought to do, yet they show, what Subjects ought
to suffer without Disloyalty, if they be done: Read Jerem. 29.7. God forbid,
says David, that I should lay my hand on the Lord's Anointed; and yet Saul
sought his Life. Who shall lay his hand on the Lord's Anointed, and be
guiltless? etc. The Wife is not freed from her Husband when he is ill, nor the
Child from his Father, no more are Subjects from their Prince: But in such
cases God the only Helper is to be thought of, and prayed unto, who can give a
Moses for a Pharaoh, an Othniel for a Cushan, who can bring down the Pride of
Tyrus by the Egyptians, and then of the Egyptians by the Assyrians, the
Assyrians again by the Chaldeans, by the Medes, and Persions, etc. yet carrying
a gracious Ear, and Eye to Prayer proceeding from a penitent Heart, (...). Not.
(...). Genesis 14. page 43, 44.
etc. -- Rebellion is a bad course to get Liberty, where Subjection is due: For
Rebellion God never loved, never prospered, but ever plagued; and the fearful
destruction of Corah, and his Company, Absalom and his Company, etc. -- say as
much. Papists charge us that we are no good Friends to Princes and Rulers, and
it is no News to hear it of them; Elias had such measure measured unto him.
Micheas, -- all of them faithful to Princes, ever were so accused. We say the
Doctrine of Rome is no Friend to Princes (and here he instances in the
treasonable Books and rebellious Insurrections of the Papists, and adds) show
the Princes the Gospel has deposed; show the Princes, that Popery has not
wronged: It is our Doctrine that we firmly hold, and they fully defy, That he
that takes the Sword, shall perish with the Sword; i. e. he that takes it
without the bounds of a calling, warranting him (and that calling he afterward
says, is only the Prince's Order) as all Rebels ever do, that he which
resists the Superior Powers, resists the Ordinance of God, and to his own
Damnation; that we ought to obey and be subject, not for Fear, but for
Conscience sake; that the Weapons of Subjects be but Prayers and Tears, etc.
See then, whether Popery, or God's holy Gospel, which we hold, stand better
with the safety of Princes, and flourishing Estates of Kingdoms, etc.

SECT. IV.
Among the Works of Dr. Lawrence Humfreys, Preached at Oxford, 1588.
which he published against the Romanists, his seven Sermons on 1 Samuel 26.8, 9,
etc. To persuade Obedience to Princes, etc. are not the least considerable. In
which, having in the Epistle Dedicatory commended that Saying of S. Ambrose,
Rogamus Auguste, non pugnamus; We beseech, O Emperor, P. 22, 23.
we fight not: and in the first Sermon mentioned the many Rebellions of the
Papists, he says, Such a Catholic Faith must be maintained by such Catholic
Means, namely, by open Rebellions, privy Practices in a Catholic and Universal
Manner, that is, by all unlawful Means, P. 24.
-- That when Scruples arise against such traitorous Enterprises, then the Pope
has this Religion and Omnipotency, P. 32.
that he can dispense with any Oath. -- In the second Sermon he teaches every
one his Duty: It is lawful for a Magistrate to put to death a Malefactor --
otherwise no Spirit, no Reason, no Friend, no carnal Respect can authorize any
Man of his own Head, or his private affection, to draw weapon against any man,
much less against a double and compound person, P. 34. etc.
as the Prince established by Law and public Authority. -- If Christ found
fault with his Servant (Peter) fighting in his own quarrel,
host much more will he be angry with them, that take weapon against his
anointed Prince, his Lieutenant in the Earth? -- What do these Giants and
Tyrants of the World think? Or what do they esteem of the Blood of a Prince? Or
what do they imagine of the Ordinance or Institution of Princes? Are they
Upstarts by themselves, etc.? No, it is only the Ordinance of our living God.
P. 36, 37
-- By Office he represents God, he is God by name, -- Saul himself is named
here the anointed of the Lord, so are all other Potentates, that are by their
Vices evil Men, yet by Office the Ordinance of God: Prove. 8. Job 34.
By me rulers reign; the Hypocrites rule not without him. -- And why are the
bad as well as the good advanced? Austin gives two Reasons hereof; It is not
unjust, that wicked men receive power to hurt, both that the patience of the
good may be tried, and the wickedness of the evil punished. -- And if they are
set up by God, they cannot fall, but by God. P. 43.
-- What were the Magistrates in the time of Peter and Paul, but Heathen and
Tyrants, as Nero and such others, and yet Paul exhorts every soul to be subject
to the higher powers: and whosoever resists, etc. -- Even Nebuchadnezzar, a
Tyrant and Infidel was to be prayed for. -- Chrysostom amplifyeth the
excellent Integrity and Faithfulness of David toward Saul the anointed, Sermon 3.
p. 56.
in that David did this in the Old Testament, where some revenge was in a sort
permitted, etc. But to kill him, or any the anointed of the Lord, is contrary
to the Law of Nature, and all Laws. -- Those that are disloyal, and Rebels, are
not good Christians. P. 63. P. 78. P. 106.
-- We of this Land do swear and protest in the name of Christ, a fidelity to
God, to the Prince, and to our Country; this Oath must be kept. Many Laws have
been made against Treason and Rebellion, yet the unbridled and cruel Subjects
have always unkindly and unnaturally conspired against their Prince, and
against their own Country. -- Our King Ethelred complains in an Oration in this
sort: We are overcome of the Danes, not with Weapon, or force of Arms, but with
Treason wrought by our own People.

Anno 1593, Reprinted (...). 1640, etc.
Doctor Richard Bancroft (afterward Bishop of London, and Archbishop of
Canterbury) published his Dangerous Positions, etc. the whole Design of which
Treatise is to expose, and 'condemn the Republican Principles, then newly
broached in England, by the Lovers of the Geneva Platform. I have already (in
the Reign of Queen Mary) given his Sentiments of the Proceedings of the English
Exiles at Francfort against Knox, whose Principles were so infective, that they
inflamed his own native Country, and threw it into a most unnatural Rebellion;
of which their Ministers were the prime cause, and shall add his sense of those
seditious Doctrines and Practices. Lib. 1. cap 3.
But because some peradventure will labor to excuse these Proceedings, and to
color the same with some pretense of zeal, and great desire they had to be
delivered from Popish Idolatry and Superstition; I have thought it convenient
to let you understand how far they are from making any such pretenses in their
own behalf, and with what new Divinity Positions Mr. Knox and Mr. Buchanan have
amplified the Geneva Resolution,
(viz. That if Princes refuse to reform Religion, the Magistrates and People
may lawfully do it by force of Arms) to the Justification not only of their
said Attempts and Actions, but also many others of the like nature. Chapter 4.
-- And afterward he mentions their Positions, That Princes for just causes may
be deposed -- That it is not Birthright only, nor Propinquity of Blood, that
makes a King lawfully reign above a People professing Jesus Christ. -- If
Princes be Tyrants against God and his Truth; their Subjects are freed from
their Oaths of Obedience. -- The People are better than the King, and of
greater Authority, etc. Of all which, and many the like Propositions he averrs,
that they tend to the disturbance and utter overthrow of the freest and most
absolute Monarchies that are, or can be in Christendom, and that they are
contrary (he was sure) both to the Word of God, and to all the Laws and Customs
of this Realm. -- But I must transcribe the greatest part of the Book, should I
cite all that is to my purpose in it, while I leave to the Reader's private
Consideration that, and his other excellent Treatise called, a Survey of the
pretended Holy Discipline. And if I mistake not, by his directions the Account
of Hacket's, Coppinger's and Arthington's Treason was drawn up, and Printed in
the Book called Conspiracy for pretended Reformation; the Design of which is
expressly against the Doctrine of taking up, Arms against the Lord's anointed,
especially on the Account of Religion.

SECT. V.
Anno 1594, Dr. Richard Eedes, Printed with five other Sermons, London, 1604.
p. 70, 72, 73, 74.
Dean of Worcester Preached before the Queen on Isai. 49.23. Wherein he says,
That the Strength even of Heathen States was in their Religion, by the which
they were persuaded, that their Princes were the Children of their Gods, and
their Laws drawn from the Oracles of some Divine Power. They found by
experience, how hard it was for men to be brought to obey men, unless they had
the authority of more than men, etc. And what does more teach either Obedience
or Peace than the Religion of Christ? -- Obedience is rightly called Nervus
Imperii, the Sinew and Strength of a Kingdom, as well because it is grounded
upon the Obedience of Christ, who, as Bernard notes, Ne perderet Obedientiam,
perdidit vitam, did rather choose to lose his life, than to leave his Obedience.
As also because it requires in Christians Obedience without respect of persons
to all (without difference of Degrees) higher Powers, Romans 13.2. Without
exception against their Qualities, not only to them that are good and
courteous, but to them also who are froward, 1 Pet. 2.18.
And that in all things, Tribute to whom tribute, etc. and that not with
eye-service, as men-pleasers, etc. and that not because of wrath, but for
conscience sake, Romans 13.5. That if all the Laws and Policies of States and
Kingdoms were gathered into one, they could not be so strong to work peace, and
to persuade Obedience, as these few, but very forcible Rules of the Religion of
Christ. -- How much therefore is it to be lamented, that in so great Light
there should be so little Fruit -- That whereas the Truth of Religion is the
Preserver of Government, and the Mother of Obedience, the name of Religion is
made the Firebrand of Kingdoms, and the armor of disobedience; and that not
only to maintain the Tyranny of that Usurping Power, who takes upon him to
Depose Kings; but also to bring in that Anarchy of factious Subjects, who
presume to give Laws to their lawful Princes: Wherein, besides that it is true,
which Leo wrote unto Theodosius, private causes are handled with pretense of
Piety, and every Man makes Religion, which should be the Mistress, the Handmaid
of his affections; it is intolerable to see how far some busy heads fetch the
beginning of Kingdoms, p. 7^. Vindic. contr. Tyran. Bach^n. de ju^e regin.
and so, as they please, the right of Kings, from the pleasure of the People --
how contemptuously they term the titles of honor and reverence, the solecisms
of the Court; -- how seditiously they give wings to ambitious humors, to plead
the right of a ^aconical Ephory against Kings, but for themselves; and to arm
that beast of many heads the multitude, which ever goes, as Seneca, not whither
it should, but whither the stream bears it, against (that, which to want of
judgment is ever most heavy) the present Government; Whereas the right rules of
Religion, give no remedy to Subjects against the Highest Authority,
but the necessity of either suffering or obeying; and therefore they, that
open that gap, whether it be to the Tyranny of ambitious Popes, or to the
Anarchy of seditious Subjects, howsoever they pretend the name of Religion,
they shall sooner prove themselves to have no Religion, than that there is any
defense for them in the Religion of Christ; which teaches, as to be thankful
to God for good Princes, so to be patient of those, whom in anger, as the
Prophet Hosea speaks, Hos. 13.11.
he sets over us for the punishment of our sins, and against whom the first
Professors of our faith had no weapons, but prayers and tears; p. 2.
-- the same Author in his first Sermon before King James says, that promotion
comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South, but from
God. Ps. 73.6. that their power is of God, Romans 3.1. and their judgments God's
judgments. Deuteronomy. 1.17. and that therefore they, who resist them, not only by a
consequence resist the ordmance of God, Romans 13.2. but God in them, as he told
Samuel, they have not rejected thee, but me. 1 Samuel 8.7.

The Reverend Bishop Moreton begun very early to assert this Doctime in his
Writings, and he lived long enough to assert it by his sufferings, being a
great sharer in that affliction, which in the great Rebellion the Doctrine of
resistance brought upon both the King and the Church. Anno 1596. he published
his Solomon, or a Treatise declaring the shake of the Kingdom of Israel, pr.
Land.
as it was in the days of Solomon. Wherein he proves, after the words as it was
in the days of Solomon, insert these following, that the Kingdom of Israel was
a most true, and lively picture of the State and Crown, -- one egg being not
more like another, than the State to that, under which we live; -- so that all
his arguments without any further comment, are applicable to our Kingdom; and
whereas he foresaw, Ep. ad Lect.
that it would be objected to him, that he gives the Christian Magistrate,
especially in great and absolute Monarchies greater authority, than seems to
stand with the good of the Church, or the truth of God's Word, -- he desires
the Reader, not to attribute it to flattery, but to a constant and settled
persuasion, -- he intending in publishing the Treatise, the good and peaceable
State of the Kingdom, and the maintaining of that powerful and majestical
Authority, whereunto it has pleased God to make us subject; -- and in the
discourse he affirms, Sect. 2. p. 4, 5.
that Magistracy is not a mere device of Man, as they, who contemn, and labor
to overthrow all Authority, speaking evil of those things, which they know not,
have imagined; but an ordinance of God. Romans 13. there is no power but of God,
he therefore that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. Obj. But
it cannot be showed, that it was ever established by God throughout the World
(except only among the Jews) but was invented, and continued by Men excelling
others in strength and ambition. Answ. The abuses of Magistracy, tho many and
grievous, p. 6.
cannot take away the lawful use of it; -- and although Magistracy has been by
the express commandment of God established only in the Church, yet it belongs
as much to Infidels; for it is instituted by God, not as he is the Savior of
his Church, but as he is the Creator, and Preserver of all Men. p. 7.
-- God sets up this his Ordiannce among Infidels by the light of nature
remaining in the minds of Men, etc. -- When the People set one over them, Sert.
4. p. 17.
reserving to themselves Authority, either to displace or control him, or if
need be, to rise up in arms against him, and to lay violent hands upon him,
they give unto him but improperly the name of a King. -- Obj. Sert. 5. p. 18.
But was there no authority to restrain a King, if at any time he should be
impious, or unjust in his Government, -- otherwise the People might be
miserably oppressed, Religion defaced, yea, all things turned upside down, and
in the end the Commonwealth utterly overthrown. Wisdom, therefore, Reason, and
Necessity, the Glory of God, and the good of Men required, that there should be
in Israel, some Authority either in the People, Priests, Senate, or inferior
Magistrates against those Kings, who did degenerate into violent and bloody
Tyrants. Answ. This reason has carried many headlong in heat to condemn, and
reject utterly these absolute Monarchies as Tyrannical and Barbarous, etc. but
we ought not to suffer our selves to be deceived by any appearance to judge
that to be unlawful and profane,
which God, by establishing it in his Church, p. 19.
has showed to be holy and lawful, -- the authority of a King over his People
was no less than is the authority of a Father in his Family in respect of his
Children; who, if he do injuriously entreat any of them, -- or live any way
disorderly, it is the duty of his Children, if not with silence to suffer it,
yet with great modesty to admonish him of it; but if they should join together,
and offer any violence unto him, especially if they should throw him out of his
house, all Men would count them rebellious, and ungracious Children;
but if they should take his life from him, they were to be esteemed
notoriously wicked, yea rather as Monsters, p. 20.
worthy to be abhorred of all Men: -- no Subject of what place soever, no not
the whole People jointly could lawfully use any violence against the King's
Person, or proceedings, and that the King might (tho not lawfully in respect of
the law of God, of Men, or of Nature, yet) safely, and freely in respect of his
Subjects, p. 21.
do whatsoever pleased him, according as Jacob foretells Genesis 49.9. -- the
dealing of God himself does prove the same, who when he purposed to preserve
David against the fury of Saul,
would never suffer him to oppose Ceila, or any other of Readiness Cities against
him, but made him fly first into the mountains and deserts, and afterward out
of the land to the Philistines; yea David, although he were appointed by the
express Word of God to succeed Saul in the Kingdom, yet he was so far from
laying violent hands upon him, that his heart smote him, 1 Samuel 24.6. i. e. his
conscience did accuse him, that he had behaved himself disloyally against the
King, in that he had offered violence to the King's Garment, because that was
as a threatening of death unto him, and a great disgrace; yea further we do not
read, that God did ever by any of his Prophets stir up his People to maintain
his true worship by violence against the Kings, or ever reprove them, because
they had suffered them to set up Idolatry,
which is an evident proof of this point; for if it had been lawful to resist
in any case, then surely in the maintenance of the true worship of God, p. 22.
and of his Glory. -- no Man, no company of Men could for any offense committed
by the King, either against God or Man, the first or second Table, call him to
account, summon him to appear in judgment, or use any manner of violence,
either in word or deed against him: -- To the Kings of Israel, neither the
Kingdom was given, Sect. 6. p. 23. Sect. 7. p. 28.
nor the conditions imposed by Man, but by God, and therefore they could not
forfeit their Kingdom to Man, but only to God; -- but what was the behavior of
Loyal Subjects in such cases? the weapons, which God gave unto his People,
wherewith to defend themselves against the Tyranny of their lawful Kings, were
these. 1. wisdom, carefully to avoid all occasions of the King's anger and
injury. 2. to avoid and decline from the violence, and injury it self by
flying. 3. the third remedy, where the second is wanting, is patience to suffer
with a quiet mind the violence or injustice of the King, which could not be by
wisdom either prevented or avoided. 4. the last remedy is to appeal from the
unjust Sentence of the King, not to any Man, or to any Court here on Earth, but
to the King of Kings, even to God himself, whose ears are always open to hear
those who are oppressed; this remedy is the last, and therefore not to be used,
but in cases of greatest extremity, whenas the violence is too too grievous,
shameful, and to Man's infirmity altogether intolerable; p. 29.
this means did Samuel commend unto the People; whereby they should ease
themselves of those intolerable burdens of tributes, which their King would
lay upon them. 1 Samuel 8.18. saying, then you being thus oppressed by your King,
shall not rebel against him, but shall cry unto the Lord. Where it is added,
that God will not hear them, when they cry, this is meant, that could not
afterward put down their Kings, neither be freed from their Tyranny.

The same Reverend Prelate in his Encounter against Parsons, p. 187.
says diversity of Religion, changes not the natural right of Inheritance;
this ancient Doctrine the Protestants still follow, they still acknowledged
Henry the fourth of France, when he revolted from them; but the Romanists would
not admit him, while he professed himself a Protestant.

And in his Causa Regia (his answer to Card. Bell. Land. An. 1620. c. 1.. 21.
p. 26
book de Officio Principis Christiani) written by him, when he was Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield; he shows, how vain that compact (whether tacit or
expressed) is whereby Kings, as Bell. says, stand bound to the Pope, so that by
virtue thereof, whenever they turn Heretics, or would make their Subjects
such, he may deprive them of their Kingdoms; and whereas the Cardinal cited
that of our Holy Savior, whosoever does not hate father and mother, etc. is
not worthy of me; he answers,
that only 'signifies, that we ought not to obey our Parents in those things,
which they command contrary to the true Faith; but by no means ( what Bell.
compact implies) to rob our Parents of their Possessions, c. 2.. 9. p. 73, 74.
-- that Christ exercised his Priestly Office not actively in Deposing Princes,
but passively, by giving his life, as became a good Shepherd, for his Sheep; --
and when the Apostle armed St. Timothy, he gave him not a temporal Sword, to
hurt any Man, but a Spiritual, to be exercised in suffering; for so he commands
him, 2 Timothy 4.5. Watch thou in all things, endure afflictions. -- E Greg.
Tolesano de rep. c. 7.. 1^.
And for 300 years after Christ, though the Christians suffered innumerable,
and most cruel torments (20000 being slain at one time) yet they never plotted
against the Laws, the Magistrate, the Emperer, or his ^^enrity in the least
degree; but by this argument they personaded Men to turn to Christianity, as to
the best Religion, because it t^^k Men off from ambition, and a desire of
change, and taught Men to obey Magistrates; -- and accordingly ( as Nicephorus
relates) the Christian, that but pulled down the Edict of Dioclesian at
Nicomedia, was looked upon by his fellow Christians to be justly executed for
the Fact; -- it therefore behooves Princes to consider, c. 2. Sect. 16. p 83.
in what a slippery place their Sacred Majesty stands, if this Principle of
Deposing Princes, unheard of in the Church of Christ for 1000 years be true;
and this he confirms by the authority of the Fathers, c. 6. Sect. 14. p 255.
especially St. Ambrose, who is famous for this saying against the Goths, My
tears are my weapons, such are the defense of a Bishop,
any otherwise I dare not resist.

Many other passages might be transcribed, were not what is already cited more
than enough, since the Author's practice was so solemn, and unquestionable a
confirmation of his Opinion, and his other Books (especially his discovery of
Romish Rebellious Positions, with his full satisfaction against Parsons, etc.)
a proof, that he never lived to repent of so truly Primitive, and Apostolical
Doctrine.

SECT. VI.
Mr. Greenham in his short form of Catechizing. Land. 1599. 4 to p. 412,
413.414.
Qu. What do you understand by Father and Mother in the fifth Commandment?
Answ. Not only my natural Parents, but those whom God has set over me for my
good, as Magistrates, etc. Qu. What be the duties of Servants toward their
Masters? Answ. Servants ought in fear, and trembling to submit themselves to
the instructions, commandments, and correction: of their Masters. Qu. What if
Parents or Masters do not their duty to their Children and Servants? Answ. Yet
they must obey them for Conscience sake to God's Ordinance. Qu. What if they
command unjust things? Answ. Then they must obey God rather than Men, and
submit themselves to their corrections.

Archbishop Abbot An. 1600. published his Lectures on Jonas, Lon. 1600. lect.
20. p. 432.
and I shall only cite one Quotation out of him. Athanaric King of the Goths,
seeing the triumph of the Emperor Justinian at Constantinople, brake forth into
these words, The Emperor without doubt is a God upon Earth, and whosoever shall
stir his hand against him, shall be guilty of his own blood.

In the same year on March 1st. being the first Sunday in Lent, Dr. William
Barlow, (afterward Bishop of Rochester, Pr^at Lon. 1601.
and then of Lincoln,) Preached at Paul's Cross (a little time after the
Execution of the Earl of Essex) on Matthew. 22.21. and therein he well instructs
us, -- it pleases God to be called a King in Heaven. Ps. 20. and the King is
called a God on Earth. Ps. 82. Therefore he which denies his duty to the
visible God, his Prince and Sovereign, cannot perform his duty to the God
Invisible; certainly a mind inclined to Rebellion was never well possessed of
Religion; -- they therefore, who with Sheba, 2 Samuel 20.1. will make a secession
from their Prince -- or with Jeroboam, and the ten tribes will turn from him,
because he has turned his Father's scourges into Scorpions. 1 Reg. 12. They,
who think, that they may either kill their Liege, or sall from him, or depose
and thrust them out of their Seat, or expose them to danger or fear, are guilty
not only of Rebellion, but of Irreligion, -- the Jesuit Parsons al. Doleman
dedicates his Book to the Earl of Essex (a Principal, if not the only poison of
the Earl's heart) wherein he would prove, that it is lawful for the Subject to
rise against his Sovereign, etc. -- my exhortation to you is, beloved, that you
will believe Jesus rather than a Jesuit, who wills his Disciples, and all
Christians to possess their Souls in patience. Luc. 10. albeit they be
persecuted even to death by their Princes; and St. Paul, who adjudgeth him to
damnation, who resists the ordinance of God. Romans 13. If you desire some
stories of Scripture; Saul an Apostate rejected by God, not dejected by Samuel:
Jeroboam plagued, not dispossessed; Ahab reproved by Elias, not deprived;
Nebuchadonosor punished from Heaven, not deposed by his Subjects; the Law of
God is straight in this case, it bridles the mouth, that it speak not evil of
the King. Exodus 21. It binds the heart, not to imagine evil against him. Eccl.
10. -- the sum of this part is that of the Prophet Daniel 2.21. that the
Inthroning and Deposing of Princes, is God's only Prerogative Royal; and the
conclusion shall be an argument, that if obedience be due unto Caesar, a
Tyrant, and a Foreigner; much more are we to perform it to our Prince, etc.

SECT. VII.
Thus also says Francis Marbury in his Sermon on Eccl. 10.20. (...) 1602.
at the Spittle on Tuesday in Easter Week, Printed by authority; the Principal
question of this Chapter -- is that Subjects that are Godly wise, ought to
repress in themselves all insurrection of mind against the supposed scandals of
civil administrations, and against the doings of Princes, and that a disloyal
thought ought not to be lent thereunto, -- it being insinuated by an evil
subject, that it is impossible to stand contented in a Government, that
perverts and inverts the use of preferments and abasements, aiming perhaps at
something done by Solomon in his uxoriousness, at the instigation of his
Idolatrous Wives; -- and that the state of the Country is depraved by the
riotousness and dissoluteness of the Governors, -- but God gives us no
dispensation for any cause to disreverence the Prince,
except that we be able to show, that we do it at God's Commandment, -- the Men
of God, when they have by mistaking exceeded toward a Ruler (though a wicked
one) have used diligence to excuse themselves, and to avoid the scandal; so St.
Paul, Act. 23 5. and David was cut in his heart, because he had cut off the
lap, that was in Saul 's Garment;
so that if to refuse God be ungodliness, then it must needs be so to admit a
contemptuous thought of a Prince, in whom God offers himself unto us -- and
it is sure, that they are ungodly Men, 1 Samuel 10.27.
which offend in this kind, that the Holy Ghost calls them Sons of Belial, i.
e. unyoked Persons, which refuse to be under the yoke of due obedience, -- as
for the allegation made by Heretics of Conscience to God, when no disobedience
to God is required, it is in great Hypocrisy that God is alleged; for are
they not put together in the Scripture, fear God, and the King, and depart from
the seditious, or as the Text has it, from the various, from those that divide
these duties so, as if they could not consist together; and did not both Peter
and Paul require so much, when Kings were Enemies of the truth, and of the
Salvation of their Subjects? Verily when Men make their excuse by God in this
they tell a lie for the Almighty, as Job says in another matter, for that which
is Caesar 's may be given to Caesar, without the least breach of allegiance to
Almighty God; and it is most true, that Chrysostom says on the 13th to the
Romans, subjection to Princes overturneth not Religion; a point belike, that in
those days stood in need stall, and successively to be urged; for the Greek
Scholiast, likewise in his Collect on the same place to the Romans, has it
near word for word; and he says after, that St. Paul takes great care to urge
it (...) every where; neither was this (as Jerome supposes) by reason of the
continuance of any old Heresy, but because St. Paul saw, that this sin would
universally, and successively assail; -- and therefore as Men hinder the work
of godliness in themselves, they must keep tenderly in the reins of their
consciences the reverence of their Prince. -- Whosoever does vilipend his
Sovereign in his conscience, is either an Atheist, or a Hypocrite; -- the
causes of Sedition and Rebellion are. 1. Pride, -- there are, that go under the
name of resolute, that give occasion to upbraid the Land, as Ezekiel upbraided
Jerusalem, there are in thee that have despised father and mother, Ez. 22 7.
that speak scornfully both of Queen and Council. 2. Lack of Wisdom in not
discerning the policies of Princes. 3. lack of compassion in not weighing their
temptations, and their necessities. 4. lack of equity, when the Subject blames
his Prince for his own fault. Lastly, forgetfulness of their benefits, which is
unthankfulness, -- in my Text the Lord threatens the depravers of Kings and
Magistrates, the foul of the Heaven shall carry the voice, etc. -- this notes
the heinousness of the Sin; for the Holy Ghost is not wont to bewray Men for
trifles -- and is strong evidence, that the maligning of Higher Powers is in
the Catalogue of those sins, which, though they escape Man, yet the vengeance
of God does pursue, and as it were bring back again to the judgment seat; it
matters not, what plausible shows there be to do such things, for the event
discovers, that they are but shows. Absalom seemed to have a just quarrel
against Amnon for lying with his Sister, especially his pernicious impunity
considered by reason of David 's indulgence, but Absalom 's matter was not
Amnon 's incest, but Amnon 's Seniority; he was betwixt Him and the Crown, for
the Event declared, what an hater of incest Absalom was by his behavior to his
Father's Concubines; and the Lord discovered by his Insurrection against his
Father, that it was ambition, that made him to kill his Brother.

Dr. John Dove in his Sermon about divorcement at Paul's Cross 1601. says, that
some Men will prove Rebellion, and High Treason out of the Scriptures, that the
People are above the King, and cites in the Margin, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos.

CHAP. V. The History of Passive Obedience during the Reign of King James.
SECT. I.
WHEN God of his great mercy had taken to himself our illustrious Queen
Elizabeth in the beginning of the Year 1603. her undoubted Successor King James
published the same Year a little, but accurate Treatise entitled, The true
Laws of free Monarchies, which is an exact Comment on 1 Samuel 8.11, etc. where
Samuel shows the Israelites, what would be the manner of the King that should
reign over them, that if he made their freeborn Children Bondmen, verse. 11,
etc. and seized their Estates by Injustice and Violence, verse. 14, etc. they
should be allowed no other remedy in that day of their Calamity, but to cry
unto the Lord, verse. 18. and to punish them for their Contempt of his immediate
Conduct, God threatens he will not hear them. In this Book, says the learned
John Forbes, Duplies to Henderson. p. 20.
he does at length demonstrate, That in a free Monarchy (such as he proves his
Kingdom of Scotland to be) the Subjects for no occasion, or pretext whatsoever
may take Arms, without power from the King, and much less against him, whether
he be a good King or an Oppressor, etc. -- and comprehends the sum of all his
Discourse concerning this matter, in these words following: Shortly then to
take up in two or three Sentences, grounded upon all these Arguments, out of
the Law of God, the Duty and Allegiance of the People to their lawful King:
Their Obedience, I say, ought to be to him, as to God's Lieutenant on Earth,
obeying his Commands in all things, except directly against God, as the
Commands of God's Minister; acknowledging him a Judge set by God over them,
having power to judge them, but to be judged only by God, to whom only he must
give account of his Judgment; fearing him as their Judge, loving him as their
Father, praying for him as their Protector; for his continuance, if he be good;
for his amendment, if he be wicked; following and obeying his lawful Commands;
eschewing and fleeing his Fury in his unlawful, without resistance,
but by Sobs and Tears to God; according to that sentence used in the Primitive
Church in the time of the Persecution: Preces and lacrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae;
i. e. Prayers and Tears are the Arms of the Church. And the Book it self speaks
out, The Wickedness of the King can never make them, that are ordained to be
judged by him, to become his Judges: And if it be not lawful to a private man
to revenge his private Injury upon his private Adversary (since God has only
given the Sword to the Magistrate) how much less is it lawful to the People, or
any part of them (who all are but private men) to take upon them the use of the
Sword, whom to it belongs not, against the public Magistrate, whom to only
it belongs.

But should I transcribe every Passage out of that accurate little Treatise, I
should swell this Volume, and tire the Reader, whom I therefore refer for his
further satisfaction to the Work it self, in which, and his other Works, the
King has shown himself as a learned man styles him, A Pillar of the Church;
Oweni Antipar. Page 117, 118.
a Support to a ruinous Commonwealth; a brave Champion of Christ against
Antichrist, and the new Arians; an invincible Defender of Kings against the
Papal Tyranny, the Impostures of the Cardinals, and the Seditions of the
Puritans; the Restorer of the Episcopal Dignity, and the Defender of it against
Presbyterian Anarchy, the Defender of the Catholic Faith, and the truly
peaceable King.

R. Doleman, i. e. Parsons having published his Conference concerning the
Succession to the Crown of England, Ann. 1594. (a Book from whence most of our
modern Enemies of the true Rights of Princes have borrowed both their Arguments
and Authorities) Sir John Hayward, Ann. 1603. sets out his Answer to the first
part of that Conference ( which was reprinted Ann. 1683. for the satisfaction
of the zealous Promoters of the Bill of Exclusion): The Book was written, as
himself in his Dedicatory Epistle tells the King, in Defense of the Authority
of Princes, and of Succession according to proximity of Blood; and to maintain,
that the People have no lawful Power to remove the one, or repel the other.

The Jesuits main Argument is, Hay^ p^^. 1. Ed (...) and p 3^^
that Succession to Government by nearness of Blood, is not by Law of Nature,
or Divine, but by the humane and positive Laws of any Commonwealth, and
consequently, that it may upon just Causes be altered by the same, changing the
fashion of Government, and limiting the same with what Conditions they please.
But the learned Civilian confutes the Opinion with much Reason, Page 6.
and many very pertinent Authorities; he grants, That it is inconvenient to be
governed by a King, who is defective in Body or Mind; but it is a greater
inconvenience by making a Breach in this high point of State, to open an
Entrance for all Disorders, wherein Ambition and Insolency may range at large.
-- When S. Peter terms Kings a Human Creature, c. 2. p. 39, 40, etc.
1 Pet. 2. he means not as you interpret, a thing created by man. -- Is a
brutish Creature to be taken for a thing created by a Beast? -- If so, then all
Creatures should be called Divine, because they were created by God, to whom it
was proper to create. -- And S. Paul says, Romans 13. That all Authority is the
Ordinance and Institution of God. -- It is evident, that in the first heroical
Ages, the People were not governed by any positive Laws, but their Kings did
both judge and command by their Word, by their Will, by their absolute Power, --
without any restraint, or direction, but only of the law of Nature; -- and when
it grew troublesome and tedious for all the People to receive their Right from
one man, Laws were invented, as Cicero says, -- and when any People were
subdued by Arms, Laws were laid like Logs upon their Necks, to keep them in
more sure Subjection. -- Parliaments in all places have been erected by Kings;
-- so that neither Laws nor Parliaments were assigned by the People for
assistance and direction to their Kings. -- We must judge Facts by Law, and not
Law by Facts, or Example, which Alciat and Deciane do term a Golden Law,
because there is no Action either so impious or absurd, which may not be
paralleled by Examples. Page 46.
I never heard of Christian Prince, who challenged infinite Authority without
limitation of any Law, either Natural or Divine; but where you term it an
absurd Paradox, that the People should not have power to chasten their Prince,
and upon just Considerations to remove him, I am content to join with you upon
the Issue: Page 47.
-- Had you no Text of Scripture? no Father of the Church? no Law? no Reason to
alledg? -- Do not the Apostles (1 Pet. 2.10, 13. Jude 8. Romans 13. Tit. 3.1. 1 Timothy 2.1.) oblige us to pray for and obey Kings? But perhaps you will say, that
the Apostles did not mean this of wicked Princes; the Apostle speaks generally
of all. S. Peter 1.2.18. makes express mention of evil Lords: And what Princes
have ever been more either irreligious or tyrannical, than Caligula, Tiberius,
Nero, the Infamy of their Ages, under whose Empire the Apostles did both live,
Page 50, 51.
and write? -- I will give you an Example of another time, Nebuchadnezzar King
of Assyria, wasted all Palestina, took Jerusalem, slew the King, burnt the
Temple, took away the holy Vessels and Treasure; the residue he permitted to
the Cruelty and Spoil of his unmerciful Soldiers, who defiled all places with
Rape, Ruin, and Blood. After the glut of this Butchery, the People which
remained, he led Captive into Chaldea, and there commanded,
that whosoever refused to worship his Golden Image, should be cast into a fiery
Furnace: What Cruelty, what Impiety is comparable to this? And yet the Prophets
Jeremy (c. 29.7.) and Baruch (c. 1.11.) did write to those captive Jews, to
pray for the Prosperity and Life of him and Baltasar his Son, that their days
might be upon Earth, as the days of Heaven: And Ezekiel (c. 17.) both blames,
and threatens Zedekiah for his Disloyalty in revolting from Nebuchadnezzar,
whose Homager and Tributary he was: What Answer will you make to this Example?
-- Princes are the immediate Ministers of God, and therefore he calls
Nebuchadnezzar his Servant; and the Prophet Esaias calls Cyrus, a profane and
heathen King, the Lords Anointed: -- In regard hereof David calls them Gods:
And if they do abuse their Power,
they are not to be judged by their Subjects, as being both inferior, and naked
of Authority; because all Jurisdiction within their Realm is derived from them,
which their presence only does silence and suspend: But God reserveth them to
the sorest Trial; horribly and suddenly (says the Wise man) will the Lord
appear unto them, and a hard Judgment shall they have. Page 52.
-- If he commands those things that are lawful, we must manifest our
Obedience by ready performing: If he enjoin us those Actions that are evil, we
must show our Subjection by patient enduring: It is God only who sets Kings
in their State; it is he only who may remove them. 2 Chronicles. 1. Prove. 28.2. 2 Chronicles. 28.6. -- And therefore we endure with patience unseasonable Weather,
unfruitful Years, and other like Punishments of God; so must we tolerate the
imperfection of Princes, and quietly expect either Reformation, or else a
Change: This was the Doctrine of the Ancient Christians, Page 53.
even against their most mortal Persecutors. -- In a word, the current of the
Ancient Fathers is in this Point concurrent; insomuch as among them all there
is not one found (not any one; one is a small Number, and yet I say confidently
again, there is not any one) who has let fall so soose a Speech, as may be
strained to a contrary sense: How then are you of late become both so active
and resolute to cut in sunder the Reins of Obedience, the very Sinews of
Government and Order? Page 54.
-- Neither was the Devil ever able, until in late declining times, to possess
the Hearts of Christians with these cursed Opinions, which do evermore beget a
world of Murders, Rapes, Ruins, and Desolations: For tell me, What if the
Prince, whom you persuade the People you have power to depose, be able to make
and maintain his Party? -- What if other Princes, whom it does concern, as well
in Honor, to see the Law of Nations observed, as also in policy, to break those
Proceedings, which may form Presidents against themselves, do adjoyn to the
side? What if, whilst the Prince, and the People are (as was the Frog and the
Mouse) in the heat of their Encounter, some other Potentate play the Kite with
them both, as the Turks did with the Hungarians? c. 3. p. 57, etc.
-- That Princes may be chastised by their Subjects, your Proofs are Two; one
is drawn from certain Examples; the other from the good Success and Successors,
which usually have followed. -- Slender Threads to draw any Man to your Opinion.
-- There is no Villainy so vile, which wants Example; -- and by the secret, yet
just Judgment of God, diverse evil Actions are carried with appearance of good
success. Page 61.
-- When Saul persecuted David, he defended himself no otherwise than by
flight: During this pursuit, Saul fell twice into his power; once he did not
only spare, but protect him; the other time his Heart did smite him, for that
he had cut away the Lap of his Garment; lastly, he caused the Messenger to be
slain, who upon request, and for pity, had furthered (as he said) the Death of
that sacred King. We have a Precept of Obedience, which is the Mould wherein we
ought to fashion our Actions. God only is superior to Princes, who uses many
Instruments in the execution of his Justice; but his Authority he has
committed unto none. Page 68.
The Examples of Suintilla, and other Gothic Kings in Spain is answered, by
saying, that the Kingdom was not then settled in Succession. And then he shows
the illegality of the Proceedings against King John, Page 72, 73, 74, 75.
Edw. 2. and Rich. 2. and adds, Three Causes are commonly insinuated by you,
for which a King may be deposed, Tyranny, Insufficiency, and Impiety: But what
Prince could hold his State, what People their Quiet assured, if this your
Doctrine should take place? How many good Princes does Envy brand with one of
these Marks? What Action of State can be so ordered, that either blind
Ignorance, or set Malice will not easily strain to one of these Heads? Every
execution of Justice, every demand of Tribute, or Supply shall be claimed
Tyranny: Every unfortunate Event shall be exclaimed Insufficiency: Every kind
of Religion shall by them of another Sect be proclaimed Impiety. -- But are not
Princes subject to Law, C 4. p. 81, 82, etc.
and Order? Answ. I will not deny, but there is a Duty for Princes to perform;
but how prove you, that their Subjects have power to depose them, if they fail?
-- The people may so give away their Authority, that they cannot resume it, and
few Princes in the World hold their Estates by Grant of the people. -- If the
Prince has no power, but by Commission from the People, then all Estates are
popular. -- Our Laws do acknowledge supreme Authority in the Prince within the
Realm and Dominions of England; neither can Subjects bear themselves either
superior, 1 El. 1.
or equal to their Sovereign, or attempt violence either against his Person, or
Estate. -- No Prince is Sovereign, C. 5. p. 92.
who acknow ledgeth himself either subject, or accountable to any but to God.
-- Did David bear Arms against his Anointed King?
Did he ever lift up his Eye lids against him? Did he ever so much as defend
himself otherwise than by flight? -- What then shall we say unto you, who, to
set up Sedition and Tumult, abuse all Divine and Human Writings in whatsoever
you believe will advance your purpose? who spend some Speech of Respect unto
Kings for Allurement only, to draw us more deep into your deceit? etc. -- The
Coronation Oath is only a free, P. 102.
Royal Promise to discharge that Duty which God does impose -- The Prophets, P.
105.
the Apostles, Christ himself has taught us to be obedient to Princes,
tho both Tyrants and Infidels. This ought to stand with us for a thousand
Reasons, to submit our selves to such Kings, as it pleases God to send unto
us, without either judging or examining their Qualities: their Hearts are in
God's Hand, they do his Service, sometimes in preserving, sometimes in
punishing us. -- If they abuse any part of their power, -- let them assuredly
expect, that God will dart his vengeance against them with a most stiff and
dreadful Arm. In the mean season we must not oppose our selves otherwise, than
by humble Suits and Prayers, acknowledging that those Evils are always just for
us to suffer, which are many times unjust for them to do. -- If we break into
disorder, we resemble the Giants, who sealed the Skies. C. 6. 116, 117.
-- It was alleged in behalf of some Cities in France, that they were not
Rebels, because they had not professed Allegiance unto Henry the Fourth: but
the chiefest Lawyers of our Age did resolve, that forasmuch as they were
original Subjects, even Subjects by Birth, they were Rebels in bearing Arms
against their King, although they had never professed Allegiance. -- But the
admission of the people (say you) has often prevailed against Right of
Succession.
So have Pirates against Merchants, so have Mutherers and Thieves against true
meaning Travelers. Chap. 8 p. 146, 147.
-- But may not a man trespass on such Laws for the good of the Realm? Answ.
What Conscience can any men have in defiling their Faith? Such Consciences you
endeavor to frame in all men, P. 156, 157.
to break an Oath with as great facility, as a Squirrel can crack a Nut. -- In
what a miserable condition should Princes live, if their State depended upon
the pleasures of the people, in whom, company takes away shame, and every man
may lay fault on his Fellow? How could they command? P. 164.
Who would obey? -- c. -- It seems strange to reason to plant Religion under
the Obedience of Kings, not only careless thereof, but cruel against it. But
when we consider, that the Jews did commonly forsake God in prosperity, and
seek him in distress; that the Church of Christ was more pure, more zealous,
more entire, I might also say, more populous, when she traveled with the storm
in her face, than when the wind was either prosperous or calm. -- We may learn
thereby, no further to examine, but to admire, and embrace the unsearchable
Wisdom and Will of God. P. 170. etc.
-- God has taught by the Apostle S. Paul, that whosoever resists the higher
powers (which at that time were Infidels) receive unto themselves damnation.
You teach, that whosoever does not in the like case resist, does damnably
offend; were not the Spirit of Division, otherwise called the Devil, seated in
your Soul, you would not thus openly oppose the Settlings of your rotten Brain,
against the express and direct Sentence of God. -- The Apostle teaches us to
be obedient to higher powers for conscience sake, and not for any private
respect. P. 173, etc.
-- You, whose Office is to pray, to instruct Men in pure Devotion, to settle
their Souls in piety and peace, -- you take upon you the Policies of State, you
read and deface the Reputation of Kings, you make your selves both Judges and
Moderators of all their Actions, allowing them to fly no further, than you
give them Wings. You dispose not only their Affairs, but their Crowns at your
pleasure; you hunt them not to covert, but to death. -- You train up your
Followers in the high mystery of Treason. -- To these ends you wrest
Scriptures, you corrupt Histories, you counterfeit Reasons, you corrupt all
Truth. -- And all, you say, is directed to a holy and religious end. Away then
with your Devotion, and so we shall be rid of your dangerous Deceit.

This was his Opinion in the Days of King James; nor was it newly taken up to
comply with that Prince: for, Ep. Dod. ante Answ. to Doleman.
as Sir John Heyward himself informs us, he wrote his Account of the Deposition
of King Richard the Second, and the Usurpation of King Henry the Fourth, to
show, that the People have no lawful power to resist their Prince, nor to
hinder the Succession according to Proximity of Blood.

SECT. II.
On S. James's day, being July 25, of the same year, was this Learned Prince
crowned, Pr. London. 1604
the Sermon on that Solemnity being Preached by Dr. Bilson, Bishop of
Winchester, on Romans xi^^. 1. The powers that are, are ordained of God. In which
we are told; That the likeness, which Princes have with the Kingdom of God, and
of Christ, consists in the Society of the Names and Signs which they have
common with Christ; in the Sufficiency of the Spirit, wherewith God endueth
them; in the Sanctity of their Persons, which may not be violated; in the
Sovereignty of their Power, which must not be resisted.
-- By the anointing of Kings God has taught us, that their persons, once
dedicated to his Service, are, not only protected by his stretched-out Arm, but
are, and ought to be sacred, and secured from the violence and injury of all
men's hands, mouths and hearts; Touch not mine anointed, P. 105.
says God by his Prophet, which is chiefly verified of Princes, whom God
anointeth to be the chiefest of his People. -- Neither is violence only
prohibited toward them, but all offense in speech, or thought. -- Yea, the
very Robes, which they wear, are sanctified. -- The Sovereignty of their Power
will soon appear, as well by the persons subjected, as by the things committed
to their Charge, Let every soul be subject, etc. He that brings an Exception,
uses but a Delusion, says Bernard, for who can loose what God has bound;
neither is this an Exhortation to Obedience, but a plain Injunction. You must
needs be subject, etc. You must imports a necessity; for conscience, declares a
Duty to God; the danger of resisting being as great as the Commandment of
obeying is straight. Whosoever resists, resists the ordinance of God; and they,
that resist, shall receive to themselves judgment.
Dare any man promise himself success, and protection in Conspiracy and
Treason, when the Spirit of God so plainly threatens ruin, and condemnation to
all that resist, whosoever they be. -- To maintain Peace and Tranquillity, God
has allowed Kings power over the Goods, Lands, Bodies and Lives of their
Subjects: and what private men may not touch without theft and murder, that
Princes may lawfully dispose, as God's Ministers, taking vengeance on them that
do evil.
-- He that resists and dishonoreth them, resists and dishonoreth the
Ordinance of God, to his own confusion in this life, where Princes are
permitted to revenge the wrongs done to them; and in the next, where God
everlastingly punishes the contempt of his Ordinance. -- What kind of Honor is
due to Princes, is shortly delivered in that Commandment, Honor thy Father. Rom
xiii. 1.
-- The Apostle in this place names three things due to Princely Dignity,
Subjection, Honor and Tribute; teaching us, that Princes must be obeyed with
Conscience, Reverence and Recompense. -- It is therefore sin to despise, or
refuse their Laws, commanding that which is good, and likewise to resist, or
reproach their Power, punishing that which is evil even in our selves. --
Howbeit when Princes cease to command for God, or bend their Swords against
God, whose Ministers they are, we must reverence their Power,
but refuse their Wills. It is no resistance to obey the greater before the
lesser, neither has any man cause to be offended, when God is preferred. Yet
must we not reject their Yoke with violence, but rather endure their Swords
with patience, that God may be Judge between Prince and People, with whom is no
unrighteousness nor respect of persons. -- The man of sin has not more grossly
betrayed his pride, and rage in any thing, than in abasing the Honor, and
abusing the Power, and impugning the Right of Princes, by deposing them from
their Seats, and translating their Kingdoms to others, by absolving their
Subjects from all Allegiance, and giving them leave to rebel, by setting his
Feet in Emperor's Necks, and spurning off their Crowns with his Shoe, etc. In
all which he has showed himself like himself, to yoke whom God has freed, and
to free whom God has yoked; to deject whom God has exalted, and to erect whom
God has humbled; to challenge what God has reserved, and to cross what God
has commanded.

And whatever Citations may be made out of this Learned Prelate's Book, Of the
true Difference, etc. Printed at Oxford 1585, in Quarto, and the next year at
London in Octavo, to prove the contrary Yenet, the Quoters, and some of them, I
fear, wilfully mistaking what he says of such Republics and States, in which
upon the Invasion of Sabjects Privileges they are allowed by fundamental,
written, known Compact (as in Germany by the Bulla Aurea) to resist, as if it
were applicable to free Monarchies, and particularly to England, contrary to
his own express Assertion; P. 518, 519, etc. where be proves it at large.
That the Subjects in England have not that lawful Warrant to draw their Sword
without consent of their Prince, as the Germans have, without consent of the
Emperor. He also teaches us our Duty, agreeable to the holy Scriptures, and
primitive Antiquity in many places of that Book. P. 339, etc.
What Question can this be between the Prince and the People, whether the
Magistrate shall be deposed? since God has expressly commanded the People to be
subject to the Sword, and not to resist. Against which Precept no earthly Court
may deliberate,
much less determine to break his Law, or license the People to frust are his
Heavenly Will. -- It is one thing to disbu^ then the Conscience from obeying
the Evil which a Prince commands, which a Priest may do, and another thing to
take the Prince's Sword out of his hand for abusing his Authority, which the
Priest may not do. -- Manasses was carried Captive out of his Realm in the
midst of his furious Idolatry; and yet in his absence and misery no man stirred
against him, but his Kingdom was reserved for him, until he was released out of
Prison, and sent back from Babylon. It was therefore not for fear of Death, but
for regard of Duty, that the zealous Priests and Prophets submitted their
persons to those wicked Princes, whose Idolatry they reproved with the loss of
their lives. -- P. 359.
If the Prince wilfully maintain Heresy and open Impiety, the Bishops are to
reprove, admonish, etc. but still they must serve him, honor him, pray for him,
and teach the People to do the like;
and with meekness enduring what the wrath of the Prince shall lay upon them,
without annoying his person, resisting his power, discharging his Subjects, or
removing him from his Throne. Which, says he to the Jesuit) is your way of
censuring Princes. P. 366. P. 382.
-- The Church of Christ offers not any Example of resisting and deposing
Princes for a thousand years.
-- It is not enough for you, to have Laws of your own making to license you to
bear Arms against your Prince, you must have God's Law for your Warrant, or
else you may come within the compass of heinous and horrible Rebellion. --
Theoph. P. 384.
(that is the Protestant Interlocutor) That Is the Case, which you take in hand,
that the People may punish the Prince offending, as the Prince may the People.
Phil. (i. e. the Jesuit.) Either the people, or none must do it. Theoph. And
seeing the people may not do it, it is evident, that God has reserved the
Magistrate to be punished by himself, and not given the people power over their
Prince. P. 502.
-- Do not with violence restrain them, but in patience possess your own souls.
This is the way for all Christian Subjects to conquer Tyrants, and this is the
Remedy provided in the New Testament against all Persecutions, not to resist
Powers, which God has ordained, lest we be damned; but with all meekness to
suffer, that we may be crowned. P. 512.
-- If Princes presume to violate the Dominion, which God has reserved to
himself, we may not rebel, (that is your Jesuitical Doctrine) but disobey them
in that, or any point, that is prescribed by man against the will of God, and
submit our selves to endure persecution for righteousness sake. P. 541.
-- If Princes embrace the Truth, you must obey them; if they pursue Truth, you
must abide them.

And these Passages, with what has been formerly cited out of the said Book,
will, I think, sufficiently vindicate both the Author and his Doctrine, from
all that is usually objected against them. Especially if we consider, that when
the Jesuit had quoted Goodman's Book of Obedience, as applauding Wyat's
Rebellion, the Protestant answers,

It is much that you measure the whole Realm by one man's merit; Par. 3. p. 273
274.
and more, that you draw the words, which he spoke, from the meaning which he
had, to warrant your Rebellions. The party,
which you name, at the same time took Queen Mary for no lawful Prince, which
particular and false supposal beguiled him, and made him think the better of
Wyat's War; but our Question is of lawful Princes, not of violent Intruders,
and therefore Goodman's Opinion, which himself has long since disliked, is no
way serviceable to your Seditions; or as it is in the Margin, Goodman's private
Opinion, long since corrected by himself, cannot prejudice the whole Realm.
Goodman did not hold, that lawful Princes might be thrust from their Crowns,
but that Queen Mary was no lawful Magistrate.

One of his great Arguments against her, being taken from her Sex, which was
made by God, as he dreamed, incapable of Government; this being one of his, and
Knox's beloved Paradoxes: but he lived to repent and retract them.

SECT. III.
To give the King at his entry into England, a Specimen of the temper of the
Zealots, they tendered him a Petition called the Mill manus Petition (as if
they would have intermixed their desires with threatenings) by telling the King,
that 1000 Ministers, An. 1603.
(as they loved to be called) had influence enough on many thousands of People,
to incline them to give disturbance to his Government, (if he did not comply
with their requests) to which the University of Oxford wrote a full and
satisfactory answer; wherein they affirm, that the Presbyterians allow the
King, not potestatem Juris, p. 29.
but only facti, while they make him a maintainer of their proceedings, but no
commander in them; and all the while the King submits his Scepter unto the
Scepter of Christ, and licks the dust of the Churches feet ( for which they
Quote T. C. lib. 1. p. 180.) This assertion they condemn together with the
other Antimonarchical, Antiepiscopal Doctrins of that Petition; nor was this
the sole judgment of that Famous University, but of her Famous Sister at
Cambridge, whose Epistle is published at the end of that answer, and wherein
they aver, Quicunque Ecclesiae Anglicanae doctrinam, vel disciplinam, vel ejus
partem aliquam legibus publicis stabilitam, etc. that whosoever shall by
writing, speaking, or any other way publicly oppose the Doctrine, or
Discipline of the Church of England, or any part thereof established by public
Laws, shall be incapable of taking any Degree, and suspended from any Degrees
he has formerly taken. Dated October. 7. 1603.

Dr. Anthony Rudd Bishop of St. pr. at Land. 1604.
David's Preached before the King May 13. 1604. on Ps. 101. v. 2. and in it
gives an account of David's demeanor both before, and after he attained the
Crown of Israel; and among other things, he commends him for his patient
waiting on God till Readiness Death; p. 26, 27.
David had given proof of his rare patience in his distressed Estate, during
the expectancy of the Kingdom of Israel; for though in that Interim of sundry
years attendance after that Samuel had Anointed him,
before the Crown fell unto him by the death of King Saul, he sustained many
grievous troubles, inconveniences, and dangers; yet he still possessed his Soul
in patience without seeking unlawful means to hasten his own advancement, by
the making away of his Sovereign. Insomuch as though Saul, who deadly pursued
him, was twice by the Providence of God offered into his hands, that he might
have d^ne his pleasure with him, first in the Wilderness of Engedi, and
secondly in the desert of Z^ph, yet he spared his life, and did no violence to
his Person, leaving him to God's Judgment, and referring his own cause to God's
merciful providence, patiently attending the Lord's leisure, till he should
vouchsafe to come, and put him in possession of the Kingdom.

To King James at his first coming to the English Throne, the Learned Dr. Field
was a Chaplain, as he was also an eminent Champion for the Church against her
adversaries of Rome; and his arguments against the Usurpations of the Popes are
equally cogent against the Republicans. of the Church l. 5. c 45. p. 610.
If they shall say, that Sovereign Princes are subject to none, while they use
their authority well; but that if they abuse it, they lose the independent
absoluteness thereof, their saying will be found to be Heretical;
for if upon abuse of mdependent Authority, they that have it, lose and forfeit
it ipso facto, then authority, and abuse of authority, at least extreme abuse
of it, cannot stand together; which is contrary to that of St. Augustine, where
he says, nee tyrannicae factionis perversitas laudabilis erit, de bono
consugali c. 14.
si regia clement^^ tyrannus subditos tractet, nec vituperabilis ordo regiae
potestatis, si rex crudelitate tyrannica saeviat; aliud est namque injusta
porestate just velle uti, and aliud est justa potestate injuste velle uti. i.
e. ^^ther shall the perverseness of Tyrannical Usurpation ever be praise worthy,
though the Tyrant use his Subjects with all Kingly clemency; nor the order of
Kingly Power be ever subject to just reprehension, th^ugh a King grow fierce
and cruel like a Tyrant; for it is one thing to use an unlawful Power lawfully;
and another thing to use a lawful Power unrighteously, and unjustly.

SECT. IV.
After the happy discovery of the damnable Gunpowder Treason, and the just
execution of the wretched miscreants, that were engaged in it; the Parliament
met at Westminster, which had been first summoned Anno 1603. and with it a
Convocation; the Members of which reslecting upon the horrid design of Garnet,
and his Accomplices, thought themselves in justice to their Sovereign, and
their own Principles obliged, when they met, to censure and condemn such
Doctrins, as led Men to such Rebellious Practices; hereupon the Prolocutor of
the lower house, Dr. Overall (then Dean of St. Paul's, afterward Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield, then of Norwich (whose vast learning gives him a
character beyond all, that can be said of him here) drew up a Treatise, which
being reviewed by the Upper House of Convocation, was mutually agreed on, and
declared to be the Sense of the Church of England in that very Svnod, which
made the Canons, that as yet are looked upon as the Code of our Church; a
Manuscript of which Acts, This Book is since Printed by W. Kettilby an. 1690.
lib. 1. c. 2.
and Canons having been happily put into my hands, I cannot but think my self
obliged to transcribe some Passages, that discover the belief of our Church
representative at that time.

They positively assert; that God having created our first Parents, and
purposing to multiply their seed into many Generations, for the replenishing of
the World with their Posterity, did give to Adam for his time, and to the rest
of the Patriarchs, and chief Fathers successively before the Flood, Authority,
Power, and Dominion over their Children, and Offspring to Rule, and Govern
them; -- adding further, Can. 2.
if any Man shall affirm, that Men at the first without all good Edacation or
civility ran up and down in Woods and Fields, as wild creatures, resting
themselves in Caves and Dens, and acknowledging no Superiority one over
another, until they were taught by experience the necessity of Government; and
that thereupon, they chose some among themselves to order and rule the rest,
giving them power and authority so to do; and that consequently all civil
Power, Jurisdiction, and Authority was first derived from the People, and
disordered Multitude; or either is originally still in them, or else is deduced
by their consents naturally from them, and is not God's Ordinance originally
descending from him, and depending upon him, he does greatly err.

Thus they account for the Government of the old World; nor did the Flood alter
the nature of Authority, or alienate the Rights of Princes; for say they, If
any Man shall affirm, Can. 6.11.
that the civil Power and Authority, which Noah had before the Flood, was by
the deluge determined, or that it was given unto him again by his Sons or
Nephews; or that he received from them the Sword of his Sovereignty; or that
the distribution of the World to his three Some, did depend upon their consents;
or received from them any such authority, as without the same it could not
lawfully have been made; -- or that this Power, etc. did not proceed from God,
or were not properly his Ordinance, but that they had the same from the People,
their Offspring; he does greatly err.

Besides, it is generally agreed upon, cap. 16.
that obedience to Kings and Civil Magistrates, is prescribed to all Subjects
in the 5th Commandment. Ex 20.12. where we are enjoined to Honor our Parents;
whereby it follows, that subjection of Inferiors unto their Kings and
Governors, is founded upon the very law of Nature; and consequently that the
sentence of Death awarded by God himself against such, as showed themselves
incorrigibly disobedient to their Parents, or cursed them, or struck them, was
likewise due unto those, who committed any such offenses against their Kings,
and Rulers, being the Heads and Fathers of their Common^ealths and Kingdoms;
which is not only apparent by way of consequence, but likewise by example,
practice, and precept; as where Shimei is judged to die for cursing of David
the Lords Anointed; where David himself, appointed by God to succeed King Saul,
would not be induced by any persuasions to lay violent hands upon his Master
the King. If any Man therefore shall affirm, C^n. 16.
that it was lawful in the Old Testament, either for Children or Nephews, to
have been disobedient to their Fathers, being their chief Govern^rs from the
Creation till Moses 's time or afterward, either for the Children of Israel,
either under Moses, Joshua, the Judges, or their Kings to have been disobedient
to them in their lawful commandments, or to have murmured or rebelled against
them; or that it was in those times more lawful unto Subjects for any cause
whatsoever, either to curse their Princes, Kings, or civil Governors,
or to bear arms against them, or to depose them from their Kingdoms, or
Principalities, or to lay violent hands upon their Persons, than it was in the
said times lawful upon any occasion for Children, either to have cursed their
Parents, or to have rebelled against them, when they did reprove or correct
them, or to have withdrawn themselves from their subjection, saying unto them
(they being private Men) we will be no more your Children, or you shall be no
more our Fathers; or (bearing civil authority over them) we will depose you
from your Government over us, and will be no longer ruled by you; or to have
offered any violence to them, or to have beaten them, and much less to have
murdered them, he does greatly err.

After this, they deduce the Scheme of Paternal and Regal Government, through
the several Ages of the Church, down to the time of the Jewish Kings; and, when
they considered the case of Uzziah, who for offering to burn Incense on the
Altar (which was peculiarly the Priests Office) was by God smitten with
leprosy, ^ 1. Can 22
they aver, if any Man shall affirm, that Azariah, and the other Priests used,
or that they lawfully might have used any violence, or force against the King's
Person, either in hindering him for burning of Incense,
or in thrusting him out of the Temple, or in compelling him to dwell apart in
a house, as he did (though he was a leper) if he had not of himself yielded to
the observation of the law in that behalf, or that he was deprived of his
Kingdom, either by the said streke of God, or by his dwelling in a house apart;
or that any thing, which the Priests then did, might have been a lawful warrant
to any Priest afterward in the Old Testament, either to have deposed by
sentence any of their Kings from their Kingdoms for the like offenses, or to
have used arms, or repressed such their unlawful attempts by forcible ways,
though they had imagined, the same might have tended to the preservation of
Religion; or that either before that time or afterward,
any Priest did resist by force of Arms, or depose any of the Kings either of
Israel, or of Judah from their Kingdoms, tho the Kings of Israel all of them,
and fourteen of the Kings of Judah were open and plain Idolaters, he does
greatly err. Can. 23. l. 1.


And because against this the Case of Athaliah might be objected, they say
further, if any Man shall affirm, that Jehoiada, and his Wife did amiss in
preserving the life of their King Joash; or that Athaliah was not a Tyrannical
Usurper (the right Heir of that Kingdom being alive) or that it was neither
lawful for Jehoiada, and the rest of the Princes, Levites, and People to have
yielded their subjection unto their lawful King; nor having so done, and their
King being in possession of his Crown, to have joined together for the
overthrowing of Athaliah the Usurper, or that Jehoiada the High Priest was not
bound, as he was a Priest, both to inform the Princes and People of the Lords
promise,
that Joash should Reign over them: -- or that this fact, either of the
Princes, Priests, or People was to be held for a lawful warrant for any
afterward, either Princes, Priest, or People, to have deposed any of the Kings
of Judah, who by right of Succession came to their Crowns, or to have killed
them for any respect whatsoever, and to have set another in their places
according to their own choice; or that this example of Jehoiada, or any thing
else in the Old Testament did give them to the High Priest any Authority to
dispute, determine, or judge, whether the Children of the Kings of Judah,
should either be kept from the Crown, because their Fathers were Idolaters; or,
being in possession of it, should be deposed from it, in this respect, or any
other respect whatsoever; he ^oth greatly err Can. 25.


-- If any Man shall affirm, that it is lawful for any Captain, or Subject,
high or low whosoever, to bear Arms against their Sovereign, cap. 28.
or to lay violent hands upon his Sacred Person -- he does greatly err: -- and
this Doctrine is earnestly inculcated in many other places. The Israelites in
Egypt, after Joseph's death, being oppressed very tyrannically many ways, did
never rebel against any of those Kings, but submitted themselves to their
authority, tho their burdens were very intolerable, both in respect of the
impossible works imposed on them, and because also they might not offer
sacrifices unto the Lord (a special part of God's Worship) without apparent
danger of stoning to death; besides, it may not be omitted, when God himself
sent Moses to deliver them from that servitude, he would not suffer him to
carry them thence, till Pharaoh their King gave them license to depart.

When Alexander the Great, l. 1. cap. 30.
having overthrown Darius, sent to Jaddus (the High Priest, and Prince of the
Jews) to assist him in his Wars, and become tributary to the Macedonians, as he
had been to the Persians; Jos. Ant. l. 11. c 8.
he returned for his answer, that he might not yield thereunto,
because he had taken an Oath for his true Allegiance unto Darius, which he
might not lawfully violate while Darius lived, being by flight escaped, when
his Army was defeated. Can. 30.
If any Man shall affirm, that Jaddus the High Priest did amiss in binding his
obedience to King Darius by an Oath; or that he had not sinned, if he had
refused, being thereunto required, so to have sworn; or, having so sworn, he
might lawfully have born Arms against Darius, or have solicited others,
whether aliens, or Jews thereunto; he does greatly err.

And agreeable hereunto they tell us, was the belief and practice of our
Blessed Savior, and his Holy Apostles under the Gospel. If therefore any Man
shall affirm, Can. 2. l. 2.
that our Savior did exempt himself from the obedience due to the civil
Magistrate; or did any way, or at any time encourage the Jews, or any other,
directly,
or indirectly, to rebel for any cause whatsoever against the Roman Emperor, or
any of his subordinate Magistrates; or that he did not very willingly both
himself pay tribute to Caesar, and also advise the Jews so to do, or that, when
he willed the Jews to pay Tribute to Caesar, including therein their duty of
obedience unto him, he did not therein deal plainly, or sincerely, but meant
secretly, that they should be bound no longer to be obedient unto him, but
until by force they should be able to resist him; or that he did not utterly,
and truly condemn all devises, conferences, and resolutions whatsoever, either
in his own Apostles; or in any other Persons for the using of force against
civil Authority, or that by Christ's Word, all Subjects of what sort soever
without exception, ought not by the law of God to perish with the Sword, that
take, and use the Sword for any cause against Kings, and Sovereign Princes,
under whom they were born, or under whose Jurisdiction they do inhabit; -- or
that Christ did not well, and as the fifth Commandment did require, in
submitting himself, as he did, to Authority, although he was first sent for with
Swords and Staves, as if he had been a Thief, and then afterward carried to
Pilate, and by him (albeit he found no evil in him) condemned to death; or that
by any Doctrine or Example, which Christ ever taught, or has left upon good
record,
it can be proved lawful to any Subjects, for any cause of what nature soever,
to decline either the Authority and Jurisdiction of their Sovereign Princes, or
of any their lawful Deputies, and inferior Magistrates ruling under them; he
does greatly err.

If any Man shall affirm, Can. 6. l. 2.
-- that the Subjects of all the Temporal Princes in the World, were not as
much bound in St. Paul's time to be subject unto them, as the Romans were to be
subject to the Empire, not only for fear, but even for conscience sake; or that
St. Paul's commandment (by virtue of his Apostleship, and assistance of the
Holy Ghost) of obedience to Princes, then Ethnicks, is not of as great force to
bind the Conscience of all true Christians, as if he had been then summus
Pontifex; -- or that the Primitive Church was not as well restrained de Jure by
the Doctrine of Christ's Apostles, as de facto from bearing Arms against such
Princes, as were then Ethnicks, and transferring of their Kingdoms from them
unto any others; -- or that the Apostles at that time, if they had found the
Christians of sufficient force for number, provision, and furniture of Warlike
Engines to have Deposed those Pagan Princes, that were then both Enemies,
and Persecutors of all, that believed in Christ; would (no doubt have moved,
and authorized them to have made War against such their Princes, and absolved
them from performing any longer that obedience, which they (as Men temporizing)
had in their Writings prescribed unto them; or that, when afterward Christians
were grown able for number, and strength to have opposed themselves by force
against their Emperors, being Wicked and Persecutors, they might lawfully so
have done for any thing, that is in the New Testament to the contrary; he does
greatly err.

If any Man shall affirm, that it is not a most profane impiety, Can. 10. l. 2.
tending altogether to the discredit of the Scriptures, for any Man to hold,
that St. Peter and St. Paul had so instructed the Christians in their times, as
that they knew, if they had been able, they might without offense to God have
deposed Nero from his Empire; or that the Christians in Tertullian's time, when
they professed, that notwithstanding their numbers, and forces were so great,
as they had been able to have distressed very greatly the Estate of the
Emperors (being then Persecutors) they might not so do, because Christ their
Master had taught them otherwise, ought not to be a sufficient Warrant for all
true Christians to detest those Men in these days, and for ever hereafter, who
contrary to the Example of the said Christians in the Primitive Church, and the
Doctrins of Christ, which were then taught them, do endeavor to persuade them,
when they shall have sufficient Forces, to rebel against such Kings and
Emperors at the Pope's commandment, and to thrust them from their Kingdoms and
Empires;
or that this devilish Doctrine of animating Subjects to Rebellion (when they
are able) against their Sovereigns, either for their Cruelty, Heresy, or
Apostasy, was ever taught in the Church of Christ by any of the Ancient
Fathers, during the Reigns of Dioclesian, or Julian the Apostate, or Valens the
Arrian, or of any other the Wicked Emperors before them; or that it is not a
wicked perverting of the Apostles words to the Corinthians, (touching their
choice of Arbitrators to end dissentions among themselves, rather than draw
their Brethren before Judges, that were Infidels) to infer thereof, either that
St. Paul intended thereby to impeach in any sort the Authority of the Civil
Magistrates, as if he had meant they should have chosen such Judges, as by
civil Authority might otherwise have bound them, than by their own consents to
have stood to their award; or to authorize Christian Subjects, when they are
able, to thrust their Sovereigns from their Royal Seats, and to choose
themselves new Kings in their places; he does greatly err.

But it were requisite to transcribe almost that whole admirable Treatise,
should I give the Reader a view of all those passages, that vindicate the
Divine Right of Kings, and assert the necessity of Subjects being obedient to
them; while I forbear in expectancy, that the most venerable owner of that
great Treasure, will very speedily make the World happy in the publication of
so elaborate a work.

SECT. V.
Some few years after this, King James ordered to be Printed, and had in every
Church, a little Treatise called Deus and Rex, which was published both in
Latin and English (and, as I am very credibly informed, drawn up by Bishop
Overal) which was reprinted in English Anno 1663. by the especial command of
King Charles II. and therein the Nation is taught their duty toward their
Superiors thus; In the Allegiance of a Subject to his Sovereign, the evil he is
to eschew, is. 1. Evil in action; p. 15, 16. edit. 1663.
for he is not to touch him with any evil touch, not to stretch out his hand
against his most sacred Person, nor so much as to affright, or disgrace him by
cutting the lap of his Garment. 2. Evil in words; for he is not to curse his
Ruler. 3. Evil in cogitation; for he is not to curse the King in his thought;
(and all this is proved by many Texts of Scripture placed in the Margin.) Now
if the Subjects of our Sovereign out of their Allegiance to His Majesty are to
succor, and defend him even with the hazard of their lives, etc. and the bond
of this Allegiance is inviolable, and cannot by any means be dissolved, then
etc. Eccles. 8.2. p. 17.
is an evident Testimony, that Kings are subject unto God,
and have no mortal Man their superior, who may require of them an account of
their doings, and punish them by any Judicial Sentence, -- which Doctrine is
excellently confirmed by the instance of David in the case of Uriah, and the
Prophet Nathan 's carriage toward him; after which it is said, that God only
gave unto Saul Kingly Power, and not the People, p. 19. p. 29, 30. etc.
who are said to make him King; i. e. approving him, as made by God, etc. But
was not Saul a Tyrant, a bloody Oppressor; did not the blood of so many
Innocents cry to God for vengeance, and by his special commandment (whosoever sheds
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed) deserve death? Yet David by God's
own appointment designed to the Kingdom says, the Lord keep me from doing that
thing unto my Master the Lord's Anointed, etc. -- the Bishop of Rome, (and by
parity of reason, any other Person, p. 35.
if I Judge aright) cannot dispense with the Law of Nature, which from the
first beginning of the reasonable Creature is unchangeable; nor with the Moral
Law of God, whose Precepts are indispensible; but the duty of Subjects in
obedience to their Sovereign, is grounded upon the Law of Nature, beginning
with our first beginning; for as we are Born Sons, so are we Born Subjects. p.
38. Obj.
-- But is there no means to stay the fury of a Sovereign command, if he should
be so tyrannous, and profane, as to endeavor to oppress the whole Church at
once, and utterly to extinguish the Light of Christian Religion? -- Princes in
their rage may endeavor wholly to destroy God's Church, Ans.
but in vain, because Christ has so built it on a Rock, that the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it; -- and when they do labor to effect so heinous
an impiety, the only means we have to appease their fury, is serious repentance
for our sins, which have brought this chastisement upon us, and humble prayer
unto God, who guides the hearts of Princes like Rivers of Waters. You know, how
before the coming of Christ, the Jewish Church by the command of Ahasuerus, was
to be destroyed, Esth. 4.
both young and old, etc. here the whole Church by the barbarous designment of
Ahasuerus seemed to be in the very Jaws of death, yet they take no arms, they
consult not how to poison Ahasuerus or Haman, they animate no desperate Person
suddenly to stab them, but there was only great sorrow among them, and fasting,
and weeping, etc.

This Book gave so much disgust to a party of Men in this Kingdom, that they
could not be quiet, till something was Printed under the name of an answer to
it (tho every Pamphlet, that is so called, does not deserve that name) and to
make it pass the more plausibly, it assumes the same title, Deus and Rex, and
is said to have been Printed at Colen, An. Dom. 1618. the Author of which (tho
unquestionably a Papist, as appears by many passages in the Book) affirms, p.
13.
that the Scots had undoubtedly the true spirit of the Gospel, who professed (
and for it he quotes Knox 's History of the Scotch Church) that they would be
Subjects to no one, unless they could enjoy their desired Reformation; p. 19.
and that the former Dialogue falsely asserts, that Kings have their Power only
from God, and are accountable only to him; and that the duty of Subjects cannot
be dissolved, if the King turns Tyrant, Infidel, Heretic, or Apostate; and
that Kings are not to be deposed, or resisted, unless by prayers and tears, tho
they are fallen into so much impiety and madness, as to seek the ruin of the
Church, and the destruction of Religion: Which Assertions the Author condemns,
but with no reason, and a great deal of injustice, while he owns, and improves
the Romish Doctrins of resisting, and deposing Princes in many places, so
easily are Men inclined to be despisers of Dignities, and blasphemers of
Dominions.

Gabriel Powel says, De Adiaplyris, Land. 1606. c 8.. 34 p. 69
that when St. Paul bids us be obedient for conscience sake, that he means, we
must no way offend the Magistrate by rebelling against him; but that we must
keep a good Conscience in his sight, who has set the Magistrate over us --.
93. p. 71.
for his Power is from God, -- and to the just praise of our Reformation, he
adds, c. 9 Sect. 35. p. 79
that no Church in Europe reformed her self more orderly, than the Church of
England; in which nothing was done tumultuarily, by force and arms, or by
fraud; but all alterations were made by the supreme Power of the Nation,
agreeable to the Word of God, and the Example of the Primitive Church.

Oliver O^mered in his picture of a Papist; It is not lawful for Subjects to
attempt the murdering of their Sovereign for Religion sake, or for any
p^etence whatsoever. Go with cresset, and torchlight throughout the whole Book
of God, and throughout the spacious volumes of the Ancient Fathers, and tell
me, whether any Priest, Levite, Evangelist, Apostle, Ancient Father ever has
taught, counseled, and much less practiced the like, I say not against Lawful
Magistrates,
but tyrannous Rulers, and such as were reprobated of God, p. 176.
-- the Prophet Isaiah complained of the Exactions, and Oppressions of the
Kings of Israel, showed them their faults, and admonished them of God's
vengeance; but he did not animate, encourage, and incite the People to avenge
themselves of their Princes, and to lift up Arms against them; -- the Prophets
Amos, Micah, and Zephaniah give sufficient testimony, that the Rulers in their
times were very wicked Men, and such as did grind the faces of the Subjects;
and yet all this notwithstanding they did not advise the Subjects to mutiny, or
rebel against their Princes. -- When Rome was pure and primitive; you shall
find, p. 179.
the arms of the Church were tears and prayers; but now they are degenerate
from their former purity, and openly threaten the lives of Kings. -- the
ancient Romans shall in judgment rise against you, and condemn you; for they
conspired not the death of Pagans, Infidels, and Tyrants, that made havoc of
the Church of God, etc.

SECT. VI.
Among these Divines I will place one Civilian, the famous Albericus Gentilis;
who, tho Born in Italy, yet lived long in England; the King's Professor of the
Laws in the most Famous University of Oxon, of which he was one of the greatest
Ornaments. I shall not mention, what he says on this subject in his Books de
Jure belli; since he has undertaken it professedly in his three Royal
Disputations, London 1605. 4 to.
as he calls them; in the first of which, treating of the absolute power of a
King (wherein his Notions are very agreeable to the Sentiments of his Master
King James in his true law of free Monarchies, to which he refers) he affirms,
that he is absolutely supreme, p. 9, 10, 17.
who acknowledges nothing above him, but God, to whom only, and not to any
other he is to render an account. -- he confesses there were some Magistrates
improperly called Kings, such as the Kings of Sparta, and of Egypt, to which
last there were laws set how far they should walk, and how often bath
themselves, who might be accused when they were dead, and being convicted be
denied decent Burial; but those do not deserve to be called Kings, whose
Subjects pay them no more obedience, than they please. -- A Prince is a God
upon Earth, his Power is greater, than either that of a Father of old over his
Children, or that of a Master over his Servants. All Princes are feudataries to
God, p 17.
to whom they ought to render an account of their Government, who is their only
Judge, p. 34.
-- it is a Maxim in the Civil Law, Princeps legibus solutus est, a Prince is
free from laws; the Greek Interpreters understand it, of his freedom from Penal
Laws; for a Prince has no Judges, who can compel him; others, that he is
exempt from the coaction, not from the direction of the law, -- but all agree
against any force to be used against him.

This, and much more to this purpose, the Reader will meet with in that first
disputation; while the third treats largely, how unjust any violence is, p 39.
p. 100.
which Subjects use against their King, -- by King, he says, he means such a
Prince, as has no Superior, no Judge, or Governor over him; he means also a
lawful Prince, not a Tyrant; but such a lawful Prince who rules Tyrannically,
i.e. seeks the destruction of the Commonwealth. It is a fundamental and
unquestionable Law, that Men ought to honor their Prince, p. 101, 102.
and not to speak evil of him, -- and that what injuries ought not to be done
to a Parent, parad. 3.
ought much less to be done to a Prince; but no Man, says Tully, can take away
the life of his Father without great sin. This perhaps he spoke like a Stoic,
but it was also spoken like a great Lawyer; for the Roman Lawyers were great
followers of that Sect of Philosophers; Romans 13.
-- the Power of a Prince is by Divine Right, not by the sole Constitution of
Men. -- Suppose a Prince going about to destroy his own Country, p. 103.
as Nero did, even Tyranny is more tolerable than Anarchy; (...) what happened
when Nero was slain? In the Reigns of the three following Princes, p. 105, 106,
107.
which lasted but a few Months, more blood was spilt, than in the 14 years of
Nero 's Government. When it is objected, that we owe more to our Country than
our Prince, he flatly denies it, -- affirming, that the very Heathens knew,
that God sent evil Princes, and that to reclaim Men from their sins; and that
God has left us remedies for such evils, such as repentance of our Vices,
obedience to our Sovereign,
thereby to incline them to be kind, and gentle; patience to take off the edge
of their fury, p. 112.
and sighs, and tears. -- If the case of the Low Countries be objected, and
that our excellent Queen Elizabeth both praised, and defended them; the same
answer must serve for this, as for all examples; that we must judge not
according to examples, but according to Laws: or the case of the Men of Libnah,
who rebelled against Jehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21.10. be insisted on, we must answer,
says Drusius ( and so we have another witness to this truth, the Learned
Drusius) that every action, that is related in Holy Scripture, is not praised,
nor was the cause good, that because the Prince had deserted the true Religion,
therefore they might desert him, -- for the Christians did not desert the
Apostate Julian,
and that action is not to be made a pattern, that is done contrary to reason
and law; nor does our defense of the Dutch confirm the Justice of their cause;
for we may justly defend those, who themselves are engaged in an unjust War, p.
116.
as I have in more than one place proved as to this fact of Queen Elizabeth. --
If Equals have, no power one over another, how much less has an inferior power
ove^ his superior, a Subject over his Prince? he shall be restrained by his
superior, who is God, -- is it not in every Man's mouth, that a Prince has no
other Judge but God? -- Shame and conscience, p. 118. p. 121, 122 123.
and honor may check them, but not their Subjects. -- Obj. But do not Aquinas,
Luther, Peter Martyr, and Beza allow of resistance? Answ. the book de regimine
Principis is not Aquinas 's, says Sigonius ( lib. 17. de regn. Ital.) Luther
was deceived by the German Lawyers, and brought to alter his opinion for the
worse, and what he spoke he said only of feudataries, and of a Defensive War.
Martyr was swayed by examples, not reason; as if because the Jews resisted the
Macedonians, and Romans, whose Subjects they were not, therefore Subjects may
resist their lawful Sovereigns, -- the example of St. Ambrose does not reach
this case, for he used no force, nor had he any right to deny the temple to the
Emperor, which was his, -- and Beza says only, p. 12^. etc.
that the Laws must authorize such resistance. -- But there are cogent reasons
to incline to the practice of Passive Obedience. 1. It is a rule, that we must
not speak evil of the Prince. 2. Force toward a Father is unlawful, therefore
toward a Prince. 3. A less evil is not to be removed, if a greater will
follow. 4. If a Man in defense of his Mother ought not to resist his Father,
neither ought he to resist his Prince in defense of his Country. 5. No one can
depose a Prince, but he, who made him; but the People did not make him, etc. 6.
No evil is to be done, that good may come of it. 7. How can a King have
absolute Power, when he has so many Ephori over him, as he has Subjects? 8.
The Authority of the Ancients, Plato, and Tully. -- If it be objected, that
Plato says, that Parents, when they grow mad, must be restrained; and that
others say, that a Tyrant is a Madman: I answer, we constitute a Guardian over
a mad Prince;
but we deny that a cruel Tyrannical Prince is to be reckoned a Madman. Plato
and Tully, and Bartolus are of the opinion, p. 132.
that there can be no just cause of rebelling against, or resisting a Prince.
The sentence of Mr. l'Hospital is observable, that the Faction of the League
was very potent; the defense the Hugonets made, seemed necessary, but that only
the King's cause was just; that both the Hugonots and Leaguers, were guilty of
waging War against their King; but the Hugonots in a lesser degree, because the
necessity of self defense is more excusable, than the Ambition of a Crown; bu^
no Cause was just, but the King's; for there cannot be any just cause of
resisting a lawful Prince.

SECT. VII.
The treasonable Design of Garnet, and his Accomplices, gave occasion to the
making, and imposing the Oath of Allegiance, as good Laws generally owe their
Rise, and Original to men's ungoverable Passions, and irregular Manners; but no
sooner did the Oath appear, but out came two Breves of Pope Paul the Fifth, to
forbid the taking of it: and Cardinal Bellarmine's Letter to the Archpriest
Blackwel upon the same Account. To these Adversaries that Learned King wrote an
Answer, Tripici nodo triplex cuneus, and immediately Books multiplied on both
sides to a great number, Bellarmine, Gretser, Suarez, Eudaemon, Johannes,
Scioppius, Becanus, Parsons, and others attempting to relieve the baffled
Papacy; while Bishop Andrews, Bishop Barlow, Bishop Buckeridge, Bishopt Abbot,
Bishop Moreton, Bishop Prideaux, Isaac Casaubon, Burhil, Thompson, Collins, and
others, stoutly defended their King, as they ought. And tho their Arguments
seem particularly levelled against the Papists, yet by parity of reason they
condemn all such for the like Opinions and Practices, whoever asserts, or is
guilty of them. It were a Subject worth a wise man's pains, who had abilities
and leisure, to give an accurate Account of that Controversy; but I shall only
cite the Authors, as they occur, and make for the present purpose. The King's
Opinion we need not doubt of, since the severest Enemies of this Doctrine
confess, that it has been a commendable policy in Princes to popagate such
Opinions, nor have the Atheistical Politicians spared even Solomon himself, as
he served his own, and not the interest of Truth, when he said, By me Kings
reign. Bishop Andrews's Sentiments have been published in the first part of
this History, to which may be added other Passages in the Writings of the same
Author: Vol. of Sermon. p. 803, 804.
Upon misconceiving this point, some have fallen into a fancy, that his
anointed may forfeit their Tenure, and so cease to be his. -- If after he is
anointed he grow defective, -- prove a Tyrant, fall to favor Heretics, his
anointing may be wiped off, or scraped off, then you may write a Book de justa
abdicatione, make a holy League, etc. -- but it is not Religion, nor Virtue,
nor any spiritual Grace, this Royal Anointing. Christus Domini is said, not
only of Josias, a King truly Religious, but of Cyrus, a mere Heathen; not only
of David, a good King, but of Saul, a Tyrant, even when he was at the worst. --
Unxit in Regem, Royal Unction gives no Grace, but a just Title only; it
includes nothing, but a just Title; it excludes nothing, but usurpation; God's
claim never forfeits, his Character never to be wiped out, or scraped out; nor
Kings lose their Rights, no more than Patriarchs did their Fatherhood. P. 809.
-- Never was any truly partaker of the inward anointing of a Christian Man,
but he was ever fast and firm to the Royal Anointing.

The same excellent Prelate in his Answer to Tortus (or Cardinal Bellarmin's
Book against King James's Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, says, That
Subjects are bound to obey their Prince by all Law, London 1609. p. 16. 36.
Natural, Moral, Civil, Municipal, That Christ never interdicted any Subjects
Obedience; his Father sent him not into the World on this Errand, nor did he
send any of his Followers; P. 43.
-- Let the King be a Heathen, he ceases not to be a King; let him be a Julian,
an Apostate, which is worse than a Heathen, -- yet he is a King still,
and against even such it is not lawful to take Arms, nay, it is a sin, not to
take Arms in their defense, when they command us. P. 110.
-- Both Papists and Puritans conspire the hurt of Kings, as Herod and Pilate
agreed to murder Christ; -- both being equally injurious to Kings, in striving
to rob them of their Authority. -- Kings in their Kingdoms are God's Vicars. P.
158, 161.
-- And the ancient Christians cheerfully obeyed them -- A forced Obedience
rather becomes the Devil, than a Christian, for they are subject against their
wills; but to the praise of Christianity, the Christians in the Infancy of the
Church were so sincerely obedient, that their Enemies could not bespatter them;
and so cheerfully patient, that their Enemies were forced to admire them. --
And it is blasphemy against Christ to think, or say, P. 321.
that he would have any one, that is his Vicar, to hinder Subjects from being
true to their Prince, or Kings from being safe. P. 384, 385.
-- Kings derive their Authority from God, the people confer nothing upon them,
they are God's anointed, not the people's; -- the Form of Government may be
from men, but the Authority is always from Heaven.

Anno 1610, The same Learned Prelate published his Answer to Cardinal
Bellarmin's Apology, and therein avers, C. 2. p. 58.
That every Subject is bound by his Allegiance, not to suffer any one who shall
endeavor either to depose his Prince, or to dispose of his Kingdom; he is
bound to oppose himself against any Invader, neither to absolve himself from
his Allegiance, nor to suffer himself to be absolved by any other; not to take
Arms against his Sovereign, but to defend him from all violence in his Crown
and Person, and to discover all Conspiracies. P. 132.
-- To render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. The Apostles did so to
Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Domitian. The Martyrs did so to Commodus,
Severus, Decius, Dioclesian. The Fathers did so to Constantius, Valens and
Anastasius. Nay, the Popes themselves did so to the Arians, to Theodoric, and
the Goths; in their times the contrary Doctrine was reckoned to be Heresy.
These were the Sentiments of that great man, than whom, while he lived, the
King had not a more Loyal Servant, nor the Church a more Learned Prelate, as
the Editors Ep. Ded. R^gi.
of his Opuscula, with Justice, aver.

When Becanus, a busy Jesuit, had undertaken to answer this admirable
Prelate's Books against Bellarmin, Rich. Thompson, an. 1611. wrote his
Vindication, P. 20.
and smartly censures his Adversary, for saying, That in England we swear
Allegiance to our Kings upon these two conditions: 1. As long as we stay in
England. 2. As long as he maintains the true Religion. Both which Propositions,
as he says, are most false; and then he proceeds to confirm his Hypothesis,
proving, in pursuance of his Design, P. 27.
That to the Oath of a Papist no regard ought to be had; for who can believe,
whether he swears truly, and from his Heart, who defends the Lawfulness of a
mixed Proposition, of which one part is spoken, P. 44.
the other reserved? -- The Text, Touch not mine anointed, only concerns Kings,
and in the whole Bible none are called the Lord's anointed, but Kings. And
Rabbi Levi Ben Gershon, the Jew, has commented more honestly, and more like a
Christian, on 1 Samuel 12.24. than the Fathers of the Society of the Jesuits. P.
78, 79, 83.
All Princes, even Pagans, have a supreme Power over all their Subjects, and in
all Causes, and Proscribere, and non posse proscribi propria sunt Regum
timendorum in proprios greges, and ad ipsos coelitus delapsa autoritate, ac
peculiari quadam ratione spectant, i. e. To punish others, and not to be
punishable themselves is the peculiar Right of Kings, derived unto them from
above.

Nor was Becanus the only Antagonist, that Bishop Andrews met with in this
Cause, Eudaemon Johannes, a Cretan, and a Jesuit (and he needs no other
Character) undertakes the Defense of Garnet, and the Censure of Allegiance, him
Dr. Samuel Collins, the public Professor of Divinity at Cambridge, Cantab.
1612.
undertakes, wherein he averrs, Par. 2. p. 52.
That the Jesuit had belyed King James, when he called him a Follower of Knox,
to whose Opinions he was always most averse, detesting both him and his
Followers, whom he, upon all occasions, rather punished, than countenanced, --
Par. 3. c. 72. p. 252.
Show me, that there is any such power, I do not mean only in private persons,
but in the Pope, or in any other mortal, to depose,
or to murder a King. -- If a King do not his Duty, he is to be left to the
Divine Tribunal: Against thee only have I sinned, says David; for he was a
King, says S. Hierom, and had no one whom he might fear. Understand it of
coercive power, not only not to punish, but also not to upbraid him, for who
shall say to a King, why do thou so? Eccl. 8.4. And who can resist him? Prove.
30. P. 2.3.
-- But you have found out this pretty Distinction, that as long as a King
remains a King, let him be never so tyrannical, his Subjects dare not oppose
him, but when the Pope deposes him, then it is lawful boldly to oppose him:
(And I would fain know, where the odds is, if the Pope, or the people depose
him) so that if the Commons have power, and the Pope consent, and no danger of
scandal follow, the murder of Kings is lawful and honorable. -- Consider with
your self, P. 254.
what a gap you open to popular Licentiousness, when you praise those Men, who
magnify the parricides of Princes?

The same Author in his Epphata to F. T. being a Vindication in English of the
same Prelate, vindicates the same Doctrine; Cambr. 1617.
in his Epistle Dedicatory he says, That tho Kings die like men ( i. e.
Quatenus homines, non quatenus Reges) yet we are to remember, that they fall
like one of the Principes, i. e. one of the Angels, says the Cardinal himself,
among others, on that Psalm, who, we know, are not judged, till God judges
them: though no doubt but that aggravates their Judgment so much the sooner. --
It were worth the considering, what correspondence such Grounds have with the
ancient Doctrine, which the Cardinal, and his Followers would seem so close to
follow. Of Chrysostom,
that a Sovereign King is accountable to none (not only to his Subjects, but)
not so much as to his Successor ( as David said, that he is to be judged by God
only.) The same Chrysostom noting, that whereas the Psalmist passes over other
miracles of the Wilderness in deep silence, he insists only on the Death of Og
and Sehon, two mighty Monarchs, because Kings lives are so wholly in God's
Hands, and the Disposition of them is always miraculous, reserved and
appropriated to God himself. Of S. Basil, that a King is subject to no Judge.
Of Ambrose, that nullis tenetur Legibus, not only the King of Israel, but not
the King of Egypt. Of the Pope in Theodoret, who told Theodosius, that it was
not lawful to implead a King, not only in his person, but not personating
another, not fictione juris, as the Lawyers say. -- Chapter 1. p. 58, 59.
Now Obedience is become among the Ceremonies, and the honoring of our Parents,
i. e. in truth, of our Princes, Patres Patriae, by ancient style,
(and so Ezechias called the Priests his children, 2 Chronicles. 29.11.) is as
subject to alteration, as the Sabbath Day. -- And because the Jewish Ceremonies
may not only be omitted, but may not be retained without heinous crime,
therefore it shall be Conscience to wax wanton against Princes, to shake off
their Yoke, yea, merit, virtue, and what not? -- as if the Precept of honoring
Parents, which is the primum in promissione, Ephesians. 6. were now secundum in
omissione, after that against Images, P. 60, 61, 62.
which is usually cancelled in the Popish Catechisms. -- Against the Emperors
under the Old Testament there was no rising up; -- and as for the Emperors in
the New Testament, tho as they were Heathen, they were neither by Christ, nor
his Apostles obeyed, I hope, Sir, it is enough that they were not resisted. --
Kings, when transported by Error, they forsake their Duty, Page 75.
yet forfeit not their Supremacy; -- We yield no Abdication of our King,
tho his Fault be Heresy, remembering that, Deus defendit oleum suum, as
Optatus says, and Caesar non desinit esse Caesar, even in Alto Gentilisino, as
our Savior acknowledged of him, Matt 22. -- So beinous is the Heresy of
Deposing Magistrates for moral Misdemeanors. -- A bad Head, I should think,
which the Body will be the better for the cutting off. -- No Iniquity can
abolish Authority: -- And if it be objected, Page 94. P. 137. 139.
that Kings must be hampered with a coercive Power, or all must run to nothing,
and the Church be clean extinguish^d: -- It is answered, The Church gains by
Patience in Persecution, therefore she loses by Resistance and Opposition.

SECT. VIII.
Among these domestic Champions of the King, and the Truth, it may not be
amiss to reckon an eminent Foreigner (if I may call Isaac Casaubon so, who
lived some Years in this Kingdom, and dyed here, one of the Glories of his Age;
before he came into England, he just after the Quarrel between the Pope and the
Republic of Venice, An. 1607.
printed a Discourse, De Liberate Ecclesiastica (or rather but a part of a
Discourse); for whereas he promises Eleven Chapters, the first three are not
entirely printed, the rest being stopped at the Press by Order of the French
King; tho as imperfect as the Book is, Goldastus has thought it worth a place
in his Collections) and in it he shows, that the true Church of God never
usurped the Rights of Kings, Ad Lect. p. 6. Page 12.13.
while the Popes spoil Kings of their Liberty and their Majesty too; for under
them it sometimes happens, that Kings may be safe, but they can never be
secure; for they so value this Liberty, that to defend it they tumble all
things upside down, mingle Heaven and Earth, things sacred and profane: -- And
whereas our holy Master's Precepts ought not to be contradicted, since he has
joined his Example to his Commands, and recommended to us the Love of our
Enemies, Subjection to the Powers ordained of God,
and Obedience to them for Conscience sake; they to build up, and to confirm
this Liberty (unknown to the Primitive times) do every where inkindle Wars,
become a Terror to Kings and Princes, dispense with their Subjects Allegiance,
and arm them against their own Sovereigns, and pretend, that to violate all
Laws divine and human, is a holy undertaking, and most acceptable unto God. --
As ifby an ill management of supreme Authority, Page 17.
the Authority were forfeited. -- And if once Princes shall suffer the
Foundations of their Government to be shaken in the minds of their Subjects,
their Government and Empire must of necessity reel and totter, and fall into
the dust. -- God commands all orders of Men to render to Caesar the things that
are Caesar 's; Page 69.
and, let every soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. therefore Gregory
Nazianzen says, that the Civil Magistrate does reign together with Christ; nor
does it make any difference, that some Kings arrive to the Throne by hereditary
Succession, others by Election, a third sort by Conquest; for tho God in the
establishment of a King (as in the Ordination of a Priest) uses the Ministry of
men; yet it is impious, not to acknowledge, that the Dominion and Power is
received originally from God: By God Kings reign, as the holy Scriptures in
almost infinite places do testify. P. 102, 103.
-- The Primitive Christians did so use the World, as those that used it not,
as S. Paul advises; for while their Zeal for Piety was flagrant, while the
Innocence of their Manners, their mutual Love and Affection, their unfeigned
Humility,
their constant Meditation on the Joys of Heaven, their Fidelity and Obedience
to their Princes, as far as their Conscience would give them leave, lastly,
their incomparable Constancy, in suffering all manner of Torments for the true
Religion, made them every day a Spectacle to the whole World, they ravished
their very Enemies to admire them and their Virtues; these were the beginnings
of Christianity; this the infant Age of the Church, whom Tortures made happy,
Infamy glorious, the Contempt of Gold rich, and the Crown (not of a Kingdom,
but) Martyrdom made august.

And as Truth is the same in all Climates, so was this learned Man, in
whatsoever place Providence fixed, for, when he came into England, he had the
same Notions, as fully appears by his Epipistle to Fronto Ducaeus, written Ann.
1611. wherein, discoursing of S. Gregory Nazianzen's Observation of old, that
Men's. preposterous Zeal had destroyed their Charity; he adds: But Good God!
Page 82 Land. 1611.
Had the Father lived in our Age, what Complaints would he have made? To see so
many Men, acted by a preposterous Zeal, under the pretext of Religion and
Piety, most wickedly, and irreligiously, not only break the Peace of the Church
about Trifles; but undertake Rebellions, Treasons, most cruel Massacres of
innocent People, overthrowing of lawful Governments, and the Murder of
Princes: -- this is your privilege at this time of day, (as he addresses
himself to the Roman Catholics) that not only the grave Citizens and Senators
of a Nation assembled in a general Convention (tho what they should do of this
kind is unlawful), but even the Mobile assume to themselves a Power of
Abdicating Kings, forfeiting their Kingdoms, and giving them to whom they
please, and of abolishing all Laws under the pretext of Piety; which Villainy no
Religion (tho never so profane and impious) except yours (meaning the Popish)
ever allows, P. 100, etc.
or has ever formerly allowed. Garnet 's chief Crime was, that he had either
forgotten or neglected S. Paul 's Advice, consenting to the doing of evil, that
good might come thereof; -- this he ought not to have done, had he demonstrated
himself a true follower of Jesus Christ; for what Precept or Example bad he of
our holy Savior for his so doing? Who was a Lamb without blemish, -- and
reproved the preposterous Zeal of James and John, the Apostles with, You know
not what spirit you are of, i. e. You think your Zeal is commendable, which
hates the Samaritans, and would destroy them; but I do not require such a
cruel, sanguinary, and destructive Zeal from my Followers; what I require is
Charity, that is Patient, Edifying, and which covers a multitude of Sins; this
I approve of, and this I would have practiced by those, to whom I am to leave
my Peace: -- This he would not have done, had he remembered, P. 104, 105.
how severely our holy Savior chastised Peter, when he rashly cut off Malchus
's Ear. -- But Zealots are very seldom removed from their purposes by any
consideration of Laws, either divine or humane; whatever School teaches this
Doctrine is not Christian, it is the School of Antinhrist, and of Satan, for
the Devil was a Murderer from the beginning,
a true Abeddon and Apollyon; but the Doctrine of our holy Savior Jesus Christ
is perfectly contrary to this; for he prescribed no other remedy to his
Disciples against all manner of Injuries, but Flight, Patience, and Prayers;
that rejoicing in hope, being patient in Tribulation, and praying continually,
as the Apostle advises, they might triumph over all their Adversaries: These
were the only Arms that the Apostles used, wherever they laid the foundations
of the Gospel; these were the only Weapons which the Fathers of the ancient
Church only knew; no man took Arms, or raised Rebellion against his Prince;
these were the fruits of the Hildebrandine Doctrine, which flies at the Crowns
of Emperors, Kings, and Princes, etc.

SECT. IX.
Against this modest and learned Epistle of Isaac Casaubon did Eudaemon
Johannes write, which Dr. Prideaux Pr. at Oxford, 1614. c. 2. p. 76.
(afterward the King's Professor of Divinity, and Bishop of Worcester)
answered, in which he compares the Jesuits, and Buchanan, and Knox together,
branding them justly with the name of Traitors, as King James had done before
him; and avers, P. 107.
that the Popish Writers bred in the School of Hildebrand, call a lawful King a
Tyrant, if excommunicated by the Pope; whereas, a Tyrant, according to the
Doctrine of the Sorbon, and of the Men of ancient sincerity and simplicity, is
opposed to a lawful Prince, and signifies one who has invaded an Empire that
is not his own, by Force and evil Arts; -- and then adds, If an Apostate should
reign in France, P. 109.
or England, who exceeded Julian, or the Grand Signior, it is not the duty of
his Subjects to dethrone him: -- For, who can lift up his hand against the
Lord's anointed, and be innocent?
Did the Israelites attempt any thing against Nebuchadnezzar, or the Christians
against Julian, and the Heathen Emperors? Did they use any other Weapons
besides their Prayers and their Tears? -- Let us use these Arms, and if the
King do amiss, let us expect when God will punish him, let not his Subjects
tumultuously oppose him: And whereas Mariana had affirmed, P. 123.
that when Princes openly invade the Rights of their Subjects, and there is no
other way left to maintain the public Safety, then it is lawful to take Arms,
and murder Kings; he replies, here is no mention made of the Patience of the
Subjects, the just Judgments of God, the Obligation of Oaths, the sacred
Authority of Princes conferred on them immediately by God, the Duty of
Subjection, not only when we live easy under the Government for our Profit,
but when we suffer under it for Conscience sake; -- by the Maxims of the
Jesuits, P. 130, 131.
the People are made the King's Judges, to enquire into his Faults, and to
punish him, as they think fit, when he does amiss: -- What difference is there,
if this be true, between the Rights of Princes and their Subjects? -- A Subject
breaks the Laws, and he is punished by the King; the King violates his
Promises, and his Subjects tell him, We will not have this Man longer to rule
over us: Admirable security of the Persons and Crowns of Princes! We obey our
Princes for Conscience sake, P. 60.
we believe them to be immediately constituted by God; if they rule well, they
are God's greatest Blessing; if they degenerate into Apostasy or Tyranny, they
are God's Scourges to punish the Sins of a People; as Romans 13. and in 1 Pet. 2.
Calvin says truly; If a King abuse his Power, he shall render an account to
God in time, but for the present he does not lose his Authority. -- We urge not
Compact, but we pour out our Prayers; our Bishops do advise, not threaten.

Id. Sermon. on Gowry's Conspir. p. 4, 6, 7.
The same learned Bishop, in his Sermon on the 5th. of August, at S. Mary's,
before the University, preaches the same Doctrine: When occasion is offered
(howsoever they otherwise strive to appear good Subjects) Traitors will be ever
ready to vent their Treasons. -- Hypocritical Traitors watch their times, and
are ready to vent their Villainy upon the least advantage. -- In the 2 Kings
19.37. (where we read, that Adrammelech and Sharezer slew their Father at his
Devotions) instead of the word (...) his Sons in the Original, we find the
Vowels set in the Te^^ (which is somewhat strange in that tongue) without their
Consonants;
perhaps to intimate closely, that so many Circumstances, concurring otherwise
for the aggravation of the offense, as Subjects to lay violent hands on a King,
and that in the Temple, and that at his Devotions; to add further, that it was
done by his own Sons, however it be more vocal than the Blood of Abel, yet the
manner of setting it down should show it also to be scelus infandum, a
Wickedness too monstrous to be fully expressed. -- Two Sons there were that
David had, whom he especially (as it were) doated upon, above the rest of his
Children, Absalom and Adonijah, and both of these take their advantages (as far
as in them lay) to tumble their aged Father down from his Throne, and bury him
alive, to make way for their prodigious and preposterous Purposes: the former
by the Peoples favor, which he had gotten by his Hypocritical Popularity; the
latter by his Fathers Feebleness, backing himself by the countenance of wicked
Joab and disloyal Abiathar; this hard measure received good King David, at the
hands of those of whom he best deserved: He saw the Law of Nature violated,
Conscience (of so heinous a Fact) contemned, his Indulgence repaid with
monstrous Ingratitude, his tried Valor outbrav'd by his own Subjects. Page 8.
-- But the Judge of all the World is not subject to like Passions with us; none
shall touch his Anointed for evil, but evil shall hunt those wicked Persons to
destroy them. P. 10.
-- Godoliah was too confident on his own Innocence, and the Loyalty of those
that spoke him fair; -- but the event proved it too true; for his security gave
the advantage, which the Traitor taking, performed that most wicked Design,
which made all the miserable remnant of Israel to smart for it. P. 11, 12.
-- They who hold such Grounds in their Schools, that the Pope may make void
the Oath of Allegiance, that Subjects have taken to their lawful Princes, that
upon a pretense they are fallen from the Church, and turned Heretics, he may
depose them; -- and that being so deposed, they may be lawfully murdered by
their Subjects: What hope may remain, that such, so bred, so taught, so
believing, will ever prove loyal? -- A Traitor is a man of Belial, P. 16, 18.
who to the disgrace of himself and his whole Family impiously conceivs, and
rebelliously vents his Hatred and Disloyalty against his lawful Sovereign. --
Treason is of a deeper tincture (than other Sins) deserving a heavier doom, and
therrfore of all true Christians the more earnestly to be detested. P. 22, 23.
-- Had these Men remembered what the wise King Solomon had left them for a
better direction, Prove. 8. By me Kings reign, etc. -- they might have found,
that the bond of Obedience to Princes is not so loosly knit by God, that
Subjects may dissolve it at their pleasure, or upon any Discontent, or Injury,
whatsoever cry, we have no part, and renounce our Inheritance; for as a Head
never so rheumatick, and the fountain of all Diseases in the rest of the
Members, may not be therefore parted from them for fear of a worse
inconvenience, neither can the Members upbraid it (as the Apostle, and Nature
teach us) with these contemptuous Words,
I have no need of thee: So the Head in the Body politic must keep his place
howsoever, till that highest Authority take it off, who first set it on, to
change it for a better; the more pernicious in reformed States and
Commonwealths is the wicked band of Antichrist, who take upon them to sever
those whom God has so linked together. What other conclusion do they drive at
in all their Volumes against the King's Supremacy, and Subjects Oath of
Allegiance, but to make their Followers conceit, that they have no part in King
James.

SECT. X.
William Barclay, tho a Romanist, having written Six Books against the Enemies
of Monarchy, Buchanan, Junius Brutus, Boucher, and others, Cardinal Bellarmine
thought himself so nearly concerned in the Controversy, as to write an Answer
to the learned Scotchman, Barclay being dead, Dr. Buckeridge, Bishop of
Rochester undertook the Papal Champion, Land. 1614.
and in Two Books fully handles the Power of the Pope, in deposing Kings; and
having asserted, Lib. 1. c. 1. p. 11.
That Authority and Obedience are Relatives, grounded on the Commandment of
Honoring our Parents, and C^p 8 p. 1^0, etc.
that all the Ancients were of this opinion, that Kings were inferior only to
God, and superior to all other Persons, and therefore could be deposed only by
God, (because Inferiors have no Authority over their Superiors) and that their
Misdemeanors are not punishable by their Subjects, since they have no Judge but
God alone; he cites S. Lib. 2. c. 3. p. 217.
Paul, Romans 13.1. that there is no power but of God, and that this is a general
Sentence, and that therefore the Power of Kings is from God, and not from the
People: -- He that resists, resists the ordinance of God; this also is a
general Sentence, and binds all Traitors and Parricides, who conspire against
the Lord's Anointed, who raise Seditions and Tumults, take Arms, and muster
Forces against Kings, tho they be excommunicated and deposed. Lib. 2. c. 6. p.
281.
And when Bellarmine had objected, that the Power of Kings is not immediately
from God; because Men by a certain natural instinct choose themselves
Magistrates, by whom they are governed: He proves at large, that tho the form
of Government ( i. e. whether it be a Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy) be
from Men, yet the Power is alone, and immediately from God. -- Every King sits
on his Throne as a God (I have said, ye are gods) but can the People choose and
constitute a Deputy in God's stead? Can they erect God's Throne, and
communicate his Power to Men without his consent? Power therefore is
immediately from God, although it be given to this or that particular Person by
the mediation of the People. P. 282.
-- Paternal and regal Power are the same in essence, tho they differ in
extent; what a Father is in one Family, that a is King in many Families; what
then? Did the Power of Adam over his Sons and Nephews, and all mankind, depend
on their consent, or did it flow from God and Nature?
-- And are hereditary Princes, who are not made, but born so, made Kings by
the consent of the People, when in the same instant, in which the Father dies,
the Son is King? P. 289.
-- If the Power of Kings be not instituted by men without God, neither can it
be destroyed by men without God: Grant we the Proposition true, that God does
give Kingdoms to the Subjects with the consent of their Subjects: P. 290.
for God can confer and transfer Kingdoms by Men and without them, by second
Causes and without them; but because God does this sometimes by the consent of
the People, as he transferred the Kingdom of Saul to David, and the Kingdom of
Joram to Jehu, and sometimes does it without the Peoples consent, as he
transferred the Kingdom of the Canaanites to the Jews, that of the Medes to
Cyrus, that of the Persians to Alexander, and of many other Kingdoms, to the
Romans; will it therefore follow, that it is lawful for the People, without
God, without any express relation of his Will, to dethrone their Kings, and
take from them their Authority?
If God and the People make Kings, then the People without God, and without an
express revelation of his Will cannot depose their Kings; -- God is the chief
and principal Agent, the People are only God's Instrument; as therefore the
Instrument does nothing without the Artificer, so whither can the People do any
thing in this case without God. -- After this he proves, Lib 2. cap. 20. page
614, 615.
that both the Jews and Christians did bear with, as their Duty obliged them,
idolatrous and tyrannical Kings; and then adds, to this practice of the Church,
and of all Antiquity, the best Interpreter of Scriptures, I will subjoin the
Institution of Kings, All power is of God, it is his Ordinance, and whosoever
resists it, resists the Ordinance of God: From the same God had David and
Samuel, Solomon and Jeroboam, Hezekiah and Ahab, Manasses and Josiah, Nero and
Constantine, Julian and Theodosius, their Authority; of good Kings it is said,
By me Kings reign: Of evil Kings, I have given them a King in my wrath: Good
Kings are given in mercy; evil Kings in fury; but all are given by God,
therefore all must be obeyed, although not in all things; we must not resist any,
but must either do that which the King commands justly, or suffer what he
cruelly inflicts: For the Obedience of Subjects falls under the divine Precept,
natural or moral, in the Fifth Commandment, which is also confirmed by Christ
in the Gospel, by his Precept, Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar 's; and
by his Example, who paid Tribute, and suffered a most shameful Death under
Pilate, who rather forfeited his Life, than he would forfeit his Obedience; and
by his Apostles, Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, to Heathens,
and infidel Persecutors, who endeavored to draw their Subjects over to their
Infidelity: Such a one was Nero, such were the rest of the Persecutors; and yet
these were to be submitted to, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

Fear God, honor the King; and of this Honor the chiefest part is Obedience.
These divine Precepts, natural, moral, evangelical, are indispensable, and bind
the Conscience; nor is it likely, that God, and Christ, and the Apostles would
have delivered such Precepts, as they would not have to be observed by
Christians. -- If thy King be good, he is thy nursing Father; if he be evil, he
tryes thee; if he be a Persecutor, he exercises thee; if he be godly, he is
exercised with thee: What can a Christian Soul here contemn? Will it contemn
its nursing Father, who affords it Necessaries, that it may be brought to
Heaven? Or will it contemn him who tryes it, who exercises it under the Cross,
that it may shine gloriously in the Kingdom of Heaven?

-- The Enemies to this Doctrine, are 1. the Anabaptists and Libertines, who
disown all Magistracy, and throw off its Yoke; and of Stephen of Hallestat who
would have none but good Magistrates obeyed. 2. All Seditions, Tumults, Wars,
etc. by means of which, the Christian Religion is evil spoken of among the
Heathen, as if it were a traitorous Religion, and an Enemy to Kings, the Name
of God is blasphemed, and the Enemies of the Gospel encouraged to persecute the
Church.

As to the instance of Athalia, Lib. 2. cap. 38. p. 919.
he avers, that she was Queen only de facto, and not de jure, having cruelly
against Nature slain the Sons of Ahaziah her Son, being incited by Ambition,
that she got the Kingdom by Tyranny, without any Right or Title, that she kept
it by Force and Arms, that she was not a lawful Queen, but a most wicked
Usurper. -- There is a vast difference between a Tyrant that has a just Title
to his Crown, and a Tyrant who has no Right,
who has usurped a Kingdom by force; if a lawful King turn Tyrant, neither his
Bishops, nor his Nobles, nor his People, can compel him to rule according to
Law; God only can restrain him, who gives such a King in his fury, and for the
Sins of a Nation causes a Hypocrite to reign over them; for such a Tyrant,
having a just Title to his Throne, is ordained by God, and he that resists him,
resists the Ordinance of God; but if any Man usurp a Kingdom by Force and
Tyranny, he is not a King, but an Enemy, and it is lawful for any man to resist
him, as he would do an Enemy.

Francis Godwin, Ann^^s of Q. Mary, page 266, 267.
Bishop of Hereford, published his Annals, An. 1616. and therein treating of
the Lady Jane's assuming the Crown (which he truly says, she was forced by her
Parents, and Friends Ambition, to accept, and which she received with Tears,
but resigned with Joy) and the march of the Duke of Northumberland's Army
against Queen Mary, to whom the Londoners, when they marched through the City,
did not wish success, he observes the Londoners stood very well affected in
Point of Religion, so did also for the most part the Suffolk and the Norfolk
Men, and they knew Mary to be absolute for Popery;
but the English are in their due respects to their Prince so loyally constant,
that no regards, no not pretext of Religion can alienate their Affections from
their lawful Sovereign, whereof the miserable Case of the Lady Jane will anon
give a memorable Example; for although her Faction had laid a strong
foundation, and had most artificially raised their Superstructure, yet as soon
as the true and undoubted Heir did but manifest her Resolution to vindicate her
Right, this accurate Pile presently fell and dissolved, as it were in the
twinkling of an Eye, and that chiefly by their endeavor, of whom for their
Religion the Lady Jane might have presumed herself assured: -- And the learned
and godly Prelate Ridley (who, I wish,
had not erred in this matter) when he preached up the Lady Jane's Title, P.
270.
was scarce heard out with patience by those, who were his particular Charge.
-- And as the Earl of Arundel said, the Friends of Northumberland had no regard
to the Apostolical Rules, That Evil must not be done, that good may come
thereof; and that we must obey even evil Princes, not for Fear, but for
Conscience.

SECT. XI.
Anno 1610. Dr. David Owen (the only Batchelour of Divinity) published at
Cambridge a little Treatise, called, Herod, and Pilate reconciled, to show the
Concord of Papist and Puritan ( against Scripture, Fathers, Councils, and other
Orthodoxal Writers) for the Coercion, deposition, and killing of Kings; and the
Title is a sufficient declaration what the Author's judgment was (the Book it
self being in many places, both as to Argument and Style, very agreeable to the
Treatise, called Deus and Rex, set forth by the King's Order) he proves in the
First Chapter, that Kings are not punishable by man, but reserved to the
Judgment of God, by the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures; and in the subsequent
Chapters he proves the same by the Testimony of the Fathers, and other ancient
Writers; and he briefly gives his Opinion, P. 24.
Chap. 4. but very fully: Be the King for his Religion impious, for his
Government unjust, for his Life licentious, the Subject must endure him, the
Bishop must reprove him, the Counselor must advise him, all must pray for him,
and no mortal man has Authority to disturb or displace him.

The same Author, Ann. 1622. printed at Cambridg his Anti-Paraeus, in
confutation of Ambergae, 1612.
David Paraeus's Book (De Jure Regum and Brincipum contra Bellarminum, Becanum,
etc.) who disallowing the Pope's Claim, invested the Power over Princes in the
People; In the Preface of this Book, the Dr. shows the consonancy, and
agreeableness of the Popish and Disciplinarian Principles, and in the Book
refutes from the dictates of nature, These. 1. p. 3, etc.
the laws of Nations, Civil and Canon, Scriptures, Fathers, and most eminent
Reformed Divines, that the Power and Jurisdiction of Kings is not founded in
compact (as if the Majesty of Princes were derived from the People, and limited
by them) but that, P. 16, 17.
as God is the Supreme Lord of all, who judges all his Creatures, and is judged
of none; so Kings and Princes, who judge and punish others, can be judged and
punished by no one, save God alone, to whose only power they are subject; this
David understanding, though guilty of Adultery and Murder, implores the divine
mercy, against thee only have I sinned; for I acknowledge no other Superior on
Earth, but thee, who can call me to account, give sentence against me or punish
me for my sin. -- the reason is, the King is the head of the body politic, but
the members ought not to judge the head, because they are subject, nor to cut
it off, for then they cease to be members; and this the Heathen Poet knew, and
averred, that Kings have a power over their several Subjects, but God only has
an Empire, and Authority over Kings.

Nor will the public safety and tranquillity be maintained without such an
unaccountable power in Kings; for the Monarch, who is opposed by his rebellious
Subjects, although they are much too strong for him, will call to his
assistance all his neighboring Kings, and Confederates, will list Foreign
Forces to vindicate himself, and the miseries of such a War will be a poor
comfort to such an infatuated Nation. P. 18.
-- but suppose there were such a power in the People to call their Kings to
account, which we ought not to grant,
Nero perished, but the case of Rome was not bettered by it; for in the next
year after his death it felt more calamities, and was imbrued in more blood,
than in the whole nine years of Nero 's Tyranny. -- Rome, when she cast off her
Kings, did not abrogate, p. 19.
but change the Tyranny, and Athens drove out one Tyrant, and brought in
thirty.
-- I do confidently assert, that all Tyranny, whether it uses violence against
God or Man, ought to be suffered; ought not to be abrogated, till he puts an
end to it, who alone girds and ungirds the loins of Kings. p. 20.
Solomon was guilty of Polygamy and Idolatry, but lost not his Crown and
Dignity: Ahab slew Naboth Tyrannically, Banished, and put to death the
Prophets, persecuted the true Religion, and established the Worship of Baal by
his Authority, but neither the inferior Magistrate, nor the People presumed to
resist his Tyranny; it is true Jehu did so, but it was not by any power, that
the Laws gave him, but by an extraordinary Commission from Heaven; and that
which could not then be done without an Oracle from Heaven, cannot now be done
without the contempt of God's Majesty, the contumely of Kingly Power, and the
ruin of the Commonwealth. Christ who lived under the Empire of Tiberius, the
Authority of Herod, and Government of Pilate; p. 22.
the Apostles, who flourished under Caligula, Claudius, Nero, and Domitian; the
Primitive Christians, who lived under Persecutors for three hundred years;
Liberius, Hosius, Athanasius, Nazianzen, and many other Fathers, who for a
thousand years after the Birth of Christ, watered the Church with their holy
Lives, and sound Doctrine, were all ignorant of this Mystery, (that Princes may
be resisted by their Subjects) if they are blessed, who suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, p. 25.
then they undoubtedly shall not be blessed, who refuse to suffer persecution
for righteousness sake; for in that they will not suffer, but rise against
their Persecutors, they are convinced of sin, and acquire to themselves
damnation. But are not Princes under the power of the Law? Yes, P. 41.
under the directive, not under the compulsive power of the Law. P. 43.
-- but have not Princes given their Subjects many, and must they be suffered
to invade them? it is very hard that Princes own voluntary concessions, should
be made use of to their detriment, to encourage their Subjects to Rebellion and
Parricide; but whatever Princes do, as the Laws are derived from them, and they
are the interpreters of them, so, though they voluntarily submit to their
direction, they cannot be compelled so to do; the concessions of a Prince to
his Subjects, P. 55.
do not give them a right to call him to account. Tyrants (who are in
possession of lawful power over us, we are commanded to obey, forbidden to
resist;
for in the Holy Scripture we find no distinction between a good Prince, and an
evil Tyrant, as to the honor, reverence, and obedience, that is due to them;
it is not lawful therefore to draw the Sword against them, because they that
resist, resist God, and shall receive to themselves damnation; but no law of
God, or Man has set over us private Tyrants, Usurpers, or Domestic Thieves,
we are under no obligations to them, we owe them no obedience, nor are we any
way, either out of reverence to their power, or necessity of submission, but
that we may repel force by force, P. 65.
-- one Apostle forbids all resistance, another commands obedience to
Superiors, neither of them make any distinction between good and bad, and they
speak to all Inferiors indifferently, to Lay and Clergy, to Men of all Orders,
Degrees, and Dignities; that Man therefore distinguishes ill, where the Law of
God admits of no distinction, -- in such a case God allows us flight, P. 80.
and patience, and prayers, and tears; Christ provided for his own safety by
flight; the Martyrs by patience offered their Souls to God, and the prayers of
the Church have always prevailed over its Tyrannical Persecutors.

SECT. XII.
Anno 1613. Dr. John Downham's sum of Sacred Divinity was published, in Commen.
on the 5th. Command. P. 177.
which starting the usual objection, what must be done, if Princes command
things unlawful, such as with a good conscience we cannot yield unto? he
answers, in such cases we are patiently to abide the punishment; in which doing
we no way violate the obedience due to them, as the Apostle directs. 1 Pet.
2.19, 20.

Anno 1614. Printed at Oxford. 1614. P. 86.
Lancelot Dawes, sometime Fellow of Queens College, Preached two Sermons at the
Assizes held at Carlisle, the second of which had for its subject Psalm. 82.6,
7. I have said, ye are Gods etc. and in it we are informed, that Princes have
their Authority only from God; for Ja. 1.17.
if every good, and perfect Gift be from above, even from the Father of Lights,
much more this excellent and supereminent gift of governing God's People must
proceed from the fountain; -- the reason of all the sins that were committed in
Israel, is often in the Book of Judges ascribed unto this, Judge. 17.6, 18. etc.
P. 99.
that they wanted a Magistrate: there was at that time no King in Israel, -- by
me Kings reign, etc. -- it is not for a Magistrate to debase himself, neither
is it for others of what reputation soever, to equalize themselves with the
Judge, whom God has placed over them -- and this is not only meant of Godly
and Religious Magistrates, P. 100, 101. 1 Samuel 8.
but of Wicked and Ungodly Governors too, such as are described by Samuel,
which take Men's Sons -- and Fields, and Vineyards, etc. the reason is, because
the bad, as well as the good are of God, the one he gives in his love, the
other in his anger, -- and be they good or bad, we have no commandment from
him, but parendi and patiendi, of obeying them, when their Precepts are not
repugnant to God's Statutes, and of suffering with patience whatsoever they
shall lay upon us; it was a worthy saying of the Mother of the two Garacs, when
they kept Sigismond in Prison, Bentin. ^er. Hung. ^ec. 3. l 2.
that a Crowned King, if he were worse than a beast, could not be hurt without
great injury done to God himself; a lesson, which she learned from David, whose
heart smote him, when he had out the lap of Saul 's garment, because he was the
Anointed of the Lord; although he himself was before that time Anointed to be King
over Israel, and was without cause hunted by Saul like a Pelican in the
wilderness, and an Owl in the desert.

Then to draw thy sword, and to seek perforce to depose such as God has placed
over thee, either because they are not suitable to thy affections, or not
faithful in their places, what is it, but with the old Giants to fight with God
-- the weapons of a Christian in this case (when such a case does happen) must
be preces and lacrymae, prayers, that either God would turn the heart of an
evil Magistrate, or set in his room a Man David like after his own heart; and
tears for his sins, which as they are the cause of War, Famine, Pestilence; and
all other calamities, so are they also of Wicked and Ungodly Magistrates. P.
102.


SECT. XIII.
To what has been cited out of Dr. Bois in the first part of this History may
be added; In Holy Bible we read, Bois on Ps. 47. P. 936.
that David would not suffer his Enemy Saul, tho a wicked King, to be slain,
when he was in his hands, for that he was the Lord's Anointed; he had
sanctitatem unctionis, albeit he had not sanctitatem Vitae. i. e. he had an
holy calling, tho not an holy carriage, wherefore David said, who can lay hands
on the Lord's Anointed, and be guiltless; and if Heathen Emperors in the
Primitive times, and ungodly Kings in all Ages ought to be thus obeved, how
much more a Christian, and Virtuous Prince? etc.

After the death of Robert Abbot Bishop of Salisbury were his Academick
exercitations against Bellarmine, Lon. 1619.
and Suarez concerning the supreme power of Kings printed, a work [as it is
called in the Epistle dedicatory] agreeable to the Laws of Nature and Religion,
and very seasonable; the Author of which having been the King's Professor of
Divinity at Oxford, Prelec. 1. Sect. 4. p. 4.
vindicates the power of Kings, and affirms, Prelec. 1. Sect. 4. p. 4
that Pope Hildebrand ( Hellbrand Luther calls him) that the first, who assumed
to himself the Power of Deposing Princes, and absolving their Subjects from
their Oath of Allegiance, which Doctrine Sigebert a Writer of that Age calls
Novelty and Heresy; Sect. 5. p. 6, 7.
and when he treats of Romans 13.1. be subject to the higher powers, etc. he
says, by Powers are meant Kings, and Monarchs, as the Word is used Luc. 22.
(...), they that exercise authority, etc. in which words Kings by a certain
circumscription are defined, because power belongs only and properly to them;
thus Origin, Ambrose, and Aquinas understood the words; and Kings are not only
called powers, but also (...) in St. Peter 1. ep. 2. supereminent powers,
because in their Kingdoms they have power over all Persons, being constituted
the supreme, and over all, and to whom it is given to exercise that power over
all. -- for Kingly Majesty is absolutely eminent, and above all, being so
constituted by a supreme right, for as in Romans 13.
St. Ambrose says, it has the Image of God, that all others might be under
one, to whom, because he is God's Vicegerent, every Soul ought to be subject,
as unto God. This Sentence of St.
Ambrose lays the unquestionable foundation of Kingly Power; for it expresses,
that in the Power of a Monarch the Image of the Divine Majesty appears, and
that Kings exercise a Power over Men delegated unto them in God's stead, and
therefore must be superior to all Men, because nothing can be higher than God,
whose Deputies Kings are; P. 12.
this also is the Doctrine of Optatus, St. John Chrysostom, Agapetus, and other
Fathers; and so destructive have the Romanists thought it to their pretensions,
that the Spanish Index Expurgatorius, has ordered this sentence to be blotted
out of Antonius his Melissae (tho the sentence be in two other Fathers, viz.
Agapetus, and Maximus) A King has no superior on Earth. Prelec 2. Sect. 4. p.
19.
-- and tho Kings may be made by Men, yet their Power is from God, by whose
Providence and Conduct they are advanced to those dignities by Men, and whom
God, either in Mercy, Job 34. Prelect. 3. Sect. 1. p. 25.
or in anger decrees to rule, even that God, who makes a Hypocrite to reign for
the sins of a people. -- Now the Supremacy of Kings, and the subjection of
every Soul to them are so joined, that the King cannot be said to be supreme,
unless every Soul be subject to him; nor will the duty of subjection agree to
every Soul, unless the King be invested with this Supremacy, Sect. 3. p. 21.
-- for all Men (universim omnes, and sigillatim singuli) whether singly, or
contained in a body, are bound in conscience by this Apostolical Precept, to
pay the duties of subjection, and observance to Kings. and whereas Bellarmin
(as others) urged the deposition of Athaliah, Sect. 5. p. 33.
to prove the lawfulness of Dethroning Princes, he answers, that Athaliah had
no right to the Crown, that she had the Kingdom by violence, that the true King
lay hid, that by her Parricide and Treason she had made herself guilty of death
by the Law, and ought to have suffered; Prelect. 4. Sect. 3. p. 44. p. 47.
-- and that word (...) (Power) which St. Paul uses, never signifies force and
violence, but a just Power, which must be lawful, because it is from Heaven, --
that Christ was subject by the law to the Power of Pilate, -- and the Apostles
to the Heathen Princes. Prel. 5. Sect. 1.2. p. 70, 71.
-- and that in the Primitive Church, there were no Traitors, who either openly
or privately contrived, or attempted any thing against the Life or Crown of the
Emperor, when they wanted neither numbers nor force, but they durst not turn
Rebels or Traitors,
lest by breaking the command of Christ they should lose Heaven, and Bellarmin
belies them, when he says, they wanted not a right, nor good will to depose
Kings, but only forces sufficient, P. 73.
-- it was of old their Doctrine, that the Church ought not to rebel against
Princes, and this the Gospel taught them; let them therefore show from the
Gospel, that it is lawful, for else let a Man pretend to Inspiration, if he
speaks from himself, and not from the Gospel, believe him not, says St.
Chrysostom; Prelect. 8. Sect. ult. p. 96.
and having shown from David's saying, against thee only have I sinned, that
Kings are accountable only to God, he closes his Lecture with these words. -- a
King is under the coercion of no Laws, because there is no power among Men on
Earth, that can punish him, so that when Kings transgress, we must expect the
judgments of God upon them.

SECT. XIV.
In the same year, Dr. Lewis Bailey Bishop of Bangor, set forth the Practice of
Piety, P. 479. edit. 1675.
in the end of which he shows, that the Doctrine, which St. Paul taught the
Ancient Church of Rome, is diametrically opposite in 26 fundamental points of
true Religion, to that, which the new Church of Rome teaches and maintains;
and the 24th is this, that every Soul must of conscience be subject, and pay
tribute to the Higher Powers, i.e. the Magistrates, which bear the Sword. Romans
13.1, 2, etc. and therefore the Pope, and all Prelates (and by parity of reason
all other Subjects) must be subject to their Emperors, Kings, and Magistrates,
unless they will bring damnation upon their Souls as Traitors, that resist God
and his Ordinance, -- and therefore let the Jesuits, P. 480.
etc. take heed and fear, lest it be not Faith, but Faction, not Truth, but
Treason, not Religion, but Rebellion; which is the cause of their deaths.
-- because they cannot be suffered to persuade Subjects to break their Oaths,
and to withdraw their Allegiance from their Sovereign, to raise Rebellion, to
move Invasion, to stab and poison Queens, to kill and murder Kings, etc.

Some years before this, Dr. Richard Crackenthorp Preached at Paul's Cross viz.
Mar. 24. 1608. and in his Epistle Dedicatory he affirms, pr. Land. 1609.
that his desire therein was to testify his unfeigned love, first to God's
truth, and then to the Peace of our Jerusalem, and in the Sermon he commends
King James's Book, of Free Monarchies, but especially his Learned Apology for
the Oath of Allegiance, and proves, that as Solomon had his Kingdom neither
from the Priest, nor the People, but immediately from God -- so the Scriptures
call Kings the Ministers, or Lieutenants of God, Romans 13. -- and that all the
Ancient Fathers did believe, that the Imperial Authority of Kings was
immediately, and only derived of God, immediately depending of God, and of God
alone. -- this was the judgment and just defense of all the Christians, and of
the Church at that time. -- and to prove this to be agreeable to the Law, he
cites a Statute made 16. Ric. 2. c. 5. of purpose to keep sacred and inviolable
the Sovereignty, and regality of this Kingdom;
it was therein declared, that the Crown of England has been so free at all
times (not then only, but which is specially to be remembered at all times) that
it has been in subjection to no Realm, but immediately subject to God, and to
none other, in all things touching the regality of the same, -- in defense of
which Statute they in the Parliament then Assembled promised to live and dye,
as it is there noted; by all which it is evident, that this Doctrine, which is
now at Rome counted most ridiculous, it in it self most sacred, as being
grounded on the Scriptures of God, and as most sacred has been embraced by all
the Christians in the Primitive Church; taught, and maintained with a general
consent by the Ancient and Godly Fathers in their several Ages, and
Successions; constantly defended by whole Kingdoms and Empires, and that under
pain of High Treason to the Gainsayers thereof, even in those latter times
also, when superstition had dimin'd, but not quite extinguished, and put out
the Truth. -- that cannot possibly be true loyalty, or sincere obedience, which
ever attending to an higher command, includes in it, as in a Trojan Horse, that
condition of rebus sic stantibus, durante beneplacito, or the like -- out of
which, if strength and opportunity might serve, -- they might let out whole
Armies, and Troops of Armed Men, suddenly to surprise both Church and Kingdom,
and much more to that purpose. To Dr. Crackenthorp it is requisite to join his
Friend Dr. P. 334 ed. Lon. 1675
Daniel Featly, who in his Handmaid to devotion, on the Feast of the Fifth of
November gives all good Christians this useful admonition. All that fear God,
ought to abhor, and detest all Traitorous and Bloody conspiracies against the
Prince and State, because God strictly forbids, dreadfully threatens,
miraculously discovers, and severely punishes all Treasons, and Conspiracies,
as we see in Corah, Absalom, Adonijah, Zimri, the Servants of Ammon, Sullam,
Haman, the servants of the Nobleman in the Parable, Judas: for God forbids
conspiracies, Touch not mine Anointed, etc.

SECT. XV.
The Famous Peter du Moulin the Father (the Cicero of the French Churches) was
by King James made a Prebendary of the Church of Canterbury, and gave that
Prince no reason to repent of his favors to him, vindicating on all occasions
both the interests of the Church, and the Person, Power, and Writings of the
King; nor were his Books, and his Actions dissonant one to the other, for he
never sided with, never encouraged the Commonwealth of Rochel (as it was
called) and in his works Orthodoxly States the Catholic Doctrine of
Government, and confutes the objections of its adversaries; thus in his Buckler
of Faith, etc.

Buckler of Faith. He lays down briefly, but fully, Lib. 2. Sect. ult. p. 556,
557. Lon. 1623 in Engl.
first the Opinion of the Romanists, and then the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches, as to the right of Kings, Thomas the chief Schoolman (says he) avers,
that the Power of Princes, and Sovereign Lords, is but a humane constitution,
and proceeds not from God; and with him agree Bellarmin, and Arnoux; their
reasons are. 1. That the first King, that was in the World, Nimrod, made
himself King by force. 2. That the greatest part of Empires were erected by
Conquest. 3. That Kings are established by humane means, whether they attain to
the Crown by Hereditary Succession, or by Election, since there is no rule in
the Word of God, that binds to follow an Hereditary Succession more than an
Election. 4. That there is no express command set down to obey Henry, or Lewis,
or to acknowledge this, or that Man more than another to be King. 5. That for
these reasons St. Peter calls the Obedience to Kings an Humane Order; while we
on the contrary maintain, that Obedience due to Kings proceeds from the
Divine Law, and is grounded upon the Ordinance of God, and whom no Man may
resist without resisting God. Romans 13.1, 2. and St. Peter in the same place,
which they object against us, will have us yield Obedience to the King for the
Lord's sake; and although Nebuchadnezzar was an ungodly King, a scourge used by
God to destroy Nations, nevertheless God speaks thus unto him by his Prophet (
Dan. 2.37.) Thou, O King, art a King of Kings, etc. -- as to their reasons. 1.
It is false, that Nimrod was the first King in the World, for the Fathers, and
Heads of Families were Kings, Priests, and Sovereign Princes of their Families,
Men living after the Flood Five or Six hundred Years, long enough to see a
multitude of their own Children, over whom they were to exercise their paternal
Power. 2. As to the establishment of Government in Conquest, I say, that those,
whose Countries a strange Prince seeks to invade, do well to defend
themselves; and if in that defensive War the Usurper chance to be slain, he is
justly punished; but if he get the upper hand, if the Race of the Ancient
Possessors of the same Country be clean extinguished, if the States of the
Country assembled together, do agree upon a new form of Government, and if all
the Officers throughout the Country have taken their Oaths of Fidelity to the
New King, then we must believe, that God has established such a Prince in that
Kingdom, then I say, that the People ought to yield to the will of God, who for
the sins of Kings, and of their People transposeth Kingdoms, and disposes of
the Issues of Battles at his will and pleasure; as to the third, it belongs not
to the Question, whether a King succeed by Inheritance, or by Election, but
whether by the Ordinance of God we ought to obey him, when he is established
therein? while our Adversaries will have the Power of Popes to proceed from the
Ordinance of God, tho they enter into the Papacy by Election, and too often by
indirect means, etc. 4. Tho there be no command to obey Henry, or Lewis, it
suffices there is a commandment to obey the King, and to keep our Oaths of
Fidelity made to the King, and by consequence to be faithful to that King, to
whom we swear Obedience and Loyalty; [nay by this argument no King of this age
were to be obeyed, because we do not find his name expressly set down in Holy
Writ] nay no Man were bound to fear God, or to believe in Jesus Christ, because
the Scripture does not particularly ordain, that Thomas, Anthony, or William
should fear God, or believe in Jesus Christ; it suffices, that the Word of God
contains general rules, which bind particular Persons without naming them. 5.
St. Peter calls the Obedience, that Men owe to Kings, an humane Order, either
because Kings command diverse things, which by their own nature are not derived
from the Divine Law (as suppose, to forbid to go by night without a Candle) or
because they attain to that Power by humane means, which hinders not, but that
their Power is grounded upon the Word of God, after they are once established;
for the Question is not touching the means, whereby a Prince attains his
Kingdom ( i. e. whether by Hereditary Succession, or Election] but what
Obedience is due to him, after he has attained thereunto, whosoever builds
the Authority of Kings upon Man's Institution, and not upon the Ordinance of
God, cuts off three parts of their Authority, and bereaveth them of that, which
assures their Lives, and their Crowns more than the guards of their Bodies, or
puissant Armies, which put terror into Subjects instead of framing them to
Obedience; then the Fidelity of Subjects will be firm and sure, when it shall
be incorporated into piety, and esteemed to be a part of Religion, and of the
service, which we owe unto God.

The same excellent Person in his rejoinder to de Balzac after he had asserted,
that the Jesuits teach the Murder of Princes, Letter 2d. ed. Lon 1636. Eng p.
73, 94, 95.
and that their Schools have produced many King-killers; he proceeds to
vindicate the French Church from de Balzac's imputation (who professes himself
incensed against the Authors of the troubles in France, tho he acquits du
Moulin's Person, as one, who made the subjection due to Sovereignty a part of
the Religion, which he taught) affirming, that Obedience to our Sovereigns is a
thing just and necessary; that to find out an occasion of Rebellion, either in
a Man's own Religion, or in that of his King, is to make insurrections to
defend Religion by courses condemned by the same Religion; such as these, being
perplexed in their own particular Affairs, hope to find ease in troubled waters,
and to save themselves amidst a confusion; never yet did the cause of God
advance it self that way. Moses had power to inflict grievous punishments on
Egypt, and her King, notwithstanding he would never deliver the Children of
Israel out of Egypt, without the permission of the King.

SECT. XVI.
And tho this famous Man Peter du Moulin had one Son, Lewis, who applauded the
Regicides, translated Milton, and bespattered the best Church in Christendom,
yet God blessed him with another, of his own Name and Principles, who in his
Letter (as he calls it) of a French Protestant to a Scotchman of the Covenant,
Printed at Lon. 1640.
disproves their pretended conformity with the French Churches in the points of
Church Discipline, and Obedience to Superiors, averring solemnly, P. 2.
that it was ever far from our wishes, that your conformity with the Reformed
Churches of France, should be misapplyed as a pretense of your expelling your
Bishops, much less a president for you to take Arms against your Gracious
Sovereign. P. 37, 38.
-- take it for granted, that the Orders imposed upon you by His Majesty are
Ungodly, and Antichristian; are you therefore allowed to defend Religion with
Rebellion? will ye call the Devil to the help of God? Sure it is a prodigious
kind of Christian Liberty, for a Subject to draw his Sword against his
Sovereign; you, that stand so much upon the point of conscience, ought ye not
to be subject for Conscience sake?
Were your Sovereign unjust and froward, and his commands injurious unto God,
had ye instead of our pious defender of the Faith, a fierce Dioclesian, illud
solis precibus, and patientia sanari potest, nothing will mend it, but prayers
and patience; it is Beza's counsel to the discontented Brethren of England,
conformable to that of St. 1 Pet. 3.17.
Peter, for it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well
doing, than for evil doing; if the Sovereign come to kill the Subject for his
Religion, the Subject must yield him his throat, not charge his Pike against
him; and this he proves by Calvin's Practice and Writings, P. 38, 39, 40.
-- the Churches of France, have lately declared to His Majesty's Ambassador
there, their utter dislike of the Insurrection of Scotland, under pretense of a
Covenant with Christ. P. 41.
-- there can be no just cause to take Arms against a Lawful Sovereign, --
after this he treats of the French Protestants taking Arms, P. 46.
and concludes, that till the Reign of King Lewis, the Arms of the Protestants
were either justifiable, or excusable, but their Wars in his time were neither,
and they prosper'd accordingly. P. 48.
-- the French Protestants had to do with a King of a contrary Religion; they
were incensed by many wrongs and oppressions; they were in danger to lose with
their Forts and Towns, their Liberty, their Religion, and their Life, the
privileges which they enjoyed, were rewards of their long Services; by the
Charter of Rochel, when they yielded to Lewis XI. it was granted to them, that
they should be no longer the King's Subjects,
than the King should maintain their immunities; and yet these true reasons,
and just fears could not justify their defensive Arms against their Sovereign,
but they were condemned by the best of their own, and of their neighbors, and
God showed his dislike by the ill success he gave them. And much more to this
purpose is to be seen in his answer to Philanax Anglicus, and in his Regii
sanguinis Clamor ad caelum contra Parricidas Anglicanos; Hagae Com. 1652 C. 1.
(...) 5.
(for that being is du Moulin juniors, and not Alexander Morus's, as was
conjectured) affirming with the Apostle, that even the Jews would not have
Crucified the Lord of Glory, had they known him, while the Parricides of King
Charles I. wittingly, and wilfully Murdered their Lawful King, and with the
King beheaded also the Church of England, and brought upon the neighboring
Protestant Churches abundance of Dishonor, and much danger, while the same
madness was imputed to all the Reformation, which had only infected a few, who
falsely called themselves Reformed. -- Nothing has happened since the beginning
of the World, more contrary to the glory of God, or that has cast a greater
blot upon holy Truth; while the Wickedness defends it self by the Doctrine of
the Gospel, and is said to be perpetrated to vindicate the Protestant Religion,
to the just indignation and abhorrence of all the foreign Churches, for which
reason Salmasius, P. 7.
Heraldus, Porree, and others wrote smartly both against the Men, P. 17.
and their villainous Principles: It is a Law, not only written, but born with
us, and springs from the most pure fountains of Nature, That it is a most
horrid crime for Subjects to punish their Princes; and therefore we do too much
honor to Parricides, when we use Arguments against them; for as Aristotle
says, they, who doubt, 1 Top. c 9
whether God is to be worshipped, or Parents to be honored, are not to be
convinced by Reasons, but by Scourges; and Salmasius has proved by
unanswerable Reasons, by divine and human Authority, that the Majesty of Kings
is unaccountable, and that Subjects have no manner of Authority over them. Cap.
2. p. 29, 30.
-- There is no fallacy of Satan, which more prevails upon good Men, to engage
them in an evil Cause, than when Men contrary to God's Word believe, that it is
lawful to do evil, that good may come thereof, and that God has need of our
sinful assistance to promote his Kingdom, and that whatever is designed to
promote God's Glory, immediately commences good. P. 52.
-- the Judges at Westminster were turned out by the Army; because, being
consulted, they had given this opinion, that to judge the King was against the
Laws of England. Cap. 5. p. 107.
-- to argue from Providence, and Success to the goodness of a Cause is
impudent; one man is hanged for that, by which another gets a Crown. Junius
Brutus by expelling the Kings of the Family of Tarquin saved his Country;
another Brutus by murdering a Tyrant ruined it; perhaps the later Brutus did an
act of justice, when he slew an Usurper; but the first was very unjust, who
drove away a lawful King -- by the murder of King Charles I. Cap. 6. p. 121.
the Parricides taught the rest of the World, that Kings may be guilty of
breach of trust to their People, that the People are their Judges, and may
condemn and execute them; and these Tenets, they are not ashamed to own in
their Writings, that they had freed the World of its old Superstition, that
Kings are only obnoxious to God, and can be punished only by him, that they had
set an example to all other Nations conducive to their safety, and to be
dreaded by all Tyrants; as Cromwell wrote to the Scots after Dunbar fight, --
what an occasion of insulting is hereby given to the Papists to say, Cap. 7. p.
135.
this is the Religion, which brings down Reformation to us from Heaven; these
are the Men, who cry out against the Usurpations of the Popes upon the Crowns,
and lives of Princes; only, that they might themselves have that power over
Kings, when they had snatched it from the Pope: But the Papists would suggest
this with less fierceness, if they remembered that those few, who left us in
this point, went to them, and borrowed their Weapons from them. C. 8 p. 148.
-- these Monsters do not content themselves with being simple Parricides; but
they turn Rebellion into a Doctrine of the Church, and would fain defend it, as
the uniform belief of the Reformed. -- much more to the same purpose may be
found in the same Book, which I recommend to the Reader's perusal; the Learned
Author of which wrote after his Father's Copy; and therefore I have joined them
together, tho according to the exact rules of Chronology, I should have given
the junior du Moulin a place in the next Reign.

CHAP. VI. The History of Passive Obedience during the Reign of King Charles
the Martyr.
SECT. I.
WEre we to judge of the righteousness of any Cause, and of its being
acceptable to God, by the prosperity of its outward circumstances; and to
entitle Heaven to the owning of all the designs, which providence promotes, (as
some Divines both then, and since have argued, more consonant to the Doctrine of
the Alcoran, than the Holy Gospel;) then the most Excellent Prince Charles I.
was a vile Malefactor, and fell justly a sacrifice to the rage of his rebel
Subjects; but the true Sons of the Church were of a more Orthodox belief, and
chose rather to suffer with their Master the Lord's Anointed, than to enjoy the
ease and preferments, which then were the rewards of perfidiousness and
disloyalty; as the first part of this History has amply proved.

And though Dr. Sybthorp's Sermon called Apostolical Obedience, was severely
censured (nor is it fit to defend every Proposition in it) yet the then Bishop
of London Dr. George Mountain, approved it publicly in Print, as a Sermon
learnedly and discreetly Preached, Testim. ante concion.
and agreeable to the Ancient Doctrine of the Primitive Church, both for faith
and good manners, and to the Doctrine established in the Church of England; and
therefore, under his hand gave authority for the Printing of it. Ma. 8. 1627.

Mr. Hayes. Could any thing privilege Loyalty toward Kings, Sermon. at St. Mary's
Oxon. on Esth. 1.15 1624. p. 3, 21.
Eminence and Alliance might be fair pretenses; but neither of these could
yield Queen Vasthi advantage, -- but what? shall any dare to limit Sovereignty,
and prescribe Majesty it is duty? shall he, that enjoys the subjection of others
by the Law, be subject himself to the Law? no, in no other sense, than that of
Aquinas, not that the Law should lead him by compulsion, but lead him by
directive persuasion; if he conform his actions to the prescript of the Laws,
it is of his own accord; if he do not, is he liable to account? Yes, but it is
only to God; against thee only have I sinned, says King David. Ps. 51. those
modest times had not the face to capitulate with their Sovereigns; the pride of
Faction had not yet hatched this rebellious Doctrine,
that if Kings obey not Laws, Subjects have leave to disobey their Kings; no,
let it glory in no Ancienter Author, than New Rome, and in no better success,
than confusion, and seeing it owes it self to Jesuited Patrons, let it be
banished this Land together with their Persons.

Mr. Adams. -- When Saul was in David 's hands, In 2d. ep. of Peter pr. 1633.
p. 755.
his Men allege God's promise, and the advantage concurring, -- and what was
David 's charm, to allay the fury of those raging Spirits? he is the Lord's
Anointed: Saul did not lend David so impenetrable an Armor, when he ran to
encounter Goliath, as David lent him in the plea of his Unction. -- not one of
the discontented Outlaws durst put forth a hand of violence against him; the
image, and impress of that Divine Ordinance strikes such an awe into the hearts
of Men, that it makes even Traitors cowards; so that instead of smiting they
tremble, like those, whose Office it is to suffer, not to do; fear God, honor
the King; there was never Man that feared God, but he also honored the Prince.
-- But let us hear, P. 759, etc
what the Synod of Hell can plead for disobedience, how if the Prince be bad,
an Enemy to truth and goodness, a Ravisher, a Persecutor, raising powers for
the extirpation of the Gospel; here, if ever a Subject may renounce all
Allegiance, for here is power against power, Man against God, and the Subject
of both left to follow either. Answ. in this straight some, for fear of the
King, Shipwreck their faith, and these are Traitors to God; others by a
defensive sword in their hand Rebels to the King:
there is no question, but God must be obeyed even against the King, when the
King commands things against God. -- what then, shall we resist him with
violence; no, God never Warrants that practice, no not against a Prince, that
denies him; there is an active Obedience, and a passive, I may not execute his
impious commands, I must suffer his unjust punishments. -- the vices of Men
cannot frustrate the institution of God; peruse Mat. 5.44. and Rom 12.17. this
will tie the Hands of Christian Subjects; Samuel offered not to depose Saul,
though the express Sentence of God had cast him off, and he was Excommunicated
by a higher power than ever came from Rome, Saul lived, and dyed a King, --
this he illustrates by the examples of the Jews, and Primitive Christians; and
adds, what resistance did those Primitive Christians make to those barbarous
outrages, but praying for the Emperor's life, when under the Emperor's command
they were bleeding to death; neither did they suffer, because they were not
able to resist, but it was their Doctrine, etc. -- Christians never prove
losers, but when they unjustly sight for their own preservation, provide we the
buckler of patience, not a sword. -- when the decree was gone out by Ahasuerus,
this was their refuge, preces and lacrymae, -- the Apostles could work
miracles, yet they resisted not the ordinate powers; this charge St. Paul gives
the Romans, even while Nero was their Emperor, a Monster, whom diverse held to
be Antichrist; -- that Religion then cannot be right, that pulls down Princes;
seeing neither Moses in the Old Testament, nor Christ in the New, nor Levite,
nor Prophet, Apostle, nor Disciple, either counseled or practiced against
Government; which should decide the point, that has cost the Lives of so many
Christians, and still threatens more Tragedies, P. 763.
-- there was never Prince, to whom some Belialist took not some exceptions, --
it were ill with Princes, if their state depended on the good liking of their
Subjects: -- Subjects unfaithful at the heart, may be without the suspicion of
their Prince; but they beheld Rebels in the Court of Heaven; we be bound to be
subject not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. In all the time of David
's prosperity there was no news of Shimei, he looks like a fair Subject; but
he, that smiles on David in his Throne, P. 821.
cursed him in his Flight. -- there is no security in that Subjects Allegiance,
that has not God in his Conscience, -- he that poisons the People with the
male opinion of their Prince, is the most dangerous Traitor; to rip up the
faults of Kings is bold Impiety, but to charge them with faults they have not,
is shameless Blasphemy.

SECT. III.
To this purpose also, the Author of a discourse concerning Supreme Power, and
common right calculated for the year 1641. but published an. 1680. is very full
and pertinent: I must recommend the Book to the Reader, while I cite only one
passage out of it. Kings have a right of security against all Violence, P. 33.
they are above all humane judicature, and only under God, as the People are
under them; for which God styles himself, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings.

Sam. Otes Chaplain to Sir Francis Walsingham, Land. 1633. fol. P. 206, 207,
etc.
and other Persons of Honor, in his Seventeenth Sermon on S. Jude's Epistle, v.
8. -- Our Lord Jesus performed all Obedience to Rulers, even then, when they
were Heathen, and knew not God; his precept was, Give to Caesar the things that
are Cesars -- his practice, he paid tribute, and Paul 1 Timothy 2.1. wills the
Ephesians to pray for them, even then, when like Manasses, they poured out
blood like water, and made Towns and Cities swim with blood, as he did
Jerusalem; when like the Chaldees,
they gave the dead bodies of God's Servants unto the Fowls of the air, and the
Flesh of his Saints unto the Beasts of the field: When, like Antiochus, they
burnt all Libraries, and consumed the days of the Christians like smoke, and
their Bones were burnt like an hearth, when they were like Pelicans in the
Wilderness, and like Owls in the Deserts; when they did eat ashes like bread,
and mingled their Drink with weeping, and to show the constant practice of
this, not to go back, like the shadow of Ezekiah 's Dyal, to the time of the
Law; the Jews are commanded to pray for Nebuchadnezzar, tho, as a Man, he
deserved not the Name of a Man but a Beast; yet, as a King, he is called the
Servant of the Most High God.

Mr. Rob. Bolton, Bachelor in Divinity, and Preacher of God's Word at
Broughton in Northamptonshire, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Honorable Sir
Rob. Carre, Gentleman of the King's Bedchamber. A gracious Man about a Royal
Person, is a goodly sight, and full well worth even a King's Ransom. For never
any, except himself truly fear the great God of Heaven, can possibly be
cordially and conscionably serviceable to any of our earthly Gods: A Principle
so clear and unquestionable, that no Man of Understanding, and Master of his
own Wits, except himself be notoriously obnoxious, can have the face to deny
it. Please they may, be politickly plausible, flatter extremely, and represent
themselves to ordinary observation, as the only Men for Loyalty and Love; but
if we could search, and see their hearts, we should find them then most
laborious to serve themselves, and advance their own Ends, when they seem most
zealous for their Sovereign's Service. Achitophel, in the sunshine of Peace and
Calmness of the Kingdoms, did accommodate himself to the present, both in
Consultations of State, and religious Conformity; but no sooner had this
hollow-hearted Man espied a dangerous Tempest, raised by Absalom's unnatural
Treachery, but he turned Traitor to his natural Lord: When he observed the Wind
to blow another way, he followed the blast, and set his Sails according to the
Weather; which made David after complain; but it was thou, O Man, even my
Companion, my Guide, and Familiar: We took sweet Counsel together, etc.
Wherefore let great Men, without Grace, profess and pretend what they will, and
protest the Impossibility of any such thing; as Hazael did in another Case; yet
ordinarily, in such tumultuous times, and of universal confusion, for the
securing of their temporal happiness; which without timely turning on God's
side, is all the Heaven they are like to have in this World or the World to
come. I say upon a point of great Advantage and Advancement with safety, they
would fly from the declining State and downfall of their old Master, tho
formerly the mightiest Monarch upon earth, as from the Ruins of a falling
House. And it can be no otherwise; for they have no internal Principle, or
supernatural Power, to illighten and enable them to set their shoulders against
the Torrent of the times, and be overflown with it. But now, he that truly
fears God, would rather lose his high Place, nay his Posterity; as much
Hearts-blood, if he had it, as would animate a whole Kingdom, than leave his
lawful Sovereign Lord in such a Case, upon any terms, tho he might have even
the Imperial Crown set upon his own Head. For, Conscience, that poor neglected
thing, nay, in these last and looser times, even laughed at by Men of the
World; yet a stronger tie of Subjects hearts unto their Sovereigns, than Man or
Devil is able to dissolve; ever holds up his Loyal Heart erect and unshaken,
when all Shebnas, Hamans, and Achitophels would hide their heads, and shrink in
the wetting. Which Conscience of his, if upon such occasion he should unhappily
wound, he knows full well, it would follow him with guilty Cries, for his so
base temporizing and traytorous flinking, all the days of his life.

Mr. To. 2. Ser. 8. p. 637.
Faringdon. If we make no better use of our Liberty, than to fling it over our
shoulders, and wear it as a Cloak of Maliciousness, the spirit is ready to pull
it off, and tell us our duty, that for all our liberty we are to serve one
another; that Christianity destroys not relations of Son to Father, of Servant
to Master, of Wife to Husband, of Inferior to Superior, but establishes them
rather, -- and his Practice was according to his Doctrine, for he was an Eminent
Confessor to Loyalty in that great Rebellion, as was also his dear Friend Mr.
Chillingworth, between whom there was a great Sympathy of Sentiments and
Sufferings; for both were harassed for Preaching the same truth, His first Ser.
before the King on 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, etc. p. 6, 7, etc.
especially the later; but nothing could affright him from his duty, which
obliged him freely to reprove the vices of the Age, he lived in: -- the chief
actors in this bloody Tragedy, which is now upon the Stage, who have robbed our
Sovereign Lord the King of his Forts -- of the Persons of many of his Subjects,
and as much as lies in them, of the hearts of all of them, is it credible, that
they know and remember, and consider the example of David recorded for their
instruction, whose heart smote him, when he cut off the hem of Saul 's garment;
-- they, that make no scruple at all of fighting against his Sacred Majesty,
and shooting Muskets, and Ordnance at him (which sure have not the skill to
choose a Subject from a King) to the extreme hazard of his Sacred Person, whom
by all possible obligations they are bound to defend; do they know, think you,
the general rule without exception, or limitation left by the Holy Ghost for
our direction in all such cases, who can lift up his hand against the Lord's
Anointed, and be innocent? 1 Samuel 26.9. or do they consider his commands in the
Proverbs of Solomon (24.21.) my Son, fear God and the King, and meddle not with
them, that are given to change; or his counsel in the Book of Ecclesiastes
(8.1.) I counsel thee to keep the King's commandment, and that in regard of the
oath of God; or because they possibly may pretend, that they are exempted from,
or unconcerned in the commands of Obedience delivered in the Old Testament, do
they know, and remember the Precept given to all Christians by St. Peter,
submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, etc. or that
terrible Sanction of the same command, they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation, left by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, who then
were the miserable Subjects of the worst King, the worst Man; nay I think, I
may add truly the worst Beast in the World; that so all Rebels mouths might be
stopped for ever,
and left without all color and pretense whatsoever, to justify resistance of
Sovereign Power. Undoubtedly if they did know, and consider, and lay to heart
these places of Scripture, or the fearful judgment, which befell Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, for this very sin, which they now commit, and with a high hand
still proceed in, it would be impossible, but their hearts would smite them, as
David 's did upon an infinitely less occasion, and affright them out of these
ways of present confusion, and eternal damnation.

SECT. III.
Dr. 10 Sermon. Pr^at Lon. 16, ^. P. 10^.
Arthur Lake Bishop of Bath and Wells. Magistrates are from God, and he resides
among them, Magistrates must proceed like God -- God can, and will redress the
evils, that spring from them, because he is Sovereign in, and over those places
and persons, which are misgoverned by them; P. 131.
-- what is our lesson? truly first, as Nazianzen advises, as near as we can,
though we cannot as constantly as God, not to have a heart, and not a heart;
but to say with King David, I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed; it were
to be wished, there were such a constancy in our Oaths; so many would not
retract the Oath of that Allegiance, which they owe without an Oath.

Dr. Sermon at St. Mary's Cambr on Judge. 21.25. 1642. p. 27, 28, 29.
Stephens. The King's Commission is signed from Heaven, by me Kings Reign, his
Authority is conferred by Heaven, he is the Anointed of the Lord; his power
descends from Heaven, -- obedience to him is required from Heaven. 1 Pet. 2. it
is the will of God, that you submit your selves to the Government of your
Kings. I have heard the Prophet David suspected by some, as partial in his own
cause; just like the Northern Borderers, who conceived the Eighth Commandment
(thou shall not steal) to be none of God's making, but foisted in by Henry the
Eighth, to shackle their thievish fingers; -- but I dare oppose the 13th
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans against the power of Men, or Devils, which
would trample upon the necks of Kings, -- suppose thy King very wicked, he has
more need of thy Prayers to make him better; suppose him to be a Tyrant, he
will give thee the fairer occasions to exercise thy virtue of patience; suppose
him to be a Persecutor, he will do thee a courtesy, he will send thee to Heaven by
violence -- Saul was an unnatural Tyrant against his own Son Jonathan, P. 30,
31.
a bloody Persecutor of the Priest's of God, a Sacrilegious Usurper of their
Holy Offices, a demoniacal furious Man possessed with a Devil, and on David 's
part, his life was sought for, and by sparing Saul he should undo himself; he
had all the opportunity that might, and security could administer unto him, he
was Saul 's adopted Son by Michal 's Marriage, he was a Successor to the
Kingdom by the Prophet's Unction, and yet for all this, who can lift up his
hand, etc. -- are we Christians, do we know the virtue of an Oath? What think
we then of the Solemn Oath of our Allegiance? an Oath, which can receive no
dispensation, no absolution from any power whatsoever. -- contrary to the
assertions of Bellarmine, and Parsons is the established Doctrine of the Church
of England in the 37 Article; the King's Majesty has the chief Power in this
Realm of England, and his other Dominions, and is not, nor ought to be Subject
to any jurisdiction whatsoever. -- the six parts of the Homily against
Rebellion are so full and apposite, that we must either disclaim them from
being the Interpreters of the Doctrine of our Church, or sit down convinced in
the manifest truth of this assertion, etc. Consider seriously, against whom
would you take up Arms? Id. Sermon. on Judge. 4.23. p. 78.
is it not against the Power, against the Ordinance of God? -- they are Men
before God, but they are Gods before Men. -- the whole earth combining could
not make St. Bernard willingly offend his King, and shall the fear of a
threatened plundering make us oppose our King? -- shall the common rout persuade
me to go to Hell for company? -- It Is true, God sometimes refines his Church in
the Furnace of Persecution, neither then does he leave it naked, and disarm it;
but what are the Churches weapons? St. Ambrose had his dolere potero, potero
flere, his sighs, and groans against the Gothish Soldiers, St. Bernard fought
to death against Lewis of France, non scutis, aut gladiis, sed precibus, and
fletibus, prayers and tears were his Sword and Buckler. Nazianzen overcame
Julian, but it was lacrymis ubertim effusis, by softning his Adamantine Heart
with salt drops from their eyes; thence flows the only Sea, we can overthrow
Pharaoh 's Host in. --

SECT. IV.
P. H. Corah of the tribe of Levi joined with Dathan, etc. Sermon at Cambr.
1640. on Numb. 16. 3. p. 5, 6.
of the tribe of Reuben -- the Levite, or Clergy alone would have wanted power
and strength, the Laity, or Reubenite alone could not have had so fair a
color, and cloak of Religion to cover their rebellious practices; but both
joined together make a strong Faction, and a fair show, -- our surest course is
to judge Men's Persons by their actions; if their actions be unsound and
irregular, P. 10. 2. p. 11, etc.
if they gather themselves together (against God's express word, and
commandment) against their Prince and Sovereign, be their outward appearance
never so specious, we may assure our selves, that they neither fear God, nor
regard Man, but only to serve their own turns. -- if God in absolute and
unlimited terms pronounce,
whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, I cannot see,
how the goodness of the end, be it Religion or Reformation, or the common good
can warrant any such resistance from the transgression of God's Ordinance, P.
15. cons. the place.
unless these, and the like limitations had been specifyed, and annexed to the
Command, Law, or Ordinance of Almighty God, etc.

Anno 1643. Dr. Thomas Swadlyn Printed three Sermons entitled the Sovereign's
desire, and Subjects duty; (and himself was a Confessor at that time, being
Imprisoned for his Loyalty, as he declares in his Epistle, which he dedicates
to the World) wherein having proved, that all Power is from God; especially
Monarchy, he shows, that every Soul is to be subject, howsoever a King may deal
unjustly with them, Sermon. 2. on Romans 13 1. p. 25.
either. 1. By violating the Laws, and enforcing their Consciences, or. 2. By
depriving them of their Goods by extortions, and imprisoning their Persons; and
though in the former of these cases he may not be obeyed, yet in neither of
these cases may he be resisted. But what are we to do then? Why, we may either
fly away, as David did from Saul; if we do not, then we must suffer, but at no
hand may we resist. -- When St. Paul says, let every soul be subject, he means.
1. Let every Soul honor the King. 2. Let every Soul obey the King in things
lawful and indifferent. 3. Let every Soul be subject to the King in commands
unlawful, i. e. let every Soul patiently suffer, when he cannot actually do.

If the commands violate the Conscience, Id. Ser. 3. p. 29. 31, ^3, 38.
yet there the Power may not be resisted, for to resist the Power is a sin
second to none, but Sacrilege; the highest crime against Heaven is Sacrilege,
and the next crime to this, is Rebellion against, or disobedience unto the
Majesty of Earth, and whosoever resists the Higher Powers, resists both God and
the King, -- the word is (...), and signifies, whosoever contrary orders, or
orders against the Laws, or the Arms of the chief Magistrate, he resists the
Higher Powers, whether it be in subtilty of counsel, or obloquy of speech, and
if so, much more a heinous crime is it to take up Arms against the King. -- I
have not spoken this to flatter Kings; no, they shall dye like Men, but to
inform you; -- he that presumes, sins against the justice of God; he that
despairs, sins against his Mercy; but he, that resists the Power, sins against
the Power of God; and he, that dares take Arms against the King, would, if he
could, take Arms against God too; and therefore as damnation is due to every
sin, Sermon at Whitehall March 22 1639. p. 18, 19.
so especially to this sin, the sin of Rebellion.

Dr. B. Holyday Archdeacon of Oxford, to strike one's Father was death by the
Law, to curse one's Father was death by the Law, etc. the Law then for the Son,
and the Subject being the same; where is the love? where is the fear? where is
wisdom? where is grace? where is nature? are they not all fled from a
rebellious heart? had zeal anciently armed it self against Sovereignty, we had
never heard of a Calendar of Saints. P. 28.
-- Salus populi suprema lex includes in it the safety of the head; -- and for
the members of the body to rise against the head, is it not unnatural? is it
not frenzy? -- let them remember the breach of Israel, P. 30.
which did first wilfully depart from their Sovereign, and afterward
unwillingly, whilst perforce, from their Country; and that afterward in two
hundred years they had both many more, and worse Kings than Judah had; and were
at last seized on by the divine judgment, to the instruction of others, but
their own ruin; -- we may not do evil, Id. Sermon. at Oxf. May 21. 1643. p 42
Sermon at St. Mary's May 19. 1644. p. 65, 66.
that good may come thereof; -- royalty must not down for the advancement of
Religion -- object Rebellion, and ye object all crimes, -- it is nearer to a
flout, than a truth to call a Rebel, a Christian. -- they will ask, what is the
final cause of a King? and they will answer, the Peoples welfare certainly, a
true answer, and as certain an imperfect one; the People's good is an inferior
purpose of Majesty; the representation of the Divine Majesty is the highest
purpose of Humane Majesty -- when in all causes, a King is next under God
Supreme Governor, how can the People, whether single, or united, P. 91.
be the Governor of that Governor? a great Council may be the adviser of a
Prince, but as the Statute Law of our Prayer binds us to confess before God, it
is God, that is the only Ruler of Princes. Id. Sermon. at Chr. Chapter Nov. 10. 1644.
p. 106.
-- a King Absalom would be, -- not of God's making, for he had made David; not
of David's making -- a King then he could be made only by the People, and the
Devil, whilst by the People and Treason, whilst against the consent of God and
David.

Mr. Berkenhead. Sermon. on Nov. 3. 1644. at Chr. Chapter Oxon. p. 13.
However we must perform active Obedience to such Princes only, as far as
lawfully we may, so long as they are not set in competition with God; yet we
must perform Passive Obedience, and absolute subjection, even if they should
command the most unjust, superstitious, idolatrous, profane, and irreligious
things, which can be imagined; yet, I say, we must not Rebel, unless we will
renounce Christianity; but we must let this be the touchstone of our
subjection, even our patient and constant sufferings.

SECT. V.
Dr. Henry King Lord Bishop of Chichester. They, Sermon at St. Paul's Mar. 21.
1640. p. 11.
that lift up their hands against the King in public Rebellion, or their
tongues in murmur against his Commands, or their hearts in disobedient, and
discontented thoughts are as ill Subjects to God, as to the King: you need not
ask, whom have they resisted? St. Paul tells you Romans 13. they have resisted
the Ordinance of God; for he has his Power from God. -- Men like the mutinous
Israelites, P. 36.
upon all occasions of pretended discontent, cry down Moses, and set up an Idol
made out of popular votes and contributions, Id. Sermon. before the King May 29.
1661. p. 22, etc.
to what Votes soever Elective Rulers owe their Scepters, Succession is the
Vote of God, who both declares the right, and then continues it, as his
donation. -- Crowns conferred by other hands sit loose, and tottering upon the
head of such, as wear them; I will give it, keeps them fast. this is the great
Charter, by which Kings hold the right to their Kingdoms, by me Kings rule --
where are those then, who place the right to dispose Kingdoms in the Popes, or
those in another extreme, who entitle the People to this power; a strange
prodigy in opinion not heard of, till those Men came into the World, who (as
was falsely alleged of the Apostles at Thessalonica Act. 17.6.) turned the
World upside down, placing the feet above the head, and subjecting the Higher
Powers, contrary to the rule of God, to the People, who by his command ought to
be subject unto them. -- when the rebellious Israelites in Moses's absence,
would needs make a God, that is, a Leader or Ruler to go before them, they
contributed their earrings to the carrying on that design; but the effect and
issue of that contribution was only a Calf. I beseech you, remember from all
our contributory Plate, from the silver basin, even to the smallest bodkin,
whether we have any productions amongst us better than this. P. 30.
-- Men, who decry the Pope, yet cry up themselves into an Authority as great
as his, not only over the People, Id. Visit. Sermon at Lewis October. 8. 1662. p.
43.
but over the Prince -- whatsoever therefore teaches -- Children Obedience to
their Parents, Subjects Loyalty toward their Sovereign; whatsoever teaches the
afflicted patience, the happy temperance, the faithful perseverance, and all
sorts of People Charity, is that sound Doctrine, which we must Preach, the
Congregation learn.

Dr. Gardener. It is high time for Sovereign Majesty to send a strict
injunction of taking heed, Sermon at St. Mary's Ox. on Act Sund. 1622. p. 25,
etc.
that we poison not our studies with the Writings of Puritans, and Jesuits; for
the one, no less than the other, under color of Zeal, and pretense of Holy
Discipline corrupt, and spoil green age, before it can discern, and season new
Vessels with unseasonable liquor, witness that detestable and traiterous
instruction, encouraging Subjects to resist their supreme Rulers, when they are
notoriously taxed of injustice and cruelty; so that Kings according to them
shall be no longer Kings, than they serve their turns; are not these
Gospellers, where they broach such Tenets, mere Popes? are they not like to
Antichrist, that sits in the Temple of God, but advances himself against all
that is called God? or do they not work like Sampson, who laid hold on the
Pillars, whereon the house did stand, that overthrowing them, the house, and
the men might fall into a common ruin? I am sure, God's word says, Touch not
mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; and this Commandment of Obedience is
without distinction. Jeremy chap. 29. commands the Israelites, even those,
which were Captives under Heathen Kings, not to resist, but to pray for them,
and for the Peace of Babylon; and it is acceptable to the Lord, says St. Paul
(1 Timothy 2.) not that ye resist, but that ye make supplications and prayers for
Kings, and for all that are in authority, the Prophets, the Apostles, and
Christ himself subjected themselves to the Power of Magistracy, and therefore
when the Disciple did draw his Sword in Christ's defense, he was commanded to
put it up; -- the examples are not to be numbered of God's punishments upon
those, that have resisted authority by God ordained and established: In the Old
Law it was death, if a Man had resisted the Higher Power. Corah with all his,
was consumed with fire, Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up of the earth,
because they seditiously resisted Moses and Aaron: We know what end Absalom
came unto, when he had expelled his Father out of his Kingdom; what seemed more
goodly to the eye of the World, than that notable act of Brutus and Cassius,
who destroyed Caesar reputed a Tyrant, and yet that those their doings were not
allowed of God, the end declared; wherefore it is not lawful to resist supreme
Rulers, the they swerve from the line of justice; for it pleases God sometimes
to punish his People by a tyrannous hand, and in such a case to resist what
else is it, but tollere martyrium, to take away the occasion, the Glory and
Crown of Martyrdom.

Anno 1647. Dr. Jasper Main published his (...), P. 5.
or the Peoples war examined, etc. and in it, he affirms, that suppose the King
invade the Peoples Liberties, which could not possibly be preserved, but by
Arms taken up against the Invader, -- yet the King being this Invader (unless
by such an Invasion he could cease to be their King, and they to be his
Subjects) I cannot see, how such Rights could make their defense lawful. -- and
this he proves, P. 6, 7, etc.
by showing the Divine Institution of Kings, and what rights God allowed them,
-- particularly that of being supreme, independently Lord of his own actions;
whether unjust or just, as not to be accountable to any but God; after which he
proceeds to show, P. 12, etc.
wherein the supreme Power consists, P. 16, 17.
and that those particular rights do belong to the Kings of England, --
wherefore the Crown is Hereditary, where the tenure is not conditional, nor
hangs upon any contract, where the only obligation upon the Prince is the Oath,
that he takes at his Coronation to rule according to the known Laws of the
place; tho every breach of such an Oath be an offense against God (to whom
alone a Prince thus Independent, is accountable for his actions) yet 'twill
never pass for more than perjury in the Prince; no warrant for Subjects to take
up Arms against him. -- were a King misled by evil Counselors,
did actually trample upon the Laws of the Kingdom, and the liberty of his
Subjects; yet unless some Original Compact can be produced, where it is agreed,
that upon every such incroachment, it shall be lawful for them to stand upon
their defense -- that where the King ceases to govern according to Law, he
shall for such Misgovernment cease to be King, to urge such unfortunate
Precedents, as a deposed Richard, or a dethroned Edward (two disproportioned
examples of popular fury, the one forced to part with his Crown by resignation,
the other as never having had legal title to it) may show the injustice of
former Parliaments grown strong, never justify the pitched Fields, that have
been fought by this. If this supposition were true, the King being bound to
make the Law his rule by no other obligation, Sect p. 20, 21, etc.
but his Oath at his Coronation (than which there cannot be a greater, I
confess, and where it is violated, never without repentance scapes unpunished)
yet it is a trespass, of which Subjects can only complain, but as long as they
are Subjects can never innocently revenge. -- but they will say, they have all
this while fought for the defense of the Protestant Religion, etc. all which
resolves it self into this unchristian bloody conclusion, P. 36.
that an Assembly of professed Protestant Divines have advised the two
Parliaments of England and Scotland confessed Subjects, to take up Arms against
the King their lawful Sovereign, have thereby set three Kingdoms in a flame,
Id. def. of his Sermon. against Cheynel. p. 4.
etc. This Doctrine (that it is not lawful to propagate Religion, how pure
soever it be by the sword) is that Religion, to which I profess my self ready
to fall a Sacrifice, is that defamed, true, Protestant Religion, for which the
Holy Fathers of our Reformation dyed before me.

Dr. Peter Heylyn Anno 1643. Print Oxf. p. 2, 3, etc.
published the Rebel's Catechism, wherein he shows, that Lucifer was the first
Author of Rebellion -- that the Rebellion even of the heart makes a Man guilty
of Damnation in the sight of God, much more that of the tongue, or the hand; --
that one branch of the Rebellion of the hand is the composing, and dispersing
of false and scandalous Books, and Pamphlets tending to the dishonor of the
King; the other the taking up Arms against such Persons, P. 6, 7. cons p. 9,
10, 11, etc.
to whose Authority they are subject. -- and it is worth our observation, that
not only the bearing Arms against the King is declared to be Rebellion by the
Law of England, but that it was declared to be Rebellion by the chief Judges of
this Kingdom, at the Arraignment of the Earl of Essex, for any Man to seek to
make himself so strong, that the King should not be able to resist him,
although he broke not out into open act, -- even defensive Arms are absolutely
unlawful in the Subject against his Sovereign, in regard that no defensive War
can be undertaken, but it carries with it a resistance in it to those Higher
Powers, to which every Soul is to be subject. -- we find it thus resolved in
Plutarch, P. 12.
that it was contrary both to positive Laws, and the Law of Nature, for any
Subject to lift up his hand against the Person of his Sovereign; with much more
to the same purpose.

The same Author, near about the same time, See his Ecclesia Vindicata p 645,
etc Pr^at Lon. 1681.
wrote a Treatise entitled, the stumbling block of disobedience removed, to
show, that Kings ought not to be controuled by their Subjects, either singly,
or in a body, the whole of which learned Treatise, as well as his other
Vindications of the Doctrins and Rights of our Church, will sufficiently repay
the Reader's expense of pains and leisure.

And in his Sermon on May 29. 1681. it is to be observed, that such as draw
their Swords upon God's Anointed, use commonly to throw away the scabberds
also, and find no way of doing better, but by doing worse; no middle way for
them to walk in, but either to bear up like Princes, or to dye like Traitors.

SECT. VI.
Of the same belief was Sir John Spelman in his Case of our affairs in Law,
etc. that the Sovereignty is in the King's Person inseparably, Pr. Oxf. 1643.
p. 15, 17, 19.
and the allegiance of the Subject by Law thereto inseparably annexed,
fortifyed, and enforced by Religion, under the severe menace of damnation. --
what straight then of humane Affairs can be so violent, as to make Christian
Subjects contrary to sworn Faith; to Law, and to Religion, not only to disobey
their Sovereign, but resist and Invade the Sovereign Rights, etc.

Anno 1641. Sir Tho. Ashton, and many others, Noblemen, and Gentlemen of
Cheshire, tendered a Remonstrance to the Parliament against Presbyterian
Government; and in it they affirm, that the donation of Sovereign Power is
solely from God, and so will he have the revocation too; he does not subject
them to the question of inferiors, but puts a Guard upon their Sacred Persons,
which to violate, though in our own defense, is a breach of his command, even
when persecuted, as David was by Saul, which precepts are renewed in the
Gospel. -- we see our selves bound by Oath to acknowledge, and support that
Regal Government, our Statutes have established, our Laws approved, History
represents most happy -- to whom all Primitive times yielded full obedience, to
whose Throne Christ himself yields Tribute, whose Persons God will have Sacred,
whose actions unquestionable, whose Succession he himself determines, and whose
Kingdoms he disposes. -- Tacitus, tho a Heathen, advises us, to bear with the
riots, and covetousness of Kings, as with barrenness, and other infirmities of
nature; for while there are Men, there will be vices, but they cannot continue
long, and will be recompensed when better come.

In the 19th year of this King came forth a little book, called an Appeal to
thy Conscience, as thou will answer it at the great, and dreadful day of Jesus
Christ; p 2, 3, etc.
the Author of which says, that Subjects may not take up Arms against their
lawful Sovereign, because he is wicked and unjust; no, tho he be an Idolater
and Oppressor. 1. Because it were an high presumption in us to limit that
command, which God does not limit; now our obedience to Superiors, is always
commanded without limitation. 2. We may not think evil of the King, much less
may we take up Arms against him. 3. St. Paul says, recompense to no man evil
for evil, Romans 12.19. If to no Man, then certainly not to thy King, (...) That,
which peculiarly belongs to the Lord, thou ought not without his Authority
to meddle with; but vengeance is his. 5. Romans 13. Every Soul (none excluded)
must be subject; there is no Power but of God (if so, then the Power of a
wicked Prince is from God) and the penalty of resisting, is everlasting
damnation both of Soul and Body in Hellfire for ever. 6. In Eccl. 8.1, 2. the
Covenant made by the People to obey their King, is called the Oath of God, and
who dares break this Oath of God? 7. God commands, Touch not mine Anointed,
therefore thou may not smite him, therefore thou may not bear Arms
against God's Anointed. 8. For Subjects to take up Arms against their own King,
tho an Idolater, and an Oppressor, is contrary to the practice of God's People
in all Ages, the Jews, and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and the
Primitive Christians. 9. God's heavy judgments on those, who have taken up Arms
against their Prince, tho an Idolater and Oppressor, ought to be a warning to
us, how we do the like; this is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of
England in her Homilies. -- then he answers the usual objections for
resistance, resolves several doubts, and removes other little scruples; and in
the close of all, passionately advises all Men to return to the Lord, and to do
their duty; P. 51.
for it is strange (says he) that God's Church can be no way preserved, the
Subjects liberty no ways maintained, but by sin; who ever heard, unless from a
Papist, that the way to Heaven was through Hell? shall we do evil, that good
may come? Romans 3.8.

It would be a very needless labor to cite all the passages to this purpose,
that occur in the Books written between the year 1644. and the time of the
King's Murder, and therefore I shall refer the Reader to the Regal Apology
Printed 1648. the Kingdoms brief answer to the Declaration of the Commons. Pr.
1648. the Plea for the King and Kingdom 1648. with many other Treatises of the
same kind; only I shall mention Bishop Rainhowe, who took the degree of Doctor
of Divinity An. 1646. Vid. Bish. Rainbow's life, p. 41.
when his chief Question (on which he made his Thesis) was, Ecclesia Anglicana
tenet omnia ad salutem necessaria; a point, which he durst defend in the worst
of times, when that Church was so much oppressed for asserting her Loyalty to
God, and the King, for her agreement with the Primitive Church in not rebelling
against the lawful Magistrate, and in owning the Jus Divinum of Episcopal
Hierarchy and Liturgy.

To what is quoted out of Mr. Edw. Symmons's Vindication of King Charles in the
first part of this History, let these Passages be added. -- by virtue of the
Canon (Romanus Episcopus) say the Jesuits, Sect 4. p. 46. v. p. 47.
the Pope has power to depose Kings, be they Heretical or Catholic, of
vicious or virtuous lives, if in his judgment he finds them unfit, and some
others more capable of Government; and do not these Men believe the Authority
of Parliament to be as irresistible, as that of the Pope, and their Votes to be
as full of virtue, as his Canons, and altogether as authentic, even to the
deposing of Kings, and disposing of their Kingdoms. -- have they not loosened
People from their Oath of Allegiance to the King, and then put them in Arms,
persuading them, that it is no Rebellion to fight against him. Sect. 16. p. 160,
161.
-- the next thing they mention (wherein they triumph indeed, and glory) is
their late extraordinary success in the Field; some perhaps may wonder, how
these three can agree together, great sufferings, strange patience, and
extraordinary good success, -- prosperity and good success, which of old went
current only among the Papists, for a note of the true Church, is now admitted
also by these Men, to be a special mark of the goodness of their Cause; but in
regard, our Religion has hitherto taught, that sufferings and patience, were
rather the marks of Christ's true Flock, than extraordinary success in the
World, therefore, etc. -- these two names of suffering and patience, shall from
henceforth be rejected, and wholly disclaimed, P. 168. cons. loc.
as infallible marks of Loyalty and Malignity, -- success is the weakest
Argument, that can be alleged to prove the goodness of a Cause, and the
wickedest Men have most used it. -- this Book was written Anno 1645. tho not
published till the year 1648.

CHAP. VII. The History of Passive Obedience under King Charles II. etc.
SECT. I.
WHen the execrable Parricide was committed on the Martyr Charles, and his
Family driven into Exile, this Truth did not want its Confessors, tho they
smarted bitterly for owning it; of which number Mr. Sheringham published his
accurate treatise of the King's Supremacy, wherein (as he says in his
Introduction) he exposes, and confutes those Principles and Grounds, whereby
the Rebels endeavored to justify the War against the King; the first of which
was, that it was lawful for the People to resist their Sovereign, and Supreme
Governors, by force of Arms, in case they be Tyrants, and bent to subvert the
Laws, and Religion established; or by illegal Proceedings invade the Lives,
Estates, or Liberties of their Subjects: This dangerous position, he fully and
learnedly confutes in his Book, proving the Supremacy of our Kings, and that
they are neither coordinate, nor subordinate to the People, both by the Statute
and common Law of this Land, and clearly answers all the objections, from
either reason or authority, concluding all with this remarkable saying, P. 118.
To speak my desires, I wish unfeignedly the Salvation of all the pretended
Parliamentarians;
but to speak my thoughts, I conceive more hopes of the honest Heathen, than of
any Man, that shall dye a Rebel, or not make restitution, as far as he is able,
of all that he has gained by oppression and injustice.

Mr. Allington in his Grand Conspiracy. Sermon 3. p. 106, 107. Vid. Sermon. 2. p.
60, 81.
Caiaphas pleaded the exigencies of the State for the Murder of our Savior,
and which of us is there, that has not a Caiaphas in his bosom? Which of us is
there, that does not rather consider the expediency, than the justice of an
action? which of us do not consider, whether what we do be not rather secure,
than conscionable? -- Men, who will sacrifice both Judgment, Loyalty,
Conscience, and all Honesty, to avoid an inconvenience. P. 115, 116.
-- it is a Law much commended in this Land of ours, that no Man shall be tried
but by his Peers; now a King must be above the judgment of his Subjects,
because among them he can have no Peers. -- such an heir ( as Christ was in the
Parable, Sermon 4. p. 179.
Luc. 20.14.) could not be robbed of his Birthright, nor deprived of his
Inheritance, but it must be done with violence, and that violence could never
had hands enough without an Association, -- the Husbandmen without any mask of
Religion, P. 205.
or cloak of Godliness, without any pretense of freeing themselves from
Tyranny, Arbitrary Government, or any manner of Oppression; they declare
clearly (what more subtle Rebels would not) that the reason they prosecute,
bought, arraigned, and killed the heir, P. 208, and P. 210, 211.
it merely was for his Inheritance that the Inheritance may be ours; this Lord
had power to call the Laborers, but the Laborers had none to call him to
account.

Anno 1651. Mr. Jane (Father to the present Regius Professor at Oxon, if I am
rightly informed) Printed his Answer to Miltons Iconoclastes, and in it fully,
and on all occasions avers this truth. Exam. of the Pref. p. 5. v. p. 11
It is hateful in any to descant on the misfortunes of Princes, but in such as
have relation to them by Service or Subjection, (as the Libeller Milton to the
late King) is the compendium of all unworthiness, P. 28, v. p. 34.
and unnatural Insolence, -- had His Majesty's faults been as palpable, as this
Author's falsehood, it could not diminish his Subjects duty, nor excuse the
Rebels imprety. -- Rebels never wanted pretensions, P. 36, 37.
but liberty and justice, were the common masks of such Monsters; so this Man
will have the World believe -- Rebellion is dearer to this Author, than
Religion, and he will rather commend superstitious actions of a blind Age, and
the very dregs of Popery, than want an ingredient to the varnish of that horrid
sin. P. 39.
-- Superstitious Churchmen had their hands in the old Rebellions, and in our
days we find, they have Successors, that teach the People Doctrins of Devils,
and seduce them from Obedience to those, that had the rule over them. P. 47.
-- Obedience and Sufferings are the servility and wretchedness, which Milton
calls the Pulpit stuff of the Prelates; we may shortly expect, that as these
Miscreants have altered State and Church,
so they will compose an Index Expurgatorius of the Bible; for it cannot be
imagined, that they will object this heinous crime of Preaching Passive
Obedience to the Prelates, and leave so many places in the Gospel, which
command it; and themselves need not the Gospel to make Men obedient: they have
the Sword, and this Ceremony of Religion is abolished, P. 48, 49.
-- if righteousness consists in blaspheming God, contempt of his Ordinances,
and scorning the Doctrine, and practice of his Saints, these Men may lay some
claim to it. -- are they greater practisers of self-denial, who Preach War, and
Blood, rather than obey, than those who Preach Passive Obedience, and Suffering
rather than violence. P. 55.
-- Milton is very industrious to find out causes, why so many would not be
Traitors? why could he not fall into the consideration of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, that all Members of parliament take at their
entrance?
-- how did he forget the commands of Obedience from God? P. 59.
-- repentance is a great reproach among those Rebels, the Preaching of that
Doctrine is worse to them, P. 64.
than Passive Obedience. -- It is ridiculous to any judgment uninthral'd, that
such as Rebel against their King should pretend, P. 66.
they are not Rebels to God. -- Christians never thought, that any sword drawn
against their King, did not violate their Loyalty and Allegiance, much less
that their professed Loyalty, and Allegiance led them to direct Arms against
the King's Person.

There are many such Passages in the Book, Medit. on death. p. 257, 258.
but I shall only quote one more toward the end of it. Kings have their Power
from God, and God gives the Sword, yea even to wicked Kings, and because the
Power is given them for justice, it is called the Sword of Justice, tho they
use it oftentimes to injustice, -- the Scripture forbids us to judge another
Man's Servant, but this Man will have the Father punished by the Child, the
Master by the Servant, the Prince by the People. -- Kings are unaccountable to
Men for their actions -- for if Kings be accountable to Men, are not they, to
whom he is accountable, by the Libellers argument not only stronger than the
King, but stronger than Justice? P. 260.
-- divine law forbad all Men to take the Arms of justice, without, or against
the King, who is referred to God's justice, and justice has no Arms, but his
power. -- the Law was above the Emperor Theodosius, P. 262 v. loc. and p. 263.
in regard it was his rule, but could not make any Person or Society above him.
-- it were a profane Oath, as well as vain, that should be void at the will of
the Father. -- this last Age has brought forth a generation, that do God
service, when they scorn all his Laws, and Religion, etc.

SECT. II.
Bishop Sanderson in his censure of Ascham's Book Printed at London 1650. Upon
perusal of Mr. Ascham 's Book you left with me, I find not my self in my
understanding thereby, convinced of the necessity, or lawfulness of conforming
unto, or complying with an unjust prevailing Power, further than I was before
persuaded, it might be lawful or necessary so to do, viz. As paying Taxes, and
submitting to some other things (in themselves not unlawful) by them imposed or
required, such as I had a lawful Liberty to have done in the same manner, tho
they had not been so commanded, and seem to me in the conjuncture of present
circumstances, prudentially necessary to preserve my self, or my Neighbor from
the injuries of those, that would be willing to make use of my Non-submission,
to mine or his ruin; so as it be done with these Cautions.

1. Without violation either of duty to God, or any other just obligation, that
lies upon me by Oath, Law, or otherwise.

2. Only in the case of necessity otherwise not to be avoided.

3. Without any explicit, or implicit acknowledgment of the Justice and
Legality of their Power: I may submit to the (...) (to the Force) but not
acknowledge the (...) (the Authority) or by any voluntary Act give strength,
assistance, or countenance thereunto.

4. Without any prejudice unto the claim of the oppressed Party, that has a
right Title; or casting my self into an incapacity of lending him my due, and
bounden Assistance. If in time to come, it may be useful to him toward the
recovery of his Right.

5. Where I may reasonably, and Bona Fide presume the Oppressed Power, (to whom
my Obedience is justly due) if he perfectly knew the present condition I am in,
together with the exigency and necessity of the present case, and all the
circumstances thereof, would give his willing consent to such my conformity and
compliance.

So that, upon the whole matter, and in short, I conceive I may so far submit
unto the Impositions, or comply with the Persons of a prevailing Usurped Power,
unjustly commanding things not in themselves unlawful; or make use of their
Power to protect me from others Injuries: As I may submit unto, comply with, or
make use of an High way Thief, or Robber, when I am fallen into his hands, and
lie at his mercy.

As for Mr. Ascham's Discourse, tho it be handsomely framed, yet all the
strength of it to my seeming (if he would speak out) would be in plain English
this.

1. That Self preservation is the first and chiefest obligation in the World,
to which all other Bonds and Relations (at least between Man and Man) must give
place.

2. That no Oath, at least no imposed Oath, in what Terms soever expressed,
binds the Taker further than he intended to bind himself thereby; and it is
presumed, that no Man intended to bind himself to the prejudice of his own
safety.

Two dangerous and desperate Principles, which evidently tend, first, to the
taking away of all Christian Fortitude and Suffering in a Righteous Cause. 2.
To the encouraging of Daring and Ambitious Spirits to attempt continual
Innovations, with this confidence, that if they can by any ways (how unjust
soever) possess themselves of the Supreme Power, they ought to be submitted
unto. 3. To the obstructing unto the Oppressed Party all possible ways and
means, without a Miracle, of ever recovering that just Right, of which he shall
have been unjustly dispossessed: And (to omit further instancing) 4. To the
bringing in of Atheism, with the contempt of God, and all Religion, whilst
every Man, by making his own Preservation the Measure of all his Duties and
Actions, makes himself thereby his own Idol.

The same excellent Casuist is of this mind in his Case of the engagement (the
bond of Allegiance (whether sworn, Vid. loc.
or not sworn) is in the nature of it perpetual, and indispensible, etc.) and
his Fifth Lecture of the Obligation of Conscience, Sect. 11, 13, 14, 16, 17,
20, 21.
to which, for the sake of brevity, I refer the Reader.

SECT. III.
To this Eminent Bishop, Jenkins Redivivus Lon. 1681 p. 20, 21.
I shall join the Eminent Judge Jenkins, To depose the King, or take him by
force, or Imprison him, until he has yielded to certain demands, is adjudged
Treason in the Lord Cobham 's Case, -- the Law makes not the Servant greater
than the Master, nor the Subject greater than the King, P. 81.
for that were to subvert order and measure. -- it is High Treason by the Law
of the Land to levy War against the King, to compass, or imagine his death,
etc. follow the Monition, and Counsel of the Lord Cook (3. P. 141.
part Instit. p. 36.) peruse over all Books, Records, and Histories, and you
shall find a Principle in Law, a Rule in reason, and a Trial in experience,
that Treason does ever produce fatal, and final destruction to the Offender,
and never attains to the desired end (two incidents inseparable thereunto) and
therefore let all Men abandon it, as the poisonous bait of the Devil, and
follow the Precept in Holy Scripture, Serve God, Honor the King, and have no
Company with the Seditious.

Dr. Stewart in his Sermon Preached at Paris, called Hezekiah's Reformation; P.
38, 39.
he can be no Martyr for the first Table of the Law, who is in the same deed a
transgressor of the second; nor will God at all thank him, as a Reformer of his
Church, who in the self same act is no less than a Traitor to his Deputy; so
that as for Subjects to take up Arms against their Kings is by the Doctrine of
St. Peter,
and St. Paul in all cases damnable; so especially to do this in point of our
Religion, which so much commends and blesses Patience, and Sufferings, and
Martyrdom; either upon pretense to plant it, where now it is not, or to reform
it, where it has been planted, is of all other kinds of contentions, or Wars
most Turkishly Antichristian. -- Rabshakeh himself was grown so much a Divine,
as to aver openly, that he, P. 54.
who puts his hand to overturn that Religion he professes, yea that puts his
hand to overturn it too at the same time, while he likes it, pretend what he
will, he trusts not in God, he trusts perhaps in the Syrians, or in Egypt.

To what is quoted in the first part of this History out of Bishop Brownrig's
Sermons, may be added a remarkable Passage or two of his life, P. 183, 186, 187.
recorded by Bishop Gauden, the first that having Preached at Cambrige, that
Christians had neither Christ's Precept, nor any good Christians practice to
resist their Sovereign Princes, but that there was only left them the choice to
obey actively or passively, to do or suffer, he was immediately for this Doctrine
proscribed, and outed of his places in the University, and deprived of his
liberty, and put in Prison; the second, that when O. P. with some show of
respect to him, demanded his judgment in some public Affairs, then at a non
plus; his Lordship with his wonted gravity, and freedom replied: My Lord, the
best counsel I can give you, is that of Our Savior, render unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God, the things that are Gods; with which
free answer O. P. rested rather silenced than satisfied.

There are many observations worth the noting made by Bishop Hacket on this
Subject, in his Sermon on the day of the Coronation of King Charles I. on Ps.
118.24. but I refer the Reader to the Discourse it self, while I relate what is
recorded of him in his life written by Dr. Plume; that in the time of the great
Rebellion, P. 17.
no Man Preached more boldly against the licentiousness of those times, than
he, challenging the boutefeu's to show, where ever the Scripture gave
countenance to Uproars and Rebellions. Julian the Apostate reading the Bible
with a malicious intention to quarrel at it, said, that Christianity was a
Doctrine of too much patience, but he could never find any place in it to
object, that it was a Doctrine of Rebellion. If the administration of a Kingdom
be out of frame, it is better to leave the redress to God, than to a seditious
Multitude; the way to continue purity of Religion, being not by Rebellion, but
by Martyrdom; to resist lawful Powers by seditious Arms, and unlawful Authority
was not the Primitive, and Apostolical Christianity, but Popish Doctrine, not
taught the first three hundred years, but much about a thousand years after Our
Savior's Ascension into Heaven by the Pope of Rome, the very time, the Spirit
of God says, Satan should be let loose, viz. by Gregory VII. who first taught
the Germans to rebel against the Emperor Henry IV. -- this poison was given the
English People to drink out of the Papal cup, tho they pretended quite
contrary; but Bishop Hacket ever asserted, this was not the way to pull down
Antichrist, but Protestant Religion; and therefore he warned the Nonconforming
Divines to have a care, how they cried up a War, and became famous in the
Congregation only, as Erostratus, by setting the Temple on fire.

SECT. IV.
Thus the truth was asserted in the days of distress, till God was in his
infinite mercy pleased to restore the King, under whom the Confessors for
Loyalty, who had during his Exile Preached this truth by their sufferings,
asserted it as vigorously from the Pulpit and Press; and among them the most
Reverend Primate Dr. Sancroft challenges an Eminent Station, who in his most
Learned Sermon, Preached at the Consecration of Seven Bishops, comparing the
State of our Native Country with that of the Island of Crete, adds, have we not
outvyed the Cretans, lied for God's sake, P. 31.
and talked deceitfully for him? what pious frauds, and holy cheats? what
slandering the footsteps of God's Anointed, when the Interest was to blacken
him? -- Pliny has observed it, nullum animal maleficum in Creta, and Solinus
adds, nec ulla serpens; but they should have excepted the Inhabitants. -- and I
wish there were no other Island, could show Vipers too many, that have eat out
the Bowels of their common Mother, and slown in the face of their Political
Father, without whose benigner influence their chill, and benumbed fortunes had
not warmth enough to raise them to so bold an attempt. -- fullness of bread was
also one of their sins, and now I cannot wonder, if it be observed from the
Records of History (as Grotius assures us, who knew them well) that the Cretans
were (and I wish, there were no other such) a mutinous, and a seditious People,
and had but too much need to be put in mind by Titus to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates.

The Devil of Rebellion and Disobedience, Id. lex ignea p. 15.
which not long since possessed the Nation, rent and tore it, till it foamed
again, and pined away in lingering Consumptions; that cast it oft-times into the
Fire, and oft-times into the Water, (calamities of all sorts) to destroy it --
this ill spirit, this restless fury (this unquiet and dreadful Alastor, the
Eldest Son of Nemesis, and heir apparent to all the terrors and mischiefs of
his Mother) walks about day and night, seeking rest, and finds none; and he
says in his heart, I will return sometime or other to my house, from whence I
came out: Oh! let us take heed of provoking that God, who alone chains up his
fury, lest for our sins he permit him to return once more, with seven other
Spirits more wicked than himself, and so our last Estate prove worse than the
former.

Dr. Pr. 1661. P. 34. v. p. 14, 19, 21.
Morley (Bishop of Winchester's) Sermon, at the Coronation of King Charles II.
is full to this purpose, -- as no Man can take upon himself the Honor, or
Office of a Priest, so much less can any Man take to himself the Honor, or
Office of a King; but he must have it from God himself, either by God's own
immediate designation, as Moses and the Judges had (for the Judges were Kings)
and as Saul and David had; or by God's ordinary way of Dispensation, which was
by Succession of Children unto their Fathers; according unto which method, as
Families grew into Nations, so Paternal Government grew into Regal; and
consequently an Usurper, as he has no claim to Divine Institution, so he has
no title to Divine Benediction or Protection; and besides, because what is
gotten by the Sword must be maintained by the Sword, an Usurper must be a
Tyrant, whether he will or no. Lastly, a Monarchy by Usurpation is res sine
titulo, a possession without a title; which seldom lasts long, or ends well,
for he that takes the Sword, shall perish by the Sword, says Our Savior. Mat.
26.52.

Again, as Monarchy by Usurpation is res sine titulo, so Monarchy by Election
is titulus sine re, for Elective Kings are but conditional Kings, and
conditional Kings are no Kings; besides, P. 35.
a King is to have the power of life and death, which none, that have it not
themselves, can give unto him; and therefore how he, that is Elected by those,
that have not the power of life and death, comes to have the power of life and
death, and consequently how he comes to be a King is, I conceive, not easy to
imagine; the best and surest way for Prince, P. 38.
State, and People, is to protect, cherish, and allow of that Religion, and
that only, which allows of no rising up against, or resisting Sovereign Power,
no not in its own defense, nor upon any other pretense whatsoever; -- but tho
Princes are called Gods, yet they shall die like Men, P. 46.
says one, that was a Prince himself Ps. 82.7. and tho they be accountable to
no Tribunal here, yet they are to be judged hereafter by one, who is no
respecter of Persons. -- a Prince therefore is to take care to govern himself,
not according to that license, which his exemption from the penalty of humane
Laws may prompt him to, but according to that strictness, which the severity of
the Divine Justice does require of him.

The same Prelate in his Vindication of himself against Baxter, P. 29, etc.
among Baxter's Maxims of Treason, Sedition, and Rebellion reckons these. That
unlimited Governors are Tyrants, and have no right to that unlimited
Government: If God permits Princes to turn so wicked as to be incapable of
Governing, so as is consistent with the ends of Government, he permits them to
depose themselves.

If Providence disableth a Prince from protecting the just, etc. -- it deposes
him, if any Army (of Neighbors, Inhabitants, P. 31.
or whoever) do (tho injuriously) expel the Sovereign, and resolve to ruin the
Commonwealth, rather than he shall be restored; and if the Commonwealth may
prosper without his Restoration, it is the duty of such an injured Prince for
the Common good to resign his Government; and if he will not, the People ought
to judge him as made incapable by Providence, and not to seek his restitution
to the apparent ruin of the Commonwealth.

If a People, that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign, P. 33.
shall sinfully dispossess him, and contrary to their Covenants choose, and
covenant with another, they may be obliged by their later Covenant,
notwithstanding their former; and particular Subjects, that consented not in
the breaking of their former Covenants; yet may be obliged by occasion of their
later choice to the Person, whom they choose. -- with many more such Rebellious
Treses, all which the Bishop with great reason censures, and to the Book it
self, I must refer the Reader, where he will find ample satisfaction in a Manly
confutation of the abovecited, and other such popular errors.

And among these venerable Fathers of the Church, I must beg leave to introduce
a Layman, concerned in the same controversy, for when Baxter had published
his Key for Catholics, and in it p. 321. treated of the King's murder, of
which he says, Providence had so ordered it, that it could not be laid on the
Protestants, with much more to that purpose. John Nanfan Esquire in those worst of
times, writes a censure of the Passage, P. 3.
and in it avers, that all War taken up by Subjects upon any pretense
whatsoever, or by whatsoever caution or limitation, evermore, in the nature of
it, intends the destroying of King and Kingdom. P. 4.
-- that all the bringing the People into a body by Covenant, is unlawful,
because Government merely consists in having no contracts of the People acting
of themselves, -- that in such Covenants Men swear things contradictory, as to
fight against the King, and to be true to him. -- there is no such thing in
nature, as a defensive War against the King by Subjects, -- to subdue a King,
and deprive him of his Power, P. 5.
is the same thing as killing, it stays but the acting -- I should be very
glad, P. 7.
that the World should be satisfied, that Supreme Power should be
unquestionable; I would trust God and Man, and Humane casual events with my
share out of it, because I see, pretended Reformations never countervail the
mischief of Rebellions. -- nothing in nature can go higher than its first
cause; P. 9.
a Power derived out of the King, cannot be understood to be against the King,
for no Power can create a Power against it self. P. 10, 11.
-- all attempts to bring a King under the Power of his People, are the same as
to destroy him; and this was resolved in the case of the Earl of Cambd. Annal.
p. 547, 548.
Essex; -- and it never came into the conceit of any Person to except a
Parliament for committing Treason. -- the nature of Man is, to think any thing,
that has been done, P. 12.
may be done, and so never finds end of wickedness, but to make it infinite;
any extraordinary or transcendent acting upon Government, tho never so unlawful
and violent; yet if it become powerful, it commonly creates something to others
to derive from it: thus the Long Parliament declared long before that execrable
murder was committed, that in case they should act to the highest president,
they should not fail in duty or trust;
having their eye and aim upon the deposing of Kings, Edw. 2. and Ric. 2. and
the last actors that completed the Tragedy, conclude power of Parliaments, from
former destroying Kings, and setting up others. -- the deposition of Edw. 2.
was as horrid Treason, as was imaginable or possible to be in nature. -- and
does doing wickedly create a lawfulness? if so, all sins and villainies by the
perpetrating them lose their natures to be evils, and become lawful. --
wickedness can be no president, p. 16.
-- no such thing as Government can be, if the governed may judge and execute
their Governor. -- I wonder how Mr. Baxter can dispense with the Scriptures,
against using force to Kings or destroying them; his distinction of
Parliamentary right, will not serve the turn, since it is absolutely forbidden,
as is proved from Exodus 22.28. Ezr. 6.10. Ps. 51.4. Eccl. 10.20. Prove. 24.21. 1 Samuel 26.9. Romans 13. 1 Timothy 2. 1 Pet. 2.13, P. 19.
17. which texts (having some of them a relation to very Tyrants) show
directly, the nature of supreme Governors, to be born by the People, whatsoever
their condition be, -- to call them Gods is an exemption from all humane
Tribunals, above the condition of Mankind, subject to God only, as Supreme
Governors cannot in nature be other. -- I think that God would take it ill,
that we should mock him, p. 20. p. 22.
to set up a King to govern, and then to reserve a Power to destroy him. -- God
does sometimes give evil Governors, and does he not likewise give them power?
God himself forespake in Saul, and then concluded the People, in these words, 1 Samuel 8.18. then. i.e. when they were oppressed by their King, shall they cry
out. i. e. seek help of God (because there are no humane remedies, as Grotius
expounds it) and call to God for help. i. e. there was no means of resistance
to be used on their part. -- Kings were, when Parliaments were not; P. 23.
we cannot suppose here in England any time of Government without Kings; the
Parl. therefore was a creature merely of the King's will and creating, the King
is the sole judge of the safety, p. 27.
or danger of the Republic -- Supremacy is the sole governing Power, p. 53.
and Government is a constant being, the other (that of Parl.) but at times,
and by occasion. -- that must needs be a strange Government, p. 54.
where the Sovereignty is divided; and lying in diverse powers, when they
differ, the People are distracted in their obedience. -- therefore the 11. of
Henr. 7. was made to avoid the mischief of a divided commanding Power, tho it
be a gross Law, and against truth many times,
because Usurpers did possess the Throne. -- it is not possible to fancy
governing power, with a power in the People, p. 57.
or any Party out of the King to resist his power; for then he should govern no
longer, than the governed Party were disposed to obey, and so no Government at
all. -- there can be no such thing, as a conquest of Subjects over their King;
p. 64. p. 65.
it is Desertion or Treason, not Conquest. -- there is no footstep, or mark
from God of the Peoples title over Kings, or their making them, or giving them
their Power. -- Parliaments have declared for titles, p. 69.
but never can make any, nor deprive right; it is true, diverse Usurpers have
had Parliament Test for their Warrant, for those have most need of it, but
still it was acted under power enforcing, and so it was nothing, p. 70.
but merely so long as the Power lasted. -- Conquest is only a great Riot, and
multiplying of Rapines and Man slaughters, it is all wickedness, which is only
distinguished from common wickedness, as it transcends all other actings of
Wickedness; and such is conquest by excess of Wickedness, to make it self above
offending and punishment; and if so, then it cannot be in the submission of the
People, who are first conquered, before they consent -- none of these things
make right; for if the outed Prince can recover, and regain power, these things
vanish as unlawful; -- one instance with us in England of sixty years
discontinuance, yet when it recovered power to act, all the Usurpation went for
nothing, and the old came in as Right, not as Conquest.

SECT. V.
Bishop Wren in his abandoning of the Scotch Covenant. P. 49, 50.
God disposed of the Kingdom of Abiah, but otherwise by Man it could never else
have been done rightly, nor would it ever have held; no Man, not all the Men in
the Kingdom (whatsoever is told you of the Power of the People, by those, that
worship that many headed Monster) had Power or Authority, to alter that
Covenant of God with David, more than they had to alter that Covenant of day
and night in their Seasons, says God himself, if Men would believe him. Jer.
33.21. they were never to meddle with it, unless God himself gave order
expressly in it.

Bishop Laney. We were in a sad case not long since in this Kingdom by a Civil
War. Sermon at Whitehall Mar. 18. 1665/6. p. 19, etc.
-- they Covenanted, first to extirpate the Government of the Church, in this
they were too bold with the King's Scepter; at the next turn they take hold of
his Sword too, and engage themselves to a mutual defense against all
opposition, -- tho a self defense may be allowed, as natural to all, it is
against private, not public opposition, and then too, as Divines generally
resolve, Cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae, never to the hurt of others; every
Man may defend himself clypeo, but not every one gladio, the Sword is the
Kings, and he that takes it from any hand but his, where God has placed it,
shall perish with the Sword.

Bishop Pearson aggravating the sin of the Gunpowder Traitors, Sermon. No. 5.
1673. p. 14, 20, 25.
says, Touch not mine Anointed, is the voice of God -- nor must we do evil,
that good may come thereof, such Men's damnation is just. -- I cannot choose but
remember those words, which I read so frequently in the Scriptures, God save
the King, God save the King; God save him from the open Rebellion of the
Schismatical Party, the ruin of his Father; God save him from the secret
Machinations of the Papal Faction, the danger of his Grandfather. God save the
King, and let all the People say, Amen.

SECT. VI.
Francis Lord Bishop of Ely, has frequently asserted the same great truth. --
The Church of Rome 's Fifth-Monarchy-Men (assertors, Sermon. bef. the King Jan.
30. 168 0/1. p. 13 P. 17.
I mean, of the Papal Universal Monarchy) in the Murder of Conradine King of
Naples, and Sicily; were beforehand with our Fanatics, and taught the Art of
killing a King ceremoniously, -- the Life and Person of the King, his Office,
his Crown, and Dignity ought to have been inviolable, and sacred in the Eyes of
all his Subjects. -- if he be the soul of the Nation, then it follows, P. 18.
that his Power is derived from above, and is held from none under Heaven, --
and as none but God can judge both Soul and Body, so none but God is a
competent judge of the King. P. 20.
-- David spoke by the Spirit of God to the Amalekite, wast thou not afraid to
stretch forth thy hand against the Lord's Anointed? What! afraid of a conquered
King, unable to defend himself, much less afford protection to any Subject? is
not that enough to Unking him? yes, if we owe him least assistance, when he
needs it most. -- tho flying; nigh breathless, panting, and gazing round to beg
his death of some friendly hand, he was formidable, he was sacred still, P. 23,
24.
for still he had a signal impress of the Deity upon him. -- I will only put
the case of Julian the Apostate Emperor; after so clear conviction, after so
full instruction, as he had in the Christian Religion, having, as some
Historians report, taken one of the lower Orders in the Clergy, before he came
to the Throne; after all this he renounced his Baptism, he turned a very plague
to the Church, he proved the most formidable Persecutor, that is, a tempter of
his Christian Subjects to Apostasy: he offended with that malicious
wickedness, that the Catholic Church, and all her guides justly supposed, he
had committed the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost; they looked upon him
as one, that had cut himself off from their body with the greatest
Excommunication, even to Anathema Maranatha. i. e. till the Lord come to
judgment; now in this case was it lawful for Christians to cast him off, that
had so openly, and maliciously cast off his Christianity? We have the judgment
of the whole Church to the contrary; they thought themselves obliged by St.
Paul 's Apostolical Canon, to make prayers and supplications even for him, that
whatsoever he was, and howsoever he behaved himself toward them, they might
still lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; and they
had the Grace, they prayed for, they did live peaceably under him, they never
took upon them to Unking him, they drew out no Forces against him, but only
their thundering Legion of prayers and tears.

St. Paul exhorting to make prayers for all Men, Id. Sermon. before L. Mayor. May
7. 1682. p. 10 P. 11, 12.
for Kings, etc. has left no room for any to evade it, as if he had foreseen,
there would be a sort of Men (and they lived within our memories, Men) who
instead of praying for their King, would learn to pray against him, -- there is
a sin unt o death, says St. John, I do not say, that ye shall pray for it; but
St. Paul in my text has provided even against this supposition, tho the
charity, that hops all things were overcome, so that the spiritual welfare of
a Nero, etc. were in a manner despaired of, yet such Provision is made, that as
their Prince, he was to be prayed for still, that they might lead a peaceable
and quiet life; thus it was in the case of that impious Wretch Licinius, P. 13,
14, 15.
etc. -- and if our lives ought to be answerable to our prayers ( since praying
for peace, is but mocking of God without keeping the King's peace too,) then
let not any pretend to be good Christians, and sound Members of Christ's
Church, unless they be also good Subjects. -- my aim is against the Power of
Deposing Kings, that has been often claimed by the Bishops of Rome -- and there
is another Party of Men, who have introduced a distinction of taking Arms by
the Kings Authority against his Person. -- whereas, wheresoever the King's
Person is, P. 16, 17.
there is also his greatest Authority, -- but they tell us, the Primitive
Christians wanted not Authority and Right, but strength to resist the civil
Powers; but did our Savior want Power, when he controuled evil spirits, and
cast out devils -- did he want Power then, when he commanded Universal nature,
when even the Winds and Seas obeyed him? etc. -- he had more than twelve
Legions of Angels at his call; why did he not strike Herod or Pilate, but that
he confesses himself Subject to him? -- the Men, P. 30, 31.
that first broke the Peace of the Church were the first, that gave the leading
foul example of waging War against their lawful Prince, as did the Novatians of
Paphlagonia, who fought with the Arian Emperor Constantius 's Forces sent
against them, to compel them to receive the Arian confession.

Such as will not trust in God, Id. Sermon. Sept. 9. 1683. p. 10 P. 17.
as a deliverer from any dangers they fear, but will take the Sword against
their lawful Prince, upon any pretense whatsoever, their sentence is read in
the words of our Blessed Savior, they that take the Sword, shall perish with
the Sword, the Jews shedding innocent blood brought upon them a deluge of
blood; and their second desolation under Titus, says Josephus, came upon them
in the same month, on the same day of the month, that the former fell upon; and
when by the same division of Priests and Levites, the same Divine Service was
reading in course, viz. that Psalm, P. 24.
which was written in admiration of God's vindictive justice, O God, to whom
vengeance belongs, etc. -- there are complying Men, who resolve to thrive
under all Governments -- they are animals incombustible for Religion (as one
defines them) and whatever interest prevails in the State, they laugh at the
notion of being State-Martyrs, -- honesty is true policy, unless Men mean to
revive that old abominable Gnostick Principle of complying with any Usurpations
or Impositions, for fear of suffering.

St. Paul declares, their damnation is just and righteous, Id. Sermon. Nov. 5.
1684. p. 5, 6.
who persevere in charging the Blessed Gospel with admitting so cursed a
Principle, as if it were lawful to do any one known evil, tho with an eye to
the best, and noblest designs, and with an aim at no other consequences, but
such as were most beneficial to the public; -- for this was no Apostolical
Canon, but a maxim from Hell. -- such Men are apt to conceit, P. 10.
that they have made themselves necessary, as if God Almighty could not do his
work without them. -- I have heard, that the case of Jacob's wrestling with
God, was Preached upon to our late Great Usurper, and this Doctrine raised, that
God's Jacobs, or glorious Wrestlers with God,
might for great ends do some things contrary to his declared Will, which
things might yet be acceptable to his secret Will, and procure a blessing. --
it is a Jesuit's Salvo, P. 20. P. 27.
that a Man of wit never sins against his conscience. -- we believe it a
preposterous way of securing our Religion, by giving up the peculiar Doctrine of
our Church, the Doctrine of Obedience unto Kings; and we judge it a strange
means of barring out Popery, by letting in the Doctrine of translating, and
disposing of Kingdoms. --

For a King and People to be happy, Id. Coron. Ser. April 23. 1685. p. 15, 16.
the King must have a right to his Kingdom, for how can an Usurper expect to
reign prosperly? -- how mise rabble is a King and Kingdom, when every Man, that
is but audacious enough, has a fair pretense, if he can but gather force, to
overturn any settlement, that can be in such a case; such a Pirate Prince must
be always exposed to Tempests. -- King Stephen was none of our worst Princes,
and one of the most valiant, but an Intruder he was, and he sped accordingly;
his reign was the most turbulent of any, except that of King John, another
Usurper, etc. -- But be the title of a King, P. 18.
as good as a Warrant from Heaven can make it; be it so undoubted, as Hell it
self can find no pretense to question it; be the King like an Angel of God --
yet if his Subjects will be Sons of Belial, Sons of the Devil; so Rebels are
called in Scripture, Men, that will bear no yoke, it is still in their power to
be as miserable, as they please. -- therefore, I commend your strict adherence
to your former Protestations, P. 27.
and to your Oaths of Allegiance -- take heed of destroying your Country to
build your own House -- destruction, and death is not all you are like to get
by it; take heed of that which follows, there is another death to come after;
God has warned you of it, they that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation; as you would avoid this, take heed of that which leads to it. --
thus that great Prelate, who, as it is justly said of him, Thom. Brown. Ep.
praefi. conc. Jun. 11. 1687.
in the whole course of his life, and in all the varieties of times, and
fortune, still maintained his fidelity to his Prince in an illustrious manner.

SECT. VII.
And of this opinion was that great promoter of piety and learning, Bishop
Fell, who having in his On 2 Pet. 3.3. Anno 1675. p. 21, 22. Ox. 1675.
Sermon before the King, asserted, that nothing can be so unhappy, as
Authority, when baffled, that the Coffee-house rebel is more mischievous, than
he, that takes the Field, and that a Prince is sooner murdered with a Label
than a Sword, and in his Dec. 22. 1680. p. 3, 4. on Mat. 12, 25. Oxf. 1680.
Sermon before the Lords, expressed his astonishment, by what Enchantment (but
that Rebellion is the sin of Witchcraft) Men should be persuaded to disturb
their own, and the public Peace, forfeit all the advantages, they enjoy in a
settled Government, which cannot be so bad, as not to be much better than the
confusion, which sedition brings, and run upon that sudden destruction, which
the Wiseman says, is the end of those, who are given to change, he continues to
give the same advice in his Sermon before the Sons of the Clergy, wherein
having told them, that a great part of them present were the Sons of the
persecuted Clergy, On Act. 3.16 p. 61, 63, 68, 69.
a sort of Men, that hazarded their lives unto the death, and their Estates to
the greater cruelty, and grave of sequestration for the cause of God, and of
their Prince. He adds, -- it is their glory, that in the day of trial they did
all they pretended to, they forsook Father, and Mother, Houses, Brethren, and
Sisters, and those more endearing names of Wife and Children, -- let it
therefore be the strict concern of every one here present to maintain a
faithful Loyalty to his Prince and Sovereign: It is the peculiar glory of the
Church of England,
that She, above all others, Principles her Children in Obedience to Superiors,
and most supports the ends and interests of Government, which had so visible an
effect in the late unhappy revolutions, that the Royal Martyr, who fell a
Sacrifice to the misguided zeal of his rebellious Subjects,
made it his observation, that none forfeited their duty to him, who had not
first deserted their Obedience to the Church; nor can you any way more
remarkably approve your selves to be Orthodox in your Religion, and good Sons
of the Church, than if you are Loyal in your Principles, and good Subjects to
the King.

On the 23. of June of the same year Dr. Thomas Bishop of Worcester dyed,
having two days before sent for a Reverend Divine, to whom, after he had
discoursed an hour about the new Oath of Allegiance, which he thought
altogether inconsistent with the Doctrine of the Church, and his former Oaths,
he said; if my own heart deceive me not, and God's grace fail me not, I think,
I could dye at a Stake, rather than take this Oath.

The Earl of Clarendon in his Animadversions on Mr. Cressy 's answer to the
Dean of St. Paul's, P. 72.
as a very competent witness, avers, that there were very few, who did so much
as pretend to have a reverence for the Church of England, that were ever active
in the late Rebellion; -- and that it were to be wished, rather than hoped,
that the Profession of Christian Religion in any Church had that impulsion in
it, as it ought to have, that it preserved the Professors of it, from entering
into Rebellion, and the practice of any other iniquity. -- and speaking of
Archbishop Cranmer, who signed King Edward the Sixth's Will, he adds, if that
unhappy, P. 80.
and ill advised Queen (who had just reason to be offended highly with that
Archbishop) could have found, that the Law would have condemned him for
Treason, she rather desired to have had him hanged for a Traitor, than to have
him burnt for his Religion -- but the Law would not extend to serve her turn
that way; if it would, no body would have blamed her for having prosecuted him
with the utmost rigor, whereas many good Men then did, and since have for
proceeding the other way with him.

-- The Popes, who have assumed Authority to depose Princes, P. 151, 152.
have caused more Christian blood to have been spilt, more horrible Massacres
of Kings, and Princes, and People, than all the Heresies in the World, and all
other politic differences have produced. -- much the greatest part of this
destruction,
and ruin proceeded from the perjury of Popes themselves, after they had
promised, and sworn to observe such parts, and agreements voluntarily entered
into by themselves, or from the dispensation, they granted to others to break
their faith, and not to perform the contracts, they had entered into.

The same noble Person, even when under the displeasure of his Prince, and in
Banishment, thought himself still obliged to be unalterably Loyal, as he
professes in his Epistle to the King; I thank God, from the time I found my
self under the insupportable burden of your Majesty's displeasure, and under
the infamous brand of Banishment, I have not thought my self one minute
absolved, in the least degree, from the strictest duty to your Person.

And whereas T. H. (in his Leviath. p. 114.) had affirmed, that the obligation
of Subjects to their Sovereign is understood to last as long, and no longer,
than the Power lasts to protect them; he rejoins, P. 90.
hereby he gives Subjects leave to withdraw their obedience from their
Sovereign, when he has most need of their assistance; so that as soon as any
Town, City, or Province of any Prince's Dominions, is invaded by a Foreign
Enemy, or possessed by a rebellious Subject, that the Prince cannot for the
present suppress the Power of the one or the other, the People may lawfully
resort to those, who are over them, and for their protection perform all the
Offices and Duties of good Subjects to them; whereas the duty of Subjects is,
and all good Subjects believe they owe another kind of Duty and Obedience to
their Sovereign, than to withdraw their subjection, because he is oppressed; and
will prefer poverty, and death it self, before they will renounce obedience to
their natural Prince, or do any thing, that may advance the service of his
Enemies, P. 92.
-- surely this woeful desertion, and defection, which has always been held
criminal by all Law, that has been current in any part of the World, has
received so much countenance, and justification by Mr. Hobbs's Book,
that CROMWELL found the submission to those Principles produced a submission
to him; and the imaginary relation between protection, and allegiance, so
positively proclaimed by him, prevailed for many years to extinguish all
visible fidelity to the King, whilst he persuaded many to take the Engagement,
as a thing lawful, and to become Subjects to the Usurper, P. 135, 136.
as to their legitimate Sovereign. -- Kings themselves can never be punished
for their casual, or wilful errors and mistakes, let the consequences of them
be what they will; but if they, who maliciously lead, or advise, or obey them
in unjust resolutions and commands, were to have the same indemnity, there must
be a dissolution of all Kingdoms and Governments; but as Kings must be left to
God, whose Vicegerents they are, to judge of their breach of trust, so they,
who offend against the Law, must be left to the punishment, P. 163.
the Law has provided for them. -- if all Sovereigns be subject to the Laws of
Nature, because such Laws are divine, and cannot by any Man, or Commonwealth be
abrogated, they then are obliged to observe, and perform those Laws, which
themselves have made, and promised to observe; for violation of faith is
against the Law of Nature:
Nor does this obligation set any Judge over the Sovereign, nor does any Civil
Law pretend, that there is any power to punish him; it is enough, that in
justice he ought to do it, and that there is a Sovereign in Heaven above him,
tho not on earth.

To this great Minister of State I should join Sir Robert Filmer, but that it
is needless, the Enemies of the unaccountableness of Kings, having branded him
with the mark of a State Heretic for his Orthodox Opinions, which among all
good Men make his Memory reverend, and his works Eminent, to which I advise the
Reader to make his recourse, particularly his short, but excellent Treatise of
the Power of Kings, etc. See also Sir William Dugdale's Preface to his view of
our late troubles, etc.

The Late Bishop of Chichester, Dr. Lake, having Aug. 27. 1689. received the
Sacrament on his Deathbed, did in the presence of Dr. Hicks Dean of Worcester,
Dr. Green and some others, make this protestation, being (as himself worded it)
engaged in the most sacred and solemn act of conversing with God, See the
Paper, and the vindication of it.
not knowing to the contrary, but that he might appear with those very words in
his mouth at the dreadful Tribunal.

That I was Baptized into the Religion of the Church of England, and sucked it
in with my Milk: I have constantly adhered to it through the whole course of my
life, and now, if so be the will of God, shall dye in it, and had resolved,
through Gods Grace assisting me, to have dyed so, tho at a Stake. And whereas
that Religion of the Church of England taught me the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, and Passive Obedience, which I have accordingly inculcated upon
others, and which I took to be the distinguishing Character of the Church of
England,
I adhere no less firmly, and steadfastly to that, and in Consequence of it,
have incurred a Suspension from the exercise of my Office, and exspected a
Deprivation. I find in so doing much inward satisfaction, and if the Oath had
been tendered at the peril of my life, I could only have obeyed by suffering,
etc.

Manu propria Subscripsit Jo. Cicestrensis.

To this great Man I should add his bosom Friend, Dr. Allestrey, who speaks
fully, and consonant to sound Doctrine on this Head; but I must refer the
Reader to his Sermon, November. 5. 1665. on Luc. 9.55. Vol. 1. p. 127. and Vol.
2. p. 60. and p. 253, 276.

Thus the acute Dr. Sherlock. Some Men pretend great Oppression, Sermon. on Ps.
18.50. p. 2.
and Maladministration of Government, though their licentious noises, and
clamors sufficiently confute it; for Men, who are most oppressed, dare say the
least of it. The Liberties and Properties of the Subject, is an admirable
pretense to deprive the Prince of his Liberties and Properties. -- Others make
Religion the pretense for their Rebellion: Religion, the greatest, and the
dearest Interest of all; but, methinks, it is a dangerous way for Men to Rebel
to save their Souls, when God has threatened damnation against those who Rebel.
-- No Men fight for Religion, who have any. Religion is a quiet, peaceable,
governable thing: it teaches Men to suffer patiently, but not to Rebel. -- It
is evident it is not Religion, such Men are zealous for, but a liberty in
Religion; i. e. that every one may have his liberty to be of any Religion, or
of none; which serves the Atheist's turn, as well as the Sectaries, but is not
much for the honor, or interest of true Religion. -- So that, whatever the
pretenses are, it is an ambitious, p. 3. v. p 6, 7.
discontented, revengeful spirit; an uneasy, restless, fickle, and
unchangeable humor, which disturbs Politic Government, and undermines the
Thrones of Princes. -- In the time of the Fanatic Plot, p. 7, 8. p. 11.
but to Talk, or Write, or Preach about Obedience to Government, or patient
Suffering for a good Cause, was to betray the Protestant Interest. -- God may
sometimes suffer Treason and Rebellion to be prosperous, p. 11.
but it can never prosper but when God pleases; and it is impossible Rebels
should ever know that, and therefore it is impossible they should have any
reasonable security of Success. -- There is nothing more expressly contrary to
the revealed Will of God, than Treasonable Plots, and Conspiracies against
Sovereign Princes. -- Christian Religion, indeed, is the greatest security of
Government, both in its Precepts, and Examples -- It requires us to obey our
Superiors in all lawful things, and quietly to submit, and suffer, when we
cannot Obey. And the blessed Jesus, who was the Author of our Religion, and our
great Pattern, and Example, did himself practice these Laws, p. 14. v. loc. and
p. 21, 22 etc
which he gave to us. -- Under the most barbarous, and persecuting Emperors, no
Christian ever suffered as a Rebel; they gave no other disturbance to the
Government, than by confessing themselves Christians, and suffering for it.
Their numbers indeed were very formidable, but nothing else.

The same Doctor wrote his Case of Resistance, when the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, and Passive Obedience were not Confuted, but laughed out of
Countenance. Ep. Ded. p. 109.
When whoever has been so hardy, as to assert the Doctrine of Non Resistance,
has been thought an enemy to his Country; one who tramples on all Laws, who
betrays the Rights and Laberties of the Subject, and sets up for Tyranny, and
Arbitrary Power. p. 3.
In this accurate Treatise he proves. 1. That God himself set up a Sovereign,
and iresistible power in the Jewish Nation; and that during all that time, v.
p. 13, 14.
it was unlawful for Subjects, upon any pretense whatsoever, to resist their
Princes. 2. That our Savior taught the same Doctrine, both by his Example and
Precepts, as did also St. Peter, and St. Paul. p. 133.
-- The sum of St. Paul's Doctrine is this, that all Men, whatever their rank
and condition be, -- must be subject to Sovereign Princes; i. e. must obey all
their just and lawful commands, and patiently submit even to their unjust
violence, for Sovereign Princes are made, and advanced by God, -- and therefore
he that resists, resists not Man, but God: -- and how prosperous soever
such Rebels may be in the World, they shall not escape the Divine Vengeance,
and Justice, which will follow them into another World: They shall receive to
themselves damnation. p. 221.
-- The last Judgment weighs down all other considerations; and certainly
Rebellion may well be said to be as the sin of Witchcraft, when it so inchants
Men, that they are resolved to be Rebels, though they be damned for it.

So Dr. H. Bagshaw. Sermon. on Isa. 1.26. p. 8.
Should Magistrates omit Works of Justice and Mercy, they are no more Gods, but
Idols; nay, the worst sort of Idols, that being made to represent, do yet
foully reproach Divine Power: but should People resist, libel, or abuse them,
and so strive to deface the marks of their greatness, they strike at the
Majesty of the Supreme. We may all learn Duty from considering that God is the
founder of human Government.

So also the learned Dr. Faulkner. V. Christian Loyalty, l. 1. c. 5. p. 183,
184.
The truth is Maximus was a Rebel, and had wicked murdered Gratian the Emperor,
and invaded the Territories of Valentinian; and for this cause S. Martin,
though often requested, for a long time refused to come to his Table, and
avoided all converse with him, -- and did also foretell his ruin. And
Marcellinus, Socrates, Theodoret, and Sozomen, in their Histories, often give
him the style of Maximus the Tyrant. And Symmachus, a Roman Senator was found
guilty of Treason by Theodosius, for publishing a Panegyric upon Maximus. --
S. Ambrose not only refused Maximus the salutation of a Kiss from him, but
withdrew himself from those Bishops who Communicated with him, etc. Chap. 6. p.
233.
The same Author confuteing the claim of the Pope to this Kingdom, on the
account of the surrendry made by King John to Pandulphus the Pope's Legate,
adds, I shall choose to observe in general, that this Case is the same, as if
any Seditious persons, or Usurpers, should by fraud, or force, reduce the King
to straits, and difficulties; and should then by like methods gain a promise
from him, that he should be under their Government, and shall order the Affairs
of his Realm in compliance with them, and subjection to them. Now all such Acts
are wholly void, and utterly unobligatory: Because, 1. No part of Royalty can
be gained by Possession, upon an unjust Title, against the right Owner, upon a
sure Title; this being a parallel Case to a Thief being possessed of an honest
Man's Goods. 2. No Sovereign King (unless by voluntary relinquishing his whole
Authority to the next Heir) can transfer his Royal Supremacy to any other
person whomsoever, etc. p. 383. v. loc.
-- Another ground of Subjects security, though they may not take Arms against
their Sovereign, is from God being the Judge, and Governor of the World -- and
shall not the Judgment, and Authority of God over Princes be thought valuable,
and considerable, though he is more righteous, and more able to help the
oppressed, than any Judge upon Earth? p. 393. V. p. 395, 397, 456, 457, 463,
490, 491.
-- Unless all things be in utter confusion, and Anarchy, it is not possible,
but that there must be acknowledged such an Authority, which none have power of
resisting; but this can no where be so well placed for the Subjects Interest,
as in their Sovereign Prince, and Supreme Governor. -- Christians are Baptized
into that Doctrine, which makes great provision for the security of Kings, and
against all manner of resistance. -- But though the directions of our Religion
be plain; History will acquaint us, that there have been many contrary
Practices, as matters of Fact. But these are no more to be urged against the
Rules of Duty in this, than in other Actions of disobedience, and swerving from
God's Commandments. p. 507.
-- It was truly observed by Barclay, that Valentinian the younger, who was an
Arian, might as easily have been Resisted, and Deposed by the Catholic
Christians, as any King or Emperor whatsoever, if they would have undertaken
any such thing; for then the strength of the Eastern part of the Empire was
then in the Hands of Theodosius, who was a zealous promoter of the True Faith:
the Western Empire was overrun by Maximus an Enemy to the Arians, -- The Army
of Valentinian, then at Milan, were so disaffected to the Emperor, that they
declared, they would go over to those, Ambr. Ep. 33. ad Marcellin.
to whom S. Ambrose should direct them, unless the Emperor would Communicate
with them who embraced the True Faith. But in this case Theodosius protected,
and assisted Valentinian, and S. Ambrose disclaimed all resistance against him,
and espoused his Interest to the utmost against Maximus.

Herbert Lord Bishop of Hereford, Pr. Land. 1688.
in his Defense of the Reading the late Declaration, asserts the same Truth;
for though he pleads for the Reading of the Decclaration; p. 5.
Because, when we are bid to Honor the King, we ought to observe that express
command of God in every thing, that is not expressly contrary to the word of
God, or at least, most evidently deduced from it, so that every common
understanding must needs see it. p. 15.
Yet he subjoyns -- that it is impossible that a true Son of the Church of
England should have any disloyal thoughts in his Heart, his Principles
commanding him unto entire Obedience, either Active or Passive, without any
Equivocation, or Mental Reservation whatsoever.

SECT. VIII.
Dr. Matthew Griffith. Sermon. 25. Mar. 1660. called, fear God and the King, p.
11. v.p. 39. and p. 8, 9.
If God command one thing, and the King should command another, then God's
command is to be preferred: and yet let me tell you, that the King is not to be
disobeyed; for a true Christian is obliged to a twofold obedience, Active and
Passive. Where the King commands things Lawful, there yield Active Obedience,
and know that it is your duty to do them: but if he should command such a thing
as you may not lawfully do, then you must not resist, but suffer patiently for
your not doing it, and that is your Passive Obedience: and in both these you
may still keep a good Conscience; for though God be to be preferred, yet God
will not have his Anointed to be disobeyed.

Dr. Jane Dean of Gloucester. Ser. at the Consecr. of Doctor Crompton Bishop of
Oxon, p. 30, 31, 32.
Such is the peculiar genius of Christianity, that where ever it is either
Preached or Received, it can create no jealousy in the State. The ground upon
which this Assertion stands, is this, that it disclaims all title to the Sword,
but leaves him that takes it to perish with it, though it be drawn in defense
of Christ himself. -- In the Church then, as of old in Israel, there was no
Smith to provide Swords and Spears, though against their persecuting
Philistines. -- To obey Authority was taught, and practiced under a Nero, and
their Submissions were as unparalled, as their Provocations. And we may truly
suppose, under the Roman Emperors, that had the Doctrine of Obedience been as
truly received by their Heathen Subjects, as it was Preached by S. Paul, and
practiced by the believing Romans, they had effectually provided for the
public Tranquillity without any further need of Forts, and Armies to secure it.

Dr. Outram. The Glory of the King, Ser. Jan. 30. 1664. p. 141, 149.
the Privileges of the Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, the Purity of
Religion, these are written upon the Face of the design. -- The Principle is,
doing evil that good may come of it, and breaking Laws that we may the better
observe them. -- These Men went to Rome to whet the Ax, and borrowed an Arrow
out of the Roman Quiver secretly, to shoot the Lord's Anointed. -- Were the
Prince a Nero, p. 160.
Paul would charge us, we should not resist, and would charge resistance with
damnation.

Sir Orlando Bridgman, at the Trial of the Regicides, says, Try. p. 10, 12. v.
p. 15, 52, 182, 283.
I must deliver to you for plain and true Law, that no Authority, no single
Person, no Community of Persons, not the People Collectively, or
Representatively, have any coercive Power over the King of England. And this he
proves at large in the same place. -- The Crown of England is, and always was
an Imperial Crown. -- Now I do not intend any Absolute Government by this. It
is one thing to have an Absolute Monarchy, another thing to have that
Government absolutely without Laws, as to any coercive Power over the Person of
the King. -- God is my witness, what I speak, V. p. 13, 14. p. 280. V. p. 281,
282.
I speak from mine own Conscience, that is, that whatsoever the case was, by
the Laws of these Nations, the Fundamental Laws, there could not be any
coercive Power over the King. And this he there proves from the obligation of
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, etc. Mark the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and I do not know with what spirit of Equivocation any Man can take
that Oath of Supremacy. -- Her Articles were the judgment not only of the
Church, but of the Parliament at the same time. -- And the Queen, and the
Church were willing that these should be put into Latin, that all the World
might see the Confession of the Church of England.

So also Sir Heneage Finch, P. 51.
then the King's Solicitor General. The King is not accountable to any
coercive Power. See also the accurate Treatise, See also Nalson's Counter. p.
35, etc. 3^9. Com. Interest of Kings, p. 139, etc. p. 3.
called the Harmony of Divinity, and Law, which proves that it is a damnable
sin to resist Sovereign Princes, and answers all the little objections of the
Republicans to the contrary.

I shall here only mention Mr. Foulu's History of the Plots, and Conspiracies
of the pretended Saints; and briefly transcribe a passage or two out of Dr.
Sprat (Bishop of Rochester) his True account of the horrid Conspiracy -- At
that time under the color of the only true Protestant the worst of all
Unchristian Principles were put in Practice; all the old Republican, and
Antimonarchical Doctrines, whose effects had formerly proved so dismal, were
again as confidently owned and asserted, as ever they had been during the
hottest rage of the late unhappy Troubles. p. 21. See p. 41.
-- The Lord R -- was seduced by the wicked Teachers of that most Unchristian
Doctrine, which has been the cause of so many Rebellions, That it is lawful to
resist, and rise against Sovereign Princes for preserving Religion. p. 43, 44.
-- Other Principles were, that the only obligation the Subject has to the
King, is a mutual Covenant: that this Covenant was manifestly broken on the
King's part,
that therefore the People were free from all Oaths, and other ties of Fealty
and Allegiance, and had the natural Liberty restored to them of asserting their
own Rights, and as justly at least against a Domestic, as against Foreign
Invaders. p. 131. v. p. 132.
The whole design of A. S's Papers was to maintain, That Tyrants may be justly
Deposed by the People; and that the People are the only Judges who are Tyrants.
-- That the general Revolt of a Nation from its own Magistrates can never be
called a Rebellion, which Positions the Historian calls with great Truth and
Justice, Villainous Opinions, p. 133.
and such, as, if allowed, it will be impossible for the best Kings, or the
most happy Kingdoms in the World to be free from perpetual Treasons, p. 164.
and Rebellious Plottings. -- But his Majesty has just reason to acknowledge
that the main body of the Nobility and Gentry stood by him: so has the whole
sound, and honest part of the Commonalty: so the great Fountains of Knowledge
and Civility, the two Universities: so the wisest and most learned in the Laws:
so the whole Clergy, and all the genuine Sons of the Church of England:
a Church whose glory it is to have been never tainted with the least blemish
of disloyalty.

Dr. Pocock. In chapter 8. Hos. 4. p. 388, 389.
Some Interpreters by Setting up Kings, but not by me, would understand Saul;
but that cannot with reason be imagined. Others looking on the sin of the
Israelites to be their defection from the House of David, on which God had
intayled the Right and Title of the Kingdom, and their changing of the Kinghom,
and Priesthood of their own heads, will have the words to concern their setting
up of Jeroboam, and his Successors in opposition to the House of David, as
appears by their carriage. 1 Kings 12.16. when not liking Rehoboam's answer to
them, they cried, what portion have we in David? etc. no command, or
instructions were (for ought we find) given them by Abijah, or any other from
God; neither did they, in what they did, consult with God by that Prophet, or
any other means to know his pleasure therein; but what they did, was of their
own heads, out of a rebellious humor of casting off their lawful Sovereigns of
the House of David, in which God had settled the right of the Kingdom; so that,
tho they so fulfilled the Will and Counsel of God, yet they did it, not in
obedience to them, but with contrary intentions, and plain disobedience; and so
were no more justifiable in it, than the Jews in murdering Christ, than Judas
in betraying Innocent Blood, that it was determined by God. -- and the setting
up of his Successors, was a continuance of defection from the House of David,
and a Rebellion against God. -- others by, setting up Kings without me, etc.
would mean, their seeking to Foreign Kings and Princes for help, as to the
Assyrians, and King Jareb chapter 5.13. to Egypt chapter 7.11. so forsaking God, and
their dependence on him, and setting up them as Patrons, and Protectors to
themselves.

Dr. Fitz Williams. Sermon. of the duties of fearing God, and the King. p. 4, v.
p. 5, 6.
Subjects withdrawing their obedience from their lawful Prince is a denying
God's Authority; -- Treason against him is a kind of Sacrilege; a revolt from
him, an Apostasy from God; a resisting him, an opposing God; rebelling against
him, fighting with God; the setting up the title of a Counterfeit Prince
against the true one, an introducing a plurality of Godheads; the obeying of an
Usurper, Idolatry; the slandering his Anointed, and his Footsteps, a
Blaspheming God; the blaming his conduct, P. 15.
a quarrelling with Providence. breaking through all Oaths, -- Oaths, in which
they deposited with them the richest pawn, it was possible for them to stake
down, and gave them the strongest security, that others could require of their
fidelity and obedience, their Salvation; Oaths, in which they called God's
Omniscience to witness these engagements and his justice, and power to revenge
the breach of them. -- can it be thought, that he, P. 23.
who will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain, should connive
at the violation of all obligations of duty, and fidelity contracted in that
name, -- if Men shall be in danger of Hellfire for calling their Brother Fool,
shall they be in none for railing against their Superiors invested with
Authority from above, and acting by a Commission from Heaven? St. Peter, and
St. Jude have taught us, that God reserves such, who speak evil of dignities,
unto the day of Judgment to be punished in the blackness of darkness for ever.

Mr. Wagstaffe. Sermon. Sep. 9. 1683. p. 11, 12.
It is the glory of our Reformation, that as it proceeded by the most peaceable
and orderly steps, so it held the most peaceable and orderly Doctrins; the
first Reformers pleaded, as the Primitive Christians did, that they always paid
subjection to the powers set over them -- that they always complied with the
will of their Rulers, where they lawfully might, and where they might not, they
submitted with patience, and always chose rather to suffer, than to be
seditions, turbulent, and unquiet; this was the first Reformation, and this the
true Protestant Doctrine; but alas! since that time there has risen up another
Protestant Religion, P. 33, 34. See also his Sermon. July 26. 1685 p. 18, 19 21,
22, etc.
and another Reformation, etc. it is the peculiar glory of the Church of
England, that it never has, either by Doctrine or Practice, in the least
encouraged, or countenanced any thing tending to Treason, Sedition, or
Rebellion. -- it is impossible, that any Man, so l^^g as he continues in the
Communion of the Church of England, should be a Matineer or a Traitor.

Of this Opinion also are, the Authors of the Remarks P. 32, 33, 34, 35.
on Popery represented, etc. as to the deposing Doctrine; P^^^ Prosecution ^o
persecution p 21. See his mod. Pharisee. p. 4, 23. Id misch. of Anarchy p. 13.
v. p 33, 55, 56, 57, etc Exposit. 5. Comm. in private devot. Ox. 1089. In lib.
4. antiquit: p. 294. con. loc.
and of the Catholic balance. Dr. Bisby. Formy part I wish as well to my
Religion as any Man, and pray as heartily for the continuance of it -- but to
put by my lawful Prince, because I suspect he will call me to account for my
Religion, and thereby make me worthy of suffering for Christ, nay blessed; this
my Duty, my Conscience, my Oaths, my Religion will not suffer me to do, -- a
King supposes a Power Sovereign accountable to none but to God, who is the King
of Kings, and the last Judge of Men.

Dr. Ed. Bernard. I will obey, I will reverence all my Superiors, Spiritual,
and Temporal, and in all things not plainly repugnant to God's Word; and
whenever they command any thing contrary thereto, if I may not according to
Law, Righteousness, and Honor appeal to a superior Power on Earth, I will
patiently submit to their censures and penalties.

The Oxford Notes on Josephus treat largely of this Subject and say, that the
Pharisees were the Men, who under the doubtful, and linsey woolsey Government
of the Maccabees brought in these Maxims, that the King could do nothing
without the High Priest and the Sanhedrim (because in weighty matters he used
to consult them of his own choice) that his luxury and other vices ought to be
maturely corrected; and that an Aristocracy was a better Government, than that
of a single Person; that they themselves might be concerned in the Government;
although in that very Age it was a celebrated Axiom among the Jews, that the
Majesty of their Kings was so sublime, that it ought not to be stoopt to the
Senate -- the King gives judgment, but no Man judges him; that God only calls
the King to account, but no mortal Person; with many other citations out of the
Rabbinical Writers to the same purpose. Such Doctrins therefore contrary to the
Rights of Kings, Josephus would never have vented, if he had been less addicted
to the Opinions of Hillel and Shammai, and had remembered the Golden Times of
David and Solomon; or the flourishing State of Judea in other Reigns; for the
Posterity of David down to the Assyrian Captivity, exercised a full Power (a
(...), as truly such, as any that Asia ever saw) in all Affairs, Sacred and
Civil, etc. beware therefore, O you Princes, of the Doctrine of the Scribes, and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, of the Rabbis, Jesuits, and Presbyterians.

Dr. South with great smartness censuring the solemn League and Covenant,
observes these two things. 1. That those, Sermon. at St. Mary's Oxf Jan. 30.
1660. and before the King Jan. 30. 1661.
who promise Obedience to the King, only so far as he preserves the true
Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, (withal reckoning themselves Judges of
what Religion is true, what false, and when these Liberties are invaded, and
when not) do by this put it within their own Power to judge, when Religion,
Faith, and Liberties are Invaded, as they think convenient; and from such
judgment to absolve themselves from their Allegiance. 2. That those very
Persons, who thus covenanted, had already from Pulpit and Press declared, the
Religion established in the Church of England, and then maintained by the King
to be Popish and Idolatrous, and withal, that the King had actually Invaded
their Liberties. -- was there any thing in the Book of God to warrant this
Rebellion? -- Why yes, Daniet dreamed a Dream, and there is also something in
the Revelation concerning a Beast, and a little horn, and a fifth Viol; and
therefore the King ought undoubtedly to dye:
-- others plead providential dispensations; God's work it seems must be
regarded before his Word; -- as if when we have a Man's Handwriting, we should
endeavor to take his meaning by the measure of his foot, -- we have lived
under that model of Religion, in which nothing has been counted impious, but
Loyalty, nothing absurd but restitution. -- the Church of England is the only
Church in Christendom we read of, whose avowed Practices and Principles, disown
all resistance of the Civil Power, and with the saddest experience, and truest
Policy, and reason will evince it self to be the only one, that is durably
consistent with the English Monarchy; let Men look back into its Primitive
Doctrine, and it is History, and they will find, neither the Calvin's, nor the
Knox's, the Junius Brutus's, the Synods, nor the Holy Commonwealths on the one
side; nor yet the Bellarmin's, nor the Mariana's on the other.

SECT. IX.
And here it is necessary to mention the several Addresses, that own the same
Doctrine; and I shall begin with that of the two Universities; that of Oxford
runs thus, being according to an Act of Convocation dated Febr. 21. 1685.

May it please your Majesty, etc.

We your Majesty's most dutiful, etc. -- as we can never swerve from the
Principles of our Institution in this place, and our Religion by Law
established in the Church of England, which indispensibly binds us to bear all
Faith, and true Obedience to our Sovereign without any restrictions, or
limitations -- so we presume to assure your Majesty, that no consideration
whatsoever shall be able to shake that steadfast Loyalty and Allegiance, which
in the days of your Blessed Father, that Glorious Martyr, and in the late times
of discrimination, stood here firm, and unalterable to your Royal Brother and
your Self, under the sharpest trials; and that we shall constantly (by God's
assistance) with our utmost zeal and sidelity, improve all those advantages,
wherewith God and your Majesty have entrusted us in this ancient nursery of
Learning, to promote the quiet, happiness, and security of your Majesty's Reign
over us.

Thus also the University of Cambridge in their Address tendered by the
Vice Chancellor, Gaznum. 2019.
etc. Mar. 23. 1684. -- We do with all humble submission present to your Sacred
Majesty our unfeigned Loyalty, the most valuable Tribute that we can give, or
your Majesty receive from us: this is a Debt which we shall be always paying,
and always owing; it being a Duty naturally flowing from the very Principles of
our Holy Religion, by which we have been enabled in the worst of times to breed
as true, and stedy Subjects as the World can show, as well in the Doctrine, as
Practice of Loyalty, from which we can never depart.

Many other Addresses, Gaz number. 2008. 2012. 2013. 2016. 2018, etc.
of the same kind, were made by the University of Dublin: by the Bishop and
Clergy of the City of London: the Bishop and Clergy of Chester: the Bishops of
Bath and Wells, and of Hereford: and in truth of all the Dioceses, I think, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland: besides such as were tendered by Lords
Lieutenants, Grand Juries, and particular Societies. For which Sense of the
Nation, in those days, I must refer the Reader to the Prints, while I only
subjoin the memorable Close of the Address tendered by the Bishop,
Vicar General, and the Clergy of the Cathedral, and City of Bristol.

The Church of England is peculiarly indeared to us, for that (above all that
is called Religion in the World) it twists Piety with Loyalty; and, without
Reserve, Recognizeth your Sacred Majesty as the Sovereign, and Supreme Power
within your Majesty's Realms and Dominions, against whom there is no rising up,
and only less than God himself. According to the Dictates of that most
excellent Religion, we abhor all those Antimonarchical Persons and Principles,
which would either exclude Princes from their just Rights, or disturb the
peaceable enjoyment of them. And we earnestly beseech the King of Kings, that
your Majesty's Throne may not only be Established, but raised still higher upon
the ruins of those that shall endeavor to Subvert, or Supplant it.

SECT. X.
Dr. Stillingfleet, Origin. Brit. c. 5. p. 319.
inquiring into the Reasons why the Saxons were called into Britain by
Vortigern, quotes Gildas, who affirms, That after the Britains found themselves
deserted by the Romans, they set up Kings of their own, and soon after put them
down again, and made Choice of worse in their room. Adding, it is plain, that
he supposes, that the Britains, in that Confusion they were in, took upon them,
without regard to their Duty, to place, and displace them. -- But withal he
observes, that then the Britains were left to their full liberty by the Roman
Empire, that there was no Line remaining to succeed in the Government, nor so
much as to determine their Choice, which made them so easily to make, and
unmake their Kings; who lost their Purple, and their Lives together. This must
needs breed insinite confusions among them, and every one who came to be King,
lived in perpetual fear of being served as others had been before him. And the
natural Consequence of this jealousy of their own Subjects, was looking out
for assistance from abroad, which, I doubt not, was one great reason of
Vortigern 's sending for the Saxons, hoping to secure himself by their means
against his own People: although it proved at last the ruin both of himself,
and his People.

And whereas Cressy, in his answer to my Lord of Clarendon's Vindicaon of the
Dean of S. Paul's, had objected, That days of Thanksgiving were kept for the
discovery, and prevention of such personal Treasons (as the Gunpowder Treason)
but none for the Deliverance of the whole Kingdoms from almost an Universal
Rebellion; as if their were no necessity of requiring from any a retraction of
the Principles of Rebellion, or a promise that they shall not be renewed. Answ.
to the Letter Apologet. c. 5. p. 334.
The Dean smartly rejoyns By this we might think Mr. Cressy a stranger in his
own Country, and that he had never heard of the 30. of January, or the 29. of
May, which are solemnly observed in our Church, and the Offices joined with
that of the 5. of November, and are purposely intended for that very thing,
which he denies to be taken notice of by us in such a manner. -- what does Mr.
Cressy think the Renunciation of the Covenant was intended for, if not to
prevent the mischief of the former Rebellion? -- After his, he gives an
Historical account of the Controversy in England about the Power of Princes,
and the Usurpations of the Pope over them, p. 348.
and having cited Pope Gregory the Seventh's Letter, wherein he avers, That
Kings had their beginnings from Men, who gained their Authority over their
equals by blind Ambition, and intolerable Presumption, by Rapines and Murders,
by Perfidiousness, and all manner of Wickedness:
He subjoins, Is not this a very pretty account of the Original of Civil Power
by the Head of the Church? The Oath of Allegiance sworn to the Pope, p. 366.
leaves no room for Allegiance to Princes, any more than a person who has
already sworn Allegiance to one Prince, has liberty to swear the same thing to
another, p. 370.
which it is impossible he should keep to both. -- And discoursing of King
Stephen, he says, that his Title being very bad, he saw it necessary for him to
strengthen it by the Pope's Authority, -- and that during his Usurpation all
the Rights of the Crown were lost. p. 373. p. 452.
-- Again he says, If depriving Sovereign Princes of their Crown and Dignity,
endeavoring by open Rebellions, and secret Conspiracies to take away their
Lives, be not Treasons, there are none such in the World. p. 463.
If the Primitive Christians had been guilty of so many horrible Treasons,
and Conspiracies, if they had attempted to deprive Emperors of their Crowns,
and absolved Subjects from their Allegiance to them, if they had joined with
their open, and declared Enemies, and employed Persons time after time to
assassinate them, what would the World have said of their sufferings? Would Men
of any common sense have said, they were Martyrs for Religion? but that they
dyed justly, and deservedly for their Treasons. -- the late Regicides pleaded
the cause of God and Religion.

The Scripture attributes the great revolutions of Government to a particular
Providence of God; Id. Ser. on 1 Cor. 12.24, 25. p. 17.
God is the Judge, or the Supreme Arbitrator of the Affairs of the World, he
puts down one, and sets up another; which holds with respect to Nations,
as well as particular Persons; which does not found any right of Dominion (as
some fansied, till the Argument from Providence was returned with great force
upon themselves) but it shows, that when God pleases to make use of Persons or
Nations, as the scourges in his hand, to punish People with, he gives them
success above their hopes or expectations, but that success gives them no
right.

Suppose a Prosperous Usurper in this Kingdom, Id. ans. to the first royal
paper. p. 23. and vindicat of that ans. p. 64.
had gained a considerable Interest in it, and challenged a Title to the whole;
and therefore required of all the King's Subjects within his power, to own him
to be rightful King; upon this many of them are forced to withdraw, because
they will not own his Title; is this an Act of Rebellion, and not rather of
true Loyalty, -- Id. Vindi. p. 37. and ans. to the 1st. part. p. 19.
the Doctrins of deposing Princes, and absolving Subjects from their
Allegiance, are errors in matters of practice of the highest importance; Id.
ans. to 2d. royal paper p. 40, 55.
-- if fancy only keeps us firm to the Church of England, might it not as well
have been said, that the Protestants of the Church of England, adhered to the
Crown in the times of Rebellion out of fancy, and not out of judgment? and that
if their fancy changed, they might as well have joined with the Rebels. -- as
we have cause to be thankful to God, when Kings are Nursing Fathers to our
Church; so we shall never cease to pray for their continuing so, and that in
all things we may behave our selves toward them, as becomes Good Christians,
and Loyal Subjects; and whereas the Defender of the Royal Papers. p. 80. argued
against this, that Subjects were no longer according to this Doctrine to be
Loyal, than their King is a Nursing Father to their Church, the Doctor wipes
off the Aspersion by telling him, Vindic. of the ans. p. 101. P. 86.
that he had put an ill construction on his words far from the intention of the
Author, who thinks it a part of a good Christian, to be always a Loyal Subject.
-- I desire this Gentleman to resolve me, whether in the late times of
Usurpation this had been good Doctrine; that those, who enjoy or pretend to
Supreme Power, are to be judges in their own case? if so, then it had been
impossible for Men to have justified their Loyalty to the Royal Family, then
very unjustly put out of possession, P. 88, 89.
-- it is some comfort, that our Church is confessed to teach the Orthodox
Doctrine of Loyalty, and her practice to be conformable thereto in the worst of
times; (and so the Doctor hopes, it will always be) -- But it has been said by
some body,
that we have nothing peculiar to our Church, but our Doctrine of
Non-Resistance; this might have given occasion to inquire, whether the Church,
which pretends to be infallible, does teach it so Orthodoxly or not? or whether
those, who do think themselves obliged to believe what she teaches, are thereby
obliged to the strictest Principles of Loyalty?
-- this our Church does not only teach them as her own Doctrine, but, which is
far more effectual, as the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and of the
Primitive Church; which, I think, ought to have more force on the Consciences
of Men, P. 99.
than the pretense to Infallibility in any Church in the World.
-- Is it any argument that the constitution of our Government is not firm, or
that Loyal Subjects cannot be certain of their duty, because Men of ill
Principles have run away with false notions of a Fundamental contract and
coordinate power? -- and whereas it might be objected, that propositions as
dangerous, as those of the Jesuits, were held by some among our selves (witness
those condemned at Oxford July. 26. 1683.) We cannot deny, says he, but that
there have been Men of ill Minds, and disloyal Principles, Factious and
Disobedient, Enemies to the Government, both in Church and State; but have
these Men ever had that countenance from the Doctrins of the guides of our
Church, which the deposing Doctrine has had in the Church of Rome? To make the
Case parallel, he must suppose our Houses of Convocation to have several times
declared these damnable Doctrins, and given encouragement to Rebels to proceed
against their Kings, and the University of Oxford to have condemned them. --
how come the Principles of the Regicides among us to be paralleled with this
Doctrine, when the Principles of our Church are so directly contrary to them?
and our Houses of Convocation, would as readily condemn any such damnable
Doctrins, as the University of Oxford? and all the World knows, how repugnant
such Principles are to those of the Church of England. And none can be Rebels
to their Prince, but they must be false to our Church.

The same Author in his accurate Preface to the Jesuits Loyalty; says, P. 1, 2.
that tho the Jesuits walk in darkness, and do mischief, his intention was to
set such marks and characters upon them, that when others see them, they might
take the wind of them, and avoid the infection. -- and that he published the
Jesuits Treatises, because some poisons lose their force, when they are exposed
to the open air; and thereupon addressing himself to the Jesuits, he endeavors
to prove two things. P. 3.
1. That if you do not renounce the Popes power of deposing Princes, and
absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, you can give no real security to the
Government. 2. That if you do renounce it, you have no reason to stick at the
Oath of Allegiance, -- to prove the first, he says, it is allowed by all
Friends to our King and his Government,
that the Commonwealth Principles are destructive to it, and that none, who do
own them, can give sufficient security for their Allegiance. I shall therefore
prove, that all the mischievous consequences of the Republican Principles do
follow upon the owning the Pope's Power of deposing Princes. P. 4.
-- Now the mischief of the Commonwealth Principles lay in these things. 1.
Setting up a Court of Judicature over Sovereign Princes.
2. Breaking the Oaths and Bonds of Allegiance Men had entered into. 3.
Justifying Rebellion on the account of Religion. As to the first of setting up
a Spiritual High-Court of Justice at Rome, it is no satisfaction in this case
to distinguish of a direct and indirect power; for however the Power comes, the
effect and consequence of it is the same. -- The question is, whether the Pope
has any such Sovereignty over Princes, as to be able by virtue thereof to
depose them; and the Commonwealth's Men do herein agree with you; for they do
not say, that the People have a direct Power over their Princes (which were a
contradiction in it self, for Subjects to command their Sovereigns) but only,
that in case of breach of Trust, the People have an indirect power to call
their Princes to an account, and to deprive them of their Authority; but are
the Commonwealth Principles the less mischievous to Government, because they
only assert an indirect Power in the People? -- the main thing to be debated
is, P. 5.
whether Sovereign Princes have a Supreme, and Independent Authority Inherent
in their Persons or no; or whether they are so accountable to others, that upon
maladministration they may be deprived of their Government? -- the
Republicans, and Assertors of the Pope's deposing Power are agreed in the
Affirmative of the later Question, and only differ, whether the Power be in the
Pope, or the People to call Princes to an account -- and even in this they do
not differ so much, as Men may at first imagine; for however the Primitive
Christians thought it no flattery to Princes,
to derive their Power immediately from God, and to make them accountable to him
alone, as being superior to all below him (as might be easily proved by
multitudes of testimonies) yet after the Pope's deposing Power came into
request, the Commonwealth Principles did so too, and the Power of Princes was
said to be of another Original, and therefore they were accountable to the
People.

Thus Gregory VII. not only took upon him to depose the Emperor, and absolve
his Subjects from their Allegiance; but he makes the first constitution of
Monarchical Government to be a mere Usurpation upon the Rights and Liberties of
the People. -- and did ever any Remonstrance, Declaration of the Army, P. 6.
or agreement of the People give a worse account of the beginning of Monarchy,
than this Infallible Head of the Church does? What follows from hence, but the
justifying all Rebellion against Princes, which upon these Principles, would be
nothing else, but the Peoples recovering their just Rights against intolerable
Usurpations? -- the very worst of our Fanatics never talked so reproachfully
of Civil Government,
as your Canonized Saint does; their Principles and Practices, we of the Church
of England profess to detest and abhor. -- I pray Gentlemen tell me, what
divine assistance this good Pope had, when he gave this admirable account of
the Original of Civil Government? and whether it be not very possible upon his
Principles, for Men to be Saints and Rebels at the same time.

I have had the curiosity to inquire into the Principles of Civil Government,
P. 7.
among the fierce contenders for the Pope's deposing Power, and I have found
those Hypotheses avowed and maintained, which justify all the Practices of our
late Regicides. -- Parson's Book of the Succession (to the making of which
Cardinal Allen, Sir Francis Inglefield, and other Principal Persons of our
Nation concurred) being shred into so many Speeches to justify their
Proceedings against our Late Sovereign of Glorious Memory, the Book being
designed to exclude King James -- and thus we see, P. 8.
the Pope's deposing Power was maintained here in England by such, who saw, how
necessary it was for their purpose to defend the Power of Commonwealths over
their Princes,
either to exclude them from Succession to the Crown, or to deprive them of the
possession of it.

The same we shall find in France in the time of the solemn League and Covenant
there, in the Reigns of Henry III. and IV. for those, who were engaged so deep
in Rebellion against their Lawful Princes, found it necessary for them to
insist on the Pope's Power to depose, and the People's to deprive their
Sovereigns. -- thus Boucher affirms, the fundamental and radical Power to be so
in the People, that they may call Princes to account for Treason against the
People. -- and that in such cases they are not to stand upon the niceties, and
forms of Law; but that the necessities of State do supercede all those things.
If this Man had been of Council for the late Regicides, he could not more
effectually have Pleaded their Cause, -- our Countryman William Reynolds also
Vindicating the Murder of Henry III. says, that Obedience to Princes is so far
conditional, that if they do not their duty, their Subjects are free from their
obligation to obey them; the contrary opinion being against the Law of Nations,
and the Common reason of Mankind: and this is affirmed by many others of their
Writers.

Thus we find, P. 1^.
the most mischievous Commonwealth Principles have been very well entertained
at Rome, as long as they are subservient to the Pope's deposing Power; and if
we inquire further into the reason of these pretenses, we shall find them alike
on both sides; the Commonwealth's Men, when they are asked, how the People
having once parted with their Power, come to resume it; they presently run to
an implicit contract between the Prince and the People, by virtue whereof the
People have a Fundamental Power left in themselves, which they are not to
exercise, but upon Princes violation of the Trust committed to them;
the very same ground is made the Foundation of the Pope's deposing Power. viz.
an implicit contract, that all Princes made, when they were Christians, to
submit their Scepters to the Pope's Authority; which is so implicit, P. 13.
that very few Princes in the World ever heard of it. -- it is declared in the
Case of King John, that the resignation of the Crown to the Pope is a void Act.
And so consequently will the Imposing any such condition be, as inconsistent
with the Rights of Sovereignty, -- if they plead an implicit contract, who
made such conditional settlements of Civil Power upon Princes?
who keeps the ancient Deeds and Records of them? for all the first Ages of the
Christian Church, this conditional Power and Obedience was never heard of --
not when Emperors were open, and declared Infidels, or Heretics; what reason
can be supposed more now, than was in the times of Constantius, and Valens,
that were Arian Heretics? Yet the most Learned, Zealous, and Orthodox Bishops
of that time, never once thought of their losing their Authority by it; as I
could easily prove, if the design of this Preface would permit me.

If Christ and his Apostles were the best Teachers of Christianity, P. 15
this is certainly no part of it, for the Religion they taught, never meddled
with Crowns and Scepters, but left to Caesar the things that were Caesar's, and
never gave the least intimation to Princes of any forfeiture of their
Authority, if they did not reader to God the things that are God's. -- it
requires all Men, of what rank or order soever, to be subject to the Higher
Powers, P. 16.
because they are the Ordinance of God, and to pray for them that are in
Authority, etc. Thus far the Christian Religion goes in these matters, and thus
the Primitive Christians believed and practiced, when their Religion was pure,
and free from the Corruptions and Usurpations, which the Interests and Passions
of Men introduced in the following Ages; and how then come Princes in these
later times to be Christians upon worse and harder terms, than in the best Ages
of it? -- in my mind there is very little difference between Dominion, being
founded in grace, and being forfeited for want of it; and so we are come about
to the Fanatic Principles of Government again; which this deposing Power in
the Pope does naturally lead Men to; but this is not all the mischief of this
Doctrine. For,

2. It breaks all Bonds and Oaths of Obedience, how sacred and solemn soever
they have been. P. 17.
-- there being an obligation to Obedience on the Subjects part, which does
naturally arise from the relation between them and their Prince, when Subjects
are absolved from their Oaths of Allegiance, they are thereby declared free
from that natural duty, they were obliged to before, -- this is nulling the
obligation to a natural duty, and taking away the force of Oaths and Promises.
-- this is turning Evil into Good, and Good into Evil, that can make Civil
Obedience to Princes to be a Crime,
and Perjury to be none; this is a greater Power, than the Schoolmen will allow
to God himself, where there is intrinsic goodness in the nature of the thing,
and inseparable evil from the contrary to it. P. 18.
-- for tho it be granted, that God may after the matter or circumstances of
things, our Question is only, about dispensing with the force, and obligation
of a Law of Nature, such as keeping our Oaths undoubtedly is. -- this he
illustrates very Learnedly, and at large, in some following Paragraphs, asking,
how comes the Pope to have power to give away another Man's natural right? a
Man swears Allegiance to his Prince, by virtue of which Oath, the Prince
challenges his Allegiance, as a sworn duty: -- the Pope dispenses with this
Oath, i.e. gives away the Princes right, whether he will or no. -- but how came
the Pope by that right of the Prince, which he gives away? P. 19, 20, 21.
may he not as well give away all the just rights of Men to their Estates, as
those of Princes to their Crowns? -- Cajetan lays down a good rule about
dispensing with Oaths, that in them we ought to see, that no prejudice be done
to the Person, to whom, and for whose sake they are made. -- he afterward
cites the several distinctions, which the Roman Casuists use to vindicate this
Power of dispensing with Oaths, particularly Laymen, that a promising Oath made
to a Man cannot ordinarily be relaxed, p. 24.
without the consent of the Person to whom it is made, except it be for the
public good of the Church,
as tho evil might be done for the good of the Church, -- but woe be to them,
that make good evil, and evil good, when it serves their turn; for this is
plainly setting up a particular Interest under the name of the good of the
Church, and violating the Laws of Righteousness to advance it; if Men break
through Oaths, and the most solemn Engagements and Promises,
and regard no bonds of justice and honesty to compass their ends, let them
call them by what specious names they please, p. 25.
the good Old Cause, or the good of the Church (it matters not which) there can
be no greater sign of Hypocrisy, and real Wickedness than this, for the main
part of true Religion does not lie in ca^ting Phrases, or mystical Notions,
neither in specious shows of devotion, nor so zeal for the true Church; but in
Faith, as it implies the performance of our promises, as well as belief of the
Christian Doctrine; and in Obedience, or a careful observance of the Laws of
Christ, among which, Obedience to the King as Supreme, is one, which they can
never pretend to be an inviolable duty, who make it in the Power of another
Person to absolve them from the most solemn Oaths of Allegiance; and
consequently suppose, that to keep their Oaths in such a case would be a sin,
and to violate them may become a duty, which is in effect to overturn the
natural differences of good and evil, to set up a controuling Sovereign Power
above that of their Prince, and to lay a perpetual Foundation for Faction and
Rebellion, which nothing can keep Men from, If Conscience and their Solemn
Oaths cannot. Therefore, 3. The third mischief common to this deposing Power of
the Pope, and Commonwealth Principles, Is the justifying of Rebellion on the
account of Religion; which is done to purpose in Boucher and Reynolds, whom he
cites at large, and then proceeds to his second Proposition, that whosoever
does renounce the deposing Power, has no reason to refuse the Oath of
Allegiance; and then adds, P. 29.
-- it is very true, this has been the effect of this Blessed Doctrine in the
Christian World; Seditions, Wars, Bloodshed, Rebellions, what not?

But I ought to transcribe all that excellent Preface, were I strictly to do
the Author, or the Cause justice, while I refer the Reader to it at his leisure.

SECT. II.
Dr. Tennison in his Epistle Dedicatory to his Examination of Hobbs's Creed,
says, Hobbs's Creed examined. Land. 1670.
that Hobbs has framed a model of Government, pernicious in its consequence to
all Nations, and Injurious to the right of his present Majesty; for he taught
the People soon after the Martyrdom of his Royal Father, that his Title was
extinguished, when his adherents were subdued; and that the Parliament had the
right,
because it had possession; he has subjected the Canon of Scripture to the
Civil Powers, and taught them the way of turning the Alcoran into Gospel; and
for these, and the like Tenets he calls him an insolent and pernicious Writer.
P. 2.
-- and when Mr. Hobbs had asserted, that Nature had made all Men equal, so
that no Man can thereupon claim to himself any benefit, P. 129, 130, 131.
to which another may not pretend, as well as he, that from equality of
condition competition arises fomented by equality of hope, and from thence a
War of every Man against every Man, etc. he rejoins, that it is a very absurd,
and unsecure course to lay the groundwork of all Civil Polity, and Reformed
Religion upon such a supposed state of Nature, as has no firmer support, than
the contrivance of your own fancy: let Philosophers discourse, and make
different Hypotheses of the motion of the Stars, -- but when the temporal, and
eternal safety of Mankind is concerned (as in the Doctrins of Civil, and Moral,
and Christian Philosophy) then are Hypothesis framed by imagination -- as
exceedingly dangerous, as they are absurd; wherefore such Persons, who trouble
the World with fansied Schemes and Models of Polity, in Oceana's and
Leviathans,
ought to have in their minds an usual saying of the most excellent Lord Bacon
concerning a Philosophy advanced upon the History of Nature, that such a work
is the World, as God made it, and not as Men have made it; for that it has
nothing of imagination: -- for the faithful accounts of time give us another
account of the Origin of Nations; P. 13^.
-- our Parents being before the Institution of Commonwealths absolute
Sovereign^s in their own Families. P. 141, 142.
-- after which he confesses, that prejudice, and self interest does (usually)
blind the understanding, and cause it to put evil for good, and humor, and
education, and profit for reason, -- and adds, P. 147.
if Men be lawless in a State of Nature, and for the mere sake of temporal
security, do enter into Covenants, and are obliged to justice, and modesty, and
gratitude, and other such like sociable Virtues, only because they conduce to
our Peace, and to the keeping of us from the deplorable condition of a War of
every Man against every Man; then when any Subject shall have fair hopes of
advancing himself by treading down Authority, and trampling upon the Laws in a
prosperous Rebellion, what is It according to your Principles, which can oblige
him to refuse the opportunity? If it be said, that one Covenant is this, that
we must keep the rest; It will be again inquired, what Law engages Men to keep
that past, seeing there is no Law of more ancient descent, except it be that of
Self-preservation? for the sake of which we suppose the Covenants to be broken;
so that without the obligation laid upon us by Fidelity (the Law of God
Almighty in our nature) antecedent to all humane Covenants, P. 148
such Pacts will become but so many loose materials, without the main binder,
in the fence of the Commonwealth, which will therefore be trodden down, or
broken through by every herd of unruly Men: Men are apt to violate what they
esteem most just, and sacred for the sake of Reigning, and they will be much
more encouraged to break all Oaths of Duty and Allegiance,
when they once believe, that their ascent into the Throne, and possession of
the Supreme Power, like the coming of the reputed Heir unto the Crown, Lord
(...) Hen. 7. p. 13.
as in the case of Henry VII. does immediately clear a Man of all former
Attaindors. -- this Doctrine is of the same strain with that pernicious Book,
Entitled Nature's Dowry, Printed the year after the Leviathan, that Rebeilion
is not iniquity, P. 149.
if upon probable grounds it becomes prosperous; that he, who usurps not like a
Politician, is therefore a Villain, because he is a Fool; that all Usurpers in
the World, stepping up into the Throne by means likely to further their ascent,
pursue the Fundamental Law of Nature, and are rightful and undoubted
Sovereigns, -- that the Earl of Essex in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when he
miscarried was a Rebel and a Traitor; because he was a weak and unfortunate
Politician; but that Oliver, who was sure of being Protector, by the
inclination of the Soldiery, and possession of the Militia, was a Lawful
Prince; after this he with justice taxes Mr. White, as the p. 93.
first part of this History gives an account, and then shows, that Bishop
Bramhal fled from England, rather than submit to the Usurpation, and that the
other Bishops that staid at home, P. 153, 154.
promoted the Cause of their Sovereign, which, if all zealous Loyalists had
withdrawn themselves, would by degrees have dyed away; and because they refused
the Oaths imposed at the Peril of their Lives, and of their Fortunes,
they therefore are not to be judged treacherous in undermining the Usurped
Government, or disloyal to the King in enjoying protection under Oliver, whom
they neither armed nor owned in Power. P. 156.
-- It is not for you to pretend to Loyalty, who place right in force, and
teach the People to assist the Usurper with active compliance against a
dispossessed Prince; and not merely to live at all adventure in his Territories,
without owning the Protection by unlawful Oaths, or by running into Arms
against their Dethroned Sovereign. P. 157.
-- thus you give encouragement to Usurpers, and also when Civil discords are
set on foot (as it happens too frequently in all States) you hereby move such
People, as are yet on the side of their Lawful Prince, whose Affairs they see
declining, to adjoin themselves to the more prosperous Party, and to help to
overturn those Thrones of Sovereignty, at which a while before they prostrated
themselves; for in your way of reasoning they have a right to preserve, or
delight themselves by any course of means, and can be best protected by the
prevailing side, which because it has more degrees of growing Power, has it
seems, therefore more of right, P. 158.
-- thus it is in the choice of every Subject (whom you make the Judge of the
means to preserve himself) to apply himself to the stronger side; or for a
Company combined in Arms and Counsel, when an Heir, and a Traitor are engaged
in Battle with equal success (as was the practice of the Lord Stanley, etc. at
Bosworth-field) to give the day to the side, they presume will most favor
them. -- but there is no tie so strong, as that of Religion, etc. Vid. 1. part
of the Hist. p. 93.
-- and whereas Hobbs affirmed, that Covenants are but words and breath, and
have no force to oblige or constrain any Man, but what it has from the Public
Sword; he answers, that thus the Prince is always in a State of danger, P. 160.
(Society being like a State of Nature, managed all by force) because he cannot
be a day secure of remaining uppermost; seeing that the People are taught by
you to believe, that the right of Authority is a deceit, and that every one
would have as good a Title, if he had as long a Sword, for the many headed
Beast will throw the Rider, when he burdens and galls them. -- Woe to all the
Princes upon Earth, if this Doctrine be true, and becomes Popular; if the
Multitude believe this, the Prince not Armed with the scales of the Leviathan,
i. e. with irresistible Power, can never be safe. P. 161.
-- wherefore such as own these pernicious Doctrins, destructive to all
Societies of Men,
may be said to have Wolves Heads, as the Laws of old were wont to speak
concerning excommunicated Persons, and are like those ravenous Beasts, so far
from deserving our love and care, P. 192.
that they ought to be destroyed at the common charge, -- if the commands of
Christ, and his Apostles are not also Laws -- what means the common Doctrine in
the Scripture of suffering for the sake of Christianity? We are injoined to
take up the Cross, and to follow Christ, etc. Such commands and exhortations,
to dye rather than to obey Unchristian injunctions are delivered in vain, yea,
they deserve the name of Impious, if they be not a Royal Law without the stamp
of Civil Authority. -- it is therefore your opinion, that it is our duty for
the sake of outward safety to obey that, which is the Law of our Country, tho
we live among the Heathens, rather than to follow dangerous, tho Evangelical
Counsel.

This Doctor, together with the Lords Bishops of Ely, and Bath and Wells, and
Dr. Hooper were by the King appointed to attend the late Duke of Monmouth
before his Execution, and the great thing, that they with reason pressed him to,
was a particular repentance, an acknowledgment that his Invasion was a
Rebellion, particularly urging him (as the Printed account says) more than
once, P. 1, 2.
if he were of the Church of England to acknowledge the Doctrine of Non
Resistance to be true;
and therefore I believe, that Pulton the Jesuit (as Pulton considered, p. 67.
himself says) charged him unjustly, that when he assisted Sir Thomas Armstrong
before his Execution, that he did not oblige him to an humble acknowledgment of
his Crimes, and particularly of the injury done to his King and Country, for
the Account of the cons. with (...) p. ^3.
Doctor (even in the height of Popery) thought his Loyalty more valuable, than
Mr. Meredith's, because he, as a Son of the Church of England professed, he would
not rebel against the King, notwithstanding he might be of another Religion,
whereas Mr. M. being of the same Religion, could not well separate Loyalty from
Interest. -- and (...) cons. p. 89.
avers, that he is by Church Principle against resisting the Higher Powers, and
approves not of the excluding, and deposing Doctrine taught in Mr. P's. great
Lateran Council, before there were Jesuits, and also after they arose, by
Bellarmine and Doleman, and a long train of others; in which some Popes, some
Synodical Men have pompously marched.

To pass by General Complaints, Id. exam. of (...). 10 note (...). holiness of
life. p. 243.
we may furnish our selves with abundance of instances, in the Lives of
particular Men of that Communion, who have been Infamous for Impiety. -- I
shall content my self with a few reflections upon two or three of this sort of
M^n, with whom the more the World is acquainted, the less veneration it will
have for them. -- Pope Gregory the Great -- fawned upon the Emperor Mauritius
whilst he lived and prospered, and owned him as his Patron, and the Maker of
his Fortunes, even before he had made his own. But as soon as the Emperor and
his Family, were barbarously Murdered by the most Bloody Vassal and Usurper
Phocas, Gregory insulted over this dead Lion, and flattered this living
Monster, and his Immoral Wife Leontia: He used such words at his ^surped
^xaltation, as he did at that, which he called the Conversion of England;
singing profanely, Glory to God in the Highest -- Let the Heavens rejoice, and
the Earth be glad.

There are many things in the Roman Church it self, P. 248.
which by helping forward an ill life, do, in part deface this mark of her
Sanctity: Such as -- the Doctrins about -- Papal Supremacy. Which last is very
prejudicial to the quiet of the World, especially in the Deposing Point,
concerning which, I take leave to use the words of another, with Relation to
Bellarmine. He was Postscript to transl. of (...) of the Leag. p. 15, 16, 17.
himself a Preacher for the League in Paris, during the Rebellion there of King
Henry IV. Some of his Principles are these following. In the Kingdoms of Men,
the Power of the King is from the People, because the People make the King. --
We hear Bellarmine in another place ^ositively affirming it, as Matter of
Faith, if any Christian Prince shall depart from the Catholic Religion, and
shall withdraw others from it; he immediately forfeits all Power and Dignity,
even before the Pope has pronounced sentence on him: And his Subjects, in case
they have Power to do it, may and ought to cast out such an Heretic, from his
Sovereignty over Christians.

If therefore, the Faith of Bellarmine be Faction, whatsoever his Church is in
it self, it is certain, as he has made it, it can never he found out, either as
The Church, or as A found Church, so far as we are to look for it by the Note
of Holiness.

SECT. XII.
Dr. Patrick has also fully declared his Opinion in this point, for, besides
what has been cited out of his works, in the first part of this History, he
says Paraph^. on on Ps. 15. p. 75.
, that he, who shall dwell in God's Tabernacle, is a Man, who has such a
respect to Religion, that whatsoever he promises by Oath, he will perform, tho
be loses never so much by keeping his faith. -- and in Ps. 51. p. 361.
that David confessed to God, against thee only have I sinned, not because I
stand in fear of punishment from Men, who have no Power over me; but because I
am so obnoxious to thee, whose judgments I ought to dread the more, the less I
am liable to give an account of my actions unto others: O how it afflicts me,
that I presumed, because I had none to control me here on Earth, to offend thy
Majesty, thy All-seeing Majesty! at whose Tribunal,
the highest must be judged. -- Politicians, when they do unwarrantable
actions, Id. Jewish Hypocrisy. p. 371, 372. Land. 1660.
think to excuse themselves with the Reason of State, and pretense of Common
good -- and therefore will break their Faith, and their Oaths, and at the rate
of their honesty purchase the common welfare, -- as if God had need of Men's
sin, or we could tell what is his Interest, better than himself. I am something
angry at this vile abuse of his Holy Name, -- that tho God has told us, what
is his mind and pleasure, yet they will instruct him, and teach him what is
more for his benefit, and show him a way, that he thought not on, for the
advancement of his Glory.

The same Author in his Epitome of Man's duty annexed to his Treatise of the
Jewish Hypocrisy, is of the same mind; as we love our selves, P. 41.
let us endeavor to live in all good conscience before God; let us not do the
least evil for to avoid the suffering of the greatest evil, and let us not
neglect any good for the purchasing of the best good the World affords. -- it
cannot be long before thou feel that hidden Whip, the cords of which thou
art continually twisting for to lash thy self. -- all impatience comes by
pride, P. 67, 68.
and our murmurings are bred by too goodly thoughts of our own selves; but if
we thought with our selves, what we are, etc. we should become very humble, i.
e. meek, and patient, and contented under all that befalls us: one act of
humility begets another, and he, that thinks meanly of himself, will not be
angry that he is afflicted. -- Be peaceable and obedient to Governors, who are
Gods in the World, and to whom God has bidden us, that we should submit our
selves, submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, etc.
1 Pet. 2.13. It is an high act of Pride and Insolency, to control the
Authority that is over us, and to set up our own wills above God's Vicegerents;
for it is a great contempt of the Majesty of God, whose Image they more
remarkably bear, and with whose Effigies they are more visibly stamped than
other Men; we must always therefore do what they command us, or else suffer,
what they inflict upon us;
and if we choose the latter, we must suffer as meekly and peaceably, as if it
was an immediate hand of Heaven upon us; for if Solomon says of every Man, that
proud and haughty scorner is his name, who decleth in proud wrath, Prove. 21.24.
Then much more is he to be branded in the forehead for a Man superlatively
proud, who cannot endure to be touched in Body or Estate, but it casts him into
the highest Inflammations of anger even against the Highest Powers.

Dr. Tillotson. There is a Spirit in the World, which is not only contrary to
Christianity, Ser. on Nov. 5. 1678. p. 17, 18.
but to the common Principles of natural Religion, and even to humanity it
self; which by falsehood and persidiousness, by secret Plots and Conspiracies,
or by open Sedition and Rebellion, -- by Deposing and Killing Kings -- in a
word, by dissolving all the bonds of humane Society, and subverting the Peace,
and order of the World, i. e. by all wicked ways imaginable does incite Men to
promote, and advance their Religion. P. 19.
-- When Religion once comes to supplant Moral Righteousness, and to teach Men
the absurdest things in the World, to lie for the truth, P. 20.
and to kill Men for God's sake, and to be a bond of Conspiracy, -- better it
were, there were no revealed Religion,
and that humane nature were left to the conduct of its own Principles and
Inclinations, which are much more mild and merciful, than to be acted by a
Religion, that inspires Men with so wild a fury -- and is continually
supplanting Government, and undermining the Welfare of Mankind. In short, such
a Religion, as teaches Men to propagate, and advance it self, by means so
evidently contrary to the very nature and end of all Religion. -- how much
better Teachers of Religion were the Old Heathen Philosophers? P. 21, 22.
in all whose Books and Writings, there is not one Principle to be found of
Treachery and Rebellion. -- Panaetius, Antipater, and Diogenes the Stoic;
Tully, and Plutarch, P. 28.
and Seneca were much honester, and more Christian Casuists than the Jesuits
are, etc. -- I am not sure, that the Pope is Antichrist, -- but I challenge
Antichrist himself, whoever he be, and whenever he comes, to do worse and
wickeder things than these. Sermon. on 1 Cor. 3.15. p. 11, 15.


I hope no body expects, that I should take the pains to show, that this was
not the Doctrine of our Savior, and of his Apostles, nor of the Primitive
Christians (viz. the Doctrine of deposing Kings) -- our Church has this
peculiar advantage above several Professions, P. 3^, 34.
that we know in the World, that it acknowledges a due and just subordination
to the Civil Authority, and has always been untainted in its Loyalty.

Dr. Meggor. Serw. before the L. (...) on Ps 11.3. (...) 30 p. 14.
Although there were Laws to guide, and direct the Kings of Judea and Egypt, yet,
if they forgot themselves so much, as to violate and break through them, there
were none by which they might resist and punish them; their Ministers and
Instruments were ever accountable, but as to themselves it was a Maxim every
where, that they could do no wrong, P. 16.
-- he, who resists Kings, is in danger of receiving to himself damnation in
the other World for such unjustifyable, and forbidden practices. -- there never
yet was any Rebellion, where Religion or Liberty were not one, or both
pretended, yet -- he, who examineth the most judicious and impartial W^^ters of
Story, will be hugely put to it to produce an instance of any one, where
Personal disgusts, and selfish designs were not the first Promoters and
Fomentors of it; -- they, P. 28, 29. v. p 43, 44, etc.
that can dispense with their Oaths, and comply with Usurpers, be instruments
of the illegal Innovations, and Zealous for the Statutes of Omri, may receive
some wages for their unrighteousness, and ravish to themselves fortunes, as
unexpected as ignominious; but for those, that dare not debauch their
Consciences, nor be partakers of other Men's sins; that will retain their
integrity, and rather than do, would suffer evil, P. (...).
what can there do? These are they, that are so pityed in the Text; -- down
then,
down to the place of darkness from whence it came, with that Antichristian
Principle, that it is lawful for the People, upon the ill managers and abuse of
their Power, by Arms, and force to depose and punish their Princes. -- this
once admitted, lays the Ax to the Root of all Civil Society, etc.

Dr. (...). p. 37.
Nath. Hardy. D. R. The Enemies of the King accuse him for being a Traitor to
his People, which was so far from being true, that it was impossible, since he
never received any trust from them. -- after which, addressing himself to the
Lord Mayor, and his Brethren; he adds, you have taken care, that Rebellion may
be destroyed in that, which was its Principal Engine, the illegal League and
Covenant -- and in its rotten Principles, those Doctrins, which give Power to
the two Houses of Parliament, in some cases to take up Arms without, and
against the Kings command, and distinguish between the Personal and Politic
capacity of the King, as to the point of resistance, etc.

Dr. Sermon. before Lord M^yer F^^. 11. 16 S^. p. 22, 24.
Goodman. Kings are God's Vicegerents, and he maintains and upholds them in
their Offices under himself, -- a King has the Stamp and Character of Divine
Authority upon him; -- it is the Divine Providence, that is the Peoples caution
and security against the weaknesses, passions, and extravagances of Princes; so
that they shall not need to resort to Arms, or any seditious and unlawful means
in their own defense; we use to appeal to an Higher Court, when we are oppressed
in an inferior Judicatory, and this is our proper refuge, when our Rights and
Properties are invaded, to look up to God the Supreme Potentate of the World,
that he will restrain the exorbitances of his Ministers: P. 25, 26.
God is the King of Kings. -- the safety of Religion, Liberty, and Property are
mighty Concerns, but certainly they are not too great a Stake to trust in the
hands of God, -- unless the means we use, be as certainly and manifestly
lawful, as the cause we pretend to shall be just and honorable, we shall but
provoke Providence instead of subverting it, P. 34.
-- let the People be quiet, not listen to noice and rumors; but be sure to
Banish all disloyal thoughts of resorting to irregular means for the asserting
their pretensions? Is not God in the World? etc.

SECT. XIII.
Dr. Burnet in his modest and free conference -- Printed Ann. 1669. p. 6, 7.
Show me one place in either Testament, that warrants Subjects fighting for
Religion? you know, I can bring many against it; yea, tho the old dispensation
was a more carnal and fiery one, than the new one is; yet, when the Kings of
Israel, and Judah, made Apostasy from the Living God into Heathenish Idolatry;
some of the Kings of Judah polluting the Temple of Jerusalem, as did Ahaz, and
Manasseh, so that God could not be Worshipped there without Idolatry; yet where
do we find the People resisting them, or falling to popular Reformations?
neither do the Prophets that were sent by God, ever provoke them to any such
courses; and you know, the whole strain of the New Testament runs upon
suffering; -- it seems, you are yet a Stranger to the very design of Religion,
which is to tame and mortify nature, and is not a natural thing, but
supernatural; therefore the Rules of defending, and advancing it must not be
borrowed from nature, but grace. -- are not Christ's injunctions our Rule?
Since then he forbad his Disciples to draw a Sword for him, with so severe a
threatening, that whosoever will draw the Sword, shall perish by the Sword, this
must bind us, and what he says to Pilate on this head, my Kingdom is not of
this World, etc. is so plain language, P. 24.
that I wonder it does not convince all. -- Pope Gregory VII. Armed the
Subjects of Germany against Henry IV. the Emperor upon the account of Religion,
because the Emperor laid claim to the Investiture of Bishops, they being then
Secular Princes; and this prospering so well in the hands of Hildebrand, other
Popes made no bones upon any displeasure they conceived either against King or
Emperor, to take his Kingdom from him, and free his Subjects from their
Obedience to him. -- the Authors, who plead for this are only Courtiers,
Canonists, and Jesuits; now are you not ashamed in a matter of such Importance
to symbolize with the worst gang of the Roman Church (for the soberer of them
condemn it) yet fill Heaven and Earth with your clamors, Burn. Vind. of the
Authority, etc. of the Chapter of Scotland ad Lector.
if in some innocenter things the Church of England seem to symbolize with
them? one great rule, by which the peace and order of all humane Societies is
maintained and advanced, is Obedience to the Laws, and submission to the
Authority of those, whom God has set over us, to govern and defend us; to
whose commands if absolute Obedience be not paid, ever till they contradict the
Laws of God, there can be neither peace, nor order among Men; -- now it cannot
be denied to be one of the sins of the Age we live in, that small regard is had
to that Authority, God has committed to his Vicegerents on Earth, the Evidence
whereof is palpable, since the bending or slackning of the Execution of Laws,
is made the measure of most Men's Obedience, and not the Conscience of that
duty, we owe the commands of our Rulers; for what is more servile and
unbecoming a Man, not to say a Christian, than to yield obedience, when
overawed by force; and to leap from it, when allured by gentler methods? --
hence it appears; how few there are, who judge themselves bound to pay that
reverence to the Persons, and that Obedience to the commands of those, God has
vested with his Authority, which the Laws of Nature and Religion do exact; and
the root of all this disobedience, and contempt can be no other, but unruly and
ungoverned Pride, which disdains to submit to others, and exalts it self above
those, who are called Gods;
the humble are tractable and obedient, but the self-willed are stubborn and
rebellious; yet the height of many Men's pride rests not in a bare disobedience,
but designs the subverting of Thrones, and the shaking of Kingdoms, unless
governed by their own measures.

Among all the Heresies, which this Age has spawned; there is not one more
contrary to the whole design of Relligion, and more destructive of Mankind,
than is that Bloody Opinion of defending Religion by Arms, and of forcible
resistance upon the color of preserving Religion;
the Wisdom of that policy is earthly, sensual, devilish, savouring of a
carnal, unmortified, and impatient mind, that cannot bear the Cross, nor trust
to the Providence of God; and yet with how much Zeal is this Doctrine maintained
and propagated, as if on it hung both the Law and the Prophets? neither is the
zeal used for its defense, only meant for the Vindicating of what is past, but
on purpose advanced for reacting the same Tragedies, -- indeed the
consideration of these evils, should call on all to reflect on the evident
signatures of the Divine displeasure, under which we lie, from which it
appears, that God has no pleasure in us; nor will be glorified among us, that
so we may discern the signs of the times -- we must consider, wherein ye have
provoked God to chastise us in this fashion, by letting loose among us a Spirit
of uncharitableness, giddiness, cruelty, and sedition.

The Question is in general, 1st. Confer. P. ^^0.
if Subjects under a Lawful Sovereign, when appress'd in their (...) Religion,
may by A^^s defend themselves, and resist the Magistrates? To which (...) he
Nonconformist answers, consider, if there can be any thing more evident from
the Law of Nature, than that Men ought to defend themselves, when unjustly
assaul^ed, -- he is a self Murderer, who does not defend himself from unjust
force; besides, what is the end of all Societies, but mutual protection? did
not the People at first cl^^se Princes for their protection, etc? -- it was
then the end of Societies; that Justice and Peace might be maintained, so, when
this is inverted, the Subjects are again to r^^me their own conditional
su^^^der, and excoerce the Magistrate, who forgetful of the ends of his
Authority, does so corrupt it. -- to this Basilius, the O^thodox A^^ertor of
the King's Authority, gives the Answer, which you find in the (...) part of
this History. p. 73. distinguishing between the Laws of Nature, and the
per^^ions of nature.

It is like the sacredness of the Megistrate's Power, P. 12.
was a part of the Traditional Religion conveyed from Noah to his Posterity, as
was the practice of expiatory Sacrifices; P. 17, 18.
-- certainly, the defense of Religion by Arms is never to be admitted, for the
nature of Christian Religion is such, that it excludes all carnal weapons from
its defense; and when I consider, how expressly Christ forbids his Disciples to
resist evil, Mat. 25.39. how severely that resistance is condemned by St. Paul,
and that condemnation is declared the punishment of it;
I am forced to cry out, Oh! what times are we fallen in, in which Men dare
against the Laws of the Gospel defend that practice, upon which God has passed
his condemnation; if whosoever break the least of these commandments, and teach
Men so to do, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of God, what shall their
portion be, who teach Men to break one of the greatest of these commandments?
such as are the Laws of Peace and Subjection; and what may we not look for from
such Teachers, who dare tax that Glorious Doctrine of patient suffering as
brutish and irrational; and tho it be expressly said, 1 Pet. 2.21. that Christ
by suffering for us, left us his example, how to follow his steps, which was
followed by a Glorious Cloud of Witnesses, yet in these last days, what a brood
has sprung up of Men, who are lovers of their own selves, P. 35.
traitors, heady, high-minded, etc. I must confess my self amazed, -- when I
find St. Peter saying expressly, 1 Pet. 2.21. that Christ suffered, leaving us
an example, that we might follow his steps; and applying this to the very case
of suffering wrongfully, and that notwithstanding that you would study to
pervert the Scripture so grossly.

I confess, P. 58.
there is no piece of story, I read with such pleasure, as the accounts are
given of the Martyrs; for methinks they leave a fervor on my mind, which I meet
with in no study, that of the Scriptures being only excepted; say not then,
they were not able to have stood to their own defense, when it appears, how
great their numbers were; It was then no Legend, P. 61.
or shall I here tell you the known story of the Thebaean Legion, which
consisted of 6666, who being by Maximinus Herculeus. an. 287, etc. -- Consider,
how Maximinus came, in the ^^g end of that great Persecution begun by
Dioclesian and Herculeus, continued by Galesius, and consummated by Maximinus
himself, in which for all the numbers of the Martyrs, and the cruelty of the
Persecution, there was not so much as a tumult; which makes it evident,
that Christians of that time understood not the Doctrine of resistance; the
whole course of our Savior's Life, Id. Sermon on Romans 13.5. p. 25, 26.
was a perpetual tract of doing good, and bearing ill. -- and when he was
accused to Pilate, of being an Enemy to Caesar, and pretending to set up
another Kingdom, he did in the plainest style was possible, condemn all
practisings against Government upon pretense of Religion, by saying, my Kingdom
is not of this World, if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants
fight, etc. the Blessed Apostles followed their Master's steps in this, P. 27.
as in all other things, and therefore having learned of our Savior that
Lesson of bearing the Cross, and suffering patiently -- St. Peter does at full
length once, and again call on all Christians to prepare for sufferings, and to
bear them patiently, etc. P. 29.
-- profane, as well as Ecclesiastical Writers assure us,
the numbers of the Christians became very soon so vast, that nothing but the
Conscience of the duty they owed the Supreme Powers, obliged them to be Subject.

Id. mist ^y of Iniq. 8vo. p. 73, 75.
The Bishops of Rome not content with their Usurpations over their Brethren,
and Fellow Churchmen, their next attempt was upon Princes -- they pretended to
a Power of deposing Princes, disposing of their Dominions to others, and
dispensing with the Oaths of Fidelity their Subjects had sworn to them, -- but
I cannot leave this particular without my sad regrets,
that too deep a tincture of this Spirit of Anti Christianisme is among many,
who pretend much aversion to it; since the Doctrine of resisting Magistrates
upon colors of Religion is so stiffly maintained, and adhered to by many, who
pretend to be highly Reformed, tho this be one of the Characters of the
Scarlet-colored Whore.
Their contempt of the fifth commandment follows upon the Doctrine of the Pope's
Power of deposing Princes, and freeing their Subjects from their obligation to
them, by which they are taught to rebel, and resist the Ordinance of God. -- we
hold, P. 152.
that the Civil Powers are of Christ, whose Gospel binds the duty of Obedience
to them more closely on us; and therefore, if they do wrong, we leave them to
Christ's Tribunal, who set them up, but pretend to no power from his Gospel, to
coerce or resist them, -- while we have a Zeal against Popery, as a bloody,
rebellious, and cruel Religion, Sermon. at the Rolls. Nov. 5. p. 25, 27, etc.
we must do nothing to show, that we are acted by the Spirit of Popery; -- we
must never forget the Station, in which God has put us, ^s we are Subjects
under a Lawful Prince, to whom we are tied both by Divine and Humane Laws; and
even the Lion's Mouth it self opening to devour us,
can never excuse us from our obligation to submit and suffer, if God had so
ordered it by his Providence, that we were born under a Prince, that would
deliver us up to the Lion. -- the late Rebellion, as it was managed with a
Popish, i. e. a bloody Spirit, so many of the Arguments that were used to
defend it, were taken from Popish Authors. P. 28.
When we go out of the way of patience and submission, of obedience, and of
bearing the Cross; when we give scope to passion, and rage, to jealousy, and
mistrust, and upon this fermentation in our minds we break out into Wars and
Rebellion, we forget, that the God, whom we serve, is Almighty, and can save us
either from a devouring Fire, or a Lion's Mouth; -- we forget, that the
Savior, whom we follow, was made perfect by sufferings, and that we become
then truly his Disciples, when we bear his Cross, even tho we should be crushed
under it; we forget, that our Religion ought to inspire us, with a contempt of
Life and the World; and with meekness and lowliness of mind, etc. P. 29.
-- we are not to share with the Papists in their cruelty, not imitate them in
their Rebellion.

SECT. XV.
Dr. Adam Littleton in his Catechism, Printed Lon. 1662 ^p. ded.
or the Grounds of Religion. An ungrounded Christian will be easily pe^suaded
to give him self up to any wild Opinion, or loose practice, to turn Heretic or
Rebel, P. 334.
and prove a fit instrument for the managery of Satan's designs. -- the fifth
commandment is the hinge of the two Tables, -- and concerns the Magistrate, who
is God's Vicegerent on Earth, and the keeper of both the Tables; wherefore some
assign it a place in the first Table, P. 336, 337. See his Ser. on Nov. 5 1675.
p. 221, 223, 224, 226. and Ser. on Jan. 30. 1677. p. 236, 237, etc.
God having a special care of civil order, and Peace in the Societies of Men,
honor thy Father and Mother, whether thy natural Parents, or the Civil
Magistrate. -- disobedience dissolves, and unloosens or ^er and peace, which
are the bands of Society; whereas oppression does but strain, and gird the ties
of Government too close; no Tyranny of the most wicked Prince can be so
mischievous, and destractive to the Public, as the Rebellion of Subjects, let
them pretend never so much Religion for it; the great interest of society is to
obey, since the resisting of a Lawful Governor will in the end destroy
Government it self, and bring all things into consusion;
-- then he introduces God thus speaking, thou inferior, whoever thou art, that
art under another Power, P. 343, 344.
-- thou shall be subject to him, and yield a ready and cheerful obedience to
him, as to the Lord, in all things that are just and lawful; and hear with his
humors, and his harshness,
remembering, that the he be a Man of like passions with thy self, yet he is in
God's stead; and if he at any time swerve from his rule in commanding, yet do
not thou decline thy duty in obeying; but when be bids thee do any thing
coutrary to my will, carry thy self with submission, and resolve to suffer for
a good conscience, rather than to resist, where thou can not with a good
conscience obey, -- thou shall not withdraw, or grudge thy obedience, P. 347.
much less shall thou take upon thee to call him to account; -- thou Subject,
shall honor and obey the King, and his Ministers, -- thou shall not raise
sedition to bring an odium upon the Magistrate's Person, his Authority, or his
Council; nor show any discontent to the disturbance of the public Peace, nor
take up Arms against thy Lawful Sovereign, nor maintain or assist Rebellion;
nor meddle with those that are given to change; thou shall not offer any
violence to the King's Sacred Person; but if at any time unrighteous commands
are imposed upon thee, have recourse to thy Prayers, and make thy appeals to
Heaven, to God the King of Kings, to whom alone they are accountable, and who
will in his dut time remove the oppression, and call the Oppressor's to an
account. P. 352, 353.
-- when the hedge of Government is broken down, neither Religion, nor Law
shall bound us; -- this has been England 's Case in the wicked times of
Anarchy and Confusion, -- when we complied with Illegal Powers, -- when our
Oaths of Allegiance were eluded with the solemn cozenage of a League, and
sinful Combination, when we were bewildred with the Witchcrafts of Rebellion,
and knew not the things, which belonged to our Peace, but pretended to reform
abuses by destroying the Offices, -- when we raised War against our dread
Sovereign, and offered violence to the Lord's Anointed. -- what need have we
therefore to pray fervently with the Church; Lord, have mercy upon us, and
incline our hearts to keep this Law.

The same Author in his Sermon, Pt. Land. 1669. p. 24, 25.
called The Churches Peace asserted upon a Civil account, Preached July 4th.
An. 1669. says the same thing. The best Party of the Dissenters have such
Principles of Policy and Government, as are utterly inconsistent and
incompatible with Monarchy -- whereas there is no one thing, that the English
Church does in her Doctrine more positively affirm,
or in her Offices more ^ealously express, than Obedience to Governors, and her
duty to her Sovereign; -- thanked be God, we live not now under Heathen
Emperors, and Pagan Governors; tho if we did, it were our duty to pray for
them, and to thank God for them too, and to obey them in all lawful commands,
An Original of all Plots. Land. 1680. 810. cap. 1. p. 2.
and where we cannot safely obey, cheerfully to suffer for a good Conscience.

Dr. William Saywel. Still it has fallen out, that Men of more zeal than
discretion, of greater reading than judgment, have struck in with the
Politicians, and wrote that, which would most please the Men in Authority, and
was likely to get them most favor, and reputation amongst those, who could
satisfy their ambition, and by these means have rather served themselves than
God, tho with the confusion and disorder of the Church. -- Athelsm, breach of
common faith and honesty, P. 3.
violations of all Oaths and Contracts, Murders, Treasons, Conspiracies,
Rebellions, long and bloody Wars, Massacres, Fires, Underminings, Poisons, P.
4, 5.
and Subversions of Governments are the sad consequences of such dissensions in
Religion -- that these Parts of Christendom for some Ages past have been an
Aceldama or Field of Blood, and many horrid and barbarous Murders have been
acted upon pretense of Religion, is evident from all Modern Histories; and tho
the Romish Party have been the great cause of all these inhumane Butcheries,
yet they have not been the only Actors in them; there are another sort of Men,
who have had their Hands stained with blood, and upon what Motives and
Principles, and to what degrees they have proceeded, I refer the Reader to
Archbishop Bancroft's dangerous Positions, and to the History of Presbytery to
satisfic himself. Chapter 2 p. 7. 8.
But tho several Murders and Rebellions have been carried on by those, that
call themselves Christians, yet neither the Christian Religion, nor the Church
it self did ever teach any such Doctrine, or encourage any such Practice, -- nay
there are such Evidences against it, that no rational Man, that does rightly
consider the matter, can ever doubt, but that she in her judgment and belief,
wholly condemns all such wicked and ungodly designs. -- And for further
satisfaction, I will inquire into the flate of the matter, P. 9.
-- that all Power and Dominion is Originally from God, is not to be doubted,
but by Atheists, and that Governors act in his Name, and by his Authority, is
as unquestionable among Christians; now this Power is derived to them, either
from the Law of Nature, which is common to all Mankind, or else from positive
Revelation and Assignment; the first and highest fountain of Supreme Power, is
founded in that natural Dominion, that God has given Parents over their
Children, insomuch that if either Adam, or Noah, who were the common Fathers of
us all, were now alive, P. 10.
they ought to be the Universal Monarchs of the World; but when the Father
dies, and Brothers are scattered up and down the World, and live independently
one of another, there can be no natural pretense for one to have Dominion over
the other; yet the necessity of forming themselves into Societies for mutual
defense and traffic, will oblige them to enter into Covenants -- and tho while
they are free, they may choose different forms, as they shall see best for
themselves, yet having once chosen and accepted of a Supreme Power, they are
not at liberty to cast it off again when they please, but all the Rights,
Prerogatives, and Jurisdictions, which belong to Sovereign Authority, are
presently by God invested on it, who does ratify all lawful pacts and
agreements, and requires us strictly and inviolably to observe them, -- tho it
may fall out, P. 11.
that the Person sometime may be chosen by the People, or Nobility, or Senate;
-- yet the Power, and Office it self was not made, is not given, nor can it be
limited or bounded by them, so as to destroy the Office it self, or make it
become no Supreme Power; one Prerogative whereof is to be irresistible, P. 1^.
and not to be called to account by any but God. -- a Prince must use his
Subjects as Freemen, and not Slaves; but if Princes do not their duty, we must
not revenge our selves; for we ought not to be Judges in our own case, for God
has told us, that Vengeance is his, and he will repay; P. 13.
therefore we must go for vengeance to those, whom God has appointed to
execute vengeance in his stead; if then our inferior Governors do us wrong, we
must go to the Superior, who are made Revengers, to execute wrath upon them
that do evil. But if the Supreme Powers themselves oppress us, they cannot be
judged by their Inferiors; and there will be no other remedy, but to leave them
to the judgment of God, who has reserved their punishment to himself; but
tells us, he that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they
that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation; and it is better to suffer
unjustly in this World, than to suffer justly in the World to come; for since
the last judgment in this World must be somewhere, it is fitter, that Children
should be committed to the judgment of their Parents, and Inferiors to the
Supreme, than any other way; P. 14, 15.
-- tho Princes are the Instruments, yet it is God's purposes or commands, that
they put in execution, whether they be for good or evil; he inclines them to
favor and mercy -- when he is pleased to try us with prosperity and kindness,
-- again, when our sins call for judgment and indignation, then he sends forth
evil Governors, or else permits wicked Men to act according to their own cruel
and ambitious minds, and the ins^igation of the Devil; but yet in the midst of
judgment he does remember mercy -- they shall not do any harm, further than God
in his Wisdom shall give them leave, and that is no more than is needful for
our good; -- so that we are to look upon evil Governors and Superiors, that
oppress us, no other than plagues, or violent Storms, or Earthquakes sent from
God, from whence we may run and hide our selves, if it be possible, and use all
reasonable means to save our lives by flight, or the like, but they are no more
to be resisted by violence, than any of those natural Evils; we must by
humiliation and prayer implore God's mercy to us, in turning their hearts, or
some other way sending us deliverance, as we do to avert a Plague, or an
Earthquake; P. 16.
but God has given us no natural strength to secure our selves, and thereupon
will defend us himself, and have us wholly therein depend upon his own care;
this belief it was, that filled the World with Martyrs, etc. this made our
Savior confess to Pilate, that he had Power given him from above to crucify
him, etc. it was upon this account, that St. Paul said, let every Soul be
subject, etc. and in this sense those Texts, and the Authority of Governors
were vouched by the Ancient Fathers and Councils; and there is not one Writer
for a Thousand years of any credit in the Church, that did ever doubt of, P. 17.
or question this Doctrine; but many of them have declared themselves fully for
it, that Sovereign Princes had their Authority immediately from God, and were
accountable to none but him, if they did use it amiss, and therefore could not
be deposed by any Authority upon Earth, whether of Pope or People, neither
ought they to be resisted by open violence, or have their Power wrested out of
their hands by any of their rebellious Subjects; those also, that act in a War
without the Commission of the Supreme Power, or of the King, where he is
Supreme, have not the Sword given them by God, but take it themselves; and
therefore shall perish with the same: And this he confirms, as from Scripture,
so from the Doctrine of the Church, and the sense of the Holy Fathers about it;
P. 40, 41.
and concludes, It were casie to carry the same Doctrine through all Ages of the
Church, and to produce testimonies -- especially from the Articles and Canons
of the Church of England, and the Writings of our Learned Bishops, and other
Eminent Defenders of our Church; but these shall suffice for the present, and
they are enough to convince any sober Man, that the Ancient Christians did
never dream, that either the Pope, or the People did give Kings their
Authority, or had any Power to depose them, and authorize their Subjects to
take up Arms against them, with or without their Authority; much less to set up
others in their stead, or reserve their Power in their own hands, but did
believe, that their Authority and Power is wholly from God, and therefore must
be obeyed according to his Ordinance; and that they never can be deposed either
by the People or People, or any other Authority upon Earth.

Dr. Dove. Sermon on Nov. 5. 1680. p 4, 5.
They, that dare imagine evil against the King in their Bedchamber, will not
stick to countenance Rebellion against him in the Camp; for the malice of
Treason, like fire concealed, will either find or force its passage; -- this is
the usual Prologue to all traiterous designs, P. 21.
to calumniate the Government, and speak evil of dignities, to repreach the
one, and make it odious, by traducing the other, and rendering them
contemptible. -- we may learn by experience, that God for the better Government
of the World, thinks it fit to make Rebels and Traitors, the most memorable
examples of vengeance and judgment; search the Scriptures, and turn over the
Annals of all Ages, you shall scarce meet in story with a seditious Innovator,
or a Rebel, who has not ruined himself. Id. Ser. bef. Lord M^yor Sept. 29.
1682. p. 15.
-- If a Man can help Men to an evasion from the duty of Obedience, he shall
have followers enough; this is a certain sign, that tho Men know their duty,
yet they do not love to hear it; -- for certainly obedience to Magistrates is
one of those things that accompany Saivation; and if they that resist, shall
receive to themselves damnation, then surely we may safely affirm, and that
without any breach of charity, or stretching beyond our line, that they who
oppose them in lawful things, or refuse to obey them in the same, without a
timely repentance, and reformation are in danger of it. P. 17.
-- tho David was next heir to the Crown, and already anointed to it, tho Saul
thirsted for his blood, and persecuted him by force and fraud, tho he had the
hearts of the People, and Saul was given up into his hands, so that he could as
easily have slain him, as have cut his skirt; yet this was that, which kept him
from so great iniquity, that he was the Lord's Anointed. P. 18.
-- the Authority is still from God, tho it be placed in the bands of a sinful
Man, and it loses not its essence by the accession of personal miscarriages,
etc. -- disobedience has all that is base in it, P. 24.
and Rebellion contains a whole conjugation of wickedness; of which there seems
to be an indelible sense in all Men's minds, since even they, who love the
thing, do usually hate the name of Rebels, and such as are conscious of the
guilt, would gladly avoid the reproach of it; a plain indication of guilt, as
guilt is a manifest argument of sin and wickedness, P. 25.
-- it is a sin next to blasphemy to speak evil of dignities, a degree of
profaneness to disobey them,
and intolerable iniquity to rebel against them; it is as bad in its own
nature, as murder, or theft, being as expressly forbidden as these, and in its
consequence, it is far more mischievous, etc. this sin debauches the conscience,
P. 26.
and hardens Men in impiety, so that it is rare, very rare to find a repenting
Rebel. -- it is directly opposite to the Spirit and Power of Christianity, --
it makes the very profession of Religion odious and despicable, -- it is
contrary to the example of Christ, the Blessed Apostles, and Primitive
Christians; -- there have been many pretenses made for disobedience and
resistance; P. 27. v. p. 28.
one has libelled the Primitive Christians, ascribing their meekness, and
submission to necessity, ( so Bellarmine) another, that the Apostles in
prescribing Obedience only flattered the Emperors ( so Salmeron) a third has
taught, that the Doctrine of resistance was a mystery bid from the first Ages,
and reserved for these last days of greater light (so Jo. Goodwin) -- thus the
Gospel it self is belyed to countenance that, which it every where condemns. --
we have a Church, P. 30.
whose Doctrine, Discipline, and Government is Apostolical and Primitive,
defective in nothing so much as the Obedience of her Members, unless it be the
exercise of her Discipline. -- this Church was always famous for her untainted
fidelity and loyalty to the Crown; oh! that our lives were as good as our
Religion, etc.

SECT. XVI.
Dr. Henry Maurice. The Ancient Christians knew how to dye, better than to
dispute, Ser. on Jan. 30. 1681. p. 2, 12, 30, etc. cons. 1st. pt. hist. p. 112.
but none understood yet how to rebel for their Religion, -- how then are we
departed from this ancient and reasonable practice? -- no Faction did ever
insult a Prince, they did not mean to destroy; -- but now to return to the
blaspheming of the Church of Rome; if community of name be not so much to be
regarded, as agreement in Doctrine, our accusers will be found to have a greater
part in these Sectaries, than we; for both agree in the Fundamentals of
Rebellion, and the lawfulness and merit of Resisting the Higher Powers.

There are Men in the World, that honor such as Martyrs, P. 180.
that were executed for murdering their King -- I hope, they were neither
Bishops, nor Episcopal Men, that were so fond of Canonizing those Murderers for
Martyrs; P. 318.
-- when Chrysostom saw the Civil Power against him, he would not contend, but
endeavored to steal away to prevent contention; and what his favorers did,
when they began a Mutiny, they did it against his will, and against all his
entreaties, and obsecrations to the contrary; did not the Primitive Christians
meet to serve God, p. 326.
and suffered Martyrdom for it; but did they ever enter into Covenants, and
Practices against the State? -- in all the lamentable distractions of the
Church (by the Arians) we find no Orthodox Bishop animate the People against
the Government, p. 327.
what Persecution soever they suffered; but on the contrary restraining all
tendences to Rebellion, and withdrawing themselves, when the popular favor
toward them grew inordinate, p. 32^. p. 337.
and uncontrolable. -- Whoever animated the People to resist Julian? -- what a
number of worthy learned Ministers of the Church of England, were turned out to
make vacancies for the Non-Conformists (in the days of Rebellion) who were to
instruct the People in new Mysteries of Religion, which their old Pastors had
not the conscience, or ability to teach them, i.e. of the lawfulness of
Rebellion; -- we read of St. Ambrose's zeal against the Arians, of his
popularity, of his charity, etc. but not a word of his Sedition, p 34^.
or his forcible resistance of the Emperor. -- while the good Bishop in his
Embasly to Maximus carried himself, as the Father, or Guardian of his Prince,
tho he had been provoked in the most tender part by his Prince's endeavors,
for the introducing of Arianism; others perhaps, if they had been in his
condition, would have looked upon this Tyrant's (Maximus) declaring for the
truth, as such an opportunity, that Providence had offered for the Preservation
of the Faith; and since the Empress was of a false Religion, and the Emperor
was governed by her, why should they not set up this Maximus, as the Protector
of the true Faith? But Ambrose, and the Bishops were of another mind; they knew
what it was to dye for their Religion, p. 346.
but did not understand, what it was to brigue, or to resist; -- and, I pray,
how did the Bishops comply with the Usurper Maximus? were any of them
instrumental to his advancement? did they Preach up his cause, and the
lawfulness of his revolt? did they ever press the People to bring in their
Plate and contributions? or after his successes, and the Murder of Gratian,
did any of the Bishops justify the Usurper's Proceedings, and Preach, and
Print in defense of that barbarous Regicide? did they flatter him, as the
preserver of Religion, the David, the Champion of Israel? with much more to the
same purpose.

Dr. Williams Printed his Sermon Preached July 26. 1685. Se^^ful. 26. 1685. on
Romans 3^7, 8. p. 11.
being on the day of public thanksgiving, for the late victory over the
Rebels, to vindicate the City Clergy, and particularly himself, who was
censured, as if the Sermon was not to the purpose of the day, and occasion, as
he says in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Bishop of London; Grant this, that
evil becomes lawful by a good end, and when we think our selves secure, we make
all compacts broken, Oaths dissolved, all difference betwixt Superiors and
Inferiors confounded; it exposes the Church and State to every pretender, and
any one that has a mind, P. 20, 21.
will never want a reason for Insurrection, and Rebellion. -- as no Religion
has more discountenanced such Principles and Proceedings, than the Christian;
so no Nations, nor Persons have more discountenanced the thing, than those who
have professed it; it is too notorious to be dissembled, for that there have
been Rebellions against, and depositions of Princes; dissolutions of
Governments; taking, and breaking of Oaths, and other things apparently evil,
of that and the like kind done to serve a Cause, a Party, or a Church, is no
Mystery now a days. -- Christian Religion teaches the wholesome Doctrine of being
subject to the Higher Powers, and that they, that resist, p. 22.
shall receive to themselves damnation. -- from the confessions of Faith, in
all the ^rotestant and Reformed Churches nothing can be drawn, p. 23.
that will justify Opposition, or Rebellion against Civil Authority, but they
expressly declare against it; -- when Queen Mary was a known Member of the Roman
Church, yet the Protestants first joined with her against the Lady Jane Gray,
who was invested with the title of Queen, and was a Protestant. -- And this
particularly is the avowed Doctrine of the Church of England in all its
Articles, and Homilies at large, three of which are against Rebellion.

Do they find in the Sermons of the Ministers of the Church of England, Id.
Apol. for the Pulpits, p. 3, 4.
the Doctrines of the Peoples Power over Princes, of the lawfulness of
resisting their Sovereigns, or rather, where have the Rights of Princes, and
the Subjection and Obedience of the People in all lawful Cases, and the
Non-resistance in any Case,
been so much asserted? -- That Loyalty which concerns all, of all Persuasions,
is taught in the Pulpits of the Church of England, which obliges them to be as
loyal, when the Prince is of a different Religion, as when he is of the same
with them.

The same Author also in his Difference between the Church of England, and the
Church of Rome, having cited our Articles, Homilies, etc. to prove the chief
Power of the King, and that he ought not to be resisted; and shown how contrary
to this Doctrine the Decrees of the Church of Rome are, he subjoins, page ^1.
-- The Church of England teaches, the King in all his Realms has Supreme
Power in all Causes, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil; -- For God allows
neither the Dignity of any Person,
nor the Multitude of any People, nor the Weight of any Cause as sufficient,
for the which Subjects may rebel.

So Dr. Grove, in his Examination of Bell. 15th. Note, viz. Temporal Felicity.
page 393.
-- Since the Power of Deposing Princes has been openly assumed, and
frequently practiced, and never yet condemned by any, either Pope or Council;
since the Doctrine of Equivoeation, and many other absurd and Impious Opinions
are taught by their Casuists, and made use of by their Confessors, in directing
the Consciences of their Penitents; and since these, and many more very
dangerous Errors, do not only escape without a Censure, but are approved of,
and encouraged by their Governors, I cannot see how they and their Church can
possibly be excused from the Guilt of them.

Mr. Thomas Stainoe, B. D. and Archdeacon of Brecknock, preached Sept. 6. Ann.
1686. Seem. on Romans 13.5. Epist. Ded.
before the Lord Mayor, and says, that he published it, That it might be
instrumental to convince the People of their Duty to their King; because it was
for that very reason, that he preached it. That there is no Man so much a
ravening Wolf inwardly, page 3.
but he will put on Sheeps Clothing; and tho his Resolutions are bent upon
Rebellion, yet his Discretion and Prudence will prompt him to pretend Religion.

The least that can be inferred from the words will be a Subjection to lawful
Authority, and by consequence also, to our own Prince: For the truth of all
which, I shall urge no more at present, than the tacit Confession of his most
avowed and professed Enemies, who after all their contrivance of Wit, Anger,
and Malice, could at length pitch upon no better expedient to prevent his Right
of Accession, than a Bill of Exclusion: Now such a Bill either presupposes an
antecedent Right, or it does not; if it does not, then it must be confessed,
that they did most elaborately trifle, whilst they took a great deal of pains
to bring that about that was already done to their hands. If it does, then we
have what we look for, and that is, that the Injustice of their Actions does
make good the Justice of his Title, and affords us a tacit Confession, that
there was no other way to overthrow that Title, but by overturning the very
Foundations of the Government it self. page 7.
-- We are therefore obliged in Conscience to be in subjection to the Superior
Powers, because God himself commands us so to be. -- God has given the lawful
Magistrate a Title to that Authority, page 12.
to which we are obliged in point of Conscience to be subject, and therefore we
are obliged in Conscience to be subject to our own Prince, because he is the
Minister of God. -- There are a sort of Men in the World, who, tho they do
always complain, that we do not quote Scripture enough, when we discourse upon
any other subject; yet, when we discourse about Subjection to Government, do
always complain, that we quote too much;
and therefore they are by no means willing, that the Case of Subjection should
be measured by that Rule. -- tho Government is the Ordinance of God, if the
Scripture had never acquainted us with any such thing.

I would have it considered, page 14.
that neither the Laws of Nature, Reason, nor Justice, will ever allow us to
endeavor to strip the lawful Governors of any Places (either where we live,
or where we are born Subjects) of their Authority, any more than they will
allow us to take away any other Man's lawful Right, or just Possessions. For
for that very reason, that Supremacy is a Right that belongs to them,
Subjection is a Duty that belongs to us. -- These Laws of Nature, Reason, and
Religion, are the Laws of God. -- If therefore the Law of God does command our
Subjection to the Higher Powers, tho the Scripture had never told us any such
thing, page 15.
-- then let the Government have been formed when it will,
and by whom it will; yet, in such a Case, because the Governors have a just
and undoubted Title to, and Possession of their Supremacy, we cannot withdraw
our Subjection from them, unless we break the Law of God. -- The only Objection
that I can foresee against this, is this, When the Actions of the Higher
Powers, without any regard to the Laws of Justice, or the Government, do
manifestly tend to the Subversion of Justice and Right, and instead thereof, do
load our Necks with Injuries and Oppressions, page 16.
then we may fairly and honestly renounce our Subjection. Before I speak
directly to the Objection, I must premise, 1. That that Design is justly
susp^cious, which measures our Duty by our temporal Interest. And 2. That it is
as well an act of Subjection, peaceably and quietly to submit to the Penalty,
as it is actually to obey the Command. -- Now, if our Adversaries do not allow
the Obligation to this disjunctive Subjection, it is apparent, that (when they
tell us, we are not to be subject in the Case objected) their meaning is, we
may defend our Disobedience by Resistance; and then the Objection put into
plain English amounts to thus much, That whenever the Prince does not govern us
according to the Laws of Justice, and those of the Land, page 17.
there it is lawful for us to resist and rebel against him. -- This Doctrine is
seditious and treasonable, and likewise absurd and false; for if a Subject does
resist his Prince, tho it be in such a Case, in which it is supposed, that his
Prince does him an Injury, he does by so doing stand guilty of these following
Acts of Injustice:

1. He takes upon him to be Judge in his own Case: Now because he that does so,
may be rationally supposed to be biassed in his Judgment, by Self-Love, by
Malice, Revenge, Covetousness, and the like train of Lusts and Passions; and
over and above in the present Case, by Pride and Ambition: Therefore all those
wise Men, who have made it their business to instruct us in the Laws of Justice
and Equity, have with one consent condemned the practice of it. -- Nay, the
Rebel is both Judge and Executioner too in his own Case.

2. page 18.
He that resists his Prince upon supposition, that his Government is unjust, is
therefore so himself, not only in that he undertakes to be a Judge in his own
Cause, but in that also he does by so doing, usurp to himself that
Jurisdiction, which of right does belong to another. For there is no doubt, but
that the Title to the Sword is of right lodged in the Prince's Power; and there
can be as little doubt, that the Subject can acquire no Right from the
Injustice of the Prince to force it thence. For by the same Law that the
Injustice of a Prince does entitle his Subjects to wrest the Power of the Sword
out of his hand against himself; page 19.
I say by the same Law, the Injustice of any private Man would give the injured
Person a Title to the Estate and Life of the injurious. And so new Titles would
continually start up with new Injuries, and in a little time the Right to the
whole World would (tho perhaps the possession might not) belong to injured
Persons, as such.

3. page 20.
He that resists his Prince, upon supposition, that his Government is unjust,
is so himself, not only in that he usurps to himself that Jurisdiction, which
of right belongs to the Prince alone, but in that he invades the Rights of his
Fellow Subjects; for tho it should prove true, that the Prince by his Injury to
the Rebel does forfeit his Title to his Government over him; yet there is
another Enquiry behind, Whether or no, by such his Injury, he forfeits his
Title over the rest of his Subjects; if he does, then he may forfeit his Title
as well where he has not done an Injury, as where he has; -- if he does not,
then the resistance of the Rebel is unjust.

'There are several Conclusions that offer themselves from the Doctrine already
delivered, page 23.
the first is this:

1. Ought we to be subject for Conscience sake, and is therefore our Obligation
to Subjection bound upon us by the hand of God himself? Then we may very fairly
infer, that both the Doctrine and Practice of Resistance comes from the Devil.
For most undoubtedly any Practice or Doctrine does so, that stands in
Diametrical Opposition to any Duty that is laid upon us by God. -- When People
resist their Prince, and at the same time pretend to fear God, such their
Pretensions are not only false, but blasphemous too.

2. If we are bound in Conscience to be subject to the Higher Powers, page 27
and if such Obligation comes only from God, then we do infer, that no lawful
Authority can be founded in mere outward Force: The reason is, because our Duty
of Subjection to lawful Authority arises from an Obligation of Conscience. Now,
tho a long Sword may have terror enough in it (in many Cases at least) to awe
our outward Actions, yet it can never have Power enough to oblige our
Consciences. And tho it may, upon the account of our Interest, engage us to a
Compliance, yet it will never be able, upon the account of our Consciences, to
engage us to an Obedience. For if mere Power can instate a Man in a just Title
to the Supremacy, then it will follow, that whoever has Power enough to invade
the Throne, has Right enough to possess it; and his Usurpation will therefore
become lawful, because his Strength has made it possible; and so at length the
Robbers Sword and Pistol will come to be the only Standard of Justice, all
other Power must be cancelled, and we must come at last to make the Power of
doing wrong to be the only measure of Equity and Right. All these things are at
least true, page 28.
when there is any Person in being, to whom the Title or Succession of the
Supremacy does belong, which (blessed be God) is our Case at present. And
therefore that great Argument, which was brought to vindicate the Usurpation of
the successful Rebels in the late Wars, namely, that the People were not bound
to adhere to their Prince, when the Prince was disabled to defend the People,
supposes no other Obligation upon Subjects than mere Interest; and so evacuates
and makes null all Obligations of Conscience. We shall therefore, before we
part from this Inference, fix it as a certain Rule, by which every
conscientious Subject may and ought to guide his Practice: That so long as
there is any Person of the Royal Race,
to whom by the Course of Succession, according to the Tenor of the Law of the
Land, the Crown does belong; so long we have a lawful Supremacy, and so long we
shall be bound in Conscience to be in Subjection.

3. Are we bound to be subject to the Higher Powers for Conscience sake, and
does the Obligation of Conscience come only from God? Then I do infer, that to
bind the People to be in Subjection to their Prince, there is no necessity of
any Bargain or Contract between them, and the reason is, because that
Obligation that binds the Subject to Obedience in this Case, is founded
immediately and directly upon the Law of God.

Lastly, Are we obliged to be subject to the Higher Powers out of Conscience;
page 31.
and is this Obligation ^id upon our Conscience by God? Then I do infer, That
no worldly Inconventence that we can possibly suffer by such our Subjection,
can be a sufficient warrant for our Resistance. And the Reason is plain and
easy, because our secular Interest, be it what it will, can never be a
sufficient Counterpoise to our Duty; and he that will break God's Commands,
because it is for his secular Advantage, can at best but make that foolish
Bargain in the Gospel, that is, to gain the whole world, and in exchange for
his Purch^se, to lose his own Soul.

Mr. Wake is also of the same mind; Answ. to the B. of Ox^^'s Reasons. l. 34,
etc.
for when the Bishop of Oxon charges the Church of England, as if she set up
the Charge of Idolatry, as a Standard against Monarchy; he replies, That it is
a Calumny upon the whole Body of the Reformed; and that he might dare venture
to say, that there is not the least reason to be apprehensive of Violence; he
knows very well, how free the Christians of the Three first Centuries were in
laying the very same Charge against the Gentile World; and yet we do not find,
that ever they showed themselves the less obedient to their Emperors upon the
account of it. And tho I am verily persuaded, that the Romanists are guilty of
Idolatry, yet I thank God, I am not conscious to my self of one Disloyal
Thought to my King. -- And what I can thus truly profess in my own behalf, I
doubt not, but I may do for all others the true and genuine Members of the
Church,
and who by being such, must, I am sure, by Principle be obedient Subjects. As
for this Author, he has made a broad Sign, that he intends to leave us, by
insinuating, that the Charge of Idolatry ought to be followed by Blows. -- We,
who do protest against certain Practices, as idolatrous, do also protest
against violating Loyalty upon the account of Religion. -- Did we indeed
profess that of Idolatry, which some others do of Heresy, that it is a
sufficient ground for the Excommunicating of a King, and the absolving his
Subjects of their Allegiance; had we ever been caught, not in Oatesian
Conspiracies, but in real Plots against our Sovereign upon this account, there
might then have been just cause for such an insinuation. But whilst our
Principles are so loyal, that we have even been laughed at for our asserting
them -- it was a very unreasonable apprehension to think, that the Charge of
Idolatry should in the bottom have been the design against the Monarchy, which
we have so often declared, and in the Person of our present King, have shown,
we think our selves obliged to support, whatever his Religion be, who is to sit
upon the Throne. -- The truth is, when I consider, how heinous a Suggestion
this is, and what little Foundation there is, either from our Principles or our
Practices to support it, I am under some temptation to reply to this Author,
Nemo hoc potest credere, nisi qui possit audere; and this, I hope, may serve
for my excuse, if I have at this time appeared in defense of a Charge, in
which, every true Member of the Church of England is so highly concerned. --
Let the same Mind be in us, page 15, 16.
which was also in those Primitive Christians before mentioned. -- Let us still
be careful to maintain the Character of the best Subjects, as we have long
asserted the most Loyal Principles; that as the Prosperity of our King makes up
a considerable part of our daily Prayers, so by a sincere discharge of all
humble Obedience toward him, he may effectually see, that excepting only our
Duty toward God, we are much more forward, and ready to do his Majesty
effectual Service, than any Man can be, whose Loyalty is not supported by
Religion. -- We set before our People the Examples of the Primitive Christians;
-- with what an humble Obedience they submitted themselves to their idolatrous
Emperors, and underwent the most cruel Persecutions for their Religion sake,
even when they had Power sufficient to have asserted their Faith, and to have
destroyed both the Idolaters and their Idols together, and by these Maxims we
exhort them to walk.

God be thanked, Id. 2d. Def. against the Bish. of Condem, est. Part. p. 75, 76.
the Pulpits Zeal has ever been employed to keep up in the Subjects that Duty,
which by God's Command they owe to their Prince; and nothing is at this day,
next to our Zeal for our Religion, more our desire and endeavor, than to make
Men Loyal to their Sovereign. Our Pulpits still speak the same Principles of
Subjection,
they ever did. We are neither ashamed of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, nor
afraid of its Practice, tho some of your accquaintance have endavoured to laugh
both that and us out of countenance. Our steadiness to our Religion shall never
make us fail in our Duty to our King. In one word, We will both by our
Preaching and Actions make it our business to fulfill that great Evangelical
Precept, of rendering unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar 's; and unto God,
the things that are God 's.

Dr. Fowler. There is nothing more certain, than that for any of us to be
false, D^sign of Christianity p. 243, 251, 252.
and perfidious, to be ungovernable, rebellious, or seditious, upon the account
of Religion it self, is most unsufferable, and inexcusable: For if it be lawful
to behave our selves after this manner, upon any account whatever, Religion
would be the most useless thing in the World; and if this were lawful upon the
account of Religion only,
I will not stick to say, that it will not be more useless and unprofitable,
than mischievous and hurtful. Nor would the Christion Religion it self be
worthy our profession, if it would give us leave upon any design, to allow our
selves in the forementioned Immoralities, or in any one whatsoever. -- Thus to
do, is no other, than to be irreligious to promote Religion, to be unchristian
to do service to Christianity; and therefore to go the directest way to destroy
it by the means we use for its preservation. -- Thus to do, is to oppose the
Interests of our Religion to that of our Souls, Id. Discour. of Christian
Liberty. p. 175. ^ee his Discourse of Offenses. p. 9, 10, 11.
and to cast these away in the defense of that. -- It is come to that sad pass,
that preaching Obedience to Authority is as unacceptable Doctrine as can be to
even many great Pretenders to Christianity, although it be done never so prudently
and agreeably to the express Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles. And the
Notion of Obedience for Conscience sake, seems almost lost among not a few,
which is one of the great Sins, for which we have too great reason to fear,
there is a heavy Scourge near us.

Mr. Evans. A moderate Man, when the Honor of God, or the King, when Religion,
Sermon of Moderat. 1682. p. 12.
and the Welfare of his Country lie at stake, then thinks it a most worthy and
weighty occasion of employing his Zeal and Activity in their Service, of
defending them with Courage and Resolution, with his Life and Fortunes. -- He
never breaks the second Table to preserve the first, nor make use of any ways
to secure Religion, that are contrary to, or destructive of its Principles. --
What Men esteem great Falsehoods, page 23.
and call Toryism and Popery, are really as true as Gospel. page 34.
-- I will conclude all with this Remark; We may, and shall, if we do not
timely take up, bring in Popery by a heady and extravagant Zeal against it,
and ruin and enslave our selves by our fierce and passionate Contentions for
Liberty, Property, and Safety. p. 48.
-- Give me the Man that is honest, and constant to his Principles, and to what
he professes, whatsoever Party or Persuasion he is of; he is much more valuable
to me, than he that plights his Faith to the Church, and gives all the Security
that can be taken for his Conformity to it, and then after he has wound
himself into its Communion and Preferments, plays booty, and acts like a
Nonconformist: These are the treacherous Friends, that like Vipers, prey upon
the Bowels of their Mother, and betray her, as Judas did our Lord with a Kiss.

Dr. Comber, in his Religion and Loyalty, Sec. Edit. 1683. p. 8, 3. v. page 12*
13, etc.
If the Church of England did make worldly Interest the sole measure of her
Actions, -- they would never consider what was honest, but only what was
expedient, and never stick at ill means to accomplish that, which they account
good Ends. -- We of this Church are perhaps the only Christians since the
Primitive Ages, who never dispensed with our Loyalty to serve our worldly Ends.
And if this do not commend our Policy, I am sure it declares our Honesty and
Integrity, and must needs recommend us to all good Men, as those, who prefer
our Duty and our Conscience before all earthly Advantages. p. 39.
-- No Religion in the World teaches and practices more Loyalty, than that,
which is truly called Protestant; and we doubt not, but that if ever his R. H.
should attain the Crown, he will not blame our Church for that, which was the
Opinion of those, who endeavored to subvert it, after they had renounced all
Communion with it; page 52.
-- especially when it is further considered, how constantly the true
Protestants of the Church of England have loved, and how faithfully they have
served the Royal Family in all Fortunes, how closely they have adhered to the
Interests thereof upon all Occasions; so that whoever were true Sons of this
Church, our Kings have always reckoned them their certain and undoubted
Friends: And when a Rebellion was designed against the blessed Father of his
Royal Highness, the Contrivers of it found it necessary, first to seduce Men
from the Church of England, before they could engage them in so wicked an
Action. p (...)
-- And since the happy Restoration, they have incurred the Hatred of the
bigoted Fanatics, for their perpetual standing for the King's Prerogative,
and their zealous promoting his, and his Royal Highness's Interest. -- The
Pamphlets written in defense of the Bill of Exclusion, p. 57.^^.
frequently transcribe whole Passages out of Doleman's Book: -- Take some of
their accursed Principles.

The Commonwealth has Power to choose their own fashion of Government, as also
to change it upon reasonable Causes.

The Commonwealth has Power, not only to put back the next Inheritors upon
lawful occasions, but also to dispossess them that have been lawfully put in
possession, if they fulfill not the Laws and Conditions by which and for which
their Dignity was given them.

The Republic may cure or cut off their Heads, if they infest the rest.
Princes are subject to Law and Order, and the Commonwealth, which gave them
their Authority for the good of all, may also restrain, or take the same away
again, if they abuse it to the common evil.

The whole Body to superior to the Prince; neither so gives the Commonwealth
her Authority and Power up to any Prince, that she depriveth herself utterly of
the same, when need shall require, to use it for her defense for which she gave
it.

The Prince's Power is not absolute, but delegate from the Commonwealth, and is
given with such Conditions and Oaths on both Parties, as if the same be not
kept by either Party, the other is not bound.

With many other such Popish Positions, So also the Apost. Pr^^. p. 4, 5.
and it is very observable, that this wicked Libel of Doleman was in part
reprinted, Anno 1648. under the feigned Title of Several Speeches delivered at
a Conference concerning the Power of Parliaments, to proceed against their
King's form of Government. page 61.
-- But the Protestant Church of England is not only better in all other
accounts, but does hold, teach, and practice Loyalty above all others in the
World; the Divines thereof generally holding Monarchy to be of divine Right,
and Allegiance to be an Obligation on the Conscience, and indispensible,
because the King's Power is from God, page 62.
to whom only Kings are accountable. -- They pray for him three or four times
by Name in all their solemn Offices; their Sermons are frequent and pressing
upon this Theme, and their Books are numerous (against Papists and their
factious Scholars) for the Right of Kings; yea, and their Actions being always
Loyal, do justify, they sincerely believe as they teach.

Dr. Sec. Edit. ad Lectorem.
Pelling's Apostate Protestant. Those Republicans who were the Movers of the
Bill of Exclusion, very well knew, that by the sam ePower which they pretended
to have to dispose of the Heir, they might pretend afterward to have to divest
and destroy the Possessor of the Crown. -- And I will presume to declare on my
own and my Brethrens behalf too (without begging their pardon) that we still
act,
and by the Grace of God, resolve steadfastly to act upon the same loyal
Principles, wherewith we have hitherto endeavored to season the Kingdom. -- The
People cannot but be tickled at the heart, p. 6, 7.
when they are told, that they have a Sovereign Power in them, which they did
not dream of, that they can make and unmake Kings, that Crowns and Scepters lie
at their Worship's Feet, must make Court to them for Succession, and that they
can if they will, bar them out, and come like the Tribunes of the People of
Rome, with an uncontrollable Veto. -- I am grieved at the heart (and it is
enough to raise the indignation of every honest Man) to find, that so many
among us do so inconsiderately (not to say maliciously) run altogether upon
this Jesuit's Principles, etc. V. p. 9, 10, 11. p. 14.
-- Doleman confidently insists on this, that the Crown is not a bare
Inheritance, but an Inheritance accompanying an Office of trust, and that if a
Man's defects render him incapable of the trust, he has also forfeited the
Inheritance, and from this Principle he concludes, that even a true King may be
deposed, when he answers not the trust, which the People had reposed in him. --
This Jesuitical Doctrine did not long ago cost one of our Kings his Throne, and
his life too; I pray God, it be not so chargeable to another, but it is ominous,
when pretending Protestants will be nibling at such Jesuitical Principles;
Observe, that the Power of Deposing a King, P. 19.
naturally follows from the Doctrine of the People's Power to choose one, -- if
any of our Clergy hold our Kings to be Divine, they hold no more, than what all
Christians have ever held, P. 21. V. p. 24, 25. P. 33, 34. v. loc. and p. 36.
no more than what the Church of England has declared, no more than what the
Laws of our Country do own, and will bear them out in. -- Doleman is positive,
that Princes may lawfully be deposed; and he observes too (is a remarkable
instance, as he calls it) that God has wonderfully concurred (for the most
part) with such judicial Acts of the Commonwealth against their evil Princes,
not only in prospering the same, but by giving also some notable Successor in
the place of the deposed; had Father Parsons been alive in our days, perhaps he
would have instanced in that blessed Bird Oliver Cromwell among the rest.

I happened to read a new Assemblies Catechism, called a Political Catechism,
p. 38. v. p. 40, 41, etc.
and I found it as full of the Jesuit's Venom, as if it had been spit out of
Doleman's own Mouth; these are some of the Principles in it word for word. 1.
That the Government being a regulated Monarchy, the King is not above the Law,
but is accountable to the Law, and not to God only. 2. That whatsoever is done
by the King without, and beyond the limits of the Regulation is not Regal
Authority. 3. That to resist the notorious transgressions of that regulation is
no resisting the Regal Authority; -- that the immediate Original of the King's
Power is from the People, and many other such Principles, upon which the late
Rebellion was raised and maintained

After this he proceeds to show, that the little arts made use of to evade the
obligations to Passive Obedience, have been also borrowed from the Jesuits, and
to vindicate Dr. Hicks's Sermon on that Subject; as also to show the Parallel
between the Jesuit, and the Puritan, particularly in their disobedience to
Government, violation of Oaths, etc. And then subjoins, that when once Men are
Jesuited, P. 50.
they will never stick at any manner of wickedness, Lying, Libelling, Sedition,
defaming of Government, Perjury, etc. -- you see, how basely partial these
Folks are in their ordinary censures; P. 51.
let a Man be a true Friend to the King, and to the Established Government, and
presently (forsooth) he is a Papist; let him resuse to do evil, that good may
come (tho that was St. Paul's way) and he is called a Papist; let him be for
subjection to a Lawful Prince,
and (when time serves) for Passive Obedience, and he is a Papist with a
witness, but let these Men profess the Faith and Doctrins of the Jesuits, let
them lie and equivocate like the Jesuits, let them violate Oaths, v. p 52, 53,
57, 58.
or construe them in their own sense like the Jesuits; let them dispense with
one another in doing any wickedness, that is serviceable to their cause (as the
Jesuits do) yet who but they the true Protestants? -- we dare not be dishonest,
unless we will be Hypocrites, nor be Rebels, P. 54.
unless we will be damned.

Some in Solomon's time were given to change out of (...) strange kind of
levity, and inconsistency of mind; Id. Sermon. on Prove 24.21. 1632. p. 25.
and therefore some Expositors render the place thus, cum inconstantibus, with
Men that are fickle, and unsteady in their Loyalty; would we not think it
strange, that Men, who have showed their fidelity all along; Men, who have
acted, taught, suffered, and ventured their Lives for the sake of Majesty,
should such, I say, start aside, and suffer themselves to be wheadled into
Faction at last? Truly we might wonder at it the less, when we consider, that
it was the case of several Men in the Reign of David, and especially two very
eminent Persons, Abiathar the Priest, and Joab that brave Commander; the former
had been David's secret, and sure Friend, and the later had not turned after
Absalom; both of them had been faithful hitherto; but when Adonijah usurped the
Kingdom, both of them were concerned in that Plot; the Priest turned an
Ap^state, and the General a Renegado; upon what provocations, I do not know,
nor can I gather any reason thereof, unless it be that I now have mentioned, a
strange inconstancy of Spirit in Men, who in David's Old Age thought it their
best cunning to take up the Persian custom, and worship the Rising Sun.

Thus the Letter to a dissenter on occasion of the Declaration of Indulgence;
We are not to be laughed out of our Passive Obedience, and the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, tho even those, who perhaps owe the best part of their security
to that Principle, are apt to make a jest of it.

SECT. XVII.
Dr. C. 26.. 1, 2, 6, 8.
Pierce Dean of Salisbury in his body of Orthodox Divinity, avers, that the
Church of God consists of a Civil, as well as an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, that
Magistrates are constituted by a Divine right, as well as Priests; that he, who
resists the Magistrate so constituted by God, wounds his Conscience deeply in
this World, and shall be damned in the next; after which he smartly censures
both the Fanatics, and the Jesuits; the scandals of Christianity, as he calls
them, condemning the Doctrins of both sorts of them, and showing the
unreasonableness of that proposition, that Inferior Magistrates may control a
Prince, if he does not do his duty, since by the Laws of the Land (as well as
the Laws of God) a King can do no harm, i.e. that the King is unaccountable,
inferior only to God, and obnoxious only to his Tribunal, so that no Mortal,
much less his Subjects can have any Authority over him. Id. exceeding
sinfulness of Schism.. 5, 6, 7, 11. v. Ser. on 1 Pet. 2.13.. 4, 5, 7, 8.
-- Obedience to Magistrates being of Divine Right, strongly founded upon the
Will, and the Word of God, and even a part of the Obedience to God himself
(whilst it is paid to that Authority, which God has commanded us to pay an
Obedience to) cannot possibly be due to the Men, as Men; or to the good, as
they are good; but to the Magistrates, as they are such; it is due to the
Governors, as they are Governors, and as the Ordinance of God, let their
Practices and Opinions be what they will. -- When God and his Deputies do stand
in competition for our Obedience, God must have our whole active, and his
Deputies our Passive Obedience only. -- Saving the dignity, and priority of the
first and great commandment, as the ground and foundation of all the rest, our
Obedience to our Governors, and Humane Laws in force among us, is as really an
Essential and Fundamental of Christianity,
and of as absolute necessity to our Salvation, as the belief of one God, or
any other that can be named; it being as rigidly commanded by God in Scripture,
under the very same promises of reward, if we obey, and under the very same
threats of endless punishments, if we rebel.

Dr. Sermon. on Tit. 3.1. p. 4, 5. etc.
D. Whitby Chantor of the same Church in the time of the D. of Monmouth,
Rebelbelli^n laid down this position, That Christians must be subject to their
Civil Magistrates, and in no cases are allowed, or authorized forcibly to
resist, or bear Arms against them; and this he proves at large from the
expressions of the Holy Scriptures, from the deportment of David to King Saul,
-- that Jeroboam's revolt is by God himself called Rebellion. 1 King. 12.19. p.
8, 9.
-- for as a Father does not forfeit his Authority over his Children, nor are
they freed from that Obedience, which they owe him, because he deals severely
with them, so neither can the King, i. e. the Father of his Country lose his
Authority over his Subjects, because he governs them severely, or lays
afflicting burdens on them; -- the Scriptures of the New Testament expressly
call for our subjection; Let every Soul be subject, says St. Paul; so let him
yield subjection to them, as never to resist on any provocation, temptation, or
specious pretense whatsoever. -- whence it is clear, p 10. Sermon. (...) 13.1. p.
24, 26, 27, 2^, 29, 30, 31.
that by the Christian Doctrine it is unlawful to resist the Higher Powers upon
pretense of Maladministration, Tyranny, Injustice, or to rebel for the
defense of our Religion against the worst of persecuting Princes; for if
Resistance in the forementioned cases was a damning sin, when can it be
excusable: -- after this he answers the common objections from the Coronation
Oath, and Self-Preservation, etc.

Mr. Long's Sermon, called the causes of Rebellion, Preached Jan. 13. 1683. on
J^^. 4.1. P. 14, 15.
was Printed by the joint desires of the Bishop of Exon, and the Justices of
the County of Devon, and the Dedication gives an account of an order of theirs,
that concurs with the Doctrine of the Sermon; -- nor can any complaint of
Tyranny, or Oppression justify a War among us, -- did we suffer under some
miscarriages in Government, some passions, and excesses in our Governors,
neither Scripture, nor reason will warrant any resistance. Obj. But the
Primitive Christians had no Laws to confirm their Religion, P. 16.
and therefore it was not so lawful for them to defend their Religion by Arms,
as it is for us. Answ. It is strange, that our Laws should be made a pretense
for Resistance, which declare, that it is not lawful to resist upon any
pretense whatsoever. -- then the Subjects are made Judges of the Actions, and
Conduct of their Governors. P. 22, 23.
-- I take those, and only those, who do agree with the Jesuits in Preaching,
and propagating Seditious and Traitorous Principles and Practices, such as the
lawfulness of Resistance, and taking up Arms in defense of Religion against the
Supreme Magistrate; that the Original of the Magistrate's Power is in the
People, who may call them to an account, and Depose, and Murder them as they
see cause, -- those, who have Murdered one King already, and use the same
Methods to destroy another, -- in a word, V. p. 23, 26.
all such as will not declare, that it is unlawful to take up Arms against the
King, on any pretense whatsoever, or that they will not endeavor any
alteration of the established Government, -- for such false Prophets, as our
Savior bids us to beware of. This also is the Doctrine of his Sermon, on July
26. 1685. and his Vindication of the Primitive Christians, etc.

Dr. Fuller Chancellor of Lincoln; -- those Men have but little sense of the
honor of Christian Religion, that abuse its Name, Ser. bef. the King June 25.
1682. p. 56, etc.
and pervert its obligations to justify Sedition and Rebellion; who with great
pretenses, and zeal for Christianity forsake her in her more principal commands
of meekness, patience, and submission; and defend the Doctrine of Resistance and
Disobedience from those Holy Scriptures, that have forbidden them under the
penalty of Damnation; -- that those Men do little deserve the Character of
Reformed, who have forsaken our Reformation in its Principal and Fundamental
Doctrine of the King's Supremacy, and renounced the Protestant Church of
England, in all her Principles of Christian Loyalty; -- and indeed all the
Enemies of the Church of England, how distant soever in other points, are
perfectly united in the Doctrine of disobedience; all agreeing in one
conclusion, against the express commands of Holy Scripture, that it is lawful
to resist the Higher Powers, etc.

Dr. Sclater. What a joy will it be to thy Spirit, and a lightning to thy
Heart, Royal pay, and paymaster on Romans 2.10. p. 6, 7, 1^
when thou can say thou did not cowardly yield, tho thou have been
disarmed, sequestered, decimated, and unrewarded for it. -- 'twas of God's mercy
to be kept faithful to the righteous cause of God, and the King, when there
were so many temptations to witdraw us from our Loyalty; -- Fidelity and
Loyalty is in a more especial manner required in a Subject toward his
Sovereign; -- it is Treason in a Subject to fight against his Sovereign. -- but
how long must this Fidelity last? a day or two, or so? Oh, no I this
Commandment is like that heavy saying in Matrimony, till death us do part.

Dr. Hickman. Sermon. before Lord Mayor Ju^. 27. 1680 p. 17, 18.
The honor of God, and the defense of his Worship are glorious Undertakings,
yet even here the excess of zeal is a crime, and the great importance of the
end cannot justify any unlawfulness in the means; the will of God, as it is
expressed in his Word, is the standard of good and evil; and he will not suffer
his eternal Laws to be violated, tho in his own defense; if it should please
him to give his, and our Enemies such advantage over us, as may endanger the
exercise of our Religion, we have our Prayers, and other lawful endeavors for
our redress; but we must not defend our Church by an unlawful return of evil
for evil, nor, like our Adversaries, commit any Act of Impiety or Injustice,
tho under the most specious pretense of fighting the Battles of the Lord: The
goodness of the Cause here is so far from justifying the Act, that it only
aggravates the offense, -- when a Law is violated, or any injustice done for
the sake of our Religion, both the scandal, and the Crime become conspicuous,
they are then laid at the door of our Church, and bring a public and perpetual
blot upon our cause; P. 19, v. p. 20, 33.
-- what can our Religion profit us, or what honor can it bring to the
Almighty, when our Sacrifice comes polluted with blood, and violence of its
own, how can it atone for our transgressions? therefore it is necessary to
obey, not only for wrath,
but also for Conscience sake. St. Peter, who was the first that drew his Sword
In his Master's quarrel, was the first that denied his name, and forsook his
cause; and doubtless, whosoever fights for his Religion against his Prince, can
never pass the muster without a Romish dispensation.

Mr. Ser. at Bath. Aug. 7. ^631. p. 4, 5, etc.
Jos. Pleydall Archdeacon of Chichester. Plebeians and Hobbists proceed upon
one and the same Principle, making the People the Fountain of all Power; --
whereas Subjects owe a natural and inviolable Allegiance, -- but if a Prince
prove a Tyrant, does he not by Maladministration forfeit the trust reposed in
him? -- in whose Opinion? in the Opinion of Mariana, or Knox, Hobbs, or
Bradshaw; i. e. in the judgment of Papists, P. 8.
Sectaries, Atheists, or Rebels; -- it is impossible there should be a
Rebellion, while the Principles of the Church of England are revered and owned;
-- that Kings may be Deposed and Murdered, P. 11.
we may reckon under the Apostles strange and monstrous Doctrins, or rather
under his Doctrins of Devils.

Mr. Assize Ser. p. 21, 22. v. p. 5, 78, 16.
Kimberley. No pretenses of Conscience or Religion, can Authorize our
Resistance of the lawful Powers, which God has set over us; they never knew,
what it was in the times of the Primitive Christianity to oppose, expel or
destroy any Pagan, Persecuting Arian or Apostate Emperor.

Mr. Assize Ser. p. 21.
Jemmat. None but God can absolve Subjects from that Allegiance and Obedience,
which they owe to their natural Lords; neither the Male administration of
Government, nor their own fears, jealousies, nor the decay of Trade; no nor the
hazard of Religion it self can justify the Acts of Rebellion; -- they, to whom
God has given his own Power, are accountable to none but himself, etc.

Mr. Sermon. on 2 Chr. 13.5. p. 6. v. p. 8, 15, 18.
Camfield. The King is in the highest place, and highest power, and
consequently all in his Dominions: Every Soul of them are obliged to be subject
to him, none may presume to judge or resist him violently; there can be nothing
justifyable on the Subjects part, but obedience and Submission, the rest must
be referred to God alone the only Ruler of Princes, etc.

Mr. Ser. at York. Aug 3. 1685. p. 16, 24. (...) loc.
Stainforth. We have great reason to pity, and pray for Kings for the eminency
of their Station, and uncontroulableness of their Power. -- if Princes are bad
Men, and oppress their Subjects against reason and against Law, we have no
reason left us, but Prayers to God, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings. --
Whatsoever Injuries they heap upon us, whatsoever Violences and Persecutions we
suffer under them, we must not suffer our Passions to rise and swell againvt
them; -- much less must we take up Arms, and by force resist their Persons or
Authority: P. 34.
-- Those who take up Arms against their Sovereign's Authority fight against
Heaven.

Mr. Graile, Rector of Blickling in Norfolk, published four Sermons: Land.
1685. P. 44, 45.
For Loyalty to our Prince is a thing commanded by God himself, together with
Piety and Devotion toward himself, yea, and commanded in the very next place
to it; so that the one is a part, an inseparable part, a very considerable part
of the other: And it follows from hence by an apparent Consequence, that Men's
Disloyalty is a clear indication of their irreligion; if they fear not the
King, they fear not God.
If any Man seem to be religious, and bridles not his Tongue from speaking evil
of Dignities, or Higher Powers, Jam. 1.26. 2 Pet 2.10. Romans 13.2. P. 53, 54, 55.
that Man's Religion is vain; and it is much more so, if he holds not his hands
from resisting these Powers: Our Law will have no Error, no Injustice, no
Folly, no Imperfection whatsoever to be found in the King. -- All the States of
the Realm joined together, all the Nobles and Commons, and the whole Body of
the People have not a Power and Authority equal to his: -- For otherwise he
would not be the King of a Kingdom, but of single Men separately taken. P. 56.
-- The King is no substitute of the People, but the Minister of God, and his
Power is the Ordinance of God. -- It is a contradiction to be Sovereign, and to
have a Superior. -- The Lords, P. 57.
both Spiritual and Temporal together, with all the Commons assembled in
Parliament, do by a solemn Oath acknowledge the King to be Supreme, and
themselves to be his Subjects: And they have in public Statutes particularly
declared, -- That both, or either Houses of Parliament cannot, nor lawfully may
raise or levy any War, offensive or defensive,
against his Majesty, his Heirs and lawful Successors: -- Neither is the King
accountable to them, or to any other besides God: These are the Essentials of
Sovereignty. -- There is but one Case, wherein a good and loyal Subject will
refuse to obey his Prince, and that is, p. 60, 61, v. p. 66, 96, 97, 119, 120,
154.
when such Obedience will by no means consist with his Obedience to God: -- But
there is no Case whatsoever, wherein he dares either to resist or reproach the
Person or Authority of the King, or to offer any Indignity to him: -- To fight
against him, is to fight against God, whom the King represents, -- upon any
pretense whatsoever, it cannot be done without open Perfidiousness and
Rebellion: -- Such are Monsters of Men, and are as natural brute Beasts, made
to be taken and destroyed: So S. Peter describes them, 2 Pet. 2.10, 12.

Mr. David Jenner, in his Prerogative of Primogenitures Land, 1635 P. 48.
, asserts the same Cause: Although the Law of God is indeed above all Kings, and
if they wilfully transgress the same, they are all accountable unto God, and
unto God only for the same, yet in this Kingdom of England, no Statute Law is
or can be above the King, because it was the King that first gave life and
being to the Law of the Land; the King by his Royal Assent made the Law to be
what it is, viz. a Law: But the Law of the Land did not make the King to be
what he is, viz. a King; for the King was King before the Law. -- That the
Doctrine and Practice of Deposing lawful Kings, P. 122.
and Excluding the right Heir from succeeding in the Throne for his being an
Heretic, Idolater,
tyrannical and wicked; is grounded upon nothing but Popery and Fanaticism.

Mr. Hancock, in his Answer to the Viscount Stafford's Memoires: Land. 1682. p.
31.
I could make it evident, that the same Maxims of Political Divinity, the same
Arguments, and many times the same Phrases and Expressions are to be found in
the Heads of both Factions: I know it is disputed, whether the Ringleaders of
Sedition among us poisoned the Jesuits, or the Jesuits them; but I do not envy
the Bishops of Rome the Honor of having first poisoned them both with
Antimonarchical Doctrins. If Milton (the great Oracle of one of the Factions)
had owned himself to be a Papist, there had been no reason to wonder at the
Impiety of his Doctrins, which he either did, or might have learnt from the
Popes, and greatest Divines of the Roman Church. It was truly alleged by
Salmasius, that the Doctrine of the sacred and inviolable Authority of Princes
was preserved pure and incorrupt in the Church, till the Bishops of Rome
attempted to set up a Kingdom in this World paramount to all Kings and
Emperors; but he with his usual Confidence, acquits the Popes, and charges his
Antimonarchical Principles on Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Bucer, Martyr, Parcus,
and all the Reformed Divines. -- Bellarmine, P. 50.
Parsons, Creswel, Suarez, etc. are the Men that furnished the leading Faction
among us with Principles and Precedents, with Arguments and Texts of Scripture;
-- out of whom they either did or might have derived the Grounds of the War
against the King, of erecting an High Court of Justice, and of bringing him to
the Block.

John Goodwin, P. 53.
in one of his Pamphlets has this remarkable Expression, As for offering
Violence to the Person of a King, or attempting to take away his Life, we leave
the Proof of the lawfulness of it to those profound Disputers the Jesuits. P.
166, etc.
-- I have fairly represented those Doctrins and Principles, which strike at
the very root of our established Religion and Government, with the Arts and
Instruments which have been used by the prevailing Faction of the Roman Church
for the Subversion of them:
And I know no stronger Argument against the truth and goodness of any
Religion, than that it supplants moral Righteousness, and serves to be a Bond
of Conspiracy; allows of Sedition and Treachery, Injustice and Cruelty; for
how can that Religion be from God, which makes Men unlike to God, as had or
worse than if they were left to the Principles and Inclinations of their own
Natures? -- Of the Church of England I will only say, It has established the
Right of Kings upon such sure and unalterable Foundations, that it is the
Interest, as well as the Duty of the Civil Power, to support and defend it.

Mr. Animadv. on Ob. Chapter Govern. Preface.
Smalridge. Certainly that Doctrine which invades the just Rights of Princes,
can hope but for few Proselytes among those, who have constantly defended them
in their Writings, asserted them in their Decrees, and upon all occasions
vindicated them with their Swords. For we do not lie open to the imputation of
a conditioned and distinguishing Loyalty, who have showed our readiness to
imitate the glorious Examples of our Fathers, and were prepared (had not God's
good Providence prevented our Service) to have transcribed that Copy lately at
Sedgmore, which they set us formerly at Edg-hill. And in truth our steady
Fidelity to the Prince is so unquestionable, that our Enemies have been pleased
to ridicule what they could not deny, and have made Passive Obedience bear a
part in our Character, when the Muse has been inclined to Satyr.

Thus also the Person of Quality, who wrote the Reasons, Why a Protestant
should not turn Papist. P. 30, 31.
-- I am then quite out of conceit with your Religion, since I cannot embrace
it without endangering my Loyalty (by reason of the Deposing Doctrine) in case I
live up to the pitch of its real Principles. But it is all one to me, so long as
I remain a Protestant, what Religion my Prince is of (tho I could wish, he were
of the same I profess) because his Authority over me, and my indispensible
Obligation to submit to him, do not depend upon his Opinion or Religion, but
upon his Birthright; yet have we not reason to doubt, if the zealous sort of
Roman Catholics would not think it lawful to take Arms against their Prince
turned a Heretic, since the French League against Henry the 4th. was upon this
very account styled Holy; and had I not been particularly acquainted with the
Principles of the Church of Rome, I had never conceived how it came to pass,
that such great Numbers of learned and well-meaning Men too, could be guilty of
such a horrible wickedness as that was, and forget themselves so far, as to
pretend Holiness in an open Rebellion against their lawful Prince. -- I am then
more satisfied with the Loyalty of a Protestant, especially of the Church of
England, who acknowledges the Prince to be a Supreme Governor over all his
Subjects, and Sovereign Judge in all Cases, than with that of a Roman Catholic,
who seems to set limits to his Power by such restrictions, as neither Reason
nor Scripture can warrant.

Mr. Pomfret. Sermon. called Subjection for Conscience sake, p. 16.
Must the freeborn Subject break in upon the Birthrights and Liberties of the
Crown, and reduce it to Submission and Slavery, that the humersom Christian may
enjoy, what he is pleased to call his Christian Liberty? Christ gave not his
Blood for this end; nor did he make a purchase of a disobedient and gainsaying
People: -- Be confident, no man can be God's Servant, unless he be also a good
Subject. P. 22.
-- Some men's Opinions and other men's Interests, is the Conscience they so much
talk of; and then it is no wonder at all, they cannot for their hearts obey,
when they themselves are setting up for Superiority. Id. Pass. Ob. stated and
asserted. page 3. P. 15.
-- Passive Obedience is a patient and mild Suffering the hard and unjust
Usages of Kings, being both the Christian's Duty and Profession: But this meek
and Christian Principle was of late called to an account, and with Arguments of
Railery and Contempt endeavored to be hooted out of the World. -- Under the
old Law, when the King should usurp upon their Lands, and Wives and Children, 1 Samuel 8.11.18. all their Remedy was, Ye shall cry out unto the Lord in that day,
etc. -- They that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. p. 17, 18, 19,
21.
It is in vain to say more, being so plain to any Man to understand, that
seriously thinks of a day of Judgment, when all the dawbing of Liberty and
Property, and Religion, shall be wiped off, and no pretense nor distinction,
satisfy against the evidence of Truth, and so plain Expressions.

Mr. Nicolas Claget. Disloyal Principles dispose Men to be unquiet Subjects,
Sermon. on 1 These. 4.11. p. 27. p. 22, 23, 38, 39, 40.
such as these, That all Power is from the People, and is put into the King's
hands upon trust, that it is lawful for Subjects to enter into Covenants and
Associations for the defense of themselves and their Religion, against the
Command of the Prince, etc. which are the Doctrins of Jesuits and Fanatics;
See also Wilson's Disourse of Monarchy, p. 15. 22, 70, 72.81, 82. 106. 198.
207. 209. 248. 258, 259. Mr. John Cook, Sermon. before the L. Mayor, May 13.
1683. page 8, 9. it. 24, 25. Dr. Jo. Price Seem. Sept. 9. 1683. page 2. 12. 15.
18. Mr. Will. Bolton, Coreh Redivivus, page 9. 14. 29. Mr. Higham on Prove.
24.21. page 45, etc. 86. 108. 123. 137. 157. 160. 175. etc. Mr. Whitfield's
Sermon before the L. Mayor, Jul. 30. 1632. on Jude 8. Mr. Gifferd's Assize
Sermon, p. 12. Mr. Hyrick's Sermon, July 26. 1685. p. 6, 10, 23, 26. Mr.
Brown's Sermon at the Visitation, Apr. 12. 1681. p. 27, 34. Dr. Smith,
Prebendary of Norwich, Assize Sermon. Sept. 13. 1668. p. 8, 9. etc. Id. Assize
Sermon. Feb. 27. 1672. p. 28. B. Rively's Sermon at Norwich, July 19. 1679. on
Romans 13.4. p. 6, 7. Dr. Thompson, Dean of Bristol, Sermon. June 21. 1685. on Tit.
3.1. p. 3, 5, 6, 14. 16, 17, 18, etc. Mr. Bura's Sermon. May 29. 1684. p. 25, 27,
etc. Mr. Ethorowe's Scriptural Catechism, p. 59. Mr. Alsop's Sermon. on Exodus
20.12. p. 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, etc. 24, 25, 30. Dr. Fr. Gregory's Sermon. Nov. 5.
1679 p. 6, 9, 25. Mr. Will. Godman's Sermon May 24. 1660. p. 21, 22, etc. Mr.
Luce's Sermon. on 1 Pet. 2.16. p. 14, 17, 18. Mr. Fisher's Sermon. Jan. 30. 1672.
p. 11, 13. Mr. Sayer's Assize Sermon. Feb. 25. 1672. p. 38, 40. Dr. Barnes's
Sermon. before the Univers. of Cambr. p. 10, 19, 20 Mr. Crisp's Visir. Sermon.
1686. And very many other such Discourses; and I have reason to suppose, that
if the Sermons of all the Divines of the Chapter of England, on this subject, were
in Print, the very Catalogue would swell to a very great bulk.
Doctrines of so pernicious a consequence to the public Peace, that it is
enough to make us reject them as false, without examining them further. -- Such
impious Doctrins and Principles as are destructive of the State, and do leave
Governments and Governors insecure. -- P. 44.
And is Religion and God's Cause a Pretext for Treason and Rebellion? This is
next to Blasphemy, and is an impious Reflection on the Wisdom and Power of God;
as if to bring about his own Designs, he stood in need of our Devilish Devices.

I shall close this Chapter with the Testimony of Dr. Carswell, Vicar of Bray,
Sermon. at she Assize, Mar. 3. 1683/^. p. 25.
in his State Reformer inquired into. -- Designing Men still cunningly hide the
disloyal Treachery in their Hearts, their ambitious Designs, their Disgusts and
Disgraces at Court, their Discontents for missng Places of Trust, Command,
Profit, or Honor, under the Vizard or fair-fac'd Pretenses of Religion or
Justice; P. 3^.
they are only concerned as Patriots of their Religion and Country, etc. -- If
our Judges are unjust, or the King had deputed none to hear, p. 44.
or none that would do Justice, it were not then lawful to oppose or revile: Be
wise now therefore, O ye Kings, etc. Tho the People may not da^e to revile, p.
41.
or presume to call you to an account, yet the King of Kings, whose Deputies
you are, will exact an account of your Stewardship. -- God made not the People
Judge of Moses's Actions, but him of theirs.

The End of the Second Part.
Some grosser ERRATA of the First Part.
IN the Catal. of Authors, read B. Montague. p. 7. for primitive, r. more
early. p. 18. for subscribed, v. assented to. for An. 1684. r. the same Year.
p. 32. r. Ficlerus. p. 35. r. Al Kum. p. 43. after or better him add the
Paragraph in p. 46. And according to this Doctrine unto Malignants. p. 54. r.
Goodwin. p. 74. for L. r. lastly. p. 88. r. irreligious.

ERRATA of the Second Part.
Page 1. for ought to, read would willingly. p. 5. l. 12. r. do deserve. p. 9.
r. an. 1542/3. p. 11. marg. r. Barnes. p. 14. l. 18. r. as they. p. 20. r. a
Friend. p. 32. l. 24. r. as he. p. 36. must. p. 53. how much. p. 57. l. 1. the
state, dele after the words, to following. p. 59. l. 26. they could. p. 70. l.
31. p. rend, etc. p. 79. l. 27. r. then. p. 82. l. 36. for which r. and. p. 84.
r. or Merode. p. 88^ as if he. p. 91. r. sorer. p. 94. Abbadon. p. 95. l. 2. r.
whom. p. 96. (...). p. 101. r. then only B. p. 104. marg. Bowsin. p. 105. l.
28. r. was the first. p. 109. dele the Cicero of the Fr. Church. dele Buckler
of Faith. p. 112. l. 37. r. that Book is. p. 127. r. 1661. p. 138. r. Theses.
p. 144. after B. Fell should be placed D. Allestry, who is placed p. 147. and
instead of Dr. Allestry should be placed p. 147. B. Thomas. p. 149. r.
wickedly. -- The rest the Reader is desired to correct.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Power communicated by God to the Prince,
and the Obedience required of the Subject: Briefly laid down and confirmed out
of the Holy Scriptures, the Testimony of the Primitive Church, the Dictates of
right Reason, and the Opinion of the wisest among Heathen Writers. By the most
Reverend Father in God James late Lord Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all
Ireland. Faithfully published out of the Original Copy (written with his own
hand) by the Reverend Father in God, Robert Saunderson, L. Bishop of Lincoln;
with his Lordships Preface thereunto. Sold by the Booksellers in London.


