woman flanked by cherubim, zodiacal signs overhead

ATLAS CAELESTIS Containing the Systems and Theoryes of the Planets, the
Constellations of the stars, and other Phenomina's of the Heavens, with
Necessary tables relating thereto

Collected By John Seller.

sun with planet orbiting through houses of the zodiac

A brief Description of the several Systems, Theories, Schemes, and Tables
contained in this Book. Also, a Discourse of the Celestial Bodies, the Sun and
Moon, and the rest of the Planets, Fiery-Meteors, Blazing-Stars, and other
Phenomena's in the Heavens.
CHAP. I.
A Description of the System of Ptolomy.
THis Systeme of the Heavens, and the Motions of the Planets, is of greater
antiquity than the other Palanetary Systems, either by Copernicus, or Tycho,
and is supposed by some to be more consentaneous to the Letter of the Scripture
then the rest. It was first invented by one Clandius Ptolomeus, a Native of
Pelusium, in his time the Prince of Astronomers, Astrologers, and Geographers,
who lived Anno Christi 135, and wrote several Books on these Subjects.

This Systeme supposes the Earth to be fixed as the Center of the World, and
that all the Celestial-Bodies move round the same, both in their Diurnal and
Annual Revolutions.

The World is supposed to be divided principally in two parts, Elemental and
Celestial: The Elemental admits of four divisions.

The first is the Earth.

The second is the Water, both which makes one entire Body or Globe, whereon we
dwell.

The third is the Air, encompassing the Earth.

And the fourth is the Fire, which according to the opinion of ancient
Philosophers, is contained in that space between the Air and the Sphere of the
Moon.

These four Elements are subject to a continual change and alteration of one
into another, according to the Proverb, Omnia sublunaria mutabilia.

The Celestial part is that which is without these elementary parts, void of
all changes, and is by the ancient Astronomers divided into ten Parts or
Heavens.

The first of which, next to the Region of Fire, is the Heaven or Orb of the
Moon.

The second of Mercury.

The third of Venus.

The fourth of the Sun.

The fifth of Mars.

The sixth of Jupiter:

The seventh of Saturn.

The eighth of the Fixed-Stars.

The ninth is called the Cristalline-Heaven.

The tenth the Primum Mobile.

Ptolemaic model of the solar system Hypothesis Ptolomaica


The magnitude of these Heavens is known by their Courses, which those great
Bodies within them makes, round the Poles of the Zodiac.

The Moon runs through the Heavens, by her natural course from West to East
in 27 Days, and 8 Hours.

Mercury in 88 Days.

Venus in 225 Days.

And the Sun in a Year, or 365 Days and 6 Hours.

Mars in two Years.

Jupiter in 12 Years.

Saturn in 30 Years.

The eighth Heaven perfects its course according to the affirmation of Tycho
Brahe, in 25400 Years.

These Heavens are turned round about upon the Axis of the World by the tenth
Heaven, which is the Primum Mobile, or first Mover, by which motion is caused
Day and Night, and the daily rising and setting of the Heavenly Lights.

Of the Copernican System.
THis System was contrived by one Nicholas Copernicus, a Native of Thorn in
Prussia, a Cannon of the Church of Frawenburgh, the Cathedral of Wamerlandt,
Scholar to Dominicus Maria, of Ferrara, to whom he was Assistant in making his
Astronomical Observations at Bologna, and Professor of the Mathematics at
Rome; and had the happiness to frame this Hypothesis, which has the general
approbation of the most Learned Astronomers and Mathematicians in Christendom.
He lived about the Year Anno Christi 1536, whose System and Hypothesis is thus
framed.

1. That the Sun is placed in the midst of the World in or about the Center of
the Sphere of the fixed Stars, and has no Circular motion, but Central only.

2. The Primary Planets are each of them in their proper Systems moved about
the Sun, and do accomplish their Periodical Revolutions most exactly in their
determinate and appointed times.

3. That the Earth is one of the Planets, and with her Annual motion about the
Sun, describes her Orb in the middle, between the Orbs of Mars and Venus.

4. That the secundary Planets are ordinarily moed about the primary Planets,
respecting their Bodies for their common Nodes or Centers.

5. That the secundary Planet the Moon is moved about the Earth as her Center,
where by reason of the Annual motion of the Earth she has not only relation to
the Earth, but by consequence to the Sun, as the other Planets have.

6. That as the primary Planet the Earth, is environed with the Sphere of the
Moon, so are some (if not all) the other primary Planets, who have in like
manner their Moons or Concomitants encompassing them: As Jupiter his
Satellities, or Circum-Jovials, and Saturn his Ring. With some other Stars
lately observed by some of our vigilant and accurate Astronomers, both in
England and elsewhere.

Copernican model of the solar system Hypothesis Copernic^


map of the sun Schema corporis SOLARIS* pr^uta PP* Kircher^ et Sch^ ^o Roma
Anno 1635 observatum
Polus Borea^

SPATIUM ETHEREUM

Solaris Equator

SPATIUM ETHEREUM

Polus Aus^s

(...) Glob^ (...) Equator Solaris B.^.C. Sp^t^m Solis boreale. H.G.I. Spac^m
(...) Spacium Solis torridum A Pute^ (...) L.M.N.O. etc. Evaporationes una et
macularum Or^



The order and motion of the Planets in the Copernican System; wherein is
showed the proportion of the Planetary Orbs, according to the latest and most
approved Experiments of Learned Astronomers, with some remarkable Observations
of the most eminent Phenomena's in the Planetary motions happening therein.
Of the Sun.
THe Sun who is Fons lucis, oculus and anima Mundi, the Fountain of pure Light,
the Eye and Soul of the World, is placed in the middle and center of the
Planetary Systems, and is far greater than any of the Planets that move about
him.

He performs a revolution upon his proper Axis, in 26 Days, or thereabouts, as
Telescope-Observations testify by several remarkable spots that appear in his
Body, by virtue whereof (says the Learned Kepler) all the Planets are carried
about the Sun in their several Orbs, and seems to be forced about by the
Central motions of that great Body in the middle of their Vortex.

And hence it is, that according to the diversity and appearance of his rising
and setting, and obliquation, he divides the Seasons of the Year, and causes
an interchangeable course and vicissitude of Day and Night.

Of Mercury.
The first primary Planet above the Sun is Mercury, who performs his course in
his Elipsis, in 88 Days.

His proper Diurnal motion is 4 Degrees. 5 Min. 12 Seconds, the Circuit of his
Sphere is 12059773 Miles; so that he wheels in a Day 137040 Miles, and in an
Hour 5710 Miles, and in a Min. 91 Miles.

The Body of Mercury is less than the Earth 3000 times, his greatest elongation
from the Sun in respect of the Earths position is sometimes but 17 Degrees. and
never fully 19 Degrees. so that he is seldom seen of us.

Of Venus.
Next above Mercury is the Orb and glittering Star of Venus, who makes her
Periodical Revolution in her Elipsis about the Body of the Sun, in 224 Days.

It is from the Sun to the Sphere of Venus 3636104 Miles; hence the Circuit of
her Sphere is 22855911 Miles.

Her mean Diurnal motion is 1 Degrees. 36 Min. 8 Seconds; so that she moves in a
Day 101712 Miles, in an an Hour 4238 Miles, and in a Min. 70 Miles: She is
lesser than the Earth 147 times, and yet in respect of her vicinity to the
Earth (in the lower part of her Orb) she appears much brighter than any Star in
the whole Firmament, the Sun and Moon excepted, insomuch that she has been
often seen in the day time, as at the Birth of His Majesty K. Charles the 2d.
When she is a morning Star, rising before the Sun, she is called Lucifer, but
when an evening Star, Vesperus.

Her greatest elongation from the Sun (as it is beheld from the Earth) is but
45 Degrees. and never 48 Degrees.

Of the Earth.
In the middle of all Planets is the Earth (which according to the System of
Copernicus) being placed between the Orbs of Mars and Venus, accomplisheth her
Revolution in 365 Days, 5 Hours, and 59 Min.

It is from the Sun to the Body of the Earth 5021896 Miles, the Circuit of her
Sphere is 31560207 Miles, her Diurnal motion 39 Min. 8 Seconds.

Therefore the Center of the Earth is transferred in a Day 86418 Miles, in an
hour 5600 Miles, and in a Min. 60 Miles.

The Body of the Earth is less than the Earth 333 times, and greater than the
Moon 45 times. A Degree of a great Circle upon the Earths Superficies is
commonly reputed 60 Miles, but by Mr. Norwood's Experiment is found to be 69
Miles.

And according to the first computation, the Diameter of the Earth is 6872
miles, its Semidiameter 3436 miles.

The circuit of compass of the Earth and Water contains 21600 Miles.

In the Superficies of the Earth is contained 148490906 Square Miles.

The whole crassitude or Body of the Earth and Waters contains 510131305785
Cubical Miles.

Of Mars.
Next above the Earth is the Planet Mars, who performs his Revolution about the
Sun in one Year, 321 Days, 22 Hours, and 20 Min. It is from the Sun to the Body
of Mars 7635292 Miles.

The Circuit of the Sphere of Mars, is 47993264 Miles, and his Diurnal motion
31 Min. 27 Seconds; so that he wheeleth in a Day 69842 Miles, in an Hour 2910
Miles, and in a Min. 48 Miles and a half.

The Body of Mars is less than the Earth 146 times, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn
(contrary to the inferior Planets) being placed without the Perimeter of the
Earths Orb, are sometimes in Conjunction with the Sun, and sometimes in
Quadtature and Opposition, which cannot be in Venus and Mercury, in regard
their Orbs are included within the Earths Elipfis.

Of Jupiter.
Next above Mars is Jupiter, who runs his Course in 11 Egyptian Years, 315
Days, 14 Hours, and 30 Min.

It is from the Sun to Jupiter 26179152 Miles. The Circuit of the Sphere of
Jupiter is 164554670 Miles, and his Diurnal motion about the Sun is 4 Min. 59 s.

Hence he wheeleth every Day 17996 Miles, every Hour 1583 Miles, and every Min.
26 Miles. He is less than the Earth one time.

About his Body (respecting it as their Center) move four small bright Stars,
called the Satellities, or Circum-Jovials, who continually move round his Body,
and are seen only by a good Telescope.

Of Saturn.
Saturn is the highest Planet in the Planetary System, and slowest in motion,
insomuch that he performs but one Revolution about the Sun in 29 Egyptian
Years, 162 Days, 1 Hour, 58 Min.

It is from the Sun to Saturn 47833576 Miles. The Circuit of his Sphere is
300668192 Miles. His proper daily motion is a Min. o Seconds.

Therefore he wheeleth in a Day 15959 Miles, in an Hour 1498 Miles, and in a
Min. 25 Miles.

Earth orbiting the sun, passing through the Zodiacal houses Incrementum et
Decrementum Dierum
Secund: Copern
CANCE. LEO. VIRGO. LIBRA. SCORP SAGIT: CAPRI. AQUAR. PISCIS. ARIE TAURU. GEMINI



Saturn orbiting the sun Systema Saturni.
Secund: ^u^en M. Zul.


Tychonean model of the solar system Hypothesis Tychonica


He is once bigger than the Earth; about his Body is a bright flat Ring which
encompasseth him about.

Of the Moon.
The Moon is a secondary Planet, and retains the Earth for her Center, about
which she performs her Revolution in 27 Days, 7 Hours, 43 Min.

It is from the Center of the Earth to the Moon 203236 Miles.

The Circumference of her Sphere is 1277483 Miles, her Diurnal motion is 13
Degrees. 10 Min. 35 Seconds.

So she wheeleth about in a Day 46757 Miles, in an Hour 1948 Miles, and in a
Min. 30 Miles and a half.

She is less than the Sun 15924 times, and less than the Earth 45 times.

Of the Tychonean System.
THis System was invented by the Illustrious Tycho Brahe, a Nobleman of
Denmark, Lord of Knudsthorp, in the Island of Schonen, not far from Elsenbourg,
who was the most diligent and exquisive Observator in his time, who framed this
Hypothesis, as a mean between Ptolemy and Copernicus. He made a happy
beginning, and glorious progress in the restoration of Astronomy, wherein he
did rectify the motions of the Sun, Moon, and the fixed Stars, which appeared
in that Horizon wherein he lived. In his Hypothesis, he supposes that Mercury,
Venus, and all the other Planets (except the Moon) in their motion, respect the
Sun as their Center; so that Saturn in opposition to the Sun is nearer to the
Earth than Venus in Apogeon, and that Mars in opposition to the Sun is neater
to the Earth than the Sun it self, as may appear by inspection from the
Hypothesis it self.

CHAP. II. A Description of the several Natures, Qualities, and Substances of
the Planets.
Of the Sun.
WHose nature and substance by a probable conjecture, is supposed to be no
other than a formal fiery Body, consisting of a true proper elementary Fire,
partly liquid, and partly solid: The liquid being an Ocean of Light, moving
with fiery Billows, and flaming Ebullitions, as is manifest to those that look
upon it through a Telescope: The solid parts being like our Terraqueous-Globe,
divided into Continents, Islands, Mountains, Rocks, that thereby the vehement
motion exestuating Solar-Ocean might be restrained, and therefore may probably
conceive, that the Solar-Globe is as this Earth of ours, hollowed with vast
Subterraneous Caverns, and Receptacles of Fire, which break forth of the Solar,
Ignivomous Mountains, in the same manner as we find our Subterranean-Fires to
break out of Aetna, Hecla, and Vesuvius; and it is in all appearance as
probable, that the solid parts of the Sun, within which the fluid and liquid
Fire is contained, are as Metal in a Furnace. It is also evident, that the
splendour as well of the fluid as the solid Fire of the Solar-Globe, is far more
bright than our earthly Fire or Flame, as you may see in the Map.

The Maculae or Spots that are seen in the Body of the Sun, are certain cloudy
obscurities appearing upon his Disque. Their shapes and figures are of unequal
form, and most irregular, which argues them not to be Stars or Planets moving
about his Body. They have a motion from the Oriental part of the Suns Disque,
to the Occidental, which course they ordinarily finish within the space of 13
Days, more or less according to their greater or lesser Latitude: for they make
their motion as it were in a Zodiac of about 60 Degrees broad, by the
observation of which spots, it is found that the Sun has a motion upon its own
Axis from East to West, which conversion is finished in 27 Days, or thereabouts.

A Table of the magnitude of the Sun, compared with the Earth, according to
Ptolemy, Maurolycus, Clavius, and Barocius.
The Suns true Diameter contains Its Circumference contains The Area of its
greatest Circle contains Its common Superficies contains Its solidity contains
5 Simple Diameters of the Earth. 17 2/7 Simple Diameters of the Earth. 20: 00
Square Diameters of the Earth. 134 - 0 Square Diameters of the Earth. 166: ^
The solidity of the Earth.

Of the Moon.
The Moon is the nearest to us of all the Planets in this our elementary
Sphere, it being a dark and opacous Body, altogether deprived of innate or
proper Light, evident in its total Eclipses, wherein she altogether loses her
luster. Hence may be inferred, that she has her light from the Sun, and as she
is opacous, so she is a dense Body, apt to receive and reflect the Suns light.

The Body of the Moon appears to be full of Eminencies and Depressions, like
our Hills and Valleys, apparent to the sense by the help of the Telescope,
which spots and excressencies varying their situation and magnitude, according
to the diverse access or recess of the Sun, to which their fite is always
opposite thence, evidencing to be the shadows and elucidations of the most
eminent parts of the Moons-Globe, resembling our Alps, Hills, and Mountains;
from whence may be concluded, that the brighter and more splendid parts of the
Moon to be those that are more dense, solid, and opacous, like our Earth, in
regard they reflect a greater portion of light than the obscurer parts to
reflect a less light, and therefore supposed to be pellucid, and diaphonous,
agreeable to our Ocean, Seas, Lakes, and Rivers, from whence it may be
inferred, that the Moon is composed of solid and liquid parts, as this our
Terraqueous-Globe in which we inhabit; and therefore has been conceived by
most Astronomers, as well Ancient as Modern, that the Moon is as it were
another Earth.

The spots that appear in the Body of the Moon are distinguished into ancient
and new.

The ancient are those greater and larger spots, at the moon as it appears to
the naked eye PHASIS LUNAE NATURALIS
a map of the moon, with notable physical features labeled PHASIS LUNAE
ARTIFICIALIS
the moon orbiting the earth Aestus Maris Per Motum Lunae R.des Carts. lib: 4^
49.
the sun illuminating the moon through different lunar phases Illuminatio Lunae
Per Solemn.
P Gassendi Justitutio Astionomia lib: 2: cap: 26.
all times discernable, without the help of a Telescope, resembling large Seas,
Lakes, and Bays.

The new ones are those lesser spots, which are not discernable, but by the
help of a Telescope, which are various, differing in magnitude, situation,
color, etc. observed with exactness, described by sundry eminent, modern
Astronomers, Hevelius, and Langrenus, etc. some of whom have imposed names and
appellations upon the several eminencies that appear upon her Body, for the
better knowledge of them, being of great use and advantage to all Students in
Astronomy, and very necessary in the making of Observations: As also in
Eclipses, for the better determining the quantity of an Eclipse of the Moon.
And according to this forementioned Hypothesis, of the light parts representing
the Land, and the darker parts the Seas, these two Maps in this Book are made
both for its natural appearance, as well as the artificial representations,
both taken from those of Hevelius's Observations; who has also given names to
the eminent parts of the Moon, having described and distinguished them by
Geographical marks and denominations, tranferring to them names proper to our
Terrestrial-Continents, Promontories, Mountains, Islands, Seas, Lakes, etc. as
may be seen at large in his Book called, Selenography. And in the Sphere of
Manilius, by Edward Sherborn Esquire.

A Table of the Moons distance from the Center of the Earth, in Semidiameters
of the same, and its Horizontal Parallax, according to Kepler, and the
Rodolphin- Tables.
In Opposition or Conjunction Distance from the Center of the Earth. Horizontal
Parallax. Apog. Med. Perig. Apog. Med. Perig. 59::0 Semid. 56:28 Semid. 54:0
Semid. 58:22 58:16 62:20 In its Quadratures. Distance from the Center of the
Earth. Horizontal Parallax. Apog. Med. Perig. Apog. Med. Perig. 59-0 Semid.
56.28 Semid. 54 0 Semid. 58.22 60.53 63.41

The Apparrent Diameters of the Moon according to Kepler.
In Opposition, Conjunction, or Quartile Aspect. Apparent Diameters of the
Moon. Apog. Perig. In and 30 -- 0 34 -- 10 In. 32 -- 32 36 -- 00

The true magnitude of the Moon, compared with that of the Earth and Sun,
according to Kepler.
The true Diamers of the Sun, and Moon, unto that of the Earth, supposed to be
100. The Solidity of the Moon to the Sun Earth Moon Earth Sun 25 7/16 100 1500
as to 1.59 as to 1.204671

Of Mercury.
The Figure of Mercury is orbicular, or round, not Mathematically, but
Physically such, rising here and there with exuberating Hills, and Mountains;
in the same manner as this earthly Globe of ours, being an opacous Body, and
receiving its illumination from the Sun; whence at several times, it is seen
under several faces and appearances. He appears in a figure like that of the
New Moon when he is Retrograde and approaching to an Opposition to the Sun.
There are likewise observed in him several spots, successively following one
another, some light, some duskish, which light spots are by Kereherus conceived
to be the said Terrestrial and Mountanous parts thereof, which by their
successive motion, likewise evince, that he has a Rotation upon his own Axis,
determined within the space of 6 Hours, or thereabouts.

Of Venus.
The most illustrious of all the lesser Planets is Venus, and from the remarks
made by the Ancients, these are some that follow. First, She is observed to
precede the Sun rising in the Morning before him: sometimes to follow the Sun
in setting after him; and sometimes in Conjunction with the Sun; and other
times receding from him; and sometimes to differ in magnitude, being greater or
lesser, whence they concluded her sometimes to approach nearer to the Earth,
and to be in Perigeo, and other times to recede further from it, and to be in
Apogeo.

Besides these Observations of the Ancients, Modern Astronomers, by the help of
the Telescope, have noted several other signal Phenomena's, as that she is
liable to the same variety of changes as the Moon, sometimes almost full, and
at other times gibbous, and now and then horned, as well when she is Vepertine
as Matutine. She is sometimes seen by day, as is before noted. Of the
structure, nature, and substance of this Planet, from the forementioned
Phenomena, it may be concluded to be an opacous Body, and has its light from
the Sun, that it is of a Spherical form, because spherically illummated. It is
of a rough and uneven Superficies, as appears by Telescopical Observations. It
is made up of solid and liquid matter, as our Terraqueous Globe, and is found
to have a Rotation upon its own Axis and Center, which it compleats within the
space of 14 Hours.

Of Mars.
Although this Planet of all the rest is the most inobservable, (as both Pliny
and Kepler affirms) yet not been able to ly hid from the subtle discoveries of
Astronomical Spies, as the ingenious Esquire Sherborn says; He is observed to move
in a large Orbit about the Sun, as the Center of its motion, within which
Circle he includes the Earth with the Moon, Mercury, and Venus, and takes up a
great part of the Solar Region; and when he is in Perigeum, he comes to the
Earth, then the Sun and the notable increase of his light, by reason of which
he is taken for a Comet or new Star.

As to his Figure, it is Spherical, and by some has been observed with a black
spot on the middle of his Body. Monsieur Hugens in the Year 1656, observed a
broad obscure Zone or Belt to shadow half the Disque of the said Planet. His
light is derived from the Sun, as that of the Moon, as to the structure and
nature of his Globe composed of solid and liquid matter.

Of Jupiter.
The Planet Jupiter is one of the most noted and beneficent Planets, He is
carried in an Orbit above Mars, as is manifest by the mutual Conjunctions of
those Planets, at which time he is obscured and hidden from our sight by the
interposition of Mars, as the Sun is by that of the Moons Body.

Ricciolus reports in the Year 1643, that be observed the edges and margins of
his Globe to be rough and uneven, rising like Hills and Mountains, are
discovered in his Body by help of an excellent Telescope, two small spots and
two great ones, like hollow Caverns, one round, and the other oval. Hevelius
also affirms, that the face of Jupiter is variegated with spots, in a manner
like that of the Moon, but it is manifest by frequent Observations that there
is a Belt (as it were) encompassing the Disque of the Planet; and this also
admits of great varieties in appearance, this Belt not appearing always
straight but bending, with its convexity upwards, and sometimes downwards,
evident marks of the Motion and Rotation of the Planet upon its own Center. As
to the structure of his Globe, it may be concluded as with the rest of the
Planets, to be composed of solid and liquid parts; and although his Body is
Physically round, yet it is full of uneven Asperities, having a motion upon its
own Center finished in 11 Days, 20 Hours, 1 Min. 15 Seconds, and that its Zones
or Belts are solid parts, less capable of receiving light than the rest of the
solid or liquid parts are.

Of the Satellites of Jupiter.
The Satellites are four Stars so called, moving about the Body of Jupiter as
his Guards, discovered first in Italy, by Galieleus, in the Year 1610. In
Germany by Simon Marius, by means of a Telescope, without which, by reason of
Jupiter's splendour, and their small distance from him (none of them receding
above 12 Degrees from his Body) they are not to be discerned, and therefore
altogether unknown to the Ancients. These by Galleleus (their first Dis^^^^er)
were called Sidera Medicaea. The first next J^piter ^e called Cosmos minor; the
next Cosmos m^yor; the third Maria Medicaea; the fourth Katherina Medicaea.
Simon Marius giving to the innermost, the name of Jovial Mercury; the next
Venus; to the third Jupiter; to the fourth Saturn. But Jo. Baptista Hodie^na,
who first of all published Ephemerides of the motions of the said Stars, names
the inmost (from the young Prince of Tuscany) Principharus; the second (from
Victoria Duchess to the Grand Duke) Victripharus; the third (from Cosmos the
first Duke of Florence) Cosmipharus; the last (from Ferd^nand the late Duke)
Fernandipharus.

The greatest Digressions from the Body of Jupiter, computed in Semidiameters
of the same, are as follows.

Satellites. 1 2 3 4 3.0 Sem. 5.0 Sem. 8.0 Sem. 12.0 Sem.

Their Periodical Revol^tions are in their several Orbits, according to
Hevelius.
Sat. Days. Hours Min. Sec. 1 1 18 28 00 2 3 13 18 0 3 7 3 57 0 4 16 18 9 0

Their Diurnal and Horary motion in their Orbits, each divided in 360 Degrees.
according to Marius.
1 Diurnal. Horary. 1 203 Gr. 25 0 8 Gr. 28 30 2 101 Gr. 17 22 4 Gr. 13 0 3 50
Gr. 14 57 2 Gr. 6 30 4 21 Gr. 28 48 0 Gr. 53 42

Of Saturn.
The highest, and of all the Primary Planets (hitherto known) the most remote
from the Earth, runs his course above all the rest, and beneath the fixed
Stars, and has little or no Parallax, nor are there any of the fixed Stars or
Planets that afford to the observing Eye, by means of the Telescope, such
strange and admirable Phenomena.

The chiefest, and most worthy of note, are three.

First, That he appears girdled about with a flat Ring of Light.

Secondly, That he has several lesser Planets, like the Circum-Jovials, moving
about his Body.

Thirdly, That his Figure appears variously and incredibly diversified, being
sometimes beheld in a round form, at other times represented with two Rundles
on each side, which at other times alter their Figure, and appear like certain
Handles or Ears, like a two eared Porringer.

Monsieur Hugens, by his Observations of this Planet, has noted, that the said
Ring about the Body of Saturn is every way alike distant from it, the plane
whereof always keeps in a certain and constant inclination to the Ecliptic,
appearing according to its diversity of Aspect, as you may see more plainly in
the System of Saturn in this Book.

There is also several other Stars, one discovered about his Body by Hevelius
at Dantzack, by Sir Paul Neal, and Sir Christopher Wren, here in in England.

And two others discovered by Signior Cossini in the Royal Parisian
Observatory, the one nearer to his Body than the Hugen^an, the other removed
the sun, moon, and planets, along with their symbols Phases. Planetarum
the sun Sol


Maculae



the moon Luna




Saturn viewed in profile Saturn


A^s^



Saturn viewed at a 45-degree downward angle Saturn


Ans^



Jupiter with moons Jupiter


Satelit^s



Mars Mars




Venus Venus




Mercury Mercury






further from him than that. The Revolution of which Interior Planet he found
to be completed in four Days and a half, the Exterior in something more than
80 Days.

This Planet (as the rest) may be probably concluded to be composed of solid
and liquid matter, of a Leaden temper and color; that it is Spherical, but
withal full of uneven Asperities, and that it is an opacous Body, and
illuminated ab extra, and although the Suns light may approach it, yet it is
not sufficient to give a requisite luster to so great and so distant a Body,
but must have doubtless the assistance of some light from some other Fountain.
He has a motion upon his own Center, performed in 29 days 10 hours, 1 16.

A Table of the magnitudes of the Planets, in respect to the Earth, according
to Hevelius.
Names of the Planets. Planets did. from the Earth Apparent Diameters. True
Diameters. Circumf. of their Disque. Sol 5176 Sem. Ter. 31 Min.: 54 Sec. 41150
Mil. Ger. 129300 Mil. Ger. Luna 59 Sem. Ter. 30 Min.: 00 Sec. 442 Mil. Ger.
1389 Mil. Ger. Saturnus 49040 Sem. Ter. 00 Min.: 16 Sec. 3362 Mil. Ger. 7945
Mil. Ger. Jupiter 26815 Sem. Ter. 00 Min.: 18 Sec. 2054 Mil. Ger. 6455 Mil.
Ger. Mars 7855 Sem. Ter. 00 Min.: 05 Sec. 160 Mil. Ger. 503 Mil. Ger. Venus
5157 Sem. Ter. 00 Min.: 17 Sec. 360 Mil. Ger. 1131 Mil. Ger. Mercurius 5157
Sem. Ter. 00 Min.: 06 Sec. 130 Mil. Ger. 490 Mil. Ger.

CHAP. III. A brief Description of Fiery-Meteors, and Comets.
AS for fiery-Meteors, their place and generation is in the upper, lower, and
in the middle Region of the Air, and are Draco Volans, Ignis Fatuus, Ignis
Lambens, Sidus Helenae, these have their birth in the lower Region: Those who
are in the middle Region, are Stella Cadens, Lancea Ardens, Fulmen, etc. And in
the upper Region of the Air, are reckoned Fax, Ignis Perpendicularis, Bolis,
Capra Saltans, etc. all which arise from Vapors and Exhalations which the
Earth continually expires and diffuses round about through its ambient
Atmosphere.

Of Comets.
As concerning the matter, place, and efficient cause of Comets, Astronomers
and Philosophers both Ancient and Modern, do much differ in their opinions,
some will have them not to be any thing real or distinct from other
pre-existant Celestial Bodies, but rather a mere appearance made by the
reflection or refraction of the Suns Beams.

Others are of opinion that they are fiery-Meteors generated of copious
e^halations from the Earth and Sea, and elevated to the supreme Region of the
Air, and hurried about by the swift motion of the Primum Mobile, and take fire,
and last as long as the sulphery, unctuous, fat matter of which they consist,
affords them Fuel to burn or shine.

Others are of opinion, that Comets, if not all, yet for the most part are
created by God of nothing, or at least formed of such matter as best pleases
him, whether Celestial or Elementary, and of such shape and figure as may serve
to terrify or admonish Mankind, and presignify Calamities to ensue.

Of the Tail, Train, or Bush of the Comets.
Aristotle and his followers asserts the Bush or Train of a Comet to be an
Exhalation set on fire, and diversified according to the diverse disposition of
the matter that feeds its flame.

Petrus Apianus makes the Bush of the Comet to be nothing else but the Rays of
the Sun, transmitted through the semidiaphonous head thereof, as it were
through a Globe of Glass.

Kepler is of opinion, that the Tail of a Comet is only enlightened by the Suns
Beams passing through the Body of the Comet, which he imagins to be purely
pellucid, vet dense withal.

Galleleus supposes the Tail of a Comet to be of its own nature, straight, as
being produced by the Suns Beams, but appears to us to be crooked, when near
the Horizon, and inclined thereunto, by reason of the refraction of the
Species, or of the visual Rays made in the Spherical Superficies of the Air,
which near the Earth, is filled with gross vapors.

Of the different shapes, and forms of Comets, and their Tails.
Some resembling the form of a round Dish, or Platter: Of this kind the chief
is called Rosa, and is of a bright shining Silver color, mixed with Gold or
Amber; and some of this sort that are not perfectly round resembling the form
of a Shield.

Others resembles the form of a Tun, of which there are of diverse kinds; some
of an Oval figure; some like a Barrel set on one end; foam inclining and cut
short off.

Others resembles a Horses Main, not always of the same shape or figure. Of
these Pliny says, are very swift of motion, and turns round about it self.

Others resembling burning Lamps or Torches, and are of several shapes;
sometimes their flame or blaze carried upward like a Sword.

And some are formed like a Dart or Javelin.

And some like a Cimitar with a Hilt.

And some like a Lance, with its Stream of light, very long, thin, and pointed.

Others whose Heads are for the most part Quadrangular, having a long Train,
very thick and uniform; all these will better appear by the several Schemes
hereunto annexed, bearing these several Appellations, 1. Rosa. 2. Pitheus sive
Doli-formis. 3. Hippeus seu Equinus. 4. Auricomus sive Argenticomus. 5. Hircus.
6. Lampadias. 7. Ceratia. 8. Ancontiae. 9. Xiphias. 10. Lonchites seu
Hasti-formis. 11. Veruseu Pectica. 12. Trigonus se^ Quadratus.

drawings of several differently shaped comets Variae Cometarum figurae. sicut
^a^ mundi aetatibus appa^a^rune. The Various forms of Comets as they have
appeared in several ages of the World.
1 Solaris ^ire Rosa

2 ^iformis

3 Ch^ciformis

4 Chy^ ardr^.

5 Do^formis ^tu^

6 D^lu^.

7 Do^iformis candatus

8 E^quin^s barbatu^

9 E^quin^^ qu^ a^l^

10 Eq^ E^

11 L^diformis

12 L^for^

13 L^p^formis

14 H^ (...)

15 (...)

16 Bar^

17 C^ifor^ Lunat^

18 C^r^formi^

19 Cornatus ^icu^datu^

20 Curvatus Dir^catus

21 Tubiformis

22 Ia^uliformis Lunatus

23 Iac^^ formis L^icus

24 Iac^^ formis rotundu^

25 E^ifor^

26 En^iformis

27 En^iformis

28 En^iformis incuvatu^

30 Ha^formi^

20 En^iformi^

31 Hastiformis

32 V^r^

33 T^ica bifurcata

34 Cometa quadrat^

35 Coniformi^

30 Cometa T^yramidatu^

37 Cometa (...)

38 Cometa M^trif^r^

30 Cometa M^





An account of these splendid Enigma's (viz. the Comets) that have appeared to
the World, since the Year of our Lord 1600, unto the Year 1679.
IN the Year 1607 appeared a Comet on the 26 Day of September, and lasted until
the 5th of November, seen in the Evening about seven of the Clock, and from
thence all night. It appeared under the Great Bear, a little higher than the
Star which is toward the Square, in the 30 Degree of Leo, and 36 Degrees. of North
Latitude, its Parallax not exceeding 3 Degrees. and consequent its place was in the
highest Heaven or Ether. It moved in direct motion from the former Foot of the
Great Bear under its Belly, passing by the midst of Boots, and struck the
Serpent coming under the Hand of Ophucus, arrived at his foremost Foot, and
stayed in his Leg. The Orbit in which it was carried, seemed to be a greater
Circle, at last bowed toward the Ecliptic.

Its Head was not of an equal roundness, but here and there exuberating. Its
apparent magnitude greater than any of the fixed Stars, or Jupiter. Its light
was pale, and waterish, like that of the Moon. Its Tail was somewhat long and
thick, projected with some little deviation against that part of the Heaven
opposite to the Sun. It appeared like a flaming Lance or Sword, 7 Degrees in
length.

The Effects that followed this Comet. The Duke of Lorrain died. A great War
between the Swedes and Danes.

In the Year 1618, the 25th of August appeared a Comet, and lasted until the
24th of January next following, in all 60 Days, appearing about three of the
Clock before Sun rising, a little beneath the left Fore-foot of Vrsa major,
inclining toward the Head of Leo, in the 10 Degrees. of the said Sign, and in 22
Degrees. of North Latitude. It appeared (by the help of the Telescope) to be Hairy,
its light not clear, shining but duskish, its magnitude like that of Venus, its
color palish. It run from Scorpio to the middle of Cancer, above one third
part of the Heavens, at first Southern, at last Northern. Its Tail was like
that of an Estridge bowed, in length 45 Degrees. In Persia it was observed to
be like a Cemitar. Its apparent, as well as its true magnitude, was various and
unconstant.

The Effects that followed this Comet, was, The death of the Emperor Matthias.
Ann Queen of England died, and the Empress of Germany also about this time.
Many eminent mutations in all parts of Europe succeeded this Comet.

In the Year 1647, there appeared a Comet on the 29th of November, lasted but
two Days, seen in the Evening at half an Hour past eight, in the Constellation
of Coma Berenices, not quite 5 Degrees from the left Leg of Boots, about 10
Degrees. from Arcturus, in the eighth Degree of Libra, in 26 Degrees. of North
Latitude. Its motion contrary to the Series of Signs, viz. From the Head of
Boots toward the Ecliptic, and Spica Virginis. It was something less in
appearance than Arcturus, but sufficiently bright and splendid. Its Tail was
erected upwards toward the Zenith, in length 12 Degrees, like to a Broom.

In the Year 1652, there appeared a Comet on the 20th of December, it lasted
while the 10th of January, appearing about 6 of the Clock in the Evening, in 9
Degrees. of Gemini, and 31 Degrees. of South Latitude, not far from Rigal, in the left
Foot of Orian. Its motion was constantly Retrograde from South to North, by the
Hare, foot of Orion, to the Pleiades, and from thence as for as Ferseus. Its
Head was round, and little less than the Moon; its light pale and dull,
overcast by a thin Cloud; its magnitude was not always the same. Its Tail at
first appeared Eastward opposite from the Sun, resembling a sharp-pointed Cone,
in length 7 Degrees, of a whitish but obscure color. About the 7th of January
it quite lost its thin Rays, like Hairs; its Tail increased, being at first
3440, at last 165000 German Miles.

In the Year 1661, there appeared a Comet on the third of February, it lasted
53 Days, seen in the Morning 47 Min. after 5 of the Clock, Eastward beneath the
Dolphin, between the Eagles-Head and that of the lesser Horse in 10 Degrees. of
Aquarius, 22 Degrees. of North Latitude, in the very Ether or highest Heaven, at
first two thousand, at last 9000 Semidiameters of the Earth distant from it,
and consequently according to the opinion of Hevelius higher than the Sun it
self. Its course was from East to West by the Head, Neck, and nether Wing of
Aquila, in a Line almost parallel to the Ecliptic. Its Head was round, and of
a yellowish color, clear and conspicuous. Its Tail extended about 6 Degrees in
length toward the Dolphin, narrower where it joined to the Head, pointing to
that part of Heaven opposite to the Sun, but with some kind of deflection.

In the Year 1664, there appeared a Comet on the 14th of December, it lasted
about three Months, seen at first in the Morning about five of the Clock,
afterward in the Evening, near the Beak of the Crow, in 8 Degrees. or Libra, and
22 Degrees. of South Latitude. In the highest Ether its Parallax at the beginning
59, in the middle 4, and in the end 16, so that at first it was 3500, then
1000, and at least 120000 Semidiameters of the Earth distant from the
Terrestrial Globe, and higher than Mars. Its motion was Retrograde from Corvus
by Hydra, Argus, Canis major, Hare, Eridanus, and Whales-Head unto Aries, its
course somewhat deflecting from a great Circle, it ran through more than five
Signs of the Zodiac, viz. Libra, Virgo, Leo, Cancer, Gemini, Taurus, even unto
Aries, and in its Progress ran 154 Degrees. Its Head was very conspicuous,
somewhat yellow, in the midst thereof was discerned a clear light surrounded
with another more obscure. Its Tail extended 14 Degrees. in length, sometimes
longer, sometimes shorter, always extended to that part of Heaven opposite to
the Sun, yet with some deviation, sometimes Northward, sometimes Southward.
Toward its end it was sometimes quite lost, and then again recovered.

In the Year 1665, there appeared a Comet on the sixth of April, lasted 14
Days, seen in the Morning half an hour after one, in the Breast of Pegasus, in
15 Degrees. of Pisces, and 27 Degrees. of North Latitude; Its Parallax at the beginning
was found to be 69, which decreased successive to 41, whence its distance from
the Earth then 3000 Semidiameters of the same, toward the end 5000,
consequently 60 times higher drawings of historical comets Figurae variorum
cometarum, qui annis his infra. nominatis apparuerunt.
Cometa 1577 Dic 13. Nov a Ty^ho^e Observe:



Cometa 1590



Cometa 1607



Cometa 1618 Dic. 1 Dec



Cometa 1647



Cometa 1652



Cometa 1672



Cometa 1661



Cometa 1664. 1665.



Cometa 1677



than the Moon at first, and at last equal to the height of the Sun it self.
Its progress was by Pegasus, under the Head of Andromeda, by the Northern Fish,
as far as unto Aries, in a motion continually direct. At the beginning it ran
through in one Day, 4 Degrees. 6 Minutes, and at last 2 Degrees. 23 Minutes. Its Head
was round of a yellowish color, it is light, quick, and bright; in the very
middle was a Nocleus of a conspicuous magnitude, of a Gold color, encompassed
equally about with another thinner kind of matter. The apparent Diameter of the
Head, wa s 6 Min. Its Tail at the beginning extended almost 17 Degrees. in length,
projected between the Mouth and the foremost Foot of Pegasus Westward: Where it
issued from the Head it was thick and lucid, and of the same dense matter with
that of the Head, but toward the end or Cuspis more thin and dilute. It
stretched sometimes in length to 25 Degrees. streaming to the part opposed to the
Sun, yet with some little deviation Southward.

In the Year 1668, there appeared a Comet the 5th and 10th of March, observed
by Signtor Cassini, at Bologna. About the first Hour of the Night (after the
Italian Computation) the Head or Body was not seen, being hid under the
Horizon. The Tail was of a stupendous length, being extended (as it appeared
at Lisbon in Portugal) over almost the fourth part of the Visible Heaven from
West to East, from the Whale through Eridanus to the Star that precedes the Ear
of Lupus.

In the Year 1672, there appeared a Comet on the second of March, lasted till
about the end of April, (as Signtor Cassins computed) seen both Mornings and
Evenings, at first between the Head of Medusa and the Pleiades, aftewards
having continued its course toward the Root of the Southern-Horn of Taurus,
and having passed the Ecliptic, went on above the top of Orion's Head to the
Milky way. Its greatest declination from the Equator Northward, was 38 Degrees. and
a half. He made 2 Degrees. 32 of motion in one Day. In the great Circle of its
apparent motion, its Head appeared in the Telescope almost round. The Tail was
almost imperceptible, and appeared of the length of two Diameters of the Head,
or thereabouts, not above 3 or 4 Min. of a Degree.

In the Year 1677, there appeared a Comet, which rose on the 21 of April, about
2 in the Morning, near N. E. by N. It had a short bushy Tail about 5 Degrees in
length, (to appearance about 2. Yards) pointing toward the right Foot of
Andromeda. The Head of the Comet was of a pale color, as big as a Star of the
first Magnitude, and was in the Longitude of 11o of Taurus, and in the Latitude
18 Degrees. No. On the 23 of April the same Comet rose after 2 in the Morning, the
Tail streaming toward the Star, in the Knee of Cassiopaea, and being in
Longitude 15 Degrees of Taurus, and in Latitude 17 Degrees Notherly.

Of the fixed Stars.
THese Stars are said to be fixed, because they always keep (at least
seemingly) the same invariable distance from one another, and from the
Ecliptic, as if they were so many Studs of Gold constellations around the
north pole A Mapp of the Constellations about NORTH POLE
By John Seller
Iaunuary February March April May June July August September October November
December

Cepheus

Cassiopeia

Perseus

Aur^a

Vrsa Major

Vrsa Minor

Draco

fixed in the Crystal Firmament, and for this reason Ricciolus conceives, the
multitude of the fixed Stars (as it were an Army drawn up in Battle Array)
mightfitly be called the Militia of Heaven, and the enquiries touching these
glorious and splendid Bodies under these following Heads, First, Their
Substance. Secondly, Their Light, Color, and Scintillation. Thirdly, Their
Number. Fourthly, Their Figure. Fifthly, Their Magnitude. Sixthly, Their Place
and Distance from the Earth, or rather the Sun.


Of their Substance.
As to their Substance, the opinions of the Ancients are various: Some hold
them to be of a fiery nature, others hold them to be Earthly, yet withal
fiery; others conceive them to be composed of the same matter as Exhalations
and Vapors, and consequently to consist of a substance, partly Aqueous, partly
Aireal. But according to the Sentiments of diverse Eminent Modern Philosophers
and Astronomers, supposes that their Bodies are compound and not simple, made
up of Elementary matter, formed into fiery Globes, and consisting of matter
both solid and liquid, as this Terraqueous-Globe of ours, and consequently
subject to corruption and alteration.

Of their Light.
As to their Light, that which is to be considered is, whether it be innate or
borrowed of the Sun: the latter of which is maintained by Albitegnius, and by
diverse other Philosophers and Astronomers, and may reasonably be supposed that
each of the fixed Stars to be a head or distinct part of the Mundan-system; and
as the Sun has several Planets constituted and carried about him, so likewise
every one of the fixed Stars has other Mundan-Bodies, like Planets, disposed
and moving about them, though not to be discerned by us, by reason of their
great distance from our Earthly habitation.

Of their Color.
The color is visibly various according to the difference of their light,
tempered by the diverse constitutions of their matter or substance, some
appearing of a ruddy, others of a Gold Color; some of a Silver white, some
pallid, others of a Leaden hue; whence some have made an estimate of their
natures, and ranged them under the several Planets, of whose qualities they
conceived them to participate according to proportion they carry of the
resemblance of their Colors.

Of their Scintillation.
In this they are particularly distinguished from the Planets, for the Planets
have no such twinkling or glimmering light, but generally all the fixed Stars,
more or less, and at sometimes more than at others, especially when the Wind
blows Easterly. The cause of this their Scintillation is variously discoursed
of by Philosophers and Anstronomers. Aristotle among the Ancients assigns the
cause thereof to their remeteness from our sight, by which they are weakly, and
as it were by a trembling weariness reached. But others assign the cause
thereof only to Refraction; and therefore (say they) Syrius and Procyon twinkle
or glimmer more than any of the rest, because they never ascend above 45 Degrees.
above the Horizon. Gassendus more probably conceives this twinkling of the
fixed Stars from that native light they are endued with, like that of the Sun,
sparkling and casting forth such quick darted Rays, as our weaker sight cannot
behold without that trembling passion. To which may be added the quick and
swift motion of theirs about their own Axis, by that means making a more sudden
variation in those radiant Objects than the Eye can pursue: But Hevelius rather
imputes their twinkling to a constant Eribration of lucid matter, or a
continual Exspiration of fiery Vapors or Effluvia from their Celestial Bodies,
in the same manner as the Fulgorations and Ebulitions in the Body of the Sun.

Of their Number.
As to their number, if we consider them, which are most notable and visible,
as being reduced to the six vulgar degrees of Magnitude, we shall find them
(according to Ptolomy's computation) to amount to but 1022. And Pliny reckons
them to 1600. But if we reflect upon the absolute number of all the Stars in
the Firmament, we may conclude them to be innumerable, at least by Humane
calculation, either looked upon by the bare Eye only, or by the help of a
Telescope, by the means of which last, Gallileus reports that he discovered in
the Asterism of the Pleiades above 40 Stars, in the space between the Girdle
and Sword of Orion no fewer than 80, and in little more than one Degree's space
in the constellation of Orion above 500 Stars. Another great Astronomer
affirms, that in the same Constellation, he observed above 2000 Stars. And
according to the proportion of Gallileo's Observation, there would be found at
least 62500 Stars, whereas looked upon by the bare Eye only, there appears not
above 63: According to the same proportion, if the rest of the Constellations
were examined, the difference computed of the number of the Stars, appearing by
the Telescope over and above those discovered by the bare Eye, there might be
reckoned above 1000000 Stars.

Of their Figures.
As to their Figure, they are apparently spherical or round. But Kepler
describes them like so many lucid points or sparks, casting forth every way
their Rays of Light, so that we may apprehend them to be only Physically round,
not Mathematically such, their Superficies are found to be uneven, and to
consist of many angles and sides.

Of their Magnitude.
As to their Magnitude, These following Tables will give account thereof,
according to the diverse Calculations made by several eminent Astronomers.

1. Table of the apparent Diameters of the fixed Stars.
Their several Magnitudes. 1 2 3 4 5 6 According to Tycho, Longo, Blanc. 2.0
1.30 1.5 0.45 0.30 0.20

2. Table of the true Diameters of the fixed Stars, and how many Diameters of
the Earth each contains.
Their several Magnitudes. 1 2 3 4 5 6 According to Tycho. 4. 1 3. 1/18 2. 1.
19/36 1. 1/48 0.

3. Table of the Solidity of the fixed Stars to that of the Earth.
Their several Magnitudes. 1 2 3 4 5 6 According to Tycho, Boyer. as to 68.1 as
to 28 ^ as to 11.1 as to 41.1 as to 1. 1/16 as to. 1

4. Table from the Observations of Ricciolus, showing as well their apparent
Magnitudes as their true Magnitudes, deduced from their undermentioned supposed
Distances from the Earth.
Degreees of Magnitude. Names of the Stars of their several Degrees of
Magnitude. Apparent Diameter. The greatest Distance of 210000 Semidiameters of
the Earth. The least Distance of 100000 Semidiameters of the Earth. True Diam.
contains the Earths Diam. The Body contains the Earths Body. True Diam.
contains the Earths Diam. The Body contains the Earths Body. 1 Arcturus 16.42
16 3932 8.0 512 2 Aquila 11.00 11.0 1120 5.7/25 137 3 Algol 7.3 7.3 260 3.2/^
34 4 Propus 6.10 6.10 216 2 9/10 26 5 Pleias 4 4. 92 2 7/10 18 6 Alcor 4 0 4.0
64 2.25/100 9

But seeing the Astronomers of the Copernican opinion, maintain the Magnitudes
of the fixed Stars to be far greater than the former Table shows them to be, it
will not be amiss to annex this following Table.

5. Table showing the true magnitude of the fixed Stars, that is; one of the
greatest, and one of the least, viz. Sirias, and Alcor, supposing the apparent
Diameter of Sirius to be 18, of Alcor 4, according to the distance in the
Copernican- Hypothesis, maintaining the Paraliax made by the Earths motion, not
to exceed 10, and imagining the Diameter of the Annual Orb to be such as upon
these Principles it is stated to be, according to Kepler.
The distances to be asserted in Semidiameters of the Earth The true Magnitude
of Sirius. The true Diameter of Alcor. The Diam. of Sirius contains Diam. of
the Earth. The Body of Sirius contains the Earths Body. The Diam. of Alcor
contains Diam of the Earth. Its Body contains the Earths Body. 142.746.428
12550 1967656731000 6000 216000000000

These Magnitudes may seem by some to be exorbitant, but in the opinion of the
Judicious, do appear to be rational.

Of the place and distance of the Stars from the Earth, (or rather the Sun,)
seems to be a question of that difficulty, that Pliny pronounced the
investigation thereof to be no less than a piece of madness: Therefore Riccolus
treating upon this subject, thought fit in the Front of his Discourse to prefix
this Theorem, as a most certain truth, Parallaxis and distantia fixarum non
potest certa and evidenta observatione humanitus comprehends.

For it is not known whether the Stars are all in the same Spherical
Superficies, equally distant from the Center of the World, or whether they are
placed at unequal distances, some higher, and some lower. This latter was the
sentiment of the Ancient Stoical Philosophers, who conceived the difference of
their luster and apparent Magnitudes, to proceed from their diversity of
situation, as more or less removed from our sight.

Of this opinion was Manilius, long since, declated, speaking of some Stars in
Orion, appearing more obscure than the rest. He gives the reason of that
Phenomenon to be, Non quod clara minus, sed quod magis alta recedunt. This
Hypothesis so seemingly rational, that the famous Tycho, Gallileo, and Kepler
have readily embraced the same, and therefore it may reasonably be supposed,
that their distances are as diverse as those of the Planets. Ricciolus reckons
up five manner of ways of attaining in some probability the knowledge of their
immense distances, according to his computation the least distance that may be
assigned, is found to amount to 210000 Semidiameters of the Earth, the greatest
being altogether uncertain by reason the crassitude or profundity of their
Heaven is not to be determined. The Horizontal Parallax of the fixed Stars
according to their least distances, is but 1.

The distance of the fixed Stars asserted by the Copernicans.
Authors. Semidiameters of the Earth. The greatest Parallax of the fixed Stars
made from the Annual motion of the Earth. The half from the Semidiameter. The
whole from the Diameter of the Annual Orb Copernicus Indefinite * * * *
Gallileus 13.046.400 0 20 0 40

The distance of the fixed Stars, supposing the Earths Annual motion, and
Copernicans distance of the Earth from the Sun, according to the calculations
of Tycho and Maginus, 7850,000 Semidiamiters of the Earth, and the total
Parallax of the fixed Stars 1 -- 00.

The distance of the fixed Stars from the Earth, supposing the Earths motion
and the greatest Parallax of the fixed Stars to be 10. The distance of the
Stars from the Earth in Semidiameters of the Earth, according to Copernicus, is
47.439.800; and the distance of the Sun from the Earth, is 1150 Semidiameters
of the Earth.

Of the proper motion of the fixed Stars.
THe motion of the fixed Stars is twofold:

First, Their Circumrotation about their own Centers, termed Motus Vertigenis,
in which they are carried about with extraordinary celerity; whence the reason
in part is the cause of their Scintillation.

The second is, Their motion of Revolution from West to East, in which they are
observed to move but very slowly. Touching this, it will not be amiss to insert
the three following Conclusions of Ricciolus in his Astronom. Reformat. page
259, quoted by Esquire Sherborn, in the Sphere of Manilius.

1. That the motion of the fixed Stars is equal and uniform.

2. That their Annual motion is not less than 49, not greater than 51.

3. That it seems most probable that their Annual motion is 50 -- 40.

From the supposition of their Annual motion of 50 -- 40, it follows that they
complete not one Degree in the Ecliptic sooner than in 71 Years, and 16/104,
or 19 Days, and 12 Hours in a manner; but the whole Circle of 360 Degrees, they
run not through in less than 25579 Sidereal Years, which is the Annus Magnus
Platonicus, (though by the Ancients computed to extend to no less than 36000
Years.) But this will be clearly manifested by this following Table.

A Table of the motion of the fixed Stars in Longitude.
Years. 1 0 50 40 10 8 26 40 20 16 53 20 30 25 20 00 40 33 46 40 50 42 13 20 60
50 40 00 Gr. 70 0 59 06 40 80 1 07 33 20 90 1 16 00 00 100 1 24 26 40 1000 14
04 26 40 10000 140 44 26 40 25000 360 00 00 00

Of the two Hemispheres of the Heavens.
THe one shows the Constellations of the Northern, and the other of the
Southern Hemispheres of the Heavens: Wherein may be seen the right Ascension
and Declination of any of the Stars in either Hemisphere, by which any Star may
be easily found, and the way or course of a new Star or Comet may be traced in
its way or Orbit, with several other uses, etc.

The names of each Constellation, and the number of the Stars in each of them
that are observed by the bare Eye, without the help of a Telescope, according
to Bayerus, and others.
The Northern Signs of the Zodiac.
1 Aries 29 2 Taurus 48 3 Gemini 31 4 Cancer 35 5 Leo 43 6 Virgo 42
The Southern Signs of the Zodiac.
7 Libra 15 8 Scorpio 29 9 Sagittarius 31 10 Capricornus 29 11 Aquarius 41 12
Pisces. 37


maps of the constellations of the northern and southern hemispheres A Mapp of
ye two HEMISPHERES of ye Heavens
ARIES. TAURUS GEMINI. CANCER. LEO. VIRGO.

a map of the constellations of the northern hemisphere Pisces

Cancer

Leo

Virgo

Boots

Androm

a map of the constellations of the southern hemisphere Aquarius

Libra

Corvuis

Crater

Hydra

Cetus

Phaenix



LIBRA SCORPIO. SAGITTAR: CAPRICO: AQUARI: PISCES.







The Northern Constellations.
1 Ursa minor 8 2 Ursa major 32 3 Draco 33 4 Cepheus 17 5 Boots 34 6 Corona 20
7 Hercules 48 8 Lyra 13 9 Cygnus 35 10 Cassiopea 25 11 Perseus 38 12 Auriga 32
13 Ophuchus 30 14 Serpens 37 15 Sagitta 8 16 Aquila 32 17 Antinous 7 18
Delphinus 10 19 Equiculus 4 20 Pegasus 20 21 Andromeda 26 22 Triangulum 5 23
Coma Berenic. 14
The Southern Constellations.
1 Cetus 27 2 Orion 49 3 Eridanus 42 4 Lepus 13 5 Canis major 19 6 Canis minor
8 7 Argo Navis 63 8 Centaurus 40 9 Lupus 20 10 Hydra 29 11 Crater 11 12 Corvus
7 13 Ara 8 14 Corona Austr. 13 15 Pisces Notius 12 16 Grus 13 17 Phoenix 14 18
Indus 12 19 Pavo 16 20 Apus 12 21 Apis 4 22 Cameleon 8 23 Triangul. Aust. 5 24
Piscis volans 7 25 Dorado 7 26 Toucan 8 27 Hydrus 15 28 Robur Carol. 12


The Total of the number of the fixed Stars of the several Magnitudes.
1 17 2 63 3 196 4 415 5 348 6 341 Obscure and Nebulous. 3 Inform or Sporades.
in the Zodiac. 45 Northern 200 Southern 93 1802

Of the System of the Ancients.
THe Ancient Philosophers (especially these of Democritus School) and most of
the Mathematicians of those times, asserted the Universe to be Infinite, and to
be divided into two chief Portions: whereof they held one to be the World or
Worlds finite as to bulk and dimensions, but infinite as to number. The other
part or portion they extended beyond the Worlds, which they fancied to be a
Congeries of Infinite A^oms, out of which, not only the Worlds already made
received their sustenance, but ancient model of the cosmos Systema AntiQvorvm
CHAOS INFINITVM EX ATOMIS

Coelum Stellatum

Planetarum ^errae^e ^ocus

new ones were produced: Which Cosmical System imagined by the Ancients, is
thus described, as may be seen in the said System. First, The place of the
Planets and the Earth: Then the Starry Firmament, marked A, B, C, D, embracing
within its Circumserence the Planetary and Elementary System, beyond which a
certain infinite Chaos of Atoms, in which this World of ours is supposed to
float, which Scheme is taken from Scheinerus.

A Description of the Material Sphere.
The Poles of the World are two fixed Points in the Heavens, Diametrically
opposite to one another; the one visible in our Hemifphere called the Artick
Pole; the other not seen of us, being in the lower Hemiiphere, called the South
or Antartick Pole.

The Axis of the World is an imaginary Line drawn from Pole to Pole, about
which the Diurnal motion is performed from East to West.

The Meridians are great Circles, concurring and intersecting one another in
the Poles of the World.

The Equinoctial is a great Circle, 90 Degrees distant from the Poles of the
World, cutting the Meridians at right Angles, and dividing the World into two
equal parts, called the North and South Hemisphere.

The Zodiac is a Zone, having eight Degrees on either side of the Ecliptic,
in which space the Planets make their Revolutions, divided and distinguished
into 12 Signs, 30 Degrees to each Sign; as, Aries Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Lee,
Virgo, which are called the Northern Signs. Libra, Scorpio, Sagittatius,
Aquarius, Pisces, called the Southern Signs.

The Ecliptic is a Circle in the midst of the Zodiac, touching the
Equinoctial in two opposite points of Aries and Libra.

The Colures are two Meridians dividing the Equinoctial and Ecliptic into two
equal parts; one of these passes the Equinoctial points of Aries and Libra, and
is called the Equinoctial Colure; the other by Cancer and Capricorn, called the
Solstitial Colure.

The Poles of the Ecliptic are two points 23 Degrees. 30 Min. distant from the
Poles of the World.

The Tropicks are two small Circles parallel to the Equinoctial, and distant
therefrom 23 Degrees. 30 Min. limiting the Suns greatest Declination.

The Northern Tropic is called the Tropic of Cancer, the Southern the Tropic
of Capricorn.

The Polar Circles are two small Circles, parallel to the Equinoctial, and are
distant from the Pole of the World 23 Degrees. 30 Min.

That which is adjacent is called the Artick Circle, and the other the
Antartick Circle.

The Zenith and Nadir are two Points Diametrically opposite.

The Zenith is the vertical Point, or the Point right over our heads.

The Nadir is directly opposite thereto.

The Horizon is a great Circle, 90 Degrees. distant from the Zenith and Nadir,
dividing the World into two equal parts, the upper and visible Hemisphere, and
the lower and invisible.

Astronomical Definitions.
The Meridian of a place, is that which passes by the Zenith and Nadir of the
place.

a mechanical cosmos supported by Atlas Spherae Materialis


Azimuths or Vertical Circles are great Circles of the Sphere, concurring and
intersecting each other in the Zenith and Nadir.

Almicanters or Parallels of Latitude, are small Circles parallel to the
Horizon, imagined to pass through every Degree and Minute of the Meridian,
between the Zenith and Horizon.

Parallels of Latitude or Declination, are small Circles parallels to the
Equinoctial, they are called Parallels of Declination, in respect of the Sun or
Stars in the Heavens, and Parallels of Latitude, in respect of any place upon
the Earth.

The Latitude of a place is the height of the Pole above the Horizon, or the
distance between the Zenith and Equinoctial.

The Latitude of a Star is the Arch of a Circle, contained between the Center
of a Star and the Ecliptic Line, making right Angles with the Ecliptic, and
is counted either Northward or Southward, according to the situation of the
Star.

Longitude on the Earth, is measured by an Arch of the Equinoctial, contained
between the Primary Meridian (or Meridian of that place where the Longitude is
assigned to begin,) and the Meridian of any other place counted always Easterly.

The Longitude of a Star, is that part of the Ecliptic, which is contained
between the Stars place in the Ecliptic and the beginning of Aries, counting
them according to the succession of the Signs.

Altitude of the Sun or Stars is the Arch of an Azimuth, contained betwixt the
Horizon and Center of the Sun or Star.

Ascension is the rising of any Star or any part of the Equinoctial above the
Horizon.

Descension is the setting thereof.

Right Ascension is the number of Degrees and Minutes of the Equinoctial
(counted from the beginning of Aries,) which comes to the Meridian with the
Sun or Stars, or with any portion of the Ecliptic.

Oblique Ascension is an Arch of the Equinoctial, between the beginning of
Aries and that part of the Equinoctial that rises with the Center of a Star,
or with any portion of the Ecliptic in an Oblique Sphere.

Oblique Descension, is that part of the Equinoctial which sets therewith.

Ascensional Difference is an Arch of the Equinoctial, being the difference
between the right and oblique Ascension.

The Amplitude of the Sun or Star is an Arch of the Horizon, intercepted
between the rising or setting of the Sun or Star, and the East or West point of
the Hozizon.

The Parallax is the difference between the true and apparent place of the Sun
or Star.

Refraction is caused by the Atmosphere, or vaporous thickness of the Air, near
the Earths Superficies, whereby the Sun and Stars seem always to rise sooner
and set later, than in reality they do.

The Use of the Table of New and Full Moons.
On the left side of the Table you have each Month in the Year; and on the head
of the Table you have the Years of our Lord, and the Characters of the New and
Full Moons; the New Moon is thus expressed ^, the Full Moon thus. The Use of
which Table will appear plainly by this Example.

I would know the time of the New and Full Moon; This Table readily shows ye
exact day off New and full Moon as likewise her true Age. for Fifteen years
to come from ye year 1678, to 1692
1678 1679 1680 1681 1682 1683 1684 1685 1686 1687 1688 1689 1690 1691 1692 ^ ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Ianu 12 27 2 10 21 5 9 23 28 13 17 3 6 22 24 10 13 29
3 18 22 7 11 25 30 14 10 4 8 23 Feb 11 26 0 15 19 4 8 2^ 27 11 16 1 5 20 2^ 9
12 23 2 1^ 21 ^ 9 24 2^ 13 1^ 2 7 21 Mar 12 28 23 17 20 5 9 24 28 15 18 2 ^ 21
24 10 14 29 3 18 21 7 11 26 30 14 1^ 4 7 22 Apr 11 26 20 15 18 3 8 22 27 11 16
30 4 19 2^ 9 12 28 2 17 20 5 ^ 24 2^ 14 1^ 2 6 20 May 1 26 20 15 18 3 ^ 22 26
11 16 30 4 18 23 8 12 27 30 17 10 5 ^ 24 2^ 13 17 ^^ 6 20 June ^ 24 27 14 16 2
20 25 0 14 28 ^ 17 21 6 10 25 29 15 1^ 3 7 22 26 11 16 30 4 18 July 8 23 27 13
15 31 ^ 19 24 9 14 28 2 16 21 6 1^ 24 2^ 14 1^ 5 6 22 25 11 1^ 30 4 18 Aug 7 22
26 11 14 2^ 3 19 22 8 12 26 ^0 14 10 ^ 9 23 27 13 15 31 5 2^ 24 9 1^ 2^ ^ 1^
Sept 5 20 24 10 12 27 2 17 21 10 23 28 13 18 2 7 21 26 11 14 20 3 1^ 22 8 12 27
30 5 Octo 5 10 2^ 1^ 27 ^1 17 2^ 6 10 2^ 28 13 17 2 7 21 25 10 14 2^ 5 18 22 8
11 26 29 15 Nove 4 18 23 7 1^ 2^ ^^ 15 1^ 5 8 24 26 12 16 ^^ 5 1^ 24 9 12 27 1
16 20 6 9 25 27 13 December 3 17 22 ^ 11 25 20 45 18 4 3 23 26 11 15 30 5 19 24 8
12 26 131 16 2^ 6 9 25 27 13 two tables of information, displayed in concentric
circles A Table showing ye Dominical letter Cyrcle of ye sun Epact and golden
Number for 56 years from the year 1676
YEARS OF OUR LORD 1676 1677 1678 1679 1680 1681 1682 1683 1684 1685 1686 1687
1688 1689 1690 1691 1692 1693 1694 1695 1696 1697 School 1699 1700 1701 1702 1703
1704 1705 1706 1707 1708 1709 1710 1711 1712 1713 1714 1715 1716 1717 1718 1719
1720 1721 1722 1723 1724 1725 1726 1727 1728 1729 1730 1731 Dom Let. BA G F E
DC B A G FE D C B AG F E D CB A G F ED C B A GF E D C Cycle of ye Sun 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 1 2 3 4

YEARS OF OUR LORD 1676 1677 1678 1679 1680 1681 1682 1683 1684 1685 1686 1687
1688 1689 1690 1691 1692 1693 1694 1695 1696 1697 School 1699 1700 1701 1702 1703
1704 1705 1706 1707 1708 1709 1710 1711 1712 1713 Epact 25 6 17 28 9 20 1 12 23
4 15 26 7 18 29 11 22 3 14 Gold. Number 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
1 2 3 4

for the Year 1680, therefore look at the head of the Table, and on the left
fide for the Month of May, and in the common Angle of meeting you will find
that is New Moon the 18th Day, and Full Moon the 31 Day; so from the Full and
Change you may compute any other Day of her Age. And if you would know the time
of High Water at London, (or any other place contained in the Table) then look
the day of her Age on the left side of the Table, (as you are before directed)
and right against it you will find the time of High Water.

The Use of the Circular Table, marked at the Corner with the Figure 1.
This Table shows the Dominical Letter, Cycle of the Sun, Epact, and Golden
Number, for 56 Years, from the Year 1676.

For finding the Dominical Letter, and Cycle of the Sun, you are first to seek
the Year of the Lord in the two outermost Circles; and in the two next Circles
within those Circles, you have the Dominical Letter, and the number of the Suns
Cycle.

For Example.
If you would know, in the Years 1700, and 1728, what the Dominical Letter, and
Cycle of the Sun is; you will find the Dominical Letter to be GF, which does
denote it to be Leap-Year, and the Cycle of the Sun to be 1. And if you would
find the Epact, and Golden Number, for any Year contained in the Table, then
find the Years required in the 5th and 6th Circle, and in the Innermost Circles
you will have your desire; as for the Years 1681, and 1700, you will find the
Epact to be 2, and the Golden Number to be 10.

And here I think it necessary to show the natural reason of these Numbers and
Letters.

Of the Prime, or Golden Number.
The Prime, or Golden Number, is a Circle, or Revolution of 19 Years; in which
space of time it was supposed by the Ancients, that all the Lunations and
Aspects between the Sun and Moon, did return to the same place they were 19
Years before: It is chiefly to find the Change, Full, and Quarters of the Moon.

Of the Cycle of the Sun, and Dominical Letter.
The Cycle, or Circle of the Sun, is a Revolutional Number of 28 Years; in
which space of time there is a perfect change of all the Sunday Letters for
every Year, and makes its Periodical Revolution in 28 Years. By help of which
is known the true order of the Sunday Letter, A, being placed against the first
day of January, and the rest in their order to the Years end: And every Month
begins the first Letter of each word in this short Distich; At Dover Dwells
George Brown Esquire,
Good Christopher Finch, And David Friar.


Of the Epact.
The Epact is a Number not exceeding 30, because the Moon, between Change and
Change, never exceeds 30 Days; and thereby the common Lunar Year, consisting of
12 Months, is less than the Solar Year by 11 Days; for to every Lunar Month is
accounted but 29 Days and a half, so that a Lunar Year contains 354 Days, and
the Solar Year consists of 365 Days; the disserence is 11 Days, which is called
the Epact.

Short Rules to find the Golden Number, Dominical Letter, Epact, etc. in short
Distichs.
To know if it be Leap-Year, or what Year past.
Divide the Year by 4, what is left shall be
For Leap-Year 0. for past 1, 2, or 3.
Example.
Anno 1680, divide only the latter part of this Number, which is 80, by 4, and
there remains 0, which shows it to be Leap-Year.

To find the Dominical, or Sunday Letter.
Divide the Year, its 4th, and 4 by 7,
What Is left substract from 7, the Letter's given,
A. 1. B. 2. C. 3. D. 4. E. 5. F. 6. G. 7.
Example.
The Year of our Lord 1680 Its fourth 420 To both which, add 4 7)2104(3 21 04

Being divided by 7, the remainder is 4; and according to the order of the
standing of the Letters, it shows it to be D, which is the first of the
Dominical Letters for that Year, (which is Leap-Year) which continues until the
24th of February, (St. Matthias day) and the other Letter is C, which serves
all the Year after, accounting the Letters backward.

To find the Golden Number, Cycle of the Sun, and Indiction.
When 1, 9, 3. to the Year has added been,
Divide by 19, 28, 15.
Example.
To 1680 add 1, which is 1681: divide that by 19, and there remains 9, which is
the Golden Number for that Year. Again to 1680 add 9, and the Sum is 1689;
divide by 28, the residue is 9, the Cycle of the Sun for that Year. Lastly, To
1680 add 3, the Sum is 1683; which being divided by 15, the remainder is 3,
which is the Indiction for the same Year.

The Prime and Golden Number being given, to find the Epact.
Divide by 3, for each one left add 10,
30 reject; the Prime makes Epact then.
Example.
Anno 1680 the Golden Number is 9, which divide by 3, and there remains 0;
therefore ten times 0 is 0, which added to 9, the Epact for the Year 1680.

By the 19 Epacts, to find the day of Easter- Limit from the beginning of March
inclusively.
The Epacts take from 47 but two,
The greatest take from 77, 'twil do.
Example.
Anno 1680 the Epact being 9, subtract it from 47, there remains 38, which is
Easter-Limit for the same Year; which reckoned from the beginning of March
inclusively, it will fall on April the 7th.

But when the Epact is 28, or 29, it must be subtracted from 77, that so the
Limit may remain, and the next following Sunday after the Limit is always
Easter day.

Easter- Limit, and the Dominical Letter being given; to find Easter- day.
The Letter more by 4 from Limit take,
What Is left from nearest sevens, shall Easter make.
Or thus; Take the Number of the given Letter more by 4 from the given Limit,
and the residue from the greatest Sum of sevens, the last remainder added to
the Limit (the Sum) or its excess above 31, is Easter Day in March or April.

Example.
Anno 1680, the Letter C, which is 3, more by 4, is 7; which taken from the
Limit 38, the resid^e is 31; this taken from the nearest greater Sum of sevens
in the Limit, viz. 35, there remains 4; which added to the Limit 38, the Sum is
42; the excess of which above 31 is 11; Therefore the 11th of April, Anno 1680,
is Easter Day.

For the Days of the Months on which the Sun enters the 12 Signs.
Twice 9, twice 10, four 12s, 11,
Then 12, then 9, then 8 or 7.
. Mar. Apr. Ma. Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. 9. 9. 10. 10. 12.
12. 12. 12. 11. 10. 9. 8.

For the Degree of the Sun's Place on any day.
From the day of the Month on which the Suns Place is required, if you may, or
else from the Sum of that and 30, substract the day of his entrance into the
Sign of that Month, the remainder shall be the Degree of his place, in that or
the next preceding Sign.

Example.
Suppose the 6th day of March 1680, I would know in what Degree of the Sign the
Sun is in: Therefore according to the Rule, put 30 to it, then is it 36; from
which if you take 9, the day of the Suns entrance into the Sign of that Month,
there remains 27, which shows the Sun is in 27 Degrees, in the Sign preceding,
which is.

To find the Age of the Moon, or the Day of Her Change.
Janu. 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
8, 8, 10, 10, these to the Epact fix.
The sum (bate 30) to the Month-day add,
Or take from 30, Age or Change is had.
Which is thus Explained.
Add to the Epact,
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. Ma. Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.
0. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 8. 8. 10. 10.
When the Epact is added to any of these Numbers, the Sum, if it be less than
30, or the Excess above 30, added to the day of the given Month, (rejecting, if
need be) gives the Age of the Moon that day; but subtracted from 30, leaves
the day of the Change in (or from the beginning of) that Month.

For the day of the Full Moon, add or substract 15 to or from the day of the
Change.

Example.
(1.) For the Age of the Moon on the 11th of May 1680, the Number of the Month
is 3, added to the Epact 9, makes 12; which added to 10, makes 22, the Age of
the Moon required.

(2.) For the day of the Change, (or New Moon) in May 1680, the Epact 9, with
the Figure 3, makes 12, (as before); which subtracted from 30, there rests 18,
on which day is the Moons Change, (or the New Moon) in May 1680.

(3.) For the day of the Full Moon, take 15 from 18, there remains 3, which is
the day of the Full Moon in that Month.

To find the Hour of the Moons coming to South, and High Water at London.
The Moons Age multiply by 4; divide
By 5 for southing; add 3 for the Tide.
Example.
If on the 10th of May 1680, the Moon is 10 days old; which being multiplied by
4, makes 40, and divided by 5, the Quotient is 8, which is the time of the
Moons southing in the Morning, because the Moon is past the Full; to which if
you add 3, makes 11, which shows the time of High Water at London.

The use of the Almanac in Lines, Entitled, (An Almanac showing the Day of
the Month, Suns Place, Right Ascension and Declination for ever.)
THe Margin on the left side shows the Suns Declination for every day in the
Year, directing your Eye from any of the Month required.

As for Example.
If it should be required to know what Declination the Sun has on the 25th day
of October; which day you will find in the second Column, and right against the
15th day, the Declination to be about 15 Degrees; and you may well determine it
to be South Declination,

an extremely intricate diagram laid out in three columns An Almanck Showing
the Day of the Month, Suns Place, Right Ascension and Declination for ever:
By John Sellers


a series of tables with a variety of purposes A Perpetual Almanac For
findeing the day of the Month for ever. For time Past, Present, And to come.
By John Seller.
January Februar March April May June At Dover Dwells George Brown Esquire
Good Christoph Finch And David Friar July August Septem October Novem: December

To find the Dom: Letter for ever
C 1 E 1 G 1 B 1 D 1 F 1 A 1 B 2 D 2 F 2 A 2 C 2 E 2 G 2 A 3 C 3 E 3 G 3 B 3 D
3 F 3 GF BA DC FE AG CB ED 1000 1200 1400 1600 1100 1300 1500 ^^^^ 20 24 28 32
36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76 80 84 88 92 96 1700 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36
40 44 48 52 2400 1900 2100 2300 1800 2000 2200

High water Land bridge Moons age The Moons southing. Moons age for her (...) 3
-- 48 1 -- 16 0 -- 48 1 -- 29 4 -- 36 2 -- 17 1 -- 36 2 -- 28 5 -- 24 3 -- 18 2
-- 24 3 -- 27 6 -- 12 4 -- 19 3 -- 12 4 -- 20 7 -- 0 5 -- 20 4 -- 00 5 -- 25 7
-- 48 6 -- 21 4 -- 48 6 -- 24 8 -- 36 7 -- 22 5 -- 36 7 -- 23 9 -- 24 8 -- 23 6
-- 24 8 -- 22 10 -- 12 9 -- 24 7 -- 12 9 -- 21 11 -- ^0 10 -- 25 8 -- 00 10 --
20 11 -- 48 11 -- 26 8 -- 48 11 -- 19 12 -- 36 12 -- 27 9 -- 30 12 -- 18 1 --
24 13 -- 26 10 -- 24 13 -- 17 2 -- 12 14 -- 20 11 -- 12 14 -- 16 3 -- 0 15 --
30 12 -- 00 15 To find the day of the Month
1 8 15 22 29 2 9 16 23 30 3 10 17 24 31 4 11 18 23 5 12 19 26 6 13 20 27 7 14
21 28



because the Sun is then to the southward of the Equinoctial, being after the
13th day of September; from which time, to the 10th of March following, the Sun
has all that time South Declination. And if you would know the Suns Place for
the same day, observe this lirection following.

To find the Sun's Place.
Suppose the Sun's Place were required on the aforesaid day, viz. the 25th of
October: direct your Eye from the said day, to the next Column on the right
hand, and you will find the Sun's Place to be in 12 Degrees of Scorpio. And if
you would know the Suns Right Ascension that day, in time observe these
following Directions.

To find the Suns Right Ascension in Hours.
Suppose it were required to find the Suns Right Ascension (converted into
Hours) for the aforesaid 25th of October; which in the 4th Column you will
find, right against the said day, to be 15 hours.

The same way and order is to be observed in all the rest of the Months for any
of the forementioned Requisites.

The Use of the Perpetual Almanac,
THis Almanac is contained in this short Distich; At Dover Dwells George Brown
Esquire,
Good Christopher Finch, And David Friar.
By which Verse, with the help of the Dominical Letter, you may find the day of
the Mouth, for any time past, present, or to come; the use of which Tables and
Verse are here-under showed.

The Use of the Tables of the Dominical Letters, and their Application, for
finding the day of the Month by the help of the aforesaid Distich.
First therefore observe, That all those Years expressed in the Tables, are all
Leap-Years; as the Years 1000, 1200, 1400, 1600, etc. and so of the rest, which
are all Leap-Years, and have each of them two Dominical Letters, as you may see
in their respective Columns over their heads; as for the Year 1000, the
Dominical Letters were GF, and so of the rest. The other Figures also, as 20,
24, 28, 32, etc. are all Leap-Years; the use of which are thus explained.

First, Suppose the Dominical Letter is required for the Year 1632; look for
1600 in one of the Columns, and in another Column for 32; and on the head of
the said Column, you will find it is Leap-Year, and the Dominical Letters to be
A G.

Secondly, Suppose you would know the Dominical Letter for the Year 1681: Look
in the Table for 81, which you find not there; Therefore look for the Year
before, which is 80, and that is Leap-Year, and the Dominical Letters are D C.
Now C being the Dominical Letter for the latter part of the Year 1680. The next
Letter before it, in the Alphabetical order is B, which is the Dominical Letter
for the next Year 1681, Which Letter you will find on the top of the next
Column, where you will find the Lerter B, with the Figure of 1 by it, which
informs you that it is the first after Leap-Year. And so for the Year 1682, the
Dominical Letter is A, and the second after Leap-Year; the same is to be
understood of the rest. Thus having found the Dominical Letter, the day of the
Month may be found by these following Directions.

To find the Day of the Month of the forementioned Distich, with the help of
the Dominical Letters found in the Table.
For the finding the day of the Month by that short Verse, you are to take
notice, That the first Letter in each word, is the same Week day Letter that
always begins the Month: as A always begins January, and so of the rest,
as you may see in any Almanac, according to that order as you see in the
Distich: All which will be sufficiently explained in this

Example.
The first Sunday in June, in the Year 1681, I would know what day of the Month
it is for that Year; I find B is the Domical Letter, and by the Distich you
find the Letter E begins the Month of June; therefore count on in the natural
order of the Alphabet, from E until you come to B, which is Sunday, thus, E
one, F two, G three, A four, B five, which is Sunday, and the 15th day of the
Month.

Example 2.
I would know what day of the Month the first Thursday of July is in the Year
1681, the Dominical Letter being B. I find by the Verse that July begins the
Month with G; therefore I say, Gone, A two, B three, (which is Sunday) C
therefore is Monday, D Tussday, E Wednesday, F Thursday, which is seven in
number from G, (including it) and therefore is the 7th day of the Month on
which the first Thursday falls on. The Month begins with a Friday, and so you
may cast your Eye down to a small Table on the bottom of the said Aimanack, and
there you may take notice, that the first row of Figures on the head of the
Table, is 1.8.15.22.29; which you may reckon to be always the same days of the
Week that the Month begins with; as if the Months which begin with a Sunday,
then the first row are all Sundays, and the second row all Mondays, the third
row all Tuesdays, and so on. As for instance, The Month of July, in the Year
1681, begins on a Friday, so then the upper row are all Fridays, and the second
row Saturdays, etc. So also you may say, Friday and Friday is 8, and Friday is
15, and Friday is 22, and Friday is 29, etc. So after these Rules and
Directions, you may always find the day of the Mouth at any time, both past,
present, and to come.

Upon the same Print of the Perpetual Almanac, you have also some other small
Tables; one showing the time of High Water at London Bridge any day of the
Moons Age. Another shows the Moons coming to the South at any day of her Age;
by help of which you may know the time of High Water at London or elsewhere,
where the time of Flowing is known, at the Full and Change days. The fourth
Table shows the Moons Age for her shining. The Use of each Table shall be
explained in these following Directions.

a graph with many lines curving across a grid A Table Showing the Altitude of
ye at Every hour in the day and in each day in the year, with its Riseing and
setting.


A Catalogue of all the Eclipses of ye Sun an Moon, which will be visible in
Eng: from the year 1677, to the year 1700.
Year. Month. D. H. M. Lun. Dig. Min. 1677 May. 6 15 25 8 15 1678 October. 19
8 17 22 18 1681 August. 18 14 22 10 35 1682 August. 7 17 56 18 50 1682
Tebruary. 11 11 28 19 48 1683 January. 17 4 27 10 30 1684 June. 16 14 17 1 35
1684 July. 2 3 10 8 0 1685 November. 30 10 26 21 45 1686 November. 19 11 22 7
35 1687 May. 1 1 25 4 40 1688 April. 5 6 4 6 49 16^^ March. 25 0 41 21 19 16^^
September 18 14 46 20 39 1690 March. 24 10 14 5 53 1692 July. 17 15 9 22 28
1693 Tebruary. 11 16 24 29 32 1693 June 23 0 6 2 34 1694 June. 26 12 50 6 47
1695 November 10 7 0 6 55 1696 May. 6 11 45 21 48 1696 October. 20 16 30 21 45
1697 October. 10 7 44 8 54 1699 March. 5 7 14 9 5 1699 September 12 21 30 10 0

By having the Moons Age, to find the time of High Water at London Bridge.
The Moons Age must be first known from some other Tables in the Book, or
elsewhere; which being known, find the day thereof in the forementioned small
Table, and right against it, on the left hand, you will find the time of
High Water at London Bridge.

As for Example.
If the Moon be six days old, I would know when it is High Water at
London Bridge. Therefore first seek the Moons Age 6 in its proper Table, and
right against it you will find 7.48. which shows that it is High Water at 72
Clock and 48 Minutes past.

To find the Moons Southing any day of her Age.
First you must look the Age of the Moon as before, and then seek the same in
the Table of her Age, and right against it, in the Table on the right hand,
under the title of Moons Southing, you will have your desire. And here note.
That from the New to the Full, the Moon comes to South in the Afternoon; but
from the Full to the New in the Morning.

As for Example.
When the Moon is six days old, I would know the time of her coming to South.
Therefore if you cast your Eye on the Table of the Moons Southing, you will
find 4 48. which shows that the Moon comes to South at 4 a Clock and 48
Minutes past.

The Use of these Tables for finding the time of the Moons Shining.
To know how long the Moon shines, enter the Column of the Moons Age for her
shining, and against it on the left hand you have the time of her shining:
which all the time of her Increase being added to the hour of Suns Rising,
gives the time of her Rising; but if added to the time of Suns Setting, gives
the time of her Setting; but after the Full, the time of her shining from the
Suns Rising, and it gives her Rising; and then take the same from the Suns
Setting, and it gives the time of her Setting.

Example.
In the Year 1680 October the 5th, the Moon is 22 days old. Which number find
in the Table, and you will see that right against it there is 6 Hours 24 Min.
for the time of her shining: which being added to the Suns rising of the same
day, which is 6 Hours 46 Minutes, makes 13 Hours 32 Minutes; from which take
12, and there rests 1 Hour 32 Minutes, which is the time of the Moons Rising
the next Morning.

Again, to the same 6 Hours 24 Minutes, add 5 Hours 14 Minutes (the Suns
Setting) and it gives 11 Hours 38 Minutes for the time of her Setting the next
day a little before Noon.

To find the Hour of the Night by the shadow of the Moon upon a Sun-Dial, by
the help of the Table of the Moons Southing.
Observe on a Sun-Dial what hour the shadow of the Moon falls upon, and take
notice how much the shadow does either lack or is past the Hour of 12 upon the
Dial, for so much it does want of, or is past the time of the Moons coming to
South.

Example.
Suppose the Moon were ten days old; you find (by the Table) that the Moon
comes to South at 9 of the Clock. Now suppose the shadow of the Moon should
fall on the Hour of 10, this wants 2 Hours of 12, and therefore it wants two
Hours of eight, which is 6 of the Clock in the Evening.

But if the shadow of the Moon had been at 2 upon the Dial, then you must have
added 2 Hours to the Moons coming to South, then would it be 10 of the Clock at
Night.

And Note; When the Moon is in the Full, then the shadow of the Moon shows the
true Hour of the Night, as the shadow of the Sun does by Day.

The Use of the Table of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon.
This Table is sufficiently plain of it self by inspection only; but however I
shall give one Example.

In the Year 1681, the 28 of August, you will find the Moon will be Eclipsed at
14 Hours 22 Minutes, which is 22 Minutes past two of the Clock next Morning,
and the quantity eclipsed will be 10 Digits 35 Minutes.

The Use of the Perpetual Table for finding the Break of Day, Suns Rising,
Planetary Hours, both by Night and Day in the Latitude of London, every 10th
Day in the Month.
In the first Column you have the 12 Months of the Year; in the second, 1, 11,
and 22 Days of the Month; in the third the Break of Day, which on the 11th of
February is at 5 of the Clock; in the fourth is the time of Twilight, which
against the said 11th of February, is at 7 of the Clock, which is the time of
the ending of Twilight in the Evening; in the 5th and 6th Columns, the Rising
and Setting of the Sun; in the 7th and 8th Columns, the length of the Day and
Night; and in the 9th and 10th Columns, the length of the Planetary Hours both
by Night and Day.

The Use of the Table of the Essential Dignities of the Planets.
Every Planet has two Signs for his Houses, except and, they have but one
apiece; has and; has and; has and has; has, etc. One of these Houses is
called Diurnal, noted with the letter D; the other is Nocturnal, noted by the
letter N. In these Signs the Planets have their Exaltations, which are noted in
the third Column; as the in the 19. in the 3. in 3 Degrees, etc. are exalted.

These 12 Signs are divided into four Triplicities; the 4th Column tells you
what Planet, or Planets, both Night and Day governs each Triplicity; as over

an intricate table, with instructions A Table showing the true Hour of the
day, by a plain Staff. divided into to 10 equal parts
Ho. before n 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 Ho. after noon 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 June. 11 Iun^ ^1
5 b 6 7 b 9 c 13 b 19 a 30 57 a June. 1 Iun^ 21 5 b 6 7 b 10 13 c 19 b 30 b 59
May 21 July 2 5 c 6 b 7 c 10 a 14 40 ^ 32 65 a May 11 July 13 6 a 6 c 8 a 10 c
14 c 21 ^ 35 78 b April 30 July 23 7 7 b 9 11 b 16 23 40 108 April 20 August 2
7 c 8 a 10 12 c 17 b 26 b 48 196 April 9 August 13 8 c 9 d 11 14 19 b 30 62 a
March; 30 August 23 10 10 b 12 a 15 c 22 a 36 b 92 a March 20 September. 2 11a 12
14 18 26 46 182 March 10 September. 13 13 13 c 16 21 31 a 62 ^ Febr 28 September.
22 15 16 18 c 24 c 39 97 a Febr 18 October. ^ 17 b 18 b 22 20 c 51 210 Febr 8
October. ^3 20 b 21 c 26 ^6 70 c Ian. 29 October. 23 24 25b 31 ^6 110 Ian. 19 Nov.
2 28 29 37 ^9 208 Ian. 9 Nov. 11 32 34 44 ^6 829 December. 30 Nov. 21 36 39 51 ^7
December. 21 Dec. ^ 39 42 56b ^7 December. 11 Dec. ^1 40 43c 59 26

Note that a stands for a quarter of a part. b for half a part and c for three
quarters.

To find the hour of the day by this Table. Take a Staff of what length you
please, and (with a Pair of Compasses) divide it into to equal parts, marking
them upon the Staff: then in some plain level place, where the Sun does shine,
set it upright, and mark where the end of the shadow thereof salls, which done,
measure with your Staff the length of the shadow and note the parts it
contains, which find out in this Table, against the day of the Month. and over
head, you have the true hour of the day.

Suppose the 9 of April or 13 of August. I should find the shadow of the Staff
to be 30 parts and a quarter (that is three Staff length and quater) therefore
seeking in the Table against the said days I see over-head, that it is then
either 7 a clock in the morning or 5 in the afternoon so that if your
observation was in the morning it was 7 but if in the after noon 5 a clock.

By this Example, you may see the ease and excellent use of the Table which is
as ready as any movable Sun-Dyal; so that wheresoever you are or travel, you
may having this Book about you^speedly known the true hour ^.



A Perpetual Table of Break of day, Sun rise, planetary hour, etc. in the
Latitude of London.
Break of day Twilight sun rise sun set leng day leng night Pl H by D. Pl H by
N h m h m h m h m h m h m h m h m Ianu 1 5 54 6 6 8 2 3 58 7 56 16 4 0 40 1 20
11 5 4 6 18 7 49 4 11 8 22 15 38 0 42 1 18 21 5 35 6 25 7 34 4 26 8 52 15 8 0
44 1 16 Feber 1 5 17 6 13 7 17 4 43 9 26 14 34 0 47 1 13 11 5 0 7 0 6 59 5 1 10
2 13 58 0 50 1 10 21 4 45 7 15 6 42 5 18 10 36 13 24 0 54 1 6 M^^^ 1 4 20 7 10
6 23 5 37 11 14 12 46 0 56 1 4 11 3 59 8 1 6 0 6 0 12 0 12 0 1 0 1 0 21 3 34 8
23 5 42 6 18 12 36 11 24 1 3 0 57 April 1 3 33 8 55 5 30 6 40 13 20 10 40 1 7 0
55 11 2 38 9 22 4 58 7 2 14 4 9 56 1 10 0 50 21 2 2 9 58 4 40 7 20 21 40 9 20 1
13 0 47 May 1 1 30 1 30 4 22 7 38 25 10 8 44 1 16 0 44 11 (...) 30 11 30 3 0 8
51 15 42 8 18 1 18 0 42 21 ^d day and no^ Night N^ night but Twilight 3 55 8 5
16 10 7 50 1 20 0 40 June 1 3 50 8 10 16 20 7 40 1 21 0 39 11 3 57 8 3 16 26 7
34 1 21 0 39 21 3 50 8 10 16 20 7 40 1 22 0 38 July 1 3 50 8 3 16 6 7 54 1 20 0
40 11 0 ^2 11 18 4 9 7 51 15 42 8 18 1 18 0 4 21 1 22 10 38 4 22 7 39 15 18 8
42 1 16 0 44 August 1 2 0 10 0 4 59 7 21 14 42 6 18 1 14 0 46 11 2 21 9 39 4 58
7 2 14 4 6 56 1 10 0 50 21 3 0 9 0 5 16 6 44 13 28 10 32 1 7 0 53 Septem 1 3 30
8 30 5 35 6 25 12 46 11 14 1 3 0 57 11 3 59 8 1 6 56 6 4 12 8 11 52 1 0 1 0 21
4 19 7 41 6 16 5 44 11 28 12 32 1 57 1 3 Octobe 1 4 48 7 12 6 36 5 24 10 48 13
12 0 54 1 6 11 5 0 7 0 6 56 5 4 10 8 13 32 0 50 1 10 21 5 18 6 42 7 15 4 46 9
50 14 30 0 47 1 13 Novem 1 5 37 6 27 7 34 4 26 8 52 15 8 0 44 1 26 11 5 45 6 17
7 49 4 11 8 22 15 38 0 42 1 18 21 5 54 6 6 8 1 3 59 7 58 16 2 0 40 1 20 December 1
5 57 6 3 8 10 3 50 7 40 16 20 0 39 1 21 11 6 0 6 0 8 13 3 47 7 34 16 26 0 38 1
22 21 5 8 6 2 8 9 3 52 7 44 16 16 0 39 1 21

a table with a note A Table showing what Planets Rules every hour of the Day
and Night.
the hours of ye Day. the hours of ye Night. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Sund Mond Tuesd Wednes Thursd Fryd Saturd

Note that to ^v^y day in the week there is appropriated a several Planets as
to Sunday to Monda^ Teusd: etc. and therefore each planet ye (...) this Table
you may perceive that ye sun governs ye first hour after sun (...) on sund*
(...) second* (...)* ye Moon governs ye fourth planetary hour and so on*
governs (...) plan. hour (...) Night that is after sun set) ye 2. ye 3. ^s you
may (...) ye rest.



A Table of ye Essential Dignities of the Planets according to Ptolomy.
Signs. Houses: Diurn: Noct: Exaltation (...) the Planets The Terms of the
Planets. The faces of the Planets. (...) (...) D: Noc D 10. 6. 14. 22. 26.. 10.
20. 30 N 3. 8. 15. 22. 26. 30. 10. 20. 30 D 3. 7. 1. 21. 25. 30. 10. 20. 30 N /
D 15. 6. 13. 20. 27. 30. 10. 20. 30 N / D. 6. 13. 19. 25. 30. 10. 20. 30 N 15.
7. 13. 18. 24. 30. 10. 20. 30 D 2. 6. 11. 10. 24. 30. 10. 20. 30 N. 6. 14. 21.
27. 30. 10. 20. 30 D 3. 8. 14. 19. 25. 30. 10. 20. 30 N 28. 6. 12. 19. 25. 30.
30. 20. 30 D. 6. 12. 20. 25. 30. 10. 20. 30 N 27.. 14. 20. 20. 30. 10. 20. 30 0

against... you find. viz. governs by Day in that Triplicity. Over against..
you find and; viz. that has domination by Day, and by Night, in that
Triplicity. Over against.. you find.. which rule as aforesaid. Over against...
you find. which (according to Ptolomy) rules only that Triplicity both Day and
Night. Overagainst, in the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, Columns, you find 6. 14. which tells
you the first 6 Degrees of are the terms of. from 6 to 14 the terms of, etc.

Overagainst, in the 10, 11, 12, Columns, you find 10. 20. 30. viz. the first
10 Degrees of are the Face of; from 10 to 20, the Face of; from 20 to 30, the
Face of, etc.

Overagainst, in the 13 Column, you find detriment; viz. being in, is in a Sign
opposite to one of her Houses, and so is said to be in her Detriment.

Overagainst in the 14 Column, you find, and over his head fall; that is, when
he is in, opposite to (his Exaltation) and so is unfortunate, etc.

A Planet dignified as abovesaid, is said to be in his Essential Dignity.
Accidental Dignities are, when Planets are casually in an Angle or succedent
House, direct free from combustion.

A Planet in his House or Exaltation, being significant of any Person, denotes
him to be in a happy and prosperous Condition, not wanting for the Goods of
this Life.

A Planet debilitated, as being in detriment, or fall, and afflicted, denotes
the Querent to be in a very low and mean Condition, much dejected and
disconsolate.

The Use of the Table of the Planetary or Unequal Hours for every Night and Day
in the Year.
To find what Planetary Hour it is, and also what Planet reigns that Hour.

You must learn at what Hour and Minute the Sun does rise upon the day
proposed; which you may find in each page of the Almanac, and also the true
Hour of the Day at any time proposed: Then observe how many Hours and Minutes
the said time is after Sun rising; the number of which Hours multiply by 60,
and to the Product add the odd Minutes, (if there be any) then the Aggregate
divided by the number of minutes that a Planet reigns, the Quotient will show
the number of a Planetary Hour.

Example.
Suppose that when the Sun rises at 8 of the Clock, as upon Saturday the 8th
of January 1681 it does, and it be required to know what Planetary Hour it is
at 11 a Clock before noon the same day; therefore because 11 a Clock is 3 hours
after 8, the Suns rising, multiply 3 by 60, and the Product is 180; which being
divided by 40, (for so many minutes are in a Planetary Hour that day) the
Quotient is 4 hours 30 minutes: Therefore you may conclude that there are 30
minutes spent of the Planetary Hour.

Having found what Planetary Hour it is, and would know what Planet does reign
that hour, do thus;

Seek the day of the Week in the precedent Table, and the hour of the day on
the top of the Table, and in the common Angle of Meeting you will find the
Planet that governs that hour: And in the other precedent Table on the right
hand, which is for the Night, is the Planet that governs the same Hour by
Night.

Example.
Upon the aforesaid day, (the 8th of January 1681) it is required to find what
Planet reigns at 11 a Clock before Noon the same day; Therefore according to
the aforesaid Rule, you may find there are 30 minutes spent of the fourth
Planetary Hour; therefore first find Monday on the side of the said precedent
Table, then look for 4 in the head of the Table, and in the common Angle of
Metting you will find to be the Governor that rules the 4th Hour of the same
day.

Of the Properties and Natural Effects of the Seven Planets.
Having now showed what Planet rules each Hour, it will be necessary to show
the Natures, Qualities, and Dispositions of them.

denotes in general, Lands, Houses, Tenements, Countrymen, Ancient People, etc.

signifies Judges, Senators, Divines, Riches, Law, Religion, etc.

signifies Soldiers, Physicians, War, Strife and Debate, Theft, and all manner
of Cruelty, etc.

signifies Honor, Greatness, noble Persons of all degrees.

denotes Women, Pleasure, Pastimes. all kinds of Delights, Mirth, sweet Odours,
etc.

denotes all kinds of Scribes or Secretaries, Mathematicians, Servants, etc.

signifies Women in general, all common and vulgar Persons.

The Use of the Table that shows the Altitude of the Sun every hour of the
Day, and each day of the Year; with the Rising and Setting of the Sun.
The Description of the Table.
The Months are on the head of the Table, each Month noted with the proper
Letter belonging to the Month, as J for January, F for February, M for March,
etc.

The Hour Lines that bend downward, are the Summer-hours, those that bend
upward are the Winterhours; the small Lines that fall perpendicularly are the
Parallel Lines of the days of the Year.

Those that run thwart them at right Angles with these, are the Parallels of
the Suns Altitude, proceeding from the Tangent-Line on the right side of the
Table.

The lower Line of the top Margent of the Months, represents the Horizon, where
you are to find the rising and setting of the Sun.

The Uses follow.
To find the Altitude of the Sun on any Hour and Day in the Year.
I would know what Altitude the Sun will have the 10th of May, at 9 of the
Clock in the Forenoon, or at 3 in the Afternoon, which is all one.

Therefore find the 10th of May in the Margent of the Months on the top of the
Table; then find the hour of 9 on the right hand of the Table, and note the
Hour-Line which passes from 8 on the right side, (which are Morning hours) to 3
on the left side (which are the Afternoon hours); then direct your eye down
from the 10th of May, in one of the nearest lines that proceeds downright,
until it meets and intersects the said Hour-line; then direct your eye from
that Intersection, to one of the thwart Lines that proceeds from the Hour-line,
and where that Line meets with the Tangent-Line (on the right side of the
Table) to 43, which is the Altitude of the Sun at that day and hour aforesaid:
the same is to be understood also of the Winter-Hours.

To find the Rising and Setting of the Sun by the same Table.
The aforesaid 10th of May, note what Hour-Line touches the lower Line of the
Margent of Months, and there you will see that the hour of 4, which proceeds
from the Morning Hour Lines, and you may see that the end of the 4 a Clock
Line, does come short of the said 10th day of May; which shows that the Sun
rises a little after 4 of the Clock; and so much after 4 as the rising of the
Sun is, so much does the Sun set before 8 at Night.

The Explanation and Use of the Tables of the Suns Right Ascension; and of the
Table of the Stars Right Ascension and Declination.
The Explanation of the Tables.
In the Table of the Suns Right Ascension, the first Page contains the first
six Months of the Year, and the next Page the other six Months.

In the first Column toward the left hand, are the days of the month, and in
the other Columns is the Suns Right Ascension in Hours and Minutes.

In the Table of the Stars Right Ascension, there are six Columns; in the
first, toward the left hand, are the names of the Stars; in the second are the
Stars Magnitudes; in the third, the Right Ascension of the Stars in degrees and
minutes; in the fourth, the Declination in degrees and minutes; in the fifth,
the Right Ascension in hours and minutes; and in the sixth, the Denomination of
the Declination, whether North or South.

The Use of the Tables.
First, To find the time of the Stars coming upon the Meridian.
The Rule.
When you have found the Right Ascension of the Sun and Stars for any day
proposed; then substract the Right Ascension of the Sun from the Right
Ascension of the Star: but if the Stars Right Ascension be less than that of
the Sun, add thereto 24 hours, and then substract one from the other; the
remainder after substraction is the time of the Stars coming upon the Meridian
from Noon: and if the remainder exceed 12 hours, substract 12 hours therefrom,
and then the remainder is the time from Midnight.

Example 1.
Suppose the time that the middle of the Pleiades comes on the Meridian, were
required to the 5th day of November 1680.

I find the Stars Right Ascension to be 3 hours 26 minutes, and the Suns Right
Ascension to be 15 hours 23 minutes.

Now because the Suns Right Ascension is more than the Stars, therefore add to
the Stars Right Ascension 24 hours, which makes 27 hours 26 min. from which
substracting the Suns Right Ascension, there remains 12 hours 3 minutes; from
which substracting 12 hours, there remains 3 minutes: which is the time of the
Pleiades coming to the Meridian after Midnight, which was required.

Example 2.
Suppose the time of Pegasus lower Wing coming upon the Meridian on the said
5th of November 1680.

I find in the Table the Stars Right Ascension to be 23 hours 55 minutes, and
the Suns Right Ascension to be as before, 15 hours 23 minutes; which being
subtracted from the Stars Right Ascension, leaves 8 hours 32 minutes, the true
time of the Stars coming to the Meridian Afternoon.

Secondly, The time being given, to find what Star will come to the Meridian
about the said time.
The Rule.
To the Suns Right Ascension add the time from Noon, at which the Stars coming
to the Meridian is required, the sum is the Right Ascension of the Star that
will come to the Meridian at that time; with which enter the Table, and look
what Stars Right Ascension agrees with the Right Ascension before found, or
nearest thereto, and that is the Star sought for.

Example.
Suppose April the 1st, I desire to know what Star will come upon the Meridian
at 3 hours after Midnight.

The Suns Right Ascension that day is, 1 hour 21 min. the time from Noon is 15
hours; which added to the Suns Right Ascension makes 16 hours 21 min. the
nearest in the Table is the Scorpions Heart, whose Right Ascension is 16 hours
9 min. and comes to the Meridian 12 min. after 4; and Hercules Head, whose
Right Ascension is 16 hours 50 min. from which take 16 hours 21 min. and there
rests 29 min. after 4 of the Clock, which is the time of Hercules Head coming
upon the Meridian. Note, That 16 hours from Noon, is 4 of the Clock next
Morning.

A Table of ye Suns Right Ascen:
Days Janua: Febr. March April. Mar. June. July. August. Septem. Octo: Novem.
December. Right Ascen: Right Ascen: Right Ascen: Right Ascen: Right Ascen: Right
Ascen: Right Ascen: Right Ascen: Right Ascen: Right Ascen: Right Ascen: Right
Ascen: H. M H. M H. M H. M H. M H. M H. M H. M H. M H. M H. M H. M 1 19.35
21.42 23.28 01.22 03.14 05.10 07.23 09.25 11.19 13.08 15.05 17.15 2 19.39 21.46
23.32 01.25 03.18 05.23 07.27 09.29 11.25 13.12 15.11 17.20 3 19.43 21.50 23.30
01.29 03.22 05.25 07.31 09.33 11.26 13.15 15.15 17.25 4 19.47 21.54 23.30 01.33
03.26 05.31 07.35 09.37 11.30 13.19 15.19 17.29 5 19.51 21.58 23.43 01.36 03.30
05.36 07.39 09.40 11.33 13.22 15.23 17.34 6 19.56 22.02 23.40 01.40 03.34 05.40
07.43 09.44 11.37 13.26 15.27 17.38 7 20.00 22.06 23.50 01.44 03.38 05.44 07.47
09.48 11.41 13.30 15.31 17.42 8 20.04 22.10 23.53 01.47 03.42 05.48 07.51 09.51
11.47 13.34 15.36 17.47 9 20.09 22.14 23.57 01.51 03.46 05.52 07.55 09.55 11.48
13.38 15.40 17.51 10 20.13 22.17 00.01 01.54 03.50 05.56 07.59 09.58 11.51
13.41 15.45 17.56 11 20.17 22.21 00.05 01.58 03.54 06.0^ 08.03 10.02 11.53
13.45 15.49 18.00 12 20.22 22.25 00.08 02.02 03.58 06.04 08.07 10.06 11.5^
13.49 15.53 18.05 13 20.26 22.29 00.12 02.06 04.02 06.08 08.11 10.10 12.0^
13.53 15.58 18.09 14 20.30 22.33 00.15 02.10 04.06 06.1^ 08.15 10.14 12.06
13.57 16.02 18.14 15 20.34 22.36 00.10 02.13 04.10 06.1^ 08.19 10.17 12.09
14.00 16.07 18.19 16 20.38 22.40 00.23 02.15 04.14 06.21 08.23 10.21 12.13
14.04 16.11 18.24 17 20.42 22.4^ 00.26 02.21 04.18 06.25 08.27 10.25 12.17
14.08 16.15 18.28 18 20.46 22.4^ 00.30 02.25 04.22 06.29 08.31 10.28 12.20
14.12 16.19 18.33 19 20.50 22.5^ 00.33 02.29 04.26 06.33 08.35 10.32 12.24
14.16 16.23 18.37 20 20.54 22.55 00.37 02.32 04.30 06.38 08.39 10.35 12.27
14.20 16.28 18.41 21 20.38 22.59 00.41 02.36 04.34 06.42 08.43 10.39 12.31
14.24 16.32 18.45 22 21.03 23.03 00.44 02.40 04.38 06.46 08.47 10.43 12.35
14.28 16.36 18.49 23 21.07 23.06 00.48 02.44 04.42 06.50 08.51 10.46 12.38
14.32 16.40 18.54 24 21.11 23.10 00.52 02.48 04.46 06.54 08.55 10.50 12.42
14.36 16.44 18.58 25 21.15 23.13 00.55 02.51 04.50 06.58 08.58 10.53 12.43
14.39 16.49 19.03 26 21.19 23.17 00.59 02.55 04.54 07.02 09.02 10.57 12.49
14.43 16.53 19.07 27 21.23 23.21 01.03 02.59 04.58 07.06 09.06 11.01 12.53
14.47 16.57 19.11 28 21.27 23.25 01.06 03.03 05.02 07.10 09.10 11.04 12.57
14.51 17.02 19.16 29 21.2^ 01.10 03.07 05.06 07.14 09.14 11.08 13.01 14.55
17.06 19.20 30 21.35 01.14 03.10 05.11 07.19 09.17 11.11 13.04 14.59 17.11
19.25 31 21.3^ 01.17 05.15 09.21 11.15 15.03 19.30

A Table of ye Magnitudes, Right Ascension in Hours and Minutes and Degrees and
Minutes, and ye Declination North or South of 33 fixed Stars.
Names of ye Stars. M R Asc Decli R Asc N / S D M D M H M Pole Star or last in
ye (...) 2 7 53 ^7 33 0 32 N Anchemidas Candle 2 12 31 ^3 56 0 50 N Medusaes
head 3 41 27 ^0 35 2 46 N Perseus right side 2 44 30 ^8 33 2 58 N Middle of the
Ple^des 3 51 22 ^3 06 3 26 N Bulls eye. 1 64 0 45 48 4 16 N Hercus or Geat. 1
72 44 45 36 4 51 N Ortons lost foot 1 74 30 8 38 4 58 S Midshar^m Orrons
Girdle. 2 79 45 1 28 5 19 S Orions ^^ght shoulder. 2 64 5 7 18 5 36 N Aurion or
Waggoner. 2 64 45 44 36 5 39 N Great Dog 1 97 24 16 13 6 30 N C^ylor or Apollo
2 108 00 32 30 7 12 N Linle dog 1 110 20 6 6 7 41 N Poullux or Hercules 2 110
25 28 48 7 22 N Hydraes heart. 1 137 36 7 10 9 10 S Lions heart 1 147 30 13 30
9 50 N Great Pears fore guard 2 160 48 63 32 10 43 N Lions Ruel 1 172 45 10 32
11 31 N Virgins Spike. 1 100 43 9 11 13 07 N Last in Great Bears tail. 2 203 36
51 5 13 34 N Architius 1 209 56 21 4 14 00 N Little Bears fore guard 2 222 46
75 36 14 52 N Hightest m ye Crown 3 231 00 27 43 15 24 N Scriptions heart 1 242
23 25 37 10 09 S (...) head 3 254 40 14 51 16 59 N L^ra^ or harp 1 276 17 38 30
18 25 N Eagle or Vullure 1 293 28 8 1 19 35 N Swans tail 2 307 30 44 3 20 30 N
Dolphins head 3 307 53 15 0 20 32 N Peoassus month 1 321 50 8 19 21 27 N
Pomahant 3 339 30 31 12 22 38 S Pegassus lower wing 2 358 50 13 22 23 55 N

A Table of the Latitudes of the Principal Cities, Towns, and -- Islands in
and about Great Britain and Ireland
ENGLAND Arundel 51 00 Barwick 55 54 Bedford 52 53 Br^tol 51 55 Buckingham 52
10 Cambridg 52 12 Canterbury 51 25 Carlisle 55 20 Chester 53 20 Chickester 50
48 Colchester 52 08 Dover 51 40 Derby 53 00 Dorchster 50 50 Durham 55 00 Exeter
50 50 Falmouth 50 22 Guilford 51 12 Gloucester 52 00 Hartford 51 50 Hereford 52
07 Huntington 52 30 Ipswich 52 20 Kendall 54 24 Lancaster 54 15 Leicester 52 45
Lincoln 53 20 London 51 32 Northampton 52 24 Norwich 52 45 Newcastle 55 12
Nottingham 53 00 Oxford 51 43 Portsmouth 51 08 P^^mouth 50 36 Readina 51 40
Salisbury 51 12 Stafford 52 50 Shrewsbury 52 50 Stamford 54 44 Truro 50 30
Warwick 52 30 Winchester 50 20 Worcester 52 25 York 54 00 WALES Analesey 53 28
Brecknock 52 10 Cardigan 52 12 Carmarthen 51 58 Car^narvan 53 18 Denbigh 53 17
Flint 33 18 Landaire 51 36 Mo^^outh 51 51 Mongomery 51 56 P^mbroke 51 26 Redner
52 20 St. Da^^ds 53 00 ISLANDS Gar^^^ 40 30 Iarses 40 12 Lundy 51 22 Man 53 24
Portland 50 30 W^^h^ 50 39 SCOTLAND Aberdin^ 57 32 Du^blain 56 41 Dundec 56 30
Dunkel 56 48 Edinburgh 56 00 Glascow 55 50 Orkney 60 06 St. Andrews 56 39
Starlings 56 12 IRELAND Ant^^m 54 30 Argl^s 54 10 Armagh 54 14 Clare 52 34 Cork
51 53 Dred^^h 53 38 Dublin 54 27 Dundall 55 54 G^a^loway 55 02 Kildare 53 00
Kno^kferans 54 37 Kinsale 51 41 Lainer^ck 52 30 Waterford 52 00 Wexford 52 18

figure of a man overlaying a model of the solar system, surrounding by the
ring of zodiacal houses Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces
Virgo Leo Cancer Gemini Tavrus Aries

Microcosmus

Pi^ita

Sanguis

Cholera



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Ursa Major Cor Caroli

Ursa major



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Boots Tropicus Cancri

Corona Borealis

Arturus

Boots

Coma Berenices

Cor Caroli



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Serpens Linea Aequinoctalis

Linea Eclipticus

Sarpentarius



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Pegasus Linea Aequi

Tropi Cancri

Pegasus

Piscis Aust



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Cepheus, Cygnus, Draco, and
Lyra Cygnus

Lyra

Cepheus

Draco



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Hercules Tropicus Cancri

Corona Borealis

Hercules

Lyra



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Aquila Tropicus Cancri

Linea Aequinoctialis

Delphinus

Antinous

Aquila



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Andromeda Cassiopea

Triangulum

Tropicus Cancri

Andromeda

Pisces Bor.



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Perseus and Auriga Auriga

Capella

Perseus

Caput Medusae



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Aries Aries



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Taurus Taurus

Aldebar^n



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Gemini Gemini



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Cancer Cancer



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Leo (...) ^is

Leo

Cor Leonis



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Virgo Virgo



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Libra Libra



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Scorpius Scorpius



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Sagittarius Sagittarius



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Capricornus Capricornus



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Aquarius Aquarius

Piscis Austrinus



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Pisces Piscis Bor.

Linum Piscium

Piscis Aust



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Ara Magnitudines Stellarum 1 2
3 4 5 6

Ara



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Cetus Linea Eclipticus

Linea Equinoctia^lis

Cetus

Tropicus Capricorni



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Eridanus Tropicus Cancri

Eridanus



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Argo Navis Tropicus Capricorni

Canis major

Syrius

Argo

Columba Noachi



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Centaurus Lupus

Centaurus

Pe^ Centaur

Crosiers



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Canis Minor Linea
Aequinoctialis

Procyon

Canicula



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Hydra Eclipticus

Spica

Tropicus Capricorni.

Corvus

Crater

Hydra



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Orion Orion

Linea Aequinoctialis

Syrius

Regeli

Aldebaran



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Phoenix, Hydrus, Tucana, Grus,
Indus, and Pavo Acarnar

Phoenix

Hydrus

Toucan

Grus

Indus

Pavo



detail of previous constellation map, featuring Apus, Volans, and Dorado
Triangulum

Apus

Chamaeleon

Musca

Robar. Carolinum

Pisces volans

Xiphias




