SAD NEWS FROM BLACK-VVALL.

Being a true RELATION OF THE BLOODY DESIGN OF SIMON MAN.

Who being denied a But of Wine by a Bristow Merchant, whose Name was Master
Henry Uichols, most cruelly carried match, powder, and Candle, into one of the
lower-most Rooms, and burned the good Ship, called the Bonaventure, upon
Friday night, being the 19. of November, 1641.

In which Ship were burned fifty eight men.

Also, The Description in what manner the Merchant and the Ma^ter of the Ship
were slain. And how the Murderer escaped away

With a true Account of all that were lost, and how many escaped the horrible
fire by swimming.

London, Printed for E.W. 1641.

C ^ R
SAD News from Black-wall.
IT is an old saying, that there is more knavery used by Sea and by Land, then
in all the whole world besides; which is most true: but my sorrowful Relation
proceeds no further then the river of Thames, which is not more Tragical to be
read, then the spectacle was to be seen. In divulging of which, white paper
and black ink does not well agree; for white and black, the one signifies joy,
the other mourning. Wherefore with sable paper, and bloody ink, does this most
doleful story deserve to be written with, Reader, my intents at this time is
to exhaust fountains of brinish tears, from each eye, although composed of
the most dry puny stone; for the Relation so bloody is that in Democritus
himself the Reader of it, he would forget presently his laughing humor and
learn how to weep: but my preambulation must not exceed my relation:
wherefore, mark the story which shall now ensue. There was one Mr. Henry
Vichole, a Bristow Merchant, who was not more famous for riches, than piety,
but as God does sometimes let tribulation fall upon the head of the righteous,
so did it happen unto him Two years since did he make a voyage to Spain, and
loaded his ship very richly with Malligo-wines; which had they bin put to sale,
would have returned unto him the full sum of forty thousand pounds.

Neptune was mild and gentle, and permitted him a safe return unto
Black-vvall, which is about four miles off from the City of London. To behold
which place, I am not able to express the good Merchants joy. But alas, how
soon was that joy metamorphosed into sorrow, how soon was his triumph
converted to a Funeral, he missed Scilla to fall by Charibdis, the unnatural
Seas did show more love and affection to him, than a natural man; for they did
endeavor to enrich him coming home; but a man did undo him, being come home:
as J now shall truly declare.

The Merchant and the Master of the ship being very merry together, for joy of
the good ship, called the Bonaventure unto Black-wall: there was one Simon Man
a common Saylor, who required of the Merchant a But of wine; which the
Merchant, insomuch as the Customers then had not received their due, denied
him; saying, that it was as then an unreasonable request. Bu^ notwithstanding,
so soon as the Customers had their pay, he should have his desire. But the
aforesaid Simon Man, the more the Merchant denied, was the more greedy to have
his desire: but at length he made this answer, profaning the miracle of our
Savior, as water was turned into wine: so will I turn your wines into water,
and so murmuring to himself some discontented words^ he left the Merchants
Cabinet, which was between 6 and 7 of the clock in the evening: and then did
he take counsel with the Devil, how he might be revenged on the Merchant for
denying him his demand, the Devil which is always ready to do any thing
which will cause a man to come unto woeful destruction, furnished him with a
bloody mind without delay to burn the ship, which after this most inhumane
manner he did.

He descended down into the lowest room of the ship, and did carry both
powder, candle, and match when the deadest time of night was, and sleep had
locked up the casements of each man's body, he set fire to the powder, which
could not blow up the ship at once, by reason that there was not enough powder,
but notwithstanding, the hold was all in a flame, vv^ seized upon many,
burning off their legs, others their arms, others had their eyes burnt out,
others had the force of the fire so much upon them, that their very Entrals
were burnt out. Great cry and lamentation there was, some cried out for aid
to other ships, others labored to restinguish the fire, others again leaped
resolutely into the Thames, to avoid the danger of the fire, and so were
drowned in the water.

The Merchant himself first seemed as one distracted, and then anon, the
flames were so violent upon him, that thereby he after great Lamentation dyed.

The Master also striving to do his best for the good of the ship, was caught
hold on by the fire, and so was slain.

In all the time of this most unhappy and bloody Catastitophe, not one ship d^d
dare to venture unto their aid, but sent their long Boats which were to very
little purpose.

The fatal Executioner of this most bloody deed, escaped away himself by
swimming, and as yet, is not to be heard off, b^t let time fly whither it
will, or can: let him be certain of this, that God will not suffer a Murderer
to continue unpunished, his Conscience will so torment him, that he will be in
as unhappy a case, as despair Judas was when he hanged himself.

Thus, gentle Reader, have thou the true and full relation of the woeful
overthrow of that good Merchant Mr. Henry Vichole, men, ship, and goods.

Five passingers, the pursers mate, a boy, and the bloody murderer escaped by
swimming, but all the rest of the officers and common men of the ship, either
by Fire or Water were consumed and slain to the number of fifty eight souls:
all which came to their ends by one malicious servant, who wanting his will,
forced them to dye unwillingly: I conclude thus, From pestilence and Famine,
from Battle, and from sudden Death, Good Lord deliver us.

FINIS.

