Remarques Relating to the STATE OF THE CHURCH OF THE First Centuries: Wherein
are intersperst ANIMADVERSIONS ON J. H. 's View of Antiquity.

(...).

Greg. Naz. to. 1. Orat. 18. p. 274. Quomodo fidem eorum possumus denegare,
quorum victoriam praedicamus?

Ambros. de fide ad Gratian. lib. 3. cap. 7. LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell
at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXX.

TO THE LEARNED Dr. WILLIAM CAVE.
TO you, Sir, who have so well merited of the present Age, by the faithful and
accurate account, which you have given the World, of the Primitive Times, is
this Address presented, as a just Tribute from one, who professes himself a
passionate admirer of the ancient Vsages, and for that reason a most obedient
Son of our holy Mother, the most Oxthodox, and pure, the best governed, and
regular part of the Catholic Church; who having nothing else to ingratiate him
to the Wise and Learned, would make his Veneration for the oldest, i. the best
Religion, a pretense for his intrusion; and I should be unjust to that duty, in
which all the lovers of sacred History stand bound to your charity to the
despised (because seemingly antiquated) Rites of Christianity, which you have
with a manly courage, and much gallantry asserted, had I omitted this
opportunity of letting you know, how gratefully an unknown Disciple of yours
relishes such instances of your generosity and care in collecting and
preserving the scattered Relics of the most reverend, and brave Assertors of
the Christian Doctrine. And when I once began to indulge to such Sentiments, I
was of a sudden conquered by an insatiable desire of serving you; And though it
may seem a debasing of your worth, which I intend to celebrate, to entitle you
to the Patronage of this Trifle, yet I was not willing to baffle my
resolutions, because I knew, that the meanest Sacrisice assumes a luster from
the piety of the Devoto; although here I should have sat down contented to
have offered a poor and despicable Present on my private Altar, and never
coveted the calling of the World to see so impertinent, and unbecoming an
Oblation, had not the interests of Religion compelled me to appear, when the
more concerned thought it not worth the while to stifle, and oppose an
imperious Aggressor, who to promote the novelties of late days, takes Sanctuary
in the remotest Antiquity, and would fain engage the best of Christians, the
Fathers, to protect and countenance him, who by his close insinuations, and
clandestine practices, is so ready to put a Masque on the Face of the most
beautiful Truths, and in that odd dress render them ridiculous: while the
Mushroom-Opinions, that were the Birth of yesterday, or in former Ages branded
as notorious Heresies, must be recorded as the only Rule of Orthodoxy.

Sir, my thoughts were some years since fixed on the Primitive Christianity, and
in the midst of my Design I was happily superseded by your more successful and
comprehensive industry; and I was not a little proud, that Mankind were rescued
from the impertinencies of my Scrible, and treated in a more satisfactory way
in your exquisite and complete Collections, where the Heterodox and Obstinate,
the Factious and Schismatical may contemplate the Beauty, Order, and Decorum of
the Temple-Service; where the fierce and brutish, the uncharitable and
censorious, may be Converts to the generous examples of that Religion which is
pure and peaceable; where the ill-natured and debauched, the lustful and
intemperate, may be invited to become Scholars to that Easter, who teaches Men
to deny ungodliness and carnal lusts, and to live soberly, and righteously, and
godly in the World. And had the Author of the View of Antiquity been so just to
his own reputation, and the interests of the Church, as he ought, he also might
have found reason to stifle his design, and confine his Papers to his private
Study, when your Apostolici bespoke the Press; for his intentions were thereby
forestalled, and his Reader engaged to be severe, since after the delicacies of
such a Treat, as your Book affords, it were insufferable Penance to be
condemned to Bread and Water; although were there nothing but the coarseness of
the Fare to be apologiz'd for, it were easily pardonable, but when it is both
moldy and unseasonably served in, it cannot but nauseate.

To rescue therefore the ignorant and unwary, first engaged me to this making
my self public, that such little arts might not impose on the credulous, and
whatever was so styled, might not presently commence Antiquity; which Essay
could poorly have pretended to the shadow of hopes of success, had not your
light directed me, and the account you give of the Apostles Disciples in the
three first Centuries unriddled many obscure passages to me, so that this gives
you a new title to my Productions, which if they may merit your pardon, and any
way promote the veneration of those best days, and practices, will over and
above satisfy the expectations, and comport with the ambition of,

Sir, Your most faithful, humble Servant. A. S.
Sept. 10. 1678.
TO THE READER.
AMong all the instances of the Ancients prudence, and sage managery of their
Affairs, this was not the meanest, that they thought not every man fit to be
honored with the Employ of an Historian, and entrusted to communicate the
Affairs of the Commonwealth to Posterity, but selected a peculiar Order of
learned, and faithful, of wise, and venerable persons to be the Conservers of
their Records, to transmit their remarkable Actions to the admiration and use
of future Ages, and to give their Bravery and Virtue its due immortality. Hence
among the Egyptians, Babylonians, Joseph. contra Appion. lib. 1. init.
Jews and Romans none, but their Priests, were dignified with this Office, a
great part of the reputation, and interest of every State depending on the just
and impartial Registry of their Achievements. But how strangely have
succeeding Ages degenerated from that excellent Pattern? Every man now thinks
himself fit to write an History, (...), etc. Lucian. quom. Histor. scribenda
sit, tom. 1. p. 347.
accounting it his particular Province, and an undertaking as facile, as to eat
or drink, to use his feet or his eyes; as if the whole of an Historian were
only to ly down and dream of Inspirations, and Antiquity, and start up a
Thucydides, or a Xenophon; as if nothing in nature were so easily attainable,
as to be able to give the World an account of the greatest Exemplars of Virtue,
and the most debauched Prostitutes of Vice, to unravel the various Mysteries of
Providence, and declare the causes of the ruin or advance of Empires, and all
the changes, that happen in a Nation, to Chronicle the Rewards of Piety, and
the Punishments of Villainy, and men could safely sport themselves no where, but
over the Graves of their Progenitors,

But the Judicious and Learned have required extraordinary qualifications in
him, that would be a Harbinger to Fame, and keep the public Archives of a
People; they tell us, that no man should dare to look toward the writing of a
History, that is not Master of a great Industry, and unwearied Diligence, in
collecting all sorts of Materials for the raising such a Fabric, of a
searching judgment and sublime acumen, to preserve him from being imposed on by
falsehood, and led by an ignis fatuus, instead of true and genuine light, and
above all of a severe and unbyast honesty, that will undauntedly tell the
truth, and discourse not as a party, but an impartial and unprejudiced Relator:
and as the Author must be thus furnished; So they tell us, Lips. not. in lib.
1. Politic. cap. 9.
his Productions must have these similar accomplishments. 1. Truth, in the
veracity of all passages, that nothing be altered, concealed, or diminished,
(...). Lucian ubi supr. p. 351.
for he is a betrayer of verity, not only who tells a lie, but who does not
freely tell the truth; and that man, who has not laid aside all affection, and
partiality, forgot his Country, and Relations, and is in love only with
Sincerity, is unfit to be an Historian. How unworthily has Socrates of old
made every passage of his Church History, that relates to the Novatian
controversy, favorable to that Schism? How does he claw the Phrygians, the
greatest Body of that Faction, and praise them for their Abstinence and other
Christian virtues, and at the same time depreciate Saint John Chrysostom, and
blame him for his heat and ungoverned passions, for his craft and injustice? In
like manner, how does Philostorgius use all his art to make the Arian dogma
pass for the only Orthodoxy? How does he celebrate Aetius, and the other prime
Assertors of that impious Heresy, but discountenance Athanasius, hardly
allowing him to be honest or learned? And to omit others, has not the famous
Baronius done so, who would have merited more than the World could have paid
him, Ut. eujus (...), atque industriam neque mirari, neque praedicare satis
possumus, ejus fidem innumeris in locis vel inviti cogamur desiderare. Casaub.
Epist. dedicat. ante exercit. adv. Baron.
had he always throughout his Annals sacrificed on the Altar of Truth, whereas
now, while we can never sufficiently admire or magnify his infinite reading,
variety of learning, and industry, we are compelled to complain of his want of
fidelity? 2. Plainness in an orderly and perspicuous disposal of narrations of
the causes, effects, and circumstances, why, how, and to what purpose affairs
were managed, without which, says Polybius, any Essay of this nature is rather
a ridiculous Fable than a sober Story; which plainness must also be observed in
the Style, that it be not abstruse or intricate, Poetical or bombast, ragged or
dull, but continued with great evenness, and a taking smoothness. 3. Judgment,
not publishing things on hearsay, or stuffing a Book with Enthusiastic
Legends, and strange performances, or oracular Dreams and Visions, the great
fault of Gregory Turonensis, and them that succeeded him, which made some
question, whether any man should be allowed to write a History, who had not
been on the place, and an eyewitness of the transactions; nor yet intermixing
trifling and foolish circumstances, wild, impertinent, and absurd narrations,
such as Saint Francis's calling the Swallows and Grasshoppers, the Hares and
Lambs, Brothers and Sisters in Antoninus, or his undertaking to teach a Sheep
to adore the Eucharist in Bonaventure, and a thousand such equally to be ranked
with the prudence of that German, who among other instances of the humility,
modesty, and condescension of one of their Henry's, reckons this, that he was
well contented to mend his own Breeches, whereas nothing insignificant, or
trifling should debase the grandeur of a History, nothing should be
intersperst, but what is necessarily subservient to the illustration of Affairs.

And if such exact care, fidelity and discretion ought to be exerted in the
Records of our secular concerns, how much more studiously should the matters of
our biggest and best Interests be managed? That the History of the Church
suffer not at the hands of its professed Friends, whose negligence or ignorance,
whose want of wit or honesty, may signally disserve Religion; for I suppose no
man is now to be convinced, how conducive the acquaintance with those primitive
and purest Ages is, to the fitting a man for the noblest and most sacred
researches, since that Maxim of the most learned Viscount Saint Albans has
hitherto commenced Oracle, Advancement of Learning, p. 105. Edit. Angl. 1633.
That it is not Saint Austins, or Saint Ambrose 's Works, that will make so
wise a Divine, as Ecclesiastical History well read and observed. And that
though Bellarmine was a man of vast Parts, and his Controversies deservedly
famous, Montague against Seldom of Tithes p. 19
yet that it is Baronius, who is the Atlas of that Church, and that the surest
way to confound oppositions and Schismatics in controverted cases of
Discipline, were to have the Face of the Primitive Church-Polity drawn to the
Life out of the authentic Writings, and especially the Epistles of the ancient
Fathers, at least till the time of the Chalcedon Council inclusively; for he
must be a man of a Brazen-Face, and a Leaden Heart, that will opine, or oppose
against the well known, and allowable practices of the Ancients.

But Ecclesiastical History, like the Church, whose Amanuensis it was, had its
infancy and youth, its maturity and old Age, and after all an unexpected
renovation, and return to its briskness and vigor. The first Essay toward an
account of the affairs of the Church (after what the Evangelical Registers give
us) was undertook by those Notaries, who probably, circ. an. Chr. 92.
Pontificat. in vit. Clement. tom. 1. Council.
were deputed by Saint Clemens the Bishop of Rome, in his own Church, and
likely by other Prelates after his example, in theirs, to transcribe the Acts
of the Martyrs, the particulars of their Discourses, and the circumstances of
their Sufferings, that in those Ages of persecutions others might be encouraged
to ambition the same Crown. Vetustissima Ecclesiae martyria, quorum lectione
piorum animus ita afficitur, ut nunquam satur inde recedat: Certe ego nihil
unquam ^n Historia Ecclesiastica vidi, a cujus lectione commotior recedam, ut
non amplius meus esse videar. De actis Martyrii Polycarpiani, etc. Jos.
Scaliger not. in Eusebius. Chron. an. MMCLXXXIII. p. 202. Edit. Lugdun. Bat. 1606.
But this course not being found sufficient to transmit all the illustrious
transactions of the Church to Posterity, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 8. and
Steph. Gobarus apud Phot. cod. (...). p. 472.
Hegesippus circ. an. 168. sets about the writing a Body of Ecclesiastical
History, in his five Books of (...), or Commentaries; and because his Memoires
as to matter of Fact were very exact, but in point of Chronology not so
accurate; Eusebius. lib. 1. c. 6, 7. and lib. 6. cap. 24.
Julius Afri canus undertook the rectifying the accounts of Times, and
adjusting proper Epocha's to every remarkable accident. And by this means the
Church History grew up, and gathered strength, till it attained to its (...),
its full maturity and growth under Eusebius, Hist. l. 1. c. 1.
who complaining of his being engaged in a desert and untrod way with signal
accuracy, and unwearied diligence gives us the best prospect could be expected,
of the three first Centuries, and so in some measure satisfied the World for
the loss of those forementioned Writers) which Method was continued, but with
less skill and accuracy, by Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Euagrius and
Cassiodore, in whom we find the six first Saecula of Christianity well
delineated; but when afterward the Employment devolved on Nicephorus, and
others among the Greeks; on Vincentius, Antoninus, Jacobus de Voragine, etc.
among the Latins, what a Deluge of Fopperies, Legends, Miracles and Visions
broke in, and overwhelmed the Church? The whole aim of those Biographers and
Chroniclers being to experiment, not how truly, but how honorably they could
write of the persons whom they mentioned; being ignorant, how different an
Encomium is from a History; (...), etc. Lucian ubi supr. p. 350.
of whose Books we may affirm what Lucian does of some of the Historians of his
Age, that they deserve rather to be called an Ecclesiastical Poem or Romance,
than a History, the enterprise being as suitable, as the introducing a Wrestler
in the habit of an Eunuch, or a General of an Army with his Face bedawb'd with
Paint and Ceruse, and adorned with the little arts of Effiminacy; under which
Spiritual Scorbute, which had emasculated all that was generous among
Christians, the Church for a long time insensibly languish'd (the whole
Commonwealth of Learning being disfranchiz'd, and its last breath expiring
among the Monks, who, by reason of their confinement to the Melancholy
loneliness of a Cell, were the unfittest men in nature to be Historians) till
Religion and the Muses had their restoration together, and the Sacred and
Secular Sciences were introduced from behind the Skreen, and shown to mankind
clothed in their native Dress, and Beauties; among which productions of that
benign providence, the holy History began to look like it self, the Winter
Tales of the Friars were hist off the Stage, De Magdeburgens. videsis, Casaub.
Ep. Dedic. ante exercit. in Baron. Montacut. apparat. Sect. 52, 54. Cave 's
Lives of the Apostolici^ ad Lector.
and men grew inquisitive after what really had been done in the days of their
Fathers; and after a few previous attempts of Melancthon, and others, to
rectify the dis-joynted Series of Times, the Divines of Magdeburg, or rather
Flacius Illyricus in the name of the rest adventured on the writing of the
Church History, whose Centuries, when first they came forth, alarmed the whole
Romish Faction, and employed them in the moving every Stone to secure their
Proselytes from believing, that the Reformed was the most ancient Religion, and
that the greatest pretenders to Antiquity were the veriest Novellists: to this
end a Countryman of theirs first takes up the Cudgels against them, William
Eysengreen, in his Centenarius primus adversus Magdeburgenses, but I never
found that he went farther than that one Book, being conscious to himself of
his own impotence, and contented to have given his Holiness such a specimen of
his Obedience and good will to the Cause. Nibbled at the Centuries were by
Harpsfield, Turrianus, Canisius, and others, but never seriously and in good
earnest undertook, till Baronius set himself to the writing of his Annals; (a
design, which Onuphrius Panvinius had some thoughts of, Hieron. Barnab. vit.
Baron. l. 1 c. 18.
but was by Death prevented) in which by digesting his Memoires into a better
order, not of Centuries, but of Years, by reading through the Body of
Ecclesiastic History seven times in his own private Oratory before he
published any thing (the Centurists never reviewing their Labors, nor bringing
them to a more accurate Edition,) by the extraordinary advantage of the
Vatican, and access to all the learned Libraries, and Men at Rome, together
with a stup^^dous wit, and industry, he became the great Patron of the decayed
Papal Interest, and shoar'd up that Church, which was just before tottering;
his Tomes were wonderfully cried up, translated into the German, Polish, and
other Langunges, epitomized by Spondanus, and by all men greedily sought after
and read; to the answering of him was the learned Isaac Casaubon designed by
King James, who went through no more than the Apparatus of the Cardinal, and
our blessed Savior's Life, and at that period was summoned to a better
Employment in Heaven [while the abortive attempt mist not its Antagonists in
Julius Caesar, Bulingerus, Lanselius, and others, most of whose quarrel^ were
rather in matter of Philology, than History] but that wise Patron of learning,
King James, was not so content, but devolved the Province on the most a cute
Critic, Doctor Montague, (who wa^ afterward Bishop of Norwick) whose design,
as himself informs us, was to reform the Magdeburg Divines on on^ hand, and the
Cardinal on the other and how happily and succesfully (...) would have managed
it, his Apparatus and the two Tomes of his Origines Ecclesiasticae are a
pregnant demonstration to the World; nor would that learned Prelate have there
sat down, had not that most elaborate work been obstructed by a Domestic
Faction, when all its foreign enemies could not supersede it; At first loud
outcries, and hard words were his portion, and for asserting Orthodoxy, he was
nick-nam'd Heretic, till at last the bigger noise of our unmanly Civil
contentions made him earnest to beg his quietus from the Court of Heaven, which
heard his Prayers, and rescued him from the evil to come; and I have been
credibly informed, that, whereas at his death there was a vast heap of
Collections piled up, in his Study, as materials for the continuation of that
Work, they were all in the hurry of the Wars ravished by one of his Chaplains,
who had been perverted to the Roman Belief, and so lost for ever; an injury to
the Church of God, and Commonwealth of Learning, not easily to be repaired:
nor do I know of any person, who has undertook the same or a like design,
since that venerable Prelates decease; for as to Hottinger's Historia
Ecclesiastica, it is too brief to be accounted a just and exact History, the
whole story of the sixteen Centuries being couched in five small Octavo's, and
the affairs of the nine first Saecula of Christian, with the Synchronisms of
the Jewish, Gentile, and Mohammedan History crammed into one of them, viz. the
first part, or Eneas.

I have thus (more largely than perhaps I ought) deduced this account to the
present time, that the World may the better judge of the reasonableness o^ my
Animadversions, and voluntary engaging my self in this Controversy, a^ an
Essay, or well-meant endeavor to testify my zeal for Antiquity, and its
reverend usages, and my duty to my holy Mother the Church of England; nor can
Master H. constru^ my remarquing what has not been by him so carefully, or
faithfully expressed, as Defamation, and casting Dir^ but rather as a serving the
Interests (...) Truth and doing homage to its Majesty, Si taceamus, cedere
videbimur, si contendamus, verendum est, ne and nos carnales esse judicemur.
Ambr. lib. 5. de fide ad Gratian. cap. 1. p. 113. ed. Erasm,
and I had rather be thought contentious by such a Vindication, than ly^ under
the misapprehension of assenting to his unsoun^ Assertions by my silence.

The View of Antiquity was a long time ready before it came to the Press, and
perhaps lay dormant so many years, to wait a more favorable Crisis in the
times for its publication, (and, methinks, should in that space have been
accurately examined) and peradventure had never been printed in the life time
of the Author, if the learned Doctor Cave's Apostolici had not appeared, in
which the whole design of Mr. H's book is, except a few Pages eternally
superseded; this I conjecture hastened the impression, and introduced it into
the Light, the Doctors Book having its Imprimatur May 10th. the other December
9th. of the same year. And as it was a long time before Mr. H. would suffer his
Tractate to appear in public, so was it no little space after my first reading
of it, e're I could persuade my self to animadvert it, being never yet tickled
with an itch of being in Print, and not unacquainted with the shallowness of my
own abilities, and the meanness of my little study, and expecting some better
furnished person to vindicate the Church; but when I saw no man appear, and
found that I had a few Books of my own, that could assist me in such a
disquisition, I seriously applied my self to the business, not tying my self
wholly to Mr. H. but occasionally making some digressions to discover the
primitive Opinions, or Customs, in some of which I have been very large out of
a persuasion, that that might comport with the Genius of others, which pleased
mine, who am not apt to be satisfied with Scraps, but have ever loved an
historical deduction of Opinions and Practices through all the Records of
Antiquity, that I could meet with, and such a Sally now and then is not, I
presume, unpardonable to one of my youth and humor; but in some places I have
been compelled to amass Quotations, that whereas my Author, whom I undertake to
correct, does very magisterially in a few words condemn the use of the Cross,
the necessity of Baptism, and many other such Catholic Dogmata, I might on the
contrary appear to their vindication and make it good, that they are not Romish
innovations, but Ancient, Primitive, and Orthodox Doctrines and Practices. I
have voluntarily subjoined all the Panegyricks, that in my small reading I
found on the Fathers, whose Lives Mr. H. treats of, but must forewarn my
Reader, that he expect not an exact confinement to the words of my Author in
every place, (though I am not conscious to my self, that I any where wilfully
falsify his meaning) I having allowed my self a large liberty in expressing
the Fathers, as I understood them; and I could wish, that all that can, would
save themselves the trouble of reading such a bald and jejune Translation, and
converse with the writings of the Encomiasts in their native and ravishing
Greek. I have also taken upon me in some places, to vary from some very
Venerable men, whose persons I reverence, and Writings I admire, but I hope it
has been no where without a becoming Modesty, and some show (at least) of
reason for my dissent.

Nor am I ignorant, that I have embittered a Cla^^^s of men, that are keen in
their Aspersions, and not wanting to the Arts of reflection, and virulency, by
so magnifying the Authority of the Fathers, whereas I have done no more than
the Church of England enjoins every good Member of her Communion to do, Can.
Eccl. Angl. 1^71
when it requires them to interpret the holy Scriptures according to the
Exposition of the Catholic Fathers, and ancient Bishops. It is true, the
judgment of those admirable men has been declined by all Exoriri videas passim
tenebriones quosdam, qui simul atque didicerunt december verba Latina, Graeca duo,
paradoxa sex, scribunt procaces libellos, miroque supercilio fastidiunt tot
saeculo^um unanimi sententia consecratos authors, haud dum scio majorene
ingratitudine, an impietate. Erasm. Epist. dedic. ante tom. 4. oper. Hieron.
Modern Heretics; by the Socinians, and Anabaptists especially, who herein
tread in the Steps of their Progenitors, the Arians, and others; for the
Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 10. and Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 12.
Historians tell us, that until the time of Theodosius the Great, the Heretics
of whatsoever denomination, refused to be tried for their Orthodoxy by the
Fathers: but when that famous Prince had convened the Catholics and Novatians,
the Arians, Eunomians, and Macedonians to give him an account of their Faith,
Nectarius the Patriarch of Constantinople, by the advice of Sisinnius,
persuaded the Emperor to engage them to stand to the decision of the Ancients,
in the Controversies of Faith, which after a strict Law made to that purpose,
they were content to do; hence it is that the Fathers of the four first
Centuries do but sparingly defend the Catholic Faith by the Testimonies of the
Ancients, Pearson vindic. Epist. Ignat. part. 1. cap. 2. p. 13. and cap. 6. p.
95, 96.
but after this time, Theodoret and Gelasius begun the custom of doing it ex
professo, and made it usual. Nor have the greatest pretenders to respect for
those Sages, always been constant to their duty either in the Church of Rome,
or the Congregation of the Discipline, for when Salmeron says, Disputat. 51 ^n
Romans page 468.
that at least three hundred Fathers may be mustered against the immaculate
conception, he shakes them all off with, Pauperis est numerare pecus; That
Saint Bernard, and the rest of the Fathers must not be credited in such a Case;
Apud Dr. Hammond. animadv. on Dr. Owen p. 21.
And when Blondel confesses, that the Ancients did believe Ignatius his
Epistles to be genuine, yet he slights them all with, Quid tum? quam multa
minime suspicaces, ac impara tos, and fefellerunt semper, and quotidie fallunt?
What then? how many times are men deceived, that are not wary and cautious? And
with this sort of Men, I fear me, we must rank Master H. notwithstanding his
usurped Title of (...), or Lover of Antiquity. But it has been the peculiar
glory of our holy Mother to confront the Romanists with their own Fathers in
Matters of Doctrine, by standing to the Challenge of the famous Jewel: and the
Men of the New Discipline, with the same Authority in point of Government and
Polity; and under her protection will I shelter my self, Recte and vere haec in
tumulo viri summi Adami a Bodenstein, Basileae, in coemeterio D. Pauli leguntur.
being satisfied, that I can say, that although I have disserv'd some
particular Interests, Nec omnia, nec omnes mihi
Placuere; quinam ego omnibus?
Non omnibus Cous senex,
Non Eremita Spagirus.
Number tu, Viator, omnibus?
Deo placere cura, abi.
Reusner. Ep. ded. ^nte lib. de probation. urinar.


yet I am not conscious to my self of having baffled my own conscience,
dishonored the Truth, or offended my Savior, and if I can please him, other
Frowns are contemptible.

THE CONTENTS.
The Life of Saint Ignatius.
THe deplorable loss of the ancient Histories, Apologies, and the Acts of the
Martyrs. Whether Ignatius saw Christ in the Flesh, and was that little Child,
that he took in his Arms and blessed. (...), what. He was ordained Patriarch of
Antioch by Saint Peter. Two distinct Coetus of Jews and Gentiles under their
distinct Bishops at Antioch, Rome, Corinth, and elsewhere. Their coalition at
Antioch under Ignatius. How long he sat in that See. Ignatius not the most
ancient of Ecclesiastical Writers. The genuineness of his Epistles evinced. The
Apostolicalness of Episcopal Government, and novelty of any other
Church-Polity. The Excellent and Primitive Government of the Church of England.
Four different Copies of Ignatius's Epistles, which of them are dubious, which
spurious, and which genuine. That to Polycarp was one of the seven genuine. The
Stages of his Journey to Rome; the reason of his being carried so far out of
his way. What the Heresy of Apollinaris was. An account of the first finding a
genuine Copy of these Epistles first in England, then at Florence. Mistakes in
Quotations, not unusual in the ancient Writings. (...), what, and who usually
carried the Bishops Letters to foreign Churches. The three Latin Epistles. His
Style and Actons very conformable to Saint Paul's. Ignatius first instituted the
Antiphonal Hymns at Antioch. Liturgies in his time, and of Apostolical
Institution. An account of the most remarkable Passages in his Epistles; his
Zeal for Martyrdom, severity against Schism and Heresy, and importunate
pressing submission to Bishops. His leisure of writing purchased from his
Guards. The reasons why he was Martyred not at Antioch, but Rome. The time of
his Journey, his Preparative Torments and Death, Gods Vengeance on the City of
Antioch. His greater Bones collected and buried. The Church instituted
Festivals to their Martyrs Memories, honored their Relics, and God wrought
Miracles by them; but their adoration was still disallowed. Other famous Men of
the Name. Saint Chrysostom's Panegyric.

The Life of Saint Justin.
His Original. He was a Samaritan by Birth, not by Religion. An Apostolical
Person. The manner of his conversion His Apology writ to Antoninus Pius. An
account of his Writings. The Age of the Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite. The
Quaestiones ad Orthodoxos are Saint Justin's, but interpolated. The Doctrine of
the immaculate conception, of Relics and Vows. That Baptism is necessary to
Salvation. The ancient use of Chrism. A dissertation concerning the use of the
Cross in all holy and secular Offices. Where, by whom, and how the Sermons of
the An^^ents were managed. The Chiliast-Opinion, the salvability of the
Heathens, and the Doctrine of Free Will considered. Saint Justin's Errors in
Chronology. His Martyrdom.

The Life of Saint Irenaeus.
His Mission by the Churches of Lion, and Vien to Pope Eleutherius and the
Asian Churches. Marcus the Disciple of Valentinus a notorious Heretic. Most of
the ancient Heretics, and persecuting. Emperors accused of too much
familiarity with the Prince of Darkness. The Female Sex most easily imposed on
by those Impostures. The Devils Policy in assaulting the Church. Irenaeus his
adjuration of the Transcriber of his works. The Greek Copy of his works not to
be found. The Villainy of Fathering Books on a wrong Author. Heresies have
appeared in the World, according to the methods of the Creed. The necessity of
Episcopal Succession. Irenaeus held not two natures in Christ. His other Errors
apologiz'd for, and vindicated. That the departed Saints are not in the most
perfect bliss, till the day of Judgment. His Character and Martyrdom.

Life of Saint Clemens of Alexandria.
The Antiquity of the Catechetick School at Alexandria. Clemens his several
Tutors, his last, Pantaenus, whom he succeeded in that School. The time of his
being made a Presbyter of that Church. A large Discourse of the extraordinary
care and respects of the Ancients toward their Martyrs, in visiting them in
Prison, in Embalming, and paying other funeral Honors to their dead Bodies, in
honoring their Relics, holding their Religious meetings at their Caemeteria,
and there performing all their Sacred Offices, in Celebrating their
Birth-dayes, and recording their last Actions, in building Churches to their
memories, allowing them an honorable commemoration at the Altar, and calling
their Children by their Names. What Books of his are lost, and what others
misfather'd on him. The Excellent method of his Writings, that remain. His
Apocryphal citations. Chemnitius his severe censure of some passages in his
Paedagogus. The disingenuous dealing of Blondel, and others, with the Ancients
on the account of Episcopacy. The agreement of the Jesuits, and Presbyterians
in that case. A description of S. Clemens his Gnostick in his Stromata. The
Judgment of Pope Gelasius invalidated in condemning the Writings of Clemens
with Hermas's Pastor, and S. Barnabas his Catholic Epistle. His errors
considered. His worth, and Death.

The life of Tertullian.
Tertullian's birth, and Education. The time of writing his Book De pallio.
That he turned Montanist sooner than is asserted; after which the Books de
Corona etc. were writ. That the Rites mentioned in that Book, were Catholic
usages, not observances, of the Montanists. That Ambition sowered most of the
Ancient Heretics, but Tertullian's ungoverned zeal swayed him. The Apostolical
Church did not admit gross offenders to penance. The necessity of single
Marriage was the opinion of the Ancients, their reasons for it. The continuance
of the Spirit of Prophecy in his time, this inclined him t^ believe the Visions
of Montanus, and let him into many odd Opinions. The difference between the
Spirit of true Prophecy, and pseudo-afflatus of Maximilla etc. Hi^ justly
lamented fall. His Writings, and Style. He did not believe Montanus t^ be the
Holy Ghost. That Martyrdom expiates Transgression, Tertullian no Ma^tyr.

The Life of Origin.
Origens Name, and Excellencies. H^^ Castration. The occasion of his remove
(...) Caesarea. The Emperor Caracalla's sple^^^ against the Alexandrians, and
the ca^^^ of it. Origin took not two journeys (...) Rome, nor was ever a
Scholar to Plo^^nus. He is too often n^gligently confoun^ed with a junior
Origin a Heathen. His Allegorical way of interpreting Scripture whence, and a
Vindication of it. His works. What extant, and what lost. His Octapla, his
Style, and the causes of his condemnation. The quarrel between S. Chrysostom,
and Epiphanius thereupon. The Church was accustomed to Excommunicate Heretics
after their death. Origen's Errors, and whence imbibed. An Apology for him. The
Platonic Opinion concerning the Resurrection. His character, and Encomia from
all sorts of Writers, Christian, Jewish, and Heathen. Some peculiar remarks in
his Life. The Title of Martyr was usually given to the confessors of Old, but
themselves modestly resus'd it. The time of his death.

Life of Saint Cyprian.
He is inconsiderately confounded with Cyprian the Magician, the Servant of
Justina. The junior Cyprian was never Archbishop of Antioch. The Carthaginian
Primate was made a Convert by his Countryman Caecilius, who was the same
person that bears a part in the Dialogue of Minutius Foelix. Donatus was
Cyprian's immediate Predecessor in that See. Who the Libellatici properly were;
the different customs of the Churches of that Age, in allowing or condemning
the purchase of such Libels of security from the Heathen Magistrate. Saint
Cyprian's exemplary humility and charity. The Adulteration of his works by the
Romanists. The Primacy of Saint Peter, what. His genuine Writings and style.
The power of the people in electing their Prelates, discust. They had a
privilege conceded them to except against the manners of the Candidate for
holy Orders, and in some places to nominate; but that power on their tumultuous
and disorderly proceedings soon taken from them. A Vindication of his reputed
erroneous Opinions. That Charity purges away Sins. That a man may tender
satisfaction to God as well as to the Church. To communicate Infants, a
Catholic custom, Authority and Reason for it. Mixing Water with Wine in the
Eucharist. A Discourse of the duration of Miracles in the Christian Church,
especially of Prophecy, the cure of Daemoniacs, and raising the Dead. Miracles
no mark of a true Church. The vain and empty boastings of the Romanists in this
case. The time of Cyprian's Martyrdom. Two Temples erected to his memory, and a
Festival. His honorable character. Saint Austin's Homily in his commendation.

Life of Lactantius.
His Country, Italy. The design of his Institutions, to stifle the Objections
of two virulent Adversaries of Christian Religion. Of whom Hierocles was one,
but Porphyry not the other. Lactantius his Errors. The Fathers were not very
wary in asserting the Divinity of the Son, and Holy Ghost, till the appearance
of Arius, and Macedonius. The praeexistence of the soul. Merit. The excellency
of Charity. That sins of ignorance damn not. Whether the wicked shall arise at
the day of Judgment, and how. His great learning and extreme poverty.

Life of Saint Athanasius.
His Baptizing his play-fellows vindicated. Baptism by Laics in case of
instant necessity connived at in the Primitive Church. The Schismatical
Ordinations of Coluthus condemned, and Ischyras degraded, who after was made a
Bishop by the Arian faction. Arsenius his appearing at Tire to the vindication
of Athanasius An account of the death of Arius. Gregory, and George the
Cappadocian usurp the Sea of Alexandria. The last of them cruelly slain. What
books of this Father are genuine. The Saturday was observed as a Fast at Rome,
and Alexandria, and the reasons of it; but as a Festival in the rest of the
Christian world, and the reasons of that custom; it is yet so retained in all
the Churches of the East, and South. Nine Orders of Angels anciently asserted
agreeable to Scripture. That the glorified Saints pray for some persons in
particular. The retention of Images. The distinction of sins into venial, and
mortal. Diverse Orders of Monks. Penance: Prayers for the dead. Antichrist who,
the holy Table frequently called Altar. The Eucharist a sacrifice, how an
unbloody sacrifice. The Doctrine of the Procession of the Father by the Son was
the ancient belief. An Historical account of the addition [filioque] and of the
just grounds of the Greek Church to keep to the ancient Creeds. The life of S.
Antony writ by Athanasius. The genuineness of the Epistles between Pope Marc
and Athanasius controverted. That Christ descended locally into Hell. The
Fathers not in complete bliss till his Resurrection. Circumcision, was a sign
of Baptism. Athanasius's Death and character. The famous men of his name. S.
Greg. Nazianzen's Panegyric on him.

The Life of Saint Hilary of Poictiers.
The legend of his Condemnation at Rome under Pope Leo. The ancient division of
France rectyfied by Augustus. What Countryman Saint Hilary was, the great
confusion in Historians, when men of the same name are cotemporaries. When
Saint Hilary was banished, and by whom. His honorable mention in the Writings
of the Ancients. The Tractate de numero septenario is not his. Venantius
Fortunatus who, and how he came to be Bishop of Poictiers. Saint Hilary's
Poems. His Books de Trinitate are his masterpiece. The Epistle to his Daughter
Abra. His Fragment of the Council at Ariminum. His Style. The Interpolation of
his works. That he did believe the Divinity of the holy Ghost. His Errors
heartily considered and apologiz'd. His Opinion of the holy Spirit. Of our
Saviors being without passions. Of our being the Sons of God by Nature. How
all things were created at once. His Opinion of Free Will, his Death, and
Character.

ERRATA.
Besides mis-pointings and Words printed in an improper Ch^racter, the Reader
is desired to Correct as follows.

In the Book
P. 4. l. 9. for by r. to. p. 10. l. 13. r. Epistle. p. 16. l. 9. r. page.. p.
18. l. 23. r. whence. p. 28. l. ult. r. rite. p. 32. l. 2. r. ancient forms. p.
34. l. 17. r. there. p. 36. l. 26. and 32. r. thee. p. 39. l. 4. r.
Obsecrationum. p. 52. l. 15. r. preceded. p. 102. l. 7. dele as. p. 103. l. 27.
after ours r. is. p. 104. ^. dispossess. p. 114. l. 21. del. of all his
Congregation. p. 115. l. 23.^ meet. p. 138. l. 29. del. that. p. 139. l. 12.
del. and. p. 148. l. 27. r. acute. p. ^49. l. 32. r. disturber. p. 152. l. 32.
r. the. p. 158. l. 29. r. Mistresses. p. 159. l. 1. r. (...). p. 164. l. 1, 2.
r. in the next Century. p. 166. l. 29. r. l. 4. p. 175. l. 26. del. as he
continues. p. 186. l. 2. r. to partake. p. 194. l. 12. r. gamala. p. 196. l.
11. r. Martyr. p. 198. l. 8. r. more beautified. p. ^07. l. 19. for in r. out
of. p. 214. l. 10. r. of Saint. p. 237. l. 18. for i r. first. p. 241. l. 18.
r. no power. p. 337. l. 10. r. Eulalius. p. 348. l. 26. r. before that time. p.
356. l. 22. r. the Heathen Magicians. p. 371. l. 24. r. Quiriacus. l. 28. r.
Rescripts. p. 390. l. 34. r. Saturnilus. p. 406. l. 34. r. Callecas. p. 421. l.
5. del. whereas it. p. 465. l. 7. r. Raynaudus.

In the Margin
P. 27. l. marg. 8. r. Cod. (...). p. 37. l. 16. r. accidentium. p. 67. r. Jo.
10. 11. p. 70. r. 1 Timothy 5. p. 115. l. 15. r. (...). p. 121. l 9. r. Vasens. p.
140. l. 10. r. lib. p. 156. l. 14. r. Ursin. p. 157. l. 2. r. 2. p. 169. l. 2.
r. 161. p. 209. l. 2. r. Sarav. p. 233. l. 11. r. 20. p. 249. l. 2. r. 27. p.
267. l. 9. r. Malaxus. p. 274. r. 160. p. 275. r. 286. p. 336. l. 11. r. 21. p.
380. l. 3. 5. r. tm. as also p. 419. p. 384. r. Socrat. l. 1.

Addenda and Mutanda.
P. 51. l. 28. for there, r. in that Metropolis of the Empire. p. 125. l. 33.
r. could not. and then add, so Gennadius de scriptor. Eccles. c. 57. says, that
S. Cyril penned many Homilies for the Grecian Bishops, which they recited in
their several Churches. And c. 67. he says, the like was done by S. Salvian,
Bishop of Marseilles, to gratify his Neighbor Prelates of the French Church.
P. 131. l. 13. add, The Auditory also customarily clapping their hands at the
end of the Sermon, and making loud Acclamations, till such Actions savouring
more of the Theater, than the Church, were forbidden, [ Vid. Chrysostom. Tom. 1. p
17. and Tom. 4. p. 784. and passim] and Paulus Samosatenus for affecting such
praises, is censured by his Brethren as guilty of unbecoming Vanity. [ Apud
Eusebius. l. 7. c. 24.] but in other Churches this was superseded by a much better
employment, that of praying for their Priest, that God would enable him rightly
to divide the word of Truth, and to show himself a workman that needed not be
ashamed, and that God would open his Mouth, that he might show forth his Law. [
Vid. Orig. Hom. 3. in Genes. and alibi pass.] p. 218. l. 32. for and r. which
custom. p. 477. l. 32. for Sulpitius Severus r. Gregory Turonensis. and l 33.
r. as say Sulpitius Severus. p. 476. l. 1. instead of, himself in his Answer to
Auxentius, tells us, etc. r. For Auxentius himself in his Libel tells us, That
when S. Hilary opposed him at Millain, it was ten years, etc.

THE LIFE OF S. Ignatius.
I. GREAT and Eminent were the Virtues of the Primitive Worthies, and it were
to be wished that their Fame in this Life were as diffusive as their Glories in
the other World, and Mankind made acquainted with the remarkable Transactions
of their most obliging Benefactors. But what a barren Account have we of those
Sacred Assertors of the Rites of Christianity? Of some only their Names, of
others not so much as that, Heaven having thought fit to inhance their Crown of
Glory, to make amends for the obscurity of their secular Reputation, that
though here they are buried with their Faces down-ward, and thrown into the
house of forgetfulness, they might be recompensed in the Resurrection of the
Just, when they shall shine like the Stars in the Firmament: And I wish I could
as easily remedy, as I am inclinable to bemoan the Fate of the Church; that is,
so to seek for the Catalogues of its ancient Bishops; the Series of succession,
with respect to the names of the Prelates, being in most Sees wholly lost, in
the rest very confused and uncertain. Of some Fathers, their Writings are
preserved, but the account of their Actions lost; of others, both Parent and
Offspring are involved in the same common Calamity. How do I long for the
Histories of Hegesippus, and Julius Africanus; for the Apologies of Aristides,
Apollonius, Quadratus and Melito, and the Excellent Writings of Apollinaris, B.
of Hierapolis? What satisfaction would it be to my Soul, to understand where
Athenagoras, Minutius Foelix, and the other brave Defenders of Religion were
born? What Testimonies of their Courage and Learning, their Virtue and Piety,
they gave the World; and when and by what means they went into the Grave, that
I might contemplate the Beauty of their Atchievments, and celebrate their
Worth? I am eager to be acquainted with the Education and Life, the Speeches
and Demeanor of Gordius and S. Laurence, of Pionius and Germanicus, and the
numerous Army of Martyrs; of Spiridion and Paphnutius, and the rest of the Holy
College of Confessors; and would willingly read the rational and solid
Confutations of the ancient Heretics, writ by Agrippa Castor, and Musanus, by
Rhodon and Modestus, Apollonius and Bardesanes, by Eusebius Emesenus, and
Dionysius of Alexandria, and his Namesake of Corinth, by Titus Bostrensis, and
Diodorus of Tarsus, and those other admirable Conquerours of Heresy, and
Defenders of Catholic Orthodoxy; but these are Happinesses only to be enjoyed
in wish, and we, that cannot be so fortunate, must be content with our present
Portion, and the knowledge, which is yet by a benign Providence left us, of
that small Company of the wise and good Men, that adorned the Church; among
which famous and venerable Persons sew have so highly deserved of the Christian
Church as S. Ignatius, who is therefore justly reckoned among the chiefest of
those Sages.

II. In order to the account of whose life Mr. H.. 1. p. 1. takes occasion to
speak of that story in Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 35.
Nicephorus, That Ignatius was that little Child, Mat. 18.1, 2.
whom our Savior held in his Arms and blessed; and this he calls, A Fabulous
Narration, and makes Nicephorus the Author of it, and adds, That there is
somewhat found in the Epistles of Ignatius that contradicts the Opinion, since
he there says, That he never saw Christ Corporally, or in the Flesh. What there
may be supposed to be in those Epistles I cannot tell, for certainly there is
no such positive Assertion; but on the contrary Des^ript. Dionys. Areopag. and
Ignat. c. 21.
Monsieur Daillee quotes a Passage out of the Epistle to the Smyrneans, That he
did see Christ corporally, and uses it as a wonderful and invincible Argument
to prove the spuriousness of these excellent Writings; and so indeed does the
Old P. 219. Ego enim and post resurrectionem eum in carne vidi.
Latin Translation, set out by the most Learned Primate of Armagh, read it; as
does also In Catal. v. Ignat.
St. Hierom, and his Translator In Catal. v. Ignat.
Sophronius; of which Writers the first being so justly admired by the Latin
Church, and the latter so well known by the Greeks, it gave occasion to the
Error, that Ignatius lived in our Savior's time. Whereas the whole Story
arises from a mistake of (...) for (...) in Eusebius, whom S. Hierom in that
Book Translates, but not so happily as it were to be wished, as he that
consults Scaliger's Eusebius may find enough to surfeit him. For Hist. Eccl.
li. 3. c (...) Lat ^o.
Eusebius, (...).
Theodoret, and all the Greek Copies of these Epistles, both the Medicean and
interpolated read the passage otherwise, (...), and so Ruffinus after S. Hierom
Translates it, (the Passage containing a Vindication of the Catholic Doctrine
against the Docetae, the Followers of Simon Magus, who held, That our Savior
took only a fantastic body,) which reading the judicious Exercit. adv. Bar.
16. n. 126.
Isaac Casaubon, and the immortal Comment. in Mat. 18.
Grotius follow.

III. And yet there is no impossibility in the Assertion, nor is it in it self
altogether improbable, (though Ubi supr.
Casaubon doubts of it, whose Dissertation on the Subject I wish that Learned
Man had lived to finish) were there any thing of greater Antiquity to
countenance the Tradition, than Anastasius Bibliothecarius. For Ignatius was
martyred but eight years after S. John's Death, (when he had sat Patriarch of
Antioch thirty years, says Chronic. (...). ^. p. 66.
Eusebius, thirty nine as S. Hierom reckons it; forty says P. 21.
Mr. H. out of Baronius; at least thirty years says our most Learned Vindic.
Epist. Ignat. part. 2. cap. 1. p. 2.
Pearson.) Now S. John was a Man, and a Disciple, when this Child was taken up
into the Holy Arms of Jesus; and Simeon Cleophae, our Savior's Kinsman,
mentioned also in the Gospel, who was the Second Bishop of Jerusalem, was
Martyred but the year before Ignatius: So that nothing could hinder, but that
this excellent man might have been blessed with the sight of Jesus, as Of
Episcopacy, Sect. 34.
Bishop Tailor affirms, did not T. 5. Hom. in S. Ignat. p. 503. edit. Savil.
S. Chrysostom contradict the Opinion, expressly asserting, that Ignatius never
saw, nor converst with Christ. Of which Passage the most acute Ubi supr. c. 10.
p. 120.
Bishop of Chester gives his Judgment, that he was ignorant on what grounds
that Eloquent Father built his Assertion.

IV. But grant we the certainty of this Position, that S. Ignatius lived in our
Savior's time, and might see him, yet to argue from thence, that he must have
been that Child that Christ set in the midst of his Disciples, is a wild way of
arguing, there being no congruity between the passages; Id. ubi supr. c. 12. p.
148. etc.
this latter story therefore rose from another original, from a mistake of that
name, which was always used by Ignatius, as an addition to his own, viz. (...),
which was changed into (...), and so the birth of this story must be placed
higher than Nicephorus, who lived but a few Centuries since, circ. an. 1300.
for we find it in Simeon Metaphrastes, who lived circ. an. 1000. and before him
in Anastasius Bibliothecarius, who, I suppose, first learnt it from the Greeks,
when he was a member of the eighth General Council, where the great Quarrel was
decided between the most accurate Critic Photius, and another Ignatius, (whom
they styled the junior Theophorus, and the Church of Rome Canonized) about the
Patriarchate of Constantinople; in which Council Photius was deposed, and this
story, I believe, coined to gain some greater honor to his Opponent, and the
accent translated from the second to the third syllable, thereby quite altering
the signification of the word, the one signifying actively, the other
passively: (...), Deum portans, (...) a Deo portatus, sic (...) matricida,
(...), a matre occisus, etc.
And this I the rather mention, because Mr. H. though he calls the story a
Fable, yet always terms Ignatius (...), against the use of the ancient Greeks,
and all Latin Translators, who render it by Deifer, or Deum, vel crucifixum
circumferens, or, qui Christum habet in pectore. In which story what makes it
most of all suspicious, is, that for this reason, say they, the Apostles made
him a Bishop without laying on of hands, because Christ had already laid his on
him, against the express testimony of S. Chrysostom, Theodoret, P. Foelix, and
other Fathers; and against Reason too; for had our Savior laid his hands on
him in the Rite of Confirmation, as we might suppose was done, Matthew. 18. yet
this hinders not the reiteration of the same Rite to another end and purpose in
Ordination.

V. We are told, p. 2. that Theodoret (and to him might have been joined S.
Chrysostom, and others) records, that S. Peter ordained Ignatius his Successor,
whereas Eusebius and Dorotheus affirm, that Euodius preceded him in that Chair;
and that it is true, Ignatius was the third Bishop there, if we reckon S. Peter
for one, but because he made a small stay there the Catalogue begins in
Euodius, and so ignatius is justly reckoned the second Bishop. But this does
not salve the Objection, how he could be ordained by S. Peter, as his
Successor, and yet Euodius come between them, who on all hands is acknowledged
to have been Bishop of Antioch, and to have dyed long before Ignatius (his Name
being inserted in that large interpolation of the p. 97. ed. U^^er.
Epistle to the Philadelphians, as also in the sp^rious p. 157.
Epistle to the Church of Antioch, which tells us of his Ordination to the
Government of that See by the Apostles.) The first that I find bidding any
thing toward a solution of this Question is ^^^^ent. (...). lib. 7. c. ^6.
Turrianus, and out of him Not. in M^r^yrel. Feb. 1. p. 9^, 100.
Baronius, who inform us, that on the dissension that happened at Antioch,
between the Jews and Gentiles, hinted Galat. 2. each party had their own Bishop
allotted them, but on the re-union-of the Churches, they were again settled
under one Prelate; and that during this breach, Ignatius having been ordained
by S. Peter, and Euodius by S. Paul (contrary to the Lib. 7. c. 46.
Apostolical Constitutions, which say, that Ignatius was S. Paul's Successor,
and Euodius S. Peter's) on the reunion Ignatius modestly gave place to Euodius
till his death, and then succeeded him (as Clemens being ordained at Rome by S.
Peter did to Linus and Cletus) and so was both the Second and Third Bishop of
that See. On this ground, as I suppose, the Learned Dissert. de Episcopat. 4.
c. 10.
Dr. Hammond has built the Opinion, which I profess to embrace, and which
excellently solves the Question.

VI. Whereas in the dispersion of the Apostles, the Gal. 2.7.
Gospel of the Circumcision, i. the Conversion of the Jews, was S. Peter's
Province, and that of the Uncircumcision, or the Gentiles, was S. Paul's;
accordingly they applied themselves to the persons designed for their peculiar
Flock (on which account S. Peter writes his first Catholic Epistle to the Jews
dispersed in the several parts of Asia, whose Diocesan he properly was, and not
to the Gentiles; and S. Paul writing to the Hebrews conceals his name, lest he
might be censured as a busy man in another Province) but where both of them
preached the Gospel in the same City, and founded a Church, it was divided into
two Coetus, or Assemblies, under their respective Bishops, as In Gal. 1. 22. to
9. p. 214. Ed. Eras. Seorsim, qui ex Judaeis erant, Ecclesiae habebantur, nec
his, qui erant e Gentibus, miscebantur.
S. Hierom, or who-ever put out those Comments in his name. So Apud Eusebius.
Hist. lib. 2. cap. 24.
Dionysius of Corinth seems to imply, was his Church founded, and so without
doubt was the Church of Rome, where Linus succeeded S. Paul, and Cletus S.
Peter, till both the Coetus had their coalition under Clemens; and that there
were two such distinct parts of their first Plantation, seems plain to me from
Romans 14. where the Gentile Church is advised not to censure the Jewish, who
observed days, and abstained from meats. And after this manner had the Church
of Antioch its Original; for it appears by Act. 15.23. that the Synodical
Epistle of the Apostles was directed to the Brethren which were of the Gentiles
in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, who were distinct from the Jewish Converts, as
appears from v. 28. And this I am apt to think was the Model of Government in
all Churches, where those two Chiefs of the Apostles came; whereas at
Alexandria, where they had only S. Mark for their Apostle and Instructor,
Epiphan. Haeres. 68. (...).
they had but a single Bishop: So that in this City both the Apostles laying
the foundation, committed the raising of the Superstructure each to a distinct
Successor, Ignatius succeeding S. Peter, Euodius S. Paul, till on the death of
Euodius, there was a coalition of both the Coetus under the surviving Bishop.
And I suppose this happened providentially in all places just upon the ruin of
Jerusalem under Titus, that the Apostles having buried the Synagogne with
honor, there might no longer be the distinction of Jew or Gentile in the Lord
Jesus; and this may help to strengthen the Conjecture of the most learned Ubi
supr.
Pearson (and to reconcile Eusebius, and his Translator S. Hierom) that
Ignatius was Bishop of Antioch more than 30 years, for so long he exercised the
Jurisdiction after Euodius his decease, as appears by Eusebius, and how long
before as the Bishop of the Jewish Christians, is uncertain.

VII. Sect. 2. p. 3. Mr. H. says, that Ignatius is altogether the most ancient
of all now extant, first of Writers, as I understand him, in the Christian
Church: Where certainly he must allow us to except S. Barnabas, who writ his
Catholic Epistles; or if that be controverted, S. Clemens his Golden Remains
to the Corinthians, the Author whereof was martyred the third year of Trajan,
whereas the first of Ignatius's Epistles was not writ till an. 10. of that
Emperor; and from this consideration we are naturally led to Sect. 3. p. 4, 5,
etc.

VIII. In the Discourse of the Writings of this Martyr, he at first gives them
their due Eulogy, Vide Baron. T. 2. an. 109. p. 31. and Not. ad Martyrol. Feb.
1.
that as a certain well-drawn Picture they do excellently represent, and give
us a lively Image of him; and so they are in the Opinion of all Learned and
Unprejudiced Persons, having had the Approbation of the Holy Fathers, and
Ancient Councils; and had our Author stopped here, in a just Admiration of this
holy Man and his Writings, I should have been content to have seconded his
Design, and offered my Veneration and Esteem on the same Altar. But what this
one fit of passion gives us, is by another snatched from us, and the Epistles
so commended, are presently attempted to be debased by an heap of
Inconcludencies. Nor can I but a little admire, that Mr. H. writing a large
Diatribe, a p. 4. ad p. 15. on these Epistles, never remembers any Edition of
them, later than that of the most Reverend Usher, who, by an ingenious and
successful sagacity, rescued this great man from the vile Abuses of his
Interpolators, who had interwoven their coarse Thread with his Purple; never
taking notice of the Edition of Isaac Vossius, who, out of the Medicean Library
at Florence, Ann. 1646. furnished the World with a genuine Copy of the seven
Epistles, (the same I suppose which Pro Epist. Pontif lib. 2. c. 10. and comm.
in constit. Apost. l. 9. c. 17.
Turrianus saw, and so much and so justly boasts of, terming it a most ancient
and emendate Copy,) the number being the same with the computation of the
Ancients, in which also the Passages quoted by them are found, which are
wanting in the Vulgar Copies, and which exactly agrees to those two barbarous
Latin Translations, which the Reverend Primate met with here in England, the
one in the Library of Cains College in Cambridge, the other among the Books of
that Prelate of Universal Learning Bishop Montague; which Transcript of
Vossius, when it was first communicated to the World, was acknowledged by
Apolog. pro sent. Hieron. praefat. p. 40.
Blondel, the bitter Adversary of those Epistles, to be the same which for
above a thousand three hundred years since Eusebius, and after him the other
Fathers used; and since him by Daillee, in his set Tract to evince their
spuriousness; of which undertaking of that Learned Frenchman, Mr. H. in his
Mantissa takes notice, and could not but see that it had Relation to the
Medicean Copy, and the emendate Edition of Vossius, (a Book that has been
unanswerably silenced by the incomparable Bishop Pearson, in his Vindiciae
Epistolarum Ignatii, a Tractate that I wonder is never mentioned in a Discourse
so suitable) but this is not the first oversight Mr. H. has been guilty of.

IX. And if the Censure be not too severe, there is some reason why this
Edition, purged of all the foisted Passages, is not mentioned, which is because
of the Episcopacy therein asserted, when by sticking to the interpolated Copies
(a Crime I find willingly committed by the Assemblers, and Dr. Owen against Dr.
Hammond, by the Accurate Daillee himself, and I will not say by our Author)
they might decry every Sentence that made against their darling Discipline, as
foisted in contrary to the mind of the holy Ignatius; this Mr. H. more than
intimates in these Passages. Life of Ignat. p. 7. vide p. 14, 15.
They (i. the genuine Epistles which he before mentions) have not escaped the
hands of those which have offered no small Injury to them, having most
unworthily corrupted these ancient Relics, partly by Addition and
Interpolation of what never fell from the Pen of Ignatius, and partly by
Diminution and Substraction of what they saw would prove of disadvantage and
prejudice to them; so that even those genuine Epistles, through the foul abuse
that has been offered unto them, have lost much of that Authority which they
had of old. And I may safely dare to affirm, that had not the Government of the
Church by Bishops, as superior to Presbyters, been intimated in every Epistle,
and a submission to their Authority so instantly pressed, these Sacred Remains
had never fallen under such rude Attacques, but been reckoned among the most
precious Treasures of the most Primitive Antiquity.

X. This set Blondel first on work, says the immortal Grotius in his Epistle to
Gerhard, the Father of Isaac Vossius, to decry these admirable Writings,
although in the former Edition, which past through the hands of Videlius at
Geneva, Blondellus magnae vir diligentiae, sed suae parti super aequum
addictus, Ignatii Epistolas, quas filius tuus ex Italia attulit, puras ab
omnibus iis, quae eruditi hactenus suspecta habuere, ideo admittere non vult,
quia Episcopatuum vetrustati clarum praebent Testimonium. Grot. Ep. Ger. Voss.
who could not be suspected to be partial for the Episcopal Cause, there be
enough left uncensur'd to show us the Face of the Church of that Age. This also
is Doctor Owen's Charge against them in his Preface to his Book of the Saints
Perseverance, that, frequently, causelessly, absurdly, in the midst of
Discourses quite of another nature and tendency, the Author of these Epistles,
or some Body for him, breaks in on the commendation of Church Officers,
Bishops, and Presbyters. Nor is Apparat. ad lib. de Primat. Pap. p. 55.
Salmasius backward in the same Impeachment; and I am apt to imagine, that Mr.
H. so thinks, since else he would have mentioned some of those many Passages,
that give an account of the Church Government then in use, as he has done in
the lives of some of the other Fathers, where any thing might seem to make for
him, and which would have served as an excellent Comment on that rational
Paragraph of his Preface. That as to the Face and State of the Church, both as
to sound Doctrine and wholesome Discipline, it may be presumed, that they, i.
the Fathers, were better acquainted with, than most others, and could give us
the fullest and truest Information, it having been their special work to
publish and defend the one, and they having had the chiefest hand in the
management of the other; for it was a solemn act of Divine Providence, says the
famous Annal T. 2. an. 109. p. 36. ex Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 30.
Cardinal, that these Epistles should be written, but a greater, that amidst
that Tempest which wracked so many of the Writings of the Primitive Fathers
these should escape, in which we have such a lively draught of the Beauties of
the Oriental Church, for what the Apostles Peter and Paul taught the Church of
Antioch, and S. John instituted in the Churches of Asia, that has Ignatius
preserved and transmitted to Posterity. For that in S. John's time, who dyed
but eight years before our Martyr writ his Epistles, the Church should be
Governed by a Common Council of Presbyters, or by every distinct Priest as
absolute over his own Flock, and presently on his death all the world of
Christians should conspire to betray the Institution of Christ, and Chillingw.
of Episcopacy. Sect. 11. p. 5.
no man wish so well to the Gospel-Discipline as to oppose it, is so wild a
sancy, that when I shall see all the Fables in the M^tamorphoses acted and
proved Stories, when I shall see all the Democracies and Aristocracies in the
World lie down and sleep, and awake into Monarchies, then will I begin to
believe, That Presbyterial (or Independent) Discipline having continued in the
Church, during the Apostles time, should presently after (against the Apostles
Doctrine, and will of Christ) be whirled about, like a Skreen in a Mask, and
transformed into Episcopacy.

XI. And I could wish that our Brethren of the Separation would consider how
much they hereby both prejudice their own Cause (since in no ancient Writer can
they find so honorable a mention of the Presbyterate, as in Ignatius) and
administer advantage to the common Enemy, and how they can answer that
Objection of Ubi supr. p. 39.
Baronius, "who challenges all the Protestants to be tried, in point of
Ecclesiastical Polity, by this Father, as if instead of a beautiful Church,
they had groaned for a most deformed Monster. But blessed be our great
High Priest and Bishop of Souls ((...), as Greg. Naz. and (...), as S.
Polycarp, and Clemens Alex. call him) that the Church of England is able to
retort the Calumny, and lay it at the door of the Objectors, being ready to be
tried for its Discipline by the Fathers of the first Ages of the Church,
consonant to whom it can show three Orders of the Clergy, in opposition to the
defects of the Conventicle, and the superfluity of the Conclave. But this
Question has been so accurately handled by so many learned men of our Church,
that it were folly in me to light my Candle where their Sun shines.

XII. But Mr. H. is not without his own Reasons why these Epistles are not
pure, though he disallow Daillees, why they should not be Ignatius's; of which,
before we examine particulars, it will not be amiss to consider how many
different Copies of the Greek Epistles have been made use of (for as to the
three Latin ones mentioned, and disallowed per, Apud Usserii prolegomen. de
Epist. Ignat. cap. 5. p. XXIX.
Baronius and the Roman Index clear the Martyr from being the Author of them)
and this I do to mind Mr. H. of another slip of his, p. 8, 9. from his haste,
or mistake of the Reverend Primate, who, in his Cap. 6. p. XXXIII.
Dissertation prefixed to his Edition of Ignatius, reckons three several
Editions of these Epistles in use among the Ancients; the first of the seven
genuine Epistles only (or six, as he would have them) which Eusebius, etc. saw
and used; the second of the same Epistles, but interpolated, and so used by
Stephanus Gobarus, Anastasius the Patriarch of Antioch, and the Author of the
Chronicon Alexandrinum, for they were not the Authors of the Connection of the
five spurious Epistles, as Mr. H. imagines; the third consisted of the genuine
and supposititious Epistles all in one Volume, used by Johannes Damascenus,
Antonius in his Melissa, and Anastasius Presbyter, whom I suppose Mr. H.
mistook for him of the same name that was Patriarch of Antioch, and so fell
into his errors. And I am apt to think with Ep. 1. p. 9. ad fin. vindic.
Pearson.
Isaac Vossius, That the genuine Epistles were adulterated, and the spurious
annexed under the Emperor Anastasius, circ. an. 510. who also suppressed the
Gospels, as if writ by Idiots and unlearned men, and commanded others to be
writ in their stead. This third Edition Proaem. c. 6. p. 28.
Bishop Pearson divides into two, one whereof had only four spurious Epistles
added to the seven genuine and untainted, as the Medicean Copy of Isaac
Vossius, and the Latin Copies of the Primate, and those used by Damascene, and
Antonius; but the other Edition (which was made use of by Anastasius Presbyter
and Ado V^ennensis, and of which sort were the first Greek Copies that ever
appeared in Print, set out by Pacaeus and Gesner) had the seven interpolated
Epistles, and five supposititious, that to the Philippians being last added.

XIII. Having thus rectified the mistake of the Editions, we may now follow Mr.
H. who still walks after the Primate's light, and therefore reckons the Epistle
to Polycarp among the spurious Epistles, expressly against the mind both of Apud
eund. ibid. p. 21, 22, etc.
Eusebius and S. Hierom; (and he that will believe Honorius Augustodunensis, an
Author so many years younger, and so many other ways inferior to the
aforenamed Fathers, has my consent to love his fancy:) and to me the reading
of the most Learned Exercit. 16. n. 126;
Isaac Casaubon, which the Primate makes an Argument against the Epistle to
Polycarp, is an Argument that it is genuine. For if you read the words, as
Casaubon would have you (and proprie ad Polycarpum, etc.) in a Parenthesis,
then the Passage mentioned by S. Hierom must not be looked for in the Epistle
to Polycarp, but in that to the Smyrneans where it is to be found. But besides
what the judicious Isaac Vossius, and Bishop Pearson have observed, we need no
other Conviction than this, That whereas none of the supposititious Epistles
were otherwise in the Medicean Copy than in the Vulgar, this Epistle to
Polycarp, in the Florentine M S. is free from the Interpolations of the former
Editions; intimating, That this was a true Birth of the Father, and fell into
the same vile hands that abused the rest, and might have escaped that hard
Sentence, p. 6. That it ought to be reckoned among the second sort of
Ignatius's Epistles.

XIV. P. 7. He re-enforces the Centurist's Argument against these Epistles,
because the Martyr was not carried the nearest way to Rome; whereas the Stages
mentioned in his Epistles are the same with these mentioned in the ancient
piece called, Martyrium Ignatii, set forth by the Lord Primate, and agreeable
to S. Paul's Stages, who went from Antioch to Seleucia, Act. 13.4. from Troas,
crossing the Helespont, to Neapolis, Act. 16.11. and from thence to Philippi,
v. 12. When S. Ignatius went on foot through Macedonia to Epidamnum, where he
took Ship, and sailed to Rhegium, and from thence to Puteoli, and so to the
Roman Port, which were also S. Paul's Stages, Act. 28.13, 14. And for his being
at Smyrna, the Metropolis of the Lydian, or Proconsular Asia, it was the common
Road of all the Presidents of Syria, when they went to their Charges, or
returned from them, and the course which Vespasian took with his Army when he
went to the Siege of Jerusalem: And to him who shall consider the Reasons which
the Ancients give for this designed undertaking, there will be no occasion of
doubting. To. 5. p. 502. Ed. Savil.
S. Chrysostom in his Encomium of this Worthy, (a Discourse which is never here
mentioned, though so pertinent to the purpose, the Author whereof was a great
Admirer of Ignatius, and a Presbyter of that Church of Antioch, of which he was
Patriarch) tells us, That it was no contemptible specimen of the Devil's Policy
so to deal with the Bishops designed for Martyrdom, at once to take them
unprovided of Necessaries, and to wear them out with the length of the Journey:
And Act. S. Ignat. apud Sur. Febr. 1.
Simeon Metaphrastes assures us, That it was the Advice of Trajan's Council to
send him a long way about to Rome, that by the length of the Journey he might
be enforced to relish the tediousness of his bitter Sentence; and this also
Ubi supr.
S. Chrysostom confirms, (...), they set him a Course to run forward and
back-ward, seeking only to prostitute his Constancy and subdue his Resolution,
(as in Id. To. 7. Epist. 13. ad Olympiad. p. 92. (...).
another place he says of himself in his Banishment, That God had so ordered it
in appointing him such variety of tedious Removes, such long and intricate
Wanderings, that his happiness might be the greater; where he gives a third
Reason of this Designation) That by this means the Martyr might enhance his
Crown of Glory. And to answer the Magdeburg Centurist's this is enough, if not
too much, if we subjoin the good Remarque of Animad. on Dr. Owen. Chapter 2. Sect.
2. N. 24.
Dr. Hammond, that in matters of Fact, the Occasion and Motives whereof are not
always visible to every man placed at a great distance from them, it is
unreasonable to fancy and conjecture what is probable or improbable, and
accordingly to reform the Records of Antiquity from our own guesses.

XV. His next proof consists of the Exceptions mustered from the Epistles
against themselves. Of which the first p. 8. is taken out of the Epistle to the
Philadelphians, in which there is mention made of the Heresy of Apollinaris,
that in Christ there was no Humane Soul. To which I might answer, That Haeres.
77.
Epiphanius, who may be presumed to know the Heresy of that very learned man,
living in the same Age with him, tells us, that Apollinaris granted that Christ
had the Soul, but denied that he had the Mind of a Man, according to the notion
of the junior Academy, that put a difference between the Mind and Soul. But
there is no need of this solution, while the Edition which P. 102. Ed. Usser.
Mr. H. makes use of tells him, That those words are interpolated, (and so he
might have found them in red Letters) and then the bare denying of the Passage
to be Ignatius's is a sufficient Vindication; though if we had granted them to
be in the true Copy, yet perchance this would not have made the Copy spurious,
since the Heresies concerning our Savior were so multiplied in the first
saeculum, that there hardly appeared a new one in the fourth, of which the
Seeds were not sown long before: of which Heresies our Martyr takes especial
notice of two in these Epistles; the first of the Docetae, whose Father was
Simon Magus, that denied the reality of Christ's Birth, Death, and
Resurrection, affirming that he assumed only a fantastic Body; the second of
the Ebionities, who denied our Savior to be God, and urged the observance of
the Ceremonial Law. The former Heresy the Disciples of Menander had scattered
over all Asia, says Haeres. 51.
Epiphanius; and probably Saturnilus, one of his Scholars, had sown the Seeds
of this Doctrine at Antioch, (for that was his Birthplace, says (...). in
Menandro, vide and Iren. lib. 1. c. 22.
Theodoret) and among his Errors the same eminent Bishop of Cyrus, reckons one
somewhat like that of Apollinaris; That the Angels were they that said in
Scripture, let us make man, and having given him a Soul, that did not enable
him to stand upright, but still he crept like a Worm, God took pity on the
decrepit Creature, (...), and sent down a Spark of Life, and made the man
perfect, and that this is that Spark that after the dissolution of the Creature
goes back again to God that gave it. Which distinction of his seems to me to be
the same with that of Apollinaris between the Soul and Mind; but this I propose
only as a Conjecture.

XVI. His second Argument is, That the Passage in Theodoret, (...), etc. is
left out of our Ignat us: not to answer him, that this Passage being found in
Usser. prolegom. c. 3. p. XV. XVI.
three of our English Writers, Woodford, Tissington, and Bishop Grosthead,
(while it was not in the Vulgar Copies) set the curious Primate on searching
for those Copies which he afterward found; this very Passage is still extant
in the P. 35. edit. Usser.
Medicean Copy, only with a small variation, in Theodoret it is (...), but in
Vossius's Edition, (...), ab eucharistia and oratione recedunt, as the P. 220.
ancient barbarous Translation.

XVII. His last Argument is from a mistake of L. 3. adv. Pelag. to. 2. P. 301.
Ed. Eras.
S. Hierom, how confidently soever it be said, that the Father had the Passage
out of one of the genuine Epistles of Ignatius, that our Savior chose the
greatest of Sinners for his Apostles. For though the Answer of Dr. Uhi supr. c.
3. sect. 1. n. 15.
Hammond be sufficient that it might be spoken by the Martyr, though not
recorded, as our Savior spoke many things not writ in the Gospel, some whereof
were recited in the Acts of the Apostles, others by some of the Apostles
Followers; yet we have a better, that this was only a slip of S. Hierom's
memory, quoting Ignatius for S. Barnabas, in whose Catholic Epistle the words
are now extant; and as the words of Barnabas did Origin quote taem long before
S. Hierom, nor are such mistakes uncommon among the Fathers: so Vide Pears
vindic. part 1. c. 3. p. 29.
Clemens Alexandrinus quotes Barnabas for Clemens Romanus, and Theodoret the
Epistle of Ignatius to the Romans instead of that to the Church of Smyrna, and
S. C. 27.9.
Matthew the Prophet Jeremy instead of Zechary, as Act. 7.16.
S. Stephen does Abraham for Jacob.

XVIII. in the next place he proceeds to the consideration of those Epistles,
which he calls dubious, but we (except the Epistle to Polycarp, which even
Apolog. pro Ignat. cap. 3.
Vedelius himself does confess to be one of the seven genuine) reject as
spurious, being over and above the number of Epistles which Eusebius and S.
Hierome attribute to our Martyr. So that notwithstanding what To. 2. an. 109.
p. 35.
Baronius pleads for them, I am of our Countryman Cook's mind, who in his Page
57, etc.
Censura Patrum gives the same reasons which Mr. H. uses; only I cannot
subscribe to that one, that because in the Epistle to Polycarp he mentions a
Letter-Carrier ((...)) therefore he must have been an Ecclesiastical Officer;
the argument being enervated by Not. Critic. in Ep. Ignat. p. 139.
Vedelius, the word certainly implying no more than a Messenger, in the style
of Ignatius, whom he advises Polycarp to send to Antioch, such as Burrhus was
that came to him at Smyrna from Troas (and such as Phoebe and others were to S.
Paul) for all the Cyrys. To. 5. p. 502, 503.
Cities round about sent to the Martyr, and provided him with necessaries, and
gave him the assistance of their Prayers and Embassies. Now these Offices were
many times undertook by the Clergy; so Irenaeus being a Presbyter carried the
Letters of the Church of Lions to Pope Eleutherius, though the Office did
properly belong to the Subdeacon, says Tom. 2. an. 179 p. 146
Baronius. Nor does (...) in that Epistle signify any imposition of hands, but
barely an appointment, or civil designation.

XIX. As to the Apostrophe in the Epistle to Polycarp, from the Bishop to the
People, it is not unusual in the Epistles of the Apostles, and may be seen in
those to the seven Churches of Asia: and notwithstanding the most reverend Not
an Epist. ad Polycarp. p. 85, 86.
Usher (after what the learned Is. Vossius has pleaded for this Epistle) be
still of his old Opinion; yet here S. Chrysostom's Authority prevails more with
me, who, in his To. 6. p. 645.
Oration de Vnico Vet. and N. Test. Legislatore, quotes this Epistle as the
genuine Ignatius's; and that that Oration is S. Chrysostom's, Bishop Ubi supr.
part. 1. cap. 9. p. 132, etc.
Pearson has fully vindicated: but this consideration has been already
adjusted.

XX. For the Latin words made Greek, all which will amount to but four in
seven Epistles, whereof three are in that one Epistle to Polycarp, it will
appear the poorest of Arguments to him that remembers how many more such there
be in the New Testament (which he that will look into the end of Pasor's
Lexicon shall find gathered to his hand, though Blondel only takes notice of
(...)) that there is (...) in the Fragment of Hegesippus, and (...) in the
Epistle of the Church of Smyrna concerning Polycarp's Martyrdom; and that in
the most elegant and polite Writer S. Chrysostom, in one To. 7. p. 93, etc.
(...).
Epistle, viz. the 13th of those ad Olympiadem, we have eight such words
together, and some of them twice and oftener; and in the Writers of Tacticks, or
Law, vaster numbers; six hundred at least in Vrbicus, an Author of the same Age
with Ignatius, who writ the Tacticks of the Emperors Trajan and Adrian. But
this is an Exception which Daillee was ashamed of, who never mentions it; as
our Author is of another which that learned Frenchman uses; viz. his compound
words, Vid. D. Ham. and Pears. ubi supr.
which also has been over and above answered.

XXI. P. 13. He avers of the three Latin Epistles (whereof one to the Virgin
Mary, the other to S. John the Apostle) that they were added by Antiochus the
Monk, circ. an. 630. to the other twelve Epistles: But this also is a great
mistake, for no man ever yet saw those three Epistles in Greek, nor are they
quoted by any Greek Writer (as Antiochus was) nor any of the Latins till S.
Bernard, as Mr. H. p. 14. out of Baronius confesses; which how it can be
reconciled with his former assertion, I am not Oedipus enough to unriddle. But
suppose that this also did arise from his misapprehension of the Primate, who
in his Page CXXIX.
18th Chapter of his Prolegomena tells us of three several Copies of these
Epistles in Greek, whereof one was made use of by this Antiochus; but not a
word of the three additional Latin Epistles, till chap. 19. where he briefly
mentions them: Nor could any thing but my promise have reconciled me to so
barren and unprofitable an Employ, as the rectifying such mistakes as these are
amounts to.

XXII. We are next informed, that Ignatius's style was lively and fiery, and
such as became a Martyr; for Martyrs, said Life of Iren. p. 62. ex Erasm.
Epist. ante Irenaei Opera.
he, out of Erasmus, have a certain serious, bold, and Mascusine kind of
speech, and very truly. Ignatius his way of Writing is very like S. Paul's, and
I may say of that Apostle, and our Martyr, (as Orat. in fun. S. Basilii. To. 2.
p. 918.
Gregory Nyssen does of his Brother S. Basil, and that Apostle of the Gentiles,
that there was in them the same measure of holy love. Thus when he was
condemned to be led bound to Rome, Martyr. Ignatii. p. 4.
he heartily thankt God, that thought him worthy, with the Apostle Paul, to be
bound with Iron Chains; and when he came in sight of Puteoli, he made haste to
leave the Ship, Ibid. p. 7.
desiring to tread in the steps of that holy man; and this he wishes might also
happen to him in Heaven, Epist. ad Ephesians. p. 40.
that he might be admitted to the pleasure of walking and conversing with him,
whenever he should see God. And as he was an Imitator of him in his actions,
so also in his way of Writing, having digested the Epistles of the Apostle, and
made his sense his own, quoting him on all occasions: and whatever Daillee may
object, this to me is a strong argument, that he was an Apostolical Prelate,
who was so intimately acquainted with S. Paul's Writings; and what nobler
Pattern could he propose to himself, than that elegant and rational Apostle?
And this himself in the Page 64. (...).
Inscription of his Epistle ad Trallianos, calls the Apostolic Character: and
of it I could give some Iustances, but that I am deterred, because it has been
undertook by that excellent person the Bishop of Chester, who I wish had
published that Commentary of his, which he Ubi supr. p. 203.
promised, wherein all the passages in Ignatius should be reduced to their
Originals, and collated with the words and sentences of S. Paul. Nor is the
conjecture incomparably bold, if we assert, that whereas these Epistles were
annexed to that of Polycarp, which they follow in the Lord Primates Edition,
they might also be publicly read in the Church, as well as that Epistle, or
the other of St. Clemens to the Corinthians.

XXIII. And here it seems to me very proper to insert somewhat of the Orders
and Institutions of that Age; particularly of that Question which has been and
is so much discussed, whether Ignatius saw that Vision which Socrates records,
and which occasioned the introducing the Antiphonal Hymns into the Church; for
Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Socrates, who is the only Historian of the Ancients, that relates it, tells us
of a great Tumult that happened at Constantinople under S. John Chrysostom, by
reason of the Arians singing alternately some Psalms of their own in dishonor
of our Savior, and S. Chrysostom's introducing others instead of them; and
thence takes an occasion to give an account of the Original of the practice,
That S. Ignatius saw a Vision of Angels praising the holy Trinity with
alternate Hymns, (like that of the Prophetic Vision, Is. 6.3.) and that
thereupon he introduced this Custom into the Church of Antioch, and from thence
it was propagated to other Churches. This Story out of Socrates has since
found a place in the Lib. 10. cap. 9.
Tripartite History, in the life of S. Chrysostom, writ by Tom. 8. Op.
Chrysostom. p. 199.
Georgius Patriarch of Alexandria, in the acute Critic God. 75. p. 141. Edit.
Haeschel.
Photius and others. But the Antiquity of the Custom having been by many
disputed, and its Eopcha set as low as Flavianus and Diodorus in the Fourth
Century, I think my self bound to adjust its due Age. The praising God in Holy
Songs was certainly as ancient as the Church Christian, and it has been the
common practice of the Heretics in all Ages to corrupt the allowed Hymns, or
to introduce new ones of their own. So Harmonius, the Son of Bardesanes, and
after him Paulus Samosatenus, and then Apollinaris writ many such Psalms,
wherein they infused the Venom of their Heresies; Baron. Tom. 2. an. 264. p.
654.
in opposition to whom Ephrem Syrus made others for the Churches of Syria, and
Gregory Nazianzen silenced Apollinaris, which was also done in the Western
Churches by Ambrose, Damasus, Paulinus, Prudentius, and others. And it was
particularly laid to the charge of Paulus Samosatenus, by the Apud Eusebius. l. 7.
c. 24.
Council of Antioch in their Synodical Epistle, that he had exploded the Hymns
that were used to be sung to our Savior's honor, as a Novel Custom, and
introduced by men of Yesterday, and provided light and idle Women in the midst
of the Church, in the most Solemn Feast of Easter, to sing impertinent Songs to
his own praise: and this passage may serve to answer that place in Hist. lib.
2. c. 24.
Theodoret, [That the Church of Antioch had their Custom of singing their
Antiphona's from Flavianus and Diodorus, who introduced it in opposition to
Leontius, the Arian Bishop of that City, in the Reign of the Emperor
Constantius, just after which time it was introduced at Rome by Platin. in
Damaso.
Pope Damasus, and at Millain by Ambros. Cont. Auxent. and Aug. Confess. l 9. c.
6, 7. etc.
S. Ambrose,] the usage having been begun by Ignatius at Antioch, in
contradiction to the Docetae and Ebionites, who did assert the same or like
Heresies with Arius, denying the Divinity of Christ. Afterward the Right was
discountenanced by his Successor Paulus Samosatenus, and so came to be dis-us'd
till Flavianus restored the ancient and laudable practice, whom by a mistake
Hist. lib. 3. c. 13. p. 47.
Philostorgius, and Apud Nicet. Thesaur. Orthodox. fid. lib. 5. cap. 30.
Theodorus Mopsuestenus make the Author of the Gloria Patri. For I am sure it
was no Novelty in Tom. 2. Epist. 62. ad Neo-Caesar. p. 843, 844.
S. Basil's time, who being opposed by some of the Followers of Sabellius and
Marcellus for obliging his Churches to such Hymns, pleads for himself, That he
had the Example of the Churches of Egypt, Lybia, Thebes, Palaestine, Arabia,
Phaenicia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and several other places; and methinks it could
not be an Universal Practice of a sudden, as it must have been if introduced by
Flavianus, S. Basil's Cotemporary. Tom. 2. a^. 152. p. 136.
Baronius informs us, That the Angelick Hymn, ( Gloria in excelsis, etc.) was
enjoined by Pope Telesphorus, circ, an. 152. to be sung at the Consecration of
the Eucharist; and I am apt to think it was done alternately, if not, I am sure
Lib. 10. Epist. 97.
Pliny, who lived with Ignatius, impeaches the Christians of that Age of no
other Crime, save that they were wont to meet at a set time before day, and to
sing among themselves invicem, alternately a Song to Christ, whom they account
a God; which is a plain description of the practice of that Age. And Hist.
Eccl. lib. 2. c. 16.
Eusebius out of Philo makes the observance coaevous with the Church of
Alexandria under S. Mark, affirming, that among the Primitive Christians, when
one began to sing, the rest quietly hearkened to him, and then sung together the
remainder of the Hymn, probably bably in imitation of Moses, and Miriam, Exodus
15.1, 21. So that it is likely that the usage may be ancienter in some Churches
than our Martyr, but not improbable that his Vision might be the occasion of
bringing in the Custom into the Church of Antioch: and as the Custom prevailed
so early in the East, and in Egypt; so also in the Southern parts of Africa,
and at Carthage; for Lib. 2. ad uxor. cap. 6.
Tertullian mentions this mutual singing, wherein they provoked one another to
Emulation who should Sing best: And Dc Orat. dominic. p. 160.
Cyprian quotes the Hymn at the Celebration of the Eucharist, begun by the
Priest with sursum corda, and answered to by the People with habemus ad
dominum: and the practice carries its own Vindication with it; for I remember
somewhere Greg. Naz. calls Man, (...), a Creature made answerable to the
Angels; and that Tom. 2. Homil. 55. in Matthew. p. 355.
S. Chrysostom relates and vindicates the Hymns of the Monks, those Angels of
the Desert, as he calls them, wherein they intermixed the Doxology, and then
went to the Hymn again, herein following the Laws of the Apostles, beginning
with the Doxology, and ending with it, and beginning with it again. So that it
seems by him to have been an Apostolical Tradition.

XXIV. Here was also a fair Occasion offered to have instructed the World, not
only that Episcopacy was then a venerable Order in the Church, but that the
Bishop had Power to impose a Liturgy, from that famous place of the P. 12.
(...), etc.
Epistle to the Magnesians: nor can I think that it was a Novel Usurpation of
the Prelates in those early days, but that set Forms of Prayer are of
Apostolical Institution, who herein followed the Example of their infallible
Master; who, as he made the Jewish Baptism a Christian Sacrament, and took the
Symbols of the Eucharist from their Custom of Blessing the Bread and the Cup at
their Passover, so was not ashamed to collect the Petitions of his most
incomparable Prayer out of the several set Forms of Petition in use among that
people. It Is true, they had in that happy saeculum the miraculous Spirit or
Gift of Prayer, which enabled the Apostolical Priest without praemeditation, to
compose Prayers according to the perpetual or emergent occasions of the
Christian Congregation, whereof he was the Guide (where we may observe what the
Apostle means when he mentions Prayers by the Spirit, and that this was given
to cross the design of our Modern Pretenders to it, that every man might not
take what Liberty himself pleased to pour out his own Effusions) yet this
extraordinary Charisma and Afflatus soon ceased, and as it abated was succeeded
by some of those very Forms which the holy Spirit had so prodigiously dictated,
collected either by the Apostles themselves, or their immediate Successors. The
Greek Church have an undisputed Tradition among them, that whereas the Apostles
spent whole Days and Nights in their holy Offices, the length of those
Devotions gave occasion to S. James to omit those Prayers, that were used only
on extraordinary and emergent occasions, (and yet even in those the Apostles
did not disdain to follow ancient Precepts, for the Prayer Act. 4. from v. 24.
to 31. is nothing but an Abstract of Psalm the second; and the glorified
Saints, Apocal. 15.3, 4. were not ashamed to sing an Eucharistical Hymn,
composed of the Songs of Moses, David, and Jeremy,) and to choose and cull out
the most pertinent of those Prayers for the daily use of the Church, which is
since called his Liturgy, and was afterward again shortened by S. Basil, and S.
Chrysostom; and if any man should dispute the Authenticalness of his or S.
Mark's, or S. Peter's Liturgies in that Church, they would first admire and
then deride him; though it cannot be denied, but that there are many Additions
and Interpolations in them as now extant, which are not of equal Authority with
those Collects, which are truly Primitive: but that also is an Argument that
there were anciently such Liturgies left to the Church as they came out of the
Apostles hands, till they fell into the hands of evil men. And for this notion
of the Spirit of Prayer we are obliged to Tom. 3. (...) 8. Romans 26. p. 120.
S. Chrysostom, who plainly affirms, That to them, that were newly Baptized,
God was pleased to give many miraculous Donatives which were called Spirits;
for he says, Let the Spirit of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets; for
one had the Spirit of Prophecy, and he foretold Futurities; another of Wisdom,
and he instructed the World in the Laws of Piety; a third of Healing, and he
cured the Sick; a fourth of Miracles, and he did raise the Dead; another of
Tongues, and he spoke diverse Languages; and among all these there was also the
Cift of Prayer, which also is called the Spirit of Prayer; and he that was so
endowed, prayed for the whole Congregation; for whereas we are ignorant of many
things that are necessary for us, and apt to ask what is unnecessary, therefore
fell this Spirit of supplication on one certain person, and he stood up and
made known the common necessities of the Church, and instructed others to pray;
and this he did with much compunction and many groans. Of which usage the
Emblem is yet retained in the Deacons bidding of Prayers. Seldom. not in
Eutych. p. 41; 42.
So when the Spirit of Prophecy ceased in the Jewish Church, Ezra and the
great Consistory instituted certain Forms of Devotion of daily use, from which
no man might dare to recede.

XXV. Among these settled and established Forms of the Apostles we may suppose
none were so likely to be retained as those at the Celebration of the
Eucharist, which then the good men received every day. For in all the ancient
Liturgies we find the same Form (admitting a few Alterations) which the Church
of England uses in that tremendous Sacrament; and indeed is the same, abating a
few Circumstances, in the Liturgies of the whole Christian World, among the
Oriental and Western Christians, the Syrians, and Egyptians, the Abassines,
and Armenians, the Melchites, Jacobites, and Nestorians, who though in other
things they disagree, are herein united; which makes me imagine their
Ceremonies at this Sacrament so uniformly observed could flow from no other
Fountain than that of the Apostles, according to that Maxim of S. Austin, that
what is univerfally practiced and was never instituted by a General Council,
must be imputed to the Apostles. Aug. Ep. 59. Paulino resp. ad quaest. 6.
For the Universal Church had a set Service which she constantly used at the
Celebration of the Sacrament, whereof a part was performed before the
Consecration of the Elements, another during the Consecration and Distribution,
the Solemnity being always concluded with the Lords Prayer, the Eucharistical
Hymns, and the Priests benediction; and that it was so from that passage, Lift
up your hearts, to the end of the Communion Service, I shall adventure to make
appear from the most profound Antiquity.

XXVI. For Chrysostom. Tom. 3. (...) in 2 Cor. p. 647.
after the Prayers of the Church, which we call the first Service, were
finished, and the Catechumens, Energumeni, and Paenitentes were dismissed, then
began another Collect, which only the Faithful said, being prostrate on the
Ground, (which I suppose was like that General Confession in our Books,
(Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.) then they arose and gave
the holy kiss each to other, after which the Priest being about to handle the
tremendous Mysteries, prays over the people, and the people pray for the
Priest; for what else mean those words (and with thy spirit) and when he
returns with his new Invocation, the people say, (it is meet and right so to
do) (...), and then he begins not the Consecration of the Eucharistical
Elements, but the Angelick Hymn, (therefore with Angels and Archangels, etc.)
and this is excellently agreeable to the Liturgy of that Liturg. Chrysostom T^^.
6. p. 996, 997. L. 8. c. 16.
eminent Father. I will briefl^ consider the several parts.

XXVII. The Sursum cordais mentioned by the [b] Author of the Apostolical
Constitutions, and he would poorly have made good his pretense, who-ever put on
that Mask, had not this Hymn been instituted by those holy men: and the
Testimony will be very considerable, if the Author of those Books be, as some
men conjecture, Clemens of Alexandria. We meet with it also as an Hymn of
Universal Practice in De Orat. Dominic. p. 160.
S. Cyprian, in Catech. mystagog. 5. p. 241.
S. Cyril of Jerusalem, and in Ep. 57. and Ep. 120. c. 19. and Ep. 156 de
spirit. and lit. c. 11. de bono perseverant. c. 13. and de vera relig. c. 13.
etc. Vide Dr. Hamm. Letters to Cheynel. p. 26, 27.
S. Austin frequently (that we may omit Dionysius the Areopagite, because not
so ancient as pretended) the famous Bishop of Hippo affirming, That they were,
verba ab ipsis Apostolorum temporibus petita, words derived to the Church from
the days of the Apostles, and S. Cyril telling us that they were traditionally
derived down to his time, and what was Tradition in his days could be little
less than Apostolical; (and it is observable, That the Liturgy which that
ancient Father so largely and Learnedly explains in his Catechetick Lectures
was the Liturgy of S. James, which was then in use in his Church of Jerusalem)
then followed the Hymn ( therefore with Angels, etc.) the Prayer, which the
Greek Churches call (...), and which S. Chrysostom means, when he says, (...),
etc. thou singest and joinest Consort with those blessed Spirits; and Gregory
Tom. 1. p. 957.
Nyssen says they are the words which the Seraphims with six Wings say, when
they sing the Hymns with the Christian Congregation; and was doubtless the
Just. M. Apol. 2. p. 97.
(...), that Eucharistical Hymn, which was sung when the Christians brought
Bread and Wine to the Priest, which he receiving returned Praises to God in the
name of the Son, and the holy Ghost. The Form of Consecration of the Elements
was, says Tom. 4. (...). 6. in 2 Timoth. p. 339.
S. Chrysostom. of indispensible necessity, and what was then retained in the Church
was the same which Peter and Paul, and Christ himself used at the Consecration
of the sacred Symbols. The Form is at large in Tom. 4. lib. 4. de sucra. cap.
4, and 5. p. 377. Edit. Erasm.
S. Ambrose after this manner. In what Form, and in whose words, is the
Consecration made? in the words of the Lord Jesus. For in all the other
Additionals thanks are given to God, Suppliplications made for the people, for
Kings, and all Orders of men, ( this also Apoleg. c. 39.
Tertullian, mentions, and ubi supr.
Justin Martyr, and S. Ep. 119. c. 18.
Austin call properly the Common Prayer, like our Collect for the whole State
of Christ's Church militant here on Earth) but when he comes to Consecrate the
venerable Sacrament, then he no longer uses his own words, but the words of
Christ. Which Form of Consecration he thus expresses, Ambr. ibid. c. 5.
the Priest says, Make this Oblation prepared for us a reasonable and
acceptable Sacrifice, which is the Figure of the Body and Blood of our Master
Jesus Christ, who, the day before he suffered, took the Bread in his hands, and
looked up to Heaven, giving thanks to the Holy Father, Almighty, Eternal God;
he blessed it, brake it, and, being so broken, gave it to his Apostles and
Disciples, saying, Take, and eat ye all of it, for this is my Body, which shall
be broken for many. Likewise the day before he suffered, after Supper, he took
the Cup and looked up to heaven giving thanks to the holy Father, Almighty
eternal God, he blessed it and delivered it to his Apostles and Disciples,
saying, Take and drink ye all of it, for this is my Blood. See, all these words
are the words of the Evangelist, till you come to Take my Body, or my Blood.
Observe every particular he says, who the night before he suffered took Bread
in his sacred hands, etc. therefore it is to very great purpose and advantage
that thou say, Amen. So S. Ambrose largely and to the parpose.

XXVIII. The Form of administration was the same with ours, Cyrilaibi supra.
The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy Body
and Soul unto everlasting Life; and to this the people said Amen, with a loud
Voice. After the Celebration of the Mysteries, Ambr. ubi supra lib. 5. cap. 4.
p. 380. Hier. lib. 3. adv. Pelag. Tom. 2. p. 309.
both Priest and People said the Lord's Prayer, which was of the entireness of
the Mystery; and so our Church uses it; though in the Eastern Churches it
preceeded the Prayer of Consecration; for this Prayer was thought so necessary,
and indispensible a part of the Christian Sacrifice, that the Apost. Conslit.
l. 7. cap. 25, 26.
Ancients were obliged to use it three times every day; but especially in the
Eucharist, as say all the Liturgick Writers, and therefore Tert. de Orat. cap.
1. praemiss^, legitima, and ordinaria oratione, quasi fundamento accidentium.
Vide eund. de fug. in persec. init.
Tertullian rationally calls this, the ordinary and lawful Form of Devotion,
which must be laid as a Foundation, on which we may build our Petitions for our
particular necessities. But I cannot believe Gregory the Great in this
particular, when he Lib. 7. indict. 2. Epist. 63.
affirms, That the Apostles used no other Form of Devotion but this in the
Consecration of the Sacrament; for I cannot but suppose that there were some
Additional Collects and Hymns subjoined, such as what I have already mentioned;
although in truth that very Prayer contain all things in it; Aug. Ep. 121. c.
12.
for whatever else we can say either may raise our Spirits, or heighten our
Devotion, but can never out do the efficacy of this Form: To this succeeded
Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 10. c. 6.
the Prayer like that in our Liturgy, We offer unto thee our selves, our Souls
and Bodies, etc. and then the Priest dismissed the Communicants with his
Benediction.

XXIX. And of this sort also am I apt to think was that custom of saying at the
naming of the Gospel, Glory be to thee, O Lord, agreeable to that of Acts
11.18. where the People, when they heard of the Conversion of the Gentiles,
glorified God; and under this head I suppose I could muster some other Collects
of our own, and the ancient Church, but I forbear. I know there are many
Objections against the ancient Liturgies, by reason of some Additions, and the
mention of some Ecclesiastic Practices not coaevous with the Apostles, but
this Argument is not of so great weight; for we may as well say, that our
Common Prayer Book is not the same with that of Queen Elizabeth, because we
have a new Form of Baptism of those of riper years, a new Form for the
thirtieth of January, etc. and for Seamen, some few Collects added that were
not then in use, the Doctrine of the Sacraments added to the Catechism, and a
new Translation of Scripture introduced, and that we pray for King Charles and
Queen Katherine, whereas they prayed for Queen Elizabeth; these things being
always varied according to the present Exigencies of the Church, and yet the
Liturgy the same. I will close all with that of DeDogm. Eccl.c. 30.
Gennadius, who speaks the sense of the fifth Century, observationum
Sacerdotalium Sacramenta respiciamus, etc. Let us pay our Veneration to the
Mysteries of the Priestly Prayers, which being established and delivered to the
Church by the Apostles, are with a strict Uniformity celebrated in the whole
Catholic Church, that an Uniformity of Devotion may go along with the
Uniformity of Faith: For when the holy Prelates do become Ambassadors in the
behalf of the Congregation to the Divine Clemency, they undertake the Interests
of Mankind, and with the assistance of the whole Church, that sighs and prays
with them, desire that the Infidels may be made Converts, the Idolatrous
reclaimed from their Impiety; that the veil may be taken from the hearts of the
Jews, that they may be Partakers of the Light of truth; that Heretics may
become penitent, and return to thebosome of the Catholic Church; that
Schismatics may be endowed with the Spirit of peaceableness and humility; that
the Lapsi may be restored to the Church Communion, and the Catechumeni admitted
to Baptism: and that these things are not perfunctorily and in vain desired
from God, the effects have made manifest; for out of every one of these sorts
God has made Proselytes to the Truth, whom he has rescued from the Powers of
Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of his Son.

XXX. When the famous Confessor was brought to his journeys end, and heard the
Lions roaring, with an uncommon joy, says S. Catal. v. Ignat.
Hierom, he thus expressed himself, I am Gods bread, etc. This Daillee would use
as an argument to invalidate the authority of these Epistles, and the so often
and justly celebrated Prelate Part 1. cap. 6. p. 84. and cap. 9. p. 130, 131.
and part 2. c 16. p. 217.
Bishop Pearson vigorously opposes the entertainment of the Opinion, as if the
words had never been spoken in the Amphitheatre, and the assertion would too
much depreciate the Epistles. But the authority of S. Hierom inclines me to be
of another belief, who plainly affirms, that Ignatius thus expressed himself,
when he heard the Lions roaring: and although I am not ignorant, that that
acute Father through haste has committed many faults, by mistaking Eusebius;
yet I can hardly believe him deceived in this, while To. 5. p. 504.
S. Chrysostom avers the same, as I understand him, who praising Ignatius for
his resolution in dying with the greatest satisfaction and willingness, asks
this Question, And how know you this? and answers himself, We know it from the
words he spoke, when he was about to dye, I wish I could enjoy these beasts.
For though he were about to dye from the time of his condemnation, yet this
implies to me, that he was nearer his death, than when at Antioch. And Act. S.
Ignat. apud Surium. Febr. 1.
Simeon Metaphrastes tells us, that he thus bespake the Romans (though there be
no such thing in the ancient acts of his Martyrdom) O you Spectators of this my
combat, know that these things have befallen me not for any crime of mine, but
that I might follow my God, and enjoy him whom I insatiably long for, for I am
his Corn, and must be ground by the teeth of the Beasts, that I may become pure
Bread. And of this mind is the great To. 2. an. 110 p. 50.
Cardinal, though no man more vigorous than he to assert the genuineness of
these Epistles; for to urge, Pears. part. 1. cap. 6. p. 87.
that he might hear the Lions roar at Smyrna as well as at Rome, is to me a
farfetcht conjecture. This therefore, I suppose, was a speech common in his
mouth, and a testimony that he was not driven, but went willingly out of the
world: and in what that Ubi supr. p. 83. etc.
great man affirms, that Maximus was the first that dreamt of any words used
proverbially by our Martyr, he seems to me to answer himself, by vindicating
him against Daillee; for when Maximus says of those words, (...), my love is
crucified, that perhaps it was a familiar sentence to him; so it looks, says
that eminent Prelate, and might be used by him in his speeches as well as
writings; and adds, that Daillee's argument from thence, that because the words
are in one of his Epistles, therefore they could not be spoken by him (though
it be the same argument which himself after uses) is a frivolous distinction,
and unworthy of Daillee. But who will believe, continues he, that this was a
familiar expression of Ignatius? I answer, S. Hierom did, and Sophronius, (and
I think S. Chrysostom) Simeon Metaphrastes, Baronius, the Lord Primate, and
others. But who can imagine, that ever these words were spoken by him before
his Condemnation? I answer, that no man certainly is so mad, as to suppose this
Apophthegm used before his Sentence, but that between it and his Execution, in
which time he writ all his Epistles, both that speech, My love is crucified,
and this, I am Gods Corn, etc. might be frequent in his mouth, as testimonies
of his courage and love to Heaven, first written by him, and afterward on all
occasions spoken; which at last that Ubi supr. p. 87. si qu^^ fuerint post ea
decantata, etc.
excellent man seems to grant. And this answer both vindicates the Ancients,
and yet gives no assistance to Daillee's Hypothesis; and of this opinion, after
I had finished this, did I find the Learned Life of S. Ignat. sect. 8. p. 106.
Dr. Cave, to whose industry and diligence the Church owes the reparation of
many of her ancient ruins.

XXXI. In his Epistles I am accosted with unaccustomed demonstrations of
Christian gallantry, and an ardent zeal, and such longings for Martyrdom, as
argue a soul strongly transported with the love of Jesus, and immortality, an
infinite care of his disconsolate and widowed Church of Antioch, which in every
Letter he recommends to the prayers and assistances of those Churches to whom
he writes, but especially to S. Polycarp; but above all, a most holy vigor and
earnestness against Heresy and Schism, there being not one Epistle wherein he
takes not care to condemn the Heresies of that age, to discountenance Schism
and Faction, and passionnately to recommend Obedience to the Prelates of the
Church: And since The View of Antiquity, handling this subject ex professo,
has given us so poor an account, I will take leave to transcribe a few
passages to that purpose.

XXXII. The great design of his Epistle to the Romans, is to engage the
Christians of that Church, Epist. ad Romans p. 21, 23, 24, 25. Ed. Usser. Land.
16^7.
not to use any means to hinder the consummation of his course by Martyrdom,
telling them, that such an act of Charity would be a great piece of injustice
to him, that he never, till the sentence of condemnation past on him, began to
be a true Disciple of Christ, beseeching them by their prayers to hasten the
day of his dissolution; assuring them that he would invite the wild beasts to
devour him, that neither the fire, nor the Cross, nor the teeth of those
ravenous and untamed Lions, that neither the breaking of his bones, the racking
of his joints, the bruising of his body, and on the head of all this the utmost
torments that Satan's malice could inflict, would signify any thing, so he
might enjoy his Master Jesus; that were he Lord of the ends of the earth, and
all the Kingdoms of the world combined into one Empire for him, they neither
could tempt nor profit him; that he had rather dye for his beloved Jesus, than
be Monarch of the Universe: for what is a man profited to gain the world, and
lose his soul? that he longed for no one but him that dyed for him, and rose
again; that he was a passionate lover of death, for his love was crucified;
that he was not satisfied with corruptible nourishment, or the pleasures of
this life, but only desired the bread of God which came down from heaven, the
bread of life, which is the flesh of Jesus Christ the Son of God, born in the
latter age of the world of the seed of David and Abraham; that he longed for no
other drink but his blood, the great testimony of the invincible Charity of
Jesus, and the means of attaining to life Eternal. Which last passage I am
inclinable to believe has its relation to that good old Custom of giving the
Sacrament of the Eucharist as a Viaticum to dying persons.

XXXIII. Id. ad Ephesians. p. 7, 8.
Against the Heresies of the Age he is very smart. Be not deceived, my
Brethren; Adulterers shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, and if they shall
dye who do these things in the flesh, how much more they who by impure
Doctrines corrupt and prostitute the honor of the holy and chaste Faith, for
which Jesus was crucified. Such a polluted person shall be thrust into
unquenchable fire, and all they, that hearken to him. I beseech you therefore,
Brethren, (and yet it is not I, but the Love of Christ which entreats you) make
use of no other but Christian Food, and abstain cautiously from the strange
Plant, which is Heresy. There are many Time-servers who embrace the Lord
Jesus, and believe proportionably to the advantages they receive by the Faith;
Men that give an envenomed draught, Ad Trallian. p. 18.
mingled with what makes it luscious and palatable, which he that is ignorant
greedily swallows to his own Damnation: keep your selves charily from such,
which is easily done, if you avoid Pride and self-conceit, and unite your
selves inseparably to the Lord Jesus, to your Prelate, and to the Ordinances of
the Apostles. Ad Smyrn. p. 35.
Of which Heretics he tells us, that they denied the Passion and Resurrection
of our Savior, and as they had forfeited the Faith, so they had lost their
Charity, took no care of the Poor, of the Widows, or the Orphans; had no
Prayers or Celebration of the Eucharist among them; of whom, though Mr. H. p.
19. tells us, that Menander, Basilides, and others are named by Ignatius, yet I
must aver, that though he means them, yet he nowhere expressly mentions them,
but rather professes, Ibid.
that he will omit the giving a particular account of them, not thinking it fit
to remember the names of such Infidels, till they had repented.

XXXIV. Nor is his Pen less keen against Schism; Ad Ph^adelph. p. 28. 30.
You being children of the light fly all Schisms, and false Doctrines; where
your Shepherd is, there do ye as Sheep follow him, for there are many Wolves.
Abstain from all noxious Plants, which the Son of God never cultivated, because
they were not planted by his Father. Be not deceived, Brethren, if any man be a
follower of a Schismatic, that man has no inheritance in the Kingdom of God;
for where there is division and wrath, in that place God has no residence: Fly
therefore Schism, Ad Smyrn. p. 36.
as the beginning of all mischief. He that is not within the Sanctuary cannot
partake of the Bread of God; Ad Ephesians. p. 3.
for if the prayer of one or two be so powerful, how much more the conjoined
supplications of a Bishop and his whole Flock? He therefore that shuns the
public Assemblies, is proud, and has cut himself off from the holy Communion,
for it is written, that God resists the proud. Let us therefore studiously
decline opposing the Bishop, that we may not be guilty of Rebelling against
God. Use your utmost endeavor that you may meet often to praise and magnify
your Maker, Ibid. p. 6.
for by such frequent Assemblies the powers of Satan's Kingdom are weakened, and
his design to ruin you for ever blasted by the Uniformity of your Faith: There
is no greater blessing than peace, by which all the quarrels in Heaven and
Earth are composed. Such are his severe remarques on all the disturbers of
Ecclesiastic Union, and yet no man a greater adviser to Christian
Condescension and Compassion than Ignatius; Ibid. p. 5.
Overcome, says he, the fury of such men by meekness, their proud boastings by
Humility, their railings by Prayers, their Errors by continuing steadfast in
the Faith, and their wild and ungoverned manners by a gentle and Christian
demeanor.

XXXV. Nor does he only discover the Distemper, but prescribes a Remedy, by
enjoining a strict submission to Episcopal Authority in every Epistle; For as
our Master Christ never did any thing either by himself or by his Apostles
without his Father, Ad Magnes. p. 12.
so neither undertake ye any thing without the Bishop and his Presbyters; nor
do ye indulge to any private Fancies of your own, how plausible or reasonable
soever; but in the same Assembly let there be one Prayer and Supplication, one
mind, one hope in charity and joy unblameable, for there is one Jesus, Ad
Trall. p. 1 6/7.
than whom nothing can be better. Undertake nothing without your Bishop, and be
subject to your Presbyters, as to the Apostles of Christ; and honor the
Deacons, as the Ministers of the Mysteries of Jesus, for without these there
can be no Church. Ad Philadelph. p. 30.
I cry aloud, and speak it with an audible Voice be obedient to the Bishop,
Presbyters, and Deacons. Some men suspected, that I spoke this, as if I had
foreseen the Schismatical Designs of some; but he is my Witness, for whom I am
bound with this Chain, that I had not the notice from flesh and blood, but the
Spirit of God revealed these things unto me, telling me, Do nothing without
your Bishop, keep your Body undefiled as the Temple of God; love Unity, fly
Divisions; be Imitators of Christ as he is of his Father. My soul for theirs
who obey the Bishop, Ad Polycarp.
Presbyters, and Deacons; he that honors the Bishop is honored of God; he
that does any thing without his Privity is a servant to the Devil: Let nothing
belonging to the Church be done without the Prelate. Ad Smy^n, p. 36.
Think that Encharist only valid, which the Bishop consecrates, or some one by
him deputed: it is not lawful without him either to Baptize or Celebrate the
Love Feasts; where the Bishop is let the Congregation be; as where Christ is,
there is the Catholic Church. And lest he might seem to impose all the stress
on the Laity, and prescribe no holy Cautions to the Governors of the Church
how to demean themselves, the beginning of the Epistle to Polycarp is wholly
spent in advices to that Apostolical Bishop; and giving a Character of the
Episcopal Office. I will only instance in one memorable saying more of his,
that famous passage which Theophilus, Origin, S. Basil, Hierom, and others
borrow from him, Ad Ephesians. p. 8.
that there were three things whereof the Prince of the Air was ignorant, the
Virginity of the Blessed Mother of God, the Incarnation of her Son, and his
death and Crucifixion; three venerable Mysteries that were now publicly
proclaimed to the World in their accomplishment, but were contrived by God in
eternal silence and secrecy.

XXXVI. And whereas some doubt has been made, how under so strict a custody he
could find leisure to write so many Letters, and make so many holy Sermons and
Exhortations as he did; we answer Baron. Tom. 2. an. 109. p. 34. and Pearson
part. 2. c. 11. p. 139.
that he bought every moment of that holy leisure from his Guards; every stay
of his being their Market, where they made him purchase each hours freedom from
their inspection and restraints with greater Sums, growing more fierce and
untractable on their gentle treatment, that they might extort new and larger
Compositions; for such was the Charity of that Age, that they accounted nothing
dearer than the concerns of their Religion, and therefore grudged at no cost to
purchase better usage for the Confessors thereof; and of this De Mort. Peregr.
p. 996.
Lucian is a sufficient witness: and such questionless was their Zeal and Love
toward Ignatius, and by this means he purchased his hours of Privacy,
notwithstanding Eusebius seems to oppose the Opinion, Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 30.
implying that he did it rather by stealth, than their Connivance.

XXXVII. It is also proposed as a great difficulty by the acute Not. in Eusebius.
Chron. an. MMCXX III. p. 189.
Scaliger, how it came to pass that Ignatius should not be martyred at Antioch,
but carried thence to Rome? telling us, that none but Denizens of that great
City used to appeal from the Governor of the Province, as S. Paul did, and if
we assert this concerning Ignatius, then could he not have been thrown to the
Wild Beasts; the L. 48. Tit. 8. ad leg. Cornel. de Sicar. and Venef.
Law forbidding to punish any Citizen in that manner, (it being in truth a
Death decreed to the vilest and most profligate of Malefactors only) and at
last professes, That he is ignorant how to solve it, and therefore proposes it,
that others might try their wits about it. And though I pretend not to unriddle
Mysteries, yet we may give more than one reason, why Trajan, who himself, and
not the Governor of the Province condemned the holy man, ordered him to suffer
at Rome. Lib. 48. Tit. 19. (...), ad ^es^^^
It was usual in all the Provinces to send the Heads and Leaders of Factions,
famous Thieves and Murderers, or any that had Excellencies more than ordinary,
as strength of Body or Skill, to suffer at Rome. Now Ignatius was the most
remarkable man among the Christians of that Country, a Patriarch of a famous
See, venerable for his Age and Piety, for his Zeal and Humility, for his
Gallantry and Courage, in freely offering himself to the Emperor, and
reproving his Idolatrous Worship. To this Tom. 5. p. 502, 503.
S. Chrysostom subjoins, That it was the Devil's Policy to cut off the Bishops,
and that in strange Countries, to which he hurryed them, that he might
prostitute their Fortitude, and bring down their Resolutions, taking them
unprovided of Necessaries, and worn out with the length of their Journeys; that
he might render their Sufferings more severe and acute, that they might dye
there unknown and unpityed, not as Martyrs for Religion, but as great
Malefactors: The people of Antioch, had Ignatius dyed at home, would have been
ravished with Admiration of his Bravery, and with Love to his Piety, when they
should see that Bishop, who had preached the Gospel so long among them, now dye
for it, and seal that truth with his Blood, which he had so often professed in
his Discourses; and God also so ordered it, to enhance the worth of our
Martyr's Crown, that the Churches through which he journeyed might be confirmed
by his Sermons, Letters, and Example; that by his Blood he might help to
propitiate the Favors of Heaven, which had been demerited by the many
Idolatrous Enormities of that wicked City; as also that in that public place
he might preach Piety to the World, and give a Testimony of the Truth of the
Resurrection of Jesus, and the hopes of the Christian World, that they also
shall rise again to a better Life; these Reasons, after this Paragraph was
written, I found urged by the Learned Life of Ign. Sect. 5. p. 103 104. vide
Halleix. Apol. pro script. Ignat. c. 6.
Dr. Cave, to which he also adds, that this was done to deter others, that
all that saw him in his Travels might observe how odious this Religion was in
the Eyes of so brave and accomplished a Prince as Trajan, who was the Darling
of the Empire.

XXXVIII. This Journey to Rome was Baron. Tom. 2. an. 109. p. 31.
undertaken in the latter end of Summer, for in August he was at Smyrna, whence
he writ his Epistle to the Romans; and on the first of February in the ensuing
year, say the Latins, but say the Greeks, on December. the 20th of the same
year, was Martyred; of the manner and circumstances of whose departure, Ado
Apud eund. Tom. 2. an. 110. p. 51. and Martyrol. ^ebr. 1.
Viennensis mentions many things, which the Ancients are silent in, as, that
his Shoulders were bruised with Leaden Bullets, his sides torn with Hooks and
sharp Stones, his hands filled with fire, and his sides burnt with Paper dipped
in Oil, and that he was commanded to stand on hot burning Coals, and his sides
again torn with Hooks and sharp Shells; of the truth of which Story the
Cardinal much doubts; but I think that ancient Martyrologist is only mistook in
the place, putting Rome for Antioch (where probably he was so tortured) as he
is also out in the names of the Consuls for that year. And agreeable hereunto
is the Relation of the Greek (...).
Menaeon, that this was done to subdue the invincible Courage of the Martyr
before his Condemnation; but when this would not produce the desired Effect,
that then the Emperor denounced the fatal Sentence against him. Nor was this
only the Opinion of Ado, but before him of venerable Bede; and before both, of
the Collectors of the Acts of this Saint in the Greek and Latin Manuscripts of
the Bodley and Cotton Libraries, as says the venerable Ep. ad Lect. ante^
Martyr. Ignatri.
Primate, and since them, of many others.

XXXIX. But as soon as the Martyr had begun this his tedious Journey, the
Persecution at Antioch ceased (and only there, as I am inclined to believe by
the Page 7.
Acts of S. Ignatius's Martyrdom; for he being at Rome, takes notice of the
continuation of the Persecution there, which he prays God to put an end to) the
Emperor thinking it sufficient in such a populous City to cut off their
Leader; Providence so ordering it, that at the same time there came Letters
from Tiberianus the President of Palestine, and Pliny the Proconsul of
Bithynia, (both which the Lord P^., 9. 10
Primate has annexed to the Martyrdom of our Saint) which suddenly altered the
Scene of Affairs, and freed the Eastern Church of a hot Persecution; only the
favor could not reach Ignatius, because his life was forfeited to the Law, he
being condemned before this Cessation, though the Execution were respited till
he came to Rome; but the Blood of this holy man brought down speedy Vengeance
on that City, for the next year after, as To. 2. an. 111. p. 55.
Baronius proves; not till seven years after, says Johannes Malela, and the
most Learned Not. in Martyr. Ignat. p. 5.
Usher, a terrible Earthquake almost buried it in its own ruins, as it is
elegantly described by the Historian L. 68. in Trajano.
Dio. It was preceeded by horrible Thundrings, and prodigious Winds, and at
last the Earthquake threw down Houses, buried many in the Rubbish, maimed
more; rooted up Trees, and dried up Rivers, and on it new Springs appeared, the
Mountain Casius was so shaken, that its top leaned as if every moment it would
fall on the remainders of that wretched City: Here Pedo the Consul was so
bruised, that the Contusion proved mortal, and the Emperor himself had shared
in the same Fate, had he not been drawn out of a Window by an extraordinary
piece of Providence; nor would he ever afterward reside in the City, but in
his Tents in the open Air. And how could Antioch but totter and become a heap
of Ruins, that was on the death of this good man robbed of what propt and
secured it? that place is next door to destruction, whose Angel-Guardian is
forced to a desertion.

XL. In this manner did this excellent Bishop leave the World, and Act. Martyr.
Ignar. p. 8.
his bigger bones, which the wild beasts had not devoured, were by his
Followers Philo, Gaius, and Agathopus, that writ the Acts of his Martyrdom,
collected and brought to Antioch, and received with much solemnity in every
City which they past through, and were buried in the Coemetery Hier. Catal^v.
Ign.
before the Gate that leads to Daphne, one of the Suburbs of Antioch; but
afterward, under Evagr. Hist. l. 1. c. 16.
Theodosius junior, were brought in a Chariot with much pomp into the City
(which Lib. 14. c. 44.
Nicephorus mistook, when he says, they were then first brought from Rome) and
interred in a Church dedicated to his memory, which before was the Temple of
Fortune, whence they were again transported to Rome, under the Emperor
Justinian, as Not. in Martyrol. December. 17. p. 844.
Baronius thinks, when Antioch was sacked and burnt by Chosroes, King of
Persia, or rather as the reverend Not. in Martyrol. Ign. p. 50.
Usher proves, circ. an. 640. when that City fell into the hands of the
Saracens. And to his memory was an eminent Festival devoted, which Gregory,
Patriarch of that See, made more illustrious by much additional Magnificence
and Ceremony, and was constantly celebrated till the days of Ubi supr.
Evagrius. But perhaps Mr. H. would not mention these things, being loath to
acknowledge that in those early days the Relics of Martyrs were reverenced,
and the Anniversaries of their Deaths celebrated with Sermons and other
Christian Offices; to both which I Will speak a few things, that it may serve for
a view of the ancient usages in that kind, and vindication of S. Chrysostom,
whose Panegyric I subjoin, in which we find him copious on this subject.

XLI. The Primitive Church did call the days of their Martyrdoms their birth
days, (Natalitia) hereby testifying, that whereas they were born in sin, but at
their dissolution went into Abraham's bosom; that they believed, that the day
of a man's departure is better than the day of his birth; Eccles. 7.1.
and though they seemed to be lost to all hopes in the eye of the world, Ps.
116.15.
yet that the death of the righteous is precious in the sight of the Lord. So
the Church of Smyrna in their P. 28. Edit. Usser. and apud Eusebius. lib. 4. c.
15. Gr. 14. Lat.
Epistle concerning S. Polycarp's death, to the rest of the Christian Churches;
We, say they, placed his bones in a fit Repository, where we meeting together,
God will give us ability to solemnize the birthday of this Martyr, with
exultations and rejoycings, that we may both celebrate the memories of former
Martyrs, and prepare and encourage others for the future to the same
undertakings. So Scorpiac. p. 279. E. Edit. Rhenan.
Tertullian says of S. Paul, that he was born at Rome, because there martyred;
and after him the name occurs frequently in Comment. in Job. lib. 3.
Origin, Epist. 37.
Cyprian, and Tom. 3. Homil. 70.
S. Ambrose, but above all in Homil. 129. in S. Cyprian. p. 117. Edit. Raynaud.
Peter Chrysologus, who gives the reason of the name; Natalem ergo Sanctorum
cum auditis, etc. The birthday of a Martyr has its denomination, because the
good man is born not a child of this world, but a son of Heaven, rescued from
labor and temptations, and introduced into the region of rest and quiet, from
a state of misery and torments to the delicacies of the superior Palace, which
do not for a while please the senses, and then disappear, but are firm and
everlasting. And in this was the care of the Church in those dangerous times
exerted, in ordaining Notaries to record the acts of their Martyrs; and this
was all the Ecclesiastical History, till Hegesippus, which they enjoyed. And I
am not a little glad, that I find this acknowledged by the learned and modest
De Re dempt. lib. 1. cap. 13. These. 1. p. 304. Eait. Neostad. 1597.
Hierome Zanchy, that the primitive Votaries used to meet at the Tombs of the
Martyrs on the Anniversaries of their Sufferings, where God wrought many
miracles to testify that those his Servants were in Heaven, and to engage
others to the like resolution; and the Christians paid a veneration to their
Relics. Which reverence De Idol. Romans lib. 1. cap. 9. sect. 1.
Dr. Reynolds does also acknowledge, and allow, and of which I shall more
particularly treat, viz. of the honor done to their dead bodies by God and
men, by Miracles wrought at their Sepulchers, and veneration paid to their
Remains; although I heartily profess my detestation of the superstitious usages
of the Romanists in this point, and their many wheadling impositions on the
deluded Laity; being only willing to adjust a due respect to those Remains of
the Primitive Martyrs, but from my soul abhorring their adoration.

XLII. Of Ignatius To. 5. p. 504.
S. Chrysostom is a sufficient Testimony, how joyfully his bones were received
in every City, and how reverently entertained: The Epist. ubi supr. p. 28.
Church of Smyrna collected the Bones of S. Polycarp, of more value than
precious stones, and purer than Gold, and laid them in a place convenient. So
the ^a^. 6. cap. 29. vide Council. Gangrens. can. 20.
Apostolical Constitutions affirm, that "the Relics of those who dwell with
God are not without their due honor; it was customary in the days of Praepar.
Evang. lib. 13 cap. 7. and Hist. lib. 2. c. 25.
Eusebius to meet at the Monuments where the sacred Tabernacles of the Apostles
and other good men were fixed, there to make their prayers to God, and to honor
those blessed Souls. Heretofore, says Tom. 1. Hom. in Ps. 115. p 319.
S. Basil, the Priests and Nazarites were enjoined not to desile themselves by
a dead body, which if any did, he should be unclean, and must wash his clothes;
but now he that touches the bones of a Martyr, receives some holy influences
from that grace that is in the body, and Ibid. p. 318.
for this cause the Relics of the Saints are honorable: For Ambr. To. 3.
Scr. 92. de Nazar. and Celso. p. 323. Edit. Costert.
why should not the faithful pay respect to that body, which even the Devils
reverence? which they punished in its tortures, but admire in its Sepulcher. I
honor therefore that body which Christ honored, when it was under the Sword,
and which shall reign with him in Heaven. Hom. in Theodor. Mart.
Gregory Nyssen, Adv. Vigdant. and Epist. 53.
Hierom, Epist. 10^.
Augustine, De S. Laurent.
Prudentius, and others, are full to this purpose, but I omit them; being
content to mention, that Vit. Ae^^^. p. 65.
Eunapius derides the Christians for honoring the salita capita, the embalmed
heads of those men, who were, as he spightfully and falsely objects, put to
death for their execrable Villainies, meaning the Martyrs; and it was one of the
methods of cruelty in the Theodoret. lib. 3. cap. 6. ^^^lostorg. lib. 7. cap.
4. Nicepl. 10. c. 3
Apostates time, to prostitute the Relics of the Martyrs. But I will shut up
my Quotations on the subject, with the opinion of the Church of the fifth
Century, out of C. 7.
Gennadius de dogmatibus Ecclesiae, "We believe that the Bodies of the Saints,
but especially the Relics of the holy Martyrs, are to be sincerely honored
as the Members of Christ, and that the Churches called by their Names are to be
approached with piety and devotion, as places dedicated to the Worship of God;
and whosoever thinks otherwise is no Christian, but a follower of Eunomius and
Vigilantius: For why should we stick to honor what God has honored by
Miracles? So the Quaest. 28.
Author of the Questions under the name of Justin Martyr; "The Bodies of the
sacred Martyrs are preservatives against the snares of Satan, and cure
Distempers that have baffled Physic. And thus does Greg. Naz. (...). in
Julian. p. 36. Edit. Montacut. vid. Chrysostom. (...). To. 6. p. 449. de S. Timothee.
the Divine expostulate with Julian. "Do thou not reverence those that were
sacrificed for Christ? Do thou not fear those great Champions? S. John, S.
Peter, and S. Paul, and those that both before and after them were in jeopardy
for the truth? by whom the Demons are dispossessed, and Diseases cured; who
appear in Visions, and foretell futurities; whose bodies, when reverently
touched, do the same things which holy Souls do? do thou not venerate but
dishonor those? And after this manner speak the other Sages of the Church, S.
Tom. 1. Hom. in S. Julit. p. 370.
Basil, and S. Cat (...). 18.
Cyril of Jerusalem, and to omit S. Ambrose, and S. Hierom, I. C. D. l. 25. c.
18.
S. Austin gives several instances of these stupendous productions, but I will
content my self with that excellent passage of L. 1. Ep. 55. Magna and in
exiguo sanctorum pulvere virtus. Paulin. natal. 9. S. Faelic. p. 665.
Isidore the Pelusiot, "(...), etc. If any man be offended that we honor the
Dust of the Bodies of the Martyrs for their great love to God, and admirable
constancy in the Faith, let him ask those that have been cured thereby, and
understand to how many Diseases it has brought remedy; so shall thou not only
not deride what we do, but be encouraged to imitate us. And it is very
observable, that generally the Fathers in this case instance in that particular
of Elisha, (2 Reg. 13.21.) into whose Grave the dead man being thrown revived.
So do the Ubi supr.
Apostolic Constitutions, Ubi supr.
S. Basil, and Ubi supr.
S. Chrysostom, but particularly Catech. 18.
S. Cyril of Jerusalem. The dead man, who was thrown into the Tomb of Elisha,
when he touched the dead body of the Prophet revived, and the dead Body of the
Prophet did the Office of a living Soul, and that which had no life gave life
to him that was departed, it self yet continuing among the dead: And why so?
lest if Elisha should have risen, it might have been attributed only to his
Soul, and to demonstrate, that in the absence of the Soul there is great Virtue
in the Bodies of the Saints, because of those Souls that so long inhabited and
actuated those Bodies: Nor let us fondly distrust the truth, as if this could
not be done, for if handkerchiefs and Aprons, being without the Body, when
touched by the Sick, freed them from their Infirmities, how much more should the
Relics of the Prophet raise the dead?

XLIII. Of these miraculous Efforts at the Tombs of the Martyrs, the case of S.
Babylas is a famous instance, and I mention it the rather, because he was
Patriarch of this very See of Antioch, and was buried in the same place with S.
Ignatius in the Daphnaean Suburb, and that the miracle fell out in that Age of
the Church when the Truth could not want Historians; it being recorded by Hist.
Lib. 10. cap. 35.
Ruffinus, Lib. 3. cap. 9. 10.
Theodoret, Lib. 5. cap. 18, 19.
Sozomen, Lib. 3. cap. 16.
Socrates, and Lib. 1. cap. 16.
Evagrius, and as to the substance of the Story by the Heathens, Orat. (...),
etc. p. 185.
Libanius, Histor. lib. 22.
Marcellinus, and In Misopogon. page 96.
Julian himself; but above all by Orat. 1. and 2. in S. Babylam. Tom. 5. p.
438, etc. and Tom. 8. Orat. 8. de Laudib. S. Pauli. p. 44.
S. Chrysostom, who was born at Antioch, and at this same time bred a Scholar
under Libanius, and but twenty years after the Fact was done relates this story
in a set Oration, and calls all persons to witness whether he spoke truth or
not; and in his second Oration in praise of this Martyr enervates all the
material Passages of his Masters Oration on this subject. Nay, Julian's own
Historian, giving the world an account of the very day that it happened, viz.
the 22th of October, An. Chr. 362. the Story is thus. Baron. Tom. 4. an. 362.
p. 4. and Not. ad Martyrol. Jun. 24.
"The Bones of S. Babylas the Martyr were by the order of Gallus, who was by
Constantius created Caesar, buried at Daphne, near the famous Oracle of Apollo;
which Oracle, Julian, before his fatal expedition into Persia, consulting, as
he did almost all the Tripods of the World, was told, that Apollo could not
give him any Answer, because some persons were buried near that Temple; which
when Julian heard, he commanded the Christians to remove the Bodies of S.
Babylas and his Martyred Companions; which they did with great Pomp and
Ceremony transport into the City, singing the Psalms of David before the
Chariot, and interposing this Versicle between every Verse, Confounded be all
those that worship Graven Images. Neither did the Oracle after this prove
vocal, having only foretold its own Funerals; but in a small time the Temple
was burnt by Fire from Heaven, and the famous Image of Apollo reduced to Ashes,
only says S. Chrysostom a few Pillars and other Ruins were left standing, as
Trophies of the Victory of the Martyr; and though the burning the Temple was
fathered by Julian on the Christians, yet the Priests that kept it, when put on
the Rack, would on all sides confess nothing, but that the Fire fell from
Heaven. Thus is the story attested on all hands, only I cannot assent to ^ol
supr^.
Evagrius, that not the Servants of Christ, but Julian himself was compelled
honorably to Translate the Body from that place, and to erect a Church to his
memory before the Gates of the City, which remained to his time, the Apostate
designing by this act of Counterfeit Piety, that the silenced and baffled
Demon might be set at liberty, while the Divine Providence so ordered it, that
the Martyrs Relics might find a becoming Receptacle. Nor were these wonderful
Operations transacted in a Corner, but in the public view of Mankind, which
Miracles whether wrought immediately by God, or by the Ministry of the
Glorified Souls of the Martyrs, or the help of Angels, neither durst De (...)
Dei lib. 22. cap. 9.
S. Austin, nor dare I pretend to determine.

XLIV. Wonderful was the Zeal of those early days in meeting, and caressing
these sacred remains of their slain Brethren with so much joy and satisfaction,
as this story and S. Chrysostom's Panegyric tell us, but above all Tom. 2.
adv. Vigil. p. 123.
S. Hierom, who condemns Vigilantius for being grieved that the Dust of the
Martyrs was covered with a fine Vail, and not wrapped up in Hair-cloth, or thrown
on a Dunghill, and adds, -- "was the August Constantine guilty of Sacrilege,
when he translated the holy Relics of S. Andrew, S. Luke, and S. Timothy to
Constantinople? -- Or is Arcadius, our present Prince, Sacrilegious, who has
after a long time brought the Bones of the Prophet Samuel out of Judaea into
Thrace? Were all the Bishops Fools that enshrined those scattered Ashes in
Silk, and carried them in a Vessel of Gold? Were the people of all Countries
besotted, who met these Remains in such multitudes that the Troop reached from
Palestine to Chalcedon? So that learned Father.

XLV. Nor are these Ancients, which so earnestly recommend this veneration, but
invincibly averse from any adoration of or prayers to these Martyrs. Thus when
the Christians of Smyrna were about to collect the Ashes of S. Polycarp, by the
instigation of the Jews, the President was inclined to hinder it, lest the
Christians deserting their crucified God should worship Polycarp. "The
miserable wretches, say Polycarp. Martyr. p. 27.
those holy men, being ignorant that it could never enter into our minds to
forsake Christ, that suffered the torments of the Cross for the salvation of
mankind, and bow down to any other as a God; for we adore him who is truly the
Son of God, and we worthily embrace and venerate the Martyrs as his Disciples,
and imitators, for their incomparable love to their Master and Prince, with
whom we expect to be sharers hereafter in Glory, as here we are Scholars to
their Piety. And Epist. 53. ad Ripar. To. 2. p. 120. and Chrysostom. To. 5.
(...). p. 984. (...). Et Aug. de vera relig. cap. 55. non sit religio cultus
hominum mortuorum. -- honorandi ergo sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi
propter religionem, etc.
S. Hierome, who is so hot against Vigilantius, yet denies that we adore Angels
or Archangels, much less dust and ashes. "But we honor the Relics of the
Martyrs, that we may adore him whose Martyrs they are; we honor the Servants
that their honor may redound to their Master, who says, he that receives you,
receives me; for if the Relics of Martyrs be not to be honored, how do we
read, that precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Thus
the Fathers on one hand appropriate to God his due adoration, and on the other
preserve the fame of those admirable persons from being sullyed by the
endeavors of those that with much rashness contemn them that have been slain
for the testimony of Jesus. Irenae. ^ib. 3. cap. 20.
"For at that time when their blood shall be required, and they made partakers
of glory, tum a Christo confundentur omnes, qui inhonoraverunt eorum martyrium,
then shall all those be confounded by Christ, that have defamed their
sufferings. And of this mind also is Exercitat. in Ep. ad Trall. cap. 14. p.
46, 47.
Vedelius at Geneva.

XLVI. Thus we see the Fathers are far from giving any honor peculiar to God
to Saints or Martyrs, they living in an age, when the traditional account of
those things could not be easily interrupted, or the faith of men imposed upon
by fabulous and legendary Relations of Relics, which have been multiplied
after a prodigious manner by the Church of Rome, to the scandalizing of many
sober men of their own Communion. So that could I be ascertained, where the
Ashes of S. Ignatius were really deposited, I would respect and reverence them,
and kneel down before his Tomb, and remember his courage and love to God, and
thank my Savior for so enabling him, and beg the same or the like assistances,
for my self; but before I should worship his Head that is enshrined in the
Jesuits College at Rome, or any of his Bones at Naples, or elsewhere reserved,
I must be persuaded to desert my present belief and veneration which I have for
the sacred Oracles, and the Writings of the ancient Church. I have been so
large in this, because I know that the Name Relic has been a Mormo and
Bugbear to affright many conscientious men from entertaining Orthodox Notions,
lest they should comply with Popish Opinions. And now I have done with S.
Ignatius, when I have told my Reader, that there was another Martyr of this
Name in S. Cyprian's time, circ. an. 250. and after him another, circ. an. 860.
whose Name is in the Martyrologies among the Confessors; for he was Patriarch
of Constantinople, and honored with the other Name of this Prelate of Antioch,
(...), Novus, or junior Deifer.

S. Chrysostom 's Panegyric on the holy Martyr S. Ignatius, who having been
carried to Rome, and there martyred, was from thence brought back again to
Antioch. December. 20.
To. 5. p. 498. etc. Edit. Savil.
'THE splendid and magnificent among Feasters make their Treats of many and
diverse Courses, at the same time testifying the Plenty of their Houses, and the
Welcome of their Acquaintance: So the Liberality of the Holy Spirit affording
us a Demonstration of its Domestic Power, and Munificence toward Gods
Friends, sets before us frequent and various Tables of Martyrs. Lately a very
young Girl and unacquainted with Marriage, the blessed Martyr Pelagia,
entertained you with abundance of delight: To day this holy and generous Martyr
Ignatius has succeeded the Feast of that Virgin: The Persons are diverse, but
the Table the same; their Combats different, but their Crown one; their
Contentions various, but their Trophies the same. For in the Heathen Games,
seeing their Exercises concerned the body, only men have admittance; but here
where the soul is in the whole Engagement, the Theater is open, and the Race
set before either Sex: Neither are men alone listed in this service, lest the
Female Sex taking refuge in the weakness of their Natures, might seem to have a
plausible Apology; nor do Women only exert their Courage, lest the men should
be ashamed, but among both sorts many are called forth to the Combat, and many
Crowned, that thou may learn by their actions, that Gal. 3.28.
in Christ Jesus there is neither Male nor Female; that neither Sex, nor
weakness of body, nor age, nor any other such thing, can hinder those that run
the holy Race, if an ingenuous cheerfulness, and an exalted will, and an ardent
and fiery fear of God be firmly settled in our minds; for this cause Virgins,
Women, and Men, old and young, Servants, and Freemen; every degree, every Age
and Sex strip themselves for these Combats; nor were they in the least hurt,
because they brought with them brave resolutions to undertake these
Engagements. This season therefore calls us to a narration of the famous acts
of this blessed man; but my reason is disturbed and full of tumult, not knowing
where to begin, what to speak to next, or wherewith to conclude, such a
multitude of praises do surround us, and we suffer in the same manner, as he
that enters into a (...).
Garden, and sees many a Bed of Roses, and many a Violet, and no less number of
Lillies, and other pretty Ornaments of the Spring, various and different in
their Shapes and Colors, is troubled about the first that he sees, and then
about the second, every thing that he looks on requiring him to fasten his Eyes
there: So is it with us that enter into the spiritual Garden of the
Archievements of Ignatius, where we see not the fading Flowers of the Spring,
but variety of the Fruits of the holy Spirit in this great man's soul, that we
are perplexed and full of doubtings, not being assur^d to which we should
incline our thoughts; every particular thing which we have seen in this
excellent person withdrawing us from the consideration of any other of his
Virtues, and using a pleasant violence to the Eyes of the soul, to engage them
to look only on its peculiar beauties: For behold he governed this Church among
us generously, and with the same exactness that Christ requires; for what that
great Bishop of souls made the chiefest Maxim and Canon of Episcopal Regiment,
that did he demonstrate in his actions, and hearing Christ say, Joh. 11.14.
that the good Shepherd lays down his life for the Sheep, with a great deal of
courage he offered his for his Flock; he truly converst with the Apostles, and
by their Ministry was baptized: What an excellent man then must we needs think
him to be, who was brought up with them, and lived in their company, and was
made a partaker both of their (...).
common and mystical discourses, and was by them thought worthy of this
Government? Again, the time is at hand that requires fortitude, and a soul that
overlooks all present things, burning with the divine love, and preferring
things that are not seen, to those that do appear. And with the same ease he
divested himself of mortality, as a man puts off his Clothes. What therefore
shall I first treat of? his proficiency in Learning under the Apostles, which
appeared in all his actions? or his scorn of this present life? or his exact
virtue, with which he managed the Government of his Church? which shall we
first praise, the Martyr, or the Bishop, or the Apostle? For the holy Spirit's
liberality having wove it in this manner, put on his holy head this triple, or
rather this manifold Crown; for if any one should accurately unfold every one
of these Chaplets, he shall find new Coronets budding out to us.

'But with your favor we will first enter on the praise of his Episcopal
Authority, nor does this seem only to be one Crown: Let us therefore unfold it
in our Discourse, and you shall see two, three, or more arising out of it. For
I do not only admire this man, that he was thought worthy of such a Dignity,
but that he was ordained to it by those holy persons, and that the hands of the
blessed Apostles were laid on his sacred head; this is greatly conducive to his
praise, not because more Excellencies did accompany this Grace from above, nor
only because they procured a more abundant efficacy of the Spirit to descend on
him, but because they bore witness to all those virtues in him, which could be
in a man. And how this comes to pass I will describe, S. Paul writing to Titus
(and when I name Paul, I do not only speak of him, but of Peter, and James, and
John, and the whole College of Apostles; for as in a (...).
Lute the Strings are diflerent, but one harmony; so in this Quire of Apostles,
the persons are diverse, but the Doctrine the same, because they had the same
Master, the holy Spirit, that made the impulse on their souls; and this S. Paul
means, 1 Cor. 15.11.
when he says, Whether it be they or I, so we preach) this same Apostle
therefore writing to Titus, Th. 1.7. etc.
and showing what manner of person a Bishop ought to be, says, A Bishop must
be blameless, as the Steward of God, not self-willed, not apt to be angry, not
given to Wine, no striker, not covetous, but a lover of hospitality, a lover of
good things, sober, just, holy, temperate, holding fast the faithful Word,
which he has been taught, that he may be able to exhort others by sound
Doctrine, and to reprove Contradictors. And writing to Timothy about the same
matter, he thus speaks; 1 Timothy ^.
He that desires a Bishopric desires a good work; a Bishop therefore must be
blameless, the Husband of Wife, watchful sober, modest, a lover of H^
spitality, able to teach. See thou what emin^nt Virtues he requires in a
Bishop For as an excellent Painter, tempering diverse Colors, being ready to
draw the exact Form of a King, sets about his work with all imaginable
accuracy, that all persons that would imitate and transcribe it, might have an
exact Pattern: So the blessed Paul, as if he were drawing a Prince's Picture,
and adorning such an Exemplar, mixing the several Colors of Virtue, has
delineated to us the perfect Characters of Episcopacy, that every one that
attains to this honor, looking on this Image, might order all things belonging
to himself with the like circumspection. I will therefore speak it boldly, that
the blessed Ignatius had accurately imprinted all this Virtue on his Soul,
being innocent and blameless, neither morose, nor angry, nor a Drunkard, nor a
Quarreller, but without any love of Contention, or love of Money, being just,
holy, temperate, and holding fast the faithful word of Doctrine; being
watchful, sober and modest, and Master of all the other Virtues that S. Paul
requires. And what proof of this say some? the same persons that spoke these
things ordained him; nor could those that with so much exactness advise others
to make trial of them that should ascend to the Episcopal Throne, themselves
perfunctorily do this act; for unless they had seen all these Virtues planted
in the Soul of this Martyr, they would never have ordained him to the managery
of this Dignity; for they certainly knew what danger threatened those that made
such Ordinations slightly, and as it might happen. And this also does the same
S. Paul again show, writing to the same Timothy, bidding him, 1 Timothy 6.32.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, nor partake of other men's sins. What say
thou? Has another man sinned, and do I partake of his Crime and his
Punishments? Yes truly, he that adds Authority to Wickedness, even as when one
puts a Sword into the hands of a Madman, whatsoever Murder the Frantic person
shall do, he that gave the Sword shall answer the Crime: So if any should
confer the Power that arises from this Dignity, on a man that lives wickedly,
he pulls down all the Fire of his wicked and bold undertakings on his own head;
for he that gives the root, is without doubt the cause of all things that
spring from it. Do thou see how this double Crown of his Episcopacy has
hitherto appeared, and that the eminency of those that ordained him has added
luster to his dignity, while (...).
they bear witness to the Universality of his Virtues? Will you that I shall
unfold another Crown to you, that buds from this? Let us reflect on the time
when he was admitted to this sublime place; for it is not the same thing to
govern the Church now, and then; as it is not an equal undertaking to journey
in a beaten way, and such as has been well trod by abundance of Travelers,
and now at first: open a new Path, and make that passab^^ that is full of Pits
and Rocks, and pestered with wild Beasts, and that never before entertained a
Traveller. For now by the Grace of God no peril threatens the Bishops, but
every where there is a profound Peace, and we all enjoy serenity, the word of
Godliness being made known to the ends of the World, and our Governors
preserving the Faith with diligence; but then there were none of these things,
but which way soever a man did look, there were Precipices, and Gulphs, and
Wars, and Quarrels, and Dangers; Rulers and Kings, People, and Cities, and
Nations, their acquaintance, and strangers, all took counsel against the
Christians; nor was this only then terrible, but much more so, because many of
the Believers (as those that in this Age first entertain new Doctrines) stood
in need of abundance of condescension, for they were yet weak and very often
supplanted; and this was that which did no less, yea much more grieve their
Teachers, than all their Heathen Adversaries Assaults. For the Consultations
and Persecutions of (...).
the Heathens afforded them abundance of pleasure, upon the account of the hope
of the rewards laid up for them: for this reason the Act. 5.41.
Apostles returned from the Council rejoicing that they were beaten; and S.
Paul proclaims it with a loud Voice, saying, Col. 1.24.
I rejoice in my sufferings, and he every where boasts of his Afflictions; but
the Wounds of those of the Family, and the failings of their Bre^^^en, would
not suffer them so much as to breathe, but as one that is burdened with a F
(...). Via. Boisii Not^in Loc.
massy Chain, this sat heavy on the nock of their Souls, and distracted them
continually. Hear therefore how S. Paul, that so glories in his Afflictions,
how bitterly he grieves and is macerated by reason of those Domestic
Offenders? 2 Cor. 11.29.
Who is there weak and I am not weak? Who is there scandalized, and I burn not?
and again, C. 12.20.
I am afraid, lest when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and shall
be found of you such as ye would not; and after a few words, lest God should
humble me when I come again unto you, and that I shall mourn over many, which
have heretofore sinned, and have not repented of their uncleanness, and
lasciviousness, and wickedness which they have done; and every whe^^ thou see
him in Tears, and full of Lamentations (...).
for the Household of Faith, and fearful, and trembling always upon the account
of Believers. For as we admire a Pilot, not that he can preserve the Passengers
in a calm Sea, when the Ship is driven by a fair wind, but if he can steer the
Vessel with all manner of security when the Sea rages, and the Waves swell, and
the Passengers are mutinous, and a great Tempest assaults them within and
without: So might we think it just, that those that then were ordained over the
Church, should be amazed and astonished much more than those that now govern
it, because that they met with great oppositions within and without, and the
Plant of Faith was then more tender, and needed more care. Because as a
new-born-Babe, (...), Laity.
the major part of the Church, wanted abundance of Providential managery, and
some extraordinary wise person to nurse it. And that you may the more plainly
learn of what Crowns they were worthy, to whom the Church then was entrusted,
and what labor and danger it was to undertake such a work in its Beginnings
and Infancy, and first to enter on such an employ I will produce to you the
Testimony of Christ that confirms these things, and establishes this Maxim of
ours; for seeing many persons coming unto him, and being willing to convince
his Apostles that the Prophets had labored more than they, he says, Joh. 4.38.
other men have labored, and ye have entered upon their labors; certainly the
Apostles labored more than the Prophets, but because they were the first that
sowed the word of Piety, and attracted the Souls of men, yet rude, to the
embraces of the Truth, he gives them this Testimony of taking more pains; for
certainly it is not, it cannot be the same thing to come after other Teachers,
and to instruct, as first of all himself to sow the Seeds; for that which is
already meditated on, and is made customary, does easily become plausible; but
that which is first heard of disturbs the intellect of the Hearers, and creates
much business to the Instructors. For this even at Athens puzzled the Auditory,
and for t^^^ reason they disdained S. Paul, crying out (...) saying, Act. 20.
Thou bring strange things (...) our hearing: for if even now the Government
of the Church does create great trou^^^ and care to those that do manage it,
consider how the labor was twice as much, treble, yea abundantly more, when
dangers and contentions, and lyings in wait, and fear were their daily
entertainments. We cannot, we are not able to express the difficulties, which
the Saints of that Age underwent, he only knows them that has past through
them.

'I will also speak of the fourth Crown, arising from his Office, and what is
that? the oversight of this Country of ours: It is a trouble to command 150 men
only, but to be appointed over such a City, and 200000 people in it, of what
Virtue and Wisdom must you suppose this to be a demonstration! For as in a
Camp, the most experienced Captains are preferred to the command of the Royal
Guards, and the fullest Troops: So is it also in Cities, the most experienced
of Governors are also entrusted with the greatest and most populous. Moreover
great was Gods care of this City, as appears by this Fact, for he commanded
Peter (...).
the Ecumenical Apostle, to whom he entrusted the Keys of Heaven, whom he
permitted to order all things, to spend a long time here; so that our City was
to him instead of the whole World: And since I remembered Peter, I see a fifth
Crown hence made up; for Ignatius is he, that after him succeeded to this
Government: for as when a man fits a great stone for a Foundation, he is
careful to suit it with another like it, unless he intends to shake the
Building, and make it infirm; so when Peter was about to go hence, the Spirit
introduced another Teacher equivalent to him, lest the Edifice that was begun
should be impaired by the simpleness of his Successor. We have now reckoned
five Crowns, from the Grandeur of his Employment, from the Eminency of his
Ordainers, from the dangerousness of the time, from the largeness of the City,
and from the virtue of him that resigned the Bishopric to him. After we have
made up all these, we might add a sixth, and a seventh, and more Crowns. But
that we may not spend all our time in this one discourse of his Episcopal
Office, we will now make a Panegyric on the Martyr, and spend the rest on his
Combat.

'A dangerous Persecution was stirred up against the Church, and as if a cruel
Tyranny had possessed the Earth, all persons were snatched from the middle of the
Marketplace, being accused of nothing that was absurd, but that abandoning
their Errors they pursued after Godliness, that they deserted the Worship of
Devils, and acknowledged the true God, and adored his only begotten Son, and
for what things they ought to have been Crowned, and admired, and honored, for
those things were all that received the Faith punished, and worn out with a
thousand miseries, but above all, the Bishops of the Churches; for the Devil
being crafty and cruel to contrive such mis^^^ievous designs, hoped that if he
could remove the Shepherds, he should easily be able to scatter the Flocks; but
he that catches the wise in their own craft, intending to convince him, that
men do not govern his Churches, but himself every where rules Believers,
permitted this to be done, that when these persons were taken away, Satan might
see, that the Interests of Piety were not lessened, nor the word of the Gospel
quenched, but more increased and advane'd; and that he and all his Assistants
might learn by these Actions, that our Concerns are not Humane, but that our
Doctrine has its Root above from Heaven; and that it is God that every where
governs his Churches; and where he engages, it never happens that he is
overcome: Nor did the Devil only contrive this mischief, but another no less
terrible than this, for he not only promoted the slaughter of the Bishops in
those Cities, over which they presided, but hurrying them in (...) strange
places, there cut them off; and he did this, at once endeavoring to deprive
them of all necessaries, and withal hoping to wear them out, and make them weak
by the toil of their Journeys; and thus he dealt with this blessed person, for he
called him from this our City unto Rome, (...).
fitting him a Course to run forward and backward, expecting by the length of
the way, and the time spent in it to prostitute and subdue his resolution, not
knowing that having Jesus a Companion and Fellow-Wanderer in his Travel, he
would grow more vigorous, and give a more plentiful demonstration of his
strength received from him, and more and more diligently instruct the Churches:
For the Cities that lay in the way running to meet him, strengthened this
Champion, and sent him away with a large Viaticum, helping him by their prayers
and (...).
messages; nor did they receive ordinary Confirmation, seeing this Martyr court
his death with the cheerfulness that became him that was called to the
participation of a Celestial Kingdom; and they learned by his Actions and his
readiness and alacrity, that it was not Death to which he made haste, but a
Pilgrimage and a change of State, and an Ascension into Heaven; and Teaching
these things in every City, both by his discourses and example, he departed;
and as it happened to the Jews, when binding Paul and sending him to Rome, they
thought they had sent him to his Death, while they sent him an Instructor to
their Countrymen that dwelt there: The same thing happened to Ignatius with
some advantage, for he departed from us a wonderful Teacher, not only to them
that dwelt at Rome, but to all the Cities that lay in the way, persuading to
despise this present life, and not to reck. on of the things that are seen, but
to love futurities, to look up unto Heaven, and not to be disheartened at any of
the sadnesses that happen on this side the Grave; these and many other such
things he taught them by his demeanor as he traveled, as it were a Sun arising
from the East, and running toward the West, or rather something more
beautiful, for the Sun runs his race above, shedding a sensible light; but
Ignatius out-shone him below, communicating the intellectual light of Learning
to Souls: the Sun as he draws toward the West is hid, and speedily gives place
to night; but Ignatius departing toward the West shone there more brightly,
and did good in a higher measure to all persons that he met; for into
whatsoever City he came, he taught that City (...).
to become Christian: and for this reason God ordered, that there his life
should terminate, that the end of such a great man might become (...).
a Lecture of Piety to all that dwelt at Rome; for you by the Grace of God did
not want any further conviction, being rooted in Faith; but the Romans by
reason of the notorious Impiety that was there, needed some greater help: for
this reason both Peter and Paul, and with them our Martyr, were all sacrificed
there, that by their Blood they might purge that City, that was polluted with
the Blood shed to Idols, and withal that they might by their Actions give a
Public demonstration of the Resurrection of the crucified Christ; persuading
the Inhabitants of that great City, that it was impossible they should with so
much satisfaction despise this present life, were they not fully persuaded,
that they should afterward ascend to the crucified Jesus, and see him in
Heaven; for this is the greatest proof o^ the Resurrection, that Christ being
slain should after his death show forth so much Power, as to persuade living
men to postpone Country, and House, and Friends, and Relations, and Life it
self to the Confession of him, and greedily to choose Scourges, and Dangers, and
Death it self, before these present voluptuous enjoyments; these were the
Achievements, not of a dead man, nor of a person consigned to his Grave, but of
one that is risen from the dead and lives; (...).
for is it not very strange, that while he was alive all his Apostles that
conversed with him, having their Courage impaired by their Fear, betrayed their
Master, and flying, deserted him; but as soon as he was dead, that then not
only Peter and Paul, but even Ignatius that never saw him, nor ever was
Partaker of the Charms of his Conversation, should be endowed with so much
constancy as to offer up his life for him? that the Inhabitants of Rome, might
learn perfectly all these things, God conceded that there this holy man should
end his days. And that this was the reason, I will evince from the manner of
his Death, for he was not executed without the Walls in a Cave, or the Prison,
or in a Corner, but in the midst of the Theater, the whole City sitting and
looking down upon him, he underwent his Martyrdom, the wild Beasts being let
out upon him, that in the sight of all men, erecting a Trophee against the
Devil, he might make all the Spectators ardently in love with his Combats,
while ^e did not only dye with much Generosity and Courage, but with much
Complaisance and Delight; not as one (...).
that must be driven out of this life, but as one that was invited to a better
and more spiritual life, so willingly did he behold the Beasts: And whence is
this manifest? from the Words which dying he spoke; for when he heard that this
sort of Punishment was appointed him, he said, Oh that I could enjoy those
Beasts; for they which love as he did, whatsoever they suffer for those whom
they love, they undergo it with pleasure; neither do they seem to have their
desires satisfied, but when the undertaking becomes more difficult; so
therefore did it fall out with this holy man, for he made haste to imitate the
Apostles, not only in their Death, but in their readiness; and hearing that
when they were beaten, they went about with joy, he would emulate his Masters,
not only in their end, but in their joy too; for this reason did he say of the
Beasts, (...).
I long for them, and thought that the Mouths of such Creatures were more
gentle than the Tongue of the Tyrant; and with much reason; for the Tongue of
the Tyrant called him to Hell; but the mouths of the wild Beasts carried him to
an (Heavenly) Kingdom. After that therefore he there ended his life, or rather
went thence unto Heaven, he returned to us a Crowned Champion. For this also
was an Act of the Divine Providence, to bring him back again to us, and to
distribute the Martyr among the Cities. Rome received his Blood when it was
shed, and you are honored with his Relics; you enjoyed his Episcopal Care,
and they his Martyrdom: They saw him striving, and overcoming, and crowned; and
you have him with you continually. God separated him from you for a little
while, and has again be stowed him on you with greater honor; and as
Borrowers pay back what they have received with Interest, so God, making use of
this Honorable Treasure for a while at a distance from you, and exhibiting him
to that other City (Rome) has again restored him to you with greater pomp. For
ye sent him forth a Bishop, but ye receive him a Martyr; ye sent him forth with
Prayers, but ye receive him with Crowns; and not you only, but all the Cities
that lie betwixt Antioch and Rome; for how were they affected, do you imagine,
when they saw the Relics carried by; what genuine pleasures did overflow
their Souls; how did they rejoice, and with what Congratulations every where
meet this Conqueror! For as a generous Wrestler, having thrown all his
Antagonists, goes off the Stage with much splendor and applause, and is
triumphantly received by the Spectators, who suffer him not to tread on the
ground, but aloft on their Shoulders carry him home, filling the Air with a
thousand Encomia of his Achievements; so did all the Cities from the
Metropolis of the Empire to this place entertain this holy man; and carrying
him on their Shoulders, transported him to this City, making Panegyricks on the
Conqueror, praising the Combatant, and langhing at the Devil, because his
Sophistry was turned to his own disadvantage; and the same thing befell him
which he thought to have done to our Martyr. In that time of his Translation he
brought help and instruction to all those places; and since then unto this
present has enriched your City: And as a lasting Treasure, drawn out every day
and yet never spent, makes all that have recourse to it more happy and rich: ^o
does our blessed Ignatius send home all that come to him, filling them with
Eulogies, with boldness, with strong resolutions, and much courage. We do not
only therefore go to him to day, but every day; gathering from him spiritual
fruits: for certainly he that comes hither by Faith, shall infallibly reap
signal benefit; for not only the bodies but the Sepulchers of the Saints are
filled with spiritual Graces; for if this happened to Elisha, that when a dead
man touched his Bones, the bonds of death were loosed, and the man again
entered on the enjoyments of life; how much rather now, when the Grace is more
copious, and the Essicacy of the Spirit greater, may that man which touches
this Depository with Faith, draw thence abundance of strength? For, for this
reason has God permitted us the Relics of Saints, being willing to induce us
to the same Zeal with them, and to afford us a certain Harbor and secure help
against all the Evils that every day surround us. Wherefore I beseech you all,
if any man be weak or under any Distemper, if any man be grieved, or under any
other necessitous Circumstances that concern this life, or troubled at the
weight of his Transgressions, let him come hither with Faith, and put off all
these Encumbrances, and he shall return with much satisfaction, having
disburthen'd his Conscience at this very sight only; but in an higher measure
is it peculiarly necessary that those who are exempted from such miseries
should come hither: Is any Man's mind full of Serenity; is he honorable,
powerful, and full of a holy confidence in God? Neither let him slight this
advantage; for coming hither, and beholding this holy man, his good things
shall dwell constantly with him, if he be persuaded to take an account of the
State of his own Soul, by comparing it with the brave Achievements of this
excellent person, and suffer not his mind to be transported with Pride at the
remembrance of his performing of his Duty: For it is no small matter, for Men
in Prosperity, not to be puffed up with the remembrance of their serene Days,
and happy Enjoyments, but to understand how to bear moderately their successes:
so that this Treasure is useful, this place of refuge fit for all persons; to
those that are troubled, that they may be delivered from their Temptations; to
those that are happy, that they may be confirmed in their state of felicity; to
those that are sick, that they may recover their health; and to those that are
well, that they may not relapse. All which things having spoken, let us set the
greater value on this acquaintance full of pleasure, full of delight, that here
we rejoicing and trading for Heaven together, may be able there to dwell in the
same Tabernacle with these Saints, and be their Fellow-commoners in Glory, by
the assistance of their Prayers, through the Mercy and Compassion of Jesus
Christ, to whom be Honor, with the Father and Holy Spirit, now and for ever,
Amen.

THE LIFE OF S. Justin THE MARTYR.
I. AMong the Notices which Mr. H. furnishes us with of this Reverend
Philosopher and Martyr, he begins,. 1. p. 22. as the Laws of History require,
with his Birth and Descent, and tells us from his own Apolog. 2. p. 53.
Apology, That he was born at Sichem or Neapolis, as the Romans called it, in
the Province of Samaria, and was the Son of Priscus Bacchius. For the place of
his Nati^ity I am of the same mind, but for his Father's Name, must profess my
dissent, believing with Apud Dr. Cove 's Life of S. Justin. Sect. 14.
Sylburgius, Apud Dr. Cove 's Life of S. Justin. Sect. 14.
Valesius, and the Learned Apud Dr. Cove 's Life of S. Justin. Sect. 14.
Dr. Cave, that Priscus was his Father, and Bacchius his Grandfather; for
whereas this very Martyr, in the Preface to his Apology, (and out of it
Eusc^ius) calls himself Justin, the Son ((...)) of Priscus, the Son of
Bacchius, who were of Flavia Neapolis, a City of Syria Palestine, there is a
plain distinction made between Priscus and Bacchius, the plural Article ((...))
implying them to have been two different persons; though I must acknowledge,
that the words have been so mistook by ^^^al. v. just. M.
S. Jerome and his Translator Sophronius, and the learned Cod. (...) ^. 163.
Photius, to omit Joseph Scaliger, and Christopherson, in his Translation of
Eusebius, and other Moderns; and the reason of so many learned men's falling
into the same Error, looks so lovely in the words of our Martyr, concerning
the old Philosophers, that I cannot but subjoin them. Just. in. Dial.
c^m^^^^^en.
It was the good hap of those that first fortunately fall on the discovery of
this sort of learning, and thereby grew famous, that all that succeeded them
thought it enough to walk in their steps, never being sollicitous whether they
were the Paths of Truth, only admiring their great courage and temperance, and
strange Notions, and thinking every Sentence Oracle that dropped from the mouth
of such an Instructor. We must therefore take care when we hear Th^^^vid.
Scalig in Ens^^. (...) M. ^. CLVII, p. 201.
S. Justin calling the Sam^ritans his Countrymen, that we think him not a
Samuritan either by Blood or Religion, but only that he was of one of those
Colonies, wherein were intermixed both Jews and Gentiles, and both under the
name of Samaritans; Fellow-Citizens they were of his, but no nearer akin. It
was therefore an Error of Epiphanius to say, That he w^^ converted from being
a Samaritan to the Christian Faith; for it appears by his own account of his
Conversion, that he was not circumcised, nor a Proselyte to the Mosaic
Constitutions, as the Samaritans were, but one that sought Truth, not in the
Schools of the Prophets, but the Philosophers; and perchance this may be a
reason of his ignorance in the Hebrew Tongue, which afterward discovered it
self in his Derivations of Pascha and Satanas, etc. and his constant using the
Translation of the Seventy; but such Errors in Etymology are too mean to
impair the Reputation of so venerable an Ancient, who was, as Apud Phot. Cod.
(...). p. 488.
Methodius styles him, a Man not much junior to the Apostles, either in Age or
Excellencies.

II. Mr. H. next proceeds to an account of the means that were instrumental to
his conversion; and though I could well like the menage of such a Story, and be
glad that it had been promoted by the intervention of an Angel; yet I cannot
assent that the old man spoken of was of the number of those blessed Spirits, and
the Philosopher's better Genius, since he is described by S. Justin himself as
an aged person only, though unknown, who met him while he was walking in a
melancholy mood by the Sea side; and after he had given him his advice,
departed from him immediately, not vanished, as Mr. H. affirms. So that I am apt
to think him one of the holy Confessors of that age, who either for his greater
privacy in his Contemplations, or for fear of the last efforts of Adrian's
Persecution, that then was not fully ceast, or by the direction of an Angel, as
Philip was sent to the Eunuch, came thither to promote the making this sage man
a Christian. For as to the argument from the case of S. Austin, that was not
done by a Vision, but a Voice only: such as the Greek Aug. (...), etc.
Menaeon tells us befell Titus at Crete; Titus, thou must rescue thy soul from
this place, and wander into some other Country, for this sort of Learning that
thou now followest will not profit thee. And I think our Author is the first
man that makes this an extraordinary Vision; for there are Apud Dr. Cave ubi
supr. sect. 2. p. 141, 142.
those that stick not to say, that this was only a Philosophic and imaginary
Drama, after the method of Socrates, and the succeeding School of Plato, who
discourst by way of Dialogue, not that there was any such thing really done,
but that he might the better entertain Trypho with the manner of his being made
a Christian. But I rather incline to the first opinion, which abating this
mistake, is pertinently applied by Mr. H. to the subject in hand; and so is
what succeeds till Sect. 2. p. 27. where he tells us, that S. Justin, and
Aristides, and Quadratus tendered their Apologies about the same time to the
Emperor Adrian; whereas it is as clear as what is writ with a Sunbeam, that
whereas the Vindications of Christianity, managed with so much learning and
zeal by Quadratus and Aristides, were presented to the Emperor Adrian circ.
an. 123. and about the sixth or seventh year of his Reign, that Eusebius. lib. 4.
(...) 8.
Justin was a Heathen long after, till the time of the Consecration of
Antinous, which was not till circ. an. 132. and that his first Apology was writ
long after that, and dedicated not to Adrian, but his Successor Antoninus Pius
(and this also Mr. H. having forgotten his former Assertion, affirms p. 28. and
31.) and I am apt to think that the Error arose from a cursory and
inconsiderate view of the Title of that Apology, where the Name Aelius Adrianus
is added to that of Antoninus Pius; for thus it runs; (...), etc. To the
Emperor Titus Aelius Adrianus Antoninus Pius Caesar Augustus, etc. In which,
as was usual, the present Emperor annexed the name of his great Patron, who had
adopted him, to his own, as an additional honor to his many other Titles: And
we may think that the same haste made Contr. Tatian. haer. 46. p. 171.
Epiphanius affirm, that Justin suffered his Martyrdom under Adrian, whereas it
is on all hands conceded, that he dyed for the Testimony of Jesus under M.
Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus, and Lucius Aelius Verus.

III. From this we pass to Sect. 3. where the number of the Martyrs Books are
reckoned, what are genuine, what spurious, what extant, what not; and p. 29. we
are told, that his two Volumes against the Gentiles, which are mentioned by
Eusebius, S. Hierome, and others, are lost; whereas they are certainly the same
with his Paraenesis ad Graecos, and Oration ad Graecos (sive Elenchus) which are
p. 30. acknowledged to be extant. His ^mment on Genesis in the Centurists, is
no (...) than the Comment on the Hexameron ^^entioned by Anasasius Sinatia; his
Comment on the Apocalypse, no other than an Explanation of the Chiliast Opinion
according to the Scheme of that Apostle's Prophetic Vision, (or if a distinct
Book, I suppose it to have been the Tractate de Resurrectione Carnis, mentioned
by Damascene) of which sort of make was the Comment on the Revelation, which
Biblioth. lib. 4.
Sixtus Senensis says was writ by Irenaeus; and in truth (whatever Mr. H. p.
61. say to the contrary) they are both joined by Catal. v. Johannes.
S. Hierome; for I think it will be hard to prove a Commentator on Scripture
ancienter than Origin, or on that part of it than Aretas; the Book it self of
the Revelation in S. Justin's time being hardly allowed a place in the Canon,
and the Question not decided who was its Author, whether S. John the Apostle,
or another John an Asian Presbyter, buried also at Ephesus in a distinct Tomb
from the Evangelist. In the same page he reckons a Comment of this Martyr on
Dionysius the Areopagite his Eccles. Hierarch. out of Possevines Apparatus, and
that among the number of his genuine Tractates not extant; but I cannot but
wonder, that he allows that counterfeit to be so ancient, as here to make him
older than Justin Martyr, and p. 94. than Clemens of Alexandria, asserting
after another Jesuit (Halloix) that Clemens writing obscurely imitated
Dionysius of Athens; whereas all sober Writers, that give the spurious S.
Dennis the greatest Antiquity, make him not elder than the fourth Century, and
generally agree that the (...) Father was Apollinaris; so Laurentius Valla^
Sirmondus, Petavius, Launoy, etc. among the Romanists, and Gerh. Vossius,
Usher, and Casaubon among the Protestants, especially (...) pist. ^^ part. 1.
c. 10.
Bishop Pearson, Dr. Answ. to Cressy's Apolog. chap. 2. Sect. 17. etc.
Stillingfleet, and Life of S. Dennis Sect. 13, 14, etc. p. 73, 74, etc.
Dr. Cave, to omit Daillee, that has undertook the task of set purpose. P. 34.
he accounts the Book De Monarchia, now extant, not genuine, because it differs
in the Title from his Tract de Monarchia Dei, mentioned by the Ancients; but
there are greater Differences than this in the Titles of Books among the
Fathers; and for his Argument, that he promises in that Book to fetch
Testimonies from the Scriptures and Heathen Aut^ors; it is to me manifest, That
the Book is imperfect, and by that means not able to speak for its self. His
Treatise entitled, Eversio quorundam Aristotelicorum dogmatum, is allowed to
be genuine by that excellent Judge of Antiquity Cod.(...). p. 162.
Photius (under this Title, (...),) which he calls, Disputations full of
rational Arguings, Vehemence, and freedom, and is not that other Book which he
there mentions ((...)) the same with his Questiones ad Orthodoxos? and if so,
the Book has fallen into foul hands that have foisted in many passages; it
being apparent, that the Book, as now it is written, has not a few places in
it, that relate to the Arian Heresy and matters of the third Saeculum, and by
that Interpolator is it, that Irenaeus and Origin are there quoted, which could
not have been done by the Author, who was Martyred above forty years before
Irenaeus's Death, and above twenty before Origin was born; herein therefore I
assent to Mr. H. but must profess my dissent from his Deduction. p. 38. that
therefore the Doctrine of the lawful use of the Cross, of the Virgin Mary's
being without Sin, keeping Relics, that Baptism is necessary to Salvation,
etc. are unsound and Popish; which Doctrines we will severally and apart
consider.

IV. The Opinion of the Virgin Mary's being without sin we explode, as a
Novelty unknown to the purer Antiquity; her being free from Actual
Transgression was first talked of doubtingly by De nature. and great. c. 36.
S. Austin; but that she was untainted with Original Sin has been the late
Dream of the Franciscans, and since of the Jesuits; and that the Fathers
universally thought otherwise, (...) may see their Sentiments quoted by
Respons. ad Albert. Pium.
Erasmus and Loc. Theol. l. 7. c. 1. p. 348. etc.
Melchior Canus, and I find In Romans 5. disput. 51. p. 468.
Salmeron himself confessing, that some men quote two hundred, some three
hundred Fathers against this Opinion of the immaculate Conception.

V. The lawfulness of keeping and honoring Relics we have already made good;
the worshipping of them, we, with the Primitive Church, disown: As to Religious
Vows, whatever some great men since the Reformation, in opposition to the
Romish Church, may have opin'd, he that knows that the Orders of Hermites and
Anchorites were an institution of the third Century, and that the Fathers
frequently distinguished between Precepts Evangelical (to which all men a^^
bound) and Counsels Evangelical, Vide Mon^^^. Appel. Cas^^ cap. 15, 15, 17.
or Perfections to which only those are obliged that will more strictly
testify their Devotion, Self-denial, and Mortification, cannot doubt of their
allowance of making new engagements beside the General Vow in Baptism, a
Practice in truth customary among Men of all Religions, Christian, Jewish,
Mohammedan, or Heathen, and I would willingly learn why it should not be as
lawful to vow under the New as the Old Testament, in things not commanded, as
well as in what is enjoined? since Vows are no part of the Divine Service, but
the manner only of performing it; especially while the ancient and holy
Christians understand the Widows casting off her first Faith, of the breaking
her Vow, 1 Timothy 5.12.
that dedicated her Widdowhood to God; and why it should be lawful to make Vows
about Fasting, Prayers, and Alms, which Case of Cons. l. 2. c. 14.
Mr. Perkins allows, and not in other matters, I profess, I cannot understand.

VI. That Baptism is necessary to Salvation we assert, as a Catholic and
Orthodox Position, and what is impregnably founded on that Doctrine of our
Savior, John 3.5. Except a man be born of Water and the Holy Chost, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, notwithstanding the little Arts of some late
Aggressors to overthrow it; for if all Sin unexpiated makes obnoxious to
Damnation, then Children are so liable by reason of their Original
Transgression brought into the World with them, unless they be allowed

Laver of Regeneration, that they may be ^anctifyed and cleans'd by the washing
of Water by the Word (the Word sanctifying the Water, and the Water purging the
Criminal) not by putting away the filth of the flesh, i. any Bodily Pollutions,
but of the Spirit, by the answer of a good Conscience toward God, (relating to
the Apostolical Custom of Interrogatories in Baptism and hereby are they washed
and sanctified. This is the Doctrine of the Church of England, declared in the
end of the Office for Public Baptism, That it is certain by Gods Word, that
Children which are Baptized, dying before they commit Actual Sin, are
undoubtedly saved. Nor will I trouble my self any farther in this, when I have
subjoined the Testimony of a Father or two to this purpose. For the Greek
Church Contr. Arian. Tom. 1. p. 147. (...). vide Nyssen. Orat. in eos, qui
differunt Baptisma. Tom. 1. p. 958. and Chrysostom. Tom. 4. Homil. 3. in Ep. ad
Philip. p. 20.
S. Athanasius, whom Mr. H. justly reverences, who calls Baptism that
sanctifying and enlivening Purgation, that brings Remission of sins, and
without which no man shall see the Kingdom of Heaven; and Tom. 1. Orat. de S.
Baptis. p. 65.
Gregory Nazianzen blames those that believe, that at their death their desire
of Baptism shall be accepted, That it is a R^ddle never to be resolved, that a
man that dies unbaptiz'd shall for his intentions he accepted by God, as if he
were baptized, or that he, that is without its confines, shall be transported
into Heaven by a few barren wishes only, without passing through the requisite
preparations for that Kingdom; for if the desire of B^ptism can confer the
effica^^ of that Ordinance on thee, the desire of Heaven shall be all thy
happiness, both preparation and reward imaginary. This H^^ 3. in La
Origin handsomely in his Allegorical way deduces from the variety of
Genealogies, which the two Evangelists allow our Savior, for S. Matthew
deriving his Line from the time of his Natural Birth, not only terminates his
Catalogue in Abraham, but reckons into the number of his Progenitors Tamar,
Rahab, Bathsheba, and other Sinners; whereas S. Luke recording his Pedigree
from his Baptism, makes him at first rise to be the Son of God: and does not
Mr. H. himself say as much. p. 43. out of this very Father, That through
Baptism we obtain Remission of the Sins we had before committed. For the Latin
Church I would quote S. Austin, but that it is palpably known, that only on the
account of this Belief Lib. 3. de Orig. animae, and l. 1. de peccatmerit. and
remis. c. 15. etc.
he damns all Infants unbaptiz'd, and assures us, Ibid. c. 24.
that the Christians about Carthage used to call Baptism, Salvation; and the
Eucharist, Life: Nor is there any difference farther than words between us and
the Romanists in this point says the Learned Apud Dr. Featley's Dipper dipped. p.
10.
Dr. Reynolds in his Lectures de Censura Apocryphorum; not but that it is in
the power of God to save without means, but that there is no way in our power
to come to Salvation without them.

VII. The use of Chrism is on all hands acknowledged to be very ancient, and to
have been used in Baptism, Confirmation, anointing the Sick, and many other
Ecclesiastical Offices; and had the Church thought fit to ^etain it still, I
suppose no peaceable man would have disgusted it; Of ^^onfir^^^g. 21.
Mr. H. in another place allowing it to be as ancient as Tertullian, (and what
he calls an ancient Custom, as De coron. milit. cap. 3. vide Apolog. cap. 3.
Christianus quantum interpretatio est, de unctione deducitur. Theophilus
Antiochen. ad Autolyc. (...).
he does Chrism, can be little less than Apostolical) and that Cyril of
Jerusalem says, We are thence called Christians, and he might have named long
before him, and Tertullian too, Theophilus Antiochenus. -- As to the Ceremonies
of the Mass (which word anciently signified no more than the Church Liturgy)
being mentioned only in General, and we being ignorant whether reflecting only
on the Innovations of the Roman Church, or the Primitive usages of the Church
of England, we say nothing in their Vindication; the Doctrine of Free Will we
shall consider hereafter; that Confirmation is a Sacrament we deny, take it in
the strict sense of the word, as it signifies holy Rituals ordained by Christ,
as generally necessary to Salvation; though in a larger sense both Confirmation
and several minuter observances of Christianity were by the Fathers called
Sacraments, or rather Sacramentals.

VIII. I have considered all his unsound Doctrines, as he calls them, that are
found in these Questions, except the first, viz. Vide Spalatens. lib. 7. cap.
12. ^ct. 86. etc.
the use of the Cross; in which if I am a little larger, I shall beg my Readers
pardon. This Mr. H. p. 14. derides, as having no power to terrify the Devil;
and p. 38. reckons aamong the Popish and unsound Doctrines; the use whereof
Parker in his Treatise of the Cross accuses, not only as a sin against the
second Commandment, but against the other nine too; and has entitled his
several Chapters of the Swearing, Sabbath breaking, Murder, Adultery,
Stealing, False-witness, and at last of the Concupiscence of the Cross, as well
as of the Idolatry of it. For whatever this last and imaginarily wisest Age of
the World is apt to acknowledge, in those days, when the Blood of a dying
Savior was yet warm, and the Testimonies of Heavens Love fresh in Men's
Remembrances, the Christians of that time put an estimate on whatever had but a
remote Relation to Jesus, but a peculiar value on the Instrument of his
Sorrows, and the Worlds Happiness: Hence they used to sign themselves with the
sign of the Cross before whatsoever undertakings. Tert. de Coron. c^. Cyral.
Catec. (...). Orig. l. 3. in Job. fol. 36. Ed. Merlin. Naz. (...). p. 47. and
Orat. 19. p. 306.
They went no where abroad, or ever came home; they never put on their Clothes
or washed; they neither did eat, or drink, or sleep, or sit, or lie down, or
walk, or enter into any Discourse; in a word, in every action they fortified
themselves by signing their Foreheads with the sign of the Cross, even to the
prefixing it to all their Writings, (as afterward they used in nomine Domini,
or (...)) and this by Apostolical Tradition, says Quaest. 91 in sacr. script.
Anastasius Nicaenus.

IX. In every civil Action they customarily ^ed it, and in every sacred Office
the Church enjoined it; it adorned the Robes, the Diadems, and the Armours of
Princes, Chrysostom. Tom. 6. (...). p. 630. (...). For in their Devotions they
stretched out their hands in the form of a Cross, says Tert. de Orat. cap. 11.
and Asterius Amisenus, Hom. de Pharis. and Public. apud Phot. God. (...). p.
816. (...). And at the reception of the sacred symbols it was by Canon
enjoined, Conc. Trull. Can. 107. and in Ordinations, Chrysostom. To. 5. (...). p.
879. (...). Aug. Tract. 118. in Johan. nisi signum (crucis) adhibeatur, sive
frontibus credentium, sive ipsi aquae, qua regenerantur, sive oleo, quo
chrismate unguntur, sive sacrificio quo aluntur, nihil eorum rite perficitur.
was used at their Prayers, and at the holy Table, in Confirmation, in
Ordinations, Ruffin. Apol. adv. Hieron. 1. inter Hier. Opera, To. 4. p. 261.
after the repetition of the Creed, and in all other Rites of the Church, but
especially in Baptism; for it was objected by Pope Cornelius against Novatian,
( apud Eusebius. l. 6. c. 35.) that he was incapacitated for the Office of a
Bishop, because having been baptized in his Bed, he was not signed with this
holy Mark, nor did after his recovery ever seek after or desire the additional
Rituals of this initiatory Sacrament. (Where occasionally we may observe, that
the Primitive way of administering private Baptism was the same with that of the
Church of England; in that case of necessity, the Cross with other Ceremonies
being omitted, which are required afterward to be supplied by the Priest, at
the admission of the person recovered to be a Member of the Church.) Nay our
Apolog. 2. p. 157. Ed. Steph.
Martyr tells us, that there is nothing in Nature, as well as Religion, wherein
God has not drawn the lineaments of the Cross.

X. So frequently was it used by those good men, that it was looked on in those
early days as a Testimony of their Tertul. Apeleg. c. 16.
worshipping the Cross, says Tertullian, who derides the objection, and retorts
it on his Adversaries; nay, the very external Action was enough to denominate
any man a Christian, for Naz. (...). p. 47. edit. Montacut.
when some of Julians Soldiers having unwittingly took his largess, and thrown
incense into the Fire, returned home to eat, when their Fellow Soldiers saw
them look up to Heaven, and sign themselves before they drank, they smartly
asked them, how they durst usurp the cognizance of that Master, whom they had
renounced? And I have somewhere read, that to erect a Cross on the top of an
Heathen Temple was enough by the Law to make it a Church; and when the ancient
Christians were hurryed to Execution, as Malefactors, as Murderers, or
Traitors, and the noise of the Tumult drowned their Apologies, they used to
sign themselves with this sign, not only as a preservative against Satan and
natural fears, but as a Public Demonstration, that they dyed for Religion; and
in truth, were there nothing else in its usage but its natural signification,
in the judgment of the Crinit. de honest. Discipl. l. 7. c. 2. vid. Socrat.
Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 17. de cruce in ruderibus Templs Serapidis inventa.
Egyptian Wisemen, that might serve for its vindication, since in their
Mythologick Divinity the Cross signified the hopes of Eternity, (spem venturae
salutis, seu vitam aeternam) and that at Alexandria there was a Prophecy
frequent in the mouths of the Priests, that their Temple should be destroyed
when this sign did publicly appear.

XI. But the Cross has its peculiar uses in that Sacrament that makes men
Christians, to put them in mind that they ought not to be ashamed of their
crucified Master, who by reason of the manner of his suffering became a stone
of offense to the Jewish, and a scorn to the Heathen World, that they might
glory in what the rest of men derided; For, As soon as the Christians have left
us, says the Lucian, de morte peregr. p. 996.
Father of Scoffers, they deny, forsak, and abjure all their Heathen Gods, and
worship only that their crucified Sophister, as he blasphemously calls Christ.
Hence the Field of the Chapter l. 3. c. 1. p. 68. and Breerwood's Enquir. c. 21.
Jacobites sign their Children at their Baptism with the sign of the Cross
imprinted with a burning Iron, some in the Arm, some in the Forehead, that they
may be known to be Christians, and if ever they shall fall away, to be
Apostates; and so do the Abassines, to distinguish their Christian Children
from the Mahometans, says Ubi supr. p. 72.
Dr. Field; but their late Emp. Apud Hottinger. Topogr. Eccles. Orient. c. 3.
Sect. 7. p. 77.
Clandius in the Confession of his Faith, says, they use it only as a topical
Custom, as they retain Circumcision, and the Indians the boring their Ears. And
such as these doubtless were those Religious Aethiopians, whom Descript. Afrd.
1. c. 3 p. 7.
Leo Africanus describes to have been so frequent every where in Europe,
especially at Rome, who had their Faces marked with some Burnings, and this is
their baptizing with Fire, which some men talk of as retained among them,
answerable to the Lips. l. 1. de Milit. Romans Dialeg. 9.
Gentile Custom of marking their Soldiers in their hands, but Slaves in their
Foreheads, that they might be publicly known whose Servants they were; and
this Vit. Cypr.
S. Cyprians Deacon Pontius means, when he says, that the Confessors, who were
condemned to the Mines, had a new Inscription made on their Foreheads, the
first mark being the Cross in Baptism; (frontium notatarum secunda inscriptione
signati,) and De precript. adv. Haeretic.
Tertullian instancing in several particulars, wherein the Devil apes the rites
of Christianity, among others reckons this, that the Priests of Mithras had
their Foreheads also signed, (and this may serve for an answer to that common
Objection, that because the sign of the Cross has been Idolatrously abused by
the Romanists, therefore we ought to disuse it; when as we see there lay the
same Argument against the ancients, because the Priests of Mithras had usurped
their Ceremonies.)

XII. And this was one great reason, why that place more than any other place
of the body, was signed in Baptism, because being upbraided by the Heathens for
adoring a Crucified Master, they were resolved Aug. Ser. 8. de verb. Apost.
in that part, where is the Seat of Modesly, there to carry their Masters
Bedge; as another reason was to testify their dependence on this despised
person for salvation; for whereas the Lactant. l. 4. c. 26. ad fin.
Jews, when delivered from Aegypcian Slavery, were commanded to anoint the
Posts of their Doors with the Blood of a Lamb; so this usage testifies, that
Christ who is the Lamb without spot, and was slain by those Jews, is a Savior
to all, who have imprinted the mark of his Blood, i. of his Cross which shed
his Blood, on their Foreheads. Hence it is called by Contr. M^rcion. l. 3. c.
22. and de spectac. c. 4.
Tertullian, signaculum frontium, who tells us, that it was retained even by
the Marcionite Heretics, by Apud Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 17. (...).
Clemens as the most perfect Amulet; by Tom. 1. Orat. 40. (...).
Greg. Nazianzen, a Seal and Preservative, and Mark of Christ's Dominion over
us; by Auth. sub nom. Hier. in c. 4. Ephesians. signaculum spiritus sancti.
S. Hierom, the Seal of the Spirit of God; by Paulin. Ep. 2. ad Delphin. p.
202. maceria signaculi salutaris.
Paulinus, the Hedge and Fence of that Sign that confers Salvation. Basil. Tom.
1. Hom. 13. p. 480.
For unless the mark of the Lord be upon thee, and the Angel can see the
Character, how shall he fight for thee, and defend thee from all thy Enemies?
Theodoret. in Cant. 1.2.
Remember therefore that sacred Office, wherein after your renouncing the
Infernal Tyrant, and owning Jesus for your King, you that were initiated have
received as it were a certain Royal Signature, (the Signature of Christ I Eack.
9.
S. Hierom calls it) without which no man can he saved. So when God punished
Vzziah with Leprosy, his angry Master, says De Unitat. Eccles. p. 153.
S. Cyprian, branded him in that part of his Body, where those that serve him
faithfully are signed, and Id. Epist. 56. p. 7^.
all good Christians must take care that the mark that is there placed be not
altered or defaced. But of this enough, though more may be seen in De
resurrect. carn.
Tertullian, Hist. lib. 6. cap. 4.
Eusebius, Hom. 76. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, De spiritu S. c. 27.
Basil, In (...). etc.
Prudentius, and others. Annot. in Cypr. Ep. ad Demet. c. 19.
Goulart at Geneva confessing, That the Old Christians retained this Ceremony
without any Superstition, because the Doctrine of the merits of Christ
preserved them from the errors which afterward crept in, and Lib. 1. p. 170.
T. C. himself, that they did it to testify that they were not ashamed of
Christ that was crucified, and that they might preserve among them an open
profession of him; for among the Primitive Christians, says Adv. Baron.
exercit. 13. Sect. 23. p. 218. Ed. Francof.
Isaac Casaubon, it was a Badge of their confidence in Christ, and his Cross
and Passion; and therefore the holy and wise Reformers of Religion in England
prudently suffered the Crosses in the Highways to stand, and retained it also
in some of their Sacred Offices, as in Baptism, and in the Rite of Confirmation
too, in the Liturgy of Edward the Sixth; but in a different manner in Baptism
from the Popish Custom; Dr. Hammond of Idolatry, Sect. 70.
For in the first Liturgy of King Edward, which agreed with the Roman Order,
the use was to cross the Child at the Church-Door, when brought to Baptism; but
this of ours a mark of reception into Christ's Flock immediately after Baptism,
and a kind of Tessera, or Military sign, that the person thus consigned into
Christ's militia, shall for ever hereafter think himself obliged manfully to
fight under his Banner, etc.

XIII. Blessed Cross, says Tom. 4. (...). in 2 Timothy p. 334. and Tom. 5. (...).
p. 565. and (...). p. 878.
S. Chrysostom, that art the great contrivance of God the Father, the glory of
his only begotten Son, the joy of the holy spirit, the Ornament of Angels, the
Safeguard of holy Church, the boasting of S. Paul, than which neither the
Creation of the World out of nothing, nor the erecting the Fabric of the
Heavens and Earth can be greater Testimonies of the Condescension and Mercy of
God; this Cross is the Wall of the Saints, and the Beauty of the whole World;
this introduces light, and makes alive; by this the Demons are put to flight,
and Diseases cured. The truth and validity of which Conquests, because Mr. H.
p. 335. derides it, I will evince, beginning with that place of L. 4. c. 27.
Lactantius (which our Aristarchus reckons among his Errors and Superstitious
Observances;) He that would know how terrible this fign is to the Kingdom of
darkness, let him observe how the Demons fly from the Bodies of the possessed,
when they are adjured by the name of Christ; for as he, when he blessed the
World with his presence, expelled those evil Spirits by his word, and restored
the distracted minds of the Sons of men to the right use of their reasons, so
now his Followers dispossessed the same polluted Guests by the name of their
Master, and the sign of his Passion; and of this the proof is most easy, for
when our Adversaries are most intent on their Sacrifices, if a Christian, whose
Forehead is charactered with this holy sign, stand by, the slain Beasts are
never propitious, nor can the Priests read the Sacrificer's Fate in the
Eatrails; and this has been done too frequently by the men of our Religion to
be disowned. And here I cannot avoid the subjoining of a famous Example of
Greg. Nys. Tom. 2. vit. Greg. Thaumat. p. 980, 981.
Gregorius Neocaesariensis, that great worker of Miracles, who that he might
decline the Burden of the Episcopal Charge, had retired himself from
Neocaesaria to a Wilderness; but at last was by a strange impulse from Heaven
made willing to serve in so honorable an Employ; and having received in a
Vision a certain Creed or Summary of Faith to preserve him from Heresy, as he
returned from his solitude with his Companions, being overtaken with night and
a violent shower, diverted himself in a famous Temple, where the Demon used to
appear visibly to the Priest, and deliver his Oracles: But as soon as S.
Gregory entered and invocated the name of Jesus, the Demons were terrified;
and having made the sign of the Cross to purge the air of those steams and
fumes that polluted it, spent the night in Prayers and holy Praises, and early
in the morning left his Lodging; Crucis signum contra Daemonas esse praesidium,
videsis apud spalat. l. 7. c. 12. Sect. 88. p. 308. and Montagues appel. c. 2
6/7.
as soon as the holy man was gone, the Demons told the young Priest, that they
could not enter any more into the Temple, because of his late guest, and made
it good by disobeying all his Charms, and slighting his Lustrations and
Sacrifices; on this the Priest in have pursues S. Gregory, and overtaking him,
threatens to bring him before a Magistrate, as a Christian, and an Enemy to
their Gods; all which the good Prelate slighted, and told him, that by the help
of his God he questioned not but to confine the Demon to what place he
pleased, which the Priest catching at, desired him to restore his Familiar to
his Temple; S. Gregory cutting out a piece of the Leaf of a Book, writ on it
these words, GPGOPIOS TO SATANA, EISELTHE, Gregory to Satan, Enter. Which
Paper, when the Priest had laid on the Altar, and used the accustomed Rites,
the Demons enter as before. -- On this, and the sight of another Miracle done
by this wonderful man, he became a Christian, S. Gregory's Deacon, and
afterward a Martyr; Nyss. ubi supr. p. 1004, 1005.
who also a little before his Death three several times by the same sign
secured himself from the Assaults of the Devil, and dispossessed him of a Bath,
which he before had fatally haunted. So when Eudoxia Orat. 1. in Cypr. Mart.
apud Phot. Cod. (...). p. 215.
the junior Cyprian the Magician (who lived under Diocletian) sent the most
furious of his Familiars to disturb the holy Justina, who would not yield to
his love, they returning confessed, that they were shamed and overcome by the
sign of the Cross.

XIV. Thus the Son of God appeared to his own vindication, and that not only
when his Servants have been his Instruments, but sometimes when his greatest
Enemies; Sozom. l. 5. c. 2. and Naz. (...). in Julian. p. 29.
the Church Historian affirming, that on a certain time the Apostate Julian
went down into one of those dreadful Vaults, where the Novices were to be
initiated, and met with some of those dismal Specter, which the Priests by
their Magic Art made appear there; and being afraid, and unwittingly signing
himself as he was wont, when a Christian, with the sign of the Cross, of a
sudden all the Phantasmata vanished, the sign prevailed, it dispersed the
Devils, and cancelled the fears of that desertor. Aug. de C. D. l. 22. c. 8.
I could also reckon the Cures wrought by this means on Innocentia, and others
at Carthage, Tiburtius his walking safely over hot burning Coals, the Woman in
the Baths at Gadara, that thus preserved her chastity, with many other
Examples, but I forbear to surfeit my Reader; Aut hoc testium satis est, aut
nescio quid satis sit vobis.

XV. By these Methods came the Cross of Christ to exalt it self into the
Banners of Armies, and to get a place on the Crowns of Monarchs, and so
venerable a respect did the succeeding Emperors pay to this solemn
Representation of the sacred passion, that L. 1. Tit. 8. Leg. unic.
Theodosius and Valentinian made it a Law, That this Symbol should not be put
to trifling and unworthy uses, nor engraven, or painted on the ground, or on
Pavements, where it might be trod upon: And Heaven appeared to reward this
piety in Paul. Diacon. addit. 18. ad Eutropium.
Tiberius junior, who walking one day and taking notice of a Cross under his
Feet, commanded it to be removed to a more honorable place; which being done,
a vast Treasure was found hid under it; and though Constantine the Great has
been censured by some for his too frequent use of this sign, as an Amulet
against all harms, and his causing so many Crosses to be made; yet it is enough
to me that the God who was crucified so commanded him, if we may believe his
Vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 22.
Historian, who had it from that August Emperors own mouth, showing it to him
first in the Air, with this Motto, (...), Conquer in this sign; and afterward
in a Vision expressly enjoining him to make such another for his Standard Royal;
and his reasons why he stamped this Figure on his Money, an next it to his
Pictures, placed it in his Standards, and on the Arms of his Soldiers, were
very just, says De Orig. Templ. l. 2. c. 9 p. 47.
Hospinian, That to the Christians it might be a Badge of their Profession, and
to the Heathens an encouragement insensibly to draw them to desert their former
Superstitions, and to worship a crucified Savior; and this Example of his was
quickly followed, Ruffinus telling us, that the Alexandrians, who in the days
of their Idolatrous Ignorance, commonly had the picture of their God Serapis on
their Walls, and over their Porches, and in their Windows; as soon as they were
converted blotted them all out, and set up the Cross in their stead.

XVI. And all this while no person dreamed that these Miracles were wrought
only by this sign, but by the power of him that dyed on the Cross, as Apud.
Greg. Nyss. ubi supr.
the Devil himself was forced to confess; much less durst any man worship it,
it is dis-owned by all the Apologists, by Apolog. c. 16.
Tertullian, Octav. p. 97.
Minutius Faelix, L. 6. cont. Julian.
S. Cyril, and others; cruces nec colimus, nec optamus, we neither worship the
Cross as our God, says Minutius, nor desire it as our Punishment; and in
Constantine's Banner this was the Motto, says L. 8. c. 2.
Nicephorus, (...), Jesus is the Conqueror; and for the Church of England, she
has unanswerably vindicated her self to all rational men in her An. 1603.
thirtieth Article, and by her redoubted Champion the profound Eccl. polit.
lib. 5. Sect. 65.
Hooker.

XVII. These were the ancient Triumphs of the holy Cross, such as not only
commenced since, but long before the Incarnation of Jesus, Just. M. Tertul.
Cypr. Ambr. Hier. Chrysostom. Naz. Athanas. etc. apud Montag. appel. Caes. c. 28.
the Fathers expressly asserting, that Joshua routed the Amalekites rather by
this sign, than by his Sword, as Abraham also vanquished the four Kings; and it
shall go on conquering and to conquer, to be the Glory of good men, and the
Confusion of its Enemies; for as Tom. 2. Orat. 1. in Resurr. Christ. p. 830.
Gregory Nyssen, in his Mystical Way of commenting, has it, This is that lota
in the Gospel, which is seen with a stroke athwart it (the figure of a Cross)
which is firmer than Heaven and Earth, and the whole Creation; for Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, and the fashion of the whole World shall fade, but one
jet our tittle of this Law shall not pass away; for our Savior chose that kind
of Death, that the Cross might supply the want of a Divine, and the Figure it
self be an Instructor to the more perspicuous, to describe the Power and
Triumphs of him, who being nailed to it, overcame all things; Chrysostom. Tom. 5.
(...). p. 880.
this being the sign, that in the days of our Forefathers opened Doors when
they were shut, quenched the force of the most destructive poisons; healed the
bitings of wild Beasts, and with good reason, seeing it broke down the Gates of
Hell, and opened the Kingdom of Heaven and Paradise, and we are no longer left
to tremble at the Devil.

XVII. Thus then it conquered Constantines and all the Churches Enemies, and it
shall confound the Jews, and all the Enemies of this holy faith at the day of
Judgment, when Mat. 24.30.
the sign of the Son of man shall appear in Heaven, i. says In Loc. Tom. 2. p.
477. and Tom. 5. p. 576
S. Chrysostom, the Cross more glorious than the sun, for at that time the sun
shall be darkened, and lie under a fatal Eclipse, but the Cross shall be
visible; which it could not be, were it not much brighter than the Beams of the
Sun. And so the Text is understood by (...). p. 473.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Homil. 30. in Matthew.
Origin, Comment. in Loc.
Hierom, Homil. 118. in Johan.
Augustine, De Abraham. l. 1. c. 3.
Ambrose, In Genes. l. 2. c. 17.
Eucherius, In natali Christ. and praefat. in (...). etc.
Prudentitus, and others; to omit Beda, Theophylact, Euthymius, and the
Moderns, and the Abassine Churches, who have made it an Article of their Creed;
and may we not probably think that those that were sealed in their Foreheads,
Apocal. 7.3. were signed with the sign of the Son of Man, and that the Elect at
the last great appearance shall so be known? So says Ad Demetrian. p. 167.
S. Cyprian, The day of Judgment is at hand, when those that are strangers to
God and Holiness, shall be burnt, and only those shall be able to escape who
have been born again, and signed with the sign of Christ, as God elsewhere
speaks, quoting Ezekiel. 9.4. on which place, Et in Is. 66.
S. Hierom (and before him Origin) tell us, that this Mark was a Tau, the
Character of the Cross imprinted on the Foreheads of Christians in the New and
Catholic Jerusalem, as Contr. Marcion. l. 3. c. 22.
Tertullian also understands it; and though all this may be a mistake, Scalig.
in Eusebius. Chron. p. 109.
because the Samaritan Tau had not the Form of a Cross, yet it is enough to our
purpose, that so the Fathers believed in this point.

XVIII. I cannot therefore but wonder, that whereas the devout De imitat.
Christ. l. 2. c. 12.
Thomas de Kempis asserts the same thing, that this sign shall be in Heaven
when Christ shall come to Judgment, (which Sentence Castellio lets stand in his
Edition, as does also the old English Translator) what should persuade Rogers
in his Edition to leave it quite out? as also to expunge that other passage,
That that man, who is armed with faith, and signed with the Cross of Christ,
need not dread the powers of Satan? For as to his Apology for it in his
Epistle, it is not worth the naming. And is not Beza's squeamishness as worthy
of our Censures, who in the Colloquy at Mompelgard professed, that from his very
Soul he hated the sight of a Crucifix (as the M S. Arab. apud Hottinger.
compend. Theatri Orient. part. 1. c. 4. p. 86.
superstitious Arabs rank the looking on the Cross (aspectus crucifixi) among
the Causes of Sottishness and Obstructions of the memory) whereas as learned
and pious a man, Melch. Adam in vit. Chytr. p. 691.
David Chytraeus, had always hanging in his Study the picture of the crucyfied
Jesus, under which he had written several consolatory Sentences out of the
Gospels, and Prayers on the seven last Sentences that Christ spoke when he hung
on the Cross. And I should think that such a Picture with Ignatius's Motto, O
(...), My Love is crucified, or with that of S. Paul, I desire to know nothing
else but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, might prove an excellent incentive of
Piety. -- I have now done with this long digression, and though it might have
been thought unnecessary by some, yet I have been the rather encouraged to do
it, because in my little reading I cannot find any set Discourse to the praise
of this Martyr.

XIX. Sect. 5. p. 40. We are told out of S. Justin 's second Apology, in how
simple and plain a manner the Ordinances of the Church were then administered
without those pompous Observances, etc. afterward brought in to the great
dishonor of God, etc. which I am willing to think has its relation to the
Novel Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, but not to any of the Additionals of
the Primitive and English Churches to advance the Beauty of those Sacraments;
(there being a vast difference between the Age of Persecutions and our serene
days, as to the necessity of decent and orderly Rituals) Nor are we ignorant,
that in those gloomy days the Church had many particular Observances in Baptism
and the Eucharist, which Tertullian in his de Corona Militis reckons up; and
yet is very positive in asserting, That they were neither numerous, nor
burdensome, nor pompous Ceremonies, Tertul. de Baptism. p. 27 0/1. Edit.
Rhenani. Nihil adeo est, quod obduret mentes heminum, quam simplicitas
divinorum operum, -- ut hinc quoque quoniam tanta simplicitate sine pompa, sine
apparats novo aliquo, denique sine sumptu homo in aqua der. issus, and inter
panca verba tinctus non multo, vel nihile mundior resurgit, eo incredibilis
existimetur consecutio aeternitatis. Mentior, st non e contrario idolorum
solennia, vel arcana de siggestu, and apparatu, d^que sumptu fidem, and
authoritatem sibi extru^nt. Proh misera incredulitas, quae deneg as Deo
proprietates suas, simplicitatem, and potestatem!
but makes that the grand difference between the Methods of the Christian and
Heathen Worship; and so I pass by that censure, as I also resolve not to
animadvert the Opinions of this Father mentioned p. 44, 45. of the Septuagint
Interpreters and the Sibyls, though in both Relations there be somewhat hard to
be maintained: But I pay more Veneration to so reverend a head, than causelessly
and without provocation to undertake to uncover his defects, Theod. de Haeres.
l. 1. Sect. de Menand. -- (...).
who to his Philosophic Habit added the Robes of Martyrdom.

XX. The Account that S. Justin gives of the usages of the second Century is so
agreeable to the Apostolical Institution, and so full, that I shall allow my
self the Privilege a little to take a view of some particulars relating to
those Ecclesiastic Offices; and because in other Circumstances of Religious
Worship the World has been already sufficiently informed, I shall confine my
self to their Method of instructing the people, by reading and preaching on the
holy Scriptures. Philo apud Eusebius. (...). lib. 8. c. 7.
The Jews were commanded by Moses, says Philo, to meet together in some
convenient place, where they might hear the Law of God read to them, and
expounded by the Priest, or some of the Elders; (these places were afterward
called Synagogues, and Proseuchae) and for this end God divided Levi in Jacob,
and scattered him in Israel, turning his Father's Curse into a Blessing, that
he might be instrumental to the instructing of the people; and for this end
also the wisemen of the great Consistory divided the Law into 54 Sections, or
Parascha's (of which they ordered the four shortest to be read two at a time)
that so the whole might be read over once every year: To this Custom did our
blessed Savior in his life conform himself (for I never find him scrupling any
innocent Rituals of the Jews) and as it was their usage out of reverence to the
Author of those holy Oracles, both Priest and People Nehem. 8.4, 5.
to stand up at the reading of them; so when the sacred Jesus took into his
hands the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, Luc. 4.16, 20.
he stood up, read the Paragraph on which he intended to preach, and sat not
down until he had closed the Book, and according to his example did the
Apostles regulate themselves in Ecclesiastical Affairs, not only introducing
that very good Custom of standing up at the New Law, the Gospel, (which was
early practiced in all Churches, and by all men, but by the Sozomen. l. 7. c.
19.
Patriarch of Alexandria, who only of all his Congregation, of all his
Patriarchate, sat at the reciting of the Gospel) but in ordering, that in all
Religious Assemblies there should first be read a Origin. Hom. 15. in Jos.
Portion out of the Law, and with this they contented themselves before the
writing of the New Testament, their Homilies being only an explanation of Moses
and the Prophets, and a Confirmation of our Savior's Divinity and Doctrine
from thence, All. 26.28.
saying no other thing than Moses and the Prophets foretold should come to
pass; but when the Gospels and Epistles were writ, they then took order, that
some parts of the New Testament, especially the History of our Saviors life,
should have a place in the Service, that the Truth might answer the Types; So
Hypotypos. lib. 6. apud Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 14.
Clemens Alexandrinus and Papias affirm, that S. Peter decreed, that the Gospel
of S. Mark should be publicly read in the Christian Churches, and 1 Thessalonians.
5.27.
S. Paul took care that his first Epistle to the Thessalonians should be read
to all the Brethren.

XXI. These Books of the holy Canon being collected into one Code, during the
Apostles residence on Earth, the reading thereof continued in the Church after
the dissolution of that Family of our Saviors own immediate constitution,
Clem. Romans Ep. ad Corinth. p. 54.
the employment devolving on the first fruits of the converted City or Country
where the Apostles preached, whom they left to raise a Superstructure on the
Foundation which they had laid, and to cultivate what their industry had
planted. So Apel. 2. p. 98. vi^e Clem. Alex. (...). 3. p. 502. and Tert.
Apolog. c. 39.
S. Justin describes the state of their Christian Conventions; All the people
that dwelt in the City, or adjacent Country, met together in one Assembly on
the Sunday, and then the Commentaries of the Apostles, or the Writings of the
Prophets are read, and when the Reader (a Church Officer very early instituted
in the Church for this purpose) has done, then the Bishop who is the President
of the Society, makes an Oration to encourage and exhort his Auditory to the
Love, Imitation, and Practice of those blessed Precepts. And when De anima cap. 9.
Tertullian undertakes to enumerate the Solennia Dominica, as he calls them,
the solemn Offices of that Festival, he mentions the reading of the Scriptures,
singing of Psalms, hearing the Sermon, and holy discourses, and then the
offering up their prayers to God. Which Expositions on holy Writ, as a part of
the service of the Lords day, grounded on the custom of the Jews, and the
practice of the Apostles, Act. 20.7.
S. Paul inures himself to, as a necessary Method of instructing his Neighbors
in the Laws of Christian Obedience, and a great incentive and preparative to
Devotion and the Eucharist; in which the Apostles had this advantage of their
Successors, that they could express themselves both in their Supplications and
Sermons without premeditation, 1 Cor. 14.30.
being assisted by a peculiar afflatus of the Spirit of God, (the Spirit of
Prayer and Prophecy) whereas their Successors, wanting those miraculous
assistances, took on them to inform their Flocks according to the several
measures of their Learning and Industry; only those who were well furnished
with the Arts of demonstration and holy perswasives, frequently spoke ex
tempore to the Congregation, as we may see in many of the Homilies of the
ancient Fathers, S. Chrysostom especially. And that we may make a more regular
proceeding in this disquisition, I shall speak to the time when, and how often
these Sermons were made; the places where, the persons who undertook this
tremendous employment, and the manner how it was performed; and by this course
we may take a brief view of the ancient practices in this case.

XXII. We take it for granted, that the Lords day was not without its share in
thi^ Honor, and that it was looked on as a necessary part of the duty of every
Prelate personally then to teach his people the Rules of Peace, and Purity. It
was the practice of the Apostles, Act. 20.7. and from them continued in the
Church Chrysostom. To. 2. (...). in Matthew. p. 31. Aug. Confess. lib. 6. c. 3.
as a Law not to be dispensed with; and besides this solemn duty of the Sunday,
in some Churches they had constant Sermons every Wednesday and Friday in the
Week, particularly at Socrat. Hist. lib. 5. c. 21.
Alexandria, where by an ancient custom all the offices of the Lords day were
then performed, except the celebration of the Eucharist, and that probably was
omitted, because those were fasting-days ( stationum semi-jejunia, as
Tertullian calls them) in Id. Ibid.
Cappadocia, and Cyprus) and probably in all other Countries where the Saturday
was not a Fasting-day) they had Sermons on the Sabbath Day, as well as on the
Sunday; nay at Alexandria Hom. 9. in Isai. apud Centur. 2. c. 6.
Origin seems to imply that they had Sermons every day, as the Centurists
understand him, and this De bono pudicit. vide Holdsworth, part. 1. Lect. 4. p.
30.
St. Cyprian terms the Bishops daily employment; nor was this Custom only used
in the Southern Churches, but in the Churches of the East too. St. Homil. 3. p.
504. and Chrysostom. (...). To. 5. p. 515. and To. 1. (...) in Genes. p. 64. and To.
4. (...). in Act. App. p. 856. and Phot. cod. (...). p. 200.
Gregory Nyssens Homilies on the Canticles imply, that he preached on that Book
of the inspired Solomon every day; and this appears also by more than a few
passages in St. Chrysostom's Homilies, in as much as it was expressly commanded
all Bishops Can. 19.
by the sixth General Council, that every Prelate on every day of the Week,
(...), but especially on the Lords days, should instruct both his Clergy, and
People; (by which we may judge of the Acumen of those Franciscan Friars at
Basil among the Switzers, who affirmed it M^^ch. Adain. Vit. Pelican. p. ^92.
to be a Lutheran trick to preach on any other but holy days.) But this Law was
not so indispensibly binding, but that many days in the year wanted their
Sermons; only this we may aver, that unless in case of great necessity the
Christians had their Homilies constantly on Sundays, on Festivals and their
Eves, throughout the whole Lent, and the twelve days, the Octaves of Easter,
and Whitsuntide, and the Rogation-Week, on Wednesdays, and Frydays, in most
places, and at other times frequently, according to the discretion of the
Prelate, or the fullness of the Congregation.

XXIII. But above all, they had their Lectures of Discipline every day
throughout the Lenten Fast, and that not only in S Tom. 6. (...). p. 381. and
ubi supr.
Chrysostomes time, but even in the Infancy of the Egyptian Churches, this
practice was introduced among those Convert Jews, whom Hist. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Eusebius out of Philo describes; who through the whole seven Weeks of Lent
were employed in Fastings, Watchings and among other duties, in hearing the
Word of God; which Custom it were to be wished that the Protestant Churches had
retained, as well as the Romanists, who have their preachings every day in that
holy time, the same person being obliged to continue the exercise as long as
his strength shall permit him. Nor had the Ancients their Sermons only for one
part of the day only, or but one at once, but it was usual very early in some
places for the Constitute Apost. lib. 2. cap. 57.
Presbyters, with the Bishops leave, to preach each one in his turn, or as many
as were thought fit, and then the Bishop himself closed up all with a sober,
and grave exhortation; and sometimes if a Gaudent. Brixiens. tract. 14. and
Nyssen. Tom. 1. p. 872.
foreign Prelate came occasionally to a Church, he was desired to preach; and
sometimes the same Person preached Aug. in Psalm. 86. reficite vires, and refecti
a cibis etc. nunc ad reliqua Psalmi, de quo in matutino locuti sumus, animum
intendite. Chrysostom. (...) Tom. 6. p. 525. tit. (...). Id. T. 5 (...). in S. Laz.
p. 229.
twice a day; for which sometimes that most admirable, and desired Preacher, S.
Chrysostom was forced to make his Apology, and free himself from the imputation
of introducing a novel Custom.

XXIV. And as the Governors of the Church took on them to appoint set times
for hearing the Word of God explained, so also they took care, that every man
might not be left to his own choice, but that fit places might be appropriated
to this duty (for in those days none but the Heretics had their separate
meetings) the Apostles at first preached from Act. 2.46. and ^^ 5.42.
house to house, for as long as they had extraordinary assistances, and no
ordinary charge, the whole world was every Apostles Diocese; but afterward,
when they were fixed on settled and ordinary charges, the Bishop, being attended
with his Deacons, was the only person that preached, and for some time the
converted Christians had not above one Sermon in a Diocese, which the Prelate
preached in his Cathedral in the Principal place of his charge, (and therefore
to ordain throughout every City, Tit. 1.5. is the same with to ordain
throughout every Church, Act. 14.23.) thither all the scattered Christians of
the Neighborhood resorted, and when the Offices were over, each man went home,
and instructed his Family, as God enabled him: (as in truth all the Ordinances
of the Church were celebrated in the Mother Church only, and none but the
Bishop officiated therein, or some other by leave from him) but when the number
of the Brethren encreast, and a third Order of Ecclesiastical persons were
instituted, a College of Presbyters to attend the Bishop, as his Council, and
Assistants, I suppose that not long after the date of their erection, the
Churches of the Mother-Cities increasing in number, the Presbyters had their
several Titles conferred on them by the Bishop, that every one might know his
several part of that flock which he was to instruct. Hence in the Pontifical it
is said that Pope Euarestus was the first that at Rome divided the Churches,
and Cemeteries, among the Presbyters and it was also very anciently practiced
at Epiphan. haeres. 69. (...). Id. apud Sozom. hist. l. 1. c. 5.
Alexandria. And thus it continued in the Cities some years, before the Country
were so well provided for; the first Country Presbyter that I meet with being
to be found in Epist. 28. p. 34.
St. Cyprian, who mentions Gajus the Presbyter, or Curate of Didda, and Haeres.
66. vide Ep. Episc. ad Dionys. etc. apud Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 24. and Socrat.
lib. 1. cap. 27. and Conc. Ancyran. and Neo-Caes.
Epiphanius takes notice of Trypho the Presbyter of Diodoris, a Village under
Archelaus Bishop of Caschara in Mesopotamia, who with his Ordinary were great
Opponents of the Heretic Manes, when he fled out of Persia into Romania; and
after this, the name commonly occurs in the Councils; but this excellent Custom
came later into some other parts of the World, than into the East, and South,
for it was after the year 630. before this Kingdom of our Nativity was divided
into Parishes, and Vid. Council. Valens. Can. 4.
probably after the year 400 that it was so ordered in France.

XXV. Every person, or every Clergyman, was not at first thought fit to take
the cure of Souls on him, none but the immediate Successors of the Apostles,
the Prelates of the Church, who in truth discharged this and all other parts of
the Ministerial Function; till his burden increasing, the Bishop permitted
some Presbyters to discharge that duty, but neither durst they preach without
their Ordinaries leave (as we find the Apostles cautiously expecting a License
from the President of the Jewish Assembly, Act. 13.15.) and seldom in his
presence, (but supplied his room, when he was necessarily absent at a Synod, or
in time of persecution, or for any other reason) and at last sometimes were
allowed to preach in his presence; which Custom began to prevail every where,
till Arius, being but a private Presbyter at Alexandria, began against the
Injunctions of his Ordinary to spread his Doctrine, and scatter Heresy in his
Sermons, whereupon he having so disturbed the Church, it past into a Law for
the Socrat lib. 5. cap. 21. and Sozom. lib. 7. c. 19.
African Churches, that none but the Bishop should dare to preach; and so it
continued for a considerable time, inasmuch as when Valerius, Bishop Possidon.
vit. Augustine. c. 5.
of Hippo, being unfit personally to instruct his Flock, called S. Austin his
Presbyter and Successor to his Assistance, and permitted him to preach; it made
a great deal of noise, and created both the good Prelate and his Priest much
envy, though Valerius pleaded for himself, that it was customary in the
Oriental Churches; but when S. Austin had thus broke the Ice, the Southern
Churches in a small time did also embrace the usage: And there is still
somewhat equivalent retained among us, not only in that our Liturgy calls all
the Clergy of the Diocese the Bishop's Curates, but that when we are made
Priests, we have Authority given us to preach the Gospel, when we shall be
thereunto lawfully called, i. e. licensed by our Ordinary.

XXVI. The subject of the Sermon was commonly Aug. sermon. 237. de temp.
the Gospel for the day, which being the last of the Portions out of holy
Scripture then read, might be presumed to have made its strongest Impressions
upon the Auditory; though I find some very learned men affirming, that till the
fourth Age the Sermon had no other Text than what the Preacher thought fit: and
it is most certain that the sacred and wise men did not always tie themselves
expressly to a Text of Scripture, but took any subject themselves thought fit,
and enlarged on it; and that not only in their Panegyricks, but on several
other occasions (as may be seen in the Homilies of S. Chrysostom, S. Austin,
and Chrysologus, and of late days in Dr. Clark's Sermons, and some others) and
very lawfully without doubt, though I heartily abhor the Impudence of that Apud
Sixtin. Amama orat. de barbary. ex Melanch.
Schoolman, who (like the rest of that Herd, that knew no more Scripture than
what they found in S. Hierom or Gratian) being to preach at Paris, where
Melanchthon was his Auditor, took his Text out of Aristotle's Ethics. But the
Fathers were very chary in suiting their Discourses to the capacities and wants
of their Auditory, not entertaining them with trifling Notions, but with the
knowledge of their biggest and most momentous concerns; S. Tom. 1. Apologet. 1.
p. 15, 16.
Gregory the Divine describes the duty of a Preacher in this case, He is to
treat of the World and its formation; of the Soul, and Angels, as well those
that kept, as those that lost their Integrity; of Providence, and its wise Laws
and Constitutions; of the Creation of Man, and his restoration; of the two
Testaments, the Types of the Old, and the Antitypes of the New; of Christ's
first and second coming, of his Incarnation and Passion; of the general
Resurrection, and end of the World; of the day of Judgment, of the rewards of
the Just, and the punishment of the disobedient; and above all, of the blessed
Trinity. And S. John Tom. 5. (...). p. 523, 524.
Chrysostom. bids his people call to remembrance what he discoursed to them of the
Nature of the Soul, of the Fabric of the Body, and the state of immortality,
of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell, of the long-suffering of
God, and the Methods of pardon, of the powers of Repentance, of Baptism, and
the forgiveness of sins, of the Creation of the superior and inferior World,
the nature of Men and Angels, the subtilty of Satan, and his Methods and
Policies, of the different Opinions in the Christian World, of the true Faith,
and the gangrene of Heresies, with many other such Mysteries, which it behooves
a Christian to be acquainted with, and who is sufficient for these things? --
These Notions made men wise and rational, devout and obedient, while the airy
speculations of the School serve only to swell the brains with a Fantastic
Tympany. And I must profess it seems to me to be one of the best Sentences in
In supputat. annor. mundi millenar. 1.
Martin Luther's large Tomes, when he says, that the ante-diluvian Patriarchs
did not entertain themselves and Children with gay discourses of inconsiderable
things, (de lana caprina) but that they disputed of the cunning of the Serpent,
and the sad effects of his Temptation, of the nature of sin and death, and the
miseries of Hell, of the promised Seed that should ruin the Devil, of the Laws
of Justice and Mercifulness, of Life and Paradise.

XXVII. Nor were these Sermons always, though commonly, new and unheard of
discourses, and the genuine Offspring of the Preachers brains, the products of
his study and industry, but many times the works of other famous men. For thus
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Hermas's Pastor was publicly read in the Church, and Id. lib. 4. cap. 22.
Clemens his Epistle to the Corinthians, together with that of Pope Soter to
Dionysius, and so was Hieron. Catalog. v. Polycarp.
Polycarp's Epistle to the Philippians, as likewise the Id. v. Ephraem.
works of Ephraem Syrus, read in the Churches of Syria, and in Sozomen. lib. 7.
cap. 19.
some of the Orthodox Conventions in Palestine, till the time of Sozomen the
Church Historian, the Revelation of S. Peter was read once every year. And I
suppose, that that which gave occasion to this appointing the Writings of
Apostolical men to be read publicly in the Assembly, was that order of S.
Paul, Colos. 4.16. That the Epistle from the Church of Laodicea should be read
in the Church of Colosse. Such also were the Acts of the Martyrs, which were
always read on the Anniversaries of their Martyrdoms, and probably sometimes
supplied the want of a Sermon, and at last this gave occasion to the
introducing of Homilies into the Church, which Tom. 1. Apologet. 1. p. 21.
S. Greg. Naz. intimates were sometimes used in his days, but were commanded by
the Council Can. 4.
of Vaux, an. 444. to be read by the Deacon, if the Presbyter, who was employed
in that duty both in the City and Country, were hindered by sickness or any
other way that he cannot preach.

XXVIII. And though the name Homily be grown odious to the half-witted Tribe of
Zealots, who by an unlimited liberty of venting what they pleased in a Pulpit,
opened a Gap to so many Heresies, yet it has been applauded as a piece of good
policy in the Grand, Gaguin. rer. Muscovit. c. 2. and Olear. Iti^er. lib. 3. p.
133.
Duke of Muscovy to prohibit preaching throughout his Dominions, which had
begot many a Quarrel and Error, and to tie all Priests, how learned soever, to
a select number of Homilies of the Greek and Latin Fathers, especially S.
Chrysostom's, translated into the Russian Language, which are to be read in the
Church without any addition or explication of their own, on pain of death. And
because it might seem an unpardonable ramble to wander into Muscovy for a
vindication of Homilies, I find the same remedy prescribed by that
conscientious and learned, that humble and devout Prelate Is. Walton's Life of
Bishop Sanderson non procul a fine.
Bishop Saunderson, the great Master of Casuistical Divinity. That the way to
restore this Nation to a more meek and Christian temper (than it had put on in
our late days of confusion) was to have the Body of Divinity, or so much of it
as was needful to be known, put into fifty two Homilies or Sermons, of such a
length as not to exceed a third or fourth part of an hours reading, and these
needful points to be made so clear and plain, that those of a mean capacity
might know what was necessary to be believed, and what God requires to be done,
and then some Applications of trial and conviction, and those to be read every
Sunday in the year, as infallibly as the Blood circulates the Body, and then as
certainly begun again and continued the year following.

XXIX. Pyterius in the Lib. 8. cap. 9.
Tripartite History is commended that he never adventured to instruct the
people, but he always prayed before he preached; and this ought to be the
Divines practice at all times, says De doctr. Chr. lib. 4. cap. 15.
S. Austin, (though it be more than probable, that Christ or his Apostles
seldom used a Prayer, either before or after their Sermons.) In the Apostolical
times the Priest and people mutually saluted each other with the gemina
salutatio, Constit. App. lib. 5. cap. 5.
the Lord be with you, and with thy Spirit; and then the holy man preached, as
the Can. 55. An. 1603.
Church of England expressly requires the saying of the Lords prayer, and that
either prefixed to the Text, or intermixed in the discourse; this Custom came
from the Synagogue into the Church; for Nehem. 8.4, 6.
Ezra, when he stood in his Pulpit of wood, and the people rose to hear the
Law, he blessed the Lord the great God, and all the people answered Amen, Amen,
with lifting up their hands, and bowing their heads. And in all likelihood the
primitive Fathers always prayed before they preached. But what Prayers? None
but the Prayers of the Church, the public Liturgy, as says that most ancient
Father Epist. ad Corinth. p. 44. (...).
Clemens Romanus, We being conscientiously and unanimously gathered together
into one place, cry earnestly to God in our Prayers with one Voice, that we may
be the better fitted to be made Partakers of his rich and glorious promises
conveyed unto us in the Gospel. And this was the common practice, as it is now
required in our Liturgy, that after the Nicene Creed the Sermon should begin,
that being a part of the public Divine Service, and when that is done, the
Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church militant, etc. and so S. Tom. 6.
(...). p. 724.
Chrysostom describes the Catholic Custom in his time, that there was no
trouble nor noise in the Church, nothing intermixed in the sacred Offices; there
were Hymns and Prayers, and then the Spiritual Discourse (the Sermon) and after
that a return to God in supplications, an excellent pattern of our present
usages.

XXX. The customary way of preaching now in vogue is by Doctrine and use, a
method found out and introduced into the Protestant Churches by Wolfgangus
Musculus, to which Method the probate of the Doctrine by reasons was afterward
added; but it was otherwise in the Sermons of the Fathers, whose Homilies were
either to the praise of some person or virtue, or the dispraise of some vice,
or else expositions on some part of Scripture, either in a litteral or
allegorical way, as the Genius of the good man led him; in the first sort of
these Sermons we find S. Chrysostom especially most elaborate, as in truth the
Greek Fathers tie themselves to the rules of Oratory, and are great Imitators
of Demosthenes; and at the end of his Comments, that golden-mouthed Patriarc^
subjoins an exhortation ((...)) but such as has not always a native relation to
the Text, but what either some passage in the Homily, or some extraordinary
event of providence occasionally gave a being to. As in truth those wise
Prelates used such modes of discourse as were best fitted to the Ears and
Humor of the Age they lived in. They omitted nothing that might instruct the
Congregation, or any private Christian, in the Church, or the Closet, and
therefore as they were thus diligent in the Temple, so they anciently were
careful in digesting the Sermons of the holy Prophets, Epiphan. (...).
dividing them into ten several Heads or Classes, into Instructions, Visions,
Exhortations, Threatenings, Lamentations, Consolations, Prayers, Histories, and
Prophecies, of which some related to the state of the old Law, others to the
days of the Messiah; to all which they used to prefix certain Notes and Marks,
by which the Reader might be easily directed to understand which of those
several Heads of Discourse was treated of in each Paragraph.

XXXI. Before they fell immediately on the subject of their Homily, according
to the Rules of Oratory the Preacher sweetened and allayed the passions,
prepared and smoothed the minds of his Auditory, by some pertinent and
persuasive Preface, wherein they for the most part gave some specimen of their
Learning and Zeal; for it was an usage among the most famous Cic. To. 3. lib.
16. Ep. 6. ad Attic. p. 553. De gloria librum ad te mist, and in eo proaemium
id est quod in Academico tertio, id evenit eb eam rem, quod habeo volumen
proaemiorum, and ex eo eligere soleo, cum aliquod (...) institui. Vide and
Demosth. exordia concionum inter opera Demosth. p. 216. etc. Edit. Wolsti.
Orators to keep a stock of Proems by them, which might with a little labor
fit all occasions. And this Preface was thought so necessary, that the Nyss.
Tom. 1. p. 871.
Father seems to make an Apology for his omitting it: As on the contrary
sometimes they indulged too far to them, and then also were forced to Chrysostom.
To. 5. (...). p. 282. (...). Vide and Tom. 1. (...). in Genes. p. 197. (...),
etc.
Apologize. In his Sermon the charitable and eloquent man Id. (...) in S.
Lazar. Tom. 5. p. 242.
did frequently use to give his Auditory an account some days before of the
subject, which he next intended to treat of, that they might in the mean time
exercise their Meditations thereupon, and bring with them minds prepared for
the entertainment of the truth; and at his next return to preach he gave them
encouragement to be more accurate in the performance of their present duty, Id.
Tom. 1. (...). in Genes. p. 17. and (...). p. 90.
by rendering them his thanks for their sedulous attention to his last
Discourses, and Nyss. Tom. 2. p. 931. hom. in 40 Martyrs.
for their thronging to Church, and Chrysostom. To. (...). p. 72.
complaining, when they saw the house of God thin and empty; and in truth so
much were the people taken with the Piety and Gravity of the man, with the
Reason and Eloquence of his Discourses, that there needed nothing else to make
them serious; for they were so transported by his holy Rhetoric, that they
Vide Dr. Cave's Primit. Christ. part 1. c. 9. p. 28 9/1.
not only flocked in infinite quantities to the Church when such accomplished
men preached, but put a great estimate on those sacred Ambassadors of the glad
Tidings of Peace, and testified much reverence at the reading of the
Scriptures; Chrysostom. To 4. (...). in 2 Thessal. p. 234.
for when the Reader stood up, and said Thus says the Lord, and the Deacons
standing by bid all the people keep silence (for he read a Lesson first out of
the Prophets, then out of the Evangelists, and then out of the Epistles) they
presently obeyed him, as men that were sensible that they conversed with that
God who speak by such earthly Instruments, and by their Embassy sent his
Mysteries and Epistles every day from Heaven to the Sons of men.

XXXII. The Apostles, whose strength and abilities were prodigious, knew no
limits, but as the emergent occasion of their own and flocks necessities
required, so they enlarged or contracted their discourses; the Apostle S. Paul
lengthened one Sermon, that it lasted from Morning till Evening, Act. 28.23.
another till midnight, Acts 20.7. but this was miraculous; and the Church
thought fit to limit the time afterward, and to Cyril. Jerus. Cateches. 13.
allow not above an hour for the Sermon; and sometimes the Fathers Homilies
took up a much less space, not for want of matter, but because they would not
impose on the patience and memories of their Auditories; so beside many short
Sermons of S. Chrysostom, S. Basil, St. Austin, Fulgentius, Maximus, Ambrose
and others, I find Chrysologus especially has more than one Homily on the
whole Creed, and other such comprehensive Subjects, where he could not possibly
want matter, and yet the largest of them will hardly find a slow and deliberate
man a quarter of an hours talk, and for this Regul. c. 9. Isai. 10.23. Romans
9.28.
St. Francis thought he had found a Text of cripture, that expressly authorized
him to command his Friars to make short Sermons, quia verbum abbreviatum fecit
Dominus super terram; and as acceptable as the most Eloquent Fathers were to
their Auditors that admired them, yet they Chrysostom. Tom. 5. (...). in S. Lazar.
p. 221.
were conscious to themselves, that they sometimes trespast on their patience,
by being too long and tedious in their Sermons; and therefore they tied
themselves for the most part to a set time, when the extraordinariness of the
Subject might have inclined them to continue their holy discourse longer, Id.
Tom. 5. (...). in S. Roman. p. 845. (...) Basil. Tom. 1. horn. 2. in Ps. 14. p.
157. (...). Id. hom. 23. p. 564. (...) Concionator non ultra horam, ne
fastidium pariat auditoribus. Can. Hungaric.
and this time was generally an hour, as appears not only by what the Fathers
themselves mention in the case, but particularly by that observation of Chrysostom.
Tom. 6. (...). p. 724. Vide Orig. hemil. 2. in Numer.
St. Chrysostom, that the whole service took the space of but two hours, and I
am sure, that their Liturgies in those days were so long, and full of variety
of Collects, Lessons, and Responses, and such other Offices, that that alone
could not take up less than one hour of the two.

XXXIII. And I am sorry, that I must say, that sometimes such was the vanity of
those first Ages, that they fell into the same error with us of the present
time, imagining the whole of Religion to consist in preaching. What shall I go
to Church for, says the Objector in the golden mouthed Id. Tom. 4. (...). in 2 Thessalonians. p. 234.
Father, if I cannot hear a Sermon? To which the good Patriarch answers, this
one excuse has ruined and destroyed all Piety; for what need is there of a
Preacher, unless the Necessity take its Original from our sloth and negligence;
for what end must we have Homilies? All things are clear, and open in the holy
Scriptures, all things necessary are plainly revealed. But men are ensnared by
their ears, and their fancy, and therefore seek after Novelties. Tell me what
pompous Train of words did S. Paul use, and yet he converted the World? What
Eloquent Harangues did the illiterate Peter make? But there are many difficult
places of Scripture. God has given thee a view of so many plain places, that
thou may take pains to understand the rest. Oh but we have the same things
read to us every day out of the Scriptures, while the Preacher entertains us
with novelties (and this in truth is the material argument) As if the same
sights were not your entertainments every day at the Theater, and Horse-races,
as if we durst not do the business of the day, unless every morning a new Sun
rise on us, nor eat, unless we had every day variety of Cheer. So that
admirable man, and with his words I close this digression.

XXXIV. The Chiliast Dogma is. 6. reckoned as the first of this Saints
erroneous opinions, and Orat. de lect. s. s. Patr. in Justine.
Chemnitius says it was a fundamental one; and an error it is, but in the sense
of S. Justin so innocent, and inoffensive, that I think it severe to brand it,
as Theodoret. (...). lib. 3. in Nepote.
some have done, with the name of Heresy; especially since it seems to have
been the general belief of the Fathers of the second Century, and not a few of
the third; the learned Life of S. Justin. sect. 22. p. 156.
Dr. Cave reckons Papias, Irenaeus, Apollinaris, Tertullian, Nepos, Victorinus,
Lactantius, and Sulpitius Soverus, to whom we may add Melito Bishop of Sardis,
Commodianus, Quintus Junius Hilarion, and the Junior Apellinaris of Laodicea,
and after them Tychonius Afer the Donatist, and for some time De C. D. lib 20.
c 7.
S. Austin himself; and till the end of the fourth Century the opinion was
plausible and well entertained, but then, says Tom. 2 an. 118 p. 62. and Tem.
^. an. 37^. p. 353.
Baronius, Apollinaris Laodicenus taking on him to write against Dionysius of
Alexandria, that had opposed the assertion of the Millennium, and answered the
Books of Nepos, it became formal Heresy, and was so condemned in the Roman
Synod under Pope Damasus, and after that was never heard of. The Acts of this
Synod the Cardinal confesses are lost, and I find it the opinion of a very Dr.
Covel's Des. of Hocker. Pres p. 12.
learned man, that it was the malice of Apollinaris his adversaries, the
Arians, Eunomians, and others, against whom he had writ with much reason and
vehemence, that forged these Calumnies, to decry those books they could not
otherwise answer; and I should willingly believe it, did not the Authority of
Epist 74.
S. Basil, Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, and In Ezekiel. c. 36.
S. Hierome oppose it, but especially Tom. 1. O^at. 51. p. 741.
S. Gregory the Divine, in his first Epistle to Cledonius, assuring us, that
Apollinaris held the opinion in the grossest sense, introducing the necessity
of Circumcision, and legal Sacrifices; and in his Id. Orat. 52. p. 747.
second Epistle he impeaches him of Judaism, Chiliasm, and the dream of
sensualities in Paradise; and in truth, the belief of the Jews was much like
this, who expected a Messiah to come with outward Pomp and Grandeur, and to
restore the Kingdom to Israel. (And perchance Cerinthus having been first a
Jew, from them drew his opinion.) And that the joys of this Monarchy should
consist in the Restoration of the Temple at Jerusalem, and the legal
Sacrifices, the Sabbath, and Circumcision; that in that Estate they should
marry, and get Children, and enjoy such other sensualities, much like a
Mohammedan Paradise.

XXXV. But this was far from the mind of S. Justin, and the followers of
Papias, unless we shall except Instit. l. 7. c. 24.
Lactantius, who tells of Rocks that shall sweat Honey, and Rivers running with
Wine, and Marriages whose Issue shall be a holy Generation, which I take to be
spoken Allegorically, and in a Poetical way (as that Father was not over-wary
in describing matters of Faith) for we are told, Just. M. Dial. cum Tryph.
Judaeo p. 233.
that they looked not for material Altars, or bloody Sacrifices, but that their
Oblations should be Eucharistical Hymns, and Spiritual praises offered to God;
so that certainly S. Hierome does those venerable men a great deal of wrong, in
making their opinion the same with that of the Jews, and Cerinthus, against
whom Irenaeus, and Tertullian, and Justin Martyr too writ, which certainly they
would never have done, had they been of the same persuasion, Lib. 5. c. 26.
Irenaeus expressly charging that Heretic with the denial of the Resurrection
of the dead, and Danaeus tells us, that the Chiliasts, who followed Cerinthus,
looked for their eternal life in this World, to be enjoyed in the City of
Jerusalem, and spent in carnal Voluptuousness, and to last a thousand years;
and uses this as an argument against them, Si post mill annos finitur haec
vita, non est aeterna, that cannot be Eternal, which shall last but a thousand
years. And therefore whereas of this Dogma in the sense of Cerinthus Lib. 4. in
cap. 19. Jerem.
S. Hierome in his dispassionate mood tells us, that he durst not condemn it,
because so many famous men, and Martyrs, have held it, we must affirm, that
here that learned Ancient was mistaken, for it was a spiritual Kingdom
abstracted from the observances of the Mosaic Economy, that they asserted,
and this in the judgment of Ubi su pr.
S. Austin makes the opinion very tolerable; and it is observable, that in the
same place the same Father fastens the name of Chiliasm to the notion of the
Mohammedan Paradise. Nay Ubi supr. p. 253. vide p. 306. etc.
S. Justin affirms confidently, that all the disciples of the Orthodox, and
pure doctrine, all thorow-pac'd Christians, believed as he did; but they that
denied it, were only Christians in Name, but in reality Atheists and Heretics,
men that disowned the Resurrection, such as were the Cerinthians,
Carpocratians, Basilidians, Marcionites, etc. against the last of which
Heretics Contr. Marc. lib. 3. cap. 24.
Tertullian uses this Topic to prove the Resurrection, as Irenaeus does
against the Cerinthians.

XXXVI. But this argument has been learnedly, and ex professo fully handled by
Comment. de mill annis Apocalypt.
Mr. Mede, who gives us a good reason of the general entertainment, which the
belief every where found, viz. to bring over, and Convert the Jews, by telling
them that they expected no other Messiah, but him, whom themselves looked for,
even Jesus of Nazareth, who should establish such a Kingdom, as the Prophets
had foretold. Thus stood the Judgment of the most Primitive Antiquity, and in
this, and the last age, it has been asserted not only by Mr. Mede, but by
Coelius Secundus Curio, Cunaeus, and others in this Spiritual sense, that the
Church of Christ shall for a thousand years flourish in greater purity, and
power, for faith and manners, in greater luster, and external glory, than
hitherto it has done in all former ages. And for my part, says Theolog. Vet.
lib. 3. c. 7. p. 513.
Dr. Heylin, I see no danger in assenting to it, and if this will please the
Millenaries, they shall have me with them. And I have been informed by a very
Reverend and learned Person, that in the late Siege of Oxon, in our unhappy
Civil War, Dr. Rawleigh the then Dean of Wells taking up this opinion (I
suppose only for disputation sake) was attempted by the Primate of Armagh, who
one day returning from him, was asked by Dr. Stewart that met him, what had
heated his Lordship; he freely told that he had been discoursing with Dr.
Rawleigh who was become a Millenary, to whom Dr. Stewart replied, One such old
Error, my Lord, is worth a thousand of your new ones.

XXXVII. Nor does the Church of England any where expressly condemn the tenet,
but rather discountenances its being reckoned among the Heresies, for whereas
in the Articles of Religion published under King Edward the sixth, this is one,
Art. 41. p. 52. Ed. Garthw.
They that go about to renew the Fable of the Heretics called Millenarii, be
repugnant to holy Scripture, and cast themselves headlong into Jewish dotage.
The Articles under Queen Elizabeth have quite left it out, as if the Opinion
were credible and safe. All this I have said to testify the great credit which
this Opinion once had, and that I cannot yet think it an Heresy; though for my
self I subscribe to the dictates of the Church in De Dogm. Eccles. cap. 54 and
55.
Gennadius. In the divine promises we expect nothing earthy or transitory, as
the Militani do, no renewal of Marriages, as Cerinthus and Marcion dote, no
sensualities of Meat and Drink, as Papias, Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Lactantius
do believe; nor do we hope for a future reign of Christ for a thousand years
after the Resurrection to commence here on Earth, and that the Saints shall
reign with him in pleasures, as Nepos taught, who first found out a distinction
between the first Resurrection of the Just, and the second of the Wicked; and
that in the interval between these two Resurrections of the dead, That the
Nations that know not God shall be kept in the flesh in the Corners of the
Earth, who after the thousand years reign of the Just on Earth, by the
instigation of the Devil, shall fight against the Righteous, and be overcome by
a shower of Fire rained from God, that shall fight for the Just; by which the
Wicked being slain shall have another Resurrection in incorruptible Bodies,
with the rest of the Sinners that beforehand dyed in their Iniquity, to be
confined to eternal Torments.

XXXVIII. Nor is the Opinion of the Angels begetting Giants on the Daughters of
men without many a venerable Author to assert it, whom we may find quoted by
Life of S. Justin. sect. 24. p. 157.
Dr. Cave, to whom among the Ancients Ser. de Resurrect. apud Phot. cod. (...).
p. 480.
Methodius adds Origin, refuting his Assertion, that the Angels after their
Apostasy falling in love with flesh, and were intermixed with the Daughters of
men; and besides the Authority of the Translation of the Seventy, which the
Fathers, not understanding Hebrew, constantly used (or had they, the Sons of
God signify the Angels in that holy Language, Job 1.6. where the Septuagint
also renders it, (...), the Angels of God) what did much persuade to the Belief
of this Opinion, was the conceit they had entertained of the Authority of the
Book of Enoch, (...), concerning Guardian Angels, where there is a formal story
told of this matter, which he that has leisure and patience may read in Page
244, 245.
Scaligers Notes on Eusebius; an Apocryphal piece, quoted by S. Jude; and
consequently thought afterward the genuine product of the Patriarch: So says
Legate. pro Christian. p. 31. Edit. Stephani.
Athenagoras, Know ye, that we speak nothing without Witnesses, but what is
declared in the Prophetic Writings, as also is affirmed by Apud Scalig. p. 243.
Zosimus Panopolites, in his Book of Chemistry: The Book it self being
Anciently had in such estimation, that it is not unreasonably conjectured by
some Thorndyke's Review, chapter 5. p. 15.
learned men, from its being quoted in the Epistles of S. Peter, and S. Jude,
that it was primitively read in their Public Assemblies, and that S. Paul, in
1 Cor. 11.10. affirming that the Woman ought to have power over her head,
because of the Angels, alludes to that Legend, as to a passage publicly known,
though not true; as 1 Cor. 10.4. he seems to allude to another fabulous story
among the Jews, that the Water followed the Israelites in the Wilderness over
Mountains, and Rocks, till they came to the Land of Canaan. This doubtless
wrought on De habitu mulicbr. Edit. Rhen. p. 180. G.
Tertullian, (who undertakes to prove the Book to be genuine) and he on his
Scholar S. Cyprian; nor did it only make Proselytes among the Christians, it
captivated the two most learned Jews, Philo and Josephus.

XXXIX. The Martyr is next charged with affirming the salvability of the
Heathens, and attributing too much to the Writings of Plato and other
Philosophers; as to the last of which, I declare that many truths look so
lovely in the dress of that wise man, that I cannot but admire the clearness of
his reason, and sublimeness of his Natural Divinity; especially their
consonancy to the Articles of our Christian Belief; he acknowledging but one
God, confessing him infinitely wise, and infinitely powerful, that he made the
World, and governs it, that the Soul is immortal, and shall after death enjoy
God, and many other such excellent Notions; above all plainly confessing a Vide
Aug. de C.D. sect. 10. c. 23.
Trinity, or three Principles, the Platonic Notion being adaequately consonant
to the Description in the first Chapter of S. John's Gospel, which a great Apud
eund. c. 29.
Philosopher of that School told Simplicianus, Bishop of Millain, deserved to
be writ in Letters of Gold; and which Apud Eusebius. (...). l. 11. c. 19.
Amelius confidently, but falsely asserted, That that Barbarian (meaning S.
John) had stole out of the Books of his Master Plato: and it was observable,
that most of the Academicks, especially Aug. Epist. 56. Dioscoro.
the School of Plotinus, either suffered themselves to be enslaved to the love
and practice of curious Arts and Magic, or being truly in love with Wisdom
became Christians, as it happened to many of that Philosophic Family in S.
Austin's time, who Id. de vera relig. cap. 4.
affirms, that a little alteration of Opinion, and the mode of speaking, would
easily make a Platonist a Christian: And I must profess my self so much
ravished with the morality of that Divine Man's Discourses, that would my
Religion permit it, as it will not, I could yet join my Devotion to the
Petitions of Poem. p. 32. Edit. Etonens.
Johannes Euchaitensis, for the Salvation of Plato and Plutarch. But I am apt
to think that there is no need to pray for that, which, for ought I know to the
contrary, may be already accomplished.

XL. Exercit. 1. n. 1.
Isaac Casaubon, and after him Life of S. Justin. sect. 20, 21, p. 154. etc.
Dr. Cave affirm, that the (...), which Justin Martyr mentions, signifies no
more, but every man's reason and natural notices of good and evil, which are
given us from him, that is the (...), the Eternal Word and Wisdom of the
Father, and so they that live according to this Natural Light, in some sense
may be said to partake of Christ, and to be Christians; and so come within the
reach of that Text, That the name of Jesus is the only name under Heaven, by
which men can be saved. Nor has this Doctrine but gotten many an Assertor
among the Moderns, Erasmus, Ludovicus, Vives, Zuinglius, and Luther, with many
a learned Schoolman, and others, as they are cited by De animab. paganor. l. 7.
c. 6.
Collius, Tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 2. p. 4.
Gregory de Valentia, and Orthodox. fid. Explic. l. 3. resp. ad axiom. 6. --
Andradius; and among the Ancients this Martyr, and Cleemns Alexandrinus,
affirming, (...). p. 234.
that the Law was a guide to the Jews, and Philosophy or the use of right
reason to the Gentiles; and that this did of it self justify the Heathens.
Were not the Fathers that lived before Christ injured by their not knowing him?
says Tom. 2. (...). in Matthew. p. 248.
S. Chrysostom, in no wise, for it is apparent, that they that did not confess
Christ were saved; for there was nothing then required of them, but to know the
true God, and abstain from Idolatry; and they that did so abstain, and worship
that God, and observe the best sort of Conversation, though they were ignorant
of Christ, shall partake of all good things, for there shall be Honor, and
Glory, Romans 2.10.
and Peace, to every one, that does good, to the Jew first, and also to the
Gentile: For then it was sufficient to their Salvation to know God aright, but
now it is also required, that we know his Son Jesus, whom he has sent, for had
I not come, Joh. 15.22.
and spoken to you, you had had no sin. And if this Hypothesis be true, as I am
of opinion, that there was no explicit knowledge then required, but only of
the one God, was not Socrates a Martyr for that truth at Athens? (for I fear
not to give him that Title, since the Church bestows it on the Infants at
Bethlehem, who knew nothing of Christ, and on S. John Baptist, who dyed a
Martyr to the Decalogue rather than to the Creed) and if Idolatry then was the
great Crime forbidden, did not that great man mock at their many Gods? Tert.
Apol. c. 14.
((...)) And as to a holy Life; his calls for the blushes, as well as imitation
of those, who have nothing to boast of as a Title to Heaven, but the Character
of their Baptism; and it wants not an Author to assert it, that Socrates's
Demon was a good Angel deputed to attend him. This serves to vindicate the
Heathens that lived honestly before the fullness of time, and clears our
Martyr; and for those that have lived since, I cannot think so hardly of Gods
mercy, that they shall be damned for not believing in a Savior, of whom they
have not heard; the Laws of God requiring, that the Gospel must first be
preached, and then he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, and he
that believes not shall be damned. And as to the eighteenth Article of our
Church, I suppose it was intended only to destroy that loose tenent of some
men, of all persuasions, that whatever a man's opinion be, if he live honestly
he must be saved.

XLI. The Doctrine of free will is in the same page, reckoned as one of S.
Justin's errors; and p. 74. laid to the charge of Irenaeus, and p. 106, 107. of
Clemens Alexandrinus, and indeed to which of the Fathers does he not impute it?
The complaint I must confess, is not made by Mr. H. only, but by many others,
that the Fathers spoke not warily enough in this point before the rise of
Pelagius, and the propagating his heresy, in as much as Ep. ded. Ludov. Borb.
ante Nov. Test.
Beza tells us, that the interests of truth had been absolutely ruined, had not
S. Austin appeared to her rescue against Pelagius; and Ad Lector. ante Caten.
Aloysius Lippomannus, of the other Church, that for this reason S. Chrysostom
especially is to be read with caution. But the fears of Beza were ill grounded,
if we may credit Commonitor. cap. 34.
Vincentius Lirinensis, since before Pelagius, no man ever asserted this
unlimited freedom of man's will, or that the grace of God was not necessary to
the doing of every good Action. It Is true, they say, that when the spirit of
God makes its addresses to the man, and grace is offered him, that man's will is
still free, either to resist it, or to comply with it; and that the Image of
God imprinted on us, does shine so brightly in nothing, as in this liberty; but
still they affirm the necessity of preventing grace; and that nothing can be
well done but by the assistances thereof. And this has Life of S. Just. Sect.
25. p. 158.
Dr. Cave done for the Fathers, whom Mr. H. accuses, who testifies, that they
acknowledge a necessity of strong assistances, and divine Grace to raise the
Soul, and exalt it to spiritual activities: for the rest of the Fathers, my
Reader may consult Hist. Pelag. lib. 3. part. 1. These. 1, 2. part. 270. etc.
Voss^us, and L. 7. c. 11. Sect. 23. etc.
Spalatensis, and S. Chrysostom speaks for himself, that he means only a
freedom from necessity and coaction; Christ says, If any man will come after
me, I do neither force nor compel, but leave every man Master of his own will,
but this still presupposing his Grace, Tom. 4. (...). in Ep. ad Philip. p. 46.
for it is he alone, that gives us willingness, and ability, for it is his
whole work; Id. Tom. 4. (...). in 2 Timothy p. 368.
dive not thou into God's secrets, learn to know this only, that God orders all
things, foresees all things, and that men are free; that some things he
actually produces, other things he permits; that he is willing that no Evil
should have a being, that all things are not done by his will, but by ours, all
evil Actions proceeding from our selves only, all good Actions from our will
and his Assistance. I will shut up all with the words of De Dogmat. Eccles. c.
49, 50.
Gennadius Massiliensis (especially because he was looked on as a Semipelagian)
This by the Grace of God ought we to preach and believe, according to the
Testimony of Scripture, and the ancient Fathers; that the will of man was so
depraved by Adam 's sin, that no man can love God as he should, or believe in
him, or do good, unless the Grace of God prevent him; and after Baptism we do
not first begin the holy Action, and then are assisted, but God himself first
inspires Faith and Love of him, without any merits of ours preceding.

XLII. I have thus vindicated this Father, and yet must my self confess, That
in point of Chronology he is many times overseen, as in making Apolog. 2.
Herod King of Judaea, when the septuagint Interpreters Translated the Bible
under Philadelphus, in affirming, Dial. cum Tryphone.
that our Savior was not born at but near Bethlehem, and that Ibid.
according to the Tradition of the Jews, he was crucified not under Herod
Ascalonites, but under his Son Antipas, and that this latter Herod was then the
High Priest. But such slips of the good man's memory are as easily pardoned, as
known by all ingenuous and pious men. In his Death and Martyrdom Eusebius is
silent, but Tom. 2. an. 165. p. 159, 160.
Baronius, out of the Acts of his Martyrdom, gives us an exact account both of
his Examination, his being first scourged, and then beheaded, Apolog. 1. p. 46.
though himself seems to expect to be crucified, saying, That he looked that
some of his Enemies would accuse him, and that he should dye his Master's
death. And he there particularly mentions Crescens, that vile and profligate,
that debauched and ignorant Cynick, who was the cause of his Martyrdom; at what
time, whatever Haeres. 46.
Epiphanius mistakes, or rather his Transcriber, he must needs be above 30
years of Age. So dyed this generous Apologist for the Laws and Religion of
Jesus, an. 165. says Baronius, but Dr. Cave in his Chronology makes it to have
fallen out a year, if not two sooner; and the Church has dedicated a Festival
to his memory, on the first of June in the Greek Church, but in the Western on
the 13th of April, and may his name be had in everlasting remembrance.

THE LIFE OF S. Irenaeus, BISHOP OF LIONS.
I. IN the Memoirs of this grave and learned Prelate, I cannot find much that
may justly be reprehended, unless the Reader may be, as I have been, inclined
to wish, that Mr H. had spoken more fully to some passages of his life: but
withal I acknowledge my longings genuinely satisfied by the Reverend Dr. Cave,
who, among other things accurately related, acquaints us with Irenaeus's
mission from the Churches of Lions and Vien to Eleutherius, and the Asian
Churches; not to the Asian Churches only, in which journey he occasionally took
Rome in his way, as Mr. H. p. 53. avers out of Vit. Irenaei^nte opera.
Feuardentius; nor to Rome only without any Letters at all to the Asian
Churches, as Tom. 2. an. 179. p. 246, 247.
Baronius would have it, but to both: to the Eastern Churches, to compose the
differences there raised by the followers of Montanus, and to Pope Eleutherius,
not because it was the duty of that Ecumenical Pastor to decide all
Controversies, as the Cardinal would have it, for himself was infected with the
same heresy, says adv. Praxeam c. I.
Tertullian; but to ratify his authority with the Letters of that Patriarch,
and perhaps that he might without disturbance employ his time and pains in the
confutation of Florinus and Blastus, two Presbyters of that Church, but
excommunicate, (whose falling into the heresy of Valentinus so grieved the
good man, that it occasioned him to Theod. (...). lib. 1. seci. Florinus, and
Blastus.
write his books against that heresy which we now have) And that he went this
Journey, I am persuaded by apud Dr. Caves life of Iren. p. 165.
Eusebius and St. Hierome, whatever the acut Valesius says to the contrary.

II. At his return from the East, he was chosen successor to Pothinus (who had
been Martyred in his absence) in a dangerous time, that needed a man of spirit
and courage, of learning and piety, the persecution raging violently without,
and the Church being as furiously assaulted within, by Marcus, one of the
Scholars of Valentinus, of whom whereas Not. in Eusebius. p. 200.
Scaliger wonders, that neither Eusebius, nor Hierome make any mention, yet not
only lib. 1. cap. 8, and 9.
Irenaeus himself and Praescript adv. haeres. cap. 29.
Tertullian names him with Heracleon and Colarbasus, the upholders of the
School of the Gnostics, but also lib. 4. c. 10. Vide Theodoret. ubi supr. in
Marco.
Eusebius gives his Character, and St. Ep. 29. to. 1 p. 198. and comment. in
Isa. 64. f. 112. D.
Hierome avers, that he was a Scholar of Valentinus, and first brought that
heresy into France, into those parts of the Country, through which the Rhoan
and the Garonne run, and thence passing the Pyrenee Mountains he went into
Spain, and that his chief employment was by Magic, and other lustful
privacies, to creep into the houses of great men, and debauch their Wives,
Women, who are led about with diverse desires, always learning, but never coming
to the knowledge of the truth.

III. And here it may not be amiss to observe, that the greatest enemies to
Christianity have been Satan's privadoes, and admitted to some more familiar
intimacies than ordinary, with the Prince of Darkness; and this will visibly
appear, if we inspect the Catalogues of the Primitive Heretics, or the lives
of the Emperors, who were the most active persecutors of the interests of
Jesus, whom we shall find acted by a more than humane impulse to uphold the
reputation and grandeur of that tottering and ruinous Kingdom. The first
disturbers of the Churches peace, and introducer of damnable Dogmata, was Simon
Magus, whose name bespeaks what acquaintance he had with the Devil; nor were
his followers any more averse from his practices, than his principles; Theodor.
(...). lib. 1. sect. Simonis haeresis.
their chief employment lying in Charms, Philtres, Amulets, and such magical
and unlawful Mysteries; his most active and acute Disciple was Menander, a Id
ubi supra. Aug. de haeres. c. 6. Tertull. praescript. ad fin. Eusebius. lib. 3. c.
20. Iren. l. 1. c. 21.
Master also in this infernal Art; after whom were Saturninus and Basilides his
Scholars, the first the more open villain, and a plain asserter of his Masters
heresies, but the other a more close and busy Proctor for Satan, being a great
pretender to abstruse and undiscovered Mysteries, but Eusebius. l. 4. cap. 7.
Theodoret. ubi supr. sect. Basil.
both equally enslaved by the Devil to become his Vassals; Basilides especially
being a great trader in Amulets, which he gave his deluded Proselytes, the form
of which you may see in Baronius append. ad To. 2. an. 120. In these steps did
Gaius apud Euseh. lib. 3. c. 22.
Cerinthus walk, and Id. l. 4. c. 7. Iren. l. 1. c. 24.
Carpocrates, who blasted Religion with his venomous breath, had an assistant
Demon, and gloried, that he kept those spirits in subjection, whose son Theod.
ubi supr. sect. Carpocrat.
Epiphanes, and the rest of his followers, grew dextrous in those instances of
their skill.

IV. Thus the first family of the Gnostics grew up, and became strong and
formidable, till it was supplanted, or rather engrossed by the Valentinians;
Theod lib. 1. sect. Valentinus.
Valentinus deriving his heresy from Simon Magus and Menander, and of whom we
may judge, what his course of life was, whose instructors were Magicians, and
Scholars of the same trade, such as were Marcus (of whom hereafter) and
Heracleon, who taught his Disciples Charms wrapped up in Hebrew, and other
obsolete words, Aug. de haeresib. c. 16.
and how to anoint their dead with oil, balsom and water, and a set form of
invocation. From this Valentinus the Ophitae derived themselves, says l. 1. c.
3. vid. and Tert. de praescript. ad fin. Theodoret. ubi supr. sect. Ophit. Aug.
ubi sup. c. 17.
Irenaeus, who adored a Serpent, which by the enchantments of the Priest was
trained out of his Den to ascend the Altar, where he rolled himself round the
Oblations, and lickt them, which were afterward distributed to the deluded
multitude, as the only true consecrated Elements of the Eucharist. The
followers of Marcus were the Tascodrungitae, says ubi supr. sect. Ascodrytae.
and Iren. lib. 1. c. 18.
Theodoret, and they also poured oil and water on the heads of their dead, that
they might be invisible, and by that means rendered more excellent, and better,
than the Spiritual and Angelick powers. As Theoddib. 2. sect. Elcesaitae.
the Disciples of Elcesai were also ensnared by Astrology, and Magic, by
Charms, and Invocations. Euscb. l. 4. c. 10.
Cerdon and Marcion were in the like manner ill addicted, and Socrat. kissed. l.
1. c. 22. Lat. 17.
Manes's Tutor Buddas was carried by his familiar into the air, whence falling
headlong the wretch perished; and his Theed. ubi supr. praef. and l. 1. sect.
Manes.
Pupil was a practiser of all unlawful arts ((...) in Theodoret) and such were
all his followers, and among the Marcionites of his time the same Ibid. sect.
Marcion.
Father says, he found a brass Serpent, an Amulet doubtless, laid up in a Chest
among many other abominable mysteries, as De p^ae script. c. 30.
Tertullian justly impeac^es the Father of that Sect of too much curiosity, and
an unquiet head. And by such an evil spirit were Montanus and his Prophetesses
acted, and among his Followers Apollinar. apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 15.
Theodotus was lifted into the Air by his Familiar, from whence he fell down
and perished. And may we not say that many of the Miracles of the Romish Church
owe their Original to this Author, since many of their seemingly most devout
and inspired Nuns have been at last convicted to have been Witches? So true is
that observation of the Tert. de praescr. p. 40. F. G. edit. Rhen.
African Father, that the greatest acquaintances which the Heretics made, was
with Sorcerers and Juglers, with Astrologers and the lovers of curious Arts,
and that we may judge of the exellencies of their Faith by the Debaucheries of
their Conversation. Nor was it without reason, that S. Paul, 1 Timothy 4.1. calls
the Gnostick Opinions, the Doctrine of Devils.

V. And as these persecuted the Christian Church with their Tongues, so those
that employed their Authority by severe and cruel Edicts to extirpate the holy
Faith, were much inclined to these acquaintances. The first declared Enemy of
Jesus among the Emperors, was Nero, who on the head of all his other
insufferable qualities, that made him a burden to the Earth, and a heavy curse
to mankind, was a great Plin. not. hist. lib. 30. c. 2.
practiser of Magic, with which he was as much bewitched, as with his love of
Music, being acted, and led, in his biggest and most weighty concerns, by the
Counsels of Tiridates, a man famous in that way. These next was Domitian, a
Monster that boggled at no Crime, who (...). Zosim. hist. l. 1. p. 5. ed. Steph.
out-doing his all Predecessors in Cruelty, Luxury, and Covetousness, was the
Author of the second Persecution; and though the Historians tell us, that he
banished the Philosophers and Mathematici from Rome, yet In Domit. sect. 14, and
15.
Suetonius is my Author, that he was studious of these devilish mysteries.
Trajan doubtless was a Prince of a very sweet temper, and most excellent
Virtues, but a prostrate admirer of the Heathen superstitions; though his
persecution seems to have commenced against the Christians, not so much on
Religious, as Politic grounds, because their hetaeriae, or meetings, (which
looked suspiciously, by reason of their numbers, and the place, and time of
their conventions, before day, and in their Coemeteria under ground) seemed to
threaten the peace, and quiet of the Commonwealth, for which reasons he not
only forbad such Conventions among the Christians, but expressly declares his
dislike of erecting any new Corporation among his Heathen Subjects, the
frequenters of which Hetaeriae without license Ulpian. lib. 6. de Offic.
Procons. F. lib. 47. tit. 22. l. 2.
were adjudged by the Roman Laws to be guilty of High Treason, equally with
those, who by force and arms seized a Temple, or any other public place. The
fourth Persecution broke out under Adrian a Tert. Apol. c. 6. excerpt. Dionis
apud Valesium. p. 714.
Prince infinitely addicted to the Pagan Rites, coveting all occasions of being
initiated into their mysteries, a searcher into all sorts of curiosities, and
strangely in love with Magic. M. Aurelius Antoninus begun the fifth
persecution, or rather the enraged Gentiles under him (for that he himself by
his express edicts begun a persecution, both Apol. c. 5.
Tertullian, and Hist. lib. 5. c. 1.
Eusebius deny) who though a most admirable, and accomplished Prince, (and one,
that professed himself an Infidel to prodigious stories, done by charms, and the
assistance of Demons, (...). init.
and therein perchance ubraids the Christians, who in his time wrought
miracles, and dispossessed Daemoniacks,) yet was early, and in his Infancy
initiated by his Patron Adrian Capitolin. in Marco.
, being at eight years old, made a member, and afterward a Priest of the Salian
College, of which at last he became President. He carefs'd the Philosophers of
that Age, who most of them were studious of Magic, though they would not own
it, having a particular dependence on that Impostor; Lucian. To. 1. Pseudomant.
p. 493.
Alexander in the expedition against the Marcomanni (his Colleague Lucius Verus
being a great cherisher of the Magic in his inroad into Parthia, many of whom
he brought with him from Babylon to Rome at his return) nay so fond are the
Heathen writers of this his acquaintance, Dio in M. Aurel. Claudian in 6.
Honorii Consulat. l. 1. vide Baron. Tom. 2. an. 176. p. 217, 218.
that they are content to falsify the truth of the story of that Expedition,
to gratify their own humor, that they may Father the Famous attempt of the
Legio Fulminatrix in that War, some on the skill of Arnupthis a Magican of
Egypt, who by invocating Mercury, and other Demons, procured that Rain;
others on Julian another Magician of that Age.

VI. Of Severus I must profess, I can meet with no account, that he either was
addicted himself, or cherisht others, that loved these Arts; but the Spartian.
in Severo.
Historians tell us, that he was crafty and subtle, and withal very cruel, and
without doubt must have been acted by a very violent and extraordinary impetus,
or he could not so suddenly have been altered from being a great favourer to
become a vigorous persecutor of Religion. Herod. l. 7. (...). Pompon. Mela,
lib. 2. sect. Thracia. Viros benignius alit Thracia, non ad speciem tamen: nam
and illis asper, atque indecens corporis habitus est.
Maximinus was a robust, and brutish person, a man of unsatisfied cruelty, and
barbarous manners, a perfect Thracian, as rude and unpolisht as his Country,
which was never fitted to produce any thing polite, and acceptable, but
cherishes inhabitants like it self, rough-hewn, and ugly. He begun the seventh
persecution, not out of any respect to the Rites of Gentilism, for he had no
Religion in him, but out of Eusebius. l. 6. c. 21.
hatred to his Predecessor Alexander Severus, who had cherisht the Christians.
But Hist. sacr. l. 2.
Sulpitius Severus denies this to have been one of the ten persecutions. The
Decian persecution begun first at Alexandria, Dionys. Alex. Ep. Fabio Antioch.
apud Eusebius. l. 6. c. 34.
where the multitude were enraged to mischief the Christians, by the
persuasions of an Egyptian Magician, and probably the infection thence spread
it self to Carthage, and so over the rest of the Empire, till it was confirmed
by a solemn Edict. The same Villain, being afterward the boutefeau, that
inflamed as Tom. 2. an. 252. p. 444. and an. 257. p. 556.
Baronius Valerian probably conjectures (and by whose instruction Id. an. 234.
p. 416.
Plotinus was acquainted with those dark, and unlawful mysteries) for the
Palace of that Prince was a kind of Church, it was so thronged with Christians,
till that Dion. Ep. Hermam. apud. Eus. l. 7. c. 10.
Archmagician practiced him to prosecute the holy men, as the greatest Monsters
on Earth, men of profligate vices, and insufferable opinions. The ninth
persecution De C. D. lib. 18. c. 52.
S. Austin, who omits that under Adrian, places under Aurelian, who was a great
admirer of Apollonius Tyanaeus that noted Conjurer, to whom Vopisc. in
Aurelian. vide Fulv. Visin. illustr. Imag. and not. in Vopisc. p. 516.
he erected Statues, and promised to build a Temple, and whose image he caused
to be stamped on his Coin.

VII. And when all these contrivances would not succeed, but the death of the
Martyrs increased the number of Confessors, Dioclesian and his immediate
Successors made the last Essay in behalf of dying Paganism, Vit. Constant. l.
2. c. 49, 50.
Constantine himself relating, that what gave an occasion to that most furious
persecution, was the Oracle of Delphos, that accused the just men of the Earth
of hindering its giving answers, which good men, when one of the Priests had
told him were the Christians, he presently set out his Edicts to root them out
of the Earth; and the same courses were taken by his followers. Eusebius. Hist. l.
8. c. 27.
Maximinus was a great cherisher of the Magicians, and other Impostors, being
naturally fierce, and superstitious, not daring to undertake the least action
without consulting an Oracle. So also was Vit. Gonstant. lib. 1. c. 10.
Maxentius, and Eus. Hist. l. 9. c. 8. and Vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 4.
Licinius. And when Julian in vain strove to deceive mankind by restoring the
Heathen Sacrifices presently on his assuming the Empire, his Court swarmed with
these infects, himself not being unacquainted with this sort of Learning, Tom.
5. Orat. 6. in S. Babyl. p. 459.
S. Chrysostom expressly calling him a Magician, and the Gedren. compend. in
Juliano. Mich. Glye. Annal. part 4. apud Baron. Tom. 4. p. 129.
later Greek Historians tell us, that he kept a Familiar, whom he used to send
on messages, and more particularly in his last expedition into Persia. And as
soon as he had published his Rescripts for the reparation of the Idol Temples,
the erection of the ruined Altars, and retriving the disused Ceremonies, Chrysostom.
ubi supr.
his palace was of a sudden filled with Inchanters, Augures, and men of that
Class; such were Maximus his Tutor, Priscus, and Chrysanthius his darlings,
that followed him to the Wars of Persia, and in truth Apuleius, Plotinus,
Porphyry, and Jamblichus, and the rest of that Tribe, in imitation of their
Master Philostr. Vit. Apollon. apud Phot. Cod. (...). p. 540.
Pythagoras, can never clear themselves from this imputation. S. de vera relig.
c. 4.
Augustine positively averring, that all the Platonists that did not turn
Christians, did turn Magicians. It was not therefore without reason, that Adv.
Hermogen.
Tertullian called the Philosophers, the Patriarchs of the Heretics, for from
them was it that Valentinus sucked his poison, from them that Marcus his
Follower took his hints, whom I have reserved till the last, that we might see
some Instances of his skill.

VIII. That venerable and Divine Man, (whose name L. 1. c. 12.
Irenaeus conceals) smartly chastises him in his Poem, (...), etc. calling him
a maker of Idols, and hunter after Miracles, a great Astrologer, and notorious
Magician, who to deceive the World did strange things by the help of Satan, and
was the Forerunner of Antichrist; and S. Irenaeus's whole ninth Chapter is
spent on this subject, in which we find, that by a long form of Invocation he
would cause the Wine of the Eucharist to appear of the color of a deep red,
that he had an Assistant Demon, that did enable him to prophecy, and to
communicate that Spirit of madness and folly to as many as he did breath on;
that he engaged that his Followers should know more than the A postles, and
should not be defiled by any thing they did, teaching them charms, how to
escape invisibly from the hands of the Judge when apprehended, allowing even
the Women to consecrate the Eucharist, and making them Prophetesses; among
which easy and perswasible Sex most Heretics have pitched their Tents: Vide
Hieron, adv. Pelag. ad Ctesiphont. Tom. 2. p. 256.
So Simon Magus had his Helena, Carpocrates his Marcellina, Ptolomaeus his
Flora, Apelles his Philumena, Marcion his Female Harbingers to prepare his
reception at Rome, Montanus his Prisca, and Maximillae Elcsai, his Marthus and
Marthana, Paulus of Samosata his Mistress, Donatus his Lucilia, Priscillian his
Galla, the Arians had their greatest numbers among the Court-Ladies, the
Nicolaitans and the Disciples of Eustathius of Sebastia were most Women, and
the opinion of the Collyridians, was Epiphanhaer. 79.
(...), the Female Heresy.

IX. Sect. 3. p. 60. the Marginal Note, (...), should be set not where it is
(as if the Tractate of the Apostles preaching ad Marcianum, were the same with
that de scientia) but higher, for the Volume adversus gentes, and that de
scientia, were the same, says Hist. lib. 5. cap. 25. Let.
Eusebius, a very short but very useful Discourse. His Church History,
mentioned by Volaterran, was doubtless a mistake of the meaning of the same
Historian, who uses only his Books adversus Hareses, yet extant; as that of his
Comment on the Revelation also had its Original from a mistake of S. Hierom,
who only says, that Irenaeus interpreted the Revelation, i. maintained the
Chiliast Opinion, whose Foundation is laid in that Prophecy, as he does
largely in the end of his fifth Book; and though here Mr. H. dislike the
judgment of Sixtus Senensis, yet on the same grounds does he entitles S. Justin
the Martyr to a like Tractate.

X. And I could heartily wish that we had only lost those imaginary Volumes,
and that his other most excellent Writings had not perished to the detriment of
the Church of God and the Commonwealth of Learning; by which unhappy fate we
are deprived of all his Epistles (the fragments of that Writ to Pope Victor
excepted) especially that Epistle to Blastus de Schismate, which would have
been so useful to this Age, as would also his Discourses de Monarchia, and de
Ogdoade against Florinus and his darling Opinion, (which I fear, under a
cleaner Masque has appeared in this Age also) that God is the Author of sin.
And here the observation of Apud Chemnit. Loc. Commun. part. 1. sect. de causis
peccati. p. 145.
Nicephorus is very remarkable, that besides the Persecutions that harassed the
Church, the Devil made use of three very subtle Methods to ruin Christianity.
1. Because the prodigious performances of the Son of God were a great
confirmation of the Truth and Divinity of his Doctrine, he opposed the
Impostures of Simon Magus and Apollonius of Tyana to the Miracles of Christ. 2.
Because the holiness of our Savior's Life and Precepts was a great persuasive
to incline the World to Conversion; he introduced into the most sacred Offices
of Religion all sort of Impurities and Lusts, by his Instruments the Gnostics
and Cataphrygians, who adopted their Vices into the number of their Mysteries;
and to whom the promiscuous Mixtures, Incests, and Eating the Blood of Men,
which were unjustly laid to the charge of the Primitive Christians, must be
attributed. 3. And lest this also might not do, that he might incline the World
to be careless and vile, he by Blastus, Florinus, and Marcion, gave being to
the Opinion, that God was the Author of sin, that so he might supersede all
Laws, and enervate the force and vigor of all the Divine Injunctions.

XI. In the end of the Tract de Ogdoade, Irenaeus adjures his Transcriber, by
the coming of Jesus to Judgment, diligently to compare his Copy with the
Original; an Obtestation so sacred, that not only Eusebius takes ^rotice of it
in his History, and S. Hierom in his Catalogue; but the former prefixes it to
^^e first Book of his Chronicon, and the latter to his Translation of the same
Book, as Ruffinus has also another such for sense, though not for words, in
the Preface to his Translation of Origin, (...), requiring his Transcriber
neither to add to, nor diminish, nor change any thing in it, but to correct it
by the Original, and accordingly to publish it; and in after Ages Usher. Epist.
Hebernic. sylloge. p. ^^.
Adamnanus has such an admonition at the end of his Book of the life of S.
Columb (a charge like that of Quintilian ad Tryphonem bibliopolam, and Ad fin.
Apolog. Thesium.
D^. Reynolds's ad transmarinos typographos admon tio^ and may we not take
leave to suppose, that Irenaeus, who was a Scholar to Papias and Polycarp, S.
John's Disciples, did herein imitate that Apostle, who closes his Apoc. 22.18,
19.
Apoculypse with the like solemn Obtestation.

XII. And I could heartily wish that we had the Greek Copy of those Books that
are left, for I know no more of this Father extant in the Language that he writ
in, than what we have in Epiphanius, Eusebius, Theodoret, etc. (for no man is
now so vain to imagine that Irenaeus writ in Latin) although Callasius in his
Epistle Dedicatory before his Edition of this Father, and Orat. delect. Patrum.
init.
Chemnitius affirm, that the Greek Copy had been seen in the Vatican, and
another read at Venice by some learned and good men, who when they came to look
for the Book a second time, found the place empty; which Relation, if true, as
Gallasisius more than once mentions it, no punishment were too big for such
cursed Villains and Plagiaries. For could the World be so happy, we should see
how disingenuously, or rather ignorantly, his Latin Translator has d^a't with
him, dressing his Notions in a style so obscure and rugged, so full of
Solecisms, and barbarous expressions, that they not only sully the Beauty, but
cloud the meaning of this great man, whose modesty, though it inclined him to
make an Pref. l. 1.
Apology for his style, as if it were plain and unrhetorical, yet to him that
reads the passages, which Epiphanius against the Valentinians repeats out of
him in his own Native Language, his style will appear, though not affected, yet
very elegant, without that (...), that sublimity which some men would require,
but not without that gravity, clearness, and perswasiveness that became a
Philosopher on so abstruse a subject.

XIII. I find it the peculiar happiness of S. Irenaeus among the Ecclesiastical
Writers, that anciently no other Writings were fathered on him, than what were
genuinely his (unless we shall say that he has been abused by ome, Vid. Phot.
cod. (...). p. 16. and not. Hae^chel. p. 923.
imputing to him, as others do to Justin Martyr, and a third sort to Josephus,
that Tractate which is truly the Comm^nt^ry of Gajus, (...)) there being scarce
one besides him of all the Sages of the Church, that has not been imposed upon
by the bastard issue of some other men. A Crime too notorious to be excused,
and of which we may say, what Hist. lib. 1. p. 413.
Tacitus does of the profession of Astrology at Rome, That it always will be
forbidden, but always practiced. A Design that seems to intimate a great deal
of Bounty, but betrays an intention of Robbery, of debasing the value, and
impairing the reputation of a worthy man, by thus exposing him to the censures
of the World in a picture drawn by a wrong hand, and martyring him again in
Effigy; destroying noble Writers, as Witches do those whose persons they
cannot reach, by venting their malice against an Image, which themselves have
molded. The undertaking has been of long standing, and may now plead gray
hairs and custom; but well it would be with the Interests of Learning and
Piety; if all such men fell under the chastisement of Theodiscus, Apud Genebr.
Chrer. lib. 3. an. 657.
whom Vasaeus in his Spanish Chronicle mentions, who being the Archbishop of
Sevil, and Primate of Spain, was deposed by his Fellow-Bishops, for setting out
some pieces of his own under the name of his Predecessor Isidorus Hispalensis
in the Arabic Version of his works, not to wish them the fate of Gallon.
respons. ad monac. Benedict. p. 32
Cicarellus, who was hanged at Rome, and afterward his body burnt for the like
Forgery.

XIV. And here I think it convenient to repeat what others have observed before
me, that the Devil in destroying the Church has followed the Method of the
Creed; in the first 300 years he instigated the Followers of Simon Magus,
Menander, Basilides, Marcion, and others, to deny and oppose the first Article
concerning God the Father. In the next three Centuries by the Followers of
Sabellius, Photinus, and Arius, to contradict the Divinity of Christ. After the
year 400 he combated the Doctrine of the Incarnation, Passion and Resurrection
by Nestorius, Entyches, Dioscorus, and others. After the year 800 the
Procession of the holy Ghost was disputed in the Greek Church: since that, the
nature of the Catholic Church, and the power of Remission of sins, by the
Papists, and Anabaptists, etc. the Resurrection of the Body by the Socinians,
and the life everlasting by the modern Sadducees.

XV. Among the memorable sayings of this Father, Mr. H. p. 69. reckons his
denying an uninterrupted succession of Bishops to be a mark of the true Church.
(Of which there is not a word in the place of Irenaeus, that Mr. H. quotes) the
Assertion it self aff onting the Judgment of the ancient Catholic Church, who
makes a continuance of Episcopal Government to be necessary to the Integrity of
a Church, and so does Lib. 3. c. 3. and l. 4. c. 43.
Irenaeus himself, advising all good Christians only to obey such Apostolical
men, but to shun those that cannot deduce themselves from this regular
succession, as Heretics and Schismatics; the mistake only lies in this, that
a Church without this continued series of Prelates may be a true Church in
Essence and Nature, but cannot be entitled to Integrity and Perfection;
Salvation may be had in that Assembly, though they want that Government which
is of Divine Institution, the retention of which sacred Order among us, has
extorted this confession from the mouth of a Cudsemius de desperata Calvini
cause. c. 11.
Jesuit, that the Church of England is not heretical, because it maintains a
succession of Prelates.

XVI. Irenaeus's Opinion of Christ's ignorance of the day of Judgment, is well
vindicated by p. ^74.
Gallasius in his Nores on that place; others of the erro^^ou^ Opimons of the
Father we have apologiz^d for in our Memo^^s of S. Justin the Martyr, and for
his peculiar opinion concerning the age of Christ, D. Life of Iren. Sect. 10.
p. 170.
Cave and Part. 2. l. 2. c. 4. p. 191.
Scrivener aga^^st Daillee have satisfied all mod^st Inquirers. ^n those words
of his, lib. 3 c. ^1. that seem to imply, as if the two Nat^res in Christ were
mixed and confused, which was afterward the Heresy of A^ollinaris, and
Eutyches, (against whom Theodoret expressly writ his second Dialogue) the holy
man without doubt means no more, but the Union of the two Natures; for so lib.
4. c. 37. he explains himself, joining commixtio, and communio Dei, and hominis
together; and lib. 5. c. 2. blaming the Ebionite Heretics for denying this
truth: his next error, that Satan never blasphemed God till the Incarnation of
Christ, for which he quotes Justin Martyr, is meant of his doing it not openly,
but under a Masque [as under the form of a Serpent he trepan'd Adam] not by
himself, but by his Instruments that profess Religion, and yet abuse the Author
of it, such as were the Marcionites, and Valentinians, whom he mentions, who
called themselves Christians, yea the purer sort of Christians, Gnostics, and
yet blasphemed God. Nor do we find among the Jews, who before the Incarnation
of Christ were the peculiar people of God, any Heresy which opposed that
Article, that the Creator of the World, who Commissioned the Prophets, should
also send his Son; which Opinion Irenaeus lays at the door of Valentinus, and
his Tribe, who distinguished between God the Father, and the Demiurgus, or the
Creator of the World; nor is his reason altogether indefensible, (quippe nondum
sciens suam damnationem) because the Devil did not as yet expressly know his
sentence, the Father seeming to allude to that opinion of Ad. Eph^^. p. 45. Ed.
Usher.
S. Ignatius, which was afterward generally embraced, that the Incarnation and
Crucifixion of our Savior, and Virginity of his Mother, were hid from the
cognizance of Satan; so that he might believe that the general promises of a
Redeemer given to the Old World, might as well reach to him, as to the Sons of
Adam, till the Incarnation of Jesus made it appear to the contrary; and that
then seeing his estate remediless, he fell into a like rage with those who are
condemned by the Law; who, says Ubi sup^.
Irenaeus, blame not themselves, but the severity of the Judge, and the rigor
of his proceedings.

XVII. His discourse of Enoch, l. 3. c. 30. that he was Gods true servant
without the badge of Circumcision, or observation of the Sabbath, no man I hope
questions; and for what is added, that being yet in the flesh (Dei legatione ad
Angelos fungebatur) he was sent on an Embassy to the Angels, had we any thing
to countenance the conjecture, beside the respect we bear to this great man, I
would say it was a mistake of the Translator, and that the words in Irenaeus's
Greek might be (...), which will bear the old Version, but to me will be thus
rendered better, And having been Gods Ambassador, i. a Preacher of
Righteousness to the old World, he went to the Angels, and was translated,
where he is kept as a witness of Gods Judgment on those fallen Spirits: which
words may be supposed to ^elate to that common Opinion among the Fathers, that
Enoch with Elias are translated into Paradise in their mortal bodies; and that
in the end of the world they shall both come again to preach Repentance to
mankind, and reduce them from the service of Antichrist, to the worship of the
true God, and shall be martyred at Jerusalem, and after three days rise again,
and then ascend into Heaven; which Opinion I take not upon me to defend, but
only to give a bare Narration of; this is expressly averred by De anima c. 28.
and de resurrect. p. 31 I. Edit. Rhen.
Tertullian, and the P. 290.
Author of the Book de montibus Sinai, and Sion under the name of Cyprian; but,
says Pamelius, of some other African Author of that Age; To. 1 (...). p. 149.
Saint Chrysostom, it is true, professes his ignorance herein, but S. De genes.
ad liter. l. 9. c. 6.
Austin is of Tertullians Opinion, as several others of the Fathers, as they
are quoted by To. 1. contr. 3. l. 3. c. 6.
Cardinal Bellarmine.

XVIII. For his Doctrine, that the Souls of the best men are not received into
Heaven, properly so called, till the day of Judgment, but that they are kept in
some certain Receptacles, where God only knows; which place of happiness is
sometimes called Paradise, at other times Abraham's Bosom, where those that
reside are ( sustinentes resurrectionem, in our barbarous translation) in
expectation of the Resurrection, or ( aeternitatis candidati, as Tertullian
styles them) Candida^es of Immortality, was the general belief of the Primitive
Ages of the Church; for besides Irenaeus, I find it the Opinion of Tertullian,
Clemens Romanus, Justin Martyr, Origin, H^^^ry, Austin, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Theodoret, Victorinus, Prudentius, Aretas, Anast^sius Sinaita, Theophylact,
Oecumenius, Euthymius, and S. Bernard, and Vide Spalatens. l. 5. c. 8. n. 97,
98. and Ushers Answ. to the Jes. Sect. of prayer to Saints, p. 43. Gennad. de
dogmat. Eccles. c. 78.
in truth, among the Fathers, of whom not? and who is there among the sober
Protestants, that asserts that the happiness of the Saints is the same at their
death, that it shall be after their Resurrection? Were it so, our Church has
done very ill in her Office at Burials, to pray, That we, together with all the
departed in the Faith, and sear of God, may have our perfect consummation, and
bliss in that Eternal Kingdom. Irenaeus calls this Station an invisible place,
because it is unknown to us, the departed being in Gods hand, in some estate of
happiness, but neither in misery, nor perfect glory; and that this is the
Opinion of Calvin, and Peter Martyr, Annotat. in Act. 3.31.
Sir Norton K^atchbul has made good, telling us, that the contrary assertion
has no foundation either in the Scriptures, the Fathers, or Reason.

XIX. And having thus vindicated this Reverend Ancient from the Objections made
against these five Books Adversus Haereses, which Cod. (...). p. 162.
Photius, as I understand him, clears from any Heterodox Assertions (since it
is not of them, but of his other Volumes and Epistles, that that acute Critic
says, the exact truth of the Opinions of the Church is debas^d by spurious
reasonings) let us commit this Honorable Servant of God to his rest, who now
wears that white Robe which was washed in his own blood; Omnium doctrinarum
curiosissim^s explanator. Tert. adv. Valentin. (...). Theodoret. (...). l. 1.
Sect. de Menandro. (...). Id. praefat. (...). Id. l. 1. in Carpocrate. (...).
Id. in Florino. (...). Id. l. 2. in Nazar. non long a temporibus Apostolorum.
Aug. contr. Julian. l. 1. c. 2. (...). Photii cod. (...). p. 161. Vide testim.
Eccles. Lugdun. apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 4. and Hier. in Catal. etc.
and it is my sorrow, that none of the Ancients have given him his due
Character, that I might have entertained my Reader with some of their raptures
concerning him (who is only here and there in the writings of the Fathers
mentioned with respect, and a short Character, but what falls abundantly below
his Merit.) He was beheaded for the Cause of Christ, An. 20^. says Baronius, or
as Doctor Cave thinks, seven years after, at the expedition of Severus into
Britain; a larger account of which Martyrdom I was encouraged to expect, when
Not. in Martyrol. Romans Jun. 28.
Baronius told me it was extant in the Vatican Library, till Annal. To. 2. An.
205. p. 330.
himself, whether being mistaken in his first Assertion, or forgetting it,
affirms, that the Acts of his Passion are quite lost; his Festival in the Latin
Church, being celebrated on the 28th of June, in the Greek on the 23. of Aug.

THE LIFE OF S. Clemens OF ALEXANDRIA.
I. THe name of St. Clemens, from all the lovers of Learning, sacred or
profane, commands reverence, and a submissive veneration; who has deserved to
be styled (...) (as the learned Montague somewhere styles him) The most
accomplished Historian, and the acutest Scholar, which the early ages of the
Church could boast of, in whom the genius of Pantaenus discovered it self,
under whom he was bred at Alexandria, where after a while he became a Catechist
in that famous School, and a Successor to his Master who was not the first who
after the Apostles exercised that office there, as Mr. H. Sect. 1. p. 80.
affirms out of B. Rhenanus (for therein that acute Scholar was mistaken) but
rather had many predecessors, Hist. lib. 5. c. 10.
Eusebius declaring, that Pantaenus in the First year of the Emperor Commodus
undertook this employ at Alexandria, in which place, by a very ancient custom,
there was a School opened to teach the sacred Learning in ( i. e. the Creed,
the Decalogue, and Lords Prayer were there explained, says Chronol. lib. 3. an.
196.
Genebrard) and which was continued to his time, and managed by many an
excellent person skilled in all polite literature and eloquence, and in the
knowledge of the Scriptures, which usage Catal. v. Pantaen.
St. Hierome makes to commence from the first foundation of a Church there
under St. Mark (and that Mr. H. p. 81. confesses, which how it can be
reconciled with his former assertion, I know not) and it is probable, that it
was one of the Schools of the Philosophers, that resided in that famous City,
(or perchance a Jewish Synagogue) whose owners being made Christians, the
School also was converted to this holy use; for that ^t was a distinct place
from the Church, is evident from vide Vales. not. in Eusebius. l. 6. c. 19, 20.
Lat.
Eusebius, as in truth it was sometimes undertook by those, who not being of
the Clergy ( Origens youth incapacitating him for Holy Orders) were prohibited
to do any Holy Offices in the Church. So that Pantaenus doubtless had
predecessors in this Office, unless we take on us to contradict all antiquity,
or can think those words of Cod. (...). p. 160.
Photius capable to solve it, who asserts, that Pantaenus not only converst
with those who heard the Apostles, but was himself an Auditor of some of them,
for if so, not certainly of St. Mark who died an. 63. It Is true De Orig. templ.
l. 3. c. 5. p. 92.
Hospinian says, that some affirm the first erection of this School to have
been an. 150. But that Epoch also is thirty years before the time, in which
Eusebius makes Pantaenus the Catechist there.

II. However, we may affirm, that when so accomplished a person read his
Lectures there, his Auditory was fuller, his School better frequented, and its
fame farther spread, than before; so that its general reputation may be said to
be owing to the learning and good conduct of Pantaenus, on whose death the
School abated nothing of its luster, because Clemens succeeded him, a
miraculous proficient under so admirable a Master; thought it seems probable to
me, Vid. Dr. Cave's life of S. Clement sect. 4. p. 196.
that he also supplied his place during his absence in India, in that mission,
which by the persuasion of Demetrius, Patriarch of Alex^ndria, (...) was
willing to undertake; for Clemens was his bosom Disciple, and Pantaenas Clement
darling Master, being the last in order, w^om he met with, for he ^ad been
under Clem. Alex. paedag. lib. 3. p. 201 and ^useb. hest. l. 5. c. 11.
many instructors, one in Gre^^ce, whom An^al. tom. 2. m. 185. p. 261, 262.
Baronius supposes to have been Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, or Caius; another
in Coelosyria, whom he conjectures to have been Theophilus, Patriarch of
Antioch; a third in the East, who was Bardesanes, or as others, Tatianus,
Justin Martyr's Scholar; a fourth in Palesline, who according to the Cardinal
was Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea, according to Dr. Cave, and others, more
probably Theodotus; but the last he met with, was Pantaenus, under whose
guidance he sat down, and went no further.

III. P. 81. Mr. H. a little too severely animadverts Dr. Heylin, who being a
man of such prodigious parts, and infinite reading, could not be ignorant, that
Pantanus was the name of this great Catechist and not Gautenus, as the Printer
mistakes, (who more than once has abused that learned man by his negligence)
for should such slips be censured, what book is free? I am sure not Mr H's, who
p. 6. quotes Bennadius for Gennadius, and p. 9. Rhodignic for Rhodigine, and p.
421. in his Mantissa, Anastasus for Nacephorus but it is a poor employment with
Domitian to hunt and stab flies, a little Christian charity and condescension,
would oversee greater obliquities; and I heartily wish, that with a thomand
such Errata I could redeem my other Errors.

IV. The admission of St. Clemens to the Priesthood probably falls in with the
beginning of the reign of Severus, a Prince, who was the riddle of the
Christian world, who at first treated them with all the methods of kindness,
condescension, and favor, and of a sudden, without cause, was so embittered
against them, that he became a hot and implacable persecutor; so intermixed were
his virtues, and his vices. His Edicts were so severe, and his Officers so
cruel, that the Judas Ch^n apud Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 6. and Hier. Gat. v. Judas.
Sacred Chronologers pen dropped out of his hand, and at this tragical period of
time he fixes the Epoch of the great Antichrist. Thus the divine providence
took care, that the Christians should be baptized with their Saviors baptism,
and drink of a bitter cup. And because the Piety of the Catholic Church was
peculiarly employed in encouraging her children to a cheerful taking up the
Cross and following Jesus; I will particularly enumerate some instances of her
prudence and compassion, to enhance the price of a heavenly Crown, and
depreciate life and liberty, honor and secular satisfactions, in comparison of
the divine blessing; for the Martyrs were the darlings of that age, and were
treated with all imaginable vemeration and affection.

V. They made them frequent visits, while under restraint, (when they were
Martyrs only in designation) neither the shame of their bonds, nor fear of
being made their fellow prisoners could affright them from paying them the
constant Offices of humanity and fraternal duty (and Tertul. l. 2. ad uxor. p.
166. E. Edit. Rhen.
the devout Visitants kissed the Martyrs chains, and ^everenc'd his scars: So the
Martyr. Polyc. p. 24.
Church of Smyrna treated St. Polycarp just before his Martyrdom, and the
Theod. hist. lib. 1. c. 11. and Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 8.
great Constantine thought it not beneath him to fasten his sacred and
Majestic lips to the hollow of the right eyes of Paphnutius and other famous
Prelates in the Council of Nice, which had been bored out for their Testimony
to the Truth) this was Eusebius. l. 6. c. 3.
Origen's chief employment at Alexandria during the Persecution there, and so
was the blessed Christ. to. 5. p. 502, 503.
Ignatius treated by all the adjacent Cities in his Jounrey to Rome, they
spared no cost, if possible, to free the good men from confinement, if not to
bribe their Keepers to permit them access; and this the great Scoffer of
Religion could not but remark; Lucian. de mort. Peregrini. p. 996.
for says he, As soon as ever the Impostor Peregrinus was cast into prison, you
might observe at the door every morning Widows and Children, and people of all
qualities, waiting to be admitted to see him; many gave large bribes to his
Keepers to stay with him all night, when variety of dainties were served in for
supper, after which they entertained themselves with their Holy discourses;
they sent Messengers from all the Cities of Asia to enquire of his health, to
encourage and strengthen him, and many a rich present was brought him under the
Masque of these Visits, and it is incredible, as he continues, what care and
diligence the Christians exercise on such an occasion, if once it be made
public.

VI. The sacred discourses, which Lucian mentions, were doubtless those,
wherein the Martyr, if a Priest, taught them by his example, and speeches a
generous scorn of the World and Life, when they came in competition with the
honor of Jesus and Religion, and a passionate love of Heaven; or if not, those
wherein the Lay-Confessors gave their brethren an account of their resolution,
and begat in them the like thoughts; or else, wherein the Deacon, who was bound
to attend the Confessors, gave both them, and their Visitants holy Counsels,
and furnished them with incentives from all the persuasive Topics he could use,
to incline them honorably and with courage to finish their course, and these to
an imitation of their gallantry and virtue. The Suppers were certainly their
Love Feasts (Agapae) which they there celebrated, the expenses whereof were
born by the Church, and the voluntary contributions of every private well
disposed Christian. Which Co^ections and Feasts, De Martyr, c. 1, and 2. inter
carnis alimenta, quae matter Ecclesia de uberibus suis, and singuli fratres de
operibus suis propriis in carcerem subministrant. -- quae justa sunt caro non
amittit, per curam ecclesiae, and agapen fratrum. -- Rhenan, in loc. pistor
panem missitabat, calcearius calceos, telam textor, hanc fullo gratis curabat,
consuebat vestiarius, pecuniam alius mittebat diurno labor collectam.
Tertullian in his sober mode applauds, but in one of his transports of
Montanisme, Tert. de jejun. p. 296. m. plane vestrum est in carceribus popinas
exhibere martyribus, etc.
severely decrys, objecting to the Catholics, that they converted the Prison
into a Tavern, where they were only restrained in name and show, but in truth
enjoyed there their Feasts and Baths, and all the volupruous conveniences that
could be desired. These Collections for their suffering Brethren were made
every Just. M. apolog. 2. p. 97. and Cypr. de oper. and eleemos. p. 180. vid.
Ep. 26, p. 32.
Lords day, besides an extraordinary Monthly gathering, as I am apt to
understand Apolog. c. 39.
Tertullian, and deposited in the hand of the Priest, who was the common Father
of the Orphans, and Guardian of the Widows, and Almoner of the Poor, Cypr. Ep.
5. p. 12. Constable. Apost. l. 5. c. 1.
but above all the Treasurer of those that were in durance. And by this means
the Candidates of Immortality were plentifully provided for with all sort of
necessaries, and this found materials for their Agapae, which it is more than
probable, were as at other times and places, preceded by the Eucharist, which
the Christians of those early days often received, and was questionless longed
for, as a Viaticum for Eternity, by those holy Men. Aug. op. brevic. collat.
cum Donatist. die. 3. c. 5.11.
And there also was Baptism frequently Administered.

VII. These compassionate Offices were many times performed by the Prelates of
the Church, who personally discharged the duty. Vid. Cypr. Ep. 37. p. 43.
So Onesimus, and other neighbor Bishops, waited on St. Ignatius at Smyrna from
Ephesus, and the adjacent Cities; sometimes the Presbyters, but Id. Ep. 11. p.
20.
the Deacons of the Church were particularly employed in these Messages, to
attend the Martyrs, to know and relieve their wants, that no Specimen of care
and compassion might be omitted. And when the rage of the persecution made it
dangerous for the Church Officers to appear publicly, then the Liban. orat. de
vinctis. p. 56.
Deaconesses did those charitable Offices. And for those that were hindered from
paying them their personal attendances, they not only passionately became
suitors to the Martyrs for their prayers, when they came to Heaven, as Cypr.
Ep. 16. p. 25. and deLaud. Martyr. p. 253.
believing, that God would deny them nothing, but gave them the noblest
assistances of their prayers for them Id. Ep. 16. p. 24.

Vide Cypr. Epp. ad Confess. and Mart. Tertull. Exhort. ad Martyr. Orig. (...),
etc.


both night and day, in their public and private devotion; and withal sent
them rational and Christian Exhortations to cheer their minds, and raise their
courage, in which with the most Tert. exhort. ad Mart. init. Cypr. de Laud.
Mart. p. 252. etc.
profound humility they express their sentiments, as if they were not worthy to
make their Addresses to men so beloved of God.

VIII. And as the Church paid them constant Visits, so it allowed them the
honor and privilege of reconciling penitents, and admitted the Lapsi to the
participation of the holy Ordinances without that solemn and strict penance,
that else was required on their Testimony and recommendation; for there was an
honorable estimate set on all their writings, (in as much as Catal. v. Pamphil.
S. Hierom seems ravished with an uncommon joy, when he met with the works of
the Martyr Pamphilus, because one Epistle from so sublime a Saint was
preferrable to a Treasure) the form of these Libels are to be seen in Ep. 17.
p. 26.
S. Cyprian, and it is also well known what a dispute arose in this very case
between that excellent Prelate and Lucian, and some other pragmatical
Confessors. Nor was the custom begun in the days of that African Father, but
was as old as Exhort. ad Mart. init. and de pudicit. c. 22.
Tertullian and Epist. Eccles. Vien. and Lugd. apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 2.
Irenaeus, the former of which Fathers sarcastically abuses the Church for this
Indulgence.

IX. There was also a select order of men deputed to attend and record the acts
of their passion, their Speeches, and demeanor, with all exactness and
fidelity; (Notaries who purchased from the Secretary of the Proconsul, or some
other Officer, a Copy of what passages commenced privately, but with an
incredible agility and nimbleness writ down the account of the public
Transactions;) it is probably believed, that S. Clemens was the first that
begun this custom, and for that end divided the City of Rome into seven Regions
(though in the Civil Notitia it contained twice as many) and appointed the
seven Deacons of that Church, who should either themselves be employed to be
Notaries, or oversee those who took care to Copy out the last discourses of the
dying Confessors, which being reviewed by the Bishop of the Sea, were, as he
thought fit, laid up in the public Archives of his Church, which when so
collected and allowed, were afterward digested into a Book (which De Coron. c.
13.
Tertullian calls, Census, and Fasti Ecclesiastici) and in process of time the
Martyrs of other Churches were admitted to a place in that Martyrology, every
one recorded on the day of his passion, Greg. M. l. 7. Indict. 1. Ep. 29.
till at last every day of the year had its peculiar Saint.

X. They were exactly curious in paying them their last respects, and the
Ceromony of a solemn Funeral. It is true, that herein their Heathen Adversaries
turned every stone to prevent these instances of their Love, and for the most
part adjudged the reputed Criminals to the Fire, not so much because that was
the highest degree of punishment, ( Tert. Exhortat. ad Mart. p. 167. L. Id. ad
Scapul. c. 3. pro Deo vivo cremamur, quod nec sacrilegi, nec hosts publici,
nec tot majestatis rei pati solent.
summa ignium poena) nor yet because they looked on the holy men of that Age to
be Baron. Not. ad Martyrolog. Febr. 27. p. 156.
Magicians, and by an Assistant Demon to perform their Miracles, and so
punished them Paul. lib. 5. sentent. rit. 23.
accordingly; but as I am inclined to believe, because the Christians should
not collect their Ashes in order to a decent Burial, and to prevent what they
saw was their constant practice, their caressing those remains of their sacred
Predecessors with that veneration and respect which they constantly paid their
Relics. Thus Martyr. Polycarp. p. 27. and apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 14.
they used their utmost endeavors to hinder the interrment of S. Polycarp, and
what they then only intended, they punctually effected in the case of the
French Martyrs of Lions and Vien, Epist. Eccles. Lugd. apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c.
1. and Aug. de cura pro mort. cap. 8. vide and Lactantii Instit. lib. 5. c. 11.
and Sozom. lib. 5. c. 8. de Martyrio S.S. Eusebii, etc. Gazae.
those embittered Adversaries of theirs, not being content to have exposed
multitudes of the good men to the wild Beasts and the Flames, took whatever
those cruel Executioners of Vengeance had spared, and first crumbled them into
small pieces, then set a guard on them for six days, after which the Bodies
having been so long publicly exposed, and again burnt and reduced to Ashes,
those very Ashes, not the least handful being rescued, were thrown into the
River Rhosne, as if they would have studied a way how not only to affront
Christianity, but to baffle God, and hinder his Almightiness from giving them a
Resurrection. But this brutish Zeal of their Pagan Enemies engaged the
Proselytes of Christianity to a greater studiousness and circumspection, in
preventing these barbarous Attempts of their malice; inasmuch as Cypr. Ep. 3.
p. 10. and Ep. 37. p. 43.
the Church threatened those men with the Divine Plagues, to whom the Duty did
belong, if they neglected it (for there was an order of men appointed for this
Office of burying the dead, who were styled Copiatae, Fossarii, and Lecticarii,
(as there were devout men who carried S. Stephen to his Grave, Act. 8.2.) and
it seems by the Can. 81.
fourth Council of Carthage, that the Paenitentes, those that were under the
Discipline of penance, were employed in this Office, as in the Apostles days
the College of Widows did it, Act. 9.37, 39.

XI. And if at any time it had been known that any Christians had been
crucified, where they were to hang (not as among the Jews only till the
Evening, but) till the dead Bodies did rot and fall off, they spared no cost to
redeem and bury those Bodies, as the Acts of the Martyrdom of S. Boniface
testisie, (nor was it an unusual custom among the Soldiers to sell the Bodies
of Malefactors,) and the Christians Ubi^supr.
of Lions and Vien complain, that when they had set all their Engines on work,
they neither by entreaties nor offers could prevail to ransom their dead
Brethren from the public Ignominy to which they were exposed, that they might
give them their Funeral Rites, and that this was the cause of their greatest
trouble and sorrow.

XII. To this end they were very industrious in collecting their Relics,
Mart. Fructuosi and apud Baron. Tom. 2. an. 262. p. 634.
they quenched their half-burnt bones with Wine, and in that liquor washed the
shattered Fragments of their torn Bodies; they kissed and reverenced those
remains of their mortality; (by which Action in the Decian persecution Julian
the Cappadocian was discovered to be a Christian, and for it hurryed to the
flames) then they embalmed what was left, as Joseph, Nicodemus, and the devout
Women treated our Savior; (and for Tert. Apol. c. 42.
this purpose did bestow more money with the Sabaeans, than the Romans did for
all their Sacrifices; and for it are sarcastically mocked by In Aedes. p. 65.
Eunapius,) and if they were in holy orders, Lib. Pontif. in Eutychiano.
they interred them in their Sacerdotal Vestments, they not only allowed them a
place of Sepulture in their Coemeteries, (which according to the Laws of the
twelve Tables were to be without the Walls of the City) where they obliged all
good Christians to interre their dead, (it being one Article against Cypr. Ep.
63. p. 9^.
Martiaiis, Bishop of Astorga in Spain, that he had buried his deceased Sons in
the Gentile Sepulchers, among men of a strange faith) but a decent and
honorable Tomb; for their Coemeteries being both their Charnel-house, and in
times of danger their Temples, Proleg. in Martyrol. c. 6. p. 9. and Tem. 2. an.
275. p. 687. vid. Ambr. lib. 10. Ep. 85. Tom. 3. p. 273.
Baronius from that of the Revelation the 6th and 9th probably conjectures,
their Graves were under the Altar, the most honorable place in the Church,
near whom the Maxim. Taurinens. p. 2^7. Edit. Raynand. and Aug. de ^ura pro
mort passim.
succeeding Servants of God were willing to lie, when they put off mortality,
as the old Prophet would be buried in the same Grave with the man of God, that
upbraided Jeroboam, and decryed the Altar at Bethel, 1 Reg. 13.31.

XIII. In these their Tombs they were deposited in expectation of a joyful
Resurrection, every one with his particular Inscription, probably of his name,
and employment in the Church of God, a breviate of his life, and particulars of
his passion, and this the Ecclesiastic Eusebius. l. 2. c. 24.
Historian confirms, that there was in his time to be seen an Epitaph in the
Coemeteries at Rome, containing the particulars of the Martyrdoms of the
Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and before him Ibid.
Cajus the Contemporary of Tertullian, says, That whoever would take the pains
to go to the Vatican, and to the way that leads to Ostia, might see these
Trophies of the Apostles; and this is confirmed by an ancient Table of stone
found in the Coemetery of Apud Baron. not. in Martyr. Jan. 3. p. 18.
Calistus, with this Title, Haec est notitia natalitiorum sanctorum hic
requiescentium. Men's. Jan. die 3. Natalis S. Anteri Papae, etc. and that their
fame might be adaequate to their merits, the Canons of holy Church took care to
secure it by prohibiting all persons to speak ill of the Martyrs; which Crime
if any man durst impudently commit, Conc. Carth. 1. Can. 2.
for the offense a Layman should be excommunicate, and a Clergyman degraded.

XIV. These burying-places of theirs (which in the Fathers and Martyrologies
are called Arenaria, Cryptae, Concilia sanctorum, tumbae, catatumbae,
polyandria, cryptae arenariae, and among the Africans frequently areae and
areae sepulturarum) were spacious and well-adorned Vaults, Tom. 2. an. 130. p.
85.
Baronius describing that found out in the Via Salaria, three miles from Rome,
which he had often seen, as if it were rather a City underground, De
Coemeteriis consulas Baron. Tom. ^ an. 226. p. 370. and P. Aringh. Roma
subterran.
than a Charnelhouse furnished with variety of Apartments, and having diverse
ways and streets in it, and Oratories as well as Tombs, as what was fitted not
only for a Sepulcher and a Chapel, but a City of refuge to the distressed and
persecuted Servants of God. At these memories of the Martyrs the devout
Christians Martyr. Polyc. p. 28. Cypr. Ep. 31. p. 43. etc.
used to meet on the Anniversaries of their Martyrdoms, which fell in with
every day of the year, and were every day celebrated, as before we remarked,
except in the time of Lent, Conc. La^dicen. can. 51. and 52.
when the solemn observation of those Festivals was confined to the Saturdays
and Sundays in that time of Humiliation. The meeting at the Tombs of holy men
was a general practice; so the Hotting. cipp. Hebr. p. 26. vide Pocock. not. in
port. Mos. p. 224.
Jews use annually to meet at the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and there with
their faces toward Jerusalem pray for a joyful resurrection, and so do the Id.
Topograph. Eccles. or. c. 5. p. 149.
Mahometans, and it was past into a Law by the August Vit. Constant. l. 4. c.
23.
Constantine, that no man should be absent from these Conventions. It is true,
the meetings at the Tombs of the Martyrs afterward ceast, and were translated
to those Churches within the City, where the dead Bodies of those Saints were
removed and interred by the Christian Emperors; for in S. In Ezekiel. l. 12. c.
40.
Hierome's time they were altogether unfrequented.

XV. But till the Age of Persecutions expired the Apostol. Constable. l. 6. c. 30.
Christians met at these Coemeteries, and there performed all the holy Offices
of the Church, and for this reason their Heathen Adversaries, when they forbad
their Conventions, Tert. ad Scapul. Pont. act. pass. Cypr. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 10.
expressly prohibit them the liberty of their Coemeteria, and in scorn Liban. p.
592.
call them haunters of Tombs, but expressly Vid. Eusebius. ubi supr.
conceded them the liberty of meeting there, when their Fury was allayed. Here
they enjoyed a freedom of Religion, when their other Oratories were not so
secure, not so much because of the secrecy of the place, but because it was
held a piece of Vid. Dr. Caves Primit. Christ. part 3. chapter 2. p. 280.
unpracticable Barbarism to disturb and violate the Ashes of the Dead; and yet
sometimes so wild and intemperate was the Pagan Fury, and so inveterately were
they bent against the Christian Martyrs, Tert. Apol. c. 37.
that they would not permit their Graves to be a resting place to them, or the
Habitations of Death a Sanctuary. In these places of privacy and sacred
retirement they heard Sermons, and partook of the Churches Prayers, they sung
their Eucharistical Hymns, and received the Sacraments, and made Collections
for the poor, they recited the names of the Martyrs, and gave them their
deserved Encomia, and severely Conc. Gangr. can. 20. vide and can. 11.
censured all the Contemners either of the Meetings, or the holy Offices there
performed. For he that has attained unto this Crown, says the great Orat. ad
sanct. coetum, c. 12. vide Chrysostom. Tom. 5. (...). p. 563. (...).
Constantine, his piety is had in everlasting remembrance, and his bravery
attended with an unsullyed glory; the Church having thought fit to celebrate
those Festivals with Psalms and holy Hymns, to the praise of God, to be
Partakers of the Blessed Eucharist, and modest Feasts for the relief of the
poor, the distressed, and Exiles, and whosoever thinks these practices absurd, is an
Enemy to the Divine and Sacred Discipline. Nay the very Conc. Laodic. can. 9.
vide Optat. l. 6. contr. Parmen. de Donatistis.
Heretics themselves had their Coemeteria, and Martyria, where they also met,
and where if any of the Orthodox were present, he was debarred the Communion,
and enjoined penance by the Church.

XVI. That at these Coemeteries the wise and well-disciplined Christians used
to offer up their Prayers is apparent from that of (...). lib. 13. cap. 7.
(...). Where I cannot but wonder at the impudence of Scribanius. Orthod. fid.
contr. 3. cap. 2. p. 13. that durst thus translate Eusebius, ad monumenta
quoque illorum accedimus, votaque eis facimus tanquam veris sanctis.
Eusebius, that it was the common custom of that Age to meet at the Tombs of
the Martyrs, and there to offer their Devotions, and those Theod. de Cur.
Graec. affect. Ser. 8. p. 121.
very earnest Prayers attended with many a sigh, and floods of Tears, that the
Assistances of Heaven might be thereby implored on the living. Here also was
the Congregation when met entertained with suitable Homilies, (for it was the
Priests Duty on the Eve before the Holy Day to give the people an account of
what Martyr's Birthday commenc't with the next rising of the Sun) and on the
day it self the Greg. Turon. de glor. Mart. c. 86.
History of the good man's Martyrdom was publicly read, and when the third
Council at Can. 47.
Carthage took so much care, that nothing were read in the Church but the holy
Scriptures; it does also allow of the reading of the passions of the Martyrs on
their Anniversaries. It is true the Church took care to prohibit false and
legendary stories, of which too many carelessly were admitted, which were not
only for bad to be read, but Conc. C. P. in Trull. Can. 63.
commanded to be burnt, but still with an allowance of the just accounts truly
Registered of those venerable men's last Essays in defense of their Religion. To
which History of the Martyr's Achievements were subjoined his Theodr. ubi supr.
Character and Eulogy, Naz. (...). p. 36. and Ep. 95. p. 846. etc.
and some other additional discourses to persuade the Auditory to an imitation
of their Virtues and Courage; at these Sepulchers also were the rest of the
Ecclesiastical Offices performed, here they baptized their Children, which the
acts of the Martyrs frequently testify; (and this perhaps is not the most
unjustifiable interpretation of that hard place of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.29. that
they were baptized in those early days over the dead) here also did they
partake of Basil. Ep. 289. and Constantin. ubi supr.
the Eucharist, and according to the usual practice with the Sacrament did they
celebrate Aug. Con. fess. lib. 6. cap. 2.
the Eucharist, and according to the usual practice with the Sacrament did they
celebrate Aug. Con. fess. lib. 6. cap. 2.
their Love Feasts, and took care of the poor, and when they would adjure their
Brethren by a form that should oblige them, they did it Basil. Ep. 336.
by the respect they bore to the memories of the Martyrs, as the Olearii
Itiner. lib. 5. p. 254.
Persians use to administer Oaths at the Sepulchers of their Saints.

XVII. The day of the holy man's passion was made a Festival, and because
through negligence or ignorance people might not be so careful as they ought in
the observance of those Solemnities, the Church from its infancy (if we may
believe Alcuinus) set apart a particular day, that of All Saints, whereon to
remember all the Martyrs together; which holy days were kept with all the
Testimonies of a sober joy, with Exultations, and great Rejoycings, say Mart.
Polyc. p. 28.
the Church of Smyrna; S. Cyprian calls it the joyful Solemnity, and Tom. 2.
Carm. (...). p. 80.
S. Gregory Naz. the holy Feast; and S. Ambrose never dined throughout the
year, but on the Saturday and Sunday, and the Anniversaries of the Martyrs? so
when Nyss. To. 2. vit. Gr. Thaum. p. 1006.
S. Gregory of Neocaesaria returned from his retirement in the Decian
persecution, he commanded the Festivals of those that had been martyred during
his recess to be observed, and all the people annually met at the places of
their Burial, and made that day a holy day; and to take them off from their old
Heathenish Customs, that prudent Prelate permitted them on those Solemnities to
cheer themselves and recreate their drooping Spirits with the several kinds of
innocent mirth, out of an intention to induce them by those sensible joys to
the relish of more spiritual and nobler pleasures. For the Christians did not
observe their Festivals as the Heathens did theirs, with a pompous train of
obscene and impudent observances, and all the Arts of Debauchery, but with a
Feast, Theod. ubi supr.
whence all Drunkenness, and Gluttony, and immoderate laughter were banished,
and where all things were performed with a modest, chaste, and temperate
decorum. Naz. Orat. 6. p. 139, 140. consul. loc.
The Fathers severely cautioning the people on such occasions not to indulge to
voluptuousness, intemperance and luxury, and other pleasurable satisfactions,
that vanish in a moment, For what conformity is there between carnal pleasures,
and the Combats of the Martyrs? The one becomes a Theater, the other the
Church. He who will celebrate the Festival as he ought, -- must imitate their
Combats, and their Victories, and stedfastness to the interests of truth, must
dread nothing but to dishonor God, and pollute his Image, and this is a
Festival kept according to the mind of Christ.

XVIII. It is true what the Fathers foresaw and would have prevented fell out
at last to the prejudice of Religion, every man Conc Carthag.' 5. Can. 14
pretended a Vision, and on the strength of that built an Altar to an imaginary
Martyr, the people in those Meetings gave the reins to all sort of unbecoming
and irregular mirth, to Intemperance and Lasciviousness, and treated themselves
with Wine and Dainties, and set up Basil. reg. fusior. disput. interr. 40.
Markets near the Coemeteries for the sale of necessaries for those luxuriant
Banquets, till the Aug. contr. Faust. Manich. l. 20. c. 21.
Manichees objected it to the Catholics, that they did appease the Manes of
the dead thereby. This set the Prelates of the Church by degrees to
discountenance and bring into disuse these conventions; the Conc. Illiberit.
Can. 34, and 35.
Council of Elvire forbiding the burning of Torches in the Coemeteries by day,
and Women's watching there by night; the making the Feasts there was prohibited
by the Council of Can. 28.
Laodicea, the Markets severely decry'd by S. Basil, the Oblations of the Bread
and Wine, and other conveniences for the Feast disallowed by S. Aug. ubi supr.
and de C. D. l. 8. c. 27. and Confess. l. 6. c. 2.
Ambrose, and other holy and wise Bishops, because of the intemperance in which
most men then wallowed. And yet the people were not of a sudden wholly
converted from this distemper, but that B. Foelicis Natal. 9. p. 668, 669.
Paulinus complains, that they retained a spice of their old Heathenisme,
serving their Belly as their God, and spending the whole night by Torchlight in
sports, and drinking, and luxury. But to the Festivals when soberly and
Christianly observed, the Bishops of the Church used to invite their
Neighbour-Prelates; So Ep. 336.
S. Basil engages one of the Bishops of his Province to be present at the
Anniversary of some Martyrs, and Naz. Tom. 1. Orat. 6. p. 139.
S. Gregory Naz. was invited by S. Gregory Nyssen, and Nicetas a Dacian Bishop
was a Guest to Paulin. ubi supr. p. 664.
S. Paulinus on the Feast of S. Foelix.

XI. To the honor of the Martyrs did the Primitive Christians very early Theod.
ubi suprd. Asterius Amisen. Homil. de avarit. p. 51. Edit. Rayn.
build Churches; Platina says, that Pope Fabianus began the custom (they were
called Martyria by the Chalcedon Council, Confessiones, and Memoriae Martyrum
by the Latins) Caius, the ancient Ecclesiastical Writer, mentioning the
Trophies, as he calls them, of S. Peter in the Vatican, and S. Paul in the Via
Ostiensis, which Baronius will have to be Churches built to their honor; and
it agrees to the account of De 7. Urbis Eccles. c 4. p. 45. etc.
Onuphrius, that there was a little Oratory erected over S. Peter's Grave in
the Vatican, near the Via Triumphalis, which was afterward destroyed by
Elagabalus, that profligate Emperor. Catalog. v. Clemens.
S. Hierome also informs us, that there was a Church built at Rome to the
memory of S. Clemens, that continued till his time: Vic. de persec. Vandalic.
l. 1.
two Churches were built to the memory of S. Cyprian, presently on his
Martyrdom, which were the one rased, the other usurpt by the Arrians, Naz.
Orat. 21. p. 386.
another to the Virgin Thecla, in the City of Seleucia, and probably it was so
done in other places; but when the Christian Faith was acknowledged by the
Governors of the world, and Constantine submitted his Scepter to the Cross,
nothing was so usual, as the enquiries after the Relics of the Martyrs, and
erection of stately, beautiful, and well-adorn'd Fabrics to their memories,
the building Temples, and erecting Altars, Aug. de C.D. l. 22. c. 10.
where they facrificed not to the Martyrs, but to that God, who is equally the
Patron of the Church Triumphant and Militant; that great man built a noble
Church over S. Paul's Grave at Rome, another at Constantinople to the honor of
the twelve Apostles; and Naz. (...). p. 14, 15.
the Divine gives us a memorable instance, how God was pleased with the hearty
zeal of those pious persons; for when both Gallus and Julian (before his
Apostasy) were wonderfully concerned, and careful in testifying their love to
the holy Jesus, by their beautifying and endowing the Monuments of the Martyrs,
and building Churches to them, the God of the Martyrs publicly testified his
acceptance of the unfeigned devotions of Gallus, by prospering the work till it
was completed; but miraculously demonstrated his disrelish of Julians
hypocritical pretenses ( as he despised Cain 's Sacrifice) for the Earth, where
he laid the foundation of his Temple, spued up the materials, and though he
more than once eagerly endeavored to fix a Basis, it still continued (as if a
perpetual Earthquake had resided there) to overthrow and scatter what was
built; Heaven taking care by this instance, not only to vindicate it self from
the godly pretenses of that Infidel, but to caution the World what a future
Enemy he would be to the Martyrs: For the Sozomen. l. 5. c. 19.
Historian reckons it as a great Specimen of his spleen and malice, that he
commanded the Churches of the Martyrs to be burnt.

XX. These Temples in the days of peace were Aster. Amisen. ubi supr.
pompous, and beautiful, and magnificently adorned, and that not only in the
curiosity of the Structure, but in new and additional Ornaments, the good
Presbyter Hier. Epitaph. Nepot. Tom. 1. p. 25.
Nepotian spending much of his time in sprucing the Martyria with diverse
Flowers and Boughs, and Branches of the Vine, and with whatever looked
handsomely and decorous; and to this was added afterward, in some places,
Paulin. Natal. 9. S. Foelic.
the History of the Old and New Testament, or of the Martyrs Life done in
picture; but the greatest Ornament that they boasted of, were the Relics of
the good man there deposited; for as it was Conc. Carth. 5. Can. 14.
unlawful to meet at any Coemetery, where no Martyrs Relics were entombed, so
Paulin. Ep. 11. ad Sever. p. 149. and Ep. 12. p. 168, 172, etc.
without some or other such remains of the Saints, they would seldom in the
fifth Saeculum consecrate a Church, and probably the day of the Martyrs death
was pitched on for the time of its dedication; for those times (the (...)) were
also made Festival, and observed Naz. Orat. 43. p. 697.
by an ancient and excellent Law, at which time, says S. Ibid. p. 704.
Greg. of Nazianzum, the Martyrs are more than ordinarily pleasant, and from
their bright Thrones convene the people that love Jesus, to hear an account of
their generous and Christian demeanor. And this gave the first rise to our
Wakes, which like the Agapae at the Coemeteries, are now much degenerated from
their Original Institution.

XXI. They were also curious in instructing the world how benign and
compassionate God was to them in easing their pains, in plaguing their
persecutors, in revealing their Relics, and working miracles at their Tombs;
their torments were so far from sitting uneasily on them, that they voluntarily
courted them, and rejoiced under them, and when they were condemned, usually
cried out, Deo gratias, God be praised. S. Ignatius resolved, and S. Germanicus
actually did incite, and allure the wild beasts to devour them, and Apollonia
leapt into the fire; S. Laurence felt no pain on his Gridiron, nor Theodorus
the acute twitches of his Rack, and other inflictions, but full of joy
continued singing a Psalm; and how could he but be cheerful, Sezo^^. ^^la sup^.
that had his Assistant-Angel at his side, wiping off his sweat, and refreshing
his tired and parcht limbs by pouring a cooling shream on him? God gave them
wisdom to confound their Adversaries, and that prudence and courage made them
active and bold, and enabled them to Chrysostom. Tom. 5. p. 491.
tread on burning Coals, as on a Bed of Roses, and sport themselves in the
midst of the flames, like those that danced at a Revel, so unconcerned were
they at all the contrivances of Satan; they flockt to Martyrdom as Bees to a
Hive, and were more passionately eager to die for Jesus, than men now-adays are
for Preferment, or a Bishopric: their Relics were revealed by Miracle, so
Naz. Orat. 18. p. 284.
S. Cyprian's Body was discovered, the remains of S. Gervasius and Protasius
were revealed to Aug. Confess. l. 9. cap. 7.
S. Ambrose, S. Stephen's to Phot. Cod. (...). p. 199.
Lucian the Presbyter of Cephargamata, the Prophet Sozom. l. 9. c. 17.
Zecharies to Calamerus, and the forty Martyrs to the Empress Id. l. 9. c. 2.
Pulcheria: to omit many other examples. That Miracles were there wrought, has
been already evinc't; for even in the days of De C. D. l. 22. c. 8.
S. Austin such supernatural effects succeeded in the Name of Christ at the
memories of his Saints; and he makes it good, by the story of a Daemoniack
cured at the Church built to the memory of the two forementioned Saints of
Millain, in the Village Victoriana, but thirty miles from his own See Hippo;
and how God punished their Persecutors, is every where obvious in the ancient
story.

XXII. Besides their Anniversaries, the Church gave them daily an honorable
commemoration at the holy Altar, and that by an Apostolical Tradition, says
Chrysostom. Tom. 4. (...). in Act. p. 736. and Tom. 7. (...). p. 928. Tert. de
Coron. Mil. c. 3. and pass. Cypr. Ep. 34. p. 37. Aug. contr. Faust. Manich.
lib. 20. c. 21. and l. 22. c. 10. etc.
S. Chrysostom; not as the Dead are now prayed for in the Church of Rome, for
so neither do they make supplications for the Martyrs, says Proleg. in
Martyrol. Romans p. 7, 8.
Baronius; for the Sacrifices there offered for the Martyrs had relation to the
Eucharist then administered, (for when in that Sacrament the death of Christ is
remembered, the death of his Martyrs is also minded, as of Soldiers with their
Captain, to testify their inseparable union to their Master, and the Church
Triumphant) to the Srcrifice of Alms then given to the Poor, and of solemn
Thanksgiving to God for the example of the Martyrs ( hostiae Jubilationis, as
Ep. 12. ad Sever. p. 175.
Paulinus elegantly expresses it) and wishing themselves partakers of their
Crowns; the prayers of the Church, then used for them, relating to the joyful
Resurrection of the whole man at the day of Judgment, and the Consummation of
bliss; Field of the Church, append. 1. p. 754. vide and Calvini Ep. 87. ad
Prot. Angl. p. 167.
For it was an ordinary thing with the Ancients in their prayers, to
acknowledge and profess, that the thing was already granted and performed which
they desired, and that the Martyrs were already carried into Heaven in a
Chariot like Elijah, and yet beseech'd God notwithstanding to accept of their
voluntary devotions and affections: So S. Austin prays for his Mother Monica,
Nazianzen for his Brother Caesarius, and S. Ambrose for Valentinian; the
Ancients using to pray for their Brethren and Friends on the days of their
Obits, and for the Martyrs on their Anniversaries, as if they had been but then
in departing, and in danger of Hell: for as on the day of the Nativity, and
Circumcision, etc. we speak to God, as if God had then sent his Son into the
world, etc. and yet mean not as the words may seem to import, that Christ does
then newly take flesh, etc. but that he is born to us, and we are made
partakers of his Birth; so they desire that which is then wanting to the holy
men, as if the Anniversary were the day of their actual Martyrdom. This was the
belief of the ancient Church, till De verb. Apest. ser. 17.
St. Austin introduced a new Opinion, that who so prayed for a Martyr, did an
injury to a Martyr, which place Decret. l. 3. tit. 33. c. 5.
Pope Innocent the 3d. notwithstanding his infallibility, too hastily calls a
Text of Scripture, and from hence came it, that the Prayers, which in the old
Missals were addressed to Heaven for the Martyrs, are in the new ones offered to
him.

XXIII. They allowed Martyrdom to supply all defects, even to the want of
baptism, for when they Chrysostom. To. 4. (...). in Ep. ad Philip. p. 20.
spoke doubtfully, if not severely of other Catechumens departed, they never
doubted of those, who were baptized in their own blood, as we shall evince in
the life of Tertullian. They asserted, that their deaths were the nearest of
any Christian returns we can make by way of recompense for the blood of Christ.
Tert. de resur. carn. p. 18. M. Ed. Rhen. Id. Apolog. cap. ult. Compensatio
sanguinis Cypr. Ep. 26. p. 32. collega passionis cum Christo. vide eund. de
laud. Martyr. p. 253. and 2 Timothy 4.6. and Chr. in lec.
For when the body is torn and mangled by the various instruments of fury and
persecution, it endeavors to repay its Savior the expenses of his wounds, and
passion, and that many times by the same sort of death, that Jesus experimented
on the Cross, if not by a more acute, and more dismal punishment, and so by a
blessed and glorious method cancells the debts, in which it stands engaged to
Heaven; and St. Cyprian calls such sufferers Christ's Compeers, adorned with the
purple of their own blood, which is a kin to Christ's. For has Christ paid his
blood for thee, says Lib. 3. de Virgin. T. 1. p. 129. vid. and Valerian.
Cimeliensis hemil. 3. p. 5. and S. Paul. Natal. 9. B. Foelicis, p. 659
St. Ambrose, thou owe him thine in gratitude, for a good servant studies to
repay his God in the same manner, that God has obliged him. Like St. Gordius's
exclamation in St. Basil, At what a loss am I, O my best Master Jesus, that I
can die but once for thee! The Church also allowed the Martyrs a more glorious
title, than others, and called them not only the servants, but the Cypr. de
exhort. Mart. c. 12. p. 197. and passim. vide ^j. lib. praefat. p. 193. etc.
12. p. 196.
friends of God, and his sons in a more eminent manner; they accounted them
Naz. or. 18. p. 276.
rational Burnt-offerings, perfect Sacrifices, and most acceptable Oblations to
God; in fine, they looked on them, as the most immediate followers of the Lamb,
whom they styled Eccl. Lugd. and Vien. apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 2.
the faithful, and true Martyr, Naz^^bi supr.
the first and most honorable Matyr, Paulin. Ep. 12. ad Sever. p. 178.
and the Martyr of Martyrs. And therefore the Church that Constantine built at
Jerusalem on Mount Calvary to the son of God, was Eusebius. lib. 4. de Vit.
Constant. c. 40. Sozomen lib. 2. cap. 26. and Cyril. Jer. Cateches. 14.
by the Fathers called Martyrium.

XXIV. They believed also, that the holy Man; that thus exspir'd went
immediately into heaven, when the rest of the servants of God were reserved in
a place of refreshment, and must expect their happiness till the day of
Judgment, (for if I understand the Fathers aright, Cypr. Ep. 16. p. 24. ad
complexum, and osculum domini. Id. Ep. 26. p. 32. codeste regnum sine ulla
cunctatione retinere, etc. Id. Ep. 52. p. 59. allud pendere in die judicii ad
sententiam domini, aliud statim coronari. Id. de exhort. mart. c. 12. and cum
Christio statim gandeat. Id. de laud. Ma^t. p. 250. Legi scriptum esse, usque
quadrantem nos ultimum reddere; sed haec pars ablata martyribus. vid. p. 252.
they made a distinction between Vita aeterna, and regnum Dei) the Martyr being
admitted to the embraces and intimacies of the divine Majesty. And when the
rest of the Elect shall be admitted to Heaven, they allotted a peculiar
Coronet, and some additional degrees of glory to the Martyrs over and above the
Crown of Immortality that all the Saints shall equally partake of, (nay they
granted them a Paulin. ubi supr. p. 665.
kind of omnipresence, that wherever God was pleased to be, they also were with
him, as the Domestics of that heavenly Prince) Chrysostom. To. 4. (...). in 2 Thessalonians. p. 723.
for the suffering affliction for the sake of Christ is its own recompense, and
the more dishonor the Disciple of Jesus undergoes here, by so much shall he be
beautified and brightened in the kingdom of heaven.

XXV. Nor did they only allow them an extraordinary recompense in heaven, but
on earth the most honorable place in their Catalogues; for when they reckon the
diverse Orders of Men in the Church, Tert. de coron. milit. c. 2.
they begin with the Catechumens, and end at the Martyrs, not being able to go
higher. And St. Tom. 4. (...). in Coloss. p. 139.
Chrysostom. having enumerated the miraculous achievements of the name of Jesus,
that it had converted the World, subdued Satan, undermined his Empire, that it
opened the Heavens, and made us Christians in Baptism, as if he could say
nothing greater or more excellent; he subjoyns this also, makes Martyrs and
Confessors. And at the Day of Judgment they allowed them to wear their
Honorable Scars, as Marks of their Conquest (so their Master could after his
Resurrection show the Marks in his Hands and his Side,) and this Aug. de C. D.
l. 22. cap. 20.
not as any deformity, but as an embellishment to them. This occasioned St.
Babylas to order his Chains to be buried with him, and Tom. 3. (...). in Ep. ad
Ephesians. p 799, 800. locum adeas.
the Golden-mouthed Father professes, That he longs to see St. Paul's fetters,
which the Demons trembled at and the Angels reverenced, and which proved a
golden rope to draw the Apostle up to heaven, for their is nothing so glorious
as to wear chains for the sake of Jesus, it is agreater honor than a Consulship
or an Empire; it is a more splendid employ to be Christ's prisoner, than an
Apostle or an Evangelist; were I to choose heaven, or the good man's bonds, I
would prefer the last, I would rather accompany St. Paul in a Dungeon, than
enjoy the society of Angels; I had rather be such a Prisoner, than a Seraphin.
So that transported Father has it. And in truth St. Panl himself calls such a
death, a sacrifice to God, Conf. Chr. To. 4. (...). in 2 Timothy p. 372. and Hier.
in loc. To. 9. p. 224.
2 Timothy 4.6. and that by a word, that signifies more than ordinary Oblation,
(...) importing a whole Burntoffering.

XXVI. They called their Children by the names of the Martyrs, rather than by
the names of their nearest relations, (it Conc. Nicen. can. 30. in cod. Arabic.
being prohibited to give them Heathen names) as if they studied all ways to
perpetuate and eternize their Memories, and induce their posterity to an
imitation of those virtues, that gave those reverend Men their Immortality.
Thus it came to pass, that there were many Paul's, and St. Peter, and St. John
had not a few namesakes (says Lib. de promis. adv. Nepot. apud Eusebius. l. 7. c.
25. Lat. 20.
St. Dionysius of Alexandria) men being desirous to give their Offspring such
names out of love to the holy Martyr, and admiration of his stupendous piety,
out of zeal and earnestness, to engage their Children to walk in such steps,
and because they thought thereby to get an equal share in the divine favor
with those beloved Disciples. Nor were Theod. ubi supr.
they without hopes this way to procure some assistances from the Martyr to
that Pupil, to whom they designed the Saint in a sort a Guardian, that he might
be engaged to his Protection. Which custody of what nature they believed it to
be, I will not now determine.

XXVII. These, with other considerations, were the great incentives of
Martyrdom, and engaged all sorts of persons among the Christians to a
passionate courting of sufferings, Tiberian. Palaest. 1. Praes. Ep. Trajan. p.
9. Ed. Usser. (...). Plin. lib. 10. Ep. 97. pervicaciam and infleuibilem
obstinationem debere puniri. Dio Chrysostom. Orat. 32. (...). Lucian. de morte
poregr. p 996. (...). -- Arrian. in Epictet. lib. 4. cap. 7. p. 417. Ed.
Wolfii. Colon. 1595. (...). -- Antonin. Imper. (...). lib. 11. sect. 3. p. 134.
Edit. Xylandr. (...). Arrius Antoninus apud T^^tull. ad scapul. c. 4. Arrius
Antoninus in Asia cum persequeretur instanter, omnes illius civitatis
Christiani ante tribunalia eju^ ^e manu jacta obtulerunt: cum ille paucis duci
jussis, reliquis ait. (...). Porphyr. lib. contr. Christian. apud Eusebius. lib.
6. hist. Eccles. cap. 19. Gr. 13. Lat. (...) vocat, rude, and barbarum vitae
genus, reddit interpres. -- Vide etiam Juliani (...) oper. part. 1. p. 528.
in as much as their Heathen adversaries admired their courage, when they
condemned their rashness, some attributing it to the barbarousness, and
rudeness of their manners, others to custom, a third sort to superstition, and
an ungrounded belief of a Resurrection, a fourth to obstinacy, and a mind bent
to opposition, and for these reasons Volentibus mori non permittebatur occidi,
says St. Cyprian, they were debarred the liberty of taking sanctuary in the
grave, or advised to betake themselves to precipices, and halters, and not tire
out their Governors in denouncing sentences, and sealing Writs of Execution;
for such inforcives of a sudden swelled the Martyrologies, and every day made
new Candidates for Heaven: Cypr. Exhort. mart. c. 11. p. 197.
For who could think it a matter of difficulty and trouble, to be sacrificed
for the interests of his Savior, when he saw the holy Catalogue swelled with
names, that could not be numbered? Hither ran Women and Children, as to a
Feast, and made have, lest they should come too late to partake of that Crown,
till the Church was forced to enjoin her Sons a prudential care of their Lives,
by telling them, That it was lawful to retire in time of Persecution, and to
bribe their Heathen Governors, that they might live securely, by condemning the
Marcionites, Cataphrygians, and Martyriani, as Hercticks, for their irrational
and rash pursuit of this honor, and by denying such undertakers a place in the
Records of the Church, by decreeing not only, Conc. Illiberit. can. 60. and
Conc. Laodic. can. 34. Epiph. haer. 80.
that no Schismatic, or profane person should be accounted a Martyr, but also
that no man, that temerariously or causlesly offered himself to his Pagan
enemies, and fell rather by his imprudent rushing on death, than staying till
providence called him to be a Witness to the Truth, should have a place in the
Ecclesiastical Register. Naz. Orat. 10. p. 168.
For this is the Law of Martyrdom, Not indiscreetly to pursue, nor cowardly to
fly dangers, not to be ashamed of our Profession, or prodigal of our Lives. And
now after this long digression we will again return to St. Clemens.

XXVIII. The issue of so pregnant a brain could not but be numerous, of which
many are lost without hopes of recovery, and among them Mr. H. p. 85. reckons
his Discourse entitled, (...), but this little Tract is extant, being Printed
in the Part 1. p. 185. n. 42. an. 1672.
Auctuarium Bibliothecae Patrum, set out by F. Combefis. For though the 8th
Book of his Stromata has that Title in some Copies, as says Cod. (...). p. 154.
Photius, yet we have another 8th Book to make up the number without this. --
His Books of Hypotyposes are now undoubtedly lost, though not very many years
since; the learned Ap. Montague against Seldom of Tithes. chapter 3. p. 420.
Fronto Ducceus writ to our Sir Henry Savil, that they were extant with the
Patriarch of Alexandria; and Annot. in Clem. Alexand. p. 50.
Heinsius thinks the 8th Book of his Stromata now extant, to be a part of his
Hypotyposes foisted in, instead of the last Book of that excellent Work which
was lost; in which he interpreted the whole Old and New Testament, says Ubi
supr.
Photius, which probably is the same Tractate, that Cassiodore means in
praefat. divinar. lection. wherein he affirms, that St. Clemens expounded the
whole Scripture from the beginning to the end (though Tom. 2. an. 196. p. 280.
Baronius would have it to be a distinct Work) a part of which perhaps are
those Commentaries on St. Peter's First Epistle, St. John's Third, and that of
St. Jude, which are fathered on this Alexandrian Catechist, and are accounted
spurious. And whereas Mr. H. mentions it not, I must acquaint the Reader, that
the Epitome of the Oriental Doctrine of Theodotus, being excerpta out of his
Hypotyposes, is still extant in the Edition of this Father by P. 565, etc.
Heinsius at Leyden an. 1616. And Ubi supr. vide Ruffin. de adulterat. libror.
Origin.
Photius says, the whole eight Books are full of strange and prodigiously
blasphemous assertions, who reckons many of them, but withal professes, that
he believes the Father has been abused, and so do I. And it is well worth our
observation, that whereas those Books, that were so full of un-Orthodox
sentiments are lost, those other, which were more prudentially, and usefully
penned, and wherein the Author testified his greatest accuracy, and skill, are
yet preserved.

XXIX. The History of Clemens mentioned p. 88. without doubt is not his, but I
am inclined to believe with Tom. 2. an. 196. p. 280.
Baronius, that the Clemens, which Sozomen speaks of, is Clemens the Bishop of
Rome, on whom is fathered the writing the Acts of St. Peter, and that Suidas
speaks of a Heathen Historian. But the Vide Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. cap. 11.
Comment on Genesis seems to have been his, or rather a Comment only on the
History of the Creation (the Hexameron) if we may believe Lib. 1. explanat. in
Genes.
Anastasius Sina^^a, who avers, that Clemens and Pantaenus (for so it must be
read, and not (...)) the Priest of Alexandria, and the most wise Ammonius were
the most ancient and first Interpreters, that unanimously understood the
History of the Creation in a mystical way of Christ and his Church. Besides all
these Tom. 2. an. 120. p. 76.
the Cardinal seems to entitle him to a Tract De Justitia, wherein he confutes
the Carpocratian Heresy; whereas it is as clear, as what is writ with a Sun
beam, to him that inspects the Father, that the Tract (...) was writ by
Epiphanes Carpocrates's Son (a young Heretic of very pregnant parts, who dying
at 17 years of age was worshipped at Sama, a City of Cephalenia, as a God) out of
which Book we have a large fragment or two in (...). 3. p. 312, 313, 314.
St. Clemens, wherein he undertakes to prove the lawfulness of community of
Wives from the dictates of Nature and the Divine Institution, and that that
Prohibition, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife, signifies no more but
this, Thou shall not destroy the law of Community, which I have established, by
coveting thy Neighbors Wife, so as to appropriate her to thy self.

XXX. The Books that are extant were writ Heins. and Dr. Cave's life of S.
Clem. p. 198.
in an excellent order: First, his exhortation to incline the Gentiles to
abandon their folly, next his Paedagogus, or instructor, as a Catechism for the
Neophytes; then his Stromata, (which Mr. H. by a hard, and uncouth term
frequently calls Stromes) being a full explication of the Mysteries of
Christianity, with the Confutation of the Heathen Dogmata, fit for the reading
of the most accomplished Professor of Religion. And that all the Arts, that were
necessary to be learnt as preparatives to the best knowledge, i. the Christian,
might not be estranged from the capacities of his Scholars, He in his
Hypotyposes treats of Logic, and the other Sciences, introductory to the
Mysteries of true Philosophy; and herein we may observe him to have been a
follower of Pythagoras and Plato, first purifying the understandings of his
Disciples from all their Faeces, and evil Notions, then initiating them into
the Temple of Truth, and at last acquainting them with the more sublime rules
of Wisdom and Piety. His Books are full of all sorts of learning, and a
pleasing intermixture of the variety of Humane and Sacred Story. Of the first
Book of his Stromata Canon. Isag. l. 3. part 3. p. 340.
Joseph Scaliger gives this Character, That he has of all men given the best
and largest account of the Chronology of the age of the Heroes. And for his
Protrepticon, which has a much nearer and more peculiar relation to the
Candidates of the Priesthood, it is numbered by the Reverend Of Idolatry, Sect.
18.
Dr. Hammond, among the choicest of that excellent set of Books, which may
serve any Student for the Isthmus, (...), or passage between the study of
Humane and Divine Learning, who reckons this with Origin 's Books against
Celsus, and Justin Martyr 's, and Athenagoras 's Apologies, with Tatianus his
Orat. contr. Graec. Theophilus ad Autolyc. Theodoret de curand. Graec.
affectib. and Eusebius de praeparat. Evangel. with Cyril of Alexandria against
Julian, Tertullian 's Apology, Minutius Faelix his Octavius, and Arnobius
contra Gentes, with Lactantius, Julius Firmicus, and St. Austin de Civitate
Dei. The converse with which Writings, is a generous, and becoming employment,
and such as is its own reward.

XXXI. That S. Clemens was an admirer of Traditions and Apocryphal writings,
Hist. 1. 6. c. 11.
Eusebius is an undoubted testimony; for when he writ his Scholia on the whole
Bible, he under that Head comprehended not only the controverted Catholic
Epistles of S. Peter, S. John, and that of S. Jude; but the Epistle of S.
Barnabas, and the Book called the Revelation of S. Peter, on all which he
commented; and in such Quotations he is not sparing; he (...). p. 304, 305.330,
331. and Epit. doctr. Orient. p. 572. etc.
more than once cites that Dialogue between our Savior and Salome out of the
Gospel secundum Aegyptios, who asking the holy Jesus, how long Death should
reign? was answered, as long as her Sex should bear Children (but that he came
to destroy the works of the Woman, meaning carnal lusts) To which when Salome
replied, that then she had done well, that never had Children, he subjoyns,
that every Herb may be freely eaten of, except that which is bitter and
venomous implying, that neither Matrimony nor Celibacy are expressly commanded,
or forbidden by the Law of God: (...). p. 339.
And when she asked him, when the Consummation of all things should be? was
again satisfied, that it should be when there should be no more shame, and two
should become one, and that one neither Male nor Female; i. when the irascible
and concupiscible faculties should be subdued to the Laws of right Reason and
Religion, from the extravagancies of which passions all shame has its
original. -- He frequently also cites the Book called, the Preaching of S.
Peter, from whence he asserts (...). 6. p. 457.
that the just men among the Gentiles did worship God, but not according to
that perfect and absolute rule which the Son of God has revealed to the World,
and that God gave to the Jews, their Prophets, to lead them to the knowledge of
Christ, and to the Gentiles, their Prophets, the Sibyls, and others to the same
end. Ibid. p. 460. vid. p. 488. and 579.
In this Tractate also he quotes, that Christ descended into Hell, to preach to
the Spirits detained there. From Epit. Doctr. Orient. p. 578. vid. p. 574.
the Book of Enoch he informs us, that the fallen Angels did teach men
Astrology and Magic, and other unlawful Arts: Among all which traditional and
Apocryphal citations, I truly admire that one of the Apostle Matthias (whom
some men Apud. eund. (...). 4. p. 356.
affirm to have been Zacheus the Prince of the Publicans, and who was Id.
(...). 7. p. 549.
abused by the followers of Marcion, Basilides, and Valentinus, as if he were
the Patron of their Opinions) who among other things affirmed, (...). 7. p. 537.
that if the Neighbor of an Elect person sin, the good man himself is the
offender; for if the holy man had demeaned himself, as the word or right reason
directed, his evil Neighbor would have stood in so much awe of his pious and
well-governed life, that he durst not offend.

XXXII. Sect. 5. p. 94. Mr. H. reckons that passage of the Paedagogus as an
excellent sentence, that this is to drink the blood of Christ, to be made
partaker of the incorruption of the Lord; which De fundam. S. Caenae. p. 109.
Chemnitius (but I remember that he was a Lutheran) calls a Novel Opinion, and
never heard of; and in good truth, if it be allowable to make Allegorical
interpretations of the plain words of the Sacraments, what evils may not thence
ensue? so in Lib. 2. c. 2.
the same Book S. Clem. thus expounds our Saviors words, This is my blood, i.
the blood of the Vine, which is shed for the remission of sins; for as Wine
refreshes the heart, and makes merry, so the remission of sins is the glad
tidings of the Gospel: which Position the same learned Lutheran terms, but too
severely, a profane, as well as a Novel Assertion: And having thus mentioned
his Censure, I leave the Reader to judge.

XXXIII. And so must I beg him to determine between me and Mr. H. in another
question of moment, relating to the Government of the Primitive Church by
Bishops, of which I find him tacitly endeavoring to supplant the belief, and
insinuating, as if in those early days there was no difference between a
Bishop, and a Presbyter; while here, p. 99. he quotes Clemens, that there were
in his time only three Orders, Bishops, Elders, and Deacons; as if that mixed
and amphibious Animal, called a Lay-Elder, had been in those Primitive days a
Church Officer, who was never heard of till yesterday, and as if Bishops were
no more than Parish-Ministers, and Deacons their Churchwardens; and so he
explains himself commonly, Bishop, or Pastor, p. 2.17.21. etc. and p. 6.
Pastor, Overseer, or Bishop; and p. 38. (...), the Pastor or Chief President;
which word Resp. ad Sacar. cap. 25. annot. in Phil. 1 1. and in 1 Timothy 1.19.
and in Apocal. 2.1.
Beza is willing to acknowledge, that it did anciently signify a Bishop, in
the sense of the Church of England, and which Tom. 5. p. 499.
S. Chrysostom twice in one page uses to denote the Eminency of S. Ignatius's
Archiepiscopal and Patriarchal Dignity; and had Mr. H. Englisht the Fathers, as
they explained themselves in those early days, he might better have rendered it
in some places Bishop, or Elder, Hier. ad Ocean. To. 2. p. 325.
the one being a name of their Age, the other of their Authority: Nor can I but
admire the prejudices of some men, who in this case appeal to Antiquity, as
Salmasius, Blondel, and others have done, forcing it to speak the sense of the
Vestry Tribunal by the most unreasonable deductions. I will only instance in
that of Praefat. ad Apolog. p. 59.
Blondel, who has found out a new Heresy of Aerius, unknown to all former
Ages, till this infallible Dictator in Divinity appeared, not that he affirmed,
that Bishops and Presbyters were the same Order, for that, says he, was the
Opinion of S. Hierome, and all the Ancients; but that from these premises he
argued a necessity of separation, and that no man could safely communicate with
any of the other Opinion; a device not worth the confutation, which having to
shadow of Antiquity to countenance it, has yet grown into practice at Geneva,
if we may believe Danaeus a Professor there, who, as Beza calls the Episcopal
Government under the Papacy, a devilish tyranny, Danae. Isag. part. 2. lib. 2.
c. 22.
so affirms, that it was their custom to re-ordain by their Presbytery any
that came over to them, and had been ordained by a Popish Prelate before, as if
every irregularity in the Ordainer, blotted out the Character, and their ill
Government, if nothing else, were enough to countenance a Schism.

XXXIV. I had therefore once thoughts to have deduced the Episcopal
Pre-eminence through the three first Centuries, from the works of those ten
Fathers, of whom Mr. H. writes the Lives; but on maturer thoughts I conceived
it to be unnecessary, only I will mind my Reader, that De praescript adv. haer.
p. 39. F. Edit. Rhen.
Tertullian reckons it as a mark of a Heretic, that he is a man that pays no
reverence to his Prelate; and close the Paragraph with the counsel of Tom. 1.
p. 955. Ed. Paris. 1627.
S. Athanasius to Dracontius, who refused this holy Office: If the Institutions
of the Church displease thee, and thou imagine that there is no reward annexed
to the just discharge of this duty, thou despisest that Savior who gave being
to this Jurisdiction. Such thoughts are unworthy a sober and wise man, for
those things which our great Master has ordained by his Apostles, cannot but
be good and practicable, and notwithstanding any opposition, shall continue
firm. I shall end this Section, when I have mentioned that Mr. H. P. 45. and
alibi.
in his Book of Confirmation has robbed the Bishops of their power in
Confirmation, that he might confer it on every Presbyter, and ranking the
Papist and Prelatical party together, has called their ways of proof
blasphemous Arguments, not considering that the concurrent suffrage of
Antiquity makes the Bishop Tailor of Confir. sect. 4.
Bishop the only Minister of this Rite; and that herein the Jesuit and
Presbyterian are united more genuinely, than the Romanist and Prelatical: For
when Smith, Bishop of Chalcedon, was sent into England by Urban 8. as an
Ordinary here, the Jesuits would never submit to him, and at last wrought him
out of the Kingdom, and presently published two Books in English against
Episcopal Government, and Confirmation, disputing both into contempt; Mystery
of Jesuitism. let. 3. p. 150, 151.
which Books having been sent by the English Clergy to the Sorbon, there were
thirty two Propositions in them censured, and condemned by that College, Febr.
15. 1631.

XXXV. The design of S. Clemens in his Stromata, is to instruct his Gnostick,
i. his accomplished Disciple, a man extraordinarily acquainted with the
Principles of Christianity (in which sense Apud Socrat. hist. Eccles. lib. 4.
c. 18.
Evagrius entitles one of his Books, which he writ of the Monastic
Institution, Gnosticus; wherein he calls the Society of more eminent and
contemplative Monks, the Sect of the Gnostics) for much after that rate that
Plato does instruct his wise man, does this Alexandrian Presbyter instruct his
Gnostick, whom he presumes to be a man elevated above the common pitch, and fit
to be entrusted with the Mysteries of Scripture, such as he and his Scholar
Origin were pleased in their Allegorizing way to make, describing (...), as
Clemens Romanus words it, the qualifications of a true Gnostick; for it was not
the usage of the Primitive Church to communicate the knowledge of their Arcana
to their Catechumens, or Strangers; but after Baptism and Confirmation, they
were permitted those fruitions; and for this reason I suppose among others,
might Baptism be called (...), illumination, Basil. To. 2. de Spirit. S. cap.
18. p. 190.
because then the Spirit of knowledge affords to the lovers of Truth a certain
image of the things they desire.

XXXVI. But the name was commonly put to a worse use, and the Gnostick was a
Synonymon of a Heretic, the whole Tribe being a mock-sort of Christians
((...), Epiphanius calls them elegantly) who begun under Simon Magus, the great
pretender to the (...), 1 Timothy 6.20. the knowledge falsely so called, and the
Atheistical methods of seducing Menander, one of the Scholars of that
Leviathan, was the first Leader of the Party, says Lib. 3. c. 4.
Irenaeus, till afterward the name was usurpt by the Id. ibid. c. 11.
followers of Carpocrates, and the Nicolaitans, who challenged it as their
peculiar denomination, though indeed the title was claimed by almost all the
Heretics of the first Century; but in the second Saeculum the Valentinians
ingrost it, and were peculiarly so called; against whom S. Irenaeus writing,
entitles his Book, A Refutation of the Gnostick Heresy, who may be termed the
second Family of the Gnostics, the Disciples of Basilides Hier. Gatal. v.
Agrippa.
having been also on his deatn so styled at Alexandria; for there was a strange
sympathy in Opinion between the followers of Basilides, and Valentinus; which
last sort of Heretics having been guilty of falfifying the works of Plato, as
well as the Scriptures, were also opposed, and writ against by the learned
Porphyr. in vit. Plotin.
Plotinus, in his Books against the Gnostics.

XXXVII. To the judgment of Pope Gelasius, in his Condemnation of the writings
of this most learned Father, I cannot pay that respect which I else would,
while it is unknown, whether that Censure be his, or every Book therein
condemned do infallibly deserve it, of which in a similar Subject the Reader
may have an account and information from Vindic. Ignat. part. 1. c. 4. p. 44.
etc.
Bishop Pearson, who has made it appear, that that Roman Synod has been
foisted into the world under the name of that Pope; in which Convention (if
there were any such) S. Clemens need not be ashamed of his company; of whom, to
omit others, I will only mention two, whose writings are at the same time
reprobated; viz. Hermes his Pastor, and Barnabas his Catholic Epistle, both
frequently quoted by this great man; of whom the first was acknowledged to be a
genuine and very useful discourse by Apud eund. p. 39. etc.
Irenaeus, and Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius, Sedulius, and others, and reckoned
with the Wisdom of Solomon, and Ecclesiasticus, etc. (though I cannot believe
Not. in Philocal. p. 683.
Tarinus, that Origin writ a Comment on the Book, for the passage which he
quotes in the Philocalia will not countenance it) and questionless deserved it,
before it fell into the same evil hands with others of the Fathers, who did
adulterate it: and Catal. v. Hermes.
S. Hierome gives a reason why it was so slighted in the Western Churches,
because not known there; whereas in many Churches of the East it was publicly
read, as Clemens his Epistle to the Corinthians, and Polycarp's were.

XXXVIII. That the Catholic Epistle St. Barnabas is the true Offspring of
that Father (which the learned Life of S. Earn. p. 41, 42.
Dr. Cave doubts, but is acknowled'gd by the most Reverend Usher, the acute
Isaac Vossius, the immortal Grotius, and others) I am convinced by Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Origin, the frequent Allegories being no argument of its
spuriousness, as strange interpretations being to be found in the gennine
Epistle of St. Clemens to the Corinthians, his quoting passages and speeches of
our Savior not Recorded in the Evangelists, usual also in the forementioned
Epistle; and for its being accounted Vid. Is. Vossii Not. in Ep. Barn. p. 311.
Apocryphal, I suppose it cannot mean, that there was any doubt of the Author,
but because some doctrines in the Epistle were disrelisht, it was not thought
fit to be admitted into the public Codex, or Canon of the Scripture, for if
all Books that were early controverted must presently be rejected, V^d. Eusebius.
hist. lib. 6. c. 13.
because so accounted, then the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Catholic Epistles
of St. Peter and St. Jude, the second and third of St. John, and the Apocalypse
must be expunged the Canon of the Scripture, (and the Epistle of Barnabas,
which Tertullian quotes, is no other, but that to the Hebrews.) And so I
believe St. Catal. v. Barn.
Hierome understood the case; who disputes not either the Author, or worth of
the Epistle, but says, That it was writ for the edification of the Church,
although it were numbered among the Apocryphal Scriptures.

XXXIX. The error of this learned and holy Priest that our Savior while on
earth was not subject to our passions and infirmities, (...). lib. 1. in
Prodico.
had its rise, I conjecture, from his very venerable thoughts of the Son of
God, as if to stoop him to our infirmities had been to debase him. That Christ
Preached but one year, from his mistake of that place of Holy Writ, which, says
he, both the Prophets and Gospels Record, He has sent me to Preach the
acceptable Year of the Lord. That Christ descended into the Limbus Patrum, to
save the Fathers there detained, is not his peculiar Error, but an Opinion,
which most of the Ancients embraced, as is confessed by Answ. to the Jes. sect
of Limbus Patr. vid. Montag Apparat. 1. sect. 1^4.
the Lord Primate, and is reckoned among the allowed Dogmata of the Catholic
Church by Dedogm. Eccl. c. 78.
Gennadius. The Doctrines of Freewill, and the Incontinency of the Angels have
been already considered. The Opinion of the Salvability of the fallen Angels, I
conjecture, proceeded from an over high conceit of Gods propensity to be
merciful, and to forgive; Vid Hier. in Jon. 3. and Ephesians. 6. p. 149. b. Edit.
Pra^n.
The Fathers generaily of the Four first Centuries being persuaded, That the
Devils are not yet locally in Hell, nor snall be till the day of Judgment, but
are inhabitants of the Air, where God allowing them some respite, it encouraged
this Father, and his Scholar Origin to suppose, there might be yet some hopes
of their Salvation.

XL. But greater Errors than these are pardonable to one, that has so
honorably deserved of the Interests of Religion, and it is to be lamented, that
the Church has not a better Account of his last Actions, whom we find buried
in silence by the Ancients. Only what Mr. H. p. 109, 110. affirms, That he
outlived his Master Pantaenus many years, and yet dyed an. 195. cannot be
reconciled. For Pantaenus flourished under Caracalla, says St. Hierome, the
first year of whose Empire did not Commence till an. 211. So that we cannot
imagine St. Clemens to dye till circ. an. 220. at the least, when probably he
went into his Grave in Peace, the Martyrologies of either Church allowing him
no place, though unjustly, they having honored many persons that worse deserved
that solemn Commemoration, and more than a few, that never swam to Heaven in
their own Blood. But it was their neglect, and our unhappiness, that we cannot
Celebrate this brave person in an Encomium tantamount to his Worth.

THE LIFE OF Tertullian.
I. TErtullian was a man eminent for his Birth, being of the Tribe Septimia, of
which there had been several Kings; admirable for his great Endowments, being
well seen in all Learning, and as the most ancient, so without controversy the
best read of all the Latin Fathers; and as famous for his fall, his deserting
the Catholic Church, and suffering himself to be wheadled by the Disciples of
Montanus; but notwithstanding his Original was illustrious, I cannot believe
him to have been the Son of a Pro-Consul, as Mr. H. p. 111. mistaking St.
Hierome makes him, for St. Catal. v. Tertul. vid. Dr. Cave 's Life of Tert. p.
202.
Hierome says his Father was Centurio Pro-Consularis, i. a Centurion at
Carthage under the Pro-Consul of Africa; for I think we shall never find in the
Roman History an ordinary Centurion entrusted with a Pro-Consular dignity.

II. Under his Father without doubt he had a liberal and ingenuous Education,
which furnished him with those sublime parts, that in his Writings exert
themselves, manifesting him a great Historian, and excellent Orator in his
African way, and an acute Lawyer, though that he pleaded at the Bar, as Mr. H.
p. 112. and others suggest, is not so clear; Dr. Cave. ibid. p. 203.
the Argument from that passage in his Book De Pallio, serving as well to prove
him to have been a Soldier, or a Courtier; which Book was not Writ by
Tertullian, at his first Conversion, as Mr. H. p. 113. out of Pamelius
supposes, Baron. and Salmas. apud eund. p. 205. and Prim. Christian. part. 2.
cap. 3.
but nine or ten years after, when he entered into Holy Orders, and so was
obliged to change his Gown, his ordinary habit, for the Cloak ( Sacerdos
Suggestus, the Sacerdotal Habit, as he calls it) a Garb, that denoted more
Mortification, and Contempt of the World, and love of the best sort of
Philosophy; and continued till the time of Socr. l. 7. c. 36.
Sylvanus Bishop of Troas, who refused to wear it, and Can. 12.
the Council of Gangra condemned the wearing, when it was presumed there was
much Holiness inherent in the Habit. And Dr. Cave's Life of S. Justin. p. 144.
Ferri hoc non posse, and cum ipsi capita, and supercilia sua radant, si quando
Isidis suscipiunt sacra: si forte Christianus vir attentior sacrosanctae
religioni vestes mutaverit, indignum facinus appellant. Ambr. l. 6. Ep. 36. ad
Sabin,
in truth the sordid and mean black Coats of the Christian Monks, were by
Libanius, Eunapius, and others laid to their charge, till it became Proverbial,
There goes a Greek Impostor, because the Pallium was a Greek Habit, as the Toga
was a Roman.

III. In this I cannot but subscribe to that Learned Man, whose name I
reverence, but must take leave to profess my dissent from him in another piece
of Chronology, when he fixes the Epoch of Tertullian's turning Montanist at
the third or fourth year of the Emperor Caracalla, and yet affirms, that his
Book De Corona was Writ the 7th year of Severus, at the Creating his eldest Son
Antoninus his Co-partner in the Empire, and his youngest, Geta, Caesar; for
then we must grant Tertullian's fall to have been very early, it being very
plain to me, that he was of that fond belief, when he writ the Tractate De
Corona Militis, from these words, ( De Coron. c. 1.
with which he girds the Catholic Soldiers, who wore their Garlands on their
heads, and thought it lawful to fly in time of Persecution, which Montanus
condemned, They may be well allowed to fly from Martyrdom, who have rejected
the Prophecies of the Holy Spirit, Where he can mean no other person but
Montanus: nor does he forbear on this account to rally the very Bishops of Rome
in the succeeding words, I have known their Prelates Lions in peace, but more
timorous than Stags in times of difficulty. And in the Cap. 11.
same Book he makes it unlawful for a Christian to be a Soldier, contrary to
his former judgment in his Apologetick, where he tells the Emperor, That his
Army was full of the Disciples of Jesus, and recites the famous undertaking of
the Legio fulminatrix without blaming them. But the former passage of the
Paraclete is so clear, that all that Pamelius can do in his Annotations, will
not wash the Aethiop.

IV. I therefore think that the Book was Written, neither at the 7th nor the
16th year of Severus, as Learned Men diversely opine; not in the 7th year, for
Tertullian's Apologetick could not be Writ till that time, (there being no
appearance of a persecution, before that year of Severus) nor I think at least
till three or four years after, for Apologet. cap. 35.
in it he not only mentions the overthrow of Cassius, Niger and Albinus, but of
Plautianus, (as I suppose he means him in that Description, Post vindemiam
parricidarum racematio superstes, calling him the Gleanings after the full
Vintage of the Traitors) whom he Characters, as a Man entering into the Palace
Armed to the ruin of the Emperor, that he affected the assuming the Regalia in
his Habit and Houses, being most princely, and was not negligent in the
consultation of Magicians concerning the Fate of the Empire, which are an exact
Description of that Traitorous and proud African, if we consult Lib. 3. p. 76,
77.
Herodian and Spartian. in Sept. Severo.
Spartianus: now the Treason of Plautianus did not break out till the 10th or
11th year of Severus. Nor do I think it writ in the 16th year of that Prince,
because Cap. 1.
Tertullian introduces that scrupulous, and over-nice man's Fellow Soldiers
complaining of him, as if that fact of his would incense the Emperor, and give
occasion to the raising of a Persecution, that would put an end to their serene
days and enjoyments; So that if it relate to the reign of Septimius, it must
necessarily be referred to the beginning of it, when Id. ad Scapul. c. 4. p. 71.
having been cured of a desperate Distemper by Proculus a Christian, he not
only kept his Miraculous Physician at Court with him, but showed himself
favorable to all persons of his Religion; whereas about the 9th of his Empire,
begun that fierce and cruel Persecution, that ended not but with his Life. I
would therefore presume to believe, that the Donative, on the occasion of which
Tertullian writ the defense of that Soldier, who refused his crown, was given,
not in the times of Severus, but in the first year of Caracalla, and Geta, on
their return out of Britain, after the death of their Father [when Antoninus
slew all his Fathers Physicians for not hastening his death, and his own
Governor Euodus for endeavoring to take up the differences between him and his
Brother, and all others that were favorites to Severus] it being usual at the
Inauguration of Princes to give such largesses, and very necessary at that time
to smooth the mind of the Soldiery after so many brutish acts of cruelty, and
continued threatenings of more mischief.

V. So that I cannot but see a necessity of believing, that Tertullian became a
follower of Montanus in the middle of the reign of Septimius Severus, for in
the fifteenth year of that Prince were his Books against Marcion writ, as L. 1.
adv. Marc. p. 56. C. Ed. Rhen.
himself testifies, but that he was then a Montanist is very plain; for Lib. 1.
ad fin.
he defends the necessity of single Marriages by the testimony of the
Paraclete, which can be no other than Montanus, and L. 4. p. 91. D.
calls the Orthodox, in scorn, Psychici, and pleads eagerly for his new
Prophetic Afflatus and Ecstasies; and to this the very long Popedom of
Zepherinus will give countenance, and engage us to believe, that the
Disputation between Gaius and Proclus, was managed some years sooner, than most
of the Chronologers place it. Nor are several other Works of this Father,
commonly reckoned among his Tracts, Writ before his Desertion of the Church,
but infected with the leaven of Montanisme; for in his De resurrect. carnis, he
styles Prisca a Propne^ess, and in his De^anima, undertakes to prove the
corporeity of the Soul, by a vision of that Impostress, and in the beginning of
his Book, De velandis virginibus, he affirm. That Holiness was in its rude
elements under the law of nature, in its infancy under the Mos^ick Economy and
the Prophets, in its youth under the Gospel Dispensation, but never came to its
maturity and full growth, till his time under the Paraclete. His discourse also
against Praxeas then commenced, wherein Cap. 1. adv. Prax.
he tells us, that at first the Roman Prelate ( Baronius says it was Anicetus,
Dr. Cave, Eleutherius, but I think it was Zepherinus) did believe the
Prophecies of Montanus, Prisca, and Maximilla, and granted Letters of Peace and
Communion to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, that were infected with that
Heresy, allowing what his Predecessors had condemned, but was diverted from
continuing in that resolution by Praxeas, the Author of the Sect of the
Patro-passiani, against whom Tertullian Writing, says, That he did two good
Offices for the Devil, while he was at Rome; he expelled the Spirit of
Prophecy, and brought in Heresy, he banished the Holy Ghost, i. Montanus, and
crucified God the Father, Calling the Orthodox by the usual name of disgrace
among those Herereticks, Psychici; which makes me wonder, that that very
Learned Man should number these Books among those that Tertullian Writ, before
he fell into Heresy. Whereas in the Books which he Writ before he became a
Montanist, he De praescript. adv. haeret. c. 52.
calls it a blasphemous assertion to aver, That the Holy Ghost discovered more
by the Ministry of Montanus, than of the Apostles, and his Tractate De
Baptismo, purposely opposes Quintilla, a Woman of great repute in the Family of
Montanus, to prove the necessity of Water to the right Administration of
Baptism, and of Baptism to Salvation.

VI. To this Opinion, for the main, Mr. H. p. 13. assents, but I can no way
allow of his deduction from it; that therefore all the customs and usages of
the Church (idle Ceremonies he calls them) which Tertullian reckons up in his
de Corona, came out of the School of Montanus, as the Centurists, says he,
profitably conjecture, and which, p. 169. he styles the materials of the
Antichristian Synagogue then preparing: For had Tertullian argued against the
Catholics from the observances of his own Conventicle, he had exposed his
reasonings to derision, by begging the question; whereas the Orthodox might
easily retort on him, that these were not the usages of the Christian Church,
but of their little Tribe; whereas the method is persuasive, when disputing
against the Catholics, he urges them with their Traditional Rites and
practices, which were common to both them, and the followers of Montanus: nor
is it but a most irrational inference, to cast off all things that are good,
because of the intermixture of some unsound Positions in any person or writing;
as if we must think all the accounts of the Primitive usages in Eusebius, were
only the little arts of the Arians, or in Socrates, did belong only to the
Novatian Schism, because the one was supposed an Arian, and the other a
Puritan: But to argue justly, we must first prove the Institution of these
Ceremonies to be an act of Montanus, and the use of them the peculiar practices
of his followers, which I think Mr. H. will hardly undertake; and if he has
any Veneration for that learned man B. Rhenanus, whom he so often quotes, he
may from his Notes on this Book have a persuasive and sober account of the
reason of these Institutions; and if this will not satisfy, Ubi supr.
Tertullian shall give him my Answer, Quamdiu per hanc lineam serram
reciprocabimus? I count it madness any longer to draw this Saw of contention:
but it behooves the opposers of ours and the Primitive Church to discountenance
as much as may be, such early instances of the use of the Cross, the Responses
in Baptism, the prohibition of fasting on the Lords day, and many other such
practices.

The occasion of this so justly lamented defection of this great man, S. Catal.
v. Tertul.
Hierome says, was the envy of the Church of Rome against him, and the
opprobrium there cast on him, which might easily work on a man of his temper
and Country, to imbitter him (Pope Victor, and the Emperor Severus, his
Countrymen and Cotemporaries, were not the most moderate men in the world) such
inju^ties being insufferable to ingenuous Natures, Lib. 6. cap. 25.
Sozomen telling us, that had Apollinaris been treated with more mildness and
condescension by Theodotus, and Georgius, Bishops of Laodicea, he believes the
Church had never been pestered with his new Heresy; others, as Pamelius, and
Mr. H. p. 115. that it arose from his missing the Bishopric of Carthage, and
such ambition has also much promoted the disturbances of the Church, Tert.
adv. Valentin. c. 4. p. 139. solent amini pro prioratu exciti, praesumptione
ultionis accendi. Id. de baptism. p. 273. Ed. Rhen. -- aemulatio enim
schismatum matter est.
the baffled pretender, out of revenge, venting his malice against the Church
that slighted him. So Hegesip. apud Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 21.
when S. Simeon Cleophae was admitted to the Episcopal Chair at Jerusalem, in
the room of S. James the Just, Thebuthis began to corrupt the Church, by
introducing Heresy, because he was not made S. James's Successor. So Tert.
adv. Valent. c. 4. p. 251. Edit. Paris. 1664.
Valentinus broached his new Hypothesis, and the Apollinaris apud Eusebius. l. 1.
c. 15. and Theodoret. (...) lib. 3. sect. Montanus.
ambition of Montanus first occasioned his deserting the Church: Cornel. apud
Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. c. 35.
Novatus turned Schismatic, being denied the Popedom; Theodoret. ubi supr.
lib. 4. sect. Arius.
Arius became the Father of that most pernicious Heresy of his, because
Alexander was preferred to the Patriarchate of Alexandria, and himself
slighted, and Socrat. Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 24.
Asterius became his follower, because on the account of his sacrificing in the
days of persecution, he was denied a Bishopric which he greedily gap't after:
Theodor. Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 4.
Apollinaris also exposed his Darling Dogma, failing of the Bishopric of
La^dicea, August. de haeres. cap. 69.
Donatus his, for missing the Sea of Carthage, and Epiphan. haeres. 75.
Aerius on the same score turned Leveller; and because being only a Presbyter,
he could not be a Bishop, was resolved, if he could have done it, that no
Bishop should have been greater than a Priest, (as Marcion forbad honest
Marriage, when himself had been cast out of the Church for prostituting the
Chastity of a Virgin) and I have it from a very worthy person, that Hugh
Broughton (the Patriarch of the Puritans) his own Brother should aver, that he
first went over to the discontented party, having been denied some valuable
preferment which he desired in the Church; and Doctrine. fid. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Waldensis quotes the Bishop of Salisbury, affirming in a full Assembly of the
Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, that Wickliff aimed at the Mitre of
Worcester, and being deceived of his expectations, grew discontent; nay, even
the very Conventicles of the Heretics were subdivided by this spirit of
ambition; for S^crat. lib. 7. c. ^.
Sabbatius made a new Schism among the Schismatical Novatians, being strongly
possessed with this Demon, and the desires of a Crosier.

VIII. But this thought, I cannot be persuaded to entertain of Tertullian, so
great a lover of Mortification and Abstinence, and one; that so little valued
external grandeur, and the pompous shadows of honor: I am therefore inclined
to believe, that it was a passionate and ungoverned zeal which swayed him; and
that his intentions were very just and honorable, but misguided; that his aim
was, though he took a wrong course to keep up the reputation of the Primitive
Severities, and holy Discipline, of which he was an eager Assertor; for we
cannot find him charged with any erroneous sentiments, in matters of Faith, but
a scrupulous studiousness to maintain the ancient practices, Rigalt. not. in
Tertull. adv. Prax. p. 501. quae Tertulliani dicuntur haereses, etc.
his greatest Heresies were no other than a stronger love of Martyrdom than
ordinary, greater frequency in fastings, and stricter holiness, an injunction
of continuing in the estate of Coelibate, or at most a contentedness with one
Marriage: And if these were his Vices, good God, what can we call his Virtues?
for it is probable, that he held the Opinions of Montanus, as that Impostor
first proposed them to the World in a taking dress, and such as was very
agreeable to the severer sort of Christians, not as they were afterward
adulterated by his followers the Phrygians, ( acu Phrygia interpolatum, as
Mons. Rigaud elegantly terms it) whose additional dotages occasioned his
separation from them, and setting up his own Congregation of Tertullianists;
and yet these Phrygians, if we may take Lib. 4. c. 23.
Socrates's testimony, were the most regular in their lives of all the
Asiaticks, men very temperate and chaste, never heard to swear, or seen to be
angry, or delighted with the toys and pleasures of the world; and this I
suppose inclined them so easily to become Novatians, which Schism renewed the
discipline of Montanus, but was not so fully agreed among themselves in some
particulars, for the Apud eund. lib. 5. c. 21.
Novatians in Phrygia did condemn second Marriages, those at Constantinople did
neither allow, nor disallow them, but the Occidental Disciples of that Sect
publicly approved them.

IX. Nor did Tertullian, in this case, want enough to plead in his own behalf,
he being the Champion of the Apostolical Institution; but the Church on the
principles of Christian prudence remitting her former strictnesses, allowing
second Marriages, dispensing with extraordinary fastings, and receiving
Penitents before the times of extremity: for it appears to have been the
Opinion and Practice of the most Venerable Antiquity, that gross sinners, as
Apostates, Murderers, Adulterers, and such like, should be wholly excluded
from Penance: And this makes de pudicit p. 555. Ed. Paris.
Tertullian object to Pope Zepherinus, the corruption of the ancient
discipline; and Ep. 52. p. 59.
S. Cyprian confesses, that many of his Predecessors did deny communion to such
Offenders; and the judicious Of the right of a Church in a Christ. S^ate. chapter
1. page 19, etc.
Thorndike says, That if we compare the writings of the Apostles with the
Original practice of the Church, it will appear that those rigours were brought
in by them, (and that these were the sins unto death, which might not be prayed
for) abating by little and little, till that Discipline was lost, but that the
Reformation of the Church consists in the retaining it. And this he there
proves largely, and so saves me the labor.

X. And for the noted Dogma which Mr. H. p. 118. adventures to say made him a
Heretic; De Monogam. p. 533
Tertullian's argument to prove the unlawfulness of second Marriages, is taken
from that of the Apostle, that a Bishop must be the Husband, of one Wife, i. as
the Fathers generally understood it, only once married, not the Husband of two
Wives, either together, or successively: but says Tert. all the Lords people
are his Priests, a Royal Priesthood, and therefore must so abstain: Nay, among
all the Fathers, Monogamy was looked on as one of the excellent Counsels of
Scripture, if not as an obligatory Precept, (and had Tertullian only
recommended, but not enjoined it, I know no man could have blamed him) and, in
truth, in Tertullian's sense, the Opinion was countenanced by that Age that he
lived in, and the most ancient Provincial Councils, We marry but once, or not
at all, says P. 10^. Ed. Oxon.
Octavius in Minutius Foelix: and the Can. 3.
Council of Neocaesarea, which was ratified in the great Nicene Convention,
requires, that those who were twice married, should do penance before their
admission to the Eucharist (which time of penance, says Zonaras, was a whole
year at least) Can. 7. and Conc. Laodic. c. 1.
the Priest being prohibited to be present at second Marriages; and when
afterward the Church connived at them, yet Ambr. in 1 Cor. 7. Tom. 5. p. 261.
and in 1 Timothy 3. p. 394. v^d. Isidor. de Divin Offic. lib. 2. cap. 19. vid.
extravag lib. 4. tit ult.
the Priest was forbidden, on pain of suspension, to give the blessing to the
new married Couple (and this Custom is still continued in the Greek Church, who
are therefore impeacht by Prateolus, and others, as condemners of second
Marriages) for such Matrimony is little better than fornication, says the
Author of the Opus imperfectum on S. Matthew: Every one of us Christians, says
Legate. pro Christian. p. 41. Ed. Steph.
Athenagoras, either remains as he was born, or marries but once, for second
Marriage is but a more plausible kind of Adultery; Clem. A^exan^ (...) p. 338
for as Idolatry is a receding from the worship of one God, to the
acknowledging of a multitude of Deities, so the dislike of single Marriage, and
the embracing of a succession of Wives is Adultery, for Origin. hem. 17. in
Luc. f. 103. Edit. Merlini. Vide and Naz. Tom. 1. Orat. 31 p. 501.
such a man can have no part in the Kingdom of God: And Lib. 1. adv. Jovin.
S. Hierome, though he condemns Tertullian, urges the same thing, and confirms
it by a multitude of examples of the brave Heathen Women, especially the
Indians, who burnt themselves on the decease of their Husbands, and smartly
blames the degeneracy of his Age, that had swerved from the Primitive Purities;
(for which Concessions he is forced to Apologize to Marcella) and in his 30th
Epistle, Tom. 1. p. 201.
ad Oceanum, he introduces Fabiola voluntarily offering her self to public
penance, because she had married twice, as if she had played the Adulteress,
since second Marriages are but a more gentile sort of Adultery: And as late as
the time of Apud C^^mnitii (...) 3. (...) digam (...) cerdot (...) 373. (...)
and L^^^. Imp. constit. 9.
Constantine Porphyrogenetus, who-ever married three Wives, was for the offense
to stand Excommunicate five years: and, in truth, the Fathers in general were
not so just in their commendations of a married life; and therefore, methinks,
should not so briskly have condemned so brave a man, that had the Apostles
Institution, and the practice of the two first Centuries for his Guide, and
great Reason besides: for if we may credit Argum (...) de pu^^^ inter (...)
per. (...)
Beatus Rhenanus, there were two main Causes that inclined them to these
severities.

XI. First, Because they thought the Day of Judgment at hand, (...) l. 1
Dies expeditionis, as Tertullian elegantly calls it: and it is the Apostles
argument, 1 Pet. 4.5. Phil. 4.5. and 1 Cor. 7.29. The time is short, therefore
let them that marry be as if they had no Wives: A Topic commonly made use of
by Ep. ad Ephesians. p. 6. (...).
S. Ignatius, by S. Justin, and the Martyrs, as their Acts testify; and the
Christians were mocked for it under the Emperor Marcus Aurelius by an Heathen
Impostor, Capitolin. in Marco.
who pretended, that when he should fall from a wild Fig Tree, and be turned
into a Stork, fire should come from Heaven, and the World be at an end: and
this the succeeding Fathers seriously believed, Cypr. Ep. 55. p. 70. and
exhort. ad Martyr. p. 192. Lactant. Instit. l. 7. c. 25. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 6.
Hier. Cat. v. Judas.
that Antichrist was at hand, and the dissolution of all things should be
shortly, and particularly that it could not be above two hundred years, till
all were accomplished; and is not this that which Philopater. p. 1127.
Lucian derides in the Christians of his Age, that they talked as if the course
of affairs should be altered, and disorders and troubles seize on the City,
scoffing them, as if they gazed in the air, and used the help of the
Mathematics for such discoveries, as every old Woman could make: and I am
persuaded, that that prayer which Apolog. c. 39.
Tertullian mentions as a part of the Christian Liturgy, pro mora finis,
relates to the deferring the coming of Antichrist, and the miseries of those
days.

XII. His second reason is, because the cares of a Married life are no mean
impediment to the Offices of Christianity, and that there was a necessity to
abate these appearances of sensuality, that they might give to occasion to
their Heathen Adversaries to bespatter that Holy name, by which they were
called, especially since many times they inter-married with the Gentiles. Hence
arose that famous abstemiousness of the Primitive Asceticks, who by wonderful
abstinences, and a dry diet subdued the flesh; by this course St. Timothy
impaired his health, for naturally he was of a good constitution, says Tom. 6.
(...). p. 450.
St. Chrysostom, but by extraordinary Fastings, and drinking of Water, he fell
into that state of weakness, that needed the Apostles compassion. The
particulars of Origens voluntary poverty, laboriousness and mortification, are
sum'd up by Hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 3.
Eusebius; and it was the method of the ancient Monks to use arts to lessen
their sleep, and subdue their carnal appetites, of which examples Cassianus and
Theodoret afford plenty, Chrysostom. Tom. 2. (...). in S. Matthew. p. 353.
Men that disciplined themselves by Fastings, Humicubations, and Sackcloth,
and a thousand such hardships. So Orat. 2. in laud. S. Basil. p. 358.
St. Greg. Naz. describes his admirable friend St. Basil, though the Primate of
Cappadocia, That he had but one coat, and one upper Garment, that his lyings on
the ground, watchings, and abstinence from bathings were his most decorous
ornaments, bread and salt his greatest delicacies, and his strongest drink
water, the effect of which ill diet he confesses were many distempers, but
however, this was both St. Basils and his Encomiasts common study and
employment; and by these means it came to pass, that the life of the first was
a burden to him, and the last was forced to lay aside his Episcopal Office,
wanting strength to go through the duties of it. And thus the Basil. Ep. (...).
p. 996. vide Sozom. l. 6. c. 6. de Basil.
good Archbishop answers the Officer of the Apostate Emperor Julian, that
demanded a 1000 pounds of him, That he had not so much in store, as would serve
to buy him Bread that day, his best dainties being only a few Herbs, a morsel
of Bread, and a little flat sour Wine. And when Tom. 7. Ep. (...). Cyriaco
e^uli. p. 169.
St. Chrysostom was accused of entertaining a Woman in his Chamber, and lying
with her, he invalidates the Argument by no other Topic, but this, Strip me of
my clothes, and you shall see all my members so mortified, that that very sight
will confute the calumny. These severities altered the countenances of the Holy
Men of those days, and introduced a livid wanness, and the symptoms of the
Grave into their faces, and exposed them to the censures of the Infidels.
Lucian bringing in Critias into the Christian Assembly to see nothing but a
company of men, with their faces inclining to the earth, and deformed with
paleness; nor could any thing less be expected from those, that used
customarily to fast ten days, and spent the whole night in singing Hymns.

XIII. And is it not hard measure, that so many persons, who were of the same
persuasion with Tertullian, both before and after him, should escape censure,
and all the guilt of such Opinions should light on his Head only? But so have
we seen Clemens of Alexandria acquitted, for holding the salvability of
Demons, but his Scholar Origin condemned for the same, the Millenary Opinion,
the belief of the whole second Century, but branded for Heresy in Apollinaris,
and Cyprian allowed to assert re-baptization, while in the Donatist it was
Heterodoxy; and all for want of a little Christian condescension, and a
generous Charity. And in truth, what are all Tertullians Discourses, after he
was so infected, but Apologies for greater and more solemn acts of self-denial,
his Exhortatio castitatis, and De Monogamia, to decry the incontinence of
second Marriages; De fuga in persecutione, to upbraid the cowardice of those,
that durst not die for their Master, (which is also the subject of his De
Corona militis) his Books De Jejuniis, a vindication of frequent Fastings, and
De Pudicitia, a Satyr against those that admitted Adulterers to the Communion;
and what more sublime demonstrations of a mortified soul, though the precepts
were taught in the School of Montanus?

XIV. But I know not how to reconcile these Opinions with the practices of some
of that Sect, if we may believe Apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 17. Hier. Catal. v.
Apollon.
Apollonius, asserting that Prisca and Maximilla were guilty of the most
profligate, and unpardonable extravagancies. Against this Apollonius Tertullian
writ, not in vindication of these excesses, but to prove Montanus to be a
Prophet, and that his Ecstasies were Divine: Vide Eusebius. l. 5. c. 3.
for Prophecy did continue till that time in the Church, of which Quadratus,
and after him Gregory Neo-Caesariensis are instances, and S. Cyprian frequently
talks of his Visions; so that it was no difficult matter for one that had but
little skill and insight into nature, as Tertullian had, to be deluded. And in
truth what more plausible and bold charms can we meet with, than those of
Montanus's she-Proselytes? who so confidently pretended to enjoy those
spiritual Charismata, especially that of Prophecy in succession to S. John,
Quadratus, and others; of whom Prisca (for I suppose Tertullian means her, whom
he De Resurrect. carn. p. 19. D. Ed. Rhen.
elsewhere styles the Prophetess acted by the Paraclete, to confute those who
denied the Resurrection) took on her to boast of her Id. de anima p. 250. A. B.
Revelations, which on the Sunday at the public meeting communicated
themselves to her in an Ecstasy, in which she assured the deluded Vulgus, that
she conversed with Angels, and sometimes with Christ himself, that she both saw
and heard Mysteries, and knew the thoughts of some persons, and the matter of
her Visions was taken either from the Lessons or Psalms for the day, from the
Sermons or the Prayers, which after the end of the Service, when the multitude
was dismissed, she committed to the select followers of Montanus, who took care
to record them. Tertullian while she was in one of these Ecstasies was
discoursing of the nature of the Soul, she returning out of her Trance tells
him, that she saw a Soul in that Vision not of a pure spiritual substance, but
thin and airy, and of a bright color, and in all its lineaments of a humane
form and shape. This either gave rise to his Opinion, or at least confirmed him
in his belief of the corporeity of the Soul. De fuga in persecut. c. 9. p. 194.
C. D.
The like Prophecies inclined him to think it unlawful to fly in time of
Persecution, If, says he, you consult the dictates of the holy spirit, those
divine exhortations advise to embrace, not to fly Martyrdom, that lays its
commands on men not to defire to die in their beds, or by the short fits of an
easy disease; but by the pains of Martyrdom, that he, who suffered for us,
may be glorified in us; that tells thee, that he that is exposed and proscribed
in the world, is in a glorious condition for he that is not proscribed by the
World, shall be proscribed by God. Nor is he without his Vision De Virgin.
veland. p. 178. E.
for the necessity of Virgins being vayled.

XV. But it is very considerable, that there were many differences between this
Ecstatick, and the true Revelation, (the Writers of the Church frequently
calling that of Montanus, a new and unheard of way of Prophecy) i. the
followers of that Pseudo paraclete were acted by a violent and frantic
Afflatus, and their raptures discovered themselves in furious and wild Schemes
of action, and not in that quiet, peaceable and serene way, in which the true
Ecstasie made it self known; the true Prophet, whose impressions were made on
his reason, never suffering any alienation of mind, to which the pretended
Enthusiast was liable, because his influences rise no higher than his fancy,
and by the extravagant motions of that, and his passions introduced disorder
and distraction into his reason, Miltiades, and Apollonius apud Eusebius. lib. 5.
c. 16. Epiphan. haer. 48. Hier. praefat. in Isai. and alibi passim. prae aliis
Chrysostom. Tom. 3. (...). in 1 Cor. 12. p. 430. (...).
so that he spoke what himself understood not (as the Poets describe the
Pythian Priestesses, rather like mad-Women, than devout, and religious persons)
(...). Clem. Alex. (...). p. 228. D. vide Naz. Orat. 14. p. 221. and Orat. 23.
p. 414. and Orat. 25. p. 441.
the Fathers calling such pretenders to Revelation in Ecstasie the Ministers of
Satan, and men acted by an evil spirit in opposition to the spirit of God, and
in set Tractates undertaking to evince, that a Prophet ought not to speak in an
Ecstasie, as do the Books of Pope Miltiades and Apollonius, which Eusebius
mentions. That the Montanist Enthusiasts had their Ecstasies Tertullian grants;
but denies that they fell into any rageings, and fits of fury, and would
undertake to Tert. adv. Marc. l. 4. c. 22.
prove, that the true Prophets were so acted from the example of S. Peter, who
on the Holy Mount, Luke 9.33. would have three Tabernacles reared, one for his
Master, another for Moses, and a third for Elias, not knowing what he said, for
says he, how was he ignorant? was it from the erroneous notions that then
possessed his mind, or from some extraordinary grace and assistance, that threw
him into an Ecstasie? For that man, who is acted by the spirit of God,
especially when he sees the glory of God, or God speaks by him, must
necessarily be deprived of his senses, being overshadowed and amazed by the
brightness of the divine power. And this, says he, is the Question between us,
and the Psychici, i. the Orhthodox. But herein Tertullian went alone, it being
apparent, that S. Peter's mistake proceeded from his ignorance of the state of
glorified bodies, and that the Masters among the Jews, and all the Fathers
acknowledge, that the Prophets had a clear light and apprehension of what was
communicated unto them, and that correspondent thereunto their deportment was
grave and their demeanor sober. Tertullian therefore was very happy, when he
more than once renders Ecstasis by Amentia, their raptures being nothing else,
but fits of madness, wherein they were acted by an assistant Demon to reveal
strange things. Melancholy, and a busy swelling fancy, with a little help from
Satan, the great pretender to Oracles, easily setting up a confident cheat to
imitate the dictates and inspirations of the true Prophets.

XVI. Secondly, The false Prophets of Montanus were of very vicious lives and
conversations, notwithstanding their great pretenses to extraordinary
strictness and mortifications; but the true spirit of God will not dwell in
unhallowed minds; Talmud. Gemar. Joma. c. 2. Abarban. pref. in 12. prophet.
Maimon. Mor. Nev. p. 2. c. 32. etc.

Philo (...); p. 424. (...). Vid. Orig. contr. Cells. lib. 7.


the Jewish Masters affirming, that he that will be a true Prophet, must be
acted by a spirit of true probity and piety, must be an humble man, a man of
wisdom and fortitude, and who has gotten a conquest over his passions. And to
this agrees S. Peter, 2 Ep. 1. chapter v. 21. That they were holy men, that spoke,
as they were inspired by God. And so the Fathers did believe, that those that
had such uncommon assistances of the spirit of God, were men whose souls were
purified by the light of a sublime reason, and whose lives were guided by that
light. But Apollin. a^ud Eusebius. ^ 5. c. 15.
Montanus himself was a man of unsatiable ambition, and covetousness, of an
ungoverned wildness and impudency, and his Apollonius ^pud eund. ^ 5. c. 18.
Prophetesses were Adulteresses, so far from being Virgins, as was boasted,
that they deserted their Husbands to follow this Pseudoparaclete, they were
addicted to the use of Fucus, and painting, to gawdery and intemperance, and
unlawful games, to putting their money to use, and to what not? and Theodotus,
Themison and Alexander, and other of their followers were notorious profligate
wretches, and at last Montanus and his two female Proselytes fell into the
condemnation of Judas, and were their own executioners, and now let the tree be
judged of by the fruit.

XVII. Thirdly, The Predictions of the true Prophets were always fulfilled, but
the Revelations of Maximilla were like the old Oracles, at best dubious, and
many times very false; she undertaking to threaten the world with Wars and
Seditions that should scourge the Church, if her dotages were not embraced;
Apollinaris ubi supr.
whereas the Father observes, that from the death of that Impostress to the
time of his Writing, there had past 13 years, in which there was a profound
peace over all the World, but more especially the Church enjoyed her serene and
quiet days, and was free from Persecution; and she also Epiphan. haeres. 48.
Prophesied, that after her decease there should not arise another Prophet, but
the consummation of all things should commence; whereas the World yet
continues. Fourthly, True Prophecy is a spirit, which descending from above is
not to be controlled by any thing but that supreme power that gives the
inspiration, who bestows and retrieves it at his pleasure; but when these
Ecstatick cheats appeared in the World, the good Fathers of that age undertook
to exorcise the Daemoniack, and cast out the evil Guest; Serapion, Apollinaris,
Apollonius apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 15, 17, 18.
Zoticus Bishop of Comana in Pontus resolving to undertake the action, but the
Montanists opposed it.

XVIII. Fifthly, The true Prophets had never granted them against the ordinary
and established Government of the Church, the Prophets of the old Testament
being to be judged by the Consistory, and of the New by the Church (against
which I can only find one instance of Elijah at Mount Carmel superseding a
positive law) but these men were guilty of introducing new doctrines, of
opposing and reviling their Ecclesiastical Superiors, and broached Opinions
that contradicted the word of God; Montanus himself, says Ubi supr.
Epiphanius, affirming, That the righteous at the day of judgment shall be a
hundred times brighter than the Sun, and the wicked a hundred times brighter
than the Moon. And what makes me most of all suspect the cheat, is, that this
Afflatus made it self appear only at set times by Tertullian's own confession,
usually on the Sunday, and that only during the celebration of Divine Service,
when the people were gathered together (like our Modern Quakers pretenses to
the spirit to assist them in their public discourses, as that thought fit,
which now no longer acts them, but at set intervals) and that the subject of
the Prophecy was hinted to the Enthusiast from some passage or other in the
Prayers, or Lessons, or Sermons of the Church: whereas the true spirit of God
tied not its self to such Methods, nor could be confined within such limits,
and needed not such concurrent circumstances, from whence it might take the
measures of its discoveries; but as a free, and uncontrolled agent shed its
influences on the mind of the Prophet, at what seasons, and in what degrees
were best liked of by the supreme Inspirer. Thus the Devil, as they say, can
take upon him the shape of a man, Naz. Orat. 25. p. 441. (...). Id. Orat. 14.
p. 221. (...), etc.
but cannot so wholly play the counterfeit, but that by a Satyrs tail, or a
cloven foot he will be betrayed to a severe and diligent inspector: so when he
seizes the Prophets Mantle to abuse the World, there are some peculiar
excellencies of the holy spirit, that he may pretend to, but cannot really
assume.

XIX. And for vindicating these usurped Privileges were the Books of
Tertullian justly deprived of their esteem, says Mr. H. p. 117. out of S.
Hierome, Bellarmine, and others; but I will oppose against them the judgment of
S. Cyprian, who could not live a day without reading some Paragraph in this his
Master, and from whom in truth he has borrowed many passages of his excellent
Writings, and the design of many of them too, of which there is no need to give
instances; and who is there, that is a lover of learning and piety, who does
not heartily bemoan the fall of so eminent a man? the errors of whose blind,
but honest zeal, I hope God has pardoned, and that though the Church allows
him no memorial in her Records, his name is written in the Book of Life.

XX. Of his writings which he left behind him, many are lost, as his Treatise
of the troubles attending Marriage, which is by Mr. H. made two distinct Books,
under the same Title in Latin, and in English, p. 124. and 126. his Tract of
the Corporeity of the Soul, is the same with that de Anima which is extant, and
wherein he maintains that Opinion; and I believe that Trithemius was also
mistaken in entitling him to a Book contra omnes Haereses, which I think was
only his most acute Book of Prescriptions against Heretics, with another
Prologue: his Books of the habit of Women, and the decking of Women, are only
two parts of the same discourse de Cultu foeminarum, the Tractate de
poenitentia, accounted suppositious, p. 145. is undoubtedly his, as Baronius
and Pamelius have evinced against Erasmus, which plainly appears, says Not. p.
120.
Rigaltius, to any man that is a Reader of Tertullian.

XXI. His Style is masculine sublime, and full of Majesty, and such as commands
submission, making as many Conquests as he finds Readers, says Commonit. c. 24.
Vincentius Lirinensis of him; but it is rough and uneven, full of obsure ways
of speaking, and Novelties in Grammar, which call for a very attentive and
thoughtful Reader, De geniculis adorare, to pray kneeling; in candido
expectare, and aeternitatis candidatus, to look for the day of judgment. So
Martyrii candida, the robes of Martyrdom; dies expeditionis, and dies
Christianae exultationis, the day of account; which day shall supremam carni
fibulam imponere. Invidiam Deo facere, to incline God to repent -- animam in
conficato habere -- prae sperasse, duricordia, imbonitas, etc.
but at the same time full of Elegancies, his very Barbarismes being very witty
and taking, and made very palatable by that salt and sarcastical Vein, which
runs through all his writings (of which the Margin affords a few instances)
which affected style of his served much to the introducing so many inconvenient
descriptions as happen in his writings, for which not a few learned men have
turned Advocates.

XXII. His Opinion that Montanus was the Paraclete, employed no more, but that
there were nobler assistances and influences of that holy Spirit shed on
Montanus, than on others, that he might thereby be capacitated in the most
perfect and accomplished manner, to explain the Laws of the Gospel to the World,
as the judicious Life of Tertull. sect. 9. p. 208.
Dr. Cave vindicates him; for I shall never be persuaded, that he took Montanus
for the Person of the Holy Ghost, as the Pepuzians did, who baptized their
Proselytes (...), as says Tom. 2. Epist. Canonic. 1. ad Amphiloch. p. 758.
S. Basil, into the name of the Father, the Son, and Montanus: And in truth,
Tertullian in his Book adversus Praxeam, does often very plainly distinguish
the Holy Ghost, and Montanus: the Opinions of Free Will, the Angels
incontinency, and the Millennium have been already considered, and that of
second Marriages: his Assertion concerning the Lent-fast, and Stations, is far
from being a Maxim of the School of that Novel Paraclete, but were of
Apostolical Institution, as has been unanswerably proved by the most learned
Bishop Gunning, in his Sermon of the Paschal Fast, and the matter of fact
deduced through all the ancient Saecula; a Book that has been scoft at by
Mervil, and others, but never soberly undertook; as we have seen a Rat nibling
at a hard piece of Cheese which he could not eat.

XXIII. That Martyrdom expiates all a man's transgressions, is so far from
being an error of Tertullian's, as it is reckoned, p. 167. that it was the
belief of the whole Church, which by these instances will appear: Apud Eusebius.
hist. lib. 6. cap. 4.
Origin commending his Scholar Herais, who was martyred at Alexandria, when as
yet she was but a Catechumen, says, that she was baptized so as by fire (which
Tertullian calls secunda solatia, lavacrum sanguinis, elegantly) and Id. hom.
11. in Numer. vide hom. 7. in Judic. and hom. 12. in Matthew.
taking notice, that many times the greatest Zealots of Martyrdom were
deprived of that honor (of which himself was an instance) gives this reason,
that the Devil hindered the persecution, because he knew that Martyrdom brought
with it remission of sins. This was Catholic Doctrine, which he learnt from
his Master Clemens Alexandrinus, who (...). p. 350.
affirms, that for this cause we call Martyrdom a state of perfection, not
that the Martyrs come to the end of their journey as other men do, (...). Greg.
Naz. Orat. 44. p. 715.
but that by this method they give a testimony of the height and compleatness
of their love. Thus when Saturus was devoured by the Leopards, the shedding of
his blood was a new baptism, say Acta passion. SS. Perpetuae, Faelicitat.
the Acts of his Martyrdom: Nay, this is a more efficacious, sublime, and
honorable baptism, says De Exhort. Martyr. praefat. p. 19.
S. Cyprian, in which God and his Christ rejoice, and after which no man can
sin; in that of water we receive remission of sins, in that of blood the reward
of our Virtues; in the first we are Gods servants, in the second his friends;
Id. de Orat. dominic. p. 159.
for what sin is it which Martyrdom cannot expiate? for here men are not
typically buried with Christ, as in baptism, but in reality, and truth; and
need not, says Tom. 2. de Spir. S. c. 15. p. 178.
S. Basil, the Symbol of water to their salvation, being baptized in their own
blood; for this was the Baptism with which Christ was baptized, says Iom. 1.
Orat. 39. p. 634. vide Nicet. comment. in loc. tom. 2. p. 1035.
S. Gregory the Divine, which is so much more venerable than any other Baptism,
in that it is never polluted with any succeeding Crimes: And this Contr. Donat.
l. 4. c. 22. and de C. D. l. 13. c. 7. and passim.
S. Austin confirms by the example of the penitent Thief on the Cross; as the
Infants at Bethlehem are for this reason called Martyrs by Lib. 3. c. 18.
Irenaeus, and so accounted by the Church.

XXIV. It was a bold, but true speech of a holy man, says Tem. 3. (...). in
Ephesians. p. 822.
S. Chrysostom, that Martyrdom will not expiate the crime of Schism;
implying, that it purges all other sins, a passage which he borrowed from S.
Cyprian, De unitat. Eccles. p. 152.
For he cannot be a Martyr, who is not in the Church: For the Savior of the
World, says S. Cateches. ^. p. 60. Ed. 1608.
Cyril of Jerusalem, being to purge it by his Cross, there came out of his side
both water and blood, that they who lived in the time of peace might be
baptized with water, and those who were confined to the times of persecution,
might be baptized in their own blood: And so the wisdom of the Father calls
Martyrdom, when he says, Can ye drink of the Cup that I drink of, or be
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with. De dogmat. Eccles. c. 73.
Gennadius gives the same judgment in behalf of the Church of the Century that
he lived in; We believe that none can be saved but the baptized, no Catechumen
having a share in that glorious place, whatever his virtues be, unless he be a
Martyr, which is equivalent to baptism. And does not De moute peregri^. p. 99^.
Lucian hint at this, when mentioning the cheerfulness of the Christians, and
their contempt of death, he gives the cause, because they were persuaded that
the whole man shall be immortal, and they shall live for ever: Which as it may
relate to the immortality of the Body after the Resurrection, so also to the
benefits of Martyrdom, that it cancels their sins, and gives them a free
passage to Heaven.

XXV. This therefore was not Tertullian's error, but a Catholic truth; nor
does it want Assertors among the Moderns; for the foreign Churches, see Loc.
Gold. sect. de b^ptis. p. 542.
Musculus, and for our own, Def. of Mr. Hooker. art. 16. p. 111, 112.
Dr. Covel is her Advocate, that the Church holds constantly, touching
Martyrs, that Baptism taken away by necessity, does not take away the necessity
of Baptism; God who has not bound his Grace, with respect to his own freedom,
to any Sacrament, may and does accept them as baptized, which are Martyred
before they could be baptized: For as in baptism by Water, it is not the
washing, but the answer of a good Conscience that confers remission of sins, so
is it here: And what greater testimony could be given to the world of the
reality of such Protestations, than being slain for that Faith? and as the
baptismal Laver confers Grace, where there is no hinderance on the part of the
baptized, so is it in the case of the Martyrs being sprinkled with his own
blood: for it is to be supposed, that nothing but a generous love to God and
Religion, could inspire him with so much courage; for it is next door to
impossible, says Homil. de Virginib.
S. Gregory the Great, that a man should give his body to be burnt, if he have
not mortified his lusts.

XXVI. Sect. 7. p. 169. we are told, that Rhenanus out of Rhegino makes
Tertullian a Martyr, but without grounds. I confess I have not that Historian
by me, but suppose that it may be a mistake of the Judicious Rhenanus quoting
Rhegino, for Ado Viennensis the Martyrologist, Martyr. ^om. Aug. 4. p. 528.
who informs us of a Tertullian (not our African) a Presbyter, and Martyr at
Rome, under the Emperor Valerian, who after he had endured the Rack, and
several other most cruel torments, was beheaded; which probably Rhenanus
applied to this Presbyter of Carthage, whom I cannot suppose to have been
admitted to that Crown, though none can deny him to have been an eminent
Confessor, as was Ibid. Apr. 2. p. 285.
another of his name, being the eighth Bishop of Bologne in Italy: And so I
leave him to that peace in another world, of which, what by reason of his
Heathen Adversaries, and what he suffered from his embittered Brethren, he had
but a small share in this.

THE LIFE OF Origin.
I. AT the same time that this most learned of the Latin Fathers gave the
Western Churches a Specimen of his transcendent parts, Providence so ordered
it, that the Eastern Nations should be blessed with the labors of the most
learned of the Greeks, Tertullian at Carthage, and Origin at Alexandria,
shineing like Stars of the first Magnitude, as if Africa had ingrost all the
literature of the World, and Athens were removed from Greece thither; equally
famous were they in their parts, their skill in the humane and sacred writings,
equally admirable in their eager desires of Martyrdom, and transported
passions for the glorifying their Master Jesus, (and in an Age of Persecution,
both missing that honor) and as equally deplorable, that their wits were not
bounded with a becoming sobriety, and their reasons, to which nothing else was
invincible, should be overcome of their own extravagancies; their sufferings,
their censures were very like, while both of them lived at that time, when I
fear many men scrupled not to sacrifice their charity to the preservation of
their Faith; and I suppose all good men, and lovers of the Liberal and holy
Studies, will with Commonitor. cap. 23, and 24
Vincentius Lirinensis, who joins them, bedew their Ashes, and bemoan their
Fate, at once applauding their prodigious accomplishments, and mourning the
excesses of them.

II. Dr. Gaves Life of Origin. sect. 1. p. 215.
Besides the Epithetes of Adamantius and Chalcenteros, which Mr. H. Sect. 1. p
171. well observes, were given him for his indefatigable studies, and
invincible reasonings: his name was Origin, given him, say some, q. (...),
because born on a Mountain, viz. in the time of Persecution, that forced his
Mother out of Alexandria, (for as to the Jesuit Halloix's Whimsey, that
Mountains in Scripture signify holy men, it cannot but be exploded) Vossius
from Orus the Egyptian Deity, but Not. in Philocal. p. 681.
Tarinus, qu. (...) vel (...), because born in due time, his Parents looking on
him as a blessing opportunely sent from Heaven to them; and says further, that
in more than one Manuscript, he found his name written with an Aspirate, (...).

III. He was not full seventeen years old when his Father was beheaded (who was
a very learned, and very good man, and a Christian, though Apud Eusebius. lib. 6.
c. 13.
Porphyry makes him a Heathen) and not long after for his maintenance set up a
School, wherein he taught Grammar, and without doubt the other Liberal Arts at
Alexandria, and at eighteen was made Catechist of that famous Church there, in
the stead of his Master Clemens, says Lib. 6. c. 3.
Eusebius; so that he must have been less than eighteen when he set up his
School of Secular Learning first, though Mr. H. p. 174. deny it; in which
School he took Heraclas to be his Assistant, not till his return from Rome,
says the same Ibid. c. 12.
Historian; whereas Mr. H. p. 175. devotes him to that Office before that
journey, about which time he made himself an Eunuch for the Kingdom of Heaven,
in the literal sense, either by some Medicinal preparations, as Epiphan. haer.
64.
some understand it, or by abscission, as Epist. ad Pammach. and Ocean. tom. 2.
p. 194.
S. Hierome positively avers; unhappy in this, that he that was so universally
blamed for understanding all other passages of Scripture in an Allegorical and
mystical way, should take this against our Saviors meaning in the literal.

This action at first was highly applauded, but afterward as much decryed by
Demetrius the Patriarch of Alexandria, and which I see not how it can be
reconciled with that passage in Haer. 64. p. 228.
Epiphanius, that he should rather choose to offer sacrifice, than defile
himself with a Negro, which must have been an impotent piece of revenge, and
ill managed in his Assailants, the fame of his castrating himself having been
spread among all persons by Demetrius, and his other Opponents, and impossible
if S. Hierome's relation of it be true: but this Calumny has been handsomely
wiped off by Tom. 2. an. 253. p. 477. etc.
Baronius, Ubi supr. sect. 15. p. 224, 225.
Dr. Cave, and others, among whom Mr. H. also p. 225, 226. with reason enlists
himself.

IV. The Sedition at Alexandria, which occasioned his first remove to Caesarea
( Eusebius calls it a Civil War) was the result of a design of the Emperor
Caracalla to ruin that City, against which he drew his Army, and inclined
Origin to seek another place of refuge; for the Spartian. in Caracalla.
Historian tells us, that he had a particular spleen against the Philosophic
Schools there, which he destroyed, because Aristotle was supposed to be an
Accomplice in the poisoning of Alexander the Great, whose Ape Caracalla was:
This anger was increased against the men of that City, for that he having
publicly married his Mother-in-law Julia, the Mother of his Brother Geta, says
Ubi supr.
Spartianus, or rather his own Mother, as Lib. 4. p. 98. Ed. Steph.
Herodian, Oppianus, and Not. in Eusebius. Chr. an. 2232. p. 211.
Scaliger, the Alexandrians, a sort of people naturally biting and satirical,
usually in an Ironical way called him Oedipus, and his Mother Jocasta, alluding
to that known incestuous story; whereupon to revenge himself, he pretends as if
he would levy a new Legion among the people of that City, who flocking to him
in great multitudes, and unarmed, were inhumanely sacrificed to his cruelty,
Herod. ubi supr.
till the Nilus was died with their blood: In which rigorous proceedings of
his, no doubt but the Philosophers, whose Schools he destroyed, were as little
safe in their persons, as their Colleges, especially Origin, whose Master
Hierocles de fato. p. 39. Edit. Londin. 1655.
Ammonius had been the grand Instrument of reconciling the Academy, and
Lycaeum, and combining the diverse Families of the lovers of Wisdom into one
Fraternity; among whom no man was so admired, and talked of, so courted and
adored, both by the Christians and Heathens, as Origin, which might occasion
his being particularly sought for; and made it not only dangerous for him to
stay at Alexandria, but equally unsafe for him to reside any where in that
Province of Egypt, as Lib. 6. c. 13.
Eusebius relates.

V. That Origin should take two journeys to Rome, one under Pope Zepherinus,
the other under the Emperor Philip, as Tom. 2. an. 248. p. 435.
Baronius avers, at which time he should come into Plotinus's School, as Mr. H.
p. 187. out of the Cardinal relates, is a passage in which Eusebius and the
Church History is eternally silent; and I suppose proceeded from a mistake of
that Origin, whom Porphyry mentions in the life of Plotinus for our
Alexandrian, who must needs have been two distinct persons; the Elder a
Presbyter of the Christian Church, but the Younger an Heathen Platonic, and a
Fellow-Pupil under the tuition of Plotinus, says Vit. Porphyr. p. 19.
Eunapius, with Porphyry, and Amerius, and Aquilinus (or as Dr. Pearson would
have it, Paulinus) Now for this reason they cannot be the same, says that
Prolegom. in Hierocl. de fato.
excellent Prelate; for Porphyry came not under the tuition of Plotinus, till
that Sage man was old; but Origin was twenty years elder than Plotinus,
Plotinus being born An. 13. of Severus, whereas Hier. Catalog. v. Origenes.
Origin, An. 10. of that Prince, when his Father was beheaded, was seventeen
years old: It was therefore the Junior Origin a Heathen, and not our
Alexandrian Catechist (though Baronius, Holstenius, and others, opine the
contrary) who coming into Plotinus's School at Rome, occasioned him abruptly to
put a period to his Lecture; and to him we must attribute the Books which are
ascribed to Origin by Longinus and Porphyry, (among which his (...) are now
extant in the Florentine Library; and are, says Lucas Holstenius, very worthy
to see the light) but never mentioned by Eusebius, Hierome, or any other
Father, as the works of our Origin; and of this latter Origin, with submission
to the judgment of the learned, would I understand those passages in (...).
apud Phot. cod. (...). p. 285. and cod. (...). p. 750.
Hierocles, that the most eminent Scholars of Ammonius of Alexandria were
Plotinus, and Origin, to which I am inclined, because a little after he reckons
him with Jamblichus, and Porphyry, and the rest, who were of the holy Family,
i. of the second Family of Plato, which begun in Ammonius, and was continued by
those excellent persons down to Plutarch the Athenian (the Great Plutarch, as
Marinus in the life of Proclus styles him) for I cannot believe that Hierocles
would have reckoned Origin after Plotinus, had he meant this Alexandrian
Catechist, who was for age twenty years elder than Plotinus, and for Seniority
in the School of Ammonius more; for Origin must have been under his tuition
before his seventeenth year, when he set up a School for himself: but Plotinus,
as Porphyry tells us, was 28 years of age when he came to Alexandria, where he
continued under the tuition of Ammonius eleven years, and came not to Rome till
the first year of the Emperor Philip.

VI. Now before the eleventh year of Alexander Severus, when Plotinus first
came to Alexandria, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 20.
Origin had been driven from thence, viz. An. 10. of that Prince; (having
resigned his School to Heraclas his Scholar, who was in a short time after
chosen Patriarch of that See) whither we never find that he returned again: So
that it is next door to impossible, that they should be Scholars together under
Ammonius, and that Origin should be the person of that name, of whom and
Ammonius, Porphyry tells us, Plotinus took his leave at his departure; but the
Chronology will be inconfused, if this passage be understood of the Heathen
Origin, who was a Compupil with Plotinus at Alexandria, and afterward probably
leaving that City, came to Rome, and put himself with Porphyry under the
tuition of his former Companion; to whom at his first entrance into that
School, we may apply that story that Plotinus gave over his Lecture, professing
that he had no encouragement to discourse to those, who understood such sublime
matters as well as himself. This latter Origin was Porphyry's intimate
acquaintance at Rome, but the former only a person whom he had ordinarily
conversed with, not at Alexandria, as Commonit. c. 23.
Vincentius Lirinensis mistaking Eusebius has it, and from him De Vit. and
Script. Porphyr. cap. 2.
Holstenius, for Origin was driven from Alexandria that very year, in which
Porphyry was born, viz. an. 10. of Alexander Mammeae, but at Tire, where Origin
spent much of his old age, and that Philosopher had his Birth, and where in his
youth being taken with his fame and learning, he possibly began a small
friendship with him.

VII. His studious Allegorizing of holy Writ he took up in imitation of his
Master Clemens, who was a great admirer of Philo the Jew, one much addicted to
that vein of Commenting: but Apud Eus. ubi supr. vid. Hier. Apol. 3. Adv. Ruff.
Tom. 2. p. 249, 250.
Porphyry says, that he borrowed it of the Greeks, who observed this custom in
explaining their mysteries, which he applied to the Jewish Scriptures, having
to this purpose made himself Master of the Writings of Plato and Numenius,
Apollophanes and Longinus, Nicomechus and Cheraemon, and other Pythagoreans,
and Stoics, and of this the learned Dr. Windet's Tractate De Pythagorae, and
Origenis Vitis, and Decretorum (...), Promised in his de vita functorum statu.
Sect. 5. p. 106.
if extant, is questionless a great instance. And for this way of
interpretation is. Origin slighted by many Moderns, but by Beza especially (a
man, that came infinitely behind him in point of learning, and went an
aequi-pace with him in errors) in whose Praef. ante verse. Nov. Test. and. Ep.
28. and in Romans 8.3.
style he is the most impure of all Christian Writers, and an Author justly
execrated, and so altogether Heterodox, that he deserves no authority in the
Christian Church. But Beza herein shows himself too severe an Aristarchus,
while he so readily pronounces (as if he spoke e cathedra) a decretory sentence
against so admirable a person, whom the succeeding ages of the Church thought
so well of, that S. Hilary, and Eusebius of Vercelli, Victorinus, and S.
Ambrose, S. Austin, S. Gregory the great, and, says S. Hierome, who not among
the Fathers, followed so exactly, as to borrow many a passage from him, which
has had the good luck to be Catholic doctrine in them, while proscribed as
Heterodoxy in Origin.

VIII. But I shall oppose against Beza the judgment of the excellent Enchirid.
Milit. Christ. c. 2.
Erasmus, who prescribes to him, that would live piously the choice of such
interpreters above others, and Id. c. 13.
blames our later Divines, some for contemning this Method, others for handling
it jejunely, and unfruitfully. And what an encouragement does this humor of
Beza give to the Socinians to continue their slighting of all antiquity, Jun.
Cath. doctrine. de Trinit. defens. 1. p. 17.
for this very reason? because they indulge to a vein of allegory, whereas it
is not out of a design to supplant or supersede the literal meaning, but to
make the word of God serviceable to all honorable purposes. And because
Erasmus may be suspected, I will match Beza with a famous person of the
Calvinist Churches, Of the right use of the Fathers. l. 1. c. 1.
Mons. Daillee, who is so far from thinking this Allegorical way a blemish,
that he positively avers, if all Origens Works were extant, they would
perchance afford us greater helps to the quieting of the present disputes and
controversies in Religion, than all the other Fathers.

IX. Origin among the ancient Worthies was the first Master of the Hebrew
Language, but Animadv. in Eusebius. Chron. p. 109.
Scaliger denies him to have had any skill in the Samaritan. His Sermons many
of them doubtless were spoken Extempore, and written by his Notaries and
others, of whose dexterity that way we have a large account by P. 222, 223.
vide Lipsii Ep. Select. Ep. 35. Leonardo Lessio.
Dr. Cave, and others; This way of speaking without premeditation was a
customary usage of many of the Fathers, especially S. Chrysostom, and is the
reason why the Homilies of that golden-mouthed Orator at Antioch are more
elaborate both for style and matter, than those which he Preached at
Constantinople; his leisure, when a Presbyter, Phot. Cod. (...). p. 201.
permitting him to pen and digest his Sermons, which he wanted when a Bishop;
as he that compares his Homilies on Genesis, the Acts and Epistles, with his
(...), and Panegyricks, must confess. This Mode of fluent discourse was first
introduced by the Father of the Sophists Plato in Gorgia Philostr. vit.
Sophist. l. 1. Valor. Max. l. 8. c. 15.
Gorgias Leontinus, who at the Olympic games, or any other solemn convention
was wont to challenge any man to give him a subject (his word was (...), says
Philostratus) and on that, whatever it were, would speak pertinently a
considerable time; for which the Greeks erected him a Statue of pure Gold in
the Temple of Apollo, whereas an Effigies gilt was the greatest honor any other
person ever attained to. And here I cannot pretermit remarking the bitter
censure of Tom. 2. an. 220. p. 359.
Baronius, that it befell Origin in making so much haste, as Solomon threatens,
Prove. 20.21. That an inheritance may be gotten hastily, but the end thereof
shall not be blessed.

X. The loss of the Works of this deserving Ancient (among which we may chiefly
mourn the Octapla) is very deplorable, and of those that are left, we have but
a few in their native Language, but in Latin (and whoever his Translators
were, whether Jerome, Ruffinus, or others, they are wanting to fidelity, as
well as elegance, and prostitute the honor of Origin) but still we have more of
his Works in Greek, than Mr. H. p. 200. acknowledges, who mentions only the
Books against Celsus, and the Philocalia. Whereas to omit the Dialogues against
the Marcionites lately set out by Wetsteinius at Basil 1674. (which are only
Collections out of the Works of Origin by Maximus, or some other Ancient, and
set out in his name) we have by the same Editor the Tractate De Martyrio, and
the Epistle to Julius Africanus perfect, (which long before was published
imperfectly by Heschelius at Auspurgh, an. 1602. and since by the Collectors of
the Critici in the 8th Tome.) The discourse De Engastrimutho was published by
Leo Allatius, and is doubtless a part of his Comments on 1 Reg. 17. (to omit
the Treatise De Oratione, the MSS. Copies whereof are in the Libraries at
Cambridge, and elsewhere) these of his Tractates are extant in Greek, and Mons.
Huet has lately at Paris given the World a new Edition of the Comments of this
Father, where in their native style we have 17 Homilies on the Prophet Jeremy,
7 Tomes on S. Matthew, and 9 Tomes on S. John's Gospel, and all these his
genuine and uncontroverted Works. But I perceive that Mr. H. is a stranger to
this last and best Edition, and it would be pardonable to a man that lives
retired and a great way from such conveniences, did Praef. to his (...).
he not tell us, that he has given his reader as full a Catalogue as could be
gotten, of whatever bears the Fathers name, with a hint of what kind they are,
whether genuine, spurious, or dubious. Which promise how it has been
fulfilled, while he never mentions Vossius's Edition of Ignatius, or Huets
Origin, I leave to the reader to judge.

XI. Many also of the Books, which he p. 206, 207, reckons as lost, are extant;
as for example, his discourse of Martyrdom, his Epitome of the History of
Susanna, which is an Epistle of his in answer to Julius Africanus, his Homily,
De Engastrimutho, and one Epistle more to Gregory Thaumaturgus ex^ant in the
Philocalia. Among his Comments affirmed to be lost, the Homily on the Song of
Hannah is extant even in Merlin's Edition, as is also that on the second Book
of the Kings, of Solomon's judgment between the two Harlots in Huets Edition;
the Comments on Job were written after the Arian Controversy began, probably
by Maximinus; the Homilies on the Canticles are discarded by Erasmus,
Amerbachius, Cook, and others, but vindicated by Merlin, Genebrard, and our
Reverend Vindic. Ep. Ign. part. 1. c. 7. p. 106. etc.
Pearson; and in truth the judgment of Erasmus (whom most men blindly follow)
and his Acumen, which for the most part happily assisted him in censuring the
Works of the Latin Fathers, wonderfully failed him, when he played the Critic
with the Greek. Mr. H. also p. 217. mentions but 14. Homilies in Jerem. whereas
there are 17 extant in the Paris Edition.

XII. Many of his Works which are lost, are omitted by Mr. H. as his Homilies
on Deuteronomy, the Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah, and Daniel, his Comments in
Veteres Philosophos, his Dialogues De Resurrectione, and Disputations with
Beryllus, which were Origen's genuine Writings. These supposititious Tractates
also are omitted (the Commentaries on S. Mark, the Scholia on the Lords Prayer,
etc.) Origin also is entitled to two Books, De Visione (...) ad Gratam, which
Prooem. in l. 1. Comment. in Isai.
S. Hierome says, are falsely fathered on Origin, but I think them to be a part
of his Comments on the Evangelical Prophet, of which Hist. l. 6. c. 25.
Eusebius says, he saw 30 Tomes as far as the Vision of the Four-footed Beasts
in the Desert. Some also Phot. Cod. (...). p. 16.
fathered on him the Book of Gaius the Roman Presbyter, called the Labyrinth,
but wrongly: and it were to be wished, that the Epistle of S. Jerome ad Paulam,
wherein he designedly enumerates the Works of this Father, and compares him
with Varro, were extant, that the great enemies of this most learned man might
see of what a treasure their spite and envy has robbed the World of wise men
and Christians.

XIII. In his discourse of the stupendous undertaking of the Octapla, the loss
whereof is more easily talked of than retrieved, this is omitted, that in the
Edition of the Psalms Hist. l. 6. c. 12.
Eusebius reckons one Version more than the common Interpreters, which
different Translation I suppose to be that which the Fathers call the Vulgar
Translation, and which as appears by S. Hierom's Epistle ad Suniam, and
Fretelam was the same with the inemendate Edition of the 70, Consul. Woweri
syntagm. de 70 Interp. c. 11.
but vastly different from the more correct Copy of Origin, which he who reads
that Epistle may see proved at large. Nor did the two Anonymous Copies found at
Jericho and Nicopolis, contain a Version of the whole Old Testament, as Mr. H.
intimates, but only of some certain Books, those as I conjecture, which we call
the Hagiographa, which Ubi supr.
Eusebius calls the Psalms, and Comment. in Tit. 3.
S. Hierome, Libri, qui apud Hebraeos versu compositi sunt, The Books among the
Hebrews, which were writ in Verse. Of all which several Versions, the Original
Copy of Symmachus came to the Fathers hands by the gift of Juliana, a Virgin at
Caesarea, with whom he took refuge during the Persecution, and on whom it
devolved either by right of inheritance, or being Eusebius. l. 6. c. 14.
given her by the Author; which very Copy Hist. Lausiac. c. 51.
Palladius says he saw, in which all these particulars were attested under
Origen's own hand.

XIV. His style Mr. H. p. 22. commends for its brevity and succinctness,
whereas it is too luxuriant, and he abounds in words; and this was a crime
which Eustathius lays to his charge, and with him Epiphanius, whose objection
favors of more envy than prudence, especially the last, who was a professed
enemy of the name of Origin, and will allow him to have done nothing well but
his Octapla; and yet while he is so severe a Critic to animadvert the style of
this eloquent Priest, he that looks into his, Phot. Cod. (...) p 162.
shall find it rugged and dry, and dressed in a vulgar way of expressing himself,
that bids defiance to the ornaments of Language. But his manner of speaking was
not all which the Bishop of Salamis objected against Origin (it being as
regular to expect that all men's faces should be alike, as their styles) but he
with Theophilus of Alexandria, Eustathins of Antioch, Methodius, and
Apollinaris (a Quarternion of slanderers Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 7, 9, 12.
Socrates calls them) in several Synods condemned his writings as Heretical,
and forbad the reading of them, which occasioned that hot quarrel between S.
Chrysostom and Epiphanius, wherein we may see an instance of the infirmities
of the greatest men, when their passions transport them to bitterness and evil
speaking; and the hand of Heaven appeared signally in it, if we may believe
Ibid. c. 13.
Socrates, who tells us that it was reported, that at the parting of these two
famous Prelates at Constantinople, Epiphanius told S. Chrysostom, that he
hoped he should never die a Bishop, to which the Patriarch retorts, that he as
firmly hoped, that Epiphanius should never return home in safety; and both fell
out true; Epiphanius dying on Shipboard before he reached Cyprus, and S.
Chrysostom a little while after in banishment. But this was a very irregular
method of finding out and countenancing Orthodoxy, and wherein they might have
followed a better pattern of two men as famous as any in that Century in a
similar question, viz. S. Athanasius and S. Basil, who differed about the
writings of Dionysius of Alexandria, the first asserting them to be Orthodox,
the last that there was something of Arianisme couched in them, yet neither
denounced the other Heretic, but amidst their different sentiments maintained
an amicable correspondence.

XV. Such was the harsh fate of this admirable man, who was not only forced to
experiment the envy of the world while alive, but was hindered taking refuge in
the grave, which is the sanctuary of the miserable; excommunicate while alive,
and as if that were not enough, excommunicate after his death too, and that not
by the hot and irrational zeal of a few private persons, but by the mouth of a
Com. C. P. general. 5. anathem. 11.
General Council, and ranked in the same Class with Arius, Macedonius,
Nestorius, and Eutyches, and other most infamous Heretics. The custom I
cannot dislike, but heartily wish, that this learned and pious man lay not
under such severe censures. For though it seems uncouth to punish any man when
he is gone out of the World, and has answered God for his Opinions, yet there
was great reason, that the Church should so proceed in the case; for how else
in truth could the ancient Heretics have been exposed, who lived before the
age of General Councils, and when few or no Provincial ones could be had? and
how should the Church curse a Heretic, till she knew him to be so? when as
many times the wretch kept himself within the Catholic Communion under the
Masque of his Hypocrisy, and the Vizard was never taken off till after his
death, when by a severer scrutiny into his assertions and writings, the
Impostor was detected. See Crackenthorp's Vigilius dormitans. c. 6.
Thus Domnus Patriarch of Antioch was punished by the Council of Chalcedon,
Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuestia, etc. by the 5th General Council, Honorius by
the 6th, and the 2d Nicene; thus the Synod of Sardica condemned the revolters
to Arianisme, and the African Synod every Bishop who made a Heretic or Pagan
his Executor, and the Synod at Rome under Pope Martin the first, execrated the
memory of Sergius and Pyrrhus the Patriarchs of Constantinople, and Dioscorus
being chosen Pope Simonically, was many years after his death for that contract
excommunicate. And according to the prescriptions of the Councils did
particular Fathers act, Ep. 50. ad Bonifac. Commit.
S. Austin declaring his resolutions to curse Cecilianus formerly the
Archbishop of Carthage, could he but be sure, that the accusations laid to his
charge by the Donatists were true. Id. l. 3. contr. Crescon. c. 35.
And professing also his intentions to do so to whatever persons had in the
time of Persecution delivered their Bibles to be burnt, though dying in the
Church Communion.

XVI. Nor were the Fathers of the Church without a president and encouragement
in the Imperial Laws; Cod. l. 2. Tit. 5. de haeret. and Manich. leg. 4.
The Emperor Theodosius decreeing, That after death an action might be lawfully
commenced against a Manichee, or a Donatist, to render the memory of the
Heretic infamous; for if traitors, though in their graves, are yet branded in
their posterity, who are deprived of estate and honor, though their Father died
unimpeach'd, how much more reasonable is it, that the same course should be
held in matters of Religion? says that august and glorious Prince. And there is
something of this nature retained in the Greek Church unto this day, who give
absolution to the dead, that have been buried in the state of excommunication,
and this supposes they may be anathematized too, that you may bind as well as
loose the dead, for they are Malanus Peloponnes. in Histor. Patriarch. C. P.
apud Crusii Turco-Graec. l. 2. Sect. 32. and passim.
persuaded, that the body of a man, who dies out of the Ecclesiastical
communion, cannot turn to ashes, as long as it lies under the Churches curse,
but continues hard and swollen, and of a dismal black and affrighting color: but
if many years after the Bishop, or any by his authority go to the grave, open
it, and solemnly pronounce the prayer of absolution, in a small space the body
returns to its Primitive dust: And the action it self, abating the
circumstances, has its warrant in the Council of Chalcedon, which absolved and
Canonized a Martyr Flavianus, Patriarch of Constantinople, who had been
Excommunicate, and murdered by the Faction of Dioscorus in the Pseudo-Ephesine
Synod: Such was the Power and Practice of the Primitive Church, and such
doubtless is the Jurisdiction of the present; but as I could wish it had been
anciently superseded in the case of Origin, so I would have the weapon drawn,
and used very sparingly at all times; for if from broken sentences, and the ill
interpretation of an honest and well-meant, but mistaken and ill-worded
discourse, a man must after his dissolution, when he cannot answer for himself,
be censured and damned, few or none of the most Eminent and stout Defenders of
the Church shall be out of the reach of this lash.

XVII. Nevertheless, the greatest lovers of the name of Origin cannot but
acknowledge, that he had his defects; his great converse with the discourses of
the Philosophers leaving a certain tincture in his mind, which became visible
in his writings, there being a near relation between the Opinions of the
Academy, and the School of Christ, Baren. Tom. 2. an. 234. p. 4^3.
Platonism being the ready way to the belief of the Name of Jesus; and I could
wish we had that Copy of his works which was once Apud eund. an. 256. p. 553.
Cassiodores, in which that wise man had marked all the dangerous passages,
that the Reader might with caution proceed, it being a prudent course to allay
the extravagancy of that esteem and love which some men had for his name,
engaging them to choose Vinc-Lirinens. common. c. 23.
rather to err with Origin, than embrace the truth with others; the most
material of his Errors L. 2. Apolog. adv. Ruffin. p. 220. Ed. Erasm.
S. Hierome has summed up in these words, That the Son of God is a Creature,
the Holy Ghost a Servant, that there are innumerable Worlds that succeed one
another, that the Souls of men were first Angels, and the Soul of Christ had a
being before his Incarnation; that in the Resurrection we shall not arise with
the same Bodies; that at that day Angels and Demons, and the Souls of men, as
well Jews and Heathens, as Christians, shall be in the same state; that a new
World shall be made, and we shall have other bodies, which shall be acted by
new Souls dropped from above.

XVIII. A few instances of his failings has Mr. H. p. 241. out of Osiander
given us; among which that, that the Son of God was a Creature, cannot be
reconciled to the passage out of his Book (...), where he acknowledges Jesus to
be God, and begotten before the Foundations of the Earth were laid: nor can I
believe, that Vid. Socrat. Hist. l. 6. c. 12. and l. 2. c. 17. and l. 4. c. 21.
S. Athanasius, S. Basil, and S. Gregory Nazianzen, would have quoted his
Authority against the Arians, and given him the character of a most admirable
and laborious man, had his Sentiments in that point concentered with the
Heretics; no more can I believe that he held that Christ had not his Body from
his Mother, but brought it with him from Heaven, as De Dogm. Eccles. c. 2.
Gennadius impeaches him; his Doctrine of the Salvability of the Devil he had
from his Master Cleinens, and there it has been considered; the necessity of
single Marriages was Apologiz'd for in Tertullian; the Doctrine of Providence,
mentioned p. 242. is disallowed by himself in his C. 1. p. 12. etc. 19. and
passim. and homil. 3. in Genesis
Philocalia; the Opinion of Free Will was adjusted in the Life of S. Justin;
Justification by Works will bear a safe and Catholic Explanation in S. James's
sense; his Pythagorean transmigration of Souls, which S. Hierome so severely
censures, and after him God. (...). p. 159.
Photius, he positively, and in express words more than once denies, L. 3.
contr. Cells. and Hom. 3. in Mat. vide Apolog. Pamph. pro Orig. Tom. 4. Hier. p.
247.
calling it an ignorant Assertion, and not consonant to the Ecclesiastical
Dogmata. This acute Father is also charged by Haeres. 64.
Epiphanius with the denial of the Resurrection of the Body, and affirming,
that what is here subject to alteration, is incapable of continuing in one stay
for ever: but this is contradicted also by his Proem to his Books (...), where
he avers, that there shall be a day of Resurrection, when this Body, which is
sown in corruption, shall arise in incorruption; and what is sown in ignominy,
shall arise in glory: And probably that very great man discoursed somewhat
according to the Platonic way of the (...), the getting out of the Dungeon in
which the Soul is fettered, and exerting it into its Native liberty; and this
gave occasion to the misconstruction.

XIX. For the most Eminent Disciples of the Academy were pleased to talk
accordingly, and on this notion to build a Superstructure that opposed the
Resurrection; for Plotinus says, Ennead. 3. lib. 6. c. 6. p. 310. (...), etc.
That as long as the Soul is in the Body, so long it is asleep; but that the
true awakening, is an awakening from the body, not a Resurrection with the
body; for the Resurrection with the body is but a change from one sleep to
another, as men go from one Bed to another; but the true awakening is from all
body, which is contrary to the nature of the Soul: And De Civit. Dei, lib. 10.
c. 29.
S. Austin says, that Porphyry opposed and derided Christianity for no one
Dogma so much, as that of the Incarnation of the Son of God; for that was a
debasing of God to stoop him to a body, whereas the great design of Reason and
Philosophy, is to elevate and advance the Soul from the body to God; and this
was the greatest stumbling block of all the Platonists, says the same Father:
With whose writings Origin having been so conversant, and delighting to dress
his Notions in their Garb and manner of expression, might easily fall into this
misinterpretation of his Orthodox meaning; and yet at last the Opinion so held
is no other than that of the Apostle, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God, but that this corruptible must put on incorruption, etc.

XX. And for the rest of his Errors, if we remember the adulterating of his
writings, the mistakes of his Amanuenses, that some things are spoken
Homilitically, others in the heat of disputation against Heretics: I suppose
we shall find just cause not to be too rash in our Censures; but this task has
been so performed by the learned Huet in his Origeniana, that he has
superseded all other endeavors: See also Dr. Cave's life of Orig. p. 235. etc.
although I cannot but wonder, that neither among his Enemies or Friends, any
notice has been taken of that one unorthodox Assertion of his, that the
Philocal. c. 12. p. 102 and Hom. 20. in Jo.
very words and letters of Charms are efficacious, especially if dressed in the
Language of the Holy Ghost, in the terms of Scripture (unless it be meant in
that passage in Cod. (...). p. 159.
Photius, (...)) an Assertion that destroys the sober Principles of Philosophy,
and opposes the determinations of Divines.

XXI. Thus checkered were the days of this most acute and judicious Father,
this devourer of Libraries, and indefatigable Student, to whom the character
belongs more justly, which was given to Longinus, that he was a living Library,
and a walking Study; or rather that description of Socrates, that he was a
lively Picture of Virtue; for he was, says our profound De coena domini. p. 75.
Ridley, most Eminent for his learning and holiness, and of that age the great
Doctor of Christianity. Nor is any one more commended by the Christian Writers,
who styled him, Hier. praef. de nomin. Hebr. Tom. 1. p. 71. Ecclesiarum
Magistrum. Theodor. (...). l. 1. in Menand. (...). Greg. Nyssen. vit. Greg.
Thaumat. Tom. 2. p. 974. (...). quod contra istius aevi haereses pend universas
scripsit, consul. Theodoret. in Menandro, Basilide, Isidoro, etc. Vide and
Hier. ad Pammach. and Ocean. de error. Origatom. 2. p. 19.
the Tutor of the Church, the Great Master of all sort of Learning, the
voluminous and acute Writer, and Teacher of the true Christian Philosophy, a
man Eminent and Venerable from his Infancy, and the true Son of a Martyr, and
the Confuter of all Heresies; for he wrote against Menander, Basilides, and his
Son Isidorus, against Valentinus and Hermogenes, Potitus, Blastus, Synerus,
Prepon, and Pithon, against the Nazaraei, Elcesaitae, Nicolaitans, and
Marcionites; and hardly an Enemy of the Church, and her Orthodox Sentiments,
but was scourged and confuted by his Tongue and Pen.

XXII. Nor were the Sons of the Church his only Encomiasts, the Adversaries of
our Faith having been just to his Merit, R. Gedaliah in Schalschel. haccabbala
p. 93. (...). apud Hotting. Smegon. Orient. p. 268.
the Jews themselves giving him a good Character, and Apud Eus. l. 6. c. 13.
Porphyry, even where he rails at it, being forced to sacrifice on the Altar of
Truth, and to commend his learning and industry: And though the Grandees of the
Alexandrian Church were his Enemies, yet the multitude adored his memory; for
when Phot. Cod. pin^ubi suppletur locus ab Haesckel. in not. p. 940.
Pierius, on the account of his indefatigable industry, acute Disputations, and
florid Sermons was much cried up by them, they could not find out a more
Honorable Title to bestow on him, than that of the Ju^ior Origin.

XXIII. Thus is he brought to his last Essay, his preparations for Heaven and
Eter^^ity, a place he could not but long for, were there nothing there but a
freedom from his Earthly troubles; and in him we may observe some things
peculiar. 1. His Preaching frequently without Orders, a thing not unknown in
that Age (and I could wish never had been practiced in ours) but unless an
extraordinary occasion justify it, little allowable, it being a just
punishment of Heaven on him for this Usurpation, to suffer him to fall into so
many gross mistakes, says Loc. com. part. 3. Sect. de Eccles. p. 130.
Chemnitius. 2. That when he was ordained, the Ceremony was performed, not by
his own Diocesan, which was usual, nor by a Neighbor Bishop with Letters
dimissory, which was sometimes practiced, but by two Bishops, the one of
Jerusalem, the other of Caesarea; it being the first example that we meet with
in Church History, of a Presbyter that had Imposition of hands to that sacred
employment from more than one Prelate. 3. That his great Enemy S. Hierome, who
so roundly taxes Ruffinus for defending him, notwithstanding the heat of his
declaiming, does Praefat. quaest. in Genes. Tom. 3. p. 204.
soberly protest, that he could be well content to undergo the envy that befell
him, could he be but Master of his skill in the Scriptures; and that he would
scorn those Mormo's, and little shadows [that surrounded him] whose fashion it
was only to affright Children, and make a great noise in a Corner.

XXIV. Envy therefore it was in the Opinion of his professed Adversary, that
occasioned his Condemnation, and made him fall under the Censures of Eusebius. l.
6. c. 7. Pamphil. Apolog. apud Phot. Cod. (...). p. 260.
two Synods at Alexandria, convened by the procurement of Demetrius, whose
spleen was grated to see a Presbyter make greater and more honorable Conquests
than the Patriarch of the Province; like David's ten thousands to Readiness
thousands: And the same Evil Spirit vexed and haunted him at Ruffin. invect. 2.
in Hieron. Tom. 4. p. 288.
Rome, because themselves were shadows, while he was admired, and his glory
eclipsed their minor fames; as when the Sun shines, it is night with the Stars.
4. That so great a lover and Zealot of Martyrdom, should in an Age of
Persecutions die in peace; for I cannot believe Apud Phot. cod. (...). p. 159.
Pamphilus, though he says there were many others of his Opinion, that he
suffered an honorable Martyrdom at Caesarea, in the Persecution under Decius,
for then he could not have lived to that age which S. Hierome allows him, nor
been Author of those Epistles, which, says Photius, he writ after the death of
that Emperor, unless we suppose the Letters to have been written after he had
left the World, as the 2 Chronicles. 21.12.
Jews say Elijah sent a writing to Joram, King of Judah, nine years after his
death, and conveyed it miraculously by the Ministry of an Angel.

XXV. But perhaps by that celebrated Martyrdom he means no more but an
honorable confession of the name of Christ in those evil times, which he never
sealed with his blood; the title in the days of Persecution being usually given
to those, who having professed the Christian Faith before the Gentiles with the
hazard of their lives, suffered, but outlived the tortures inflicted on them;
so Ad Philadelph. p. 45. Edit. Vossii.
S. Ignatius calls Philo his Deacon (...), i. not a man of known probity, but
as Not. in loc. p 284.
Vossius renders it, one that had been a Martyr in designation; and Adv.
Valent. cap. 1.
Tertullian says, Valentinus expected a Bishopric, but it was conferred on one
who had a better right to it, because a Martyr in preparation and resolves,
though not actually; and S. Athanasius's many banishments and sufferings for
Orthodoxy, got him that title too; Athanasius the Martyr, Catal. p. 314. Edit.
Sealig.
Nicephorus styles him; ( Martyrs designati, in De Martyr. init.
Tertullian, Ep. 2. ad Victric. p. 284.
Martyrs vivi, and Natal. 3. S. Faelicis. p. 573.
sine sanguine Martyr, in Paulinus, (...), Naz. Orat. 20. p. 319) and S.
Cyprian directs many of his Epistles to the Martyrs and Confessors, Nemesianus
etc. The Martyrs of God the Father Almighty, for the three children, says he,
Cypr. Ep. 58. p. 79.
were nevertheless Martyrs, though they escaped the flames of the Babylonish
furnace; the deferring of the Confessors Martyrdom does no way lessen the
merit of his generosity and bravery, but makes manifest the Magnalia of the
Divine protection. For there are two sorts of Martyrs, says Hemil. 36. in Evang.
S. Gregory the great, one in the intention only, the other in the intention
and action both. So our Savior tells the sons of Zebedee, that they should be
baptized with his baptism, and drink of his cup, by which is meant Martyrdom,
whereas S. John did not actually suffer, but yet was a Martyr in will and
resolution, though his body escaped.

XXVI. And in truth the title was promiscuously bestowed on those that dyed in
durance, that were banished or imprisoned for the sake of Jesus, or that had
but their estates confiscated; it was given to those charitable Christians, who
by visiting the sick of the Plague at Alexandria got the infection, and lost
their lives in that pestilential disease; nay any man who was unjustly
condemned and executed got that title, if we may believe the Heathen Historian
L. 27. vide Baron. not. in Martyrol. p. 266.
Ammianus Marcellinus; for I cannot allow of Tom. 2. an. 253. p. 458.
Baronius his nice distinction, that none of those who escaped death were
called Martyrs, but who had undergone the Rack and other torments in prison,
while the Confessors were only those who had been confined, but no otherwise
punished. A Confessor therefore and a Martyr were in those days reciprocal
terms in the account of all men, but the Confessors themselves who were so
modest as to disown the name. The Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Churches of Lions and Vien writing to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, that
their sufferers, who had been thrown to the wild beasts, and were afterward
rescued, would not style themselves, nor suffer others to call them Martyrs;
but if any one either personally or by Letter had given them that appellation,
would severely reprehend him, confessing that Christ who is the firstborn from
the dead, and the giver of eternal life, was the only 1 Timothy 6.13.
faithful and true Martyr. Only Lucian, and the rest of the pragmatical
Confessors so called themselves in their Rescript to Inter (...) Cypr. 17. p.
26.
S. Cyprian, Optamus te cum sanctis martyribus pacem habere.

XXVII. In this sense was Origin a Martyr, not unto death, but of the first
Class of Confessors; his time being divided between his prodigious industry in
his Studies, his beloved poverty, and his sufferings at the hands of Demetrius
and his party, besides his daily expectation of a fatal sentence from the
enraged Gentiles, made his whole life a continued martyrdom, which God put a
period to an. Chr. 256. and of his age the 69th, which cannot possibly comport
with the reign of Gallus, and Volusianus, as Photius, Baronius, and Mr. H.
assert, but must be referred to the first of Valerian, when reckoning him to be
17 years old at the death of his Father, an. 10. Severi, his 69 years are
completed. Raleigh's Hist. of the world, lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 3.
He lies buried at Tire, where he dyed, in the Cathedral Church, in a glorious
Sepulcher curiously adorned with Marble pillars, covered with gold and precious
stones, 3. p. 339.
by whom the famous Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, being drowned near Iconium,
lies interred.

The Panegyric of S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, spoken to Origin at Caesarea
Palaestinae, when he was returning home. Inter opera Greg. Thaumaturgi, p. 48.
and Edit. Gerh. Vossii, Paris. 1622.
'SIlence is a comely quality in all men generally, but especially in me at
this time, who whether I will or no, am compelled to hold my peace, being
conscious to my self of my rudeness, and unacquaintedness with the elegancies
of Speech, which requires great choice of pertinent expressions both in
composition and pronunciation, and perchance nature never designed me for so
smooth and pleasing an undertaking, (...). Gr.
fit only for those that are Native Greciuns; nor is it less than eight years
since I either spoke or writ any Oration, or heard any other either declaiming
privately, or in public making Panegyricks, except only these admirable men,
that have fallen in love with sacred Philosophy, who are less sollicitous about
the Cadencies of word, and Decencies of Elocution, primarily studying to search
out, and then to express things as they are; not that they disdain eloquence,
for they are very willing to cloth their accurate and generous notions in
beautiful and veracious Language, but that it is not so easy at the same time
to express their Divine and holy sentiments in proper terms, and the finer
dress of the Orators, and to comprehend within the narrow mind of one man two
such opposite qualifications, being the distinct employments of several
persons; for silence and thoughtfulness is a great promoter of the
understanding and invention; but few men speak well, except those that
constantly use it; and beside all this, my other studies have defaced any such
impressions, that the Greek Tongue had made in my mind, on which the study of
the Roman Laws, by which the World is governed, has imposed, which neither
were digested, nor can be understood without much industry, which in themselves
are full of wisdom and piety, and a various and admirable composure, and in a
word, dressed in a most rich and pure style, but being translated into Latin,
though the Language be venerable and lofty, and suited to the grandeur of that
Majestic Empire, they prove (if I may speak my thoughts) troublesome and
difficult to me; for whereas our words are nothing else but representations of
the passions of our souls, we confess it is as easy for skilled Orators, as
for excellent Limners well furnished in point of art and diversity of colors,
to draw the pretty blushes and various shapes, and intermixed beauties of
flowers in a Tablet: but for my self who am poor, and unfurnished of those
several boxes of paint, as having either never enjoyed or rejected them, it
suffices me to delineate my naked thoughts in those words that first come to
hand, in usual and vulgar expressions, as he that draws with a coal; expressing
my sentiments if not in gaudy and flourishing terms, yet doing my best as in
such a rude Essay, voluntarily rejecting whatever pompous and finer ways of
speaking do offer themselves unto me. But there is a third reason yet, that
more enclines me to silence, and that is the excellency of my subject, of which
I was always earnest and willing to treat; but now am afraid and full of
hesitation; for I have designed to accost you with a discourse concerning a
great Person, who as to outward view is a man, but to those that can see the
greatness of his soul, and his sublime accomplishments, he appears more than
humane, endued with Divine Excellencies.

'I will not detain your expectations with a rehearsal of his Parentage and
Education, of his strong habit of body, and comeliness, for these are the
praises of Children, which are scattered at random, with and without desert;
for to speak cautiously of things that are transitory and vain, and by many
ways, and very soon, and easily are destroyed, as if they were Venerable, and
worth our pursuit, seems to me a dull and empty undertaking; it was never my
design to speak of such trifling and unsatisfactory Toys, though if I should, I
need not fear or blush, as if I should degrade my Subject: but whereas I have
adventured to treat of greater things, and to mention that in him which is most
transcendent, and nearest akin to the Divinity, which though shut up in a
mortal and visible body, earnestly strives to be like God, and to praise my
Savior for blessing me with the acquaintance of this Sage man, beyond every
other persons expectations, and my own especially, who never imagined, nor
could ever have hoped such happiness, it is no wonder, if being conscious to my
self of my weak and mean parts, that I am at a loss, and full of tremblings,
and had rather hold my peace; this course did seem most safe to me, lest under
the pretense of gratitude, I by a hasty easiness, talking light and common
things of so Venerable and sacred a Subject, might not only fall short of
truth, but injure its interest in the minds of them that had formerly
entertained it; since an impotent and flat Oration abuses him whom it designs
to praise. But thy Excellencies, O thou amiable man, can neither be diminished
nor defamed, or rather thy Divine Endowments, which being in themselves
unalterable, cannot be debased by the meanness and indigence of my discourse.
Nor know I how to decline the imputation of confidence and rashness, who madly
enterprise matters of the highest nature, and exceeding ordinary capacities
with so small a stock of Wit and preparation; for if we had, through the heat
of Youth, adventured on such a design in another place, and before other
persons, could we have escaped the brand of boldness, and self-conceit? but the
undertaking is as rash as impudent, to dare to do so in thy presence, and madly
to profane thine ears with an undigested Harangue, and a dirty heap of
impertinent terms, where only holy reasonings and divine Essays find entrance,
not wrapped up in shadows and Aenigma's, and the coverture of obscure words, but
with the greatest plainness and perspicuity imaginable: It is time now
therefore to grow wise, and by ending my Oration here, to set a period to my
offense, which I earnestly desire; but having once trespast on the borders of
modesty, suffer me, if the Crime may be forgiven, to declare the causes of this
my Adventure: Ingratitude appears to me the blackest and most unsufferable of
Vices, and that man that does not strive to requite Obligations, if no other
way, at least by a grateful remembrance, and verbal thanks, is either a mad
man, or insensible, and a block; and he that is sensible of, and underderstands
a benefit, unless in some measure he testify his acknowledgments, is a dull,
unthankful, and imp^ous person, and guilty of a piece of baseness, which is
unpardonable in all sorts of men, in the greatest and most magnificent, as well
as in the mean and despicable; for the more noble and exalted any one is in his
enjoyments and faculties, so much the stronger tie is laid on him to render a
more illustrious recompense to his Benefactors; nor may the poor and afflicted
indulge to their sloth and carelessness, as if they had nothing fit to sacrifice
to their duty, but rather tender a small offering, than none, if not adequate
to their Patrons worth, yet proportioned to their own narrow fortunes; nor are
such Oblations, if accompanied with a cheerful and willing mind, less
acceptable than more numerous and splendid Presents. So the poor Woman in the
Gospel that offered her two Mites, in God's computation, gave more than all the
rich Contributers to the Corban; for the holy Scriptures measure not the
Oblation by the quantity of the gift, but by the intention of the Devoto: It is
not therefore necessary that I should be afraid, lest my gratitude fall short
of my Obligations, but rather I should endeavor to repay, if not what I ought,
yet what I can, and by this means avoid the infamous title of the unthankful.
It is impious to be silent, when our powers cannot reach the Eminency of an
equivalent retaliation, but an argument of candor and ingenuity, to aim at a
return we cannot attain to, and I will justly glory when I have done my utmost:
This therefore shall be my gratulatory Oration, and a Specimen of my
Resentments, I dare not say a testimony of my thanks to God; for as it is his
bounty alone that begins every good thing in us, so it is our duty to render him
the first fruits of our praises, of our Hymns and Adorations. But should I
devote my self wholly to my Maker, not as I have made my self a wicked and
impure Creature, but as he made me pure and innocent; neither could I tender
him any thing worthy so great a Governor, and prime Cause, whom neither
particular persons singly, nor the whole Series of mankind conjoined, if they
entirely employed themselves in the service, and amast all that was pure and
acceptable, could ever celebrate according to his merits; for even that power
that enables a man to think and speak well of his Lawgiver, is also a free
Emanation of his Creators Munificence, and he does not requite, but restore him
his own.

'But these Gratulations and Eucharistical Hymns to our great Prince and
Governor, must we leave to him that helps our infirmities, and is best fitted
for so sublime a task, to the great Savior and Protector of Souls, the
firstborn Word, the Creator and Preserver of all things, who can offer up
constant and uncessant thanks to the Father for himself, and all mankind,
because he is the Truth, and the Wisdom, and the Power of his Father; for he
being in the Father, and incomprehensibly united to him, it cannot be
suspected, that either through forgetfulness, or imprudence, or weakness, as if
he were estranged from him, he should either be unable or unwilling to magnify
his Majesty, which is a task fit only for his Divinity, whom the great Parent
of the World has made one with himself, and honored with an equality of
Power, because he is the first and only begotten Son of God, while we also in
an inferior Sphere may testify our gratitude, if we offer our utmost thanks
through him, by whom all the mercies of God convey themselves unto us;
accounting this a signal argument of our Piety, to consecrate our memories to
our God through him, who is the most perfect of Creatures, and the Incarnate
Word of that prime Mind, and best meriting his Fathers Providence and Love, and
best accomplished to display his worth; to that most sacred and divine Man, that
exceeds all other Mortals, is this our Oration designed as a Panegyric; and
should I acknowledge my obligations to any thing else that is invisible, and
yet is concerned in the welfare of mankind, my Tutelary Angel deserves my
return, who was deputed by God to preserve and superintend me from my
Childhood, which fed me from my Youth, and protected me from all evil, as that
good man words it, Genesis 48.16.
understanding his own Guardian. And perhaps this extraordinary person had
suitably in honor of his enhanced Piety, some one of the highest Order of
Angels deputed to preside over him, and it may be the great Angel of the
Covenant, the common Savior of mankind, although of this I am not perfectly
assured: but whoever this his Guardian was, the Patriarch both knew and
celebrated him: And in imitation of him, I my self am inclined to thank, not
only the great Governor of mankind, but my particular Guide from my Infancy,
who, as formerly in all other things he has appeared tender of my welfare, in
feeding and tutoring me (for it was he only that could discern what was
conducive to my spiritual interests, which were not discernable by me, or any
of my Kindred who were naturally blind, and could neither see nor understand
what belonged to our peace) so now especially does cherish and instruct me; and
besides all his other favors, has blessed me with the acquaintance of this wise
and good man (a happiness that out-bids all other fruitions) to whom I had no
relation either by Birth or Blood, by Friendship, Neighborhood, or Country,
which are the usual Originals of Amity amongst most men; but my good Genius, by
a divine and wise Providence, bringing me hither, contrived and perfected (and
that questionless by designation from the first hour of my birth) this blessed
Union between us that were Strangers, and unknown each to other, and separated
at a great distance, as far as many intervening Nations, high Mountains, and
deep Rivers could divide us. It would be too long accurately to describe all
the circumstances and particulars that gave birth to this familiarity; I shall
therefore mention only some few of the most material passages.

I. My first education from my Birth was under the tuition of my Gentile
Parents, freedom from which erroneous sentiments I suppose no man could expect,
nor my self hope, being as yet a child void of reason, and under the
instruction of a superstitious Father; But not long after, my Father's death
leaving me an Orphan, was perchance the first favorable circumstance that
conduced to my acquaintance with the Truth; for then first I began to apply my
mind to true and saving reason, I know not whether by the bent of my will, or
any impulsive force; for what strength of judgment could there be in a child of
14 years old? But then I began to attain the use of sacred reason, as most men
at that age use to do: Which passage, though I might heretofore, yet now I
cannot look on as a mean effect of the holy and admirable providence of God
toward me, that when I survey the course of my affairs according to the series
of my years, all my actions that preceded this my puberty, though very
erroneous, are to be attributed to my infancy and want of understanding; and
that the sacred dictates did not offer themselves in vain to my soul before it
was endowed with reason, but that as soon as it attained to the use of that
faculty, though not in its purity, I began to be in love not only with humane,
but Divine knowledge; while the sacred learning by its own powers to me
ineffable did assist the secular; which while I remember, my soul is
transported both with joy and fear; being glad that I have made so good a
progress, but dreading that after having attained so far, I may fail of my end.
Thus I know not how have my words multiplied beyond my design, while I am
willing to give you an account of my first acquaintance with this admirable
person, hastening to a relation of what succeeded, not as if I intended to
praise or requite him, that so blessed me, but that I may afford you a plain
and sincere History of my life and actions. My mother, on whom was devolved the
whole care of my education, thought it fit, having past through those other
studies, that become children well born, and brought up, to place me with a
teacher of Rhetoric, that I might be an Orator, whose School we frequented,
and were by competent judges thought likely to prove famous for eloquence, but
I had no mind to this sort of employ, which wanted its charms to endear it unto
me, but my Divine guide that was faithful in the tuition of his pupil, and
incessantly watchful over me for good, when neither my Relations thought of it,
nor my self desired it, suggested to one of my Instructors, who was appointed
to teach me the Latin Tongue, a design to persuade me to the study of the
Roman Laws, in which himself was no inconsiderable Master; he undertook the
task diligently, and I obeyed him rather to please him than my self in a study
which I fancied not. When he admitted me his Scholar, he imparted his notions
to me with accuracy, and one thing which he told me I find very true, that the
study of those Laws would be of great advantage to me, whether I resolved to be
a Rhetorician and plead at the Bar, or would betake my self to any other
calling. Thus his Lectures tended to make me passionate of Secular Learning;
but to me he seemed to be acted by a Diviner afflatus than himself was sensible
of. After I had been thus a while a pupil to the Laws, there fell out the
occasion of my coming into this Country, that I might make my progress in the
City of Berytus, which not being far distant hence, (...).
is a free City, and a famous Academy for the study of the Roman-Laws; other
business had not long before brought this holy man from Alexandria in Egypt,
where he formerly resided, into this City, as if it had fallen out on purpose
to give me the happy occasion of meeting him; what the reasons of his journey
were I know not, and willingly will pretermit; but there was nothing so
conducive to my coming hither, as that by the study of the Laws, I might be
fitted to travel to Rome; and how came this to pass? The President of Palestine
having taken my Brother-in-law with him to this place to assist and ease him of
his care in Governing the Province, for he was a Lawyer, engaged him in the
journey without the company of his Wife, of whom he was not willing long to
live deprived, and therefore sent for her, and us to accompany her, so that
when I was meditating on traveling any other where rather than here, lo a
Soldier with an Injunction, that my Sister must go to her Husband, and that we
should take the same journey, out of complaisance to our Brother-in-law,
especially to our Sister, that she might the more decently, and with the
greater cheerfulness undertake the journey, our kindred persuading us, that it
would be no mean instrument to the perfecting of our Studies, if we resided at
Berytus; all things conspired to incline us, the gratifying our Sister, and the
convenience of our own instruction, besides the easiness of conveyance, the
Soldier having brought more Carriages than were necessary for my Sister alone.
These were the known incentives, but the hidden motives were most prevalent,
the conversation of this venerable Philosopher, the true knowledge of the word
of God by his Ministry, and the profit of our Souls, this brought us blind and
ignorant, to be partakers of Salvation; So that it was not the Soldier, but the
holy Guide and good Guardian, that accompanied, led, and defended us through
our whole lives, as through a long Pilgrimage; and slightly passing by other
places, and Berytus it self, with which we seemed most passionately in love,
hither brought, and here settled us, using all methods to endear us to this
great instrument of our felicity, and perchance that good Angel that had took
the custody of me hitherto here desisted, not worn out with its care and
tutorage, (for those sacred Ministers are unwearied) but because he had
delivered me over to the proxy inspection of a man, who would omit no Specimen
of industry and providence for my advantage; for the first time of my
acquaintance with him, (which I may call the first and most happy day of my
life, when the true light began to beam in upon me) his great business was to
fix me here, who were full of thoughts of returning to Berytus, or into my
Native Country, as wild beasts, or birds, or fishes, entangled in a net, are
restless to escape; to this end he moved every stone, and set on work every
engine, and exerted the strength of his Eloquence, celebrating Philosophy and
its Proselytes with many and pertinent praises; that those only live like
rational creatures, that order their Conversations aright, and first study to
know themselves; That nothing is truly good, but what we ought to follow; and
nothing properly evil, but must be shunned; upbraiding the want of Learning,
and the whole herd of ignorants; which like bruit beasts know not so much as
what themselves are, having their understandings eclipsed; neither being able
to discern between good and evil, nor desirous to be instructed, who sordidly
pursue and fall in love with wealth, or honor, or bodily health, as the
chiefest good, accounting these things their only darlings; and studying
nothing but the little arts by which these are acquired, doting on the Sword or
the Gown, the clamors of the Army or the noise of the Bench, rejecting the care
of their minds and reasons their noblest part; and this makes men dull, and
enslaves them to sloth and vicious habits. It is impossible to express, how
many such perswasives he made use of, to exhort me to the study of Philosophy,
with much frequency and earnestness, his words by a strange violence piercing
my soul, for he was Master of an excellent faculty of persuading, that with
much sweetness he necessitated me to believe him; At first I wavered, and my
resolutions were loose, I desired to be a Philosopher, but I had not yet
conquered all difficulties; but I knew not how t^ leave him, for every day I
found my self chained faster by his most rational Lectures; asserting, that it
was impossible to be pious toward the great Governor of the World without
Philosophy, with which blessing God had of all the Creatures only adorned man,
that both the wise and unlearned might be capable of its precepts, and every
man who had not altogether lost his reason in a deluge of madness and folly; he
therefore affirmed, that it was an impossible thing to be a lover of piety for
any man but a Philosopher; and by these and many other such advices was I
insensibly charmed, tamed by his art, and settled under his tutorage, as firmly
as if the hand of heaven had fastened me there. Nor did I only admire, but
infinitely love my sage instructor, not with a light and desultory, but with a
strong and invincible affection, created in me by his wisdom and debonair
carriage, by the reason and allurements of his discourses; who sought not to
trepan but to enrich my soul with the treasures of Philosophy after the most
dexterous, kind, and insinuating method that can be imagined; not only
instilling into me those notices which other men are capable of, but admitting
me to a participation of those peculiar blessings wherewith God had
accomplished him above all other men, even his heavenly instructions, which
were Lectures of piety, that found many Auditors, but none whom they did not
subdue and conquer to the love of holiness: for who can resist the eternal
King? of whom when men are passionate, what is obscure and unintelligible to
all others, becomes to them perspicuous, and easy to be described. Thus my
love inkindled and grew strong, both toward that most amiable reason, that by
its transcendant beauties charmed the world, and also toward this generous man
its friend and interpreter, (as if some sparkles had taken hold of my soul) and
it so imperiously swayed me, that I easily persuaded my self to scorn not only
all other arts and methods of discipline, which might be more profitable for
me, and the excellent Laws of which I was a Student, but even my Country and
Relations, both those with whom I now dwelt, and those also whom I left behind
me; I courted and was passionate of nothing but Philosophy, and this divine man
that professed it; 1 Samuel 18.1.
and the soul of Jonathan was bound up with the soul of David, for this I
afterward read in holy Writ, but I a long time before felt the same influences
as plainly as they were written, and as truly as if foretold by an Oracle; for
Jonathan was not simply joined to David, but their nobler parts their souls
were united, which can no way be forced to a disunion by the separation of
those things that appear and are seen of men: for the soul is a free agent and
cannot be compelled, though you confine it to a prison; for there the primary
reason has its residence where the mind is; and if it seem to thee to be under
restraint, that is the product of thy fancy, nor can it be prohibited to adjust
it self a lodging where it pleases; for there only it may be believed to be,
where its powers discover themselves by their productions: So that what I have
suffered is most plainly illustrated by these few words, the soul of Jonathan
was knit with the soul of David, which can by no violence be disunited against
their intentions, nor with their own consent, without difficulty; for the power
to loose those bonds of this holy love was not conferred on the less eminent,
and good of these persons, whose mind was various and mutable, as neither could
he alone begin the friendship, but in the firm and unshaken good man, by whom
alone this bond of amity could be truly knit; so that holy Writ tells us not
that the soul of David was knit to the soul of Jonathan, but on the contrary,
that the soul of the worse person swayed by this passion, was united to the
soul of David; for that which is better being self-sufficient, is not
inclinable to a conjunction with what is worse; but that which is worse wanting
the assistance of that which is better, ought to build its dependances thereon,
that the more excellent part preserving its station, might suffer no detriment
by its communion with the inferior part, and that what was in it self
disorderly, by this conjunction might be overcome. So that to make such a
conquest, was the employment of the brave soul, while the duty of the meaner
person was to submit to those pleasing chains, so as not to be able to escape
them. Such Triumphs has this David gotten over me, and captivated me beyond
the possibility of flying; and could I wander hence, yet the knot is
indissoluble, which according to the sacred Scripture has so bound up our
souls. His first undertaking was to besiege me, till he compelled me to consent
to my stay in this place, and then applied himself to cultivate me, as a
skilful husbandman does a waste piece of ground untilled and unfruitful, stony
and full of gravel, or rather as he manages a field not altogether barren and
unfit for fertile productions, but of a fat mould, only neglected and
undressed, and overrun with briars and thorns; or as an engraffer, meeting
with a wild but firm stock, that produces four and harsh fruit, inoculates
thereon better and more serviceable fruit, so as we often see the mixed tree
made fruitful, whereas before it was barren, and on a wild stock bearing
excellent Olives, or the same tree, which before was wild made serviceable by
the industrious Gardener, or a tree otherwise naturally fertile, yet disabled
from bearing by too many suckers, by pruning made fit for fructification; so he
not only looking superficially on me, but searching me intimately, by
questioning with me, and weighing my answers, did artificially harrow, plough,
and water me, weeding out all the thorns and briars, and all wild herbs and
plants by reproofs and prohibitions, which my rude unsubdued and luxuriant mind
brought forth; now rallying me after the Socratick way, anon repressing me by
some other method of discourse, when he found me like a headstrong and
ungoverned Horse, taking the Bit in my teeth, and running out of the way, till
by his speeches, wherein persuasions and violence were intermixed, he had made
me tame and submissive. This was uncouth and troublesome at first, when I was
unaccustomed to obey the Laws of Reason; but when he had thus prepared me to
receive the Dictates of Truth, then he opportunely sowed the Seeds, as in a
free and well-ordered Soil, observing fit seasons for every part of this
spiritual Husbandry, heightning what was dull in my mind, either by nature or
gross diet, till it commenced acumen, giving it an edge by his subtle
discourses of rational passions, and by this way awakening me out of my sleep,
my want of judgment, and my headstrong hastiness either in assenting to the
belief of what came first to my view, how false soever, or resisting the truth,
he chastised and corrected, by the same, and many other such Essays: For this
kind of Philosophy is full of variety, inuring men neither to believe hastily,
nor dissent obstinately, but diligently to examine all things, as well what is
hidden, as manifest; for many Notions appearing to us Illustrious and
Venerable, under specious words, insinuated themselves a way by my ears into my
belief, which I afterward found full of cheat and falsehood, and only dressed in
the Mask of Truth to deceive me. On the contrary, many most veracious
Propositions wanting the Fucus of a plausible Discourse to set them off, seemed
to me Paradoxes, and incredible, and were unworthily rejected and exploded,
which appeared to be of Eternal Verity, when I weighed them more accurately,
searching further than the Superficies into the internal nature of things. Thus
was I taught to judge, and thus was I instructed to determine rationally of
words, not according to the little and unnecessary Art of the Rhetoricians,
that say this word is Elegant, that Barbarous, but according to those Rules
that are most necessary for Greeks and Barbarians, for wise men and Idiots; in
a word, for all men, since it is the interest of mankind studiously to take
care, that whatever discourses they hear, they be not deceived: Nor did he only
rectify this part of my mind, which Logic is designed to inform, but by an
insight into Nature and Physical Learning, did he excite and engage the lower
faculties of my Soul, to admire the beautiful and admirable structure of the
World, the variety and the wisdom of its contrivance, describing and
distinguishing all things which are in the World, and clearly reducing them to
their proper Classes, according to the Laws of Universal Nature, and their own
peculiar tendencies, with all the Mutations that happen in this great Fabric.
Thus by the clearness and reason of his discourses, he banished that irrational
astonishment that formerly possessed me, and introduc't into my mind a rational
admiration of the Economy of the World, and the Products of Nature. This is
that sublime and Seraphick Learning which this most beloved part of Philosophy
does teach; and what need had I reckon the sacred Mathematics, unerring
Geometry that all men affect, and Astronomy that makes its path among the
Stars, which he taught me, making Geometry the impregnable Basis and Foundation
of all other Sciences, but leading me higher by Astronomy, as it were by a
Ladder reaching unto Heaven, making me acquainted with that beautiful place, by
the assistance of both these Sciences.

'But the principal design, and that whereon the whole Tribe of Philosophers
spend their time and pains, is, that by the intermixture of all other Sciences,
and the general study of Philosophy, they might reap the fruits of their pains
in an habit of holy and divine actions, whence issues the only serene, quiet,
and happy frame of mind. This was his chief task, that I might be no longer a
Slave to my grief, or any other passions that arise from fear of evil, but
pacate, regular, and blessed, and truly like God. This he designed in all his
Lectures, full of mildness and learning, and most necessary for the modelling
of my life and manners; and also by his actions did he govern and sway my
impetuousness, raising me to the contemplation and knowledge of the rise and
origin of those heats and passions in the mind, from which considerations the
Soul is inclined to a more regular demeanor, that by viewing its own
deformities, as in a Glass, it might be capacitated to discern the causes and
roots of all evil, and that irrational Principle whence proceed all our
hurries, perturbations, and absurdities; and at the same time to see the
reflections and beautiful lineaments of that brave Reason, that nobler part of
the Soul, which as long as it preserves its Empire, the mind lives free from
the impositions of passions, and is secured from dangers; and when the Soul
has accurately ruminated on these things, it with ease rejects, and tramples
under feet, and destroys in their Infancy, all evil tendencies that arise from
the more ignoble faculties, which either too much dilate the Soul by
intemperance, or strangle and contract it by despair, that neither pleasures,
nor extravagant longings, nor griefs, nor fears, may be able to discompose it;
but it suckles and cherishes all that is good in us, which arises from our
better part, till from the weaknesses of Infant piety, it grows up to maturity,
strength, and perfection, for so divine Virtues are begotten in our minds: Thus
we acquire prudence, which can exactly discern these motions and inclinations,
by its judicious acquaintance with the passions themselves, and all other
external objects, whether good or evil; and thus we get Temperance, which in
the beginning directs us to make wise choices, and Justice, which distributes
according to every ones merit; and Fortitude, that guards and defends all the
other Virtues. He did not therefore feed me only with dry and jejune Lectures,
of what was good or evil, what was fit to be done, or left undone, as if that
were prudence, for this is the emptiest and most insignificant of Sciences, if
the man's words and actions be strangers; and that learning is vain, that does
not engage men to do their duties in the love of Virtue, and detestation of
Vice; for no men truly know what these Virtues are, but they that practice
them: For Temperance is the knowledge of what is to be chosen, and what shunned
by us, which other Philosophers, especially the Neotericks, never solidly
taught, who speak big, and are very confident: so that I have frequently
admired them, as if they had demonstrated that Virtue that unites God and men,
and given the World a Specimen, that nothing is so nearly akin to Heaven, as a
wise man; when all this has been only empty and insignificant noise, while
they neither taught true Prudence, by which a man might be engaged to act
wisely, nor true Temperance, that a man might embrace and pursue the good
things he had learnt, and as to Justice and Fortitude, they were perfect
Strangers.

'My great Master did not so teach me Virtue, but his life was a more
persuasive Lecture than his discourses; his actions and his conversation were a
more prevalent Charm than his words.

'I desire all the Philosophers whom I know, and of whom I have heard, and all
other men, that they do not misconstrue me; for he wrongs me that thinks I
speak this as swayed by a passionate and ungrounded love to this transcendant
man, or out of hatred of other Philosophers, whom if any other man, I
especially will both praise for their pious and rational discourses, and be
delighted with the Eulogies which others give them; but what I now impeach them
of is so publicly known, that the name and reputation of Philosophy is thereby
impaired; and I had rather, to speak in short, die an illiterate dunce and
idiot, than to become a Proselyte to such unbecoming methods; for as soon as I
was blessed with this Master, I thought it, though perhaps amiss, beneath me for
the remainder of my days, to consult any other Oracle. Nor let this be censured
as vain glory and affection to praise my instructor, and decry the other
professors of wisdom; but let them be assured that I cannot be mistook for a
flatterer, since my Encomium is infinitely below his deserts: Nor did I ever
hunt after words, and the smoothnesses and specious artifice of making
commendatory speeches, being so much a friend to truth, when I was a child, and
in the School of a Rhetorician, as not to praise that person or thing that did
not deserve it; much less can I now think it necessary when I intend to
commend, to lay the foundation of his honor on the ruins of other men's
reputations; nor should I but speak evil and injuriously when I design to
celebrate, should I compare the holy and even tenor of his blessed life with
the wanderings and extravagancies of others, I am not so mad to blaspheme when I
should sacrifice, but without any fucus, or the fetches of Oratory, I will give
you a plain History of what befell me. This was the only person that first
exhorted me to apply my studies to the Philosophy of the Greeks, persuading me
by his manners to love and learn the Laws of a holy and just demeanor, when I
had beforehand been proof against all the serious advices of other
Philosophers, which I must confess fell out rather unhappily than by my choice,
for I never heard many professors, and those few that I did, were only
Philosophers in their Words; but this man taught me to discourse like a
Philosopher, when by alluring me into a Philosophic course of life, he had
prevented the necessity of his counsels; not only meditating beforehand what
he should speak, but not thinking it fit to recommend to others, what he had
not intended himself with a sincere purpose and bent of mind to practice,
striving to propose himself as the Exemplar of that wise and upright man, whom
his Speeches did describe; but I will not call him such a pattern, though
should I, it would appear a great truth, because I promised not to entertain
you with the ceremonious train and pomp of elegancies, but with the plain and
naked truth; I call him not therefore an exact exemplar, but one that was
infinitely desirous to imitate such a pattern herein cheerfully, and with
diligence, and industry more than humane, employing himself, studying to mold
me into such a shape, and frame, that I might not only be a competent auditor
of a Lecture concerning the passions, but might feel the benefit of his
speculations, in entertaining all, or at least part of every virtue in my soul.
By his private demeanor, he did as it were compel me to be just, and forcibly
persuade me to abandon curiosity, and variety of business, and the noise of the
forum, to engage me to an acquaintance with my self and my own affairs; for
this is to live justly, and many of the Ancients did affirm this to be the only
equity, intimating that a private life is more conductive to the selicity of
our selves and others; for the great employ of this virtue, is to distribute to
every one his due according to his merits; and what is more connatural to the
soul, or so becoming it, as to superintend it self? not to suffer it self to
wander, and do it self injury, by being concerned in foreign affairs, but to
be its own friend in conversing with, and enjoying its self, and rendering it
the care that it deserves. These were the rules of Justice, which he compelled
me to observe; thus he also taught me the most genuine prudence, not to be a
stranger at home, and to understand that excellent precept, which the Oracle
recommended as a systeme of Philosophy to the wisest Heathen to know himself;
that the Ancients accounted this the proper duty of Prudence, and that Wisdom,
that makes us like God; for the excellence is the same in different degrees in
God, and in men. The Soul longing to contemplate and compare it self, and the
divine mind in the same glass, to observe whether it be worthy of the Kindred
that seems to be between them, and to endeavor to find out a way that cannot
be described, how to honor it self with this (...), or participation of the
Divine Nature: And by the same measures he taught me to exert Temperance, and
Fortitude; that those were truly temperate that preserved their prudence
untainted, and the knowledge of their own state; for (...).
saving wisdom is true temperance, teaching me to be steadfast to my designs,
and persist in my duty with vigor and courage, so as not to desert it
willingly, or by violence, but to stick to my Principles; and that this was the
great preservative Virtue, the Amulet against dangers, though truly my sloth
and dullness impeded my progress; so that notwithstanding his extraordinary
industry, I neither became just, nor prudent, nor temperate, nor courageous,
who have not yet attained to the vulgar, much less to the divine
accomplishments and virtues; for they are Venerable and Eminent in themselves,
nor can they be attained without the assistances of the holy Spirit. While I
was neither so liberally furnished by Nature, nor adorned by my own deserts, as
having been negligent, and wilfully impotent in the pursuit of the best and
most perfect fruitions; it was impossible therefore for this prodigiously
earnest lover and Priest of Virtue to make me virtuous, while yet under his
Dictates I became a Prostrate and violent Passionist of such generous
Acquisitions: This love he begat in me by his own virtue, and exposing to my
view the beautiful and lovely face of Justice, of Prudence, that all men long
for, and is most amiable, and of divine temperance, which settles the mind, and
is the Harbinger of peace, of admirable fortitude and patience, but above all
of Piety, which men justly call the Mother of all other Virtues, because it is
the foundation and perfection of all Morality; if we begin with this, other
virtues will naturally, and with ease grow up in us, if so be that we love our
selves, and are willing to embrace all other virtues, which every man that is
not a Slave to impious and sensual thoughts, ought to acquire, that he may be a
Friend of God, that we may not be unworthily or sordidly accoutred, but guarded
with Virtue and Prudence, as with an excellent Guide, and most wise Priest, may
so go to God. For I can esteem nothing else to be the end of our being, than
for a man being conformed to God in the purity of his mind, to make his access
to God, and to dwell with him. But besides all other objects of his industry
and diligence, I cannot enough celebrate him for his care in instructing me in
the Mysteries of Theology, with what a skilful Apparatus he fitted me for the
learning such sublime things, cautiously providing that I might run no hazards
in so necessary a part of knowledge, as was the understanding of the prime
cause; wherefore he indulged me so to follow my Philosophic Studies, that I
might read all sorts of Philosophers and Poets, and reject or nauseate none of
them (for as yet my judgment was not to be trusted with choosing or refusing)
except the writings of the Atheistical Tribe, who bafling and affronting the
common Notions and Principles of humane Nature, deny the being of a God, and
Providence, whose Books were therefore unworthy to be perused, lest my mind
should be debaucht, while intending to serve God seriously, it suffered it self
to be polluted with discourses that oppose and destroy the service of God; for
they that pay their devotions at a Temple, are religiously curious, not to
touch any thing that is profane: Such Books therefore must not be valued by men
that put an estimate on Piety, but all other Books are so to be read, that we
neither prefer nor reject the writing for its subject or style, whether elegant
or barbarous, but impartially hear all persons. This being a wise and an
accurate course, lest one single sentence of this, or the other sort of Sages
being heard, and had in honor, might, being alone, under the shadow of truth,
though in reality it were not so, impose on our minds, and so captivate us,
that it be not easy to relinquish it, or to wash off the tincture: For the
discourses of men are a powerful, fit, and voluble Engine, dressed up in the
varieties of Sophisms, and Arts of deceiving, that as soon as they strike the
Ears, suddenly make what impressions they please on the mind, persuading those
who are thereby once subdued, to love such Assertions, as the genuine and
infallible Emanations of truth; and though there be no greater cheat than such
an Harangue, yet it settles it self an Empire in the Soul; and, like a Jugler,
acts uncontrolled by the countenance and protection of the person deceived, the
mind being naturally prone to an easy assent, and to suffer it self to be
wheedled, and before it examines and discerns, either through its own dullness
or weakness, or the subtilty of the discourse, to yield its credence to the
shadows and appearances of reason, and to erroneous Opinions, which will
enervate the understanding, and not only so, but by a strange kind of tyranny
prejudice it against all talk that would undeceive it; for what else is it that
introduc't such variety of Opinions, and contrary dogmata among the
Philosophers, while some so earnestly defend their own, others oppose the
Sentiments of others, and a third sort introduce new ones? and yet all profess
themselves Philosophers, i. e. lovers and searchers after wisdom; and that in
their Disputations they have the same intentions which they entertained, when
they were first proselyted to this course of life; nay, that now they are more
earnestly in love with Philosophy, now they have tasted the sweets of it, than
when at first their rudeness, and want of experience, deprived them of those
fruitions, and nothing but a strong bent of mind made them its followers. This
they confidently boast, and will credit no man that thinks otherwise; for which
reason we find none of the Ancients undertaking to persuade to be of his
Opinion, any of the Neotericks, or Peripateticks, nor on the contrary; for no
man is easily induced to change an old, and subscribe to a new Opinion, though
perhaps the dogma were the same, which he would easily have assented to, had he
been persuaded to it before he entered upon a Philosophic life, his mind not
being yet prejudiced or forestalled, and so left free to love those Sentiments
in opposition to what he now believes. Thus the wise and egregiously rational
Sages of Greece turned Philosophers, every one being acted by a certain strong
inclination, asserting the first Opinion that he met with as infallible,
condemning the Doctrines of his fellow Sages as fallacies and trifles, while he
is no better fitted to defend his own dogmata, than they are theirs; and yet
neither force nor persuasion shall make him of any other belief, having nothing
to plead in his own vindication, but a certain irrational impetus, that sways
him to the profession of this sort of Philosophy, as the only Systeme of Truth;
whereas this impetus is nothing but blind chance, that engaged him to dote on
what he first lighted on; and under these Chains he languishes, and is content
with his confinement, so he can catch but at the least shadow of truth and
demonstration to countenance his own Assertions, and decry his Adversaries,
having unhappily anticipated the convictions of his Intellect by a blind, rash,
and unweigh'd prostrating himself before an Opinion: But such imaginary
reasonings, as they cheat men sufficiently in other things, so most notoriously
delude them in matters of the highest Cognizance, the knowledge and service of
God; and yet here they remain intangl'd and fettered, as men that are engaged
in the midst of a large Quagmire, where it is impossible to go forward, or
retreat, but the man must tarry till death deliver him; or a man in a high,
thick, and spacious Wood, into which he entered with expectation of passing
thorough, but finds every path leading him into the thickest part of it,
wanders a while, but not being able to extricate himself, sits down, and
becomes an Inhabitant of the Forest; or like one in a Labyrinth, into which
seeing but one way to enter, fancies his return easy; but when he has past
into the innermost part of it, and a while admired the wonderful variety and
wisdom of the Apparatus, and the many pretty passages, and is willing to
return, finds himself lost in those Mazes, and his escape impossible: but there
is no Labyrinth so full of unintelligible windings, nor Wood so thick, nor
Quagmire that so fastens a man, as the persuasions of those Philosophers, if
once they take possession of the mind. But lest that might befall me, that
fatally afflicts many, he acquainted me not with one particular Systeme of
Philosophy, but led me through all the several Schools of those Dogmatists,
that I might be ignorant of none of their Opinions, but he still went before
me, guided, and led me, and demonstrated to me what was Fallacy and Sophisme,
and meant to deceive, like an expert Master in the Art, to whom nothing happens
unexpected, who standing on the shore, reaches out his hand to save those that
are drowning. Thus among the Assertions of every Philosopher, he selected and
communicated to me whatever was veracious and useful, especially what related
to Piety, but condemned all false positions. He advised me not to be curious
and industrious in such small things, though I might, on that account, be
reputed the wisest of men; but that my chiefest converse should be with God,
and his holy Prophets, while he explained whatever was obscure and aenigmatical
in their writings, as many things are in the holy Scriptures; whether it were
God's pleasure so to talk with men, that the naked and plain truth might not be
committed to the breast of an unworthy Soul, as many are; or that though all
the Divine Oracles are in their own nature most perspicuous and intelligible,
yet are become difficult and dark to us, who have apostatized from God, and
forgotten our duty, I cannot tell. But he being a most acute and intelligent
Auditor of God, illustrated all those obscure passages, as if there were
nothing naturally unintelligible in those writings to him, who alone, of all
men that either I know or have heard of, by his constant Meditations on those
pure and illuminating Oracles, is able to comprehend them in his own mind, and
instill them into others. For that great Guardian and Governor of all men, who
inspired the Prophets, whom God loved, with their Predictions, and mystical and
divine discourses, honored him so as to constitute him their peculiar
Interpreter, explaining by him what was revealed only in Parables to others,
who being most faithful and veracious, either powerfully commanded or
demonstrated those things, bestowing on this man the gift of Invention and
Explanation, that if any person were of a rough and incredulous temper, or else
desirous to be informed, being a Sc^olar to him, he might be compelled to
understand, and believe, and to follow God. Nor could he so express himself,
had not the Spirit of God communicated it self to him, for there is need of the
same power and assistances for the Prophets and their Auditors; nor can any man
understand a Prophet, unless the same Spirit that gave the Prophecy, confer on
him the gift of understanding it; and so says the holy Scripture, that he only
that shuts can open, and no man else: Now when the Aenigmata of Scripture are
expounded, then what is shut is opened; this excellent gift has Heaven
bestowed on this great Man to be God's Interpreter to the Sons of Adam, both to
understand the Celestial Oracles, as they are spoken, and to declare them to
men, that they may know them: Therefore nothing was abstruse, hidden, or
difficult to me, but I was fitted to dive into all things, and with all
imaginable liberty, to search and experiment all sorts of Learning of the
Greeks or Barbarians, Mystical or Politic, Divine or Humane, that I might
satisfy my Soul with good things; which whether you will call it an ancient
Lesson of Truth, or by any other name, in him I did enjoy an admirable and full
plenty of the most beautiful things. And that I may comprehend all in a few
words, he was to me a Garden that emblem'd Paradise, in which my employment
was, not to cultivate this inferior earth, and to pamper my body, but to
embellish and adorn my nobler part with the truest sensuality and
voluptuousness, like so many beautiful trees either planted by my own industry,
or by the hand of God: this was the Garden of true pleasure, here did I indulge
to my delights and genuine satisfactions, with which for no small time I was
ravished, which yet will appear to be very short, if this day, when I must be
gone from hence, shall put a period to my fruitions. For I know not whether my
deserts or misfortune enforce me to this departure or expulsion. I am
unacquainted with fit expressions to describe my state in, more than that I
like another Adam am turned out of Paradise. How happily did I live under the
instructions of so good a Master? and how ought I now to hold my peace? I then
learned in silence, but is not this a prodigy, that the Master should become a
Pupil? but why should I use these words? my duty and my interest oblige me to
persevere, not to desert such studies: And is not this my crime an imitation of
that first transgression? and do not the same punishments wait for me? am I not
refractory and rebellious against the commandments of God, when I should
continue in mine obedience? but because I depart so, shunning this happy life,
as the first man did the face of God, returning to the earth, out of which I
was taken, dust shall I eat all the days of my life, and be sentenced to till
that ground, that will produce nothing but briars and thorns, that is, cares
and griefs, and troubles and shame, and to return to the earth whence I came,
to the house of my father, and my worldly kindred, deserting that country which
I would not apprehend to be the true place of my nativity; and those relations,
who were the greatest friends of my soul, and my fathers house, where the
parent is reverenced and honored by all his genuine sons; but I unworthily and
dirtily turn my eyes backward, and desert my felicity. We read of a child, Luke
15.12.
that having received his portion went into a far country, and there
intemperately spent and squandered what his father gave him; but at length
oppressed by his narrow fortune, and importuned by a craving appetite, set
himself to feed Swine, and when his hunger was urgent, would have filled
himself with the husks, but could not; and he suffered justly the punishment of
his luxury, that preferred that swinish diet, though he foresaw it not, to the
delicacies of his Fathers Royal Table. Change but the Names, and the History
suits me; only with this difference, for I have not received my portion, but
must depart, leaving behind me all things that are good and dear to me, and
changing for the worst. An universal sadness has overwhelmed me, troubles and
disturbances instead of my peace, a turbulent life, and full of distractions,
instead of quiet and serene enjoyments; and instead of my liberty, an
intolerable slavery, to the noise, and contentions, and quarrels of the Forum.
For now shall I have neither time nor encouragements to pursue the best and
most beneficial things, nor shall I be able to treat of divine subjects, but
must discourse of the works of men, which seemed so intolerable to the Prophet,
even of evil men: Instead of the beautiful light of day, darkness has
surprised me; instead of a joyful Solemnity, a Funeral; and instead of my
Native Soil, an Hostile Country, in which I cannot sing an holy Hymn; For how
shall I do it in a strange Land? where they that are transported live at a
great distance from God, and can only sigh and weep when they remember what
they have lost. Psalm. 137.
It is recorded, that the Enemies of Israel took the great and holy City in
which God was worshipped, and carried Captives all its Inhabitants, both the
College of Priests, and Quire of singing men, into Babylon, who, during their
Exile, though commanded by their Governors, would not sing one of the Lord's
Songs in a profane and strange Land, but hung up their Musical Instruments on
the Willows, and wept by the Rivers of Babylon. Methinks I am one of that
Society, driven by force from this City and sacred Country of mine, where day
and night the Divine Oracles are preached, with Hymns, and Songs, and Mystical
discourses, where I enjoyed light, and the Beams of the Sun, and a more
beautiful brightness than the day affords, while we conversed with the Divine
Mysteries, and at night recollected and enjoyed in my fancy what I had seen and
done by day; and to speak all, where there is a constant divine Afflatus: From
this am I ravished, and driven to be an Exile in a strange Land, where like the
poor Israelites, my Harp being hung on the Willows, I cannot sing an holy Hymn,
but shall be confined to the Bank-side, and imploi'd in a mean and dirty
calling, and be unwilling to chant the Anthems, which I remember, and perhaps
my other business will impede my memory, and rob me of such acceptable
thoughts; but it were tolerable, were I forced to be gone as a Captive, but my
own voluntary choice ingages me; I might tarry, but I am a slave to my fancy,
to my own prejudice: I court dangers, while I desert a safe and well-governed
City; and it is probable I may fall among Thieves, Luke 10.30
who may rob, and wound, and leave me half dead. But why do I indulge to such
extravagant lamentations? there is the same Savior of all men, that is a
Physician and Judge for them that are wounded and robbed, the Guardian of
Mankind, and the Word that never sleeps. Nor do I depart uncultivated, but have
in me the good Seeds, the excellent Precepts and Advices which thou have taught
me, which I carry with me, though it be my affliction to depart; but perhaps my
good Angel will bring me back again, to return the increase of this pains in
fruits, though not mature, for how can it be so? but such as will be produced
in a secular life, debased by a barren or evil quality, but not by my fault, if
God assist me. Here therefore will I put a period to my Harangue, having
peradventure spoken more boldly than I ought, but intended as a testimony of my
gratitude, according to my power. I have, I must confess, said nothing adequate
to my Masters worth, nor have I altogether stifled his Merits; and what I could
not express, I have lamented, as those that leave their best Friends. I know
not but some passages may be Childish, or flattering, obsolete, or superfluous;
but this I am assured of, that I feign nothing wilfully; for my intentions were
just, and my design honest and sincere, and in pursuit of truth.

'And now stand up, thou beloved Man, and dismiss me with thy Prayers, defend
me when absent by thy Oraisons, as thou did when present by thy Instructions,
always and especially praising that God who brought me hither, and has so
bountifully blessed me, beseeching him to guide me ever hereafter, ennobling my
mind with the knowledge of his Commands, vouchsafing me his fear, which is the
best Master, for with him I must not expect to use that liberty that I have
taken with thee: Pray that he may be my Comforter; when I desert thee, that he
would send my good Angel to assist me; and that he will complete his mercies,
by giving me an opportunity to see thee again.

THE LIFE OF S. Cyprian.
I. THE Original of this Eloquent and Pious Prelate is unknown, whatever S.
Greg. Nazianzen, and after him Mr. H. Sect. 1. p. 248. with Baronius, and
others, tell us of his being a Senator, who having blended the stories of this
Carthaginian Martyr with another of his name, who was beheaded at Nicomedia
under Diocletian, impose on the World a story mixed of both their Acts: Hence
came the rise of that report, that the Father we are treating of, was a
Magician, a person in love with Justina, a Virgin of Illustrious Piety, that
failing to get her Affections, he turned Christian, and became so great a
Proficient in his new Religion, as to seal it with his blood; which story has
met with the good luck to be credited by S. Gregory the Divine, by Prudentius,
and Simeon Metaphrastes, by Nicephorus and Nicetas, and by all the Greek
Writers; and among the Moderns, by Mr. H. but the Chronology can never be
reconciled; for the Bishop of Carthage was a Professor of the Liberal and
Honorable Arts, says his Deacon Pontius in his Life; the other, of Magic; the
first converted by Caecilius, a Presbyter of Carthage, and there baptized; the
last by Justina, a Noble Virgin of Antioch, and in that City baptized by the
Bishop thereof; the one martyred with Crescentianus, and three others near that
Metropolis of Africa, having been condemned by Galerius Maximus, under the
Emperors Valerian, and Gallienus; the other at Nicomedia, condemned by
Eutholmius, under Diocletian, and there near the River Gallus beheaded with his
Justina; and therefore the Latin Martyrology allows them two distinct
Festivals, the elder on September. 14. the other on September. 26. which plainly
evinces them to have been two distinct persons; for as to the fancy of Not. in
Naz. Orat. 18. tom. 2. p. 687.
Billius, that there were two Cyprians, both born at Carthage, and both Bishops
there; and that the latter of them spending much time at Antioch, and there
growing famous, was thence called Antiochenus, as Pomponius, though born at
Rome, was called Atticus for a like reason, it savours of more love to the
Fathers credit, which he is willing to vindicate, than to reason, or the truth
of History. But this has been sufficiently cleared by Marty^olog. Sept. 14.
and Sept. 26.
Baronius, Vit. Cypr. ante opera.
Pamelius, Life of S. Cypr. sect. 1. p. 252, 253.
Dr. Cave, and others, and before them all by the most accurate Critic Cod.
(...). p. 215, 216
Photius, who gives us an account of the life of the Martyr of Antioch out of
the Empress Eudoxia's three Oratitions on him, not intermixing the smallest
memoire relating to our Primate of Carthage; though I must dissent from him in
his making him Archbishop of Antioch, for his acts in Latin make him no more
than a Deacon; nor is there any such name to be found among the Patriarchs of
that See in the Catalogue of Nicephorus, nor yet of Anthimus his predecessor,
nor does the Church History mention any other Bishop of that name under
Dioclesian, but Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 6.
Anthimus Bishop of Nicomedia, who was then beheaded, while that cruel
persecutor resided in the City of his Episcopal charge, and when probably the
junior Cyprian also was adorned with the same Crown.

II. The visible instrument of the conversion of this great man was Caecilius a
Presbyter of Carthage, the same, as I conjecture, with him of that name, who
bears a part in the Dialogue of Minutius Foelix, his name, and employ, his
Country and Religion conspiring to make good the conjecture; for that he was no
Roman, is plain by the narration, which he gives of himself, Page 3. Ed. Oxon.
1627.
that he left his Country and Relations to see Minutius at Rome, and Page 6.
for that purpose took a voyage, which by the strongest probability must have
been from Africa; for Octavius not only calls Serapis and Osiris his Deities
Page 64.
(tui Serapidis, sive Osiridis) i.e. peculiar to that part of the World where
he was born, but Fronto by the name of Page 100.
tuus Fronto, whom Caecilius himself styles Page 26.
Cirtensis noster, whereas it is well known, that Cirta was a City of Numidia
on the Mediterranean, the Metropolis of the Country, and the seat Royal of
Massinissa, Colonia Cirta Sitianorum cognomine, as all the old Historians and
Cosmographers style it, which, say some, is Constantina the Metropolis of
Bugia, others Teddeles the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Telensin. They were
therefore both of them Africans, and both Christians (for Caecilius in the end
of that dialogue was a Convert) both Married, Minut. p. 3.
Caecilius leaving his Wife and infant-children behind him, when he came to
Rome, and Pont. vit. Cypr.
S. Cyprian on the death of his Converter being made a Guardian for his Family;
both of the same profession, Rhetoric, and it is probable, that S. Cyprian
succeeded him in his School at Carthage, as says Tom. 2. an. 250. p. 440.
Baronius, who also would have him to be the same Caecilius, who was made a
Tutor to Diadumenus son to the Emperor Macrinus. This was the good man, whom
providence thought fit to commission for the conquest of Cyprian, he was the
Jonah, who preached repentance to him, and inclined him to embrace the Laws of
Jesus, by the same methods, as the Prophet made Proselytes among the Ninivites;
not that, when Cyprian heard him, Caecilius was preaching on that Prophecy, as
Mr. H. p. 250. avers, which S. Hieroms words without some straining will not
bear: but that an extraordinary influence, such as the Sermon of Jonah at
Ninive, is requisite to the conversion of the great and wise men of the World,
since the Apostle says, not many wise, not many mighty are called.

III. At his advancement to the Sea of Carthage (of which he was the most
famous Conc. C. P. in Trull. can. 2.
Archbishop) I suppose Mr. H. need not, as he does, p. 251. doubt, whether he
succeeded Donatus, Agrippinus, or some other. For Epist. 55.
S. Cyprian himself mentions Donatus, as his immediate Predecessor, as Fabianus
preceded Cornelius. And whereas De bapt. contra Donat. lib 2. cap. 7, 8, 9
S. Austin frequently calls Agrippinus his Predecessor, he intends it only of
one, who sat in that Episcopal throne before him, without relation to him, who
sat last there. And if Agrippinus were the first in the African Churches, who
asserted the Doctrine of re-baptization, as both S. Austin and S. Cyprian
intimate, then he must have been antienter than Tertullian, especially if that
story be true, that that most learned Father was sowr'd into Montanisme by
missing the Bishopric of Carthage on the death of Agrippinus, Ep. 73. p. 105.
S. Cyprian glorying, that many years were past since the Prelates under
Agrippinus determined this point, which would hardly amount to so long a space,
if S. Cyprian immediately succeeded him.

IV. Who the Libellatici were in the Primitive Church has been a disputable
question. Baronius, and after him, Mr. H. p. 255. appropriating the term to
such, as privately denying the name of Christ, were by virtue of a Libel of
security, exempted from public sacrificing, and the rage of persecution; but
will by no means allow the title to be applicable to those, that did neither
sacrifice, nor anathematize their Savior, but only paid a great sum to be
exempted from the penalty of the Law; whereas Ep. 52. p. 58. and de laps. p.
145.
S. Cyprian peculiarly calls these the Libellati; but this mistake proceeds
from not distinguishing the Vid. Dr. Cave's Prim. Chr. part 3. c. 5.
several sorts of Libellatici, the last sort of which were those, who in
nothing complied with the Heathen rites, only paid a great sum to the greedy
Magistrate, and by that means smoothed the ruggedness of his temper, and took
off the edge of his fury, the man being Non tam crimine, quam errore deceptus,
says this Father, not so much guilty of a crime, as a mistake.

V. These in some Churches were enjoined penance, as in the Church of Carthage
in Cyprian's time, but at other times in the same; and other Churches were not
only allowed, but advised to such a purchase of their freedom and security.
Epist. Canonic. Can. 12. p. 25. Ed. Paris. 1622.
S. Peter the Patriarch of Alexandria, and a Martyr under Dioclesian, in his
discourse of penance freeing the act from irregularity. That it was no sin to
sacrifice their money to the interests of their souls, and lose their wealth to
secure their consciences, such actions being a public preferring God to
Mammon, and his service to worldly concerns, and a fulfilling of that piece of
Scripture, Prove. 13.8.
that a man's Estate is the ransom of his life, and a complying with our
Savior not to serve God and Mammon, Act. 17.9.
a course recommended by the example of Jason and Sosthenes, and others, paying
a sum for their release at Thessalonica ((...), our translation reads it,
giving security) And if it be objected, that in the days of S. Peter of
Alexandria the Church discipline was more relaxed than in S. Cyprians, it seems
to appear by the usages of the Catholic Church in Tertullian's time, that it
was recommended as a piece of Christian prudence and policy, as well as to fly
in time of persecution. De fuga in persecut. cap. 12, 13.
Tertullian for this reason smartly upbraiding the Orthodox with their
remisness and cowardice, and sarcastically girds them, that with Taverns and
Bawdy-houses, they paid a Tribute for their toleration. The different usages
being considerable in the same Church in so small a space, nor will it be so
easy to reconcile the Master, and his Scholar, unless we shall say, that the
Catholic custom had its relation only to the purchasing their quiet, while
those, who enjoyed the benefit of such protection, still publicly owned
themselves Christians; but the criminals in S. Cyprian were such, who to obtain
this security, were content to have their names registered among those, that did
sacrifice, though they did not actually sacrifice, of which Apostates from
their holy Profession, it seems, by Pliny, they kept a Catalogue, whereby they
could not be altogether guiltless, while notwithstanding the retention of their
Innocence, they were numbered among the Transgressors, being guilty of the most
notorious Hypocrisy, while they were willing, that the Judges should make the
Emperors believe, that they had sacrificed (though in truth they did not) not
carrying it with that clearness and openness, that resolution and constancy,
that became Christians.

VI. In the account of this Martyrs Virtues p. 262. Pont. Vit. Cypr. circ. med.
Mr. H. has omitted one of the most signal Testimones of his Humility, in
declining the Episcopal Honor when offered him; as also of his Charity and
Compassion, when the cruel Plague raged at Carthage, encouraging the Christians
both by his Example and Discourses to be assistant to the needs of their
Brethren, and of their Heathen Fellow-Citizens too, preparing them by his
excellent Tractate concerning Mortality to reflect on, and make provision for
another life. But this, and several other remarkable passages omitted by Mr. H.
are accurately recorded by the so often, and so justly praised Dr. Cave, in his
life of this Father; although the Martyr's own Epistles give us a full account
of his Excellencies and Traverses; but above all of the ancient
Church Discipline, wherein Is. Casaub. ^p. ad Card. Perron. p. 41.
we find a more full account of the Ecclesiastical Polity, than in many Authors
of the Fourth Saeculum.

VII. The foul usage, which this Father has met with at the hands of Pamelius,
will find in me an easy assent on the account of so many Manuscript Copies
that want the Interpolations; yet I cannot but remarque, that the most acute
and judicious Primate of Armagh, Answ. to Baxt. Great. relig. chapter 6. p. 96, etc.
Bramhall, does give his Opinion differently from others in these words. Every
one is free for me to make what Exceptions he pleases to the various Lections
of any of these places (which are the same that Mr. H. p. 277. quotes) but
there seems to me to be enough in S. Cyprian to declare his own mind without
taking any advantages from any supposititious practices, meaning, that it was
correspondent to his P. 92, 93.
former Corollaries. 1. That S. Peter had a fixed Chair at Rome, which S.
Cyprian, Epist. 52. and Ep. 55. calls, The Seat and Chair of S. Peter. 2. That
S. Peter had a Primacy of Order among the Apostles, this being the unanimous
vote of the Primitive Church, and our own; the prime Romanists themselves
granting, that he had no Supremacy or Jurisdiction over any other Apostle, he
not having that Commission as an Ordinary Pastor, the rest as Delegates for
term of life. 3. Some Fathers and Schoolmen, no sworn Vassals to the Pope,
affirm, That this Primacy of Order is fixed to S. Peter's Chair and his
Successors for ever; i. not to the person of any particular Pope, but to the
Office; and that this is S. Cyprian's meaning; but this Primacy, not due by
Christ's Institution, nor the Chair fixed at Rome by Divine Right, as De Pont.
Romans lib. 4. cap. 4.
Bellarmine confesses, and for any other Title, whatsoever is constituted by
Humane Right may be repealed by Humane Right. So that excellent Primate, and I
leave the Reader to judge of his reasonings. Nor will this Concession any thing
advance the Interest and Grandeur of the present Roman Court, the difference
being so vast between Primacy and Supremacy, which Usurpations none of the
Ancients with so much vehemence oppugn, as S. Cyprian, which might be proved by
many hundred Arguments out of his Writings.

VIII. A great part of this Fathers works owe not only their Ornament and
Beauty, but their very Substance and Being to Tertullian, which is so palpable,
that it needs no proof; as his Book de Idolorum vanitate, is an Epitome of
Octavius his reasonings in Minutius Foelix, (and this also is another Argument
to persuade me, that the Caecilius there mentioned was the Converter of S.
Cyprian) his Tractates De exhortatione Martyrii ad Fortunatum, and
Testimoniorum adversus Judaeos, etc. are undoubtedly his, whatever Erasmus,
Scultetus, or our Countryman Cook say to the contrary; a different style not
being a sufficient Argument to mis-father any writing; for then S. Cyprian's
second Epistle should not be his, being penned in a more florid and sublime
style, than any other of his Epistles or Tractates. -- the Greek Forms of
Speech in his third Book of Testimonies ad Quirinum are allowable in a
discourse, which wholly consists of Quotations out of Scripture, most out of
the old Testament, which this Father, as all the Ancients, usually quote
according to the Translation of the Septuagint, and the constant use of such
passages might easily have some influence, and leave a tincture on his other
Language in the same Book.

IX. His style shows him to be Tertullian in a more pleasing and gentile dress,
in more familiar and elegant Expressions, retaining the Majesty of his Speech,
and abating the haughtiness of it, making it smooth and palatable. The
Christian Caesar Alsted calls him, others the Christian Cicero, and Dr.
Holdsworth, Demosthenes among the sacred Orators, all men acknowledging him a
neat and admirable Writer. His vein of writing is very fluent, and his notions
taking, but the piety of his discourses is transcendent, not a page in him but
what is full of peculiar recommendations of Holiness and Obedience, many of
which Mr. H. has collected very judiciously, and I should say so of all, had
not the love of a Party (the (...)) betrayed him, and the Dream of a
Congregational form of Church Discipline in these early days imposed on his
Intellect. Hence p. 302. he tells us, That the People had their voice in the
Election of their Bishop even in Rome it self. And p. 303. That such was their
Interest in the managery of the Affairs of the Church, that the Bishop did
nothing without their Counsel, and Consent, which last passage, p. 270. he
reckons among those Sentences, which are remarkable, and of use in these
Epistles.

X. And happy had it been for Mr. H.'s Reader, if the Father had appeared in
his own dress, while the Garb he is now put in, makes him look very strangely,
and of this I make all learned men Judges, whether the words of the Cypr. Ep.
68. p. 96.
68th Epistle, and Mr. H.'s Translation do so exactly agree. It was the Custom
at Carthage, and in most other Provinces, says this learned Prelate, according
to Divine Tradition and Apostolical Observation, that in a regular Ordination
(of a Bishop) ad eam plebem, cui praepositus ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem
provinciae proximi quique conveniant, and Episcopus delegatur, plebe praesente,
quae singulorum vitam plenissime novit. This Mr. H. thus Translates, The
Bishops of the same Province, next unto the People, over whom the Chief Officer
is ordained, do convene, or meet together, and then the Bishop be chosen, in
the presence of the people, who mosh fully know the Life and Conversation of
every one. Which how distant it is from the genuine Construction, let the
Grammarians determine; the words being thus to be Englished. That in Canonical
Ordinations, every one of the Neighbor-bishops of that Province meet ad eam
plebem, among that people, or at that City, over which a new Prelate is to be
ordained, who is chosen in the presence of all the people, etc. and so
convenire ad aliquem, in Cicero, signifies to meet at such a place, and ad
signa convenient milites, in Caesar, the Soldiers are gathered to their
Standard, or are drawn up about their Ensigns. And as we have here a wrong
Translation wilfully, I fear, falleninto, so, p. 303. the Father is as much
abused by an imperfect account of his Judgment. For when he says, That the
People have in an especial manner a power of choosing worthy Priests, or
refusing the unworthy, and that this Custom descended from the Divine
Authority; he there puts a period, omitting the subsequent words, that fully
explain his meaning. Vt sacerdos plebe praesente etc. That the Bishop should be
publicly chosen in the presence of the people, that the worthy, and fit Person
might be approved by universal Testimony, as God commanded Moses to take Aaron,
and Eleazar his Son into the Mount Hor in the sight of all the Congregation,
Number. 20.27, 28.
and strip Aaron of his Garments, and put them on Eleazar. God commanded it to
be done before all the Congregation, to instruct us, that the Ordinations of
Bishops ought not to be made, but with the knowledge, and assent of the People
present, that before the multitude the Evil actions of wicked men, who aspire
to that dignity, might be detected, and the Virtues of the deserving duly
praised, and so the ordination might be just, and lawful, which was examined,
and confirmed by the Suffrage, and Judgment of all persons. By which we see
that the Power of Elections was still in the Bishops of the province, but of
making just exceptions to the Conversation of the Candidate in the people.

XI. It is true, Vide Spalatens. lib. 3. cap. 3. per totum.
that the People were always present at such Solemnities, that a Bishop, or
Priest might not be imposed on them against their consents. The consent of the
People, says Homil. 6. sup. Levit.
Origin, is required in the ordination of a Priest, that all men may be
ascertained, that he is chosen to that sacred Office, who excels the people in
learning, in holiness, and all manner of Virtue. And this is done in the
presence of the People to prevent all future scruples, and that this is what
the Apostle enjoins, that a Bishop must have a good Testimony of them, that are
without. The Custom being, when the name of the Bishop Elect was proposed by
the Deacon ( Id. lib. 8. contr. Cells. ad fin.
whose Office it was) that the People should cry out, such a Person is worthy,
such unworthy. So the Politiae Patrum informs us, that when Alexander was
chosen to the sea of Constantinople, the multitude for many hours together
cried out AXIOS, he is worthy; and when Philostorg. lib. 9. tm. 10. p. 127.
Demophilus was to be Elected to the same Patriarchate, the people instead of
crying out AXIOS, cried out NAXIOS he is unworthy of so sublime a Throne.

XII. This was the common practice, but in some places, and on some peculiar
Emergencies, the people did also give their suffrages, as in the case of Aug.
Ep. 120.
Eradius, who succeeded S. Austin, it being the Custom in Africa, in Spain, and
other places, and continued till the days of the Emperor Lewis in the West,
and in those days it was very reasonable, Cod. lib. 1. tit. 3. de Episc. and
Clero. l. 31.
the law requiring that he, who should be entrusted with the Episcopal Charge
quaeratur cogendus etc. should be a man of unparalled modesty, one that fled
from the dignity, and was forced to assume the honor. But that the people
should impose on their superiors to consecrate whomsoever they should nominate,
or that their suffrages in the Election was a Catholic Custom, cannot be true:
For this is the difference between the Church of England and Mr. H. Blondel,
Owen, and others, not that the Bishops out of condescension, when they wanted a
fit person to be made a Priest, or Deacon, advised the people to choose one,
whom they might lay hands on, as the Apostles did, Act. 6.1. nor that they
proposed the name of that person to the People, whom themselves elected, that
they might either applaud, or object against his manners, but that the Peoples
acceptance was a necessary condition, and that no Rulers of the Church were
duly ordered, but whom the people elected. For this was expressly forbidden in
the Council of Can. 12, 13.
Laodicea, which allows the peoples testimony of the laudable life of the
person to be consecrated, but directly requires, that he be elected, and
constituted by the Metropolitan, and Bishops of the Province, but by no means
to be chosen by the people. And Tom. 4. (...). in 2 Timothy p. 371.
S. Chrysostom decrys it from that of the Apostle, they heap to themselves
teachers, than which there can be nothing more emphatical, says he, the Apostle
blaming the evil custom, that their teachers were ordained by their disciples.
And Pope Cit. a Pamel in not. ad Cypr. p. 97.
Leo particularly allots all persons concerned their stations in this employ,
the Citizens were allowed to desire a Bishop, the people to give their
testimony of his life, the Nobless to be Arbiters, but the Clergy alone to
elect; and Theodoret. hist. l. 4. c. 20. Vide Liberati breviar. c. 14. de
Proterio Alexandr. and Flor. fragm. apud Baron. tom. 12. in Append. an. 813.
Peter the Patriarch of Alexandria, Athanasius's Successor, complains of Lucius
the Arian usurper of his See, that he had neither the confirmation of his
neighbor Bishops, nor the suffrages of the Clergy, nor the desires of the
People, as the Canons did require, but that he purchased that honor by unjust
and simoniacal means. And if there did arise any quarrel, the Archbishop of
the Province was to decide the controversy, or the Metropolitan, or a
Provincial Synod, and sometimes a general Council, as in the case of Meletius,
and Paulinus, Patriarchs of Antioch, and of Ignatius, and Photius Archbishops
of Constantinople.

XIII. For all the public Acts of the Church in the Apostles times, and some
while after, were done at the public assemblies of the same, so were
Ordinations, Excommunications, and other Ecclesiastical proceedings (and so is
it now used in our Church, where in Ordinations the bystanders are called to
testify, what they have to object against the person, who is a candidate for
the imposition of hands, and the bannes of Matrimony are published in the face
of the congregation) to give satisfaction to the people of their Superiors
integrity, and to prevent their jealousies by this Act of condescension, and to
oblige their superiors to that integrity by making their proceedings public,
and by these means to preserve the unity of the Church; but as such acts were
past at the Assemblies of the whole Church, so were they advised, and resolved
on at the Consistories of the Clergy, the People having no power, but a right
to be satisfied of the right use of that power by them that had it, Vide
Thorndyke of the right of a Chapter in a Christ. State. chapter 3. p. 159, etc.
for as to Ordinations, they were regularly to be made at a Synod of Bishops.
Hence Ad Corinth. p. 57.
S. Clemens Romanus, that those, who were constituted by the Apostles, or
Apostolical men were admitted to this Office with the good liking of the whole
Church, which I suppose he interprets afterward, saying, That they were men
well spoken of by all persons. For that those words cannot mean their Election
by the People, is plain from what immediately precedes, That the Apostles in
what places soever they preached, made their first converts Bishops of those
places, not of the people already converted, but (...), of such as should for
the future believe, and this they did by a peculiar afflatus, and guidance of
the holy spirit, and by the same supernatural revelation they left a Catalogue
of what persons should succeed in those Sees; to prevent the quarrels that
should arise about this authority.

XIV. So Timothy was ordained by Prophecy, 1 Timothy 4.14. i. not by any humane
constitution, but by the holy Ghost, as Chrysostom, and Oecumenius understand
the place. And so in after ages was Nyss. tom. 2. p. 976.
Gregory Thaumaturgus elected, when he was in the Wilderness, not by the
People, for then there were only 17 Christians in the City of Neo-Caesarea, but
by Phoedimus a Bishop of Amasea a neighbor City, acted, as I conjecture, by
some Prophetic and Divine impulse, as Eusebius. hist. l. 6. c. 9.
Alexander the Bishop of Jerusalem, was chosen to that Patriarchate, by
Revelation. And at other times the Emperors took on them the nomination, for
Sozom. l. 7. c. 8.
Theodosius the Great chose Nectarius Patriarch of Constantinople, and Id. lib.
8. cap 12.
Arcadius nominated Chrysostom his Successor, and Nestorius was deputed to the
same honor by Socrat. l. 7. c. 29.
the Junior Theodosius, when there were great disputes between Philip and
Proclus, for that Patriarchate. And at Hieron. Ep. 85.
Alexandria it was the custom from S. Mark to Heraclas, and Dionysius, for the
Presbyters to choose a new Patriarch out of their own College, and this
presently on the death of their former Bishop, Epiphan. haeres. 69.
for peace sake, that there might be no contentions among the people; which
custom was after ward altered to gratify the vulgus, in as much as the want
of these Popular suffrages was objected against Athanasius by the Arrians, from
which he is cleared not only by the Prelates of his own Province in their
Synodical Epistle, but by Orat. 31. p. 377. vide eund. Orat. 19. p. 310. and S.
Chrysostom. de Sacerdot. Tom. 6. (...). p. 23. who expressly, and with vehemence
decry such popular Elections.
S. Gregory Nazianzen, affirming that he was advanced to the throne of S. Mark
by the votes of all the People, after the Apostolical and Spiritual manner, but
not after that ill custom, which afterward crept in, by blood and tyranny.

XV. Which mischiefs, that attended these popular proceedings were enough, if
there were no other reason, to discountenance their continuance, when we
remember, what seditions were made at Naz. Orat. 19. p. 308.
Caesarea in the choice of their Archbishop, and at Ruffin. hist. lib. 2. c.
11.
Millain on the death of Auxentius, but especially what scandal was given to
the Heathen World in the quarrel between Damasus, and Vrsicinus for the
Popedom, there being in this feud Amian. Marcel. lib. 27.
found the bodies of no less than 137 persons slain, and that in the Church of
Sicininus in one day, and between Symmach. Epp. lib. 10. Ep. 71, 72, etc.
Boniface, and Eulatius for the same title, both recorded by the Enemies of our
Holy Faith? In which last story among the Epistles of Symmachus (who was
concerned in the affair, and gave the Emperor an account of it) we have one
writ by the Roman Clergy to Honorius and Theodosius, wherein we may see the
peoples interest in this affair, more than what they tumultuously usurped,
while they assure those Princes, Ep. 74 p. 340. Edit. Schiop.
that at the election of Boniface were present 9 Bishops of the Province, and
70 Presbyters, which subscribed, and that he was chosen by the consent of the
better sort of Citizens, and acclamations of the common people, the election,
which was by subscription, being the act of the Priests, and Bishops only.

XVI. So much in the general, and for S. Cyprian's own case, that he would do
nothing without the people, it was perchance an excellent piece of policy in
him, who had been opposed from his first entrance on his Bishopric by
Fortunatus and Faelicissimus, and the Presbyters of their faction, who sought
all occasions to bespatter him, and win the people from him, especially laying
to his charge his withdrawing in the time of persecution, as an act of great
cowardice. And yet we see, he was not afraid to oppose the judgment of the
people, when he saw cause; as Ep. 55. p. 70.
in the case of the Lapsi, mentioning his admitting some to the Communion,
though the people opposed, and contradicted him. And in the case of elections,
he in his retirement chooses Ep. 35. p. 42.
Numidicus a most eminent Confessor into the College of Presbyters at Carthage
without consulting the multitude, and that as a step to a higher Office, i. e.
the Episcopal. And this also he did in the case of Epist. 33.
Aurelius, Epist. 24.
Optatus and Saturus. Nor would so many schismatical Elections and Ordinations
have been made in the present Church, had Mr. H. and his brethren duly minded
that passage of this holy man, which he quotes p. 304. That the contempt of the
Bishop has been the occasion of all Heresies and Schisms.

XVII.. 6. Mr. H. undertakes a Catalogue of the errors of S. Cyprian, among
which his opinion of free-willhath been formerly vindicated, or if not, himself
has done it for me, as Goulart has apologiz'd for his so highly commending
alms, as if they purged away sins. To which I will subjoyn, that in the sacred
writings the words (...) and (...) Misericordia and Misericors are by the
Septuagint translated by (...), and (...) (as the Hebrews reciprocally call
alms (...), says In Thisbiapud Drus. quaest. Hebraic. lib. 2. quaest. 81.
Elias Levita) so it is rendered Genesis 19.19. (...), thou have magnified thy
mercy, and Chapter 21.23. (...), according to the kindness, which I have shown
thee, and in many other places, as also in the New Testament, as Tit. 2.4. 2
Cor. 9.9. on which last place Tom. 3. p. 651.
S. Chrysostom avers, that the Apostle calls that righteousness, which we call
charity. And so some very learned men understand the word in Mat. 5.20. and
some Copies read (...) instead of (...), Mat. 6.1. Vid. Drus. ubi sup. Gregor.
notes, chapter 14. and Knatchbul in 1 Mat. 19. alios.
and so the old Translation renders it, Videte ne justitiam vestram faciatis
coram hominibus. And the word (...) must be so interpreted, Mat. 1.19. For had
Joseph been exactly just, he ought to have made the B. Virgin, being with
child, a public example, but being a merciful man, he resolved to put her away
privately. A character, that is given to the other Joseph, that he was (...), a
good man, and a charitable, as I would render it, Luke 23.50. And so I would
understand the word in Page 16. Ed. Usser.
S. Polycarp's Epistle, when having said, that covetousness is the root of all
evil, he subjoyns, (...), let us arm our selves with charity. And if we search
the holy Records, we shall find it to have been God's Method, Ps. 18.25.
To the merciful to show himself merciful; and his advices are proportionable
to the Is. 58.6, etc.
Israelites, and Dan. 4.27.
Nebuchadnezzar, to break off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor. And to all men Luc. 6.38
to give, and it shall be given unto them, full measure, pressed down, and
running over. For great is the reward of alms, Clem. Constable. Apost. lib. 7. c.
13. (...). Lactant. Inst. lib. 6. c. 12. magna est misericordiae merces, cui
Deus pollicetur se omnia peccata remissurum. Vid. Maximi homil. p. 244. --
alios.
which procure remission of sins, say Clemens and Lactantius, to omit the other
Fathers, who to this purpose generally quote that passage of the Wise man,
Ecclus 3.30. That as water quenches fire, so alms quench transgression. And
is it not employed in that of Solomon, Prove. 16.6. That by mercy iniquities are
purged?

XVIII. The term satisfaction (notwithstanding the note of inconsiderateness
affixt to the assertion by Mr. H.) means something more in the Ecclesiastical
signification of the word, than a bare compensation made to the Church by
penance for the scandal given, there being also some satisfaction to be made to
God, and such in truth is repentance. For as I make satisfaction to a man, when
instead of reviling him, as I was wont, I make it my business to celebrate his
fame; so when instead of a profligate course of life, wherewith God is
offended, and his name dishonored, I love and practice the laws of virtue, I
may be said to make satisfaction to God for my former crimes and enormities. So
De Dogmat. Eccles. cap. 54.
Gennadius gives the sense of the Church, satisfaction as a part of repentance
is the cutting off the causes of transgressions, and resolutions never to
indulge to sinful suggestions. The approving of the man to another, by doing
his duty, being the sense of the word among Heathen Authors. But this
satisfaction, as it relates to God, is not of condignity, but congruity, the
Divine Majesty being inclined by the Penitent's Humility and Contrition to
release him from the punishments due to his sin, not from temporal punishment,
which must be suffered after the offense is pardoned, as says the Church of
Rome, but from Eternal Torments. So De Poenitent. c. 5.
Tertullian, habes, cui satisfacias, and quidem volentem -- confessio
satisfactionis consilium est, satisfactio confessione disponitur, confessione
poenitentia nascitur, paenitentia Deus mitigatur -- and this word he afterward
interprets by pudeo, and maceror, and excrucior, ut Deum reconciliem mihi, quem
delinquendo laesi, and from him S. Cyprian had the word. So L. 5. c. 13.
Lactantius, Deo satisfacere liceat fide, and paenitentia, And Hom. 1. de jejun.
S. Basil for the Greek Church, (...), per jejunium Deo satisfacito, as Billius
interprets it.

XIX. The giving the Eucharist to Infants was the practice of the Universal
Church for full 600 years after our Savior, as In Joh. 6.53.
Maldonate confesses, and has that place of S. John 6.53. for its Foundation
and Antiquity, and a general consent for its Supporters, and what is so
seconded is truly Catholic. That it was the Opinion of the African Churches,
Cypr. de Laps. Sect. 20. p. 145. August. ad Bonifac. Ep. 23. and Ep. 107. ad
Vital. and passim. Innecent. Ep. ad Patr. Conc. Milevit. inter Ep. Aug. 93.
Hieron. adv. Lucifer. Paulin. Ep. 12. ad Sever. Cyril. Jeros. Cateches. 3. c.
1. Dionys. Areopag. Eccles. Hierarch. lib. 3. c. 7.
we have the Testimony of S. Cyprian, and S. Austin; of the Western Churches,
Pope Innocent the First, S. Hierom, and Paulinus, and of the Eastern it is
affirmed by S. Cyril of Jerusalem, and Dionysius the Areopagite. The Doctrine
being everywhere asserted and believed, that without this Sacrament no
Salvation was to be had, and this, says S. Austin, from an ancient and
Apostolical Tradition derived to his Age. The Custom is yet continued in the
Smyth de hodier. Gr. Eccles. statu. p. 101, 102.
Greek and Abud. hist. Jacobit. c. 9. p. 14. etc. 13. p. 18.
Ethiopian, the Armenian, and Egyptian, and Maronite Churches unto this day,
and among the Olearii Itiner. lib. 3. p. 143.
Muscovites, in case of sickness, it is given to Children that are past seven
years old, when they think they begin to sin mortally: And it is now retained
among the Bohemians and Moravians; so that in the Southern, Eastern, and
Northern Churches it is yet retained, and in the West, in the days of
Capitular. Car. M. l. 1. c. 161.
Charlemaigne it was enjoined; it was in use in the days of Erud. Theolog. de
Sacramd. 1. c. 20.
Hugo de S. Victore, Part. 3. q. 80. art. 12.
and Aquinas, when he mentions Children, as wanting discretion to be cautious
enough in the use of the Sacrament, seems to imply, that to communicate Infants
continued till his time; and in an old Apud Chamier. tom. 4. l. 9. c. 9. sect.
14.
Ritual found at Glaritz among the Swisse-Cantons, it is commanded that the
Eucharist be forthwith given to Infants baptized; and Loc. com. sect. de coen.
dom. p. 610. Ed. 1563.
Musculus calls it a Catholic Custom, affirming, that in his native Country of
Lorraine there was in his time retained a shadow of that ancient usage; for as
soon as the Infant was baptized, the Priest, who did that charitable Office,
took some of the Fragments of the Sacramental Bread, reserved in the Pix, and
showing one of them to the people, put it again into the Pix, and then gave his
fingers to be washed in Wine by his Sacristan; which done, he dropped a little of
that Wine into the mouth of the Infant, saying, Sanguis domini Jesu Christi
proficiat tibi in vitam aeternam, which is agreeable to what is asserted by
Hugo de S. Victore, nor was the usage ever forbidden till the last, and worst
of Councils at Trent.

XX. And it is observable, that the Romish Church forbad it, not because it
could not benefit Children, but to keep up the Opinion of their fondling
Transubstantiation, Franc. a Victoria relect. de Eucharist. n. 75.
lest the queasie stomach of a Child should dishonor the Body and Blood of
Christ by casting it up again after reception. This was anciently practiced,
Est. in 4. part. 1. ^ist. 12. Sect. 9.
to withdraw the people from the Idol Sacrifices, of which some parts were
distributed to the Attendants, and put into the mouths of Infants; nor is it
without the countenance of other reasons; Mus^ul. ubi supr. p. 611.
for if Infants be Partakers of the thing signified, viz. the benefits of the
death of Christ, who shall forbid them the sign? and if they be Members of
Christ's body (for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, i.e. the Church, Mark
10.14.) which body is partaker of one Bread, and one Cup, who shall debar them
that Food which Christ allots for his Members? and why it should be more
unlawful for Children to receive the Eucharist, than to eat the Passe-over, I
know not. And for S. Paul's advice, that every one must first examine himself,
which Infants cannot do, it only relates to those of whom there is fear of
eating, and drinking unworthily, but there is no such fear of Infants, whose
original sin is done away in Baptism, and who are not capable of committing
actual sins because they offend not with deliberation and choice; and if they
may be baptized, though they cannot personally believe, but only by their
sureties, why not be communcated, when they cannot examine themselves,
especially while they are baptized without any disposition at all to that
Sacrament; but when they are communicated, they have received already some
dispositions toward the reception of that Sacrament, viz. the grace, which is
conferred on them in Baptism. So much for this practice, and I have somewhat
enlarged my self, to show that the Fathers were not without their reasons for
so doing, though I profess my self to be of the opinion of the Church of
England in this case, which rather thinks fit to debar Infants the Communion,
and requires Catechizing in the Principles of Religion, Confirmation by the
hands of a Bishop, and a solemn entry on the practice of the Laws of
Christianity before admission to this blessed, and tremendous Sacrament.

XXI. The mixing Water with Wine in the Eucharist was a Custom common in the
days of Apolog. 2.
Justin Martyr and Lib. 4. c. 57.
Irenaeus both in the East and West, and of S. Cyprian in the South, Ep. 63. p.
85.
who at large pleads for it, as what he was enjoined to use by a Miraculous
notice from Heaven; it being not improbable, that our Savior according to the
Custom of those Eastern Countries did dilute the rich and brisk Wines, Vide
Ambros de Sacram. l. 5. c. 1. alios.
which he drank, as a Testimony of Sobriety. For that our great Master did so
celebrate is expressly mentioned in the Liturgies of S. James, S. Mark, S.
Basil, and S. Chrysostom; and according to this pattern did Carth. 3. can. 24.
Aurelian. 4. can. 4. Antissiodor. c. 8. etc.
the ancient Councils enjoin all holy Priests to officiate those mysteries, and
De Dogmat. vet. Eccl. c. 75.
Gennadius numbers it among the Catholic practices of the age that he lived
in; nor was the Church without good reason, beside the Example of the Son of
God. 1. To testify, that Christ is the true rock, whence flow the Waters of
Eternal life, and which was typified by that Rock, that followed the Israelites
in the Wilderness, so says De Sacramen. l. 5. c. 1.
S. Ambrose. 2. Because both Water, and Blood issued out of the side of Christ,
when on the Cross, so all the ancient Liturgies, and Fathers. 3. To testify the
mystical union, that is betwixt Christ, and his Church, which relation is
cemented by his passion; the Wine representing the blood of Christ, and the
Water the vast multitudes of the Christian Churches; for as Water, and Wine
will so mix, that they cannot be separated, so nothing shall divorce his Church
from his love, and embraces. So Epist. 63. and Cone. Brac. 3. can. 1.
S. Cyprian. And perhaps a fourth reason was to testify the union of the Divine
and humane Nature in the Person of the Mediator of mankind. In missa Lat. Edit.
Argent. 1557. operd Illyrici. Deinde Diaconus accipiat a subdiacono vinum, and
miscent cum aqu^ in calice, dicens: Deus, qui humanae substantiae dignitatem
mirabiliter condidisti, and mirabilius reformasti, da nobis, quaesumus, per
hujus aquae, and vini mysteria ejus divinitatis esse consortes, qui humanitatis
nostrae dignatus est fieri particeps, Jesus Christus.
For it is not a little observable, that besides what the ancient Liturgies
mention of this nature, as soon as the Armenians by the persuasion of Jacobus
Syrus embraced the errors of Eutyches, condemned the Council of Chalcedon, and
would acknowledge only one Nature in the second Person of the Trinity, they
left off the use of intermixing Water with the Wine in the Sacrament, and under
Johannes Ozniensis their Patriarch, (with leave from the Caliph of Babylon and
Omir the General of the Saracens, who had overrun Armenia) by the consent of
his own Suffragans, and six Bishops of Assyria, it was past into a Synodical
decree, that no longer Water should be mixed with Wine in the Eucharist, they
pretending the Authority of S. Chrysostom for their so doing. Which
determination of that Church was presently after condemned by the Fathers of
the sixth general Council at Constantinople, Can. 32.
and every Prelate, or Presbyter transgressing the Apostolical practice was to
be deposed for his pride, and contumacy. Notwithstanding which they still
continue the usage, and so do Abuda. Hist. Jacobit. c. 13. p. 18.
the Jacobites in Egypt, and elsewhere to this day. But the Greeks are so far
from countenancing the practice of such Schismatics, as they style them, that
they make this mixture twice in the Sacrament. For while the sacred Elements
are preparing, the Goar. Not in Liturg. Chrysostom. n. 167. Smyth de hod. Gr.
Eccl. statu. p. 90.
Priest with the Knife (they call it the holy lance) is to prick the bread, and
to say these words. One of the Soldiers thrust a Lance into his side, and
presently there flowed out Water and Blood. And at the same time the Deacon is
to pour out the Wine, and put to it some cold Water; and again after the
consecration of the Elements, just as they are to be given to the Communicants,
the Deacon after the Priest has blessed it, pours warm water into the
chalice, and so delivers it to the Communicants, and this to testify, that that
water, which issued from the side of Christ, came out miraculously warm, as if
he had been alive, exhibiting to us a Type of our union to that Savior
thereby; and withal to exemplify the fervor of Faith, and the holy Spirit,
which should accompany all those that approach the holy table; and I find in
the order for the Communion under K. Edward the sixth, That the Priest is
required to bless and consecrate the biggest Chalice, or some fair and
convenient Cup or Cups full of Wine, with some Water put to it. -- Which Custom
was afterward, I know not for what reason, altered. And this was thought so
necessary, that many were apt to run into the other extreme, and to think that
the mixture was not duly made till there were as much, or more Water than Wine
in the Chalice; bordering on the Heresy of the Aquarii, who adminstred this
mystery only in Water (or rather on that sort of them Ubi supr.
which Cyprian treats of, who in the Evening celebrated the Sacrament as Christ
instituted it, mixing Water with Wine in the Chalice, but in the morning used
only Water out of caution lest the smell of the Wine might betray them to be
Christians to their Gentile Adversaries.) Bernard. Epist. 69.
Others thought Water indispensably necessary to the integrity of the
Sacrament, (and for that reason perhaps the Church of England has omitted the
usage) but even the Church of Rome it self is not so rigid, allowing the
consecration to be valid without it.

XXII. Hitherto lasted the Age of Miracles, the Divine Goodness and Omnipotence
using extraordinary Methods to countenance and propagate its supernatural
truths, that the Infancy of the Church might be assisted, with as strong and
convictive encouragements to believe the Doctrine of Jesus, as rational and
perswasible persons could desire. But the several sorts of these stupendous
Charismata, were not equally long lived, but according to the diverse
necessities of the Proselytes to Religion, some expired sooner, and some later
took their leave of the Christian World. The gifts of speaking with, and
interpretation of diverse Tongues suddenly ceast on the Conversion of the
greatest part of the then known world, and the modelling of Churches in every
Nation, because before their Christian assemblies were made up of men of
diverse Nations, and Languages, though Lib. 2. c. 57. and apud Eusebius. lib. 5.
c. 7.
Irenaeus affirms, that these miraculous gifts were extant in his time; the
spirit of Prayer ceased on the forming and establishing set Liturgies for the
use of the Church, which we have already probably evinced, were of Apostolical
appointment. The power of discerning spirits, whether men were sincere and
orthodox in their profession, or the Pretenders to Miracles were truly endowed
with that supernatural faculty, was left to the Governors of the Church for a
while, till the sacred Canon of the Scripture was collected, by which
after-Ages were to be guided, though De cura pro mort. c. 16. ad fin. cap.
S. Austin seems to imply, That that power was not wholly lost in his time. The
infliction of temporal punishments on Offenders lying under the Churches curse,
which sometimes extended to the loss of life, or health, or the like
sufferings, and other times to an actual delivery into the hands of Satan, if
we may believe the Tradition of the whole Greek Church, is yet communicated to
the Servants of God, Vid. Crusii Turco-Graec. apud Dr. Ham. Power of the Keys,
chapter 6. sect. 5. p. 147, 148.
who tell us, that no man among them dies excommunicate, but he swells like a
Drum, looks black, and cannot return to his primitive Dust, till he receive his
absolution. But whether this be so, or no, we will not at present discuss,
while we positively assert, that Prophecy, casting out of Demons, and
prodigious cures, even to the raising the dead, lasted till this age of S.
Cyprian, and after.

XXIII. The prophetic Sun, after a long Eclipse that veiled its face and
beauties from the time of the Captivity till the coming of the Messiah, broke
forth with a greater luster under the Evangelical Economy. That the immediate
Family of Jesus were so endowed no man doubts, since by that afflatus they were
assisted in conferring Orders, and leaving a List of their Successors, in
foretelling the times of Antichrist, and the revolutions of the Church, till
Peace should mantle it over with her Silver Wings. S. Philip's Daughters were
thus acted, says Hist. lib. 3. c. 25.
Eusebius, and it lasted till the days of Dialog. cum Tryphon. p. 308.
S. Justin the Martyr, about which time Eus. ubi supra. and lib. 5. c. 16.
Quadratus, Bishop of Athens, was eminent for this gift, and after him
Polycrat. apud Eus. l. 5. c. 23. and Hier. Catal. v. Melito.
Melito, Bishop of Sardis, and Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 3.
Irenaeus mentions a Revelation made to Attalus concerning Alcibiades. But when
Montanus pretended to engross this Donative, and appropriate it to his
Conventicle, it became more rare, and was bestowed only on a few persons of
extraordinary qualifications, men Orig. contra Gels. l. 7.
that had attained to a high degree of self-denial and mortification; among
whom we may reckon Greg. Nyssen. tom. 2. p. 976.
Phaedimus, Bishop of Amasea, who deputed S. Gregory, the man of Miracles, to
his Bishopric; and S. Cyprian, to whom the time and manner of his death was
revealed in a Vision, the miraculous influences of the holy spirit
superintending the actions of those admirable men.

XXIV. But I suppose, that notwithstanding what the elder Apud Eusebius. lib. 5.
c. 16.
Apollinaris avers, that this Blessing was to last for ever in the Church, and
that S. Ubi supr. and cap. 17.
Austin says, that it continued to his time, that at farthest on the alteration
of the state of Religion from a troubled and disturbed to a serene and pacate
scene of Affairs under Constantine, this inspiration was seldom, if ever,
conferred on any man; for as to that Prophecy of S. Athanasius, concerning
Julian, (Nebecula est and pertransibit, that the Cloud would suddenly blow
over) and many others of ancient and later times, they are only the sage
conjectures of an observing and prudent Experimenter, who having read, how the
world has been heretofore managed, and in his own time remarked the
revolutions of Affairs, draws Conclusions strongly probable, what will succeed
from the same or the like premises. And it is observable, that in such
predictions, as in the old Oracles, what has fallen out right, has had the
good luck to be Chronicled, when a thousand other such Essays, that have not
answered expectation, have been buried in Oblivion. So that Tully, in his
Epistles ad Atticum, foretelling the Miseries of the Civil War, may on the
same grounds be styled a Prophet; and if such productions of a discreet and
well-practis'd observer, must presently commence Oracle, this were giving up
the Cause to the Church of Rome, who, to this day, plead a right to this
dispensation, (and in truth to every bold Enthusiast, and pretender to
Revelation) but the Church of Rome may not boast of her Prophecies, since their
authorized Saints contradict each other in the account of their Visions; S.
Bridget pretending a particular Revelation, that the Virgin Mary was conceived
in Original sin, S. Katherine of Siena, pleading Revelation to the contrary;
but were Prophecy yet continued to the Church, it is no unquestionable
Authority to broach new Doctrines, Vide Theodoret. in loc.
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. and S. Contr. Faust. Manichae. lib. 4. c. 2.
Austin's Character of the Patriarchs is the best way of judging concerning
this excellent endowment, That a life, according to the Laws of the Prophets,
is preferrable to a Tongue, tip'd with such Seraphick Discourses. Illorum
hominum non tantum lingua, sed and vita prophetica fuit. Chrysostom. To. 2. hom. 24.
in Matthew. p. 172.
For Pharaoh had his Dreams, Nebuchadnezzar his Visions, and Balaam his Spirit
of Prophecy, while these Communications from Heaven were so far from
alleviating, that they aggravated both their Crimes and Torments.

XXV. To dispossess Satan was the design of the Son of God, and when he had
conquered the main Body, he left the subduing the dispersed and routed Troops
to his Followers, who got signal Victories over the baffled and affronted
powers of the Kingdom of Darkness, and erected their Trophies over Satan, not
only in the days of Apol. 1. and Dial. cum Tryph. p. 247.
Justin Martyr, and Lib. 2. c. 56, 57.
Irenaeus, of Apol. c. 23. etc. 37. and ad Scapul. c. 3.
Tertullian, and Octav. p. 90, 92.
Minut. Foelix, but in the days of Contr. Cells. l. 2.
Origin, Nyss. to. 2. p. 998, 999.
Gregory Thaumaturgus, Ep. 2. p. 6.
S. Cyprian, and Lib. 2. cap. 16.
Lactantius, those unclean guests being driven out of their Habitations by the
Prayers of the devout Exorcist; and though the Gentiles dreaded being possessed,
their Demons equally dreaded the Christians, with whose words they being
tormented, as a Malefactor is with a Whip, did not only confess themselves to
be evil Spirits, but gave an account of their names; and for such Cures were
the Servants of Jesus sought unto, even by their Enemies and Persecutors. So M.
Aurelius Antoninus courted Abercius, the Bishop of Hierapolis, to dispossess
his Daughter Lucilla, who had been betroathed to Lucius Verus, his Colleague in
the Empire, and the holy man undertook and accomplished it. And though the
truth of that story be by some doubted, yet it seems to me to carry with it its
own credentials, and To. 2. an. 163. p. 15 0/1.
Baronius has fully evinced it.

XXVI. But I suppose, that as soon as the great Enemy of Christianitie's
Interests so sensibly decayed, as they did under Constantine, when his Oracles
ceased, and his Temples were defaced; when he was no longer fed with the steams
of slain Beasts, and the fumes of Incense; then also this power ceased in the
Church of God (though De Civit. D. l. 22. c. 8.
S. Austin avers that it continued till his time;) It Is true, the term Exorcist
continued, and had a place in after Ages among the names of the
Church Officers, but then it was only aequivalent to Catecheist, (the ancient
Exorcists both instructing the Catechumens, and superintending the Daemoniacs)
which being an employment that the Church could not want, succeeded to the
whole title on the expiring of that miraculous power; for to believe that the
present charms of the Romanists succeed to the practices of the Ancients, I
must first be induced to credit their Legends, and believe, that an Amulet
shall keep me shotfree, or cure a Fever. But such Tricks find a livelihood for
their wandering and irregular Priests, and that gives them some credit, but
neither is this such a great mark of God's favor, or a true Church, if it were
yet continued; for Chrysostom. ubi supr. p. 171.
Judas had power given him to cast out Devils, and yet himself was one.

XXVII. That the anointing the desperately sick with Oil was also a specia^
influence of the holy Spirit, is uncontroleably asserted in that story of the
Emperor Tert. ad Scapul. cap. 4.
Septimius Severus, so cured by Proculus, a Christian, and of the Daemoniac
Aug. ubi supr.
Virgin at Hippo^ rescued by the application of Oil, given her by a Presbyter
of that Church, with which he had mingled his Tears; to omit other instances.
But in nothing were the Religious so famous, as in raising the dead; few, or
none of their Heathen Adversaries taking on them the confidence to pretend to
this power. Thus S. Irenaeus Lib. 2. c. 57. and apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 7.
says, that in his time the dead were raised to life, so as they continued many
years afterward on Earth, and he gives a particular instance of a man so
raised by the Prayers and Fastings of the Church, and challenges the Heretics,
as we do the Heathen, to show any such Example among the men of their
persuasion. Another instance De anim. p. 262. F. ed. Rhen.
Tertullian gives, and at the Council of Nice was present James, the Bishop of
Antioch, in Mygdonia, ( Nisibis the Syrians call it) Theodor. Eccl. hist. lib.
1. c. 7.
who had more than once made this experiment, and given life to the dead: and
after him Fortun. in vit.
S. Hillary of Poictiers, and Sulpit. Sever. in vit. Martin.
S. Martin, are said to have done the like, and perhaps some others.

XXVIII. And about this Age I conjecture that this prodigious virtue left off
assisting the Church; for I shall never have that comprehensive credence, to
believe all the strange stories of the like nature that Orthodox. fid. controv.
4.
Scribanius tells of the blessed Virgin at Sherpen-heavel, and Hall. Nor is it
impossible, but that a man may rescue his Neighbor from the bands of the
Graye, Gennad. de dogmat. Eccles. capp. 83, and 84. prodigia, and sanitates
etiam peccatores in nomine Domini facere ab ipso Deo didicimus, and cum alios
h^c praesumptione juvent, sibi per ambitionem human^e gloriae nocent. -- signis
and prodigiis clarum posse fieri Christianum, non tamen sanctum, si
intemperatis, and asperis moribus agat: temperatis autem, and placidis moribus
etiam absque signorum efficacia and sanctum, and perfectum, and Dei hominem
recbe sier, credimus.
who is himself dead in sins and trespasses: And this the Fathers well
understood, when they allowed that such preternatural effects were producible
by Magic, not denying but that in several places such Prodigies had fallen out
among the Heathen, in the names of their Idols, as is expressly acknowledged by
legate. p. 28.
S. Athenagoras; and Vespasian's cure of the blind man, with other such
Efforts, to omit the several stupendous specimina of the skill of Apollonius,
are undeniable instances of this, unless we question the truth of all History;
though in truth, what the noble Historian Lib. 16. par. (...), etc.
Polybius avers of such productions, is in general an unquestionable assertion,
that the greatest part of such Miracles were the Offspring of some crafty
Fellows, men of profligate souls and irrational minds, and were invented (...),
to inhance, and promote the Superstitions of the Vulgus. So does he character
the times before the holy Jesus appeared in the world, and for what was done
afterward, Apud Eusebius. de praeparat. Evangel. l. 1. c. 1.
Porphyry gives us a reason, that since the true God came among men to oblige
them, and to do them good, none of their false Gods had exerted their powers,
or conferred their kindnesses, (...).

XXIX. That is, the Demons did not so publicly and frequently appear as
heretofore; for they did not wholly desist, but in Porphyry's time made some
attempts to rescue Paganism from scorn: for this both Porphyry objects, and S.
Hierome grants; for when that bitter Enemy of Christianity had averred, Apud
Hieron. in Psalm. 81. tom. 8. p. 76. B.
that the Apostles were a sort of rustic and mean persons, and that their
necessities forced them to the study of Magic, whereby they insinuated
themselves into the affections of the more wealthy Females, whom they seduced;
and that they did no more than the Magicians of Egypt did in opposition to
Moses, and Apollonius and Apuleius had done since; the Father answers by
granting the Assertion, but denis that ever they confirmed their Miracles by
their Martyrdoms, but that the Apostles were crucified for the testimony of
their crucified Master, and that their blood is a confirmation of our Faith.
Non Martyrs Evan. gelium faciunt, sed per Evangelium Martyrs fiunt. Cypr.
Epist. 22. p. 30. a.
Which way of proof I cannot but dislike, for neither is this a full
demonstration of the truth either of Faith or Miracles, for a man may give his
body to be burnt, and yet want charity, 1 Cor. 13.3. and not only Peregrinus of
old voluntarily dyed for his Opinions, but in the Age immediately preceding,
Vaninus, who thought to have made Proselytes to the old Heathen Rites, was a
Martyr to Paganism, and gloried, that he would dye like a Philosopher.

XXX. That therefore we may the better understand the state of this question,
we shall close the digression with these Consectaries.

1. That Miracles though necessary in the Churches infancy, are not so now.
Then the resurrection of Jesus was an undeniable demonstration of his Godhead,
and to confirm the Apostles testimony of that resurrection, they produced their
own prodigious achievements, for to get belief among the Gentiles, the holy
man had need to bring his credentials with him from Heaven (nor do I doubt, if
the Gospel were now to be preached where it had never been rejected, but if
there were need, God would set his seal to it by signs from Heaven) but when
the greatest part of the world has already been blessed with the beams of the
Sun of righteousness, Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8.
Quisquis adhuc prodigia requirit, He that still wants a miracle to convince
him, is himself the greatest prodigy of the age.

XXXI. 2. That those extraordinary powers were not conferred on all persons in
the Church, nor at all times; on some good men not a drop of this heavenly dew
descended, on others it came down in a gentle and still shower, but a third
sort were drenched by it. And when the holy Ghost gave its largesses, it
dispersed them, fitting one holy man to raise the dead, another to speak with
tongues, a third to cast out Devils, 1 Cor. 12.29. but few men enjoyed all
these Charismata, nor were the Apostles always invested with this actual power,
but when it was necessary to make a convert. Else I suppose S. Paul, Acts 19.12.
who cured the desperately sick at a distance, would not have suffered
Epaphroditus to languish so long at Rome, nor left Trophinius at Miletum under
a sore distemper, when his company and assistance was so necessary to the
Apostle; nor would he have advised Timothy to drink wine for his stomachs sake,
had he always been endowed with this speedier way of baffling a disease.

XXXII. 3. That Miracles are not a sign of the true Church, as the Romanists
boast, Athenagoras grants, that the Magicians of his time by virtue of their
idols produced such strange effects, and S. Chrysostom says, that the
Heretics of his time frequently did the like; how consident soever therefore
the brags of the Romanists may be, that their ridiculous and impossible
Miracles are a mark of their Orthodoxy, it makes no impression on me; though
were it so, the cure of the King's Evil by our Prince is a more authentic, and
truer Miracle to vindicate the Protestant Doctrine, than all that they can
produce in confirmation of their novelties. Nor is there need of such sort of
proof now, Chrysostom. to. 5. (...). p. 605.
the holy spirit in these days manifesting it self in an ordinary way, not as
formerly by raising the dead, and cleansing the lepers, but by conferring Grace
in the Sacraments.

XXXIII. 4. That a holy life is a more becoming accomplishment, than ability to
work Miracles, Mat. 7.22, 23. To prophecy, to cast out Devils, and do wonders
is an admirable and sublime ornament says D^unita (...) Eccles. p. 152.
S. Cyprian, but he that possesses all these excellencres, if his life ^o not
holy, and just, must notwithstanding fail into Hell. When therefore men are
bid, says Tom. 5. (...). p. 278. and vid. p. 277.
S. Chrysostom, to imitate S. Peter, or S. Paul, to be followers of S. James,
or S. John, let them not retort, We cannot, it is beyond our sphere to raise
the dead, to cleanse the lepers; s^ifle that shameless Apology; Miracles give
not a title to Heaven, but a holy life, imitate therefore their pious
conversation, and thou art not beneath the Apostles. For Miracles make not an
Apostle, but Sanctity does. And this is demonstrated by that of our Savior,
John 13.35. who characterizing the virtue of a Desciple, says, In this shall
men know, that you are my disciples: in this; in what? that ye can work
Miracles, that ye can raise the dead? No. But in this, that ye love one
another. Now love is not reducible to Miracles, but to holy conversation, for
love is the fulfilling of the law. And thus you see the picture of a Disciple,
and an Apostle. -- And with this Remarque we end this digression.

XXXIV. I have no more in the life of this Father to animadvert, but (...)
whereas Mr. H. p. 313. out of Nice (...), as he out of Procopius, mentions
(...) Church erected to his memory. (...).
Victor the Bishop of Vtica, who lived near the place, tells us of two very
splendid and (...) Temples erected to his name, one at the place called Sexti,
where he was beheaded, (which whether it were so called because Sextus his
field, or 6 miles from Carthage, I dispute not) the other in the Mappalian way,
where he was buried; the first being entitled Sermon. 113. de diverse.
Mensa Cypriani, says S. Austin, not because he did eat there, as that Father
judges, but because there he was Martyred; the last called Sepulchrum Cypriani,
used by the Vandals, as a place of meeting for the Arians, when they had razed
the other Church, till under Justinian it was restored to the Catholics.

XXXV. Homil. 72. and 73. inter Ambros. and p. 235. Ed. Raynaud.
His Martyrdom happened about the time of Vintage, says S. Maximus of Turin
more than once; the Festival dedicated to his memory, which Ep. 120. cap. 5.
S. Austin calls the Solemnity of the most blessed Cyprian, was styled
Cyprianaea. The Heathens despitefully termed him Lactant. lib. 5. c. 1.
Copreanus, and Capreanus (as the Arians nick-nam'd the great Patriarch of
Alexandria, Sathanasius) but the Christians thought so well of him, as to give
his name to their children, of which name we find one a Martyr at Nicomedia
under Dioclesian, whom Nazianz. etc. confound with this Bishop of Carthage,
another a Bishop in Africa martyred in the Vandalick persecution under
Hunnerick, to omit many more.

XXXVI. The Fathers also give him a most honorable character, he is Tom. 3. p.
822.
a holy man in S. Chrysostom, a most pious and eloquent martyr, in In Isai. 60.
S. Hierome, an incomparable man, and of most excellent, and transcendent
accomplishments, in De bapt. cont. Donat. l. 6. c. 2.
S. Austin: the name of Cyprian is venerable among all persons, and that not
only among the lovers of Jesus, but his enemies too, says Tom. 1. orat. 18. p.
84.
S. Gregory Nazianzen: Apud eund. p. 276.
admirable was his humility, and his elo quence prodigious, in which he
exceeded other men, as much as men do beasts, for he presided not only over the
Churches of Carthage and Africa, but his Bishopric extended over the Western
part of the World, and the Oriental Churches were a part of his Diocese, the
North, and South, and wherever his wonders had been heard of, and his name
spread, were under his inspection. Pont. Diac. in fin. pass. Cypr.
For he was the man, whom the Christians by way of eminency called their
Bishop, or Pope; Quem Christiani suum Papam vocant. To his Memory we have an
Hymn in Prudentius, an Oration in Nazianzen, one Homily in Chrysologus, four in
Austin, one in Fulgentius, and two in S. Maximus. Among all which, having once
thoughts to insert that excellent Panegyric of S. Gregory the Divine, I have
omitted those resolutions, because his Discourse is so perplexed, and in a great
part applied to a wrong person, and have annexed that of his great admirer S.
Austin.

S. Austin's Homily on the Holy Martyr Cyprian.
'SO acceptable and religious a Solemnity, in which we celebrate the passion of
a blessed Martyr, commands this discourse from us, as a Tribute due to your ears
and hearts. Without question the Church was at that time melancholy, and clad
in sables, not so much for his loss that was dying, as out of a desire that
they might not be robbed of him, being always willing to enjoy the society and
presence of so pious an Instructor, so good a Prelate. But those, whom the
solicitude of his Encounter afflicted, were re-inspirited with comfort, by the
Crowns and Triumphs of his Victory; and now not only without any sorrow, but
with the most profuse joy do we read and reflect on those Transactions, and it
is conceded to us to exult, not to fear in that day. For we do not fear that
day that came with terror, but expect the return of it with a serene
cheerfulness. It is pleasing therefore with gladness to remember the Sufferings
of that most faithful, courageous, and glorious Martyr, now the passion is
past, for which then the Brethren were so concerned when it was future. First
of all therefore, when he was banished to Curubis for his Confession of the
Faith of Christ, there was no injury done to the holy Cyprian, but much good to
that City. For whither could he be sent where that Savior was not, for whose
Testimony he was an Exile? Christ therefore, who said, Behold I am with you
always even to the end of the World, took care to preserve that Member of his
in all places, whithersoever the Fury of the Enemy did drive him. O the foolish
Infidelity of his Persecutor! if thou would find out a place where to
confine a Christian, first find out, if thou can, a place whence Christ has
been driven; do thou think thou can force the man of God from his Country
into a strange Land, who being in Christ cannot be exiled; and while he is in
the flesh is always a stranger? But now after what Cyprian did not think, but
his Enemies imagined to be his Banishment, it is pleasant to remember and
consider what followed that his Exile, relating to his Martyrdom. For when
Cyprian, chosen by God, a holy Martyr, returned from the City of Curubis,
whither he had been banished by the Edict of Aspasius Paternus, the Proconsul,
he took up his residence in his own Gardens; and thence every day hoped and
expected that it would befall him, according as the Vision instructed him. To
what purpose now does the rage of the Persecutor express its self against a
Soul always prepared, and especially while it was confirmed by a Revelation
from Heaven? How could God desert him in his Sufferings, who would not suffer
him to be surpised in his ignorance? in that therefore two were sent unto him
to introduce him to his passion, who took him up into their Chariot, and set
him between them, this also was an Admonition from above, that with joy he
might recollect, that he belonged to the Body of that Savior, who was numbered
among the Transgressors; For Christ being Crucified between two Thieves, was
exposed an Example of patience; and Cyprian being carried in the Chariot to his
passion, between two Officers, did walk in the steps of his Master. What an
Eulogy does he deserve, or rather what praises can be adequate to his merit,
who when he was kept till the next day in the custody of his Guard, and the
whole multitude of Christians were gathered together with Resolutions to watch
all night at the Door, commanded the Virgins to be circumspectly looked to?
though his Body were in the Suburbs of the Grave, yet a Pastoral Vigilance was
lively and vigorous in the Soul of this Bishop, who was wholly taken up with a
studious care and diligence to defend and preserve the Lord's flock to his last
moment. The hand of the cruel Executioner, that just hung over his head, did
neither shake the Courage, nor supersede the Industry of this most faithful
Steward; he so thought upon his being a Martyr for the future, that he forgot
not his being a Bishop for the present; being infinitely more concerned what
account he should render to the Prince of Bishops, of the flock committed to
his inspection, than what he should answer the Infidel Proconsul concerning his
own faith; for he loved him that said unto Peter, Love thou me? Feed my
Sheep. Nor did he omit to feed those Sheep, for whom, even now, he made haste,
in imitation of him, to shed his Blood. He commanded the Virgins to be
cautiously guarded, knowing, that he had not only a sincere Master, but a
cunnning and false Adversary. In his Confession, therefore, he arms the manly
breast against the roaring Lion, and shelters the female Sex against the Wolf
that lies in wait to devour the flock: So that man truly consults his own
Interest, who is still meditating on God as his Judge, before whom every one
shall give an account of the managery of his life, and discharge of the duty
enjoined him, when every man shall receive, as testifies the Apostle, according
to what he has done in his body, whether good or evil. So he is his own best
friend, who living by Faith, and hastening that he may not be surpised by the
last day, does reckon every day his last, and so perseveres in doing what is
pleasing in the eyes of God, till the hour of his dissolution. So the blessed
Cyprian, that most compassionate Prelate, that most faithful Martyr advised
himself to do; and not as the subtle Tongue of the Devil in the mouth of the
wicked Judge admonished him, saying, Consult thy own safety. For when the
Proconsul saw his firm and unshaken resolution, when he said unto him, the
Emperors command thee to perform the accustomed ceremonies to the Gods and he
answered I cannot do it: he subjoined, Consult thy own safety: That is the fly
and insinuating Tongue of the Devil, and though not of him that understood not
what he said, yet of him that spoke in the mouth of the Proconsul. For the
Governor spoke not so much according to the mind of the Emperors, whose
commands he boasted, but according to the injunctions of the Prince of the
power of the Air, of whom the Apostle says, that he works in the Children of
Disobedience. Whom Cyprian knew to work by the Tongue of the Proconsul, though
he himself was ignorant of it. Cyprian, I say, knew when he heard him advising
him to take care of his safety, that what flesh and blood spoke foolishly, that
Satan spoke craftily, and in the same body he beheld two persons, one with his
eyes, another with his faith. The one was unwilling he should dye, the other,
that he should be crowned with Martyrdom; at length armed with meekness toward
the one, and caution toward the other, he openly answers the Proconsul, and in
secret overcomes Satan. Execute, says he, what thou art commanded; in so just
an Affair there needs no Consultation. For the Proconsul had said, Consult thy
own safety; to which he answered, in so just a matter there is no need of
Consultation. For he consuits, that either gives or asks Counsel; but the
Proconsul was not willing to take advice from Cyprian, rather he admonished him
to follow his Judgment; but the wise Prelate retorts, in so just a thing there
needs no deliberation. I ask no Counsel, because I am under no doubts; Justice
it self has delivered me from all hesitation and suspense. For the just man
lives assuredly by his faith, that he may dye securely in the Flesh. Many
Martyrs were Harbingers and Forerunners of the blessed Cyprian, whom he had
enflamed to the conquest of Satan by many warm and passionate Exhortations; and
it was but just, that he should undauntedly follow those by his sufferings,
whom by such pathetical Incentives he had sent before to Martyrdom. Therefore,
in so just an Affair there needs no Consultation. What then shall we say to
these things, and by what Exultations shall we express our joys? Into what form
of words shall our hearts and mouths break forth, but into the last Speeches of
that venerable Martyr? For when Galerius Maximus read his Sentence out of a
Table Book, I determine that Thascius Cyprianus be beheaded, the good man
answers, I heartily thank God. Let us therefore, being encouraged in so
momentous an Affair by the memory of this present place, by the Solemnity of
this Festival, by the takingness of so persuasive an example, from the bottom
of our Souls, say also, The Lord be praised.

THE LIFE OF Lactantius.
I. IT is no small part of the Churches unhappiness, that we have such scant
notices of the lives of its Ancient Worthies, of many of whom we have only
their names, of many others no more particular account, than what S. Hierome's
Catalogue of illustrious men affords us, in which we have a Breviate of the
Life of Lactantius, but neither the time, nor place of his Birth, nor Death,
though without out him we should hardly know more, than that there was such an
Advocate for the Christian Faith. For his Country I am altogether of Mr. H.'s
Opinion, that he was an Italian, whatever Baronius and Possevine opine to the
contrary, and that his Name ought to be as much celebrated, as his Country. Of
him p. 319. we are told, that he wrote his excellent Books of Institutions
against the Gentiles in opposition to the calumnies of two great enemies of
Christianity, whom according to Baronius he makes to be Porphyry, and
Hierocles; that Porphyry could not be the first, whatever that admirable
Annalist does assert, I am very sure from the character, that Instit. l. 5. c.
2.
Lactantius gives of him, that he under the pretense and vizard of Philosophy,
did indulge himself the satisfaction of every passion, that he was intolerably
covetous, and intemperate, and so extravagant in his course of life, that he,
who in the Schools was the great applauder of frugality, and poverty, when he
left them, was yet better pleased to sup at the Palace, than his own house;
which will not agree to the wonderfully modest, retired, severe, and
contemplative life of that Eunap. in vit. Porphyr. and Luc. Holsten. de vit.
and script. Porphyr. cap. 6.
Philosopher, who shunned conversation, and gave himself up to Melancholy and
Abstinences, till he was just starved; nor yet comport with the doctrine of his
Book, (...); and whereas Catalog. illustr. viror.
S. Hierome reckons Methodius, Eusebius, and Apollinaris as the defenders of
the Christian verities against Porphyry, he never says a word of Lactantius,
which I suppose he would have done, had Porphyry been the person against whom
this Father writ.

II. That the Nicomedian Judge was Hierocles, I am over and above persuaded, a
man famous and eminent both for his parts, and employment. He was the Lactant.
ubi supr.
Author of raising the persecution at Nicomedia against the Christians, (and I
suppose it was by this industry, and acumen, his zeal for paganism, and brisk
opposition of whatever was called Christian, that he endeared himself to
Dioclesian) and not content with that, he also employs his pen against those,
whom he persecuted, with much seeming modesty, and love to truth; for as the
old sages called themselves (...) (Wise men) but their followers less confident
took the name of (...) (Lovers of Wisdom) so whereas Celsus, Origen's enemy,
had styled his work (...), Hierocles gave his the inscription of (...). And
indeed out of Celsus, and Porphyry, he borrowed not only his Arguments and
Reasonings, but his very words and forms of Speech, as Eusebius expressly
testifies, who took on him to answer and overcome this aggressor; though he is
mistaken in affirming, that Hierocles writ only one Book; for Lactantius
expressly mentions two, in which Ubi supr. c. 3.
he introduces that Philosopher describing our Savior as a man, who being
banished by the Jews, gathered an Army of nine hundred bandito's, and turned
public thief; and then argues, Who is so lost to reason, as to worship him for
a God, who was crucified for his villainies? to which Lactantius answers, that
were it so, such methods of adoration were suitable to the practices of their
Religion, which has deified Mars, who, had he had his deserts, ought to have
been condemned by the Areopagus to be crucified. Afterward he brings him in
comparing Apollonius with Christ, and opposing him as an Antichrist to the Son
of God, that that Magician did as great, or greater Miracles, than our Savior,
such as were attested, says Fragm. p. 266. Ed. Land.
Hierocles, not by such impostors as Peter and Paul, men of no learning, or
credit, but by men of great parts, and severe veracity, such as were Maximus
Aegiensis, and Damis the Philosopher, and Philostratus of Athens. But Eusebius,
and this Father have for ever silenced that objection, and so I shall leave it,
and its Author, when I have told my reader, that in the primitive saecula the
men of the long robe were the ablest, and most virulent enemies of the name of
Jesus. Domitius Vlpianus, Martyrol. Romans Jan. 1. Mart. 2. Aug. 23. etc.
not being content to have had a hand in the Martyrdom of Quirianus Bishop of
Ostium, and many other servants of God, in his seventh Book De officio
Proconsulis (which is now lost, only some fragments of it are preserved)
collected all the Reasons of former Princes against the Christians, that their
Successors might have precedents, how to proceed on any new occasion, and that
what they did might seem to be the product not of fury, but of law, and the
dictates of equity, so true is that of De Pallio. c. 5.
Tertullian, Plus togae laesere remp. (Christianam) quam loricae.

III. To the right understanding of his unorthodox expressions a little charity
will greatly conduce. That God the father made himself, is no more (but more
ruggedly worded) than that he has his being of himself (and Solecisms of
expression never constitute a Heresy) and where he seems to deny the Divinity
of our Savior, his Books, says Thomasius, have been corrupted by the Arians,
and Mr. H. allows it. And we know that the Fathers of the three first Centuries
are not so express in their accounts of the Divinity, or satisfaction of our
blessed Master, and yet I should be very loath to give them all away to the
second family of Arius, the Socinians, as Not. in Epiphan. Haeres. 69.
Petavius very rashly and unworthily has done, as if their sentiments in those
Articles differed from the rule of faith. And this also will defend him from
the censures of S. Hierome, for not speaking so clearly of the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost; the Ancients having not been so careful to assert the Divinity of
the Son, till that Article was denied by Arius, nor of the Holy Ghost, till the
Heresy of Macedonius did lift up its head; and this Method is agreeable to
that memorable and worthy passage in Tom. 2. Apolog. adv. Ruffin. lib. 2. p.
223. Ed. Eras.
S. Hierome, If I am ignorant of the reason why the Fathers erred, I do not
presently call them Heretics; for perchance they erred with very simple, and
honest intentions, or had the ill luck to express themselves unhappily, and in
words that might be misconstrued, or their Writings have been wronged in
transcribing, or they spoke not so cautiously, as they would, had they lived
after some Heresies sprung up in the Church, as some of the Fathers did of our
Savior, before the rise of that Southern Devil (or Demon, that walks at
noonday) at Alexandria.

IV. The reason of our Masters retiring into Galilee after his resurrection was
probably on the account of his Disciples, who were of that Country, and were
commanded thither to retire, when the feast should be over, that being a place
more remote from Jerusalem, and consequently more secure for them. But that our
Savior would not appear any more publicly among the Jews might be a just
judgment on them, who had resisted the holy spirit, and continued unconverted
under so many methods of Grace, God resolving to fulfill his prediction, that
the day should come, when they should (in vain) say, Blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord. And this I believe to be Lactantius his meaning. And
for his silence of Christ's Priestly Office, and dying for our sins, it is not
so palpable, as the Centurists, and Mr. H. make it, witness that one place,
Lib. 4. c. 20. vid. lib. ^jus. c. 18. etc. 19.
Novum (Testamentum) veteris adimpletio est, and in utroque idem testator est
Christus, qui, pro nobis morte suscepta, nos haeredes regni aeterni fecit.

V. Where the Father affirms, that the power of the earth was given to Satan
from the beginning, certainly he means not from the beginning of the creation,
but from the fall of man, when by Adam's transgression his posterity by nature
be came frvants unto Satan. The Angels falling in love with the daughters of
men has been spoken to before; but if we may be allowed to deduce an opinion
from a broken sentence, his great error about the Angels seems to be, that he
makes them coeternal with God; for when the Objection is made, What company
God had before the creation? Lib. 1. c. 7.
he answers, that the Angels were with him, habet ministros, quos vocamus
nuntios, which is no solution, unless they were with him from eternity;
although this he presently after contradicts out of Seneca, when he says,
Genuisse regni sui Ministros Deum, that God created the Angels to be his
servants, and that also unhappily expressed by genuisse for creasse.

VI. The preexistence of the Soul, is an opinion generally entertained by the
old Philosophers of the School of Plato, and Pythagoras, who had it from the
Chaldee, and Egyptian Sages. Nor does it but look very plausibly, when we
consider, that it is the clearest, if not the only way of solving that dilemma.
If the Soul of man be ex traduce, and result out of matter, where is its
natural immortality, and how can all mankind have more than one soul, and how
can that Soul be divisible? and if it be created in the instant of generation,
and then infused, how stands it with Gods justice to force it into a body, and
there to infect it with original sin? whereas if we allow Souls a time of
probation above, before they descend on earth, they shall be immortal, because
God made them so, and confined to a body, because in their purer state they
sinned, and deserved this punishment, but this I propose only problematically
without asserting any thing.

VII. Lactantius is, and worthily, ready to encourage the practice of piety,
and doing good works; but that he speaks nothing of the righteousness of faith,
as Mr. H. p. 334. objects, I cannot believe; for in his Epit. divin. Instit.
cap. 8.
Epitome he thus expresses himself, Fides quoque magna justitiae pars est, quae
maxim a nobis, qui nomen fidei gerimus, conservanda est, praecipue in
religione, quia deus, prior, and potentior est, quam homo, and again Instit.
divin. lib. 5. cap. 13.
semper multo firmior fides est, quam reponit poenitentia, and by these two do
men make satisfaction to God, and are justified. And again Lib. 4. c. 19.
Nulla igitur alia spes est consequendae immortalitatis, nisi crediderint in
eum, that no man can be saved without faith in Christ.

The word merit signifies in the writings of the Fathers any good work, which
is acceptable to God, and De great. and lib. arb. l. 1. c. 14.
Bellarmine himself confesses it. And Mereri in Classick Authors, signifies no
more than Consequi, to incur, procure, or attain; as Agricola is said by
Tacitus, on the account of his excellent Virtues, iram Vit. Agric. p. 656. Ed.
1619.
Caii Caesaris meritus, to incur the anger of Caesar; and Contr. Liter. Petil.
lib. 3. c. 6.
S. Austin says of himself, that instead of thanks from the Donatists for his
kindness to them, flammas meruimus odiorum, He procured their hatred. But this
the most reverend Answ. to Jes. sect. of merit. p. 553.
Primate has told Mr. H. long since: And here I must again beg leave to admire
our Authors want of consideration, in assigning this Father's ninth Error in
words so wholly different from his meaning, who throughout the whole twelfth
Chapter of the sixth Book of his Institutions, having passionately recommended
the acts of Mercy, and shutting up his discourse thus, (That Gods way of
hearing prayers is, If thou shall hearken to the Petition of thy poor begging
Brother, I also will hear thee; if thou shall compassionate him, I also will
have pity on thee; but if thou shuttest up thy Bowels of Mercy, and neither
regardest nor helpest him, I will deal with and judge thee according to thy own
Methods) begins his thirteenth Chapter with these words, Quoties igitur
rogaris, tentari te a Deo creed, an sis dignus exaudiri, which Mr. H. against
all rules of Grammar, thus renders, As often as a man asks, he is to believe
that he is tempted of God, whether he be worthy to be heard. Which is so far
from being an erroneous Assertion, that it wants sense, which will be
perspicuous, genuine, and coherent, if we English it, as we ought, thus, As
often as thou art petitioned ( i. by thy poor Brother,) believe that God tries
thee, whether thou be worthy to be heard by him, when thou prayest; it being
the divine custom, as he said before, to hear only those that hearken to and
compassionate the indigent.

IX. For his next Assertion, that God pardons his Servants who sin ignorantly,
I look upon it to be very Orthodox, and agreeable to S. Paul; who, though in
the whole seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, he had described the
good man as one that with his flesh did serve the Law of Sin, but with his mind
the Law of God, begins the eighth Chapter with this comfortable Assertion,
There is now no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus; i. such sins of
ignorance and imperfection shall not damn them, if they walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit; when he both affirms and denies, that a man may be
without sin, he argues like S. Paul, Phil. 3. where v. 12. he denies himself to
be perfect, and v. 15. affirms it; but in diverse senses. So when Lactantius
affirms, that a man may live pure from all pollutions, he argues, ab
impossibili, which is an usual Topic, but his true judgment he gives
afterward, quod nemo esse sine delicto potest, that no man can live without
sinning, as long as he is on this side the Grave, -- The superstition of the
Cross has been already fully invalidated; the unlawfulness of making War was
an Error, but herein he followed Origin among the Ancients, and Erasmus, and
other famous men of late have wedded the same Opinion; his Doctrine of the
Antipodes may be called a Heresy in Philosophy, but by no means in Divinity;
and it was the ancient belief, that the Souls of all men were detained in one
common Prison, which Opinion has been already considered.

X. His discourse of the great Prophet, who shall convert the Nations before
the end of the World, is somewhat strange, and perhaps an intimation to us,
what mazes of their own making men wander in, when they undertake to reveal
what is hidden, and unriddle the Apocalypse, out of which the Millenary
Doctrine had its rise. After this Prophet's appearance, shall be the day of
retribution, in which not all, says Mr. H. p. 333. out of Lactantius, shall be
judged, (The Wicked being condemned already) but only those who know God. Which
I would willingly see reconciled with that passage of his, Lact. Instit. lib.
7. c. 26.
Eodem tempore fiet secunda illa etc. at the same time shall be the second and
public Resurrection of all persons, in which the wicked shall be raised to
live for ever in eternal torments; such are they who have worshipped Idols, and
despised and renounced the Lord of the World. For as to what Mr. H. avers to be
Lactantius his Opinion, I cannot find it either in the fourteenth Chapter of
his seventh Book, to which the Margin directs, nor yet in the 24th, as I think
it should be printed; (and here I must again take leave to admire Mr. H's
faculty of translating in these words, Quos autem plene justitia, and maturitas
virtutis incoxerit, ignem illum non sentient, which he thus renders, Those,
whom Righteousness and Maturity of Virtue shall have fully concocted, shall not
feel that Fire. Which words, as they lie, he that can make sense of, shall be
my Oracle) but in the 21 chap. of that Book, I find some words to that purpose,
not that the Wicked shall not be judged, but shall not rise again; i. as I
think, not in that solemn manner, as the just shall, but immediately on the
sound of the Trumpet shall be thrown into Hell.

XI. Nor is it improbable, but that this Father has been impeached of some
other Errors, which Mr. H. has not mentioned. Ruffinus lays to his Charge and
Tertullian's, his Dogma, that the Soul is ex traduce, to which Apolog. adv.
Ruffin. l. 2. to. 2. p. 217, 218.
S. Hierom answers, that he remem^ers no such passage in him. But he who ^eads
that Father, shall find him asserting the contrary Opinion; for De opific. Dei.
c. 19.
proposing the que^tion, Whether the Soul owe its being to the Father, or
Mother, or both, he answers it, That Souls have their being neither from one,
or both ^he Parents, but that God alone gives them Essence; serendarum animarum
ratio uni, ac soli Deo subjacet; the learned Of Credulity and Incredulity in
things natural and civil. part 1. p. 181.
Dr. Casaubon, ^eckons another Error of his, That it is impossible for a just
man to perish in any temporal calamity, as in a Tempest, or War, but that God
for his sake, either will preserve the rest, or when all the rest perish, he
alone shall be preserved. But this could not be meant by him thetically, but
that it generally happens, that God appears to the rescue of his Servants, as
he did of Noah and Lot; for else a great part of Lactantius his design were
superseded, who makes the Sufferings of the Martyrs a solemn Testimony of the
truth of their Religion; and with this I conclude, when I have given S.
Hierom's Character of him, that he was, vir omnium suo tempore eruditissimus,
the best Scholar of his Age, Tutor to the Emperors Son Crispus, but so poor,
that many times he wanted necessaries. Which might probably happen to him on
the death of his Patron the Prince, with whom he also might fall into disgrace,
and on whose death all his dependencies and hopes expired.

THE LIFE OF S. ATHANASIVS.
I. IN the Memoires of the Life of this able and worthy Champion of tha^ Faith
which was once delivered to the Saints (for which Passim in histor. l. 2. tom.
11, 12, 18. lib. 3. tom. 3, 12. lib. 7. tom. 2. etc.
Philostorgius, the Arian Historian speaks so opprobriously of him;) I cannot
but pay Mr. H. my thanks for acknowledging, Sect. 1. p. 339* that the Baptism
administered by Vid. Sozom. lib 2. c 16. Ruffin. l. 10. c. 14. Phot. cod. (...).
etc.
Athanasius to his play-Fellows was valid, and no^ to be reiterated (as was
defined by Alexander, the then Patriarch of Alexandria, and opposed by no other
part of the Church) in contradiction to the peevish Zeal of Becanus and others,
who will by no means be persuaded to allow its sufficiency. Nequaquam sit jure
pro rato habitus, says Loc. 47. quaest. 17. p. 616.
Becanus very Magisterially in the case, wherein De bapt. contr. Donatist. l.
7. c. 53.
S. Austin professes, he will determine nothing, till it be revealed to him
from Heaven, having just before asserted, That that Initiatory Sacrament must
not be reiterated, wheresoever, or by whomsoever it may have been administered,
so it be according to the form of words prescribed in the Gospel. And this I
have mentioned to evince the Church of England's practices to be consonant to
the primitive usages, which in case of most urgent necessity connives at
Baptism administered by a Layman or Woman, not but that the fact is irregular
in the person that usurps the Priest's privileges, but that the person
baptized shall not be rebaptiz'd, according to that good rule, Quod fieri non
debuit, factum valet. So De baptismo.
Tertullian, Nonne and laici Sacerdotes sumus? Are not Laymen Priests? Where a
Priest is not to be had, every man is his own Priest. So also Adv. Lucifer.
tom. 2. p. 141.
S. Hierom, and S. Lib. 2. contr. Ep. Parmen. c. 13.
Austin, affirming that the Sacrament ought not to be reiterated, though the
act be an Usurpation in the Minister; and for the Greek Church, see Tom. 1.
Homil. 13. p. 486.
S. Basil; and Orat. 40. p. 656.
Gregory the Divine affirms, that every man that is a Christian may baptize,
(...), (so Billius his Interpreter construes the words, but I think that he
means it only of the Orthodox-Clergy, in opposition to the Heretics) the
practice is allowed by the Council of Illiberis, Can. 38. and Sive quis alios
auth. comment. in Ephesians. 4. tom. 5. p. 347.
S. Ambrose affirms, that it was the custom of the Primitive Ages, before the
number of Converts were multiplied, that every one might preach, baptize, and
interpret Scriptures; but on the modelling of Churches, those duties were
appropriate to particular persons.

II. Of this the Jew in Lib. 3. cap. 37.
Nicephorus is a famous instance, who being converted in the Desert, was by his
Fellow-Travellers made partaker of this Sacrament; and it is yet practiced by
the Eastern Church, who in their Page 118. apud Smyth ubi supr. p. 74.
Catechetick Confession, published in the modern Greek for the use of their
Laity, thus express themselves, No man shall administer the Sacrament of
Baptism, but only a Priest, (...), but in case of necessity it is allowed, that
any Secular person, whether he be a man, or woman may baptize. So P. Fagius in
Deuter. 10.16.
the Jews allowed a Servant to circumcise, if the Minister of that Office were
not at hand, and they were herein encouraged by the example of Zipporah. It is
allowed by Oxf. Ans. to the mill manus petit. p. 11. marg.
Chytraeus, Snepfius, and Heerbrand, for the Lutheran Churches; and by
Zuinglius for the Churches of his persuasion; and for our holy Mother, her
Judgment is well known, and in it she has been unanswerably vindicated by the
profound Lib. 5. sect. 62. etc.
Hooker, and Mr. Course of divin. part 1. l. 1. c. 40. p. 200, 201.
Scrivener, and to them I leave her Enemies, who are rational and perswasible,
for their conviction. For Hooker ubi supr.
Baptism by any man in case of necessity, was the Voice of the whole World
heretofore, nor ought in to be reiterated, says our old Lindwood Provinc. l. 1.
tit. 7. p. 41. Edit. Oxon.
Provincial.

III. In his account of the Objections against S. Athanasius, p. 345. he
mentions the sending Macarius to forbid Ischyras, or Ischyrion, to administer
the holy things, and tells us, that this Ischyras had usurped the Office of a
Minister; but how he usurped it, we have no Footsteps in this Diatribe; and
this silence was necessary, since that one case for ever secures the peculiar
Interests of Bishops in Ordinations. For Coluthus, a Presbyter of Alexandria,
was the only person, who gave imposition of hands to this pragmatick; and this
he thought sufficient to authorize him to gather a Church in Mareotis, without
any dependence on Athanasius, (a Crime, says Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 20.
Socrates, that deserved more than one death) in whose Province that Country
was; whereupon, by the Authority of the Apud Athanas. to. 1. Apolog. 2. p. 781.
etc.
Council of Alexandria, all the Ordinations of this Presbyter were revised and
made void; on which Ischyras fled to Eusebius of Nicomedia, who promised him a
Bishopric, and I believe made it good; for twelve years after he appeared as a
Member of the Council of Sardica, says Ubi supr. p. 785.
Photius, where he struck in with the Arian Faction. -- But it would too
severely have upbraided the similar Usurpations of a modern Faction, that
affronts the Church and her Discipline, to have told the World so plainly, how
such irregular Ordinations were disallowed.

IV. This I believe was concealed purposely, but the account of Arsenius, that
he was no more than a Deacon, ignorantly; for Hist. l. 1. c. 30.
Theodoret expressly calls him a Bishop of the Meletian Faction (which Faction
called themselves, The Church of the Martyrs) nor did he come voluntarily to
Tire, the day before Athanasius made his Answer, as Mr. H. says; but if we may
believe the Theod. ubi supr. l. 1. c. 21. Sozom. l. 2. c. 22.
Church-Historians, they will inform us, that after it was published, that
Athanasius should be accused of the Murder of Arsenius; the Divine Providence
would not suffer the Impostor longer to lie hid, but it was known that he was
alive in some part of Egypt, in the Province of Thebais, lurking with one
Prines, a Monk of that Region, in a Monastery of the Faction; whither when S.
Athanasius sent one of his Deacons to search out the truth, the Monks knowing
of his coming, removed Arsenius; but Prines and Elias, another Brother of that
Cell, being brought to Alexandria, confessed that Arsenius was alive; and at
length the same Providence brought him to Tire, whither he resolved to go and
remark incognito, the managery of that Affair, notwithstanding all the
Injunctions of the Arians, who had given him money to conceal himself: When it
happened that the Servants of Archelaus, a man of consular Dignity ( Phot. ubi
supr. p. 782.
who with the Prefect of Phoenicia, and some others of the Faction of
Eusebius, were appointed Judges in the case) understood by the discourse of
some persons in a Tavern, that Arsenius lay somewhere hid in a house of the
Town; which Information they speedily carry to their Master, who making a
search finds out and secures the man; he being apprehended denies himself to be
Arsenius, till Paulus, the Bishop of Tire, who before-time knew him intimately,
pulled off the Mask, and discovered the Cheat. Whereupon being committed to
safe custody, notice was given to Athanasius, who being a little time after
convened before the Council, produced Arsenius alive, and pulling aside his
Cloak, showed both his Arms, demanding of his Accusers, that since two hands
were as many as God had given any man, they should show him the place whence
the third was cut off.

V. The account which S. Athanasius gives of the Death of Arius from the
Relation of Macarius a Priest, then present at Constantinople, is the same in
substance with what the Socrat. l. 1. c. 25. Theod. l. 1. c. 14. Sozom. l. 2.
c. 28.
Church-Historians relate of it, only Socrates tells us, that the good
Patriarch of Constantinople shut himself up in the Church, and lay prostrate
before the holy Altar, not only the night before Arius was to be readmitted to
the Catholic Communion, but fasted, and wept, and prayed for many nights
together, omitting no form of Devotion that might be suitable to that occasion;
but that the most pertinent Collect was this, Grant, O my God, that if the
Opinion of Arius must be accounted Orthodox, my Soul may be taken out of the
World before the day of disputation; but if what I believe be the true Faith,
let him suffer the punishments which his Impiety merits. -- Which acts of
Mortification and Devotion were no question doubled the Eve before that fatal
day, when God appeared to the vindication of the eternal verity, and that great
disturber of Christendom, by an exemplary stroke of the divine Vengeance near
the public Market, which was called by the name of the August Emperor
Constantine, yielded up the Ghost, the very place becoming infamous on his
death, no man approaching it for the ease of nature, but all that past by
pointed at it, as the Stage whereon that Villain acted his last; till a long
time after a wealthy and potent Disciple of that Sect, bought the place of the
Republic, and built a house there, that the memorable accident might be buried
in the ruins of the Stage, whereon it was acted, but Blasphemy and an ungodly
life give the Wretch a miserable immortality.

VI. On the introducing of Epiph. haer. 69. Socrat. l. 2. c. 6.7.8. Sozom. l.
3. c. 5, 6. Phot. cod. (...). p. 773. and cod. (...). p. 784.
Gregory into the Throne of S. Athanasius, (when Eusebius Emesenus had refused
the honor, being offered him by the Synod of Antioch) the people of Alexandria
were so incensed, that they burnt the Temple of Dionysius down to the ground;
him his Patrons the Arians finding slow and negligent in propagating their
Heresy, and hated by the people, six years after his instalment deposed in the
Synod of Sardica, and ordained George the Cappadocian in his room, who (and not
the first Gregory, as Theodoret asserts) was afterward cruelly slain at
Alexandria; Naz. crat. 21. p. 389. Epip^. haer. 76. Socr. l. 3. c. 2. ^^^om. l.
5. c. 7. script. vit. Athanas. apud Phot. cod. (...). p. 788. Philostorg. l. 7.
tom. 2. p. 86. Julian. Imp. Ep. 10. Am. Marcellind. 22. Baron. Tom. 4. an. 362.
p. 70, 71.
the particulars of which famous Attempt, besides the account which we have
from the Ancients, may be read at large in Baronius, and briefly in Billius his
notes on the 21st. Oration of S. Greg. Naz.

VII. The Argument of Scultetus, mustered p. 361. to the discarding that Tract
of Athanasius, which contains, Testimonies out of the sacred Scriptures, of the
Communion of the Divine Essence between the three persons in the Trinity,
because many passages here, and in the Questions ad Antiochum, are the same,
and therefore these stolen thence, seems to me to evince the contrary, that that
counterfeit Author took those passages out of this genuine Treatise of
Athanasius, that so he might be the more readily entertained as the true
Patriarch; and though Mr. Perkins denis that the Epistle to Marcellinus,
concerning the Interpretation of the Psalms, and the Sermon of Virginity be
his, yet S. Hierom's Authority weighs more with me, who entitles Athanasius to
two Books, one de Psalmorum titulis, another de Virginitate. Nor is it but the
most unconcluding of Arguments, that the Homily de semente must be spurious,
because found only in an English Book. Manuscripts are common enough now in
this Kingdom, and one Copy makes not a Book spurious; for then the Oration of
Athenagoras, de resurrectione, must not be his, because Ep. ante Athen.
Nannius tells us, that his Copy was the only one in Europe, and the Lexicon of
Hesychius must be rejected, because there was never another Copy of it found,
but what Manut. Epist. ante Lex. Hesych.
Bardellonus sent to Aldus Manutius; but there lies a more material and weighty
Argument against the Homily de semente, than what Mr. Perkins uses; and that is
because the Author of it, (whom I suppose some Eastern Prelate of the same Age)
mentions the Celebration of the holy duties on Saturday, as well as on the
Sunday: Now the Socrat. l. 5. c. 21. Sozom. l. 7. c. 19.
Church-Historians inform us, that Saturday was anciently a Fasting-day at
Alexandria as well as at Rome; this practice therefore does not suit with the
usages of that Church, where Athanasius was Patriarch.

VIII. Nor is it any wonder, that two so distant Churches, as Rome and
Alexandria, should agree in those Rituals, wherein they differed from almost
all other Churches, when we consider, that the first planter of holy Religion
in Egypt S. Mark was S. Peter's Disciple, and Amanuensis, and so would be
easily inclined to write after his Masters Copy. The success of the Fast, which
was observed at Rome before S. Peter's Encounter with Simon Magus, so fully
answering expectation in the ruin of that Impostor, gave an occasion to that
Church to make it a perpetual sanction, and of constant use, which at first
looked no farther than the present exigence of the Servants of God; or rather
it had its Original from a cause of more general consideration, that whereas
the holy Jesus was crucified on Friday, and the next day the Apostles were
overwhelmed with grief for their Masters loss, and fear of the Jews; therefore
out of a becoming sympathy, and to keep the transactions of those gloomy days
fresh in memory, was this Fast appointed.

IX. But the observance prevailed but in a few Churches, for even in Italy it
self S. Ambrose conformed to the Oriental usages, and he that fasted every day
else, Paulin. in vit. S. Ambr.
dined constantly on the Sabbath, and Lord's Day, and the Festivals; Illiberit.
Conc. can. 26.
nor would the old Custom be superseded in Spain by a less Authority, than that
of a Council. And though at Alexandria they followed S. Mark's steps, yet in
all Socrat. Eccles. hist. l. 5. c. 21.
other parts of Egypt, in the Country near that Metropolis, and through all
Thebais, they made the Saturday a Festival; and on it had their Sermons, and
celebrated the Eucharist: And whereas in the days of Ep. 86. ad Casul.
S. Austin there was no steady Rule, by which those Churches acted, for in one
and the same Church, says that Father, some fasted, and others dined on the
last day of the Week, yet it was otherwise there anciently, for Adv. Psychic.
c. 15.
Tertullian avers, that herein the Montanists, those great admirers and
practisers of abstinence, conformed to the Catholic Rites, not to fast on any
Saturday in the year, but on Easter-Eve [the great Sabbath day, (...), as the
Epistle of the Church of Smyrna more than once calls it] and the Custom so
prevailed over all the East, Tom. 2. p. 744.
that S. Gregory Nyssen calls the two days Twin-Sisters, nor can any man, says
he, honor the Lords day, who despises the Saturday. And Homil. an liceat
dimittere ux. p. 56, 57 Edit. Raynandi.
Asterius Amisenus styles them the Nurses of devotion, and the Parents of
Church assemblies, which summon the holy Priest to instruct his Congregation,
and command his Congregation, to frequent the house of God, and both to have a
due care of their Souls. Which observances had their confirmation not only in
the Canons fathered on the Can. 66. Can. 16, 49, 51.
Apostles, and the Provincial Council of [f] Laodicea, but in the Can. 55.
sixth general Council at Constantinople, which from all the parts of the
Catholic Church commands an uniform submission to the Sanction, which the
Latins refusing, this among other things helped to widen the breach between
them.

X. And to this day the Smyth. p. 29.
Greek Church, Gaguin. dereb. Muscovit.
the Muscovites, the Abudac. hist. Jacebit. c. 7. p. 10.
Jacobites in Egypt, the Melchites in Syria, and the Breerwood's Enquir. c.
16. etc. 23.
Abassynes keep this Festival not in conformity to the Jews, which they
expressly deny, and which the same Lacdic. c. 29.
Council, that commands its Christian observation, does expressly condemn, (as
S. Basil does censure Apollinaris, for the same Crime in his seventy sourth
Epistle) but in honor of the blessed Jesus, who is the Lord of the Sabbath. And
the Ethiopian Christians plead for it the Authority of the Apostles in their
(...), as Claudius the King of that Country expressly declares in his Apud
Hottinger. topogr. Eccles. orient. c. 3. p. 47. vid. ejusd. primit. Heidelb. p.
306.
Confession, by which he questionless means the Apostles Constitutions, which
in more than one place enjoin it, as a preparation to the great day of the
remembrance of our Saviors Resurrection [the Christian Sabbath the Abassynes
call it, as they do call the other the Jewish] Now the Apostles successors
forbad fasting on this day, say some, because the primitive Heretics Menander,
Saturnitus, Cerinthus, Basilides, and others believing that the world, because
corruptible, was not made by God, but by the Devil, fasted on that day, when
the Creation was consummated. Others, that it was done out of compliance with
the Jews, who were very numerous in the Eastern part of the World, and very
tenacious of the Mosaical Ceremonies, so Circumcision was for a while retained
to bury the Synagogue with honor, others to testify Christ's resting in the
grave that day; and perhaps it proceeded from an unwillingness suddenly to
cancel and abrogate that Festival, which had by God himself been set apart for
religious Exercises, and which not only the blessed Jesus the Lord of the
Sabbath kept, while here on earth, but his Apostles for a very considerable
time after his ascension; and so much for that usage.

XI. The Questions ad Antiochum are undoubtedly the offspring of some other
father, and in this I assent to Mr. H. p. 370. But that therefore all the
opinions therein mentioned must not be Orthodox, I cannot imagine; for as to
the nine Orders of Angels, the belief thereof is as ancient as the genuine
Athanasius, for presently after him I find them distinctly reckoned by
Apolard^. Ruff^. l. 2. p. 220. vid. ej. com. in Is. 63.
S. Hierome for the Western Churches, under the title of Cherubim and Seraphim,
throni, principatus, dominationes, virtutes, potestates, Archangeli, angeli,
and by Orat. 39. p. 207. Ed. Paris. 1622.
S. Basii of Seleucia for the Churches of the East. I will, says he, run
through the Orders of Angels, and leave the Princes thereof, i. e. the
Archangels behind me, I shall be carried above the most pleasing company of
the thrones, above the height of powers, and the eminence of principalities,
and the force of virtues, above the most pure, and perspicacious Cherubim, and
the quick Seraphim adorned with six wings. And if we may confide in the
conjectures of those learned men, that place the Epoch of the Pseudo-Dionysius
in the beginning of the fourth Century, and make him coevous with Eusebius the
Church-Historian, then the Opinion will justly claim more Antiquity; nor was
the notion unknown to the Platonists of that age, De Myster. Egypt. Segm. 2.
c. 3.
Jamblichus, who was Pophyry's Scholar, and flourisht under Julian the
Apostate, naming the several Orders of the Heavenly Hierarchy, and Scutellius
his Translator in the Margin reckons them.

XII. And in truth I am persuaded, that the Opinion is as old as Origin, not
only because S. Hierome, where he enumerates these nine Orders of Spirits,
treats of Origen's errors, but because I find the father himself numbering them,
under the names (...). l. 1. c. 6.
of Angels, Virtues, Principalities, Powers, Thrones, and Dominions, Hom. 3.
and 4. in S. Luc.
Seraphim, and Archangels, and these he there styles diverse Orders; nay
Clemens of Alexandria, in his Excerpta out of the Oriental doctrine of
Theodotus gives an account of the different Offices and Dignities of Angels,
and Ep ad Smyrn.
S. Ignatius before him discourses of the (...), the diverse ranks, and Orders
of Angels, as not only Baronius, but our most learned Pearson understand him.
And why this notion should be so strange, when holy Writ defends it, I know
not; in that we have an account of Angels frequently, of Archangels, 1 These.
4.16. of Cherubim, Genesis 3.24. of Seraphim, Is. 6.2. of Principalities, Powers,
Virtues, and Dominions, Ephesians. 1.21. of Thrones, Col. 1.16. Nor can I fancy, that
these are diverse names of the same thing, for To. 2. adv. Jovin. l. 2. p. 90.
sine causa diversitas nominum est, ubi non est diversitas meritorum, says S.
Hierome in this very case, it is in vain to use different names, where the
things are not distinguished.

XIII. That the Saints departed know all things, we leave as a novel assertion
to its Patrons the Romanists, in the mean time believing, that the Saints pray
for us, for the whole Church in general, which no sober man denies, and
sometimes, and on some occasions for some persons in particular, of which the
History of Potamiaena in Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 4.
Eusebius is a sufficient evidence, So S. Ignatius promises the Church at Ep.
ad Tralli. p. 20.
Trallis, that he would pray for them, not only while he was alive, (...), but
also when he came to Heaven. And when the Fathers tell us, that S. Paul's
Conversion was owing to S. Stephen's Prayers, may it not relate not only to the
Lord lay not this sin to their charge, but to his Supplications for him in
Heaven? thus did Hom. 3. in Cant.
Origin believe, and Ep. 57. p. 78. vid. eund. de disc. and hab. virg. p. 139.
and de mortalit. p. 177.
S. Cyprian writing to Cornelius, and the Confessors mentions a solemn
agreement made between those good men, that whoever went first of them into
another World should testify his love to his friends on earth by his prayers
for them at the throne of Grace; so Confess. l. 9. c. 3.
S. Austin believed, that his dear friend Nebridius dealt with him; and Epist.
1. To. 1. p. 2.
S. Hierome promises himself the same kindnesses from Heliodorus, to omit other
instances; and does not S. Peter promise to do so for the Jews to whom he
writes, 2 Pet. 1.15. That he will endeavor, that after his decease they might
have those things in remembrance, I am sure so In Loc. To. 2. p. 534.
Oecumenius understands it [and his reason is, because the Saints after their
departure carry their remembrances of things on earth with them, and become
Advocates for those that are left alive] and before him To. 5. (...). p. 994.
S. Chrysostom affirms the same. Nor is the intercession of the holy Jesus
hereby imposed on, for if the prayers of the Saints on earth do no way
prejudice the honor of our Mediator and Advocate [and S. Paul begs those
prayers frequently, Ephesians. 6.19. Colos. 4.3, etc.] why should the prayers of
the Saints in Heaven be an usurpation on his privileges? That the glorified
Saints pray for us the Scripture avers, Jer. 15.1. Ezck. 14.14. Rev. 5.8. and
chapter 8.3. and that God does give many blessings to his Servants on earth for the
sake of those that are in bliss, is also plain from Genesis 26.4, 5, 24. Exodus
32.13. 1 Reg. 11.33, etc. And if so, what should make the tenet unorthodox, I
cannot imagine, which has the Scripture, Fathers, and Catholic consent to
confirm it.

XIV. The adoration of images we execrate as idolatrous, but the retention of
them, if not adored, the whole body of the Lutheran Churches will defend, nor
does the Church of England disown it; and I think there is no more danger in
seeing a picture, than in reading a History, if imitation be the end of both.
The distinction of sins into venial and mortal, will find few opponents, if
rightly understood; not as if some enormities deserved the torments of Hell,
others only temporal punishments [for the wages of every sin is death] but that
some crimes, either in respect of the matter, wherein the offense is committed,
or the intention of the offender, who transgresses either through ignorance, or
weakness, are not so inconsistent with a salvable condition. No sin in its self
being venial, says Moral. Tract. 3. c. 20. apud Heyl. Theolog. Vet. l. 3. c. 5.
Jacobus Almain out of Gerson, but according to the condition and state of the
subject, that sins. Some transgressions necessarily implying an exclusion of
Grace, others ex genere, and imperfectione actus may be said to be venial
negative, and per non ablationem principii remissionis, and so Enchirid. c. 70.
S. Austin is to be understood, that the saying that Petition, Forgive us our
trespasses, does propitiate Gods mercy for such sins.

XV. The diverse Orders of Monks were frequent in S. Athanasius's time, and in
his Province of Egypt above all other places. There S. Anthony became the
first Angel of the desert, whose life Athanasius writ, and there for a while
lived Hilarion one of his Scholars; in that country Pachomius retired to
Tabennesus, and Ammon to Mount Nitria and the Desert of Scetis, in as much as
The bais and Egypt were covered with their multitudes; and to this Classis of
men does our Patriarch write his Epistle Ad solitariam vitam agentes.

XVI. The necessity of Baptisms has been already considered; and the Sacrament
of penance must be left at the Popes door; though take penance to include all
the offices of repentance, and Sacrament in its largest signification, so Ep.
180. ad Honorat.
S. Austin calls Baptism, and penance Sacraments, and so does Div. dogmat
Epit. cap. de paenitentia.
Theodoret, subjoyning, that the washings, and sacrifices of old were only
types of these Sacred Mysteries. And if we may take Cardinal Tom. 2. contr. 4.
l. 1. c. 9.
Bellarmines word for it, Luther, Melancthon, and the Apology of the Confession
of Auspurgh make Baptism, the Eucharist, and Absolution, i. Penance, properly
and truly Sacraments, and such as were instituted by Christ. But there I must
desert them.

XVII. Of what sort the prayers for the dead were in the primitive Saecula, and
that till Athanasius's time, and long after, they had no relation to Purgatory
(since in their Liturgies they prayed for Patriarchs, and Prophets, for
Apostles, and Martyrs, and the Virgin Mary her self) the reverend Usher in his
Page 197, 198.
answer to the Jesuit will give him full satisfaction; nor does the Church of
England do less in her Collect at Funerals, where we pray for the hastening the
kingdom of Christ, that we together with all those, that are departed in the
faith and fear of Gods holy name, may have our perfect consummation and bliss
both in body and Soul in his Eternal and Everlasting glory. Or as it is in P.
10.
the form of bidding prayer prescribed in the injunctions of King Edward 6th,
Anno 1547. Ye shall pray for them that be departed out of the world, in the
faith of Christ, that we with them, and they with us may rest at the day of
judgment both body and soul with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of
heaven. And did I think, says an Lord C^arendon's Answ. to Cressy. p. 167.
honorable person, that my prayers, or any thing else I could do, could
purchase the least ease to the Souls of my friends, or enemies, I would pour
them out with all my heart, nor should I fear reprehension from the Church of
England, who says nothing in it, unless comprehended in the Article of
Purgatory, and there only calls it a fond thing.

XVIII. Why Antichrist should not be a particular person, but a Society, or
Kingdom opposite to the Kingdom of Christ, I profess my ignorance, Vide Montag.
Appel. cap. 5.
or that the Pope rather than the Grand Signior should be the man, since
Constantinople is built on seven hills, and the Church of Saint Sophia is made
a Mosque. I know what the Fathers say of Antichrist, what the Romanists, and
what the Protestant Churches affirm. Powel in his Christ. Lectori.
Epistle before his book, de Antichristo tells the world, that he is as sure,
that the Pope is the great Antichrist, and the Roman Church his Synagogue, as
that God is in heaven, or Christ our Savior. And the French Synod at Gap
decreed it for an Article of Faith, An. 1603. On the other hand De Apost.
Eccles. and de homine peccati p. 24.
Kit Angelo pretends a vision, that the Grand Signior is he; and the late
Bishop of Ossory Doctor Griffith Williams in his book called (...), gives as
good reasons as either of them to prove the late prevalent faction in this
Nation, to have been the Antichrist. All with confidence enough, and some
probabilities to shore up their Tenet; but for my self, I profess ingenuously,
it is a Mystery, which I understand not, and as Ad fin. comment. in Epistolas.
Cardinal Cajetan says of the Apocalypse so say I, me nescire exponere,
exponat, cui Deus concesserit. I have not skill enough to interpret the
Prophecy, let him do it, whom God has enabled.

XIX. The last opinion which Mr. H. reckons as Popish, and Novel in these
questions ad Antiochum is the Sacrifice of the Altar, where I know not, whether
he cavils at the names, Ignat. Ep. ad Magnes. p. 34. Ed. Voss. and Ep. ad
Philadelph p. 40. Polycarp. Ep. p. 17. Iren. l. 4. c. 20. Can. App. 3. and 4.
Tertul. de paenit. cap. 9. and de exhort. castit. and de orat. ad fin. Cypr.
Ep. 66. p. 93. and Ep. 73. p. 105. Conc. Laodic. Can. 19. Eusebius. l. 10. c. 4.
Naz. Tom. 1. orat. 11. p. 186. Ambros. l. 5. Ep. 32. p. 147. Aug. Epist. 50.
etc.
or the things signified. That the name Altar was anciently given to the holy
Table, whereon the sacred Mysteries were celebrated, is very plain in
antiquity, and the Fathers trod in the steps of Saint Paul, Heb. 13.10. So
Ignatius, Polycarp, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Greg. Naz. Ambrose,
Augustine, the Canons of the Apostles, and the council of Laodicea, to omit
Chrysostom, Optatus, and others, who tell us of serving at Gods Altar, of
kneeling, and lying prestrate before it, and of Maximinus's being beat with the
broken pieces of the altar, as he stood at Gods table, and Saint Athanasius in
the life of Saint Anthony, says that that good man foresaw the rise of the
Arian Heresy in a vision, wherein he beheld certain wild mules overturning the
altars of the Christian Church with their heels. And so is the word used by
Oecolampadius, Zanchy, and other reformed Divines. Chilling. praefin. 24.
And it is the glory of the Church of England, that we can use the names of
priests, and altars, and yet neither believe the corporeal presence, nor any
proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice.

XX. This last Sacrifice we leave to the Church of Rome, Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
sacrificia in popu^o Judaico, sacrificia and in Ecclesia.
but assert that in the Eucharist there is a Sacrifice, 1. Of the remembrance
of Christ's death, (...), in that famous place of Saint Chrysostom. 2. The
Elements are properly the peoples Sacrifice, for primitively the Congregation
brought of the good things of the earth, and offered them on the altar, part
whereof was Consecrated to be the Mystical Elements, and the rest spent in a
love-feast, those they first solemnly tendered on the altar, and then as in the
peace offerings among the Jews, and other Sacrifices among the Gentiles, the
people fed on their own Oblations. [And this properly is called Sacrificium by
the Just. M. dial. cum Tryph. p. 260. Iren. l. 4. c. 3. Cypr. de Oper. and
Eleemos. p. 180. Aug. Ser. 215. etc.
Fathers.] 3. Good Christians in that Sacrament offer to God themselves, their
Souls, and bodies to be a living Sacrifice, which is their reasonable service,
as our Liturgy has it. 4. A Sacrifice of penitence, and a broken heart there
offered to God. 5. A Sacrifice of prayers and praise, which properly makes it
an Eucharist. 6. A Sacrifice of Alms to the poor. And all these are
acknowledged to be in the Sacrament by the De sacrif. miss. l. 3. c. 1. p. 752.
vide and Chemmit. exam. part 2. Sect. de missae Sacrific. p. 718. etc.
Noble du Plessis. It is no wonder, that the Fathers call the Holy supper a
Sacrifice where the sacred office is a commemoration of the sacrifice on the
Cross, where there is the reading, and exposition of the word of God, and
fervent prayers, the contrition of the heart, and the Consecration of the whole
man to God, and an Extensive Charity to all their brethren, who in Christ are
coheirs with them of heaven.

XXI. Nor is the term unbloody Sacrifice, so great a Mormo, but that our
profound Ag. Hard. art. 17. Sect. 14.
Jewel allows of it, [according to the Ancients; Demon. Evang. l. 1. c. 6. and
Orat. de laud. Constable. ad fin.
Fusebius frequently terming it the Sacrifice that is abstracted from blood, as
does also Saint Gregory Nazian-and others among the Fathers] nor is that
learned Prelate herein singular, but I find him seconded by the modest, and De
cultu Dei extern. l. 1. c. 16. p. 421.
acute Hierome Zanchy, who allows of the distinction of the Oblation of Christ
into that of bloody, and unbloody; not but that all the Primitive Sages were
ignorant of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, says he, but they so called the
Sacrament for two reasons, both because it is an image, and representation, of
that propitiatory Sacrifice, which Christ on the Cross offered up to his
Father, and also because it is a Sacrifice of praise, and thanksgiving, as for
all other the mercies of Heaven, so especially for the redemption of the world
by the Blood of Jesus. Ambr. Hom 92. de SS. Naz. and Cells. To. 3. p. 322. Ed.
Costeri. Magni periculi res est, si post prophetarum oracula, post Apostolorum
Testimonia, post Martyrum vulnera veterem fidem, quasi novellam, discutere
praesumas, and post tam manifestos duces in errore permaneas, and post
morientium sudores otiosa disputatione contendas.
What necessity is there then, these things being duly considered, that we must
be forced to learn a new Jargon in Divinity, were it not to introduce new
Sentiments, and such as differ from the Judgment of the first and best Ages?
but there is a kind of necessity to dress new Notions in new Terms.

XXIII. Nor will Rivet's Argument, which Mr. H. p. 371. uses, disfranchize the
Anonymous questions that go under the name of Athanasius, because in them the
procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son is denied, but rather confirm them to
be our Patriarch's, both because that Opinion is ancienter than S. Athanasius,
and the same which himself embraces; and since Mr. H. does more than intimate
the novelty of that Opinion, and the World has been too censorious to condemn
the whole Greek Church of Heresy in this point, it may not be altogether
impertinent, if we consider the State and Original of that Dogma, together with
the rise and occasion of the addition (filioque) to the Constantinopolitan
Creed.

XXIV. And here it is observable, that the procession of the holy Ghost, as it
falls under our cognizance, is twofold, the first unspeakable and eternal, by
which from before all Ages he proceeded from the Father; the other temporal,
when he was sent into the World, and so he came both from the Father and the
Son, according to that of Tom. 2. hom. (...). in Johan. p. 876.
S. Chrysostom, (...). And this twofold procession perchance might give an
occasion to that mistake of Poetic. lib. 6. cap. 4. p. 780.
Julius Scaliger, that the Greeks did believe there were two holy Ghosts: Now
the Controversy between the Eastern and Western Churches, is concerning the
Eternal procession, which the Greeks make to be from the Father by the Son. And
notwithstanding the learned Tom. 1. contr. 2. l. 2. c. 24, 25.
Cardinal's large muster of the Fathers both Greek and Latin in two whole
Chapters to the contrary, I shall undertake to evince, that this was the belief
of all the Fathers of the four first Centuries, till the days of S. Ambrose:
for the Tractate de adventu spiritus S. fathered on S. Cyprian, is by Pamelius
acknowledged to be of a much younger Author.

XXV. The Opinion anciently was so generally believed and so publicly known,
that Tom. 2. p. 1121.
Lucian, or whoever was the Author of the Philopatris, introduces Triephon,
advising Critias, To leave off his Heathen Oaths, and to swear by the high and
eternal God, by his Son, and the Spirit, who proceeds from the Father, the
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; which contains an excellent Summary of
the Christian Faith, though scoffingly there quoted; but we will omit such
Foreign, and summon Domestic Testimonies. Legate. pro Christ. p 30. Ed. Steph.
Athenagoras informs us, That the Son is the mind, the wisdom, and word of the
Father, (...), and the Holy Ghost an Emanation from him, as light is from the
Fire. i. from the same Father, says his Translator Gesner, and so also I
understand him. So Adv. Pra xeam.c. 1.
Tertullian affirms the Original of the Spirit to be from the Father by the
Son; and Oper. p 1. Ed. V^ss^i.
Gregory Thaumaturgus in that Creed, which was given him by Revelation by the
hands of the blessed Virgin, and S. John Baptist, thus declares his Belief,
(...). i. the holy Spirit as to his eternal proceeding came from the Father,
but as to his Mission in time unto men, Christ sent him; and this I believe to
be the Fathers meaning, notwithstanding what the infallibility Voss^ Not. in
loc. p. 104.
of Pope Gregory the ninth would draw from these words to the Confutation of
the Greek Heresy, and after him the Cardinal. This Creed is quoted by S.
Gregory Nyssen, in the life of this miraculous Father, and the Doctrine
uncensur'd, and therefore we may conclude it his belief also; especially if it
be true, what Lib. 12. c. 13.
Nicephorus, and others say, that in the Constantinopolitan Council, the Creed,
(which we vulgarly call the Nicene) was penned by S. Greg. Nyssen, we need no
other specimen of his Opinion in this case. Nor was his Brother S. Basil's
Opinion different, nor his dear friend's S. Gregory the Divine, with whom not
only Epiphanius, Basil^^o. 1. in Ps. 32. p. 203. (...). vid. l. 5. contr. Eu^m.
c. 12. Greg. Naz. tom. 1. or. 29. p. 493. (...). Id. Or. 35. p. 5^3. (...).
Epiph. in Anchor. cap. 6. (...). Hier. tom. 5. com. in Is. c. 57. Spiritus S.
-- qui de patre egreditur, and propter societatem naturae a filio mittitur, and
having quoted Jo. 15.26. he adds, ne scandalizet quempiam, si spiritus
egrediatur ex patre. See the Creeds ad Damasum and Cyrillum. tom. 4. p. 127,
224. Hilar. tom. 1. de trinit. l. 12. p. 261. ut patrem sc. te nostrum, and
filium tuum una tecum adorem, and sanctum spiritum tuum, qui ex te per
unigenitum tuum est, promerear. And again, lib. 8. p. 139. a patre enim
procedit spiritus veritatis, sed a filio mittitur, and a patre. S. Chrysostom.
tom. 6. (...). p. 730. (...).
but his Scholar S. Hierom agree, though generally computed among the Latin
Fathers of the other Opinion; for the passages quoted by Bellarmine and others,
relate to the tem^oral Mission of the Spirit from the Son, which we deny not,
with whom also S. Hilary of Poictou, and S. Chrysostom join consort.

XXVI. And for this Opinion Theodoret is so stout a Champion, that the men of
the other persuasion make him the Author of it, and censure him for it, as
speaking too rashly and agreeing with the Greek Heresy, as they word it in
Rome. 1547.
their Preface to the Edition which I use; and with him also agrees Lib. 12. in
Joh. c. 56.
S. Cyril of Alexandria, and in after ages Maximus, and John Damascene, as I
find them quoted by Sguropuli hist. Conc. Florent. sect. 8. c. 15. p. 239.
Marcus Ephesius in the Council of Florence; and after them In Johan. 3. p. 604.
Theophylact most expressly; the Latins, says he, make the Spirit to proceed
from the Son; but we say, that it is one thing to be of another, and another
thing to proceed from another; that we may not therefore make two causes of the
holy spirits production; believe thou, that the Spirit proceeds from the
Father, but is conferred on the Creatures by the Son, and let this be the rule
of Orthodoxy to thee; and Vit. Greg. M. l. 4. c. 75.
Paulus Diaconus assures us, that when the Greeks translated the Dialogues of
Gregory the great into their own language, they scraped out the word (filioque)
out of his discourse of the procession of the Holy Ghost.

XXVII. And it was one of the Articles against Cyrillus Lucaris, the late
Patriarch of Constantinople, which promoted his deposition in the Synod, held
there under Parthenius, an. 1642. That in his Confession he had held the
eternal and essential procession of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son,
against the determination of the Catholic Church. But herein they belyed the
good man, for in Interpraestant. ac erud. viror. Epp. Eccles. and Theolog. p.
403.
his Epistle to Vytenbogard, when he was only Patriarch of Alexandria, he
professes his Belief in this Article, consonant to the Doctrine of the Greek
Church, which denies the holy Ghost to have proceeded from the Son
essentialiter, and interne, and quoad esse, lest they should make two
principles of his existence, which is Heretical: And in the first Chapter of
his Confession of the Christian Faith (the Book which occasioned his deposition
and Martyrdom) he acknowledges, that the holy Spirit does proceed from the
Father by the Son, which is the true sentiment of the Oriental Churches, in
which the Confess. Claudii regis apud Hotting. topogr. Eccl. or. c. 3. p. 76.
Ethiopian Christians, Field of the Chapter l. 3. c. 1. p. 70, 74.
the Coptites, and Field of the Chapter l. 3. c. 1. p. 70, 74.
the Maronites concentre, the last of which admit it into their Creed. And the
whole Greek Church confess (as is affirmed by the learned Ubi supr. p. 127.
Mr. Smyth, who lived a considerable time among them) that the third person in
the Trinity is consubstantial with the Father, and the Son, and coequal, that
he is the Spirit of the Son, that he is sent, given, poured out, infused,
inspired by the Son, and if you understand the word proceeding of his sending
in time, neither do they refuse to use that term also, they allowing him to be
the Spirit of the Son, as he is called Gal. 4.6. and the Spirit of Christ, as
Romans 8.9. Phil. 1.19.

XXVIII. To which we may subjoin, that whereas the Apostolical and Nicene
Creeds are silent in this point, the Constantinopolitan, which was the next,
has asserted the proc^ssion of the holy Ghost from the Father exclusive, to
which Creed in the last Canon save one of the Ephesine Council, it is expressly
forbidden to make any Additions; which Caution was again inserted in the
Council of Chalcedon, and when notwithstanding this care the Addition had been
made, the eighth General Council, as the Greeks style it, ordered the words to
be expunged, as is affirmed by Marcus, Bishop of Ephesus, in the Council of
Florence. This Creed was publicly read in the Eastern Churches, as a part of
their Liturgy, and from that laudable custom was introduced into the West in
Can. 2.
the third Toletane Council, (the Occidental Churches till then using only the
Apostles Creed, as Tom. 4. an. 381. p. 431.
Baronius acknowledges) but no Addition heard of, till the seventh General
Council, and the eighth at Toledo; for that it should be made by Pope Damasus,
as is affirmed by Joseph Bishop of Modon in that Tract, which is falsely
fathered on him in the Florentine Council, and by Manuel Caldecas, or by the
Doctors of the Catholic Church, presently after the Council of Nice, as others
aver, I suppose few men are at leisure to credit.

XXIX. The Spaniards therefore first inserted the addition [filioque] and after
them the French; Vide P. Lombard. lib. 1. did. 11. B.
but both were in this case opposed by Pope Leo the third, and the whole Roman
Church, Leo causing two silver Tables to be made, and in them the Symbol to be
writ in Latin, and Greek, according to the primitive Copy, and the Tables to
be placed behind the Altar of S. Peter, there to be kept as a Testimony to
posterity. The Doctrine also was vindicated by Pope John the 8th to the learned
Photius, nor did it ever prevail at Rome, till Ann. 883. under Pope Nicholas
the first, and that without a general Council. So that we may hence judge, that
the Romanists gave occasion to the Schism, Archb. Laud against Pisher. sect.
9. n. 2.
it being hard measure to add, and anathematize too.

XXX. I have kept S. Athanasius for my last Testimony, and will only instance
in the quotation of the great Cardinal, which he uses to prop the contrary
opinion, but it quite ruins it. It is an impossibility, says our Redarg.
hypocris. Meletii, circ. fin.
Patriarch, to give the holy Spirit a place in the Glory of the blessed
Trinity, if he had not proceeded from the Father by the Son. Nor is the
addition [(...)] to be found in the Manuscript Copies of his Creed in Greek,
nor in the Printed Copies at Paris 1597, or by Commelinus 1600. although the
Latin Translation has it. And therefore Meletius the Patriarch of
Constantinople, in his Epistle to Janus Douza, says; it has been adulterated
by an Appendix made to it by the Popes, and withal adds, that it is not his,
whatever Mr. H. p. 377. is pleased to say to the contrary. Nor have the Latins
escapt the impeachment of being guilty of corrupting the Fathers, the Writer of
the Sect. 9. c. 3. p. 253.
History of the Council of Florence, in the name of his Brethren instancing in
the works of S. Chrysostom. And if, says he, they are not afraid to do so in
his Homilies, which they from their youth to their old age, were always
conversant in how much more must they expect they had done so in the Latin
Fathers?

XXXI. So that in this case we see the Greeks keep themselves to express words
of Scripture, Joh. 15.26. Heylin's Theol. vet. l. 3. c. 1. p. 379.
the Latins depend on some Logical inferences from thence, and so have the
worst end of the cause; in as much as Logical inferences to men of ordinary
capacities are not so evident as plain texts of Scripture. They have also on
their side the writings of the Fathers, the Acts of the ancient Synods, and the
Ecclesiastical Records, and a pregnant Testimony in Rome it self, in the two
Tables hung up by the command of Pope Leo the third. And yet so little is our
Charity, that besides their many other sufferings for the name of Christ, we
must add this one grievance more, to accuse them of no less than Schism, and
Heresy. And therefore I thought my self bound to vindicate them from that
unjust aspersion.

XXXII. That S. Athanasius writ the life of S. Anthony is more than once
affirmed by S. Hierome, Greg. Naz. Socrates, and others; and notwithstanding
some ridiculous passages, I cannot proscribe the Book, since he that looks into
Cassianus, shall find much wilder, and more childish transactions, and yet no
man denies those Collations to have been his. And however some men affirm S.
Anthony to have been a Lawyer, and very learned, S. Hierome entitles him only
to seven Epistles to certain Monasteries of his founding, writ in an
Apostolical, i. e. a plain style, first in the language of the Country, and
then translated into Greek. For so Ep. ante Did. de Spiritu S.
S. Hierome speaks of Didymus, that you might easily know him to be an
Apostolical person, by the simplicity and plainness of his style^; but in what
style these Epistles were writ, themselves will make appear, being not long
since translated out of Arabic into Latin, and set forth by Abraham
Ecchellensis the Maronite: And yet perhaps this, as well as some other of our
Patriarchs writings, has not escapt the foul hands Baron. tom. 3. an. 343. n.
6.
of the followers of Apollinaris. Nor is it but too Magisterially spoken, p.
373. that the exhortation ad Monachos is forged, only on the authority of Mr.
Perkins, whose judgment, I suppose, the Church of England will decline, as in
many matters of controversy, so in as many of Church History, and Christian
Philology.

XXXIII. In the same page the Epistles between Pope Marcus, and Athanasius are
condemned, as spurious, and consequently the seventy additional Canons to the
Nicene Council; and of them I shall leave my Reader to judge, when I have given
him the judgment of the sagacious Notes on Sir Tho. Ridley's View of the Civil
and Eccl. Laws. part 3. chapter 2. sect. 4. p. 218, 219.
Mr. Gregory. Some say, that these Canons are supposititious, I only know, that
they may be so, not that they are; and however it may be dull to entertain any
thing, that shall be obtruded, yet the rejection of ancient Authors and
Councils should be warily concluded upon. Thus much notwithstanding is
recorded, that by reason of the Arian incendiaries, a complete number of the
Canons of that Council was so rarely found, that Athanasius himself, who was
present at the Synod, was forced to send into these parts to the Bishop of Rome
that then was, to desire from him a perfect Copy, because in the Eastern world
a few, or none had escapt the fire of the Arians. This is in the Epistles
supposed to have past between Pope Mark, and Athanasius, and if these be true,
the Canons are the less to be suspected. -- The reasons against which Epistles
are for the most part Chronological, which are subject to much hazard.

XXXIV. The Homily de passione imaginis Christi in Beryto is doubtless
counterfeit, the dissertation being too ridiculous to be fathered on so wise a
man; but notwithstanding this, I believe it antienter, than the second Nicene
Council, where it was solemnly produced by Peter Bishop of Nicomedia, as a true
and venerable Relation, whose Author was Athanasius, to which more solemn
publication of the story I conjecture the date of some Manuscripts has
Relation. The Sermon on our Saviors passion is of the Nature of those (...),
of which the seventh Tome of S. Chrysostom will furnish so great a number,
being the Collections of some laborious man out of the writings of such a
Father according to the Custom of the middle Ages, which delighted much in
Epitomes, but that the seven additional Homilies set out by Holstenius should
be spurious, only because they lay so long dormant, is a strange way of
arguing, while himself confesses, that some of them are approved by Photius a
much better Critic than any of this last Age, and all found in three several
Libraries at Oxford, Paris, and Rome. And if their lying so long dormant, shall
disenfranchize them, what might we think of the Epistle of S. Clemens to the
Corinthians, which was wished for in vain in the Western World, till the
Patriarch of Alexandria sent it to King Charles? or the many pieces of several
other Worthies of the Church; which never saw light, till the last Editions of
their Works. But I am weary of following him in his dry, jejune, and borrowed
Criticisms, wherein Erasmus, and Rivet, Scultetus, Cook, and Perkins are his
Oracles.

XXXV. That the words, which Athanasius uses, were only known to the Age
wherein he lived, and neither before, nor after, is an inconsiderate assertion,
though positively affirmed p. 375. since Ep. ad African.
the Patriarch himself quotes his Predecessor Dionysius, and Dionysius of Rome,
with Theognostus, and others among those, who called our blessed Savior (...),
or consubstantial with his Father, and for (...), the term is frequent in
Justin Martyr, and Athenagoras, and is as old as S. John's Gospel: and should
we grant, that these words were first used which Relation to the Arian
Controversies, yet no man can be so mad to be persuaded, they were never so
used after his time.

XXXVI. Whether the Creed, that goes under the name of Athanasius be his or no,
I shall not dispute, but must profess, that Mr. H's argument, p. 376. is not
convictive; for what S. Gregory Naz. means is no other, but that Epistle sent
to the Emper or Jovianus, mentioned p. 359. containing the Orthodox Doctrine in
opposition to the new Creed of the Arians, which is extant in the first tome of
S. Athanasius's works, and in Li. 4. c. 3.
Theodoret's History. And now could I heartily wish for a man skilled in
unriddling mysteries, to instruct me in the sense of that Translation, p. 384.
where undertaking to assert the peoples power in Electing a Bishop, he says,
The people being gathered together, with the Holy Ghost, who constitute a
Bishop publicly, and in the presence of the Clergy craving a Bishop. Of which
words I profess my incapacity to make sense, or if any be to be supposed, it
implies that the people, and the holy Ghost did join suffrages, and both choose
a Bishop (which seems to me a very strange medley) and the Clergy at the same
time sat by, as unconcerned spectators.

XXXVII. But this is not the first time, that such false assertions have been
imposed on the Fathers, while their most Orthodox Sentiments have been
represented under the Notion of Errors. Thus as to the Article of the local
descent Mr. H. is not content p. 296. to tell us, that it is a novel addition
to the Creed, and that it signifies no more than that Christ was buried (which
how absurd it is, that in so short a Summary there should be two Articles the
same, and the later, that should explain the former, infinitely more obscure,
let all rational men judge) but, p. 386. objects it against Athanasius, that he
affirms the local descent of Christ into Hell, which Ep. 99. ad Euod.
S. Austin says, none but an Infidel, Etymolog. l. 8. c. 5.
S. Isidore of Sevil, none but an Heretic will deny. Some by this Article
would understand Christ's suffering Hellish pains in his foul, during his Agony
and Dereliction on the Cross, this is the Calvinists beloved Dogma, and to say
no more of it, borders too near on blasphemy to be defended. Others that he
continued 3 days in the state of the dead, his soul during that space being
separated from his body till the time of his resurrection: this Opinion the
Archbishop of Armagh first introduced into the World, and it has since found
many an eminent Patron, there being nothing in it, says Dr. Hammond, against
the Creeds of ours or the ancient Church.

XXXVIII. But the received opinion of the Ancients is, that Christ in the space
between his death and resurrection, went down locally into the Hell of the
damned, not to suffer any thing there [for this Article is reckoned by all as
the first of those in the Creed, that relate to his exaltation] but to triumph
over Satan in his own territories, and to manifest his conquests to the powers
of darkness; that Satan might see, that he, whom he tempted, was the true
Messiah, to fasten condemnation to those fallen Angels by a decretory sentence
personally passed on them, and to receive the homage, which he extorted from
them, that the wicked might look on that Savior whom they despised, and be
convinced that their torments were the just punishment of their infidelity, and
that that King of terrors might see, that he had no right to the Elect, who
were delivered, and secured from his power by the sufferings of the Son of God,
and perhaps to make a public demand there, whether any thing more were to be
done for the perfecting man's redemption. This the Lord Primate acknowledges to
be the general sense of Antiquity, Archbish. against Fisher, Sect. 11. n. 3.
and in that sense, in which the Ancient Primitive Fathers agreed, the Church
of England believes the words, as in the Creed, without further dispute. And
the learned On the Creed, Sect. of the descent. p. 479. Ed. in quarto.
Pearson, who inclines to the second opinion, confesses, that whereas the
Fathers are made wonderfully to differ in this point, yet there is nothing,
which they agree in more, than in this, a real descent of the soul of Christ
unto the habitation of the souls departed; the persons to whom, and the end for
which he descended, they differ in, but as to a local descent into the infernal
parts they all agree. But this Article has been so accurately handled by
Bishop Bilson of old, and lately by Theolog. Vett. l. 2. c. 8, 9, etc.
Dr. Heylin to the answering of all objections, that thither I am content to
refer my Reader, and there he shall meet with particular satisfaction.

XXXIX. The second error, which this Patriarch is charged with, is, that the
Fathers were in Hell till our Saviors resurrection, and at his descent into
that place were delivered. I will not say, that the words (...), and Inferi,
are of a very comprehensive signification in themselves, and include both
Paradise, and the place of the damned, which is undertook by Dr. Windet in his
De vita functorum statu, but will take them in an Ecclesiastical sense, and if
we grant, that the Son of God led captivity captive at his descent into Hell,
the question is at an end, says Ubi supr. p. 506.
Dr. Pearson, for in vain shall we pretend, that Christ descended into Hell to
lead captivity captive, if we withal maintain, that when he descended thither,
he brought none away, that were captive there. For this was the notion which
the Fathers had, that the Sons of men were conquered by Satan, and after death
actually brought into captivity, and that the Soul of Christ descending to the
places where they were, did actually release them from that bondage, and
brought them out of the possession of the Devil by force; for if he had taken
no souls from thence, how did he spoil Hell? Now that so the Fathers understood
this doctrine, see Thesaur. part. 1. l. 2. art. 4.
Jodocus Coccius, and Dr. Ubi supr.
Heylin at large, but we will content our selves with De Dogmat. Eccles. cap.
78.
Gennadius, Before the passion of Christ all the souls of the Saints were [not
in Hell properly so called, under the power of eternal torments, but] not as
yet freed from the punishment of Adam' 's sin, and therefore in a servile, and
inferior condition, not to expiate their sin by that punishment, but out of a
necessity, till Christ taking our humane nature upon him, and becoming the
second Adam, freed them from that curse, and their confinement to that place,
where yet they were under a certain hope of a future redemption, which being by
Christ perfected on the Cross, they with the penitent Thief went with him into
Paradise.

XL. Against so universal a tenet of the Catholic Church, says De rep. Eccles.
l. 5. c. 8. n. 124. p. 384.
Spalatensis, I have nothing to oppose [for Gennadius made a collection of none
but Catholic opinions] let those, to whom the Doctrine is displeasing,
disprove it. This he speaks probably, but confidently N. 122. p. 383.
affirms, that the souls of all good men, who dyed before our Saviors
resurrection, never entered into heaven till then, and so says our learned
Gagge. Sect. 41. and Appello c. 18.
Montague, to whom I will subjoyn the forementioned Ubi supr.
Dr. Heylin, the joint consent of all the Fathers make me hold off my hand from
condemning it as false, or impious, it being nothing derogatory to the Gospel,
or Kingdom of Christ, but seems to add much luster to our Saviors person,
according to the Te Deum, that Christ opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all
Believers. The little objections against which opinion he there answers, and
quotes Bullinger to uphold his hypothesis. And is not this meant by Nowel in
his Catechism? who makes the third reason of Christ's descent into Hell to be,
that the dead, who in their life time trusted in him to come for redemption,
might understand, and perceive, that the work of their redemption was according
to their hopes finished. I shall end the Section, when I have said, that it was
one of the Art. 3. p. 41.
Articles of Religion agreed on in the Reformation under Edward the VI. An.
1552. As Christ dyed, and was buried for us, so also it is to be believed, that
he went down into Hell, for the body lay in the Sepulcher until the
resurrection, but his Ghost departing from him was with the Ghosts that were in
prison, or in hell, and did preach to the same, as the place of S. Peter does
testify. Which last clause was left out of the Article in the Review under
Queen Elizabeth.

XLI. The Doctrine of Free Will, and the salvability of the Heathens have been
formerly discussed, and the Fathers vindicated; but what error there can be in
affirming, that Circumcision is a sign, or note of Baptism, I cannot see;
since except the Circumcision of the heart, which the Fathers generally speak
of, and chastity, and confession of sins, as some of them affirm, there is
nothing so properly typified by the legal Circumcision as Baptism; this, says
Contr. Julian. Pelagian lib. 6. cap. 3.
S. Austin, no man, that is but ordinarily versed in holy Writ will deny, since
the Apostle most expressly affirms of Christ, Coloss. 2.10, 11, 12. that he is
the head of all principalities, and powers, in whom also we are circumcised
with the circumcision made without hands -- buried with him in baptism. Now
the circumcision made with hands, and which was given unto Abraham, was a
similitude of that circumcision not made with hands. And for the truth of this
opinion he Contr. eund. l. 2.
elsewhere quotes S. Cyprian, and S. John Chrysostom; that the African Primate
was of this belief Ep. 59. p. 80.
his Writings make appear; and that it was generally so believed, appears by
that question, which he solves, why every Infant should not be Baptized, as
well as Circumcised the eighth day; and Tom. 1. hom. (...). in Genes. p. 323.
vide eund. to. 6. (...). p. 853.
S. Chrysostom calls the laver of Regeneration, (...), the Circumcision, which
is conferred in Baptism: This also was the Opinion of Origin, S. Basil, Orig.
hom. 5. in Josh. to. 1. fol. 154. L. ed. Merlin. Basil. exhort. ad Baptis.
init. Naz. tom. 1. Orat. 40. p. 658. Athan. tom. 2. quaest. 38. ad Antioch. p.
345.
Gregory Nazianzen, and others, as well as of Athanasius. So that I cannot but
wonder at this extravagant Censure; but all this stir about this dangerous
Opinion arises at last, such is Mr. H's unhappiness, from a mistake of
Scultetus, out of whom this whole discourse of this Father's failings is
transcribed; for Synthes. doct. Athanas. c. 17. p. 157.
he makes this to be our Patriarch's Error, not that the Sacraments of the old
Testament were Types of the Sacraments of the new, but that Circumcision, and
the Sabbath, etc. did only typifie, but not confer grace, contrary to that of
the Apostle, Romans 4.11. who calls Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness of
Abraham's Faith.

XLII. That Virginity is an Example of Angelical Purity is plain from that of
S. Matthew 22.30. that the Saints shall be like the Angels, and that explained
by, they shall neither marry, nor be given in Marriage; nor was it amiss to
say, that they are married to Christ who disengage themselves from the World
the more readily to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; and such admirable
chastity cannot fail of getting it self veneration and respect every where, and
this may serve to apologize for the excessive praises of Virginity, to which
the Ancients every where give an extraordinary Eulogy.

XLIII. The death of this great man happened not an. Chr. 371. as Mr. H.
wrongly quotes Baronius, but an. 372. Maii. 2. p. 297. annal. to. 4. an. 372.
page 33.
as the Cardinal both in his Martyrology and Annals does fix it; and his
Festival was celebrated in both Churches on the second of May; but in the
Oriental Churches he had two Holy Days, the last on the 18th of January, (a
Festival dedicated to him and his Successor S. Cyril) it being the day, as
Baronius conjectures, of his Consecration to the Patriarchate of Alexandria;
and in the same celebrated Historian you may find, that his Body was afterward
brought into Europe, and deposited at Venice; he is styled in the Coptick
Calendar, published by De Sp^^drio, l. 3. c. 25. p. 398.
Mr. Seldom, Athanasius the Apostle, by Chru^^p 314. cais. Scalig.
Nicephorus the Patriarch of Constantinople, Athanasius the Martyr, and to this
day by all the Greeks, Athanasius the great.

XLIV. Of this name were many famous men, Prelates of the Church, Bas^^ 53. and
67. So^on. l. 6. c. 12. Philostorg. l. 5. tem. 1.
one a Bishop of Ancyra, a Contemporary with our Patriarch; the Ph^^esiorg. l.
3. tom. 15. p. 50.
second an Arian of the same Age, Bishop of Anazarbum, in Cilicia; a Menolog.
Cr. A^g. (...).
third Bishop of Tarsus, a Martyr under the Emperor Valerian; a Ev^gr. hist.
lib. 3. c. 23.
fourth this eminent Confessor's Successor in his own See, circ. an. 490.
(whose immediate Predecessor was Peter Mongus) but he was a Heretic, and a
great Patron of the Acephali: There were also many others of the name, whom I
purposely omit. And having thus tired my Reader, I leave him to refresh himself
with the Panegyric of the most Eloquent S. Gregory of Nazianzum.

On the great Athanasius Archbishop of Alexandria, Greg. Naz. Tom. 1. Orat.
21. p. 373. etc.
'TO praise Athanasius, is to make a Panegyric on Virtue; for when I name that
admirable man, it is the same as if I celebrated Virtue; while a Constellation
of those best qualities did shine in him, or to speak more truly, do still
exert their Luster; for all they that have lived according to the Laws of God,
do still live to God, although they have left this evil World. For which reason
God is called, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, not
the God of the dead, but of the living; and when I write an Encomium of Virtue,
I shall magnify God, whose Donative to the Sons of men Virtue is, that by that
congenial light men may be led to the knowledge and embracing of himself. For
whereas the largesses of Heaven are many and eminent, and beyond description,
the greatest and most merciful of his Favors are the Inclinations which he
works in us toward himself, and the Familiarity he blesses us with. For what
the Sun is to sensible Beings, that is God to rational Creatures, the one sheds
his Rays on the visible, the other illustrates the invisible world; the one
illuminates the eyes of the body, that it may see Heaven, the other the Optics
of the mind, that it may contemplate God. And as the Sun, whereas it confers on
the eyes, and all things visible, powers, that the one may see, the other be
seen, while it self is the most beautiful and accomplished of visible Objects;
so God, as he gives power to understand, and a possibility of being
comprehended, is himself still the chiefest and most perfect of Intellectual
Beings, in whom all our desires terminate, and above whom they cannot soar;
for neither can the most Philosophic, aspiring, and curious Intellect aim at
any thing more sublime than God; for he is the choicest of admirable Beings,
whom when men enjoy, their Speculations are at their height; for that man that
breaks through his earthly Prison by the assistance of reason and
contemplation, and dispelling all carnal Clouds and Mists, can converse with
God, and be united to the most illustrious light, as much as humane frailty is
capable of, that man is happy, both in that he can ascend to that glorious
place, and also there enjoy that Union with the Divine Nature, which true
Philosophy procures, and a mind exalted above this inferior world to the
contemplation of the Unity of the Trinity. But he whose Soul is debased by its
Society with the Body, and is yet immersed in Clay, so that it cannot look upon
the Beauties of Truth, nor exalt it self above earthly things, though its
Original were from Heaven, and its Native tendencies thither; that man is in my
esteem blind and miserable, though blessed with the affluence of Worldly
Felicities; and so much the more wretched, in that he is mocked by his
prosperity, and deluded into the Opinion, that there can be any thing good
besides the chiefest and truest good; gathering evil Fruit of an evil
Sentiment, to be confined to darkness, to feel him as a consuming Fire, whom he
would not entertain as a comfortable light. This was the study only of a few of
the former Ages, and the present saeculum, (for there are few Servants of God,
though all are his Creatures) this wisdom being courted by a small company of
Lawgivers and Captains, Priests, Doctors, and the rest of the Society of
Spiritual persons, and among them by this venerable Patriarch, whom we now
applaud. And who were those brave Souls? that excellent man Enoch, and Noe,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the twelve Patriarchs, Moses and Aaron, Joshua and
the Judges, Samuel, David, and Solomon for a while, Elias and Elisha, and the
Prophets both before the Captivity and after it, and those last in order, but
first in eminency, who lived about the time of Christ's Incarnation; that
Torch, that preceeded the true light, that Voice that ushered in the Word, that
Harbinger to the great Mediator of the Old and New Covenant, the Blessed John
Baptist, and the Disciples of Christ; they lastly that after the Ascension of
Jesus were Governors in the Church, or were conspicuous by their Doctrine, or
famous by Miracles, or perfected by Martyrdom: among these Athanasius
challenges a place, some of whom he equalled, to others gave the precedence,
and a third sort, if my words be not too confident, he exceeded, imitating the
Eloquence of one, the Actions of a second, the Meekness of a third, and a
fourth's Zeal, the Combats of another, many things in some, in others all; and
in a third sort some particular Virtue. As he that would limn an exquisite
Picture, first draws the several Features in his mind, and then transcribes
them into the Table, which he designs a masterpiece of Art; so did he take
Transcripts of the Virtues of others, carrying away the palm from the greatest
Orators, by his persuasive Actions, and triumphing over the most active men in
his Discourses; or if you would so have it, excelling the most eloquent in his
Harangues, and the most expert men in the Charms of Conversation, out-doing all
that were but ordinarily furnished with either of these qualities, in the
transcendency of each peculiar accomplishment, and getting the start of those
that were famous for one of these Embellishments, in that he was equally
adorned with every Grace: and if it were a brave and generous charity in those
that preceeded him to leave such accurate patterns of Virtue, is not he as
admirable for his design, in affording posterity so reverend an Exemplar? and
perhaps to run through all the particulars of his life will exceed the limits
of my time, and look rather like an History than an Encomium; which out of
compassion to Posterity I could wish were done, as he has written the Life of
the divine Antonius, instructing the world in the Laws of a Monastic life, in
the account he gives of that Saint's demeanor; and when I shall have reckoned
a few of the more signal of his excellencies, which my memory will supply, that
I may gratify my own inclinations, and comport with the design of the
Festival, I will leave the rest to those that are better acquainted with his
miraculous Achievements. For it is neither just nor safe to honor the lives
of wicked men with Monuments, and to bury in Oblivion the memories of the just,
especially in that City, which more than a few virtuous Examples can hardly
rescue from ruin, a City which makes all sacred and divine Offices as
ridiculous as the entertainments of Horse-Races, or the Theater.

'His early studies were employed in Divinity, and holy knowledge, after some
little acquaintance with humane, and liberal learning, lest he might be
altogether an ignaro in those things, which he resolved to despise; for he
could never endure to prostitute, and debase his exalted and generous mind to
impertinent trifles, and spend his time like an imprudent combatant, who
buffets the air instead of his antagonist, and so loses his crown; he was
conversant above all men with the Old and New Testament, adorning himself with
sublime notions, and a beautiful conversation, fastening the links, till they
became one gold chain, a task too hard for some persons, making his actions a
guide to his contemplation, and his contemplation a seal to his actions. For
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, it swaddles and suckles infant
prudence, and prudence, when it has out-gone the limits of fear, and attained
to a genuine love, makes us the friends of God, and sons instead of servants.
Such was his education, and tutorage, as became one designed a Bishop and Guide
to the mystical body of Christ, according to the great Counsel and
foreknowledge of God, which long before lays the foundations of great designs;
and at length is admitted to the Priesthood, and made a member of the College,
which make their approaches before God (that condescends to meet and converse
with holy men) and is dignifyed with sacred orders; and after he had past
through all the inferior offices of the Ecclesiastic Ministration, that I may
omit minuter circumstances, is made Patriarch of Alexandria, which is the same,
as if I had called him the Universal, or Ecumenical Bishop. Nor can I
determine whether he took the Episcopal Office on him, as a reward of his
virtue, or as a charitable act to confer life on the Church. For there was as
urgent a necessity of refreshing that Church, which was ready to perish by
spiritual thirst, (the desire of truth) as of the Angels bringing water to
despairing Ishmael, or of Elijah's being cheared by the streams of the brook
Cherith, and reviving that expiring Prophet, that a holy seed might be left in
Israel; that we might not be left as Sodom and Gomorrha, whose crimes are
notorious, but their punishment more famous, being destroyed by fire and
brimstone; for this reason is a horn of salvation raised for us that were
ruined, and a corner stone, that unites us both to himself and each other, is
opportunely laid, or a fire is introduced, that purges all evil and putrified
matter, or the husbandman's Vanne, whereby the chafe of empty opinions is
winnowed from the weighty and substantial truths, or the pruning Knife, which
cuts off the roots of iniquity; thus in him the eternal word met with a
defender and assistant, and the holy spirit a servant, that breaths nothing but
truth and piety: and on the consideration of these endowments, by the joint
consent of the whole people, not according to the evil custom that afterward
crept into the Church, neither by murder and violence, but after the
Apostolical way, and prescriptions of the holy Ghost, is he exalted to the
throne of S. Mark, who was as much his successor in merit, as dignity, in time
very remote from him, but in virtue, which is properly to be called Succession,
he came very near him. For they that profess the same faith, sit in the same
throne, but he that is heterodox, has no right to that holy seat; the one is a
successor in name only, the other in reality; for he has not the right of
succession, that intrudes himself, but he that is compelled to take on him the
Episcopal robes, not he that tramples on all laws, but he that attains the
Dignity by a legal election, not he that is a Heretic, but the Orthodox
professor of the Catholic faith, unless we call such a man a successor; as we
say a disease succeeds health, and night the brightness of the day, or a
tempest a calm, or a fit of frenzy a prudent and settled reason; and as he was
thus regularly made a Bishop, so he also discharged the Office, and managed his
Authority; not being elated and swollen with his prosperity, not indulging to a
petulant and morose humor, as a man that has unexpectedly usurped a tyranny,
or an inheritance; this is a mark of spurious and intruding Prelates, that are
unworthy of the Title, who bringing nothing with them worthy of the Priesthood,
nor ever suffering hardships for the sake of Religion, commence Pupils and
Instructors of piety in the same moment, and undertake to purge others, while
themselves are worse polluted; yesterday guilty of Sacrilege, and to day
Priests; yesterday strangers to Religion, and to day dispensers of its
Mysteries; men grown old in vice, but Novices in piety, whose advancement is
the effect of humane favor, not of the Spirits designation; who having managed
all their Affairs by violence and force, at last exercise their tyranny on
goodness, and Religion it self, whose manners add no credit nor luster to their
Throne, but after a preposterous manner, owe all the reputation of their Morals
to their dignity; who owe God more Sacrifices for their own transgressions,
than for the sins of their people, and unavoidably fall into one of these two
Crimes, either promiscuously to pardon all irregularities, that their own
enormities may not be censured, and so instead of rooting out vice, teach it;
or by the tyranny and rigor of their Censures put a mask on the face of
Villainy, as if such severe Inquisitors into the faults of others had none of
their own that deserved punishment. But neither of these deformities found a
place in his soul, his actions were sublime, but his thoughts humble, his
virtue such as created reverence and fear in all that approacht him, but his
candor and obliging mien such as invited all men, full of meekness, a great
stranger to anger, of a compassionate temper, pleasant in his discourses, but
more pleasant in his actions, an Angel in his face, but more an Angel in his
mind, his reprehensions were mixed with cheerfulness, his praises instructive,
impairing neither of them by excess, but reproving as a Father, and commending
as a Prince, so as the one might not be softened into easiness, nor the other
stiffened into rigor, but the one might justly be termed condescension, the
other prudence, and both the effects of an extraordinary skill and Wisdom. So
managing himself, that the takingness of his demeanor might supersede his
Discourses, and the charms of his Rhetoric render his Episcopal Censures
useless; and a moderate infliction of minor penalties protect the denunciation
of the fatal Sentence. But why do I undertake to draw a Copy of this brave man?
S. Paul has prevented me, and done it to the life, partly when he (...) our
great Highpriest, that ascended (...) the Heavens, (for I dare with confidence
so to express my self, since the Scripture calls them Christ's, that live
according to the Laws of that Savior) partly in those Injunctions which he in
his Epistle commands Timothy to observe, giving the Character of an excellent
Prelate; for if you compare the prescriptions of the Apostle with the life of
this eminent person, as a rule whereby we may judge, you shall evidently
discern the exact Correspondence; let me therefore have your free and brisk
assistance in making this Panegyric; for the Burden is too heavy for my
Shoulders, and I am willing to pretermit very many things, but know not well
what to bury in silence, and what peculiar Excellencies to celebrate, for all
is wonderful as the parts of that body, where every Member has its exact
Symmetry and Beauty, and every new qualification that occurs seems more
venerable than the rest, and would engross my praises.

'You therefore that are his Admirers must share his Virtues among you, and
strive for mastery in this becoming Combat, Men and Women, young men and
Virgins, and with them the gray headed, Priests and People, Monks and Citizens,
the ordinary sort of Christians, and the more exact Followers of Jesus, the men
of a contemplative and of an active life; let the one praise his Zeal in
Fastings and Prayers, to which he was so intent, as if he had no body to take
notice of, let another extol his frequent watchings, and his unwearyed vigor
in singing Hymns to his God. Let one relate his providence, and charity toward
the poor, another his opposition to pride, and condescensions to the humble;
let the Virgins celebrate their Bridesman, the married Women their Monitor, the
Monks their Encourager, the Citizens their Lawgiver, the simple their Guide,
the contemplative men their Divine, the cheerful their Curb, the distressed
their Comforter, the ancient their Staff, the youth their Schoolmaster, the
poor their Almoner, and the rich their Steward; the Widows seem to me to praise
their Patron, the Orphans their Father, the indigent their Benefactor,
Strangers their Entertainer, the Brethren a lover of the Fraternity, the sick
their Physician, whatever Distemper seizes them, or Medicine they want; the
sound the preserver of their health: every man must applaud him, that became
all things to all men, that he might save all, or the greatest part of Mankind.
These things, as I have said, let others admire and magnify who have leisure
enough to be transported with little things; but when I call these things
little, I do it only with respect to his other Excellencies, comparing him with
himself, and one of his Virtues with another, (for the Scripture tells us, 2
Cor. 3.10.
that that which is made glorious, though in it self illustrious, has no
glory, by reason of the glory that excels) otherwise a very few of such
Endowments are sufficient to incline all men to pay him his due tribute of
Veneration; but his peculiar Accomplishments are to be the subject of this
Oration, while it becomes not us to leave the word and descend to the Ministry
of minute things; it being the effect of the Divine Assistance, who has
furnished me with these Abilities, if we speak any thing that is equivalent to
the sublimity of his eloquence, or the grandeur of his mind.

'The days were when the Affairs of Christianity thrived and flourished, when
this superfluous artificial way of Rhetoricating in matters of Divinity, was
unknown, and a stranger, when the introducing of any Novel, or curious question
concerning God into the Church, was made a Crime equal to the admission of a
Stage Player into that sacred place with his mimick and lascivious Gestures, or
a Cheat to impose on the eyes of the Spectators by his agility and skill in
shifting his Counters, when the honest simplicity of a plain and ingenuous
Discourse was accounted an infallible specimen of a pious Soul. But after the
Scepticks (the Sexti, and Pyrrho's) and an itch of Contradiction, like a
desperate and catching Disease crept into the Church, and a trifling humor was
accounted solid learning, and what the Book of the Acts impeaches the Athenians
of, was applicable to the Christian World, that they had no leisure for any
thing, but to hear or talk News, what holy Jeremy can sufficiently bemoan our
confusions, and horrid obscurities, though he alone knew how to suit his
Lamentations to so dismal an occasion?

'This furious and insolent Assault on the Church was first made by Arius,
whose name implies his madness, who suffered the just punishment of his
petulant and ungoverned Tongue, dying in an impure and stinking place, bursting
asunder like Judas, and being a Sufferer like that Traitor, as he had sinned
like him, in betraying the eternal Word: but this did not affright others from
courting the same distemper, who methodiz'd and formed it into an art of
Impiety, who deny any thing of generation to appertain to the Divinity, and
banish from it the very names of being begotten, or proceeding, honoring the
Trinity only with the Communication of the Divine name to all the three
persons, and hardly allowing them that. But this blessed Soul, this zealous man
of God, and great Trumpet of the Truth, thought not so; but foreseeing that
this lessening of the Trinity into one person was a piece of the Atheism and
Heresy of Sabellius, who first invented this Scheme of contracting the Deity,
and that the distinguishing and dividing the substance, was to make a Monster
of the Divinity, he kept this course carefully to assert the Unity with respect
to the Divinity, and piously to teach the Trinity of persons with respect to
their properties, neither confounding the persons by asserting the Unity, nor
dividing the substance by asserting the Trinity, keeping himself still within
the limits of Piety, and shunning any extravagant inclinations to either side;
and for this reason he in the holy Synod of Nice, in that Assembly of choice
men, which the holy Ghost had there congregated, as much as in him lay, opposed
the growth of this disease, when as yet he was no Bishop, but one of their
principal Assistants; for at that time Virtue made a man as honorable as a
Dignity; but when this Spark was blown up into a great flame by the breath of
Satan, and spread it self far, (for here the Tragedy began, that has since
filled the World) many and various Engines were employed to ruin this great
Assertor, this generous Champion of Jesus; (for the strongest Soldiers are
made Aggressors of him, that most courageously resists) and on every side
dangers flow in upon him, (for wickedness is very inventive of mischief, and
daring in its assaults; for how could it be expected that they should be
favorable to men that durst abuse their God?) but there was one effect of
their animosity that produced the most violent Consequences, for I my self
shall contribute a few materials to the completing the Drama. But here my
Country, the beloved place of my Nativity, merits pardon; for the Crime is not
imputable to the place, but to the Inhabitants; for Cappadocia is every where
famous for Holiness and Religion, but these men are unworthy the name of Sons
of the Church; but ye have heard, that a Bramble grows at the root of a Vine,
and that Judas the Traitor was one of the Disciples; nor are there wanting,
that affirm, that a Namesake of mine was not altogether innocent in this
Affair, who being at that time resident at Alexandria on the account of his
studies, and treated with as much kindness by this Patriarch, as if he had been
his darling Son, in as much as he was one to whom he entrusted his greatest
concerns, he, as it is reported, takes up resolutions of resisting his Father
and Benefactor. And whereas others were the Authors of the Tragedy, yet men
say, that the hand of Absalom was with them; if any of you remember that hand,
with the cutting off of which this Saint was belyed, or the dead man, yet
living, whom he was said to murder, or his unjust banishment, he understands
what I say. But this I willingly forget, for this is my judgment in dubious
things, to be more inclinable to a charitable construction, and rather to
absolve than condemn a Criminal. For a profligate man is easily induced to
condemn the innocent, but the good not so apt to censure the Villain; for he
that is not vicious is not suspicious of others; but what I now speak of is not
rumor, but palpable matter, not a bare suspicion, but a firm and public
persuasion. A Cappadocian Monstre, born in the utmost Borders of our Country,
of a scandalous Family, and a worse mind, no Freeman born, but of a mixed
Generation, as Mules are; at first a Servant at another man's Table, a Wretch,
that might be hired for a Crust of Bread, inclinable to say or do any thing to
fill his Belly, afterward, when he perniciously intruded himself into
employment in the Commonwealth, he was entrusted with the mean and most sordid
Office of a Sutler, to supply the Army with Swines flesh; in which when he had
broken his trust, (sacrificing all things to his own Belly) and had nothing
left him but himself, he bethinks him of running away, and shifting from one
Country and City to another, (as Vagrants do) at last to the ruin of the
Churches Interests, like one of the Plagues of Egypt, he wanders into
Alexandria, here he ends his Exile, and begins mischief, being eminent in
nothing else, neither for his learning, nor acceptable and pleasant Converse,
much less for putting on the Mask of Piety and Religion, but fitted for all
sort of Villainy and Disturbances. Ye all know what Tumults he raised against
this Saint, for the Righteous are many times delivered into the hand of the
Ungodly, not to create honor to the Wicked, but to experiment the courage of
the good man, that the Sinner may dye an evil and unusual death, as the
Scripture assures us, but holy men are in this life derided, as long as God
hides his Countenance, while there are laid up great Treasures for both against
those future days, when every Word, Deed and Thought shall be weighed in the
just Balance of God, when he shall arise to judge the Earth, recollecting men's
Designs and Actions, and detecting those secrets which have been laid up and
sealed in Heaven. This both the the Sufferings and the Discourses of Job may
persuade us, who was a great lover of truth, a man unblameable, just, and
pious, and Master of many other Virtues, as holy Writ testifies: and yet was he
assaulted with such various and cruel Instruments of Satan's Malice that had
begged liberty to plague him, that of all the men which since the beginning of
the World have fallen into Adversity, and many as it is probable into Torments
and Vexations, no man yet can compare Sufferings with him; for he lost not only
his Wealth and Cattle, a beautiful and numerous progeny, which all men
earnestly covet, and that in so short a space that there was no more left for
his sorrows to interpose between his last and the next Afflictions, but in the
end was smitten in his body with an uncurable and frightful disease, and to
make his griefs insufferable, must endure the bitter and wretched Consolations
of his Wife, whose great business it was to wound his Soul proportionable to
the Inflictions of his Body; moreover his best Friends were, as he says,
miserable Comforters, who when they saw his griefs, but understood not the
mystery of Providence, thought his punishment not a Trial of his Virtue, but
Vengeance on his Crimes, and this they not only thought, but never blushed
openly and severely to reprove him for it' and that so unseasonably, that had
he been plagued for his Offenses, there was more need to smooth and alleviate
his sadnesses by comfortable Discourses: In this condition was Job, and these
were some of the first Dispensations of Providence toward him, there was a
Combat between Virtue, and Envy; the evil spirit striving to overcome all that
was good in him, and his Piety exerting it self to preserve its Rights
inviolable; Satan endeavoring to smooth the way to Vice by the punishments of
the just Virtue, that its Followers might retain their Integrity, and triumph
over their Calamities. But what all this while did he, that gave him Oracles
from the whirlwind and the Clouds, who is slow to wrath, but earnest to be
compassionate, who does not suffer the rod of the Wicked always to rest on the
lot of the Righteous, lest the Righteous learn Iniquity? In the end of his
Engagements God with a loud Voice pronounces him a Conqueror, and discloses
the Mystery of his Chastisement. Think thou, O my Servant, that I had any
other intentions than that thy Righteousness should be made manifest? This is a
Plaster for thy Wounds, a Crown for thy Combats, a Recompense for thy
Patience. For what followed was perhaps inconsiderable, though they seem great
Blessings to some, and designed to satisfy the Ambition of men of narrow
Souls, when he received double for whatsoever he had lost. Nor is it therefore
so very wonderful, that George the Usurper should fare better than Athanasius.
But this would have been a greater miracle, if this good and just man had never
been tried in this fire of afflictions, nor is this so prodigious, had not his
trials been of so long a continuance; he went into banishment from this place,
and ordered the affairs of his exile with an admirable decorum; for he confined
himself to the godly Monasteries of Egypt; where the holy men weaning
themselves from the world, and falling in love with a desert enjoy a more
intimate familiarity with God, than those, that are turmoiled with the affairs
of this life; some turning Hermits, living remote from all Society, and
conversing only with themselves, and God, and claiming acquaintance with no
other part of the habitable world, but their cell; others living in charitable
fraternities, are both Anchorets, and Friars, dead to all other men, and
concernments, which in the midst of the world both create, and suffer
disturbances, and by their often changings cheat, and trepan us, while their
Monastery is the world to them, in which they provoke each other to virtue by a
holy emulation. With these good souls this great person conversing, as he was
the great Mediator and Reconciler of all other Controversies, imitating him
that by his blood made peace, and united those that were opposite; so he
reconciled the solitary life with the sociable, manifesting that the Priesthood
was a friend to true Philosophy, and that the study of wisdom wanted the
inspection of the Prelate. So he harmoniously cemented both sorts of life,
coupling a contemplative activeness with practical meditations, to persuade men
that a Monastic life does more consist in the gravity of men's manners, than
the retirements of the outward man. Of which opinion was David, that man of
great Employments, yet much a lover of solitude, if the assertion of his be
demonstrative and credible, Ps. 141.10. sec. Sep^^ag. (...).
I live retired until the day I must go hence. For this reason they that
excelled others in virtue, were so much the easier conquered by his reasons, by
how much they out-went others; and they that contributed a few ordinary
endowments to fit them for the perfection of the Priesthood, were recompensed
with greater abilities to make accomplished Monks. What he advised them became a
Law, what he forbad them was execrable; his assertions were like the Tables of
Moses, and the reverence paid him greater than what is due to the Saints. For
when some rude Villains hunted after this holy man, as after a wild beast, and
could no where find him, these Asceticks would not vouchsafe to speak to them,
but stretched out their necks to the Soldiers Swords, as if they were in
jeopardy for the sake of Christ, reckoning if they could suffer any thing for
the preservation of so good a man, that it would be of great weight to
beautify their Philosophic Profession, and more sublime and extraordinary,
than all their fasts and humicubations, and other acts of mortification, which
were their delicacies. Among these men did our Patriarch lead his life, and
experimented the truth of that passage of Solomon, that every thing has its
season; for this reason he concealed himself for a while, as one that fled from
the face of an Enemy and a furious War, that he might appear with the greater
splendor in the season of peace, which a little afterward happened; but the
factious Pseudo-Patriarch, by reason of this long retirement of Athanasius,
runs through all Egypt, and acted by the violences of his impious mind, makes
his thievish Incursions into Syria, and ravages as much of the East as was
possible, setting upon the infirm and weaker brethren, the inconsiderate and
the dull, as a torrent carries with it all that it can sweep away, imposing
upon the simplicity of the Emperor, for my reverence for his sacred Character
forbids me to call it levity, (for to say the truth, he was very zealous, but
not according to knowledge) he next purchases the favors of the Courtiers, men
that loved money beyond Christ (for the Goods of the poor were his bank and
treasure, employed to wicked and unlawful purposes) and among them the
effeminate, and the Eunuchs, men that are no men, whose Sex is doubtful, but
profligate manners most notorious, who being deputed primarily to the oversight
and custody of Women, it is a wonder to me how the Roman Emperors ever
concerned them in any masculine Employments. So prevalent was this Servant of
the Devil, this Seedsman of Tares, this Harbinger of Antichrist, employing for
this purpose the tongue of the most eloquent of the Bishops of that time (if I
may so call him, who was not so much an Heretic, as an envious and ambitious
man: for I shall willingly conceal his name) but he stood instead of the hand,
and was the Leader of the Faction, seeking the overthrow of the truth, by the
prevalence of his money, which being collected for the advancement of the
interests of Religion, was by this evil man made an instrument to promote
impiety. A great instance of this prevalence was that Council which was first
assembled at Seleucia, famous for the Church of the holy Virgin Thecla, and
afterward sat in this great City, which Cities having been eminent for the
brave things that had been done there, were now as memorable for this infamous
Conventicle, whether you will call it the Tower of Babel, where God divided the
Tongues of the Builders, (as I wish he had divided these) or the Sanhedrim of
Caiaphas, in which Christ is condemned, or by what other name we may call the
Meeting, which overturned and confounded all things, abrogating the holy and
primitive Dogma, that confesses the Trinity, using all its art and force,
power and stratagems to stifle the word (...), or consubstantial, and opening a
door to all sort of impiety, by the ambiguity of the terms of their Confession,
out of a seeming respect to holy Writ, and a pretense to use no terms but what
are there allowed, but in truth substituting Arianism, that contradicted
Scripture. For this sentence (that the Son of God was like the Father according
to the Scriptures) was only a bait to the weaker sort of Christians, covering
the Hook of Heresy, a Picture that looked on all that past by it, a Shoe that
would fit either foot, a Vanne turned with every wind, a new invented Engine to
the supplanting of the truth, acted and set on motion by Authority: For they
were wise to do evil, but to do good had no knowledge; hence proceeded their
cunning condemnation of Heretics, whom in their words they proscribed the
Church, that their designs might look more plausibly, but by their actions
introduced, reproving them not for any heterodoxy in opinion, but immoderate
passion and love of contention. Hence Laymen became Judges of those in holy
Orders, and a new mixture happened, the most mysterious Doctrines of Religion
disputed before the multitude, and an unlawful enquiry into Affairs, Sycophants
hired, and sentence on the premises denounced. Thus many Prelates were unjustly
dethroned, others substitated, but on no other terms, but that they should
subscribe to the Arian impiety, as they ought to all things else necessarily
previous to their Instalment; the Pen and Ink was at hand, and an Accuser at
their back; this betrayed many of the Orthodox, men otherwise of invincible
constancy, who erred in their subscriptions, though their Opinions were
Catholic, and gave their consent to the proceedings of those men, who on both
accounts were wicked, and though they kept themselves from falling into the
fire, could not escape being sullied with the smoke; this I have often
lamented, when I observed how Heresy diffused it self, and the Orthodox
Doctrine was persecuted by the great Patrons of Christ's Divinity; verily the
Pastors have done foolishly, as it is written, and have destroyed my Vineyard,
and dishonored the pleasant portion, that is, the Church of God, consecrated
with much sweat, and many martyred ones both before and after Christ, and by
the great sufferings of God for us. For except a few persons, who for their
meanness were contemptible, or their courage looked on as Enemies (who it was
necessary should be left as a root and seed to Israel, that by the influences
of the Spirit that might flourish anew and recover) all others complied with
the time, only with this difference, that some were sooner, some later
trepan'd; some were Leaders and Heads of Parties in this Faction, others of an
inferior rank, who either were betrayed by their fear, or captivated by
covetousness, or allured by pleasures, or imposed on by ignorance, which was
the most modest plea. If that may seem to be sufficient to apologize for such
men, who take on them the Instruction and Government of the people. For as the
motions of Lions and other Beasts, of men and women, of old and young men are
not the same, but there is no small difference in Ages and Sexes; so neither
are the inclinations the same of Rulers and their Subjects; for the vulgus that
so complied are to be pardoned, who are indisposed to curiosity, but how shall
we concede such failures to their Teachers, who, unless they usurp that name,
ought to correct and illuminate the ignorance of their Followers? For if not
the most illiterate and rustic person can safely be ignorant of the Roman
Laws, nor is there any excuse allowed for them that transgress through want of
knowledge, is it not an absurd thing, that the Teachers of the Laws of Heaven
should be ignorant of the Principles of Salvation, although in other things
they may be allowed to have less skill and insight? But grant it that they
shall be pardoned that err for want of knowledge, what shall we say of others,
who laying claim to wit and acumen, yet for the causes formerly mentioned, have
submitted to those Heretics that had usurpt a power; and whereas for a while
they were the Mask of Piety, as soon as there appeared any thing of
reprehension, easily laid it aside? I hear the Scripture affirm, that heaven
and earth shall yet once be shaken, as if they had suffered those tremblings
before, intimating some notable change and alteration of things; and we must
believe S. Paul, that the last and final earthquake shall be no other, but the
second coming of Christ, the mutation of the universe, and translation of it
into that which defies change, and motion. But I suppose the Earthquake, that
in this age broke forth, was not less furious, than any of the former, by
reason of which all the lovers of God, and Religion, and those who before this
time had their conversation wholly in heaven, were shaken, who although in
every other thing they are mild, and peaceable, now could not endure to be
moderate, and to betray the cause of God by their silence, but in this case are
egregious combatants, and lovers of contention (for such is the heat of Zeal)
and ready rather to over-do some things, than leave any thing material undone,
by the same violence no small part of the people were distracted, as in a flock
of birds taking their flight with those in the front, and not yet ceasing to
employ their wings.

'Such a comfort was Athanasius to us, as long as that Pillar of the Church
continued among us, and so great a cause of sorrow, when the Contrivances of
vile men forced him hence: For as those that design to storm a strong Castle,
when they find the place otherwise unapproachable and hard to be taken, make
use of cunning where strength fails, alluring the Governor with Money, or some
other piece of subtilty, and so with ease master the Citadel; or if you will,
as they, that did lie in wait for Sampson, first cut off his Hair, in which his
strength lay, and then took Prisoner that Judge of the Israelites, sporting
with him as they pleased, in requital of the effects of his former courage: So
did our Philistims, having laid Chains on the strength, and cut off the Glory
of the Church, wallow in the pleasures of their impious Opinions and Actions.
At this time Constantius the great Patron and Upholder of the Pseudo-Patriarch,
dies, putting an evil end to his Reign that was not altogether evil, and to no
purpose repenting, as it is reported, when he drew his last breath, (for then
every man is an exact Judge of himself by reason of the Tribunal he is going
before): he is said to have been sorry for three things, that did misbecome his
Grandeur, the murder of his Relations, the appointing the Apostate his
Successor, and the countenancing Novelties of Faith, and with these words it is
said that he exspired his last breath. After which the truth recovered its lost
Authority, and those that were its Confessors their liberty, their Zeal giving
an edge to their Indignation; this also happened to the people of Alexandria
(as an enraged populace uses to be transported against their Injurers) who not
being able to suffer the immoderate Extravagancies of the Usurper, for this
reason publicly expiated his Villainies by a strange death, and a new method of
Revenge. Ye well remember the Camel on which he was laid, and its new fashioned
burden odly exalted, together with the first, and I think the only procession
which it went, a way of revenge at this day threatened to injurious persons. But
after this whirlwind of Injustice, this Corrupter of Piety, this Forerunner
of the Devil was thus slain, though unjustly (for we ought to consider, not
what he deserved to suffer, but what we should do, but he was punished, and
became the Object of the Epidemick fury) this generous Champion returned from
his famous Exile (for so I must call his flight for and with the Trinity) and
finds the Citizens so cheerful and joyed at his appearance, and in truth all
Egypt gathered into that one place, that some were satisfied only with seeing
Athanasius, others with hearing his Voice, others (as it was said of the
Apostles) were sanctified with his shadow only, and this new Image of him; so
that whereas many heretofore both Princes and Priests, and other eminent men,
have been met with much honor, yet no man with more splendour and a greater
Company than Athanasius, and only the Prelate, and his former return from a
like flight, and for a like cause can parallel it; for so the report runs of
that Parade, for I will relate it, though it seem superfluous, that it may give
a gusto, and relish, and additional beauty to my Panegyric. After this return
of the Patriarch, one of the State-Officers made his Entry (he was my
Countryman, a Cappadocian, a man of eminent Birth, and I presume you know that
I mean Philagrius) the love of the Citizens toward him was without comparison,
and the honor they did him proportionable to their love for him (that I may
say all in a few words) on whom the command of the City was a second time
conferred by the concurrent suffrage of the Alexandrians, and the choice of the
Emperor; at that time one of the populace admiring the infinite multitudes of
people, as if it had been a vast Sea of men, is reported thus to have accosted
one of his Acquaintance as is usual on such occasions; Tell me, my best friend,
did ever see such a vast quantity of people, and so unanimous, gathered
together for the honor of one man? By no means, said the young man, I do not
believe that the Emperor Constantius was received with so much state; as if he
thought nothing could be mentioned higher than that; to whom the other
smilingly, Do thou reckon that as a great and wonderful thing? I can hardly
believe that the great Athanasius was so received, and presently he subjoyns an
Oath to confirm it. His discourse tending, as it seems plain to me, to prefer
this celebrated man to the Emperor: So great was the veneration which all men
paid him, and with such wonder do men still make reflections on his
Restoration. For the whole City like a large River went out to meet him, (as
the Alexandrians are accustomed, when they design to honor any person. And how
shall I relate the pomp of this Spectacle? a Poet would say, that Nilus that
golden streamed and fertile River run backward from the City to Chaereum, by
the space of a days Journey, and more. Give me leave therefore to indulge and
solace my self with the Narration; for I am bent upon it, nor is it easy to
divert my Speech to any other Object from this Solemnity. He rid on a Colt,
(pardon the boldness of the Comparison) as my Jesus entered Jerusalem, riding on
the Foal of an Ass: whether we shall understand by it the Gentile World on
which he ascended having delivered it from the Chains of Ignorance, or any
other thing be intimated in that Figure. There was only this difference, that
the Boughs and the various and exquisite Garments were spread in the way of
Christ, but no such preparation was made for this sublime and precious Prelate,
who in that one particular was less honored than his Master. This his return
to the Metropolis of Egypt was an exact picture of Christ's entry into the
holy City; in that many went before him and shouted and leaped for joy; not
only a Troop of Children that sang his Encomia, but the Tongues of both his
Friends and Enemies strove to outdo one another in his praise. I omit the
public applause, and the profuse Expenses of Unguents and Perfumes, the
multitude of Torches that shed their luster on the whole City, the public and
private Banquets, and every other specimen of that Solemnity, (...)
trans^^ndently and above belief (...) him; with this Pomp and At(...) adm^^able
person enter (...). But perchance all this (...), and a politic and crafty
(...) of his Affairs, as became a man who pr^^sided over such a multitude, but
either his Doctrine was not suitable to his ^if^, o^ his undertakings a
Contradiction to his Assertions, or his sufferings were inconsiderable
incomparison to the difficulties that others underwent for the sake of the
Truth and Orthodoxy, or his Rewards are unproportioned to his Deserts, or after
his entry he demeaned himself unworthily, and by his future Actions cast
opprobrium on his Admission; by no means; all his Actions were of a piece, and
suitable, all Harmonious as the strings of a Lute, his Life, his Doctrine, his
Combats, his Streights, what preceeded, and what was consequent to his
Admission. For as soon as he undertakes the Tuition of the Church, he is not
transported as those that are blinded with Anger and unruly passion, who strike
what first comes in their way, though never so undeserving such harsh
treatment; their fury Lording it over their Reasons; but imagining with
himself, that this Season was most advantageous to promote his honor, (because
for the most part, he that suffers is more patient, while he that does the
injury, is insolent) with so debonaire and meek carriage did he demean himself
toward the great fomenters of his sorrows, that his restoration was not
unacceptable even to them. He purges the Temple by driving out all Sacrilegious
Abusers of Religion, that prostituted the name of God, and Christ to their
profit, that in this also he might imitate his Savior; only he omitted the
whip of Cords, and substituted in the place thereof Perswasives and
Demonstrations. He cements all breaches among those that were at enmity with
him, or among themselves, needing no other assistances but his own; he delivers
the afflicted from Tyranny, making no distinction between them of his own and
the adverse party. He lifts out of the dust, and restores to its honor the
truth that had been trampled on, and now the Doctrine of the Trinity is boldly
asserted, and the light is set on a Candlestick, that by the bright rays of the
Unity of the Godhead, it might illuminate all men's Souls: now he again makes
Laws for the World, and enclines all men's minds to himself, writing to some,
calling others, and instructing a third sort that were never sent for, obliging
no man to any other restraint, but to be willing; for this one thing was
sufficient to direct them to the Paths of Virtue. In short, he imitated the
qualities of two famous stones; to those that abused him he was an Adamant, to
the contentious and quarrelsome a Loadstone, which by a miraculous quality
draws Iron the hardest of things to its self; but it was impossible that envy
should endure this, or suffer tamely the restitution of the Church to her
pristine beauty and health, the dissenting Members thereof being reunited, as
the Wounds of a Body that has been mangled are closed up again. To this end
the Father of malice incensed against him the Emperor, who was the Fiend's
Fellow Apostate, who (though his junior in time, was his equal in mischief, the
first of all Christian Princes that was enraged against Christ, suddenly
introducing that wicked Cockatrice, which long before had been brought forth
and cherished by him, as soon as a fit opportunity offered, and he was invested
with the Empire) became ungrateful to that Sovereign that entrusted him with
the Regalia, and abundantly more rebellious against God his Savior, and begins
a persecution more fatal than all that had preceeded it, intermixing
perswasives with his threats, (for he envyed the Martyrs the honor of their
sufferings) called in question the Trophies of their courage, using all sort of
Sophistry and little arts in his Discourses, and allowing them to superintend
his manners, or to speak a plainer truth, being inclined by his own perverse
habit of mind to such Villainies, imitating the cunning and artifice of that
Demon that possessed him; he accounted it but a poor Conquest to triumph over the
whole Family of Christ, but looked on the subduing Athanasius, and stifling his
undertakings in the behalf of the truth, as a great Victory; for he saw that
none of his Designs against the Christians were crowned with success, as long
as Athanasius opposed him, for the places of as many as deserted Religion were
supplied by his prudence with new Gentile Proselytes, which was very
miraculous. Which when that crafty Impostor and Persecutor understood, he no
longer keeps on his Masque of servile dissimulation, but making public his
rancor, openly expels this great man the City; for it became this generous
Combatant to be thrice Victorious, that his rewards might be perfect; a small
time after the Divine Justice hurryed this sacrilegious person into Persia, and
there punished him; and having permitted him to go forth, a Prince eagerly
ambitious of renown, returned him dead without the least sign of pity or
sorrow; and, as I have heard, without the honor of Sepulture, his body being
tossed up and down by the fury of an Earthquake, that then happened as a
punishment for his Crimes, the Prologue, as I suppose, to his future Tragedy;
but another Emperor succeeds him of a modest Countenance, and a stranger to
the Apostates Impudence, one that never oppressed Israel by his own or his
Followers evil Actions, but was incomparably pious and mild, who, that he might
settle his Empire on the best Foundation, and begin his Reign with the
establishing excellent Laws, recalls all the banished Prelates, and above all
him, that out-shone them in Virtue, and undoubtedly was a Sufferer for
Godliness; he enquires after the true and Orthodox Faith, that had been by many
torn in pieces and mangled, and distracted into many novel Opinions, that if it
were possible the whole World might be united in the same harmonious
profession, by the cooperation of the holy spirit; if not, he might join
himself to the Catholic Party, and reciprocally give it assistance, and
receive help from it, entertaining himself with high and exceeding venerable
thoughts of such Mysteries. And here did this Sage-man give a Specimen of his
purity and constancy in the Faith of Christ; for whereas other Professors were
divided into three several Factions, many being Unorthodox in their Sentiments
of the Son of God, and more in their Opinions of the holy Ghost (where to be a
puny Transgressor was accounted a mark of Piety) and only a few were in every
thing sound Catholics, he chiefly, and alone, or with a few Followers openly
and in the Face of the World is a confident Assertor of the truth, confessing
in his Writings the Divinity and Essence of the three persons, and in that God
head which in times past was by the many Fathers adjusted to the Son, was the
holy spirit reinvested by this inspired Patriarch, who tendered a truly royal
and magnificent present to the Emperor, an Orthodox Creed in opposition to the
Heretical Novelties that had no basis in Scripture, that one Emperor might
countermine another, one Doctrine invalidate another, one Writing supersede
another; to this Confession of Faith both the Eastern and Western Catholics
seem to me to pay a submissive deference and veneration; for some men, if we
may believe their Affirmations, are Orthodox only in their minds, but they
imprison their Sentiments, and conceal them from the view of the World, as a
dead Child that has lost its life in the Womb; others in a small measure
manifest their belief like the blaze of a Spark, that they may humor the time
and please the warmer and devouter sort of Christians; others are public
Assertors of the truth, and not ashamed of their profession, of which Party I
am willing to be (for I dare not boast of any thing higher than this) not so
much as intending to skreen my fearfulness behind the weakness of those that
have been more timorous, (for we have been evil Stewards of Heavens Mysteries,
not only not gaining some additional increase to our Talents, but prodigally
melting down our first stock, which is the Character of a careless Servant) but
to introduce this my offspring into the light to mature its growth with speed,
and render it to the eyes of all men exquisitely accomplished; but this was one
of the meanest of his admirable Achievements, for if he exposed himself to
actual dangers for the sake of the truth, what wonder was it that he should
vindicate it in his writings? But I will add one thing to my former Relation,
which I above all things revere in him, and which I cannot without injuring you
pass by, at this time especially, which is a time of Schisms and Contentions;
for this action of his ought to be an instruction to us, that now are alive, if
we seriously weigh it; for as when one thrusts his hand into the water, he not
only separates between the water that is left, but between what he grasps in
his hands, and runs between his fingers: So we divide not only from all
impiety, but from the eminently godly, not in small, and impertinent, and
contemptible opinions, (for this were more tolerable) but in words, that tend
to one, and the same sense; for whereas we piously assert one essence, and
three hypostases, the one describing the nature of the Godhead, the other the
properties of the Trinity, (as also do the Italians, only by reason of the
barrenness of their language not able to distinguish the hypostasis from the
essence, lest they might seem to admit three substances, they substitute in the
name of three hypostases three persons) what happened? something very
ridiculous, or rather lamentable. This little difference in words made a noise
as if there had been difference in opinion; hence the Heresy of Sabellius took
its rise because of the distinction of the three persons, and Arianisme because
of the three hypostases, both being the rude offspring of a pertinacious love
of contention. And what succeeded? this small distinction being established,
and grating on some men's minds, (and what made it distasteful was a love of
quarelling) the ends of the earth were in danger to be ruined by a few
syllables; which when this blessed Saint, this true man of God, and great guide
of souls both saw, and heard, he could not endure to slight and neglect so
absurd and unreasonable a distinction, but applied a remedy to the distemper;
and how did he make his application? having convened both parties with all
meekness and humility, and accurately weighed the intention of the words, after
he found them agreeing in the things themselves, and not in the least differing
in matters of doctrine, allowing them the variety of names, he tied them to
unity of sentiments; this was a more advantageous act of charity to the Church,
than all his other daily labors and discourses, which all men celebrate, in
which there may be intermixed some love of applause, and for that reason some
innovation made in the Faith. This was more honorable, than all his watchings,
and humicubations, the benefits of which are confined to the particular
practisers of those virtues; nay it is nothing inferior to his applauded
flights, and exiles; for after his sufferings he pursued those things, for
which he chose to undertake such calamities; and this also was his design on
others, praising some, moderately correcting others, useing the spur to some
dull tempers, and the reins to other hot spirits, infinitely careful, that the
offenders might repent, and those that were innocent might be kept from
falling; in his conversation master of the greatest simplicity, in his
government of the greatest variety of skill, wise in his discourses, but much
wiser in his intellect, to the mean capacities he stooped himself, to the more
acute his notions and words were more sublime, (...).
A lover of strangers, and advocate for the oppressed, and a defender from
danger; he was in truth all those things which the Heathens parcel out among
their Gods; I will call him (...), etc.
the Patron of Marriage, and the Friend of Virgins, the Peacemaker, and
Reconciler, and the guide to those who are going out of this life. How many
brave characters and qualities does the virtue of this Man afford me, should I
describe all? when he had so lived, was so instructed, and so carefully had
disciplined others, that his life and demeanor was an exact pattern, how a
Bishop should have his conversation, and his opinions the rule of Orthodoxy,
what reward did he reap of this piety? for neither is this negligently to be
past by; he dies in a good old age, and is gathered to his Fathers, the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Martyrs, that combated for the truth, and that I
may give him a short Epitaph, his Exit out of the World, was more honorable and
decorous, than his return into his City from Banishment, his Death was attended
with an Universal Mourning, and the thoughts that all men entertained
themselves with of his worth, out-went all that may be seen. But thou, O
beloved, and happy Man, who among thy many other virtues, did exquisitely
understand the seasons and measures of Speech, and Silence, do thou here put a
period to my Oration, which though it fall short of the truth, and thy worth,
is yet proportionable to my weak abilities, and look down propitiously on us
from above, and guide this people, that are perfect adorers of the perfect
Trinity, which is contemplated, and worshipped in the Father, Son, and holy
Spirit, protect me, and help feed my Flock, if peaceable and serene days attend
me, but if War and confusion, reduce, and assume me to a station with thy self,
and those that are like thee (though it be no ordinary thing that I beg) for
the sake of Christ our Lord, to whom be all glory, honor, and dominion for
ever. Amen.

THE LIFE OF S. Hilary OF POICTIERS.
I. IT is Mr. H.'s usual unhappiness in this his View to contradict himself,
while with more diligence, than judgment, he has collected whatever scattered
Memoires had relation to his subject, without that severe examination, that
became an Historian, whether all the particulars were reconcilable to the laws
of time, and truth. Of this we have a pregnant instance in. 1. p. 396. where
out of Chronic. part. 2 c. 3. p. 54.
Antoninus we are entertained with a pleasant story of an Imaginary Council at
Rome under a Pope Leo, that never was, which he that list, may read at large in
that Historian. Who having recited the particulars out of Vincentius his
Speculum, and Jacobus de Voragine, acknowledges them to be dubious, and are
indeed no way reconcilable to truth, unless we create an Antipope at that
time, called Leo, or assert, that Pope Liberius had two names, whereof one was
Leo, both which are equally improbable; for there is not a word to this purpose
in the ancient Church-Historians, who are so copious in their accounts of the
Arian Synods, no not in Philostorgius their own Historian, who not caring to
falsify the Records of the Catholic Church, would certainly never have
stifled so remarkable a transaction, had there been but the least shadow of
truth to countenance it.

II. Nor is the same argument deduced from Chronology but very prevalent with
Mr. H. p. 405. to engage him to disown the Poem called Genesis, because
dedicated to Pope Leo, the first of which name, he tells us, sat in that See
not till An. 440. But this is not the first place, where Mr. H. unfortunately
contradicts himself, who being so hot an Aristarchus in his censures of the
Fathers, is here wheadled by one of the Fantastic adventures of the Legend;
nor was this the first time this Father was so served, Apolog. pro Origin.
inter oper. Hieron. to. 4. p. 251.
Ruffinus broaching a tale somewhat like this, That whereas his Book had been
clancularly falsified by the Arians after the Convention at Ariminum, and
himself in a Synod of Bishops was examined concerning his opinion, being
willing to be tried by his own Book, what his Faith was, the falsified copy was
produced, and the Father excommunicated. And Tom. 2. Apol. 2. adv. Ruffin. p.
224.
S. Hieromes answer to that dream of Ruffinus will serve for both stories, Tell
me where this Council was held, when, and under what Emperor? who were the
Consuls that year, and who among the Prelates gave their Votes for his
Condemnation, and who opposed it?

III. Nor is Mr. H.'s superstructure on this fiction any firmer, than its
foundation, that S. Hilary was not Gallus, but de Gallia, because born in
Aquitain, which Country, says Julius Caesar, was distinct from that part of
France, which was properly called Gallia, or Gallia Celtica, as Mr. H. affirms,
but in truth wrongly; for the Province of Poictou in Julius Caesar's account was
a part of Gallia proprie dicta, which being inhabited by the Celtae, was
divided from Aquitain by the River la Garonne, and from the Belgae by the
Seine, and la Marne. For France having been divided into the Asiatick, which is
Galatia, and the European, and this last into Cispadana, called Gallia Togata,
and Transpadana, the later was divided into Gallia Bracchata, or Narbonensis
and Comata; this Gallia Comata was by Julius Caesar first among the Latins
divided into Gallia Celtica [called afterward Lugdunensis] Aquitanica, and
Belgica [though some think, that this was the division of the ancient Greeks,
from whom Caesar had it] but there being too great inequality in that division,
the whole Province of Aquitain containing little more than that Country which
the French now call Gascoigny and its Borders, and consequently being too
narrow to be accounted a third part of France, Augustus Caesar, when he had
overcome Mark Antony, and settled the Empire, divided this Country into 4 parts
[making Gallia Narbonensis one] and those 4 parts into 17 Provinces, according
to the Notitia; and to make them equal, changed and altered their limits,
taking in a great part of Gallia Celtica, or Lugdunensis, and adding it to
Aquitain, which under that Emperor extended it self not only from the Pyrenee
Mountains to the Garonne, but much farther, even to the Loire, which was its
bounds, by which means Poictou became a part of Aquitain, but not till then.
Which Country of Poictou was for a time made a Kingdom by the Goths, but they
were soon driven out of it by Chlodovec King of France. In this Country was S.
Hilary born, says Specul. hist. lib. 15. c. 23.
Vincent of Beauvais, at Bourges in Berry, the chief City of the Bituriges Cubi
a people of Aquitain, whose Metropolis was anciently called Avaricum. But I
rather believe Pr^^m. l. 2. in Ep. ad Galat. tom. 9. p. 102. D.
S. Hierome, who is herein followed by Baronius, Spondanus, Isaac Pontanus, and
others, that he was a Citizen of Poictiers by birth, which City, whether it
were the ancient Limonum, or Augustoritum, I leave to the learned to determine.

IV. Such was this famous Man for his birth, the place of his nativity, and his
actions being controverted, nor has he so escaped, but that in the account of
his writings he has equally suffered by the negligence, and unfaithfulness of
some Historians; some, as the Magdeburg Centurists, confounding him with
another Hilary of the same age, who being a Deacon at Rome, was first a
follower of Lucifer Caralitanus in his schism, and afterward turned
Anabaptist, and is reputed the Author of those Commentaries on S. Paul's
Epistles, which are reckoned among the Works of S. Ambrose; but Martyrolog. p.
42. Annal. to. 4. an. 362. p. 92.
Baronius has over and above lashed those learned men for that error. Another
Hilary was Bishop of Arles in the later end of the next Century, whom some
suppose the Author of the Carmen in Genesim, but I think rather that Pope
Hilary, who succeeded Leo the Great, writ, and dedicated that Poem to his
Predecessor. But by no means may we make S. Hilary of Arles the Author of that
Epistle to S. Austin De Praedestinatione contra Pelagianos, or that other
Epistle, which is the 88th among S. Austin's, as Mr. H. p. 404. believes, for
that Epistle was writ cir. an. 426. whenas, says the learned Gerhard Vossius,
Hilary was not Bishop of Arles [though he be so styled in the end of the
Epistle of Prosper to S. Austin] and he plainly intimates himself to be a
Layman; but if a Bishop, it was that Hilary Narbonensis, to whom the 8th
Epistle of P. Zosimus, and the 3d of P. Boniface were writ, or else Hilary of
Syracuse, who in the case of Pelagius proposed those questions to S. Austin Ep.
88. inter. Aug. which he answers Ep. 99. Baron. annal. tom. 5. an. 426. n. 20.
Voss. hist. Pelag. l. 6. These. 14. p. 600/1. Petav. rationar. temp. part. 1. l.
6. c. 16. p. 294. Raynand. disquisit. de Valeriano Cimeliensi. cap. 4. p. 10,
11. Usser de primord. Eccles. Britan. c. 11. p. 345, etc.
in which confusion of names I must direct my reader to Baronius, Gerhard
Vossius, Petavius, Raynandus, and the Reverend Primate, and there he shall find
satisfaction. And of the miraculous performances of this Father, Venantius
Fortunatus will inform him, whom I wonder Mr. H. never quotes, though he
purposely writ the life of S. Hilary.

V. When the good Prelate was banished into Phrygia, Mr. H. p. 392. makes it to
have been the act of the Synods of Biterris, and Arles, whereas those Synods
were convened in several years [that at Arles 3 years before the other] in the
first of which, not our Father, but Spondan. an. 353. n. 8. p. 32^.
Paulinus Bishop of Triers, and other Orthodox Bishops were banished into
Phrygia An. 353. in the later, which was celebrated at Besieres [whose proper
name was Bliterrae, in Antoninus Beterrae, in Ptolemy Betira, in others
otherwise] An. 356. n. 13. p. 331.
S. Hilary was banished with Rhodanius Bishop of Toulouse An. 356, which that
it happened that year, see it proved by An. 356. n. 13. p. 331.
S. Spondanus. So that Mr. H. has done ill to affirm, that he was banished by
both Synods, which was impossible, or if he meant otherwise, the rules of
Grammar would have obliged him to have set the Synod of Arles before that of
Besieres in order of writing, as in that of time.

VI. This excellent man is seldom mentioned by the Church-Historians, who writ
in Greek, or by the Greek Fathers, whom I have met with. Only I find Theodoret
styling him the holy Hilary, Bishop and Confessor. But the Latin Fathers are
more frequent in his due Encomia; Vide Socrat. Eccles. hist. lib. 3. c. 8.
Sozom. l. 3. c. 13. lib. 4. c. 8. and l. 5. c. 12.

Theodor. dial. 2. (...). Aug. contr. Julian. l. 1. c. 2. Ecclesiae Catholicae
adversus haereticos acerrimum defensorem venerandum quis ignorant Hilarium
Episcopum Gallam? -- virum tanta in Episcopis Catholicis laud praeclarum,
tanta notitia, famaque conspicuum. vid. cund. de not. and great. c. 61. etc.
Hieron. in Isai. c. 60. Cyprianus -- and nostri temporis Confessor Hilarious
^nne tibi videntur excelsae quondam in saeculo arbores aedificasse Ecclesiam
Dei? Id. Apolog. adv. Ruff. l. 2. virum eloquentissimum, and contra Arianos
Latini sermonis tubam, etc.


he is called by S. Austin, the holy, blessed, and venerable Hilary, a man
famous in the judgment of all the Christian world, the most Reverend and acute
Defender of the Catholic Church against the Heretics; by S. Hierome, a most
eminent, and eloquent man, whose Books with those of Athanasius he highly
commends in his 7th Epistle to the reading of that good woman Laeta, some of
which himself had transcribed with his own hand at Triers. And Ruffinus, who in
other places is not so just to him, yet in his Lib. 1. cap. 30.
History commends him for his excellent morals, his meekness, and sedate
temper, and for his learning, and eloquence: adding of him, and Eusebius
Vercellensis, That they were the illustrious lights of the world, and with
their rays did illuminate all Illyricum, Italy, and France; to omit Sulpitius
Severus, Venantius Fortunatus, and others.

VII. 3. p. 399. We are told, that the Tractate De numero septenario is S.
Hilary's, because it is dedicated unto Fortunatus, but that is not an argument
strong enough to deprive S. Cyprian, for there were more than one Clergyman of
that name in the time of that African Primate; for instance, there was
Fortunatus a Tuccabori, who subscribed in the Synod of Carthage, and probably
was the same to whom S. Cyprian writ his 53d Epistle, and his Exhortation to
Martyrdom. Nor could there be that actual friendship between Venantius
Fortunatus, and S. Hilary, which Mr. H. mentions, for S. Hilary is p. 414.
affirmed to die An. 366. But Venantius Fortunatus flourished not till circ. An.
570. nor was he a Frenchman by Birth, but an Italian, Born in Marchia
Tarvisana, and bred at Ravenna, who being oppressed with sore eyes, traveled to
the shrine of S. Martin, famous for such Miracles, where finding his cure, for
a testimony of his gratitude he writ the life of that famous man, and intending
a further visit to his relics, he came to Tours, and thence to Poictiers,
where making a halt, he was first made a Priest, and then Bishop of that See.

VIII. His Book of Hymns is acknowledged to be lost, unless, as Epist. dedic.
ante opera Hilarii.
Erasmus conjectures, those Hymns, Crux fidelis, and that on S. John Baptist,
Vt queant laxis etc. be some of them. But that this great man was the first
among the Catholics, that set forth Hymns and Verses, as is said p. 400, I
cannot grant. For the world is not ignorant, that Tertullian writ against
Marcion in Verse, and other Poems are fathered on him, on Cyprian, and
Lactantius; and if he means it only of Hymns, how can he reconcile his position
with that of Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. ult.
Eusebius from a much Antienter Author, who living circ. an. 200. and writing
against the heresy of Artemon, uses this as an argument to disprove that
disturber of the Church, that many faithful Brethren from the very infancy of
Christianity had writ Psalms and Hymns to the praise of Christ the Son of God,
in which they attributed Divinity to him.

IX. His Books concerning the Trinity are said by Ubi supr.
Erasmus to be his Masterpiece, as Tully's Books de Oratore, or S. Austin's de
Civitate dei, or S. Hierom's Comments on the Prophets are theirs. But withal he
wishes, that that great wit had undertook a subject that would better have
comported with his sublime and transcendent Eloquence and Acumen. But I cannot
believe that he was the first among the Latins who writ on that subject, as is
affirmed p. 401. for Mr. H. himself p. 143. acknowledges a Discourse of
Tertullian's in defense of the Trinity, which the whole Greek Church, says
Baronius, ascribe to that Father, others to S. Cyprian, a third sort to
Novatian, the Roman Schismatical Presbyter, Cyprian's Cotemporary and
Antagonist (who as Catal. v. Novatian.
S. Hierome informs, writ a great Volume of the Trinity, an Epitome of what
Tertullian had beforehand said on that subject) the youngest of which lived
some years before this French Prelate; and whereas he may explain himself, that
he means it of defending the Doctrine of the holy Trinity against the Arians,
we know, that that Alexandrian Incendiary did only revive and polish the
decryed and condemned Opinions of Artemon, Photinus, Paulus Samosatenus, and
others; though I think it were not impossible to prove, that Id. ibid. v. Lucif.
Lucifer, Bishop of Calaris in Sardinia, undertook this Controversy against
the Arian Faction, before Saint Hilary.

X. As I cannot subscribe to Cardinal Bellarmine and Possevine, that the
Epistle that is extant in the name of S. Hilary to his Daughter Abra is
undoubtedly his, so neither can I think that so indulgent, so good a Father
could be forgetful of his Family during his banishment, but that he writ both
to his Wife and Daughter, which Epistles being lost, this was foisted in for
one, as writ on that famous occasion of Abra's consulting him about her
Marriage, which Story is elegantly rendered into English by the Seraphick
Prelate Holy dying. chapter 3. sect. 7. p. 102.
Bishop Tailor, and to him I remit the Reader.

XI. The Epistles to S. Austin, and the Poem called Genesis have been adjusted
to their true owners already; and as to the Fragment concerning the
Transactions of the Council at Ariminum, p. 405. I would not have had Mr. H. so
tamely to have subscribed to Baronius, whose interest it was to decry that
piece, and who is herein followed by his Epitomator An. 352. sect. 4. and an.
357. sect. 9.
Spondanus, and the learned Resp. ad Reg. Jacob. lib. 1. cap. 27.
Perron. The passages in that fragment being too severe and peremptory to be
allowed by these Proctors of the Roman Church, as becoming Language from a
Puisny Bishop to his Holiness, to impeach him of Heresy and anathematize him;
for notwithstanding all their Arguments, I can see nothing why it may not be
genuine.

XII. His style is intricate, but copious and lofty; and for this cause among
others Erasmus complains, that it cost him more time and pains to correct S.
Hilary, Hier. Ep. 13. ad Paulin. tom. 1. p. 106. Gallicano cothurno attollitur.
Sidon. Apollin. l. 4. Ep. 3. attollitur, ut Hilarious.
than it did to set out S. Hierome; (although of S. Hierome Ep. nuncup. ante
opera Hieron.
he speaks confidently, that it cost that Father less study to write than him
to fit his works for the Press) after which he goes on with a continuation of
the Character; that his way of expressing himself is such, that had he treated
of those subjects that are plain and intelligible, yet it would be hard to
understand, and easy to deprave his Writings; much more now, when he undertook
to demonstrate what is above all reason and cannot be explained; so that men
have hardly usurped that liberty over any one of the Ancients, as they have
done over S. Hilary, especially in his Books de Trinitate, and Synodis, in
which by comparing Manuscripts he found in some places whole Prefaces added, in
others a conclusion of a discourse, in a third place 30 or 40 lines
interpolated at once. And when Ep. 141. ad Marcell.
S. Hierome says, That he durst not reprehend a man so eminent in his Age, both
for his courage in asserting the truth, for the holiness of his life, and the
perswasiveness of his Eloquence, which made him famous throughout the whole
Roman Empire; yet in the same Epistle he says, that he understood neither
Hebrew nor Greek, for which Erasmus makes his Apology, that for skill in Hebrew
none of the Fathers before him had any, but Origin, and that engaged them to
use the Translation of the Septuagint; and for his knowledge of the Greek
Tongue, that he was happier in his own Compositions than in his Translations,
adding and omitting in the later what himself pleased. Nor is his style without
its Barbarisms, but Scio inter Christianos verborum vitia non solere
reprehendi, says S. Hierome, Solecisms in Speech are no breach of the Laws of
Christianity.

XIII. His Creed,. 5. p. 407. is set down too short, as if the holy Prelate
never owned the belief of the Divinity of the holy Ghost, when to what Mr. H.
recites, he should have added what immediately follows, Tom. 1. lib. 3. adv.
Constant. p. 281.
haec ego in spiritu sancto it a credidi, ut, etc. These things by the
assistance of the holy spirit do I so believe, that I am not to be taught any
other Creed; for herein I differ not from the belief of the Fathers according
to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Symbol repeated at my Baptism. For if he
defended the Trinity ex professo in his Books, and owns the belief of the
Apostolic Creed, which he there mentions, I know not how he can be said to
deny the Divinity of the holy Ghost. And this I mention, because Erasmus and
others so impeach him; for that when he expressly mentions the adoration of the
Father and the Son, he alters his style, when he speaks of the holy Ghost, De
Trinit. lib. 2. p. 30. and l. 12. p. 261.
(hie ergo spiritus sanctus expetendus est, promerendus est -- ut patrem, and
filium adorem, and sanctum spiritum tuum promerear, etc.) and for this method
of expressing himself Erasmus gives his reasons by way of Apology, either that
his discourse did not require any more explicit Declaration of the holy
Ghost's Divinity, or that the Dogma was not yet defined by the Church, or that
there is no such position expressly laid down in Scripture, or that his great
design being against the Arians, there was more need to prove the Deity of the
Son of God, who was made man, Macedonius not yet appearing to disturb the
Church; and yet Page 260.
in the same Sentence where S. Hilary denies Christ to be a Creature, he
affirms the same of the holy Ghost; and if no Creature, then by the Father's
own way of arguing, a Creator, and if so, to be adored, and whatsoever is to be
adored is God.

XIV. The Errors laid to the charge of this venerable Ancient, have been
collected to Mr. H.'s hand by Erasmus, and others, but that acute Dutchman
excuses the first, when he assigns usum spiritui sancto, as if it were a
mistake of his in translating the passage out of some Greek Writer [and it is
affirmed by a Chemnit. orat. de lect. Patr. p. 4.
good Author, that he collected the Sentences of the Greeks concerning the
Trinity] fortasse legerat (...), quod derivatur (...), ab utendo, unde (...)
and (...); so that he imagined the word to signify use, which imports
goodness; and if so, in this last sense the Doctrine is consonant to that of
the Schools, which attributes works of Power to God the Father, of Wisdom to
God the Son, but of Mercy and Goodness to God the holy Ghost; so that this is
rather an Error in Grammar, a mis-translation, than an Error in Divinity.

XV. His second Error was not only his, but the Opinion of Clemens of
Alexandria, and others; and Bonaventure says that Gulielmus Parisiensis saw a
Book of S. Hilary's, wherein he retracted that Opinion. When he affirms, that
the blessed Virgin did conceive, carry in her Womb, and bring forth our Savior,
it implies plainly, that he derived his flesh and blood from the substance of
his mother; and when he subjoyns, that he took nothing else from her, I should
understand it either of original sin, which he was absolutely free from, or
rather of Humane Passions, which the blessed Virgin was subject to, and so this
Assertion immediately succeeding the former in the Father, seems to me to be
the same with it. Nor can I think, there would have been so intimate, and
sacred a friendship between our Confessor, and S. Athanasius, [so great, that
the Alexandrian Patriarch translated S. Hilaries Books into Greek] if the one
had denied Christ's being born of the substance of his Mother, which the other
makes an Article of his Creed. So that here I cannot forbear giving my Reader
the excellent advice of this very Father to guide him in such cases. De trinit.
lib. 1. p. 9.
Optimus lector est, qui dictorum intelligentiam exspectet ex dictis potius,
quam attulerit, neque cogat id videri dictis contineri, quod ante lectionem
praesumpserit Apud Chemnit. loc. com. part. 1. sect. de filie p. 76.
intelligendum. That man only is fit to read Books, who brings no prejudice
with him, and understands the words that he reads, in the sense of the Author,
not according to his own persuasion, and fancy.

XVI. His fourth error, that we are the Sons of God not only by Adoption, but
Nature, has its Apology in that of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.4. That we are made
partakers of the divine Nature [(...)] and if this be, as probably it may be, a
Translation out of the Greek, (...) we know in that Language is a word of
various signification, and that even in Scripture, to instance only in that one
controverted place, 1 Cor. 11.14. and there is now a MS. Commentary, says Apud
Pears. vindic. part. 2. cap. 14. p. 196.
Lambecius, in the library at Vienna with this Title, (...), How many ways the
word (...) is understood in holy writ.

XVII. His fifth opinion, that all things were created at once in the same
moment, and that Moses added the distinction of six days, the better to suit
the shallow capacities of men, is a tenet, that has found many late Vide
Valesii sacr. philos. c. 1.
Patrons, and among the Antiens the vulgar Translation of Ecclus. 18.1. He that
lives for ever, created all things at once. Which place we find did sway De
Genes. ad lit. li. 4. c. 33. and lib. 10. c. 2. and Confess. l. 12. c. 9.
S. Austin, and is easily solved, if we understand it in the sense of Rhabanus
Maurus, whom the Master of the sentences, Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas,
Carthusianus, and many others follow, that the substances of all things were
created at once [that Chaos so much talked of] but the introducing fit forms
into every particular part of that rude heap, was the work of the six days.

XVIII. His opinion of freewil, is very suspiciously worded, and yet not only
the Greek Fathers usually so express themselves, but also Lib. 3. contr. Pelag.
tom. 2. p. 301.
S. Hierome, even when he designedly writes against the Pelagians. Know this --
that it is our duty to ask, and Gods part to bestow what we Petition; for we
must begin, and God will perfect the good work. So that such sentences are more
tolerable in S. Hilary, who spoke less warily, because Pelagius had not yet
appeared in the world; and to this purpose the remarque of the most learned
Hist. Pelag. l. 4. part. 2. p. 438.
Gerhard Vossius is very pertinent. These harsh sayings of the Ancients were
the cause, that that admirable and transcendent Bishop S. Austin was in nothing
so put to it, as when his adversaries urged him with the Testimonies of the
Fathers, of which some he interprets dexterously and to the best advantage, some
he excuses, and a few, which he could no way Apologize for, he courageously
condemns.

XIX. That S. Hilary lived only six years after his return from his exile [as
is asserted p. 414.] is opposed by In Chronic.
S. Hierome, who tells us, that he returned from his banishment an. MM CCC
LXXVI. and dyed an. MM CCC LXXXIII. which is seven years; so that he could not
dye in the fourth year of the Emperors Valentinian and Valens, as says Hist.
l. 2.
Sulpitius Severus, nor in the sixth year after his return, as say Lib. 1. cap.
39.
Gregory Turonensis, and Mr. H. but in the sixth year of those Emperors, and
an. Chr. 369. for himself in his answer to Auxentius tells us, that he opposed
that Heretic at Millain ten years after the Council at Ariminum, which could
not be till Ann. 369. And in that year probably he left the world, Greg. Turon.
ubi supr.
Plenus Sanctitate, and fide, Famous for the holiness of his Life, and
miraculous achievements, among many others of which prodigious Actions he is
reported to have raised the dead; Erasm. ubi supr.
he was certainly a Prelate of a sanctified converse, and exact orthodoxy, of
singular learning, and admirable Eloquence: In a word, he lived, and dyed the
glory of his Age.

FINIS.
Books printed for and sold by Richard Chiswel.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign
Parts. Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. Dr. Cary's Chronological
Account of Ancient time. Wanly's Wonders of the little World, or History of
Man. Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Holyoak's large Dictionary,
Latin and English. Sir Rich. Baker's Chronicle of England. Causin's Holy Court.
Wilson's complete Christian Dictionary. Bishop Wilkin's Real Character, or
Philosophical Language. Pharmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis.
Judge Jone's Reports of Cases in Common Law. Judge Vaughan's Reports of Cases
in Common Law. Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Hobbes's Leviathan.
Lord Bacon's Advancement of Learning. Bishop Taylor's Sermons. Sir Will.
Dugdale's Baronage of England in 2 Vol. Ravanelli Bibliotheca Theologica 3 Vol.
QUARTO.
THe several Informations exhibited to the Committee appointed by Par^iament to
enquireinto the burning of Land. 1667. Godwin's Romans Antiquities. Dr.
Littleton's Dictionary. Bishop Nicholson on the Church Catechism. The complete
Clark. Dr. Pierce on Gods Decrees. History of the late Wars of New England. Dr.
Outram de Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from Popery. Garissolius de
Chr. Mediatore. Corpus Confessionum Fidei. Spanhemii Dubia Evangelica 2 Vol.
Dr. Gibb's Sermons. Parkeri Disputationes de Deo. Caryl on Job complete, 12
parts. Description and History of the future State of Europe, 1 s. Fowler's
defense of the Design of Christianity against John Bunyan, 1 s. Lyford's
discovery of Errors and Heresies of the times, 4 s. Dr. Sherlock's Visitation
Sermon at Warrington, 1659. 6 d. Dr. West's Assize-Sermon at Dorchester, 1671.
6. d. Mr. Dobson's Sermon. at Lady Farmers Funeral, 1670. 8 d. Directions for
Improvement of Barren Land, 6 d. Culverwel's Discourse of the Light of Nature,
3 s. 6 d. Dr. Meric Casaubon's Letter to Dr. Du Moulin, about Experimental
Philosophy, 6. d. Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain
French Gentlemen charged with a Robbery, 1671. 6 d. The Magistrates Authority
asserted, in a Sermon by James Paston.
OCTAVO.
COnold's Notion of Schism according to the Ancients with Reflections on Mr.
Hales. The Posing of the Parts. Elborow's Rationale upon the English Service.
Burnet's Vindication of the Ordination of the Church of England. Winchester
Phrases. Wilkin's Natural Religion. Hardcastle's Christian Geography and
Arithmetic. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the Clergy. Lord
Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the house of Peers in the case of
Skinner. -- Jurisdiction of the house of Peersin case of Appeals. --
Jurisdiction of the house of Peers in case of Impositions. -- Letter about the
Bishops Vote in Capital Cases. Xenophont. Cyropaedia. Gr. Lat. Duporti Versio
Psalmorum Graeca. Grews Idea of Philological Hist. continued on Roots.
Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice, Batei Elenchus motuum
nuperorum in Anglia. Brown's Religio Medici. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales of
Eton. Bishop Sanderson's Life. Dr. Tillotsons Rule of Faith. Gregorii
Etymologicon Parvum. Passoris Grammatica Grae. Novi Testamenti, 4 s. Rossei
Gnomologicon Poeticum. Gouge's word to Saints and Sinners. Dr. Simpson's
Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of the Original of
Hot-Springs and other Fountains; and a Vindication of Chemical Physic, 3 s. --
His Hydrological Essays; with an Account of the Allumworks at Whitby, and some
Observations about the Jaundice. 1 s. 6 d. Dr. Cox's Discourse of the Interest
of the Patient, in reference to Physic and Physicians, and Detection of the
Abuses practiced by the Apothecaries, 1 s. 6 d. Organon Salutis: Or an
Instrument to cleanse the Stomach: with diverse New Experiments of the Virtue of
Tobacco and Coffee: To which is prefixed a Preface of Sir Henry Blunt. 1 s.
Aristotle's Problems. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three parts. A
Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and Difference of the two Covenants, 1672. 2 s.
Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness, 1672. 1 s. 6 d. Lipsius's
Discourse of Constancy. 2 s. 6 d. Willis Anglicisms Latiniz'd. 3 s. 6 d.
Buckler of State and Justice against France's Design of Universal Monarchy,
1673. A Free Conference touching the Present State of England at home and
abroad, in order to the designs of France, 1673. 1 s. Bishop Tailor of
Confirmation. 1 s. 6 d. Mystery of Jesuitism, third and fourth part. 2 s. 6 d.
Sanderson Judicium Academ. Oxoniens. de Solenni Liga. 6 d. Dr. Samways
Unreasonableness of the Romanists. 1 s. 6 d. Record of Urins. 1 s. Dr. Ashton's
Cases of Scandal and Persecution. 1674. 1 s.
DUODECIMO.
FArnabii Index Rhetoricus. Ciceronis Orationes selectae. Hodders Arithmetic.
Horatius Minellii. Sands Ovids Metamorphosis. Grotius de Veritate Religionis
Christianae. Bishop Hacket's Christian Consolations.
VICESIMOQUARTO.
Lucius Florus. Lat. -- -- Id. Truth. 190 Crumbs of Comfort. Valentine's
Devotions. Guide to Heaven.
Books lately printed.
GUillim's Display of Herauldry with large Additions. Dr. Burnet's History of
the Reformation of the Church of England, Folio. Dr. Burlace's History of the
Irish Rebellion. Herodoti Historia. G^ae. Lat. fol. Mr. John Jenison's
Additional Narrative about the Plot. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary with
large Additions, 1679. William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, October. 12.79. --
History of the Gunpowder Treason. -- Impartial Consideration of the Speeches of
the Five Jesuits executed for Treason. fol. Relation of the Massacre of the
Protestants in France. Trials of the Regicides. 8o. Dangerfield's Narative of
the Pretended Presbyterian Plot. Mr. James Brome's Two Fast Sermons. The Famine
of the Word threatened to Israel, and Gods call to weeping and mourning. Account
of the Public Affairs in Ireland since the discovery of the late Plot. Dr.
Jane's Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11. 1679. Dr. Burnet's
Two Letters written upon the Discovery of the late Plot. 4to Decree made at
Rome 2d March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of the Jesuits and other
Casuists. 4to Mr. John James Visitation Sermon, April 9. 1671. 4to Mr. John
Cave's Fast Sermon on 30 Jan. 1679. 4to -- His Assize Sermon at Leicester, July
31. 1679. 4to Certain Genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments Civil,
Moral, Natural, Medical, Theological and Bibliographical; with a large Account
of all his Works, by Mr. Thomas Tenison. 8o Dr. Puller's Discourse of the
Moderation of the Church of England. 8o The Original of all the Plots in
Christendom; with the Danger and Remedy of Schism: by Dr. William Sawell,
Master of Jesus College Cambridge. 8o A Discourse of Supreme Power and Common
Right, by a Person of Quality. 8o Dr. Edw. Bagshaw's Discourse upon Select
Texts against the Papist and Socinian. 8o Mr. Rushworth's Historical
Collections: The second Volume. fol. -- His large and exact Account of the
Trial of the Earl of Strafford, with all the Circumstance^ preliminary to,
concomitant with, and subsequent upon the same to his death. fol. Remarques
relating to the state of the Church of the three first Centuries, wherein are
interspersed Animadversions on a Book, called A View of Antiquity: By J. H.
Written by A. S.

