TWO TREATISES Written by JOHN SELDOM OF THE INNER TEMPLE, Esquire. The First,
Of the ORIGINAL OF Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction OF TESTAMENTS: The Second, Of
the Disposition or Administration OF Intestates Goods.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset at the George in Fleet Street, and Richard
Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIII.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. Of the Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Testaments.
CHAP. I. THE Intrinsecal Jurisdiction not given to the Church by the Civil
Law, Page 1 CHAP. II. Nor by the Canon Law. p. 3 CHAP. III. The Extrinsecal
Jurisdiction by the Civil Law, in whom, ibid. CHAP. IV. In whom by the Canon
Law, p. 4 CHAP. V. Of the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction in the Saxons time, p. 5
CHAP. VI. Whence Linwood thinks the Jurisdiction Intrinsecal came to the
Church, p. 9 CHAP. VII. Testimonies of King John and Henry the Third's time,
that may serve to prove the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction then in the Temporal
Courts, p. 11 CHAP. VIII. Suits of Legacies personal in the Spiritual Court
from the beginning of Henry the Third, of the beginning of that Course, p. 12
PART II. Of the Disposition of Administration of Intestates Goods.
CHAP. I. In whom it was in the time of the Saxons, p. 15 CHAP. II. In whom
after the Normans until King John 's time, p. 17 CHAP. III. In whom after the
time of King John, p. 18 CHAP. IV. How that so granted by King John 's Charter
in Parliament has continued of practice, p. 20 CHAP. V. Of that of bona
Intestatorum in manus Domini Regis capi solebant, p. 22
PART I. OF THE ORIGINAL OF Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction OF TESTAMENTS.
CHAP. I. The Intrinsecal Jurisdiction not given to the Church by the Civil Law.
THE Jurisdiction of Testaments being either Intrinsecal or Extrinsecal, (that
is) either touching Probate, or Recoveries of Legacies: First for the
Intrinsecal, it is clear that it came not to the Bishop by Imitation; or
otherwise, from the Imperial Civil Law: for by the elder part of that Law,
regularly the Probate or Aperture of Wills was before the ff. Test. quemadmodum
aperiant. per tot. Et vide etiam Auth. 74. c. 2. sit igitur Licentia.
Praetor. And afterward the obsignation, insinuation and Probate of them in
Rome, was before the Magister Census, or De Episc. l. 41. and tit. de testam.
l. 10. and 23. and Caput Theodos. ll. 4. tit. 4. l. 4. Ubi visendus interpres
vetus:
apud officium Censuale, as it were before the Barons of our Exchequer; and
that continued into later time. And the same Officer by the name of Authent.
44. and ibid. Cujacius, and videsis Gloss. Graecobarb. Meursii in (...).
(...), or generalis in Constantinople, had the same authority: But also
afterward as well the Questor's Seal, as that of the generalis became to be
used at the obsignation, and his authority also in the Probate or Aperture. And
the Emperor Leo Novel 44. formulas ver. Testam. aperiendorum, videsis I. Paul
Regest. sentent. l. 4. tit. 6. and Marculph. Formul. l. 2. c. 37. and 38.
about the year 890. transferred all that herein belonged to the Generalis into
the Questor's place; yet so, that some other Civil Magistrates had the like
authority: and what was done before these in Rome and Constantinople, was in
other Cities before their Chief Governors, as Defensores or Praesides: neither
was the Church permitted to have to do with the Insinuation of Testaments, but
expressly forbidden by a rescript C. de Episc. and eler. l. 41. repetita.
of the Emperor Justin: nor is any thing that gives it either among the
Novells of the Greek Empire, or in the Lombarda, or Capitulares, which have
Hostiens. in prooem. sum. and vetustiores canonist. passim.
been reputed as parts also of the Imperial Law.

CHAP. II. Nor by the Canon Law.
NEither in any General Council, or other part of the received Canon Law, does
any Testimony occurr, that gives the Church this Intrinsecal Jurisdiction. But
in the fourth Council of Cap. 18.
Carthage holden in the year 398. it was ordained, Vt Episcopus tuitionem
testamentorum non suscipiat. And this being then established by two hundred and
fourteen Bishops, was afterward made a part of Did. de secular. negotiis,
cap. 5.
the Decrees, or Canon Law, collected by Gratian, and published and authorized
by Pope Eugenius the Third about 1150. and the Gloss upon that Canon interprets
tuitio for Aperture or Probate. So also Pope Ad c. nos quidem extra tit. de
testament.
Innocent the Fourth understands it: publicatio (says he) fieri non debet apud
Episcopum; and he vouches that Law, Tit. de Instrum. edit. S. ostens. 34. vid.
D. D. ad c. nos quidem, etc. si haeredes extra tit. de test. and Linwood de
test. c. item S. infin. and cap. stat. S. approb.
Consulta ducalia tit. de Testament. to prove it. Speculator, Hostiensis and
others of the same time, and generally the rest that follow them, make the
Civil Law only the square of the Jurisdiction of the Probates; and so it is
truly affirmed in our Books, that the Probate belongs not to the Church 2 R. 3.
Test. 4. 14 H. 7. so. 12. b.
by the Spiritual Law; neither is any such thing given by any later Quod
discimus ex Bullarii summa quam edidit S. Guaranta.
Bull, or Decretal from the Bishop of Rome.

CHAP. III. The Extrinsecal Jurisdiction by the Civil Law, in whom.
FOr the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction that gave Recoveries of Legacies, by the
Imperial Civil Law, where the Legacies were in pios usus, the C. de Episc. and
Cler. l. 28. Nulli, and l. 49. si quis ad declinand authentic. 135. c. 10. and
vid. c. 11.
Bishop of the Diocese sometimes by himself, sometimes with the Civil
Magistrate, provided for the execution of the Testators meaning: otherwise the
Jurisdiction of Legacies, and what else falls under Testamentary disposition,
was and ff. de Petit. haered. and tit. de legate.
is the Magistrates only.

CHAP. IV. In whom by the Canon Law.
BUt by the Canon Law, the general care of execution of Testaments is committed
to the Bishop: yet I find not any Canon to that purpose received into the Body
of that Law, now in authority, before the time of the Decretals; which have out
of some Council of Mentz these words, viz. Extr. de test. c. 6.
Si haeredes jussa Testatoris non impleverint, ab Episcopo loci illius omnis
Res quae eis relicta est Canonice interdicatur, cum fructibus and caeteris
emolumentis, ut vota defuncti impleantur. Out of what Council of Mentz this is
taken, I have not yet learned; Lib. 15. c. 34.
but in the same syllables it occurrs in Burchard, that lived about six hundred
years since, with the Marginal Note of ex Concilio Moguntino. What other Texts
are, touching the power of the Canons over performance of Testaments, have
reference to that course ordained by the Civil Law, where any thing was given
in pios usus, not to a general Jurisdiction; for so is the Canon Nos quidem
extr. tit. de testam. Neither is that Canon Vltima Voluntas in C. 13. q. 2.
taken out of S. Gregory, otherwise to be understood, if you interpret it as you
ought by those Videsis Greg. lib. 3. Epist. 9. and lib. 9. Epist. 20.
places of Gregory whence it is taken: but the Canonists generally upon that
Canon Si haeredes, take it, that executio testamentorum ad Episcopos spectat.
And so those old ones Pope Innocent the Fourth, Bernard, and others of the rest
deliver; and the Vid. Gonzal. Zuarez Prax. Eccles. Lam. 2. Praelud. 2. Sect.
44. and Zerula prop Episcop. verb. leg. ad quaest. 9.
latter follow them, yet they commonly restrain it (and that in practice in
other States) to Legacies given in pios usus. And in the Council of Trent,
where twice the Bishops power over Testaments is provided for, Sess. 12. de
reform. cap. 6. and Sess. ult. de reformat. c. 4.
nothing is spoken of but Commutations of Legacies, and of such as are given in
pios usus: yet from Ancient time both the Intrinsecal and Extrinsecal
Jurisdiction of Testaments made of personal Chattels in England, has been and
is in the Church, except in places where special Custom excludes it: the
original whereof being not sufficiently found in either of these Laws (the
Civil and Canon) diverse parts of which according to the various admission of
several Estates have been much dispersed through Christendom, and some remain
now exercised by imitation among us; It rests, that disquisition be made for it
in the Monuments of the Kingdom, that according as they together with the
Canons afford light, some conjecture may be had touching the Antiquity and
ground of it.

CHAP. V. Of the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction in the Saxons time.
THe Eldest Testament that I have seen made in England, is that of King Edgar's
time, made by Iamb. Peramb. Cant. p. 548.
one Birthric a Gentleman or Thane (it seems) of great worth, and his Wife
Elswith; wherein they devise both Lands and Goods; and in the end of the Will
says her husband. And ic hid for goder lufan minne leofan Hlaford. that He
ne thafige that ae^ig man uncerne ^pide aende; And I pray for Gods love my
leefe Lord, that he do not suffer that any man our Testament do break.

It may perhaps thence be collected, that the Protection or Execution of this
Testament was within the Jurisdiction of the Lords Court, as also the Probate;
and that especially, because diverse Lords Hensloes Case 9. Rep. b.
of Manors have to this day the Probate of Testaments by Custom continued,
against that which is otherwise regularly settled in the Church. But the same
Testament being for Lands as well as for Goods, it may be that this Clause had
reference to the Lord in regard of the Land only, (to the Alienation of which,
his Assent might be requisite) or to denote him for the Testators best friend,
as one chosen Overseer of his Will; and indeed he desires all other good people
to see his Will be not broken; which makes me only offer it, as what another
man's fancy may work on: but I conceive not out of it enough to prove either way
any thing touching the Jurisdiction of Testaments.

Nor in the Saxon times appears any thing that can sufficiently direct us to
know, how it was exercised here, unless out of that example of Siwerth of
Durham's Testament, in the In Bibli^thec. Cottoniana.
Book of Ely, you may collect, that the Probate was supplied in the lifetime
of the Testator by Inrolment, or leaving an Indented Copy of it with the
Alderman or Sheriff of the County, in whose County Court the most of
proceedings of Temporal Justice, and of the Spiritual also (for the Bishop sat
with him, as in his Consistory) were in the Saxon times: for so much perhaps
may be conjectured out of it, as we faithfully here relate it. Siwerth in King
Edgar's time, lying sick at Lindane in the Isle of Elie, makes his Testament,
and sends for Brithnorth Abbot of Elie, and diverse of the Monks, and others of
the Gentry; and the Abbot writes the Testament in tribus Chirographis, coram
(so are the words of the Book) cunctis fecit recitari, lectumque fecit incidi,
unamque partem Chirographi retinuit Siferthus, Alteram autem dedit Abbati,
tertiam vero misit statim per praefatum Brithelmum (that was one of the
Gentlemen of the Country then present) Ailwino Aldermano, qui tunc temporis
degebat in Elie, and petiit ab illo ut suum Testamentum stare concederet,
quomodo Abbas allud scripsenat, In lib. concess^siet.
and ordinaverat apud Lindane little praedictorum Testimonio virorum.

Cum itaque Ailwinus Alderman hoc audisset, and Chirographum vidisset, re misit
illico ad eum Wlnothum de Stowe cum Brithelmo, sciscitatusque est ab eo quid
aut quomodo vellet de Testamento suo: qui mox per cosdem renuntiavit ei, sic
suum Testamentum absque omni contradictione vel mutatione se velle stare, sicut
praefatus Abbas illud in Chirographo posuerat, quod ut Ailwinus Alderman
audivit, totum concessit, ut staret sient ipse Siverthus Testatus erat. But in
deed, in it Lands lying in Durham were devised to the Abbey; and so, it was not
only of personal Chattels.

The Saxon Laws are very silent of any thing touching Testaments; and we must
remember, while we think of that example of Suverth of Durham, that the
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts of Common Justice, held as one by the
Sheriff and Bishop, were not severed as now, into the Consistory, and County
Court, until the Conqueror did it by a Law yet remaining and elsewhere
published V. Spicilegia in Eadmerum.
.

In what intercedes from this time, until about H. 2. I find not any Testimony
that gives light to this purpose; as the Saxon Laws, so those of the
Conqueror, and of H. 1. and H. 2. mention nothing that tastes of either kind of
Jurisdiction of Testaments; only of a Charter of H. 1. extant in Matthew. Paris,
and in the Red Book of the Exchequer this occurrs, Si quis Baronum vel hominum
meorum infirmabitur, sicut ipse dabit vel dare jusserit pecuniam suam, ita
datam esse concedo. This may perhaps seem to denote, that the Kings Court
determined of Legacies, especially of the Kings Tenants.

But indeed it proves not so much. But the eldest passage that proves clear
enough here, is that which makes the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction t ohave been in
the Church, and the Extrinsecal in the Kings Court; I mean that which is found
in the Treatise attributed to Randall of Lib. 7. cap. 6. and 7.
Glanvill Chief Justice under H. 2. where he says, that if a Legacy be
detained, the Executors or other friends of the Testator, were to get the Kings
Writ to the Sheriff, commanding quod just and sine dilatione facias stare
rationabilem divisum, (that is, the Bequest or Legacy) N. sicut rationabiliter
monstrari poterit quod eam fecerit, and quod ipsam stare debeat, etc. And it is
plain by the words there preceding and subsequent, that it has reference to
moveable or personal possessions, not to Lands, etc. So that it seems clear by
that in H. 2. his time, the Jurisdiction of personal Legacies was in Secular
Courts. But if the Issue in Secular Courts upon that Writ came to be, whether
the Testament were true or no, or well made, or whether the thing demanded were
in facto bequeathed, Tum (says he) placitum illud in Curia Christianitatis
audiri debet, and terminari, quia placitum de Testamentis coram Judice
Ecclesiastico fieri debet, and per illorum qui Testamento intersuerint
testimonia secundum juris ordinem terminari: that is, as it must be understood,
that upon issue of bequeathed or not bequeathed, of Testament made, or no
Testament, the Trial must have been otherwise than by the practice of the
latter 29 Ed. 3.33. a. 44 Ed. 3.16. a. Perk. 493. 22H. 6.52.
Law, wherein the Testament is traversable, and the Traverse tryable in the
Kings Court by Certificate to the Temporal Court from the Ecclesiastical, as at
this day, of Institution, Bastardy, and Profession in Religion, and the like:
and thence may it be well concluded, that at this time by the practiced Law,
the Probate or the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction was in the Church; for as the
Institution, Bastardy and Profession are to be certified, because within the
Bishops Jurisdiction. Some recorded Testimonies remain of the first and third,
and the nature of the Marriage or Cohabitation (that directs in the second) is
to be judged of only in the Spiritual Courts; so the Validity of the Testament,
or the truth of this or that particular Legacy was to be certified from the
Spiritual Court, because the Probate had there proceeded, and the Copy there
remaining was most authentic; otherwise to what purpose should they have sent
to the Spiritual Court in such a case?

But on the other side, as in the case of Institution, Profession and Bastardy,
the consequence of them, which are objects of their Extrinsecal Jurisdiction,
as Descent, Exclusion from Inheritance, gaining it by a descent cast, or legal
making a Church full, or the like are determinable only at the Common Law; so
the consequence of a Testament, that is, the Recoveries of Legacies, and such
like, as it seems by that Writ, were in the Temporal, not in the Spiritual
Court. I know the authority of that Treatise is suspected, and some of the best
and ancientest Copies having the name of E. de N. which I have heard from
diligent searchers in this kind of Learning, affirmed to have been sometimes E.
de Narborough, and not R. de Glanvilla, it has been thought to be another
Work, and also of later time. But, as on the one side, I dare not be confident,
that it is Glanvills, so I make little question, that it is as ancient as his
time, if not his Work. The Tests of the Precedents of Writs under his name, the
language, especially the name of Justitia always for that which we now from
ancient time call Justitiarius; and Justitia was so used in Ita Jo.
Salisburgensis de Nugis Curial. lib. 5. cap. 15. and 16.
Writers under H. 2. and the Law delivered in it tastes not of any later Age.
And howsoever it comes to pass, the Regiam Majestatem of Scotland published by
Command of David the First under the time of our Hen. 1. has for the most part
the same syllables with this supposed Glanvill, and expressly Regiam Majestat.
lib. 3. cap. 38.
the very passages and the Writ that we have now here noted for Testaments.

That Extrinsecal Jurisdiction of those times in the Secular Courts, was
perhaps denoted by those words in the Testament of Theobald Archbishop of
Canterbury under King Stephen, Jo. Sarisburg. Epist. 57.
Supremis (says he) deficientium voluntatibus suum accommodant jura favorem,
where he devises only personal things and uses. I think, Jura is rather to be
taken for the Common Law, than the Spiritual; which is, in the most usual
phrase of that time, designed by Canones.

In this time of Hen. 2. diverse fierce Controversies fell between the Law and
Spiritual Jurisdiction, and the particulars of them are largely related at the
end of Quadrilogus, in Gervase of Dover, in Roger of Wendover, in John of
Salisbury, and Matthew Paris, but in him most abruptly; yet not the least
mention is in them touching any matter of this Jurisdiction; and in the main
Cases of our Spiritual Courts depending under H. 2. and sent by appeal to Rome,
which yet remain in the Epistles of John of Salisbury, there is not one that
touches upon either of these Jurisdictions of Testaments in the Church; but
indeed there is one that may seem somewhat to prove for that which we note out
of Glanvill, concerning the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction at that time in the
Temporal Court: for in an Appeal sent to Pope Alexander the Third, the Case, as
John Epist. 89.
of Salisbury relates it, was, that one Richard de Anestia in foro secularium
Judicum petitionem haereditatis ad bona avunculi obtinenda instituit, against
Mabile de Franckvilla, being Daughter to William of Sackvill, to whom the
Plaintiff was Nephew by his Sister: and the point of the issue between the
Daughter here and the Nephew, being upon the Bastardy of the Daughter, the
Spiritual Court had the Trial of it. If (bona) here be understood for
Chattells, as in our Law it is, and so restrained, then was this petitio
haereditatis, as a Suit for Sackvill's Goods, grounded also, as it seems, upon
a Testament of his: for in the relation of the Case also, Richardus insistebat,
says the Author, institutioni Avunculi, petitionem haereditatis instituens;
and on the other side, Mabile maxim Patris novissmae voluntati innitebatur:
which shows, that here was a Testament in the Case, and a Suit for what was
challenged by it in the Temporal Court: But haereditas and bona, it is likely,
included here (as by the Civil Law) all possessions of the Ancestor, both real
of Inheritance, and personal, that is, the universum jus defuncti, and not only
our inheritance; although it does also amongst some Barth. ad tit. de summa Tr.
l. 1. number. 42.
Civilians denote no more, if at least they understand aright what they say,
while they write, that consuetudo est in Anglia qua primogenitus succedit in
omnibus bonis: and in this Case, if the Issue had been upon the Truth of the
Testament, as it was upon the Bastardy, it had been referred also to the
Spiritual Judges.

CHAP. VI. Whence Linwood thinks the Jurisdiction Intrinsecal came to the
Church.
BY what is before delivered, it appears, that the Intrinsecal Jurisdiction or
Probate was in the Church; and that by express testimony, as anciently as the
time of H. 2. and by all probability it was in settled use before that time,
being spoken of in that Treatise called Glanvill's, as a known course of
proceeding: although indeed yet I could never see an express Probate in any
particular case, elder than about H. 3. But the beginning or course of this
Intrinsecal Jurisdiction in the Church, is not for ought I have yet learned,
extant: however Fairefaxe tells us, that it was by an Act of Parliament, 2 R.
3. tit. Teslam. 4.
which perhaps he took from that of Linwood; Tit. de Test. C. stat. verb.
Ecclesia libert.
Haec libertas (Ecclesiae) quoad approbationem hujusmodi (says Linwood)
fundatur super consensu Regio, and suorum Procerum (in talibus) ab antiquo,
concesso. Where he means by in talibus, their power of committing of
Administration of Intestates goods, as it is plain by his quotation of that
Constitution of Archbishop Stafford tit. de immunitate Eccles. accidit.
novitate perversas guidam etiam: That power was given, as I guess, by
Parliament in King John's time: but thereof more in due place. And Linwood
adds, Item fundatur super consuetudine in ea part de scientia Regum Angliae,
diutius conservata: Which is indeed, that it is founded upon the Common Law or
Customary Law of the Kingdom; or that it has like antiquity or original as
other parts of the Common Law, that is, immemorial Custom. For though it be
exercised according to the Civil and Canon Law in the Spiritual Courts, with
some reference had to the Customs of England; yet it is clear, that the power
which the Spiritual Courts have to exercise it, is merely by the Common Law;
although we find not when it came first to them, no more than we find diverse of
our settled Courses and Maxims in the Common Law; touching which yet we can
without much difficulty prove, that at such or such times they were not in
practice; as perhaps in the more ancient Ages, this was not in these Courts.
But that it was originally belonging to the Crown, that is, to the Temporal
Courts, which are all, and ever were derived from the Dignity Royal, is
affirmed also, as in that cited in Hensloe's Case, out of Jocelin's History of
the Arch bishop of Canterbury, in a Writ Cod. MS. Hosp. S. Leonardi in
Biblioth. Cottoniana.
2 H. 5. that prohibiteth the Archbishop of York to call the Executors of the
Tenants of S. Leonard's Hospital to prove their Wills before him; because as
the words are, placita de cognitionibus scriptorum in Regno nostro Angl. ad
Nos, Coronam and dignitatem nostram specialiter pertinent: and also they had
time out of mind used to prove them before the Masters and Brothers of the
Hospital. Here we see the Testaments reckoned as other Evidences, Hensloes Case
apud v. cl. Ed Cook par. 9. fo. 37, 38, 48.
the Trial and Conusance whereof belongs only to the Temporal Courts: and at
this day by special Custom many Lords of Manors have like Probate in their
Courts Baron.

By the way, That in France Probates are in the Spiritual Courts.
for that which Fairefaxe, and others following him, tells us, that in all
other Countries the Probate belongs to Lay-Judges, he is deceived, and deceives
his Readers. Indeed, in the most places of other States it belongs to the
Lay-Judges: but in France Choppin. de Dom. Franciae lib. 2. page 230. Edit.
1588. and videsis testam. Leolodi Abbatis Floriani Helgundi initio.
generally the Spiritual Judges, both before Fairefaxe his time and since, had
this Jurisdiction of Probate, and so have had without controversy ever since
the disputations about it and other parts of Jurisdiction had with some
Clergymen, by Coniers Attorney General to Philip Valois, and Peter Dreux in
behalf of the Duke of Britain, at such time as the Clergy had there so extended
their Jurisdiction, Que les Fauxbourgs estoint trois fois plus grands que la
uille, as Pasquire speaks of them.

CHAP. VII. Testimonies of King John and Henry the Third's time, that may serve
to prove the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction then in the Temporal Courts.
FOr the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction, as it seems by Glanvill and other
Testimonies, that it was in the Kings Courts under H. 2. and so by all
probability before: so out of other Records of following time, somewhat may
perhaps be collected to prove, that it continued long in them, as out of the
Patent of King John for Oliver of Rochford's Testament, Sciatis (says Patent.
3. Reg. Johan. membr. 6.
the King) Nos concessisse Testamentum Oliveri de Rupe forti sicut
rationabiliter conditum est, and apud S. Florentiam veterem and Rupem fortem
scriptum and ordinatum. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus quod nullus
Executorum Testamenti ipsius impediat quin illud sicut rationabiliter conditum
est faciant. Then out of that of Peter de Roches Bishop of Winchester, and
Chief Justice of England, touching the Will of Adam of Gurdun, Rex Rot. Claus.
Joh. Membr. 22.
Dom. P. Winton. Episc. Justic. Angl. etc. Mandamus Vobis quod teneri facias
Testamentum Adae de Gurdun quod fecit de Rebus suis mobilibus and omnibus aliis
in Angl. secundum dispositionem testamenti excepta terra quam de domino nostro
habuit septimo Augusti. Test meipso: this expressly gives some legal execution
of a Testament made of personal things unto the Chief Justice of England. And
in Claus. 5 H. 3. part. 2. m. 7. and 15.
5 H. 3. Robert of Lexinton having the possession of all the goods of Philip de
Vletott the Testator, a Writ goes out to him to pay William Earl of Salisbury a
debt of Ninety Marks out of them, and that the rest should be delivered to the
Executors ad faciendum Testamentum; and another Writ was sent, that he should
per visum and Testimonium Execut. sell all Vletott's goods, and denarios quos
inde fieri feceritis, salvo faciatis reponi sub sigillo vestro and sigillo
Executor. pradict. donec aliud mandatum nostrum inde habueritis. And in 7 Hen.
3. a Writ is directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln, Claus. 7 H. 3. part. 1.
membran. 16. idem id ipsum est quod habetur in commentario 9. v. c. Ed. Cook,
f. 38.6. sumptum est.
reciting, that whereas it appeared, that Richard Fitz-dune dyed not Intestate,
Ideo tibi praecipimus quod omnia Catalla ipsius Richardi in Manum nostram capta
in balliva tua sine dilatione habere facias Priori de Noketon, and other
Executors of his Testament ad faciendum inde rationabile testamentum: and other
like Writs occurr in the Rolls of King John and H. 3.

CHAP. VIII. Suits of Legacies personal in the Spiritual Court from the
beginning of Henry the Third, of the beginning of that Course.
BUt however it may seem by those Testimonies, that the Temporal Courts had
some Extrinsecal Jurisdiction of Testaments in the time of King John and Hen.
3. it is clear, that in the beginning of H. 3. Suits for Legacies personal were
in the Spiritual Courts, and that it seems from Custom settled in practice of
the former times that were then newly past. And perhaps it might be in the more
ancient times fori mixti, and as well exercised in the one, as in the other
Court; as we have elsewhere showed of the more ancient Jurisdiction of Tithes;
or it may be, that those Writs in the former Chapter, and the like, were but in
case of Tenants being Testators, upon whose deaths all their goods were to be
seized by the Sheriff, or other such Officer, and the debt (if any were) paid
to the King, Et residuum relinquebatur Executoribus testamenti defuncti, as the
words are, both of the Charters of King John and H. 3. Cap. 15. magn. Char.
quam etiam donavit Johannes Rex, uti videre est apud Matthew. Paris.
and perhaps by that Chapter of the Charter those Writs may be interpreted, and
faciatis teneri testamentum may be but only an amoving of the Kings hands from
the goods, that so the Executor might perform the Testament; for that the
Spiritual Court did from the beginning of H. 3. exercise a Jurisdiction for
recovery of Legacies, is infallibly proved by 2 H. 3. tit. prohib. 13. 4 H. 3.
ibidem. 28. 6 H. 3. ibid. 17. 8 H. 3. ibid. 19.
Cases of 2, 4, 6, and 8 Hen. 3. and the Attachments upon Prohibitions extant
in Records of that time, are, quare secutus est placitum in Curia Mich. 16 and
17 H. 3. Rot. 15 etc. and 18 H. 3. coram W. de Raleigh, etc. Rot. 36. in arce
Londinensi.
Christianitatis de Catallis quae non sunt de Testamento vel matrimonio: and
many such more are both in the Rolls and in Matthew. Paris. It appears also in 2
H. 3. in the Case of Simon Fitz Simon, that even that Suit for deviseable Land
being devised, was thought to be good in the Spiritual Court ex Causa
testamentaria, as if Laicum feodum versum esset in Catallum, until the devisee
had recovered it: and after the recovery, iterum incipiebat esse Laicum feodum
-- as Lib. 5. Tract. de exceptiontbus, cap. 12 page 4091. b.
Bracton says, where his Printed Copy is exceedingly corrupted. But it was
clear Law in the time of this Bracton, who was a Judge in the Common Pleas in
the latter part of H. 3. that locum Idem so. 4076.
non habet probatio in Causa testamentaria si Catalla legentur and inde agatur
in foro Ecclesiastico: and he reckons that of Testaments inter spiritualia, and
spiritualibus annexa, which agrees exactly in the known and practiced
Consultations in the Register. Orig. so. 48. (b) etc.
Register, placita de Catallis and debitis, quae sunt de Testamento and
Matrimonio, ad forum Ecclesiae specialiter dignoscimus pertinere, etc. And
although in case of Legacy, as in case of Tithes, the Jurisdiction that gave
the recovery of them, was sometimes in the one, sometimes in the other Court,
before it was restrained to the Spiritual only, yet it seems by those Cases of
Henry the Third's time, which are Testimonies beyond exceptions, that the
Spiritual Jurisdiction over Legacies, was long before in practice; otherwise I
guess that exception de Testamento, and de Matrimonio, had not been so familiar
in the Prohibitions of that Age. And notwithstanding those Cases out of the
Records of King John's and Henry the Third his time, the Temporal Court not
only prohibited not the Spiritual Court, especially in Henry the Third's time,
but also had not any Conusance of Suits for personal Legacies; for neither have
I ever met with any Suit in that kind in the Plea Rolls of H. 3. or King John,
or Richard 1. (but very few are extant of the time of the two last) neither
does Bracton admit any such thing. And the Author of Fleta in the time of E. 1.
tells us expressly, Fleta lib. 2. cap. 57. Sect. Executor.
de Causa Testamentaria sicut nec de causa Matrimoniali Curia Regis se non
intromittet. But the beginning of that practice of the Extrinsecal Jurisdiction
in the Spiritual Court, is even as difficult to find, as that other of
Probates. Linwood tells us, that Ad tit. de restam. c. Statut. verb.
Ecclesiast. libertat.
libertas quoad secundum scilicet, puniendum impedientes quo minus testamenta
and altimae voluntates defunctorum procedant, ortum habet a privilegits etiam
in ea part concessis, and a consuetudine similiter de scientia Regum Angl.
diutius observata: and further, potuit (says he) habere ortum out of those De
Episc. and Cler. and nulli 28. and siquis ad designandum, 49, etc.
Laws in the Code that made the Bishop a Protector of Legacies in pios usus. It
might be also in regard of the purpose of those Laws in themselves; and it were
no great wonder, that the Ecclesiastical Court might have gained Jurisdiction
over all personal Legacies under color of such as were given in pios usus: But
perhaps it will not be admitted for probability enough, that any part of the
Code being of the Imperial or Civil Law, was ever so received here in England,
as that it could induce any alteration touching the Jurisdiction of the Crown,
that is, touching this Extrinsecal Jurisdiction which (as is showed) did belong
to the Temporal Courts: but whosoever will not admit of any such conjecture,
must yet remember, that presently from King Stephen's time, when the Civil Law
was new born into the light, it having lain forgotten by the space of Six
Hundred years before in the Western Empire, the Code and other parts of that
Law were familiarly read by our English Lawyers; and I think as well by our
Common as Canon Lawyers: to omit that Case of Mabile of Franchiville, wherein,
it seems, a special regard was had to the Civil Cod. de lib. Nature. l. 2. Matr.
and Author. 89, etc.
Law, that permits not a mere Bastard and Succession ex Testamento against a
lawful Heir of Blood; for otherwise how could Richard the Uncle's Institution,
as it seems by a former Will have made color of right for him, against the
latter Will which Mabile pretended, unless he relied upon her being a Bastard.
But I should think it probable enough, that the Original of this Jurisdiction
for Legacies, was out of the Canon Law. And that especially from that Canon Si
haeredes, etc. before cited; for although the Decretals, wherein it stands now
authorized for a general Law, were first published but in 24 H. 3. by Gregory
the Ninth, and that we see by infallible testimony already brought, that
Legacies before that time, were recoverable in the Spiritual Court, yet by
likelihood that very Canon was inserted in all or some of those eight more
ancient Compilations of the Canons authorized by some former Popes; (which is
the more probable, because we find it also in Burchard) and so it might be,
long before sufficient ground of this Extrinsecal Jurisdiction in the Ordinary;
but I sought here for Authority more than I durst be bold in conjectures, which
I leave to every man's judgment.

PART II. OF THE Disposition or Administration OF Intestates Goods.
CHAP. I. In whom it was in the time of the Saxons.
IN the Saxons time it was in the Lord of him that dyed (understand the Chief
Lord) in case the Intestate were a Tenant, and dyed at home in peace: But in
case he were no Tenant, or dyed in his Lords Army, then it was (it seems) as
other Inheritance under the Jurisdiction of that Temporal Court within whose
Territory the goods were: This may be proved out of the Laws of that time,
which ordain, that upon the death of an Intestate, whom they call ciale ae, the
Lord Canuti. leg. cap. 68.
is only to have the Heriotts due to him, which are also appointed by Ejusdem
leg. cap. 68.
the Laws of the same time, That by his (the Lords) advice or judgment his
(the Intestates) goods be divided among his Wife and Children and the next of
Kin, according as to every one of them of right belongs, that is, according to
the nearness of Kindred, if no Children or Nephews from them be; for it must, I
suppose, be understood, that the succession was such, that the Children
excluded all their Kindred, and of their Kindred the next succeeded, according
to that in Tacitus De moribus Germanorum.
of his Germans, whose Customs were doubtless mixed with our English Saxons,
haeredes, says he, successoresque sint cuique liberi, and nullum Testamentum.
But it seems, Christianity afterward brought in the free power of making
Testaments amongst them, Si liberi non sunt, proximus gradus in possessione
fratres, patrui, Avunculi.

But this is expressed only in case the Tenant dyed at home and in peace; for if
he dyed in his Canut. legibus, cap. ^5.
Lords Army, both the Heriort was forgiven, and the Inheritance both of Goods
and Lands was to be divided as it ought, which was, it seems, by the
Jurisdiction of the Temporal Court within whose Territory the Death or Goods
were; for in that case, it is not said, that the Lords Judgment was to be
used, but that the Heirs should divide all; or, as the words in the Confessor's
Law are, habeant Leg. Ed. Confell. cap. de heretochiis.
haeredes ejus pecuniam and terram ejus sine aliqua diminutione, and recte
dividant interse; where the right of the Heir both to Lands and Goods is
expressly designed, but the Judge that should give it them, not mentioned.
Therefore it seems, it remained as other parts of the Common Law, under the
Temporal Jurisdiction, as by the F. S. Instit. de bonorum possessione.
Civil Law it is under the Pretors.

CHAP. II. In whom after the Normans until King John 's time.
UNtil King John's time it seems the Jurisdiction over Intestates Goods, was as
of other Inheritance also, in the Temporal Courts: yet no sufficient Testimony
is found to prove it expressly; only when the Common Laws of those times speak
of Intestates, they determine the succession by like division as those of the
Saxon times. Adjiciuntur Ingulphe Crolandensi MS. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
In Laws attributed to William the First we read, Si home morust sans devise,
si departent les Infants l'erite inter sei per ovell. And afterward in H. 1.
Apud Matthew. Paris.
Laws, si quis Baronum vel hominum meorum praventus vel Armis vel infirmitate
pecuniam suam nec dederit, nec dare disposuerit, uxor sua, sive liberi, aut
Parents, and legitimi homines sui pro anima ejus eam dividant, sicut eis
melius visum fuerit. Here is the first mention, as I remember, of any thing
occurring in our Laws or Histories, of the disposition of the Intestates Goods,
pro anima ejus, which indeed might have been fitly subjected to the view at
least of the Church. But no mention as yet being of any Ecclesiastical Power
that tends that way, I rather think that heretofore no use or practice was of
Administration committed, direction given, or meddling with the Goods by the
Ordinaries; but all was by the Friends or Kindred juxta Consilium discretorum
virorum, as the words are in Will. Novoburg. hist. l. 3. c. 22.
the Statutes made for such as should dye in the Holy War with Richard the
First.

Neither does that of Glanvill, which was written under H. 2. tell us of any
thing of the Ordinaries Power in this case, although it has express mention of
Testaments, and the Churches Jurisdiction of them. Indeed we there find, that
if no Executor be named, then Glanvill. lib. 7. cap 6.
possunt propinqui and consanguinei Testatoris, take upon them the
Executorship, and sue in the Kings Court against such as hinder the due payment
of Legacies; which also agrees well enough with that before cited out of the
Laws of H. 1. Neither is there in Gualter Mapes his Apocalypsis (being a bitter
Satyr against the Abuses of the Spiritual Courts in Henry the Seconds time) nor
in John of Salisbury's Epistles, that have many particulars of the exercised
Jurisdiction of the Church, any thing occurring, that touches upon any
Ecclesiastical Powers of this nature.

CHAP. III. In whom after the time of King John.
BUt in that Charter of Liberties both for the Church and Laity made to the
Baronage of England in the seventeenth of King John Reperiuntur seorsimsaepius
exemplaria illius diplomatis and penes Math. Paris, Rogerum Wendover MS. and
Thom. Rudburne MS. entant, sed in Archivis non extant.
in Reningmead an express Ordinance is, That if any Freeman dyed intestate,
his Chattels were to be disposed of by the hands of his next of kin, by the
view of the Church, that is, direction and advice being thereto given by the
Ordinary, as I understand, saving to all Creditors their debts: the words of it
were, Si aliquis liber homo intestatus decesserit, Catalla sua per manus
propinquorum, parentum, and amicorum suorum, per visum Ecclesiae distribuantur,
salvis unicuique debitis, quae defunctus eis debebat. That Charter of King John
is almost the same syllables with the common one that we now use by the name of
the Grand Charter of 9 H. 3. exemplified by the Kings Patent of 28 E. 1. But
this of Intestates, and two or three other Chapters for the Subjects Liberty,
are more in that of King John's, than is found in the Exemplification of 28 E.
1. However Matthew Paris and Roger of Wendover when they speak of H. 3.
granting it, so refer their Readers to this of King John, that they tell us,
that that of H. 3. was the self same in every particular; and therefore omit
the repetition of it. And indeed, although in the common Printed Magna Charta
of H. 3. V. Manuscriptum nostr. de Magn. Charta, cap. 16. in fine.
and in the Roll also of 28 Ed. 1. in the Tower, where the Exemplification is,
this Ordinance touching Intestates be wanting, yet in very many of the
ancientest Manuscripts of the old Statutes, that of H. 3. has the same words
as we have here transcribed it from King John's, and that in the same place of
his Charter as that in King John's; that is, between the eighteenth Chapter; Si
quis tenens, etc. and the nineteenth, Nullus Constabularius, etc. And it is to
be understood, that the greatest Prelates of the Clergy of that time, as
Canterbury, London, Winchester, Pandulphus the Popes Nuncio, the Master of the
Temple, and diverse other Bishops were on the Kings part, when that of King John
was granted. And it is probable enough, that when they saw that a Charter of
Liberties must of necessity be granted to the Baronage, they so wrought also,
that they might insert this one for the advantage of their Episcopal
Government. And they had good color to think and persuade, that some such
thing was fit for them, in regard it was now clearly taken, that some
distribution was to be made pro anima intestati, the care of souls being the
chiefest part of their common pretenses for increase of their power and
greatness. And hence I suppose, it soon came to pass, that the next of kin had
the power of disposition committed by the Ordinaries, and that in Letters or
otherwise by virtue of that per visum Ecclesiae, which was, I think, the
textual ground of right of committing of Administration by the Clergy: This of
King John's being iterated in Henry the Thirds Charter (however omitted in the
Exemplification) was it seems that provision spoken of in Cardinal Othobon's
Legatins, Proinde super bonis ab intestato decedentium, Cap. cum mortis incerta.
so are the words, provisionem quae olim a Praelatis Regni Angliae cum
approbatione Regis and Baronum dicitur emanasse, firmiter approbantes,
districtius inhibemus ne Prelati vel alii quicunque bona intestatorum quocunque
modo recipiant, vel occupent contra provisionem praemissam. What provision is
it more likely that this was, than that of the Grand Charter both of King John
and H. 3. and the words a Praelatis dicitur emanasse, justifies what we have
conjectured of the purpose of the Prelates, when they saw they could not but
yield with the King, to an establishment of Laws, by that Charter, made indeed
in a Parliament of that age. The same I suppose that which is meant in the
Provinc. Constitut. tit. de immunitate Ecclesiae, C. accidit novitate.
Constitution of Archbishop Stafford, where it is taken for granted, that the
Churches power of disposition of Intestates goods pro salute animarum and in
pios usus, was a thing consensu Regio and megnatum Regni Angltanquam pro jure
Ecolesiasticaque liberate ab olim ordinatum, etc. Where Linwood modestly
confesses, that he could not find in what Kings time this Ordinance was made.
But Johannes de Athona, upon that of Othobon, though he rightly call that
provision, Provisio Parliamentalis: yet most ignorantly and ridiculously Jo. de
Athona ad Legate. Othobonum c. cum mortis incerta.
tells us, that the provision there understood, is the Statute of Westminster,
2. Cap. 21. cum post mortem, which he makes also to have I know not what
reference to the Statute of Gloucester. But this slipped from him either in a
dream, or through the utmost neglect of those infallible characters of truth,
that the denoting of times affords us, for that Legatin of Othobon was made in
London in Praeter Annals obvios, Linwood ad C. quia verb. Ottoboni, tit. de
constitutionibus.
53 H. 3. and at such time as that Provision was yet extant in the Magna
Charta, used by our Lawyers. But the Statutes of Westminster the second, and of
Gloucester were under E. 1. the one in the sixth, the other in the thirteenth of
him; how then could Othobon think of it in his Legatin, or could John de Athona
have thought so, if he had allowed the Title of his Gloss, which supposes in
the point, that the Constitutions of Othobon were published in the year 1248.
which had it been in 1268. had agreed with truth; but doubtless the Numeral
Letters of MCCLXVIII were transposed into MCCXLVIII. and thence only that Error.

CHAP. IV. How that so granted by King John 's Charter in Parliament has
continued in practice.
AFter that Law of the seventeenth of K. John, it seems the next of kin
disposed of Intestates Goods by the testimony and direction of the Church; for
so per visum denotes, as we see in per visum proborum and legalium hominum in
Writs of Summons and the like: but I have not seen any practice of it testified
in King John's time. And under H. 3. however it were omitted in his Charter at
the Exemplification, the same visus Ecclesiae continued; so says Bracton that
then lived, and was a Judge of that time, Si Bracton. lib. 2. de acq. rer. dom.
cap. 26. sect. 2.
liber homo intestatus and subito decesserit, dominus suus nil intromittat de
bonis defuncti, nisi de hoc tantum, quod ad ipsum pertineret, (sc. quod habeat
suum Heriott.) sed ad Ecclesiam and amicos pertinebit executio bonorum. Yet it
seems also, that notwithstanding the right of the Church thus ordained, and the
succession of next of kin so included in the Ordinance, both the Lords in some
places, according to their former right, still usurp some power over the
disposition of Intestates Goods, against the will of the Ordinaries: and on the
other side also, the Ordinaries, instead of giving direction for a true
disposition of such Goods, get possession of them, and commit them often, or at
least too great a part of them, to the use either of themselves, or of the
Church, and so defrauded those to whom by the right of natural succession they
pertained. For that of the Lords, Bracton his noting it as a thing denied them,
compared with what we find among Articles granted in the Synod of London held
under Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury in 42 H. 3. proves it, Idem quod
mortuo (so is the In Annal. Burtonensis coenobii penes v. cl. Thom. Allen
Oxoniensem MS. A. 1257.
Article) laico sine Testamento non capiantur bona ipsius in manus dominorum.
Sed inde solvantur debita ipsius, and residua in usus filiorum suorum, and
proximorum indigentium pro salute animae defuncti in pios usus per Ordinarios
committantur, nisi quatenus fuerit domino suo obligatus. Here we see by the way
plainly that the distribution in pios usus, was the devising them among the
next of kin, according to their nearness and want; not an employing them to
other uses, at the Ordinaries arbitrary disposition. But also that the Ordinary
did in this Age sometimes usurp the Goods of Intestates against the next of
kin, is enough proved out of that Legatine Constitution of Othobon, cum mortis
incerta, etc. where it was ordained as you see before; so in the words of it,
that they should not dispose of them otherwise than according as that Grant was
in the Grand Charter; that is, to the benefit of the next of blood: But the
Ordinaries had about this time, against the intent of that Charter, so abused
the right of succession, that it was related Innocent. 4. tit. de Simionia, c.
ad Apostolicum.
for a constant truth, that the Custom in Britania was, that tertia pars
bonorum decedentium ab intestato in opus Ecclesiae and pauperum dispensanda,
etc. as Innocent the Fourth his words are, who lived and wrote in the time of
H. 3. What other ground than the Ordinaries ill dealing with the next of blood
was for that tertia pars I conceive not; unless the Pope had some such other
Testimony touching it, as we find in an old Manuscript Volume titled MS in
Thesauro Cottoniano c. 31. de divisione hareditatis.
Statuta Synodorum written in an hand of near seven hundred years since, being
a Collection out of the Fathers and old Councils, made as it seems by some
Britain or Irishman, as we have elsewhere conjectured. In that Statuta
Synodorum occurrs Orig. in lib. de haeredibus: pater moriens det tertiam partem
filiis, and tertiam Caesari, and tertiam Ecclesiae; si non habuerit Ecclesiam,
det pauperibus, and si non habuerit Caesarem nec Ecclesiam, dividat inter
filios and pauperes. But what Author this is cited out of, I am equally
ignorant, as I know not at all who was the Author of the whole Collection, or
whence he had many other of his Authorities. And other things that Volume has
out of some old Synod of Ireland, which makes to our present purpose, if the
Canons of that Synod had been at all binding in this State. And it was no such
wonder, that some such practice might be under H. 3. for since also in the time
of E. 3. the Church so usurped in their Jurisdiction of Probates, that they
made the Executors wait on their Officials at uncertain and remote places, and
then also put them, at times, to the Ransom of the fourth or fifth part of the
Testators Goods, before they would give them Probate; which was complained
Parl. 21 E. 3. Cro. Hill. art. 51. and consule si vis Parl. octab. Puris. 23 E.
3. art. 35. in Archivis.
of in Parliament amongst the Grievances of the Commons.

CHAP. V. Of that of bona Intestatorum in manus Domini Regis capi solebant.
FOr that of bona Intestatorum in manus Domini Regis capi solebant, for which
is cited Hensloes Case apud v. cl. Ed. Coke part 9. sect. 39, 40.
the Close Roll of 7 H. 3. Rot. 16. it is also most true, if rightly
apprehended. All that appears in the Record is, that the King wrote to the
Sheriff of Lincoln, that constat nobis per inquisitionem nobis missam sub
sigillo Stephani de Segrave, and aliorum proborum and legalium hominum, quod
Richardus filius Dunae non obiit intestatus, and therefore he commands, that
the Sheriff should deliver all the Goods of the said Fitz-dune in manus nostras
capta, to the Prior of Loketon, and others his Executors, ad faciendum
Testamentum: neither are there any words that tell us of any capisolebant, or
that these were taken in regard of dying intestate only. Indeed it appears not
sufficiently in the Writ, why they were taken; but it is most probable, that
the seizure was for some debt due to the Crown from the Intestate, which
afterward not appearing, or being satisfied, or it appearing that the Executors
by the taking upon them the execution of the Testament, would subject
themselves to the payment of it, it was fit enough to a move the Kings hands,
and deliver all over to the Executors: He that well considers the Statute of
Magna Charta cap. 18. Si quis tenens, and compares it with that of Bracton,
where he tells us, that the Law was clear, that if any man dyed indebted to the
King, the Sheriff might Bracton. lib. 2. de acq. rerum dom. cap. 26. sect. 2.
imbreviare, and attachiare cattalla defuncti, will soon see the probability of
this, howsoever the words of the Statute are only of the Kings Tenants: And it
concludes also, as if it were only in case of the death of a Testator in regard
of relinquatur executoribus ad faciendum testamentum defuncti; but plainly,
that ad faciendum, etc. has equal reference to the Intestates as to Testators:
for no name of an Administrator being then usually known, all were called
Executors that meddled with the Intestates Goods; and those Executors were
executores qui faciebant Testamentum, that is, which instead of the Intestate
Ita facere testamentum nomine defuncti sumitur apud Canonici juris peritos.
videsis Zebulam prax. Episcop. verb. legatum, sect. 8.
did take such order after his death with his Goods, as they thought he would
have done if he had made a Testament; which may be conceived also out of the
use remembered in that time, wherein sick men being unable, neither having time
to express their meaning, chose out some friends that might be super Mos iste
reperitur apud Matthew. Paris, histor. major, page 982. Ubi de Pontificia
constitutione de intestatis edit. Londinens.
hoc expressores and executores; which friends appointing of Legacies (as if
the Intestate had given them) and making disposition of Intestates Goods, were
as Testaments of those Intestates; and they did truly as Executors facere
Testamentum defuncti, in which sense it might be spoken of any Executors or
Administrators that intermedled in those times. And many Writs occurr in the
Close Roll of King John and H. 3. that have expressly in them the amoving of the
Kings hands from the Goods of the dead, when the seizure had been only for the
debts to the Crown, according to the Statute of Magna Charta (which in
substance is the Law at this day) and Bracton, by reason whereof, I see not
cause enough, why we should understand that of 7 H. 3. to prove any such thing,
as a Custom of the Kings disposing or seizing of the Intestates Goods,
especially in regard that in the passages of the Law, Lawyers and Records of
that time, no mention is of any thing that affirms it to be a Custom, or
touches it as a common use.

But admit that in Fitz-dunes Case it had been so, that the taking of the Goods
into the Kings hand, had been because of his dying Intestate only. It may
therefore be accounted rather as a particular of the irregular practice of that
time, than any example to prove a Custom; and whosoever is but acquainted with
the course of the Records of King John and Henry the Third his time, must soon
see Writs enough that agree not so much as with any settled course of Law, but
taste rather of some sudden or arbitrary course of granting them. Indeed some
two years before that of Fitz-dune, there is an example in Bedfordshire, that
might seem more fully to prove what is collected out of the other: the Writ is
thus, Rex Claus. 5 H. 3. par. 2. memb. 3.
Vicecom. Bedford salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod blada and catalla quae fuerunt
Roberti de Insula and Rossiae uxoris ejus defunct. in Wahall and Brokeberge
arestari facias and salvo custodiri, donec discussum fuerit in curia nostra ad
quem catalla illa pertinent, and aliud inde praecipimus; but this is often
enough seconded with other examples that have for the most part a mention of
the Defuncts debts to the Crown, that it cannot otherwise be understood, but
either as founded upon that Law of seizing upon the Goods for debt to the Crown
by Prerogative, or as an example (amongst many of other kinds) that discovers a
more arbitrary course sometimes in proceeding, than later time has permitted.
And according to one of those ways (but the first that is upon the Statute of
the Grand Charter is the fittest and most probable) must that also be
interpreted, where Claus. 17 H. 3. memb. 8.
H. 3. sends a Writ to the Sheriff of Rutland to command him, that
notwithstanding that Robert de Weston a Parishioner of Weston were drowned, and
dyed intestate, he should yet facere Willielmo de S. Lando (that is, to the
Parson of the Parish) habere nomine Ecclesiae suae id quod ad eum pertinet,
habendum de catallis quae fuerunt praedicti Roberti, secundum consuetudines
partium illarum: that was for the mortuarie, which properly and under that name
then was determinable in the Spiritual Court.

But surely we must conclude, that if there were any such practice by the
Officers of the Crown in the time of Hen. 3. to seize Intestates goods
generally, it was not so much the Law of the time; for if so, the Records could
not be but as full of examples of it, as the time was of the death of
Intestates, which questionless were very many; but some such temporary
usurpation, as in 31 H. 3. Pope Innocent the Fourth here had for a while
executed by his Ministers the Franciscans and Dominicans, in not only getting
into his own hands, but also to his own use, Matthew. Paris, so. 959. Edit.
Londinens.
all the Goods of the Clergymen that dyed Intestate through England, which as
Matthew Paris that then lived, relates it, cum audisset dominus Rex, detestans
Romanae Curiae augmentosam and multiplicem avaritiam, hoc fieri prohibuit,
comperiens illud ad damnum Regni and suum redundare praejudicium. Afterward in
the time of Edw. 1. it appears by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 21. cum post
mortem, etc. that the Goods of Intestates did come ad Ordinarios disponenda,
which agrees with that of Bracton before cited, and iterated in the same
syllables in Fleta Fleta l. 2. c. 57.
which was written under E. 1. And the disposition of Latestates Goods was
enquired after in those days Quod videre est in Cro. Wigorn. Ecclesiae in
Biblioth. Cott. sub initio E. 1.
amongst Articles of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And afterward by the Statute
of 31 E. 3. the Ordinary was compelled to commit the administration of
Intestates Goods to the next of kin: after which Statute the name of
Administrator was common as their Office; and by that name such to whom the
Ordinary committed were sued, although before that time they were suable by the
name of Executors, 28 E. 3 fo. 21. a.
and perhaps also by the name of Administrators: Videsis 25 E. 3. fo. 54. a.
sed and plura in l. 9. Vir. cl. E. Cook par. 5. fo. 82. and par. 9. f. 39. and
40. and 19 Ed. 3. tit. Cove nant. 24.
but that name is scarce found (as I think not at all) given a Defendant to an
Action brought before seven years after the Statute of 31 E. 3. And in the
Parliament Rolls of 17 Ed. 3. the Administrators are designed only by the Ceux
que sont per l'Evesque ordines en lieu des Executors, where a Petition is
offered Quindena Pasch. 17 E. 3. Artic. 49.
by the Commons, that such might have the like Actions as their Intestates: but
the King answers, Quant a ceux qui devient intestate le Roy voet que l'Evesque
eit action en tien case depuis que il doit responder as autres. But from that
of 31 E. 3. saving only the alteration by 21 H. 8. the Law has continued
uniformly to this day.

FINIS.

