depiction of reclining man meditating on death It is appointed for all men
once to die
Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone that I may take comfort a
little: Before I go whence I shall not return, even to ye land of darkness, and
ye shadow of death,

Job: 10: 20: 21. For I know that thou will bring me to death. and to ye house
appointed for all living,

Job: 30.23.

Daniel Sennertus HIS MEDITATIONS.

Setting forth a plain Method OF LIVING HOLILY AND DYING HAPPILY.

Written Originally in Latin, and no^ Translated into English.

^^ qui se me^niner^nt inquilinos esse, and in conducto habitare, (...) je
gerunt, (...) mi^^s gravatim excunt: ita q^i int^lligunt d^micilium c^^poris ad
h^eve tempus a natura commadatum e^se, and vivunt temper^^aius, and libentius
moriuntur,

Sen ^^ala mors putanda non est quam bond vita praecessit, neque enim facit
malam mortem nisi quod sequitur ipsam mortem

St. Aug. de Civ. Dei. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Keble, at the Great Turks Head,
in Fleet Street, over against Fetter-Lane, MDCXCIV.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN Death shall put a period to our Lives, we must appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ, and according as we have behaved our selves here, we shall be
consigned to an Eternity either of Bliss or Woe. Which four last things, being
of such vast concern and moment to us, have always been esteemed most worthy of
our serious thoughts and contemplations: for what is there that can more
powerfully move a Man to forsake the ways of sin, and walk in the paths of
virtue, and conform himself to the Divine Will, than a constant Meditation on
these things? To what purpose should any one endeavor to increase his
substance by fraud, injustice, and oppression; or set his heart on Honors and
Riches, still coveting to add field to field, if he does but think with
himself, that when Death approaches he must leave all these worldly things
behind him, and that for ought he knows even this Night, his Soul may be
required of him, and then whose shall all these things be? Who is there that
would not be afraid of committing shameful and abominable crimes, even in
secret, where no eye can see him? when he considers that in the last day of
Judgment, the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, and all his most
private actions be laid open before Men and Angels? and that he must give a
strict account of all his thoughts, words, and deeds before the great Judge of
all the Earth? Who would dare to drown himself in voluptuousness and the sinful
lusts of the flesh, if he did but remember, that for the enjoyment of such vain
and momentary pleasures, he must endure the most exquisite torments of Hell to
all eternity? Who is there that would not cheerfully walk in the narrow path
that leads unto life, though he were sure in the way to meet with
tribulation, distress, and persecution, bonds and imprisonment, famine and
nakedness, peril and Sword? if he did but lift up the eyes of his mind, and
behold that exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory which is laid up in Heaven,
for those that suffer for Christ Jesus.

Since therefore the frequent consideration of these things has so much force
and efficacy to invite Men to virtue, and deter them from sin; I was easily
induced to translate the following Meditatious into our Native Language,
notwithstanding the multitude of other books that have been written on the same
Subject: for Men being generally so forgetful of their morta^ity, especially in
time of health and prosperity, there can never be too many admonitions given,
to put them always in remembrance of these things, although they know them
already.

This Book was first published in Latin at Wittembergh in the year of our Lord
1636. By that famous Physician Daniel Sennertus; a Man well known to the
learned World, especially to the Gentlemen of his own faculty, for his
excellent works in that Art: but besides what he so deservedly professed he was
a spiritual Physician also, and took care to deliver such wholesome Medicines
that all the Diseases of our Souls might be healed; and that both Soul and Body
might live for ever; thereby imitating our Blessed Savior, who as he healed
all manner of sickness, and all manner of Diseases amongst the People, so he
also called all sinners to repentance, and exhorted them to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

It may not be amiss here to add a short account of this Book, M. Hen. Witten.
Memor. Medicorum. p. 105. Francof. 1676.
and its Author from one who has given us some memorials of his life, in an
Oration spoken the year after his Decease in the University of Wittembergh.

The innocence (says he) and probity of his Life, and that Humanity which he
showed to all Men did greatly advance his renown: such was his love and care
for Religion, that he suffered nothing to be preferred before it; He had
perfectly digested in his mind the rules and precepts of it, which he as
carefully endeavored to manifest in his life, least he should appear to be in
Word only and not in Deed, a Christian; the duty whereof he was persuaded did
not more consist in the knowledge, than in the practice of Christian virtues:
wherein that he might be the better exercised, he had judiciously and
accurately described THE NO-CHRISTIAN CHRISTIAN: for he thought if vice were
thoroughly known, the contrary virtue would thereby be represented more fair and
strong: As the People of Laced^mon recommended sobriety to their Children, by
bidding them look on the filthiness of Drunkards: On the same design there is
now lately published by himself, a most judicious Treatise of THE WAY TO LIVE
HOLILY AND DIE HAPPILY. For he cannot without great hazard dye well, who has
led an ill life, and scarcely can any one live as he should, that is ignorant
of the right method, or does not diligently exercise himself in it: He dyed on
the 21st. Day of July in the Year of our Lord 1637. When he had not yet been
ill four Days.

Some may perhaps object against the composure of this Book, that whereas the
design of it is to prepare us to dye happily, so many Chapters should be spent
in the general and more remote preparation for Death, whilst we are in our
health and vigor; and but one to be allotted for that more immediate and
particular preparation which is to be performed when Death approaches.

This may indeed seem a great objection to Worldly Men, who scarcely ever think
of dying, till they see they can live no longer: But the devout Christian knows
that a Death Bed is very unfit both for time and place for so great a work;
that all his life is little enough to work out his own Salvation, and to
prepare himself for an happy Eternity; and that if he demeans himself soberly,
righteously, and godlily, whilst he lives in this present World, he shall have
the less to do when ever it shall please God to call him out of it.

Let not any then despise these counsels and directions, as if they belonged
only to sick and Dying Men; but rather consider, that if they daily exercise
themselves in the use and practice of them, whilst they are in their health and
strength, they will reap the greater benefit by them, when they come to die,
and will depart this life with a comfortable assurance of God's favor; but it
is to be feared that they will find themselves very ill prepared for an happy
departure hence at the time of their dissolution, who when they were well, used
all their endeavors to put the thoughts of death out of their minds.

Be therefore intent and diligent in reading and meditating on Lectures of
Mortality, and learn to die whilst you live. Put on the person of a dying man,
even now whilst the strength of your mind and body remains perfect and entire
in you: Do those things now which you would desire to do when you are a dying,
and then when ever the tim^ draws nigh, that you must die indeed, you will find
all those holy preparations with which you so frequently exercised your self in
your life time, will be wonderfully helpful and subservient to you in that your
last hour: All the Divine Comforts and Consolations with which you entertained
your self during the days of your Pilgrimage here, will come afresh into your
mind, and you will have little more to do, than to rejoice in the reflections on
a well spent life, and to commend your Soul into the Hands of God, as into the
Hands of a faithful Creator, and most Merciful Savior.

And when ever any sickness seizes on you, remember that it does not come by
chance, but by the hand of God, and thank him for his Fatherly Correction
toward you: Commit your self to his Divine Providence, and rely not too much
on the Physicians help, which we find king Asa reproved for in Holy Scripture:
Yet according to the advice of the Son of Sirach, Honor the Physician, and
make use of such means as God and Nature offer, but let your greatest care be,
for the health of your Soul: For since a dreadful Eternity succeeds the short
moment of your life. What madness would it be to employ all your Care and
Diligence about this vain life, which passes away like a shadow, and to make
no provision for your everlasting State in the other World, till you are
brought to the very confines of it.

But, O Christian, if you are wise, be every day thinking, that you must
shortly put off this your Earthly Tabernacle, even as the Lord has shown you:
And in any sickness that befalls you, first reconcile your self to God, and
then you may be assured, that either he will make the means you use conducive
to the health of your Body, or else will make your Disease, and even Death it
self healthful to your Soul.

A TABLE Of the Chapters in the ensuing Treatise, comprizing the Sum of
Christian Religion.
CHAP. I. IT is appointed for all Men once to die. p. 1. Chap. II. And at death
all things in the World are to be left behind. p. 4. Chap. III. But after death
there remains another life, and death is the passage either to Eternal
Happiness or Misery. p. 10 Chap. IV. All Men after death must stand before the
Judgment Seat of God. p. 16. Chap. V. And some shall be Translated into Eternal
life, abounding with infinite Felicities. p. 22. Chap. VI. Whilst others shall
be cast headlong into the unspeakable Torments of Hell. p. 27. Chap. VII. And
since they only are partakers of the Blessed life who die well; it therefore
concerns all Men to be careful how they live, and to prepare themselves for a
Blessed death, as a thing very difficult. Now this Preparation is either
general, and to be exercised every day; or particular, to be performed when
death approaches. p. 36. Chap. VIII. Toward this general and daily Preparation
it is requisite for a Man, first to consider the certainty of death, the
shortness of life, and uncertainty of the hour of death. p. 38. Chap. IX.
Secondly, Not to fear Death. p. 52. Chap. X. Thirdly, That he perform the Duty
of a Christian. p. 61. Chap. II. Now the Duty of a Christian consists chiefly
in true Repentance: And first in sorrow for sin. p. 68. Chap. XII. Secondly, In
an Humble Reliance on the Mercies of God, and in Faith in Christ. p. 73. Chap.
XIII. Thirdly, In an Holy life. p. 79. Chap. XIV. And he lives well, who loves
God above all things. p. 85. Chap. XV. And his Neighbor as himself, p. 93.
Chap. XVI. And to this end, he is to strive against all Capital and Enormeus
sins, which are contrary to the love of God and his Neighbor. p. 97. Chap.
XVII. And that the Christian may the better persevere in the exercises of
Virtue and Repentante, it may be very useful for him to compose a Diary, or a
daily Form of Devotion. p. 118 Chap. XVIII. The particular preparation for
death consists in two things; one whereof concerns the sick Person, and the
other his Neighbor: The first is, that the dying Man make his peace with God,
and fortify his mind against all those Temptations which usually insinuate
themselves at this time: The second is, that he be in perfect Love and Charity
with all Men, and rightly dispose of all his Worldly concerns. p. 140.
IMPRIMATUR.

Feb. 15. 1693/4.

Guil. Lancaster R P D, Henrico Epis. Land a Sacris Domestic^s.

ERRATA.
Page 13 line 5. for Theogenis, read Theognis. p. 45. l. 2. f. neglact, r.
neglect. p. 52. l. 15. f. the, r. a. p. 53. l. 28. f. World, r. World. p. 69.
l. 19. f. Mirrior r. Mirroir. p. 81. l. 9. f. in, r. and. p. 103. l. 23. f.
this, r. his. p. 108. l. 28. f. Languish, r. Anguish. p. 127. l. 11. f.
putrisying, r. putrify. p. 172. l. 10. f. desire. r. deserve. p. 173. l. 8. f.
make, r. makes.

Daniel Sennertus HIS MEDITATIONS OF Living holily and dying happily.
CHAP. I. That all must die.
WE are taught both by Sacred and Heathen Writers, that we must all die; whilst
they often inculcate, that it is appointed unto men once to die; Heb. 9.27.
Wisd. 7.6. 1 Kings 2.2.
that all-Men have one entrance into Life, and the like going out; that Death
is the way of all the Earth: Thus also Ovid speaks, Tendimus huc omnes, metam
properamus ad unam:
Omnia-sub leges mors vocat atra suas.
We all pass swiftly on to the same state.
And all are subject to the Laws of Fate.


And Horace -- Lib. 2. Od. 18.
Omnes manet una nox, and calcanda semel via lethi.
A long dark Night will all the World over spread:
And all, the rugged paths of Death must tread.
But much more plainly does daily experience, and the Funerals we continually
see go by our doors, admonish us of our mortality. Sen. Ep. 100.
Omnis dies, omnis hora, etc. Every day, every hour, shows us we are nothing,
and by some fresh Arguments puts us in mind of the frailty of our Natures,
which we too easily forget, and forces us to look on death, whilst we are
thinking of abiding here for ever. There is no man can promise himself an
immunity from death, by any of those things which are wont to distinguish Men
from the rest of Mankind. Neither Age nor Sex, no condition or state of life,
neither learning, nor honors, nor riches, nor beauty, nor pleasure, can defend
any one from death; Young and Old, Kings and Beggars, the Wise and the
Ignorant, the Fair and the Deformed, must all die: Pallida mors aequo pulsat
pede pauperum tabernas, Hor lib. 1. Od 4.

Regumque turres. Neque ulla est aut magno aut parvo lethi fuga.
Pale Death goes into all a like; Id. Sat. 6. lib. 2. Sermon.
as well
Towers of Princes, as the poorest Cell;
Nor is there any one can fly from Death.
Thus as there is no difference observable in the birth of men, so neither is
there in their death.

The Prayer.
LOrd let me know my end, and the number of my days, that I may be certified
how long I have to live: Behold thou have made my days as it were a span long,
and my age is even as nothing in respect of Thee: Verily every man living is
altogether Vanity: We come up as a flower, and are cut down, and never continue
in one stay: Lord so teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart
unto wisdom: Grant that I may not be one moment forgetful of my mortality; and
knowing that I must die, let me never think of setting up my rest here.

CHAP. II. The Consideration of those things which happen at Death.
THe devout Christian ought not only to be perpetually mindful of his own
mortality, but also seriously to consider what Death is, and what usually
befalls men, when they are dying, and when they are dead: Imagine therefore
before your eyes a man now on the Confines of Death, just ready to give up the
Ghost fix this object in your mind, and every day revolve it in your thoughts:
See how he lies dying, almost without breath: His Body loses all its beauty and
comeliness, and begins to smell of the Earth from whence it was taken, and none
of its members perform their functions: And yet this is that Body which not
long since was so sumptuously fed, so delicately clothed, and nursed up with
so much care and cost: Then a man begins to despise his Gold and Silver, his
Jewels and Apparel, his Riotings and Pastimes, when he finds no assistance from
them, either against his Sickness or his Death; he sees all his worldly
delights are vanished away, and others ready to possess his Honors and Riches;
and an afflicting thought it is to him to consider, that for the obtaining
these very things, he has undergone so much toil and labor, and has
committed so many sins. And hence will arise many conflicts of mind, many
tormenting thoughts and unquiet hours: Sometimes the acuteness of his Disease
afflicts him, sometimes his Conscience wounds him, and Satan sets before his
eyes the multitude of his Sins, which now appear more vile and heinous than
ever before he thought them to be. Sometimes he is distracted, when he
remembers how much time he has prodigally spent in vanity and folly, and that
now he must give a strict account of all his thoughts, words, and actions;
sometimes his Soul is grieved by the temptations of the Devil driving him to
despair, and showing him, the direful punishments of Hellfire. Thus also when
a man begins to think he can live no longer, he then considers he must leave
his Wise and Children, his Kinsfolks and Friends, his Riches and Honors, and
every thing that was dear to him here; and this leads him to consider further,
that in a short time his Soul must be separated from his Body; and that he must
pass into another state of Life: Then if a man has not duly prepared himself
for Death, nor reconciled himself to God, with what anguish shall his Soul be
tormented, when he can expect no help from any of those things which he before
so much accounted of: To live longer is not permitted him, and to die is
intolerable: Then he calls to mind his former sins which he has committed, and
sees the time of his examination, and of the divine vengeance is at hand: If he
looks back upon his past life, all the days he has spent seems but a moment of
time: If he looks forward on that infinite space of Eternity which is to come,
he then grieves that he has preferred such vain delights, and of such short
continuance, before an eternal weight of Glory and Happiness: And these things
do so disquiet him, that no room is left for any comfortable thoughts; for
Death now approaching, he will scarcely have either time or strength to think
on any thing for his good; to what purpose is it to give wholesome advice, to
administer profitable Counsels to one, whose Senses are impaired by the
violence of his Disease, and whose mind and understanding are weakened and
disturbed by the Indisposition of his Body: For whilst he is considering that
he is not prepared for Death as he ought, and distracts himself with the
thoughts of his sad Condition, his Eyes begin to grow dim, and his Ears deaf,
his Tongue falters, and his Memory and Reason fail him.

Do those things therefore now whilst thou art in Health, and God allows thee
Time and Strength, which thou can not but think Reasonable should be done, at
thy last Hour, arm thy self betimes against all those Evils and Temptations,
which commonly befall Men at the time of Death; and seeing that neither Riches,
nor Honors, nor Pleasures, nor Friends, can prolong our Lives for one hour,
nor free us from those Cares and Anxieties, which are wont to disturb Men when
they are dying, believe it, it is desperate madness to undergo so much labor
for the sake of them; and contrariwise to neglect those things which would help
us toward the attainment of Everlasting Happiness.

And now O Man, think what will become of thee after death: As soon as thou art
dead, every one, even thy nearest and best Friends, thy Wife and Children, and
Kinsfolk, will fly from thy Corpse, and will not be able to endure the sight of
thee; before they were pleased with thy Embraces; but now thy very presence is
Ghastly and Terrible: Here then is the bounds of Worldly Love and Friendship;
It is therefore very unreasonable, to place our Confidence in these things; but
let us rather put our Trust in those, which may be useful to us even after we
are dead.

Think how horrid and noisome the stink of thy Carcass would be, even to thy
nearest Kindred, and yet this is that Body, for the indulging whereof, thou
have so often offended thy God: How much pains do some Men take, how many
Difficulties do they Encounter with, that they may leave a Rich and Pleasant
Inheritance to their Children? Though many times in the getting of it, they do
such unjust and wicked Actions, as are never to be purged away, but in the
Eternal Flames of Hell: And what do they keep to themselves, as the reward of
all their Labors? Nothing but a Despicable Winding Sheet, and a Coffin made up
of four Boards; this is the Recompense of all their Toil: But if something more
be spent at thy Funeral, it is commonly laid out more for the Fame and Credit
of thy Kindred, and the Surviving Heir, than for thee, so that a farthing
should not sometimes be bestowed upon the dead Corpse, if they could but secure
their own Honor.

The Prayer.
O Merciful Father, give me such Courage and Resolution, that I may not be
affrighted at the ghastly appearance of Death, nor faint when I think on my
last dying Agonies, and that my Body must rot in the Earth: But having my mind
fixed on thee, and on the Glories of the Eternal State, I may put off all fear
of Death, and depart this Life with Joy and Readiness, with a firm hope of a
Glorious Resurrection, and of enjoying that Bliss and Glory, with which both
Body and Soul, shall be endued in the Celestial and Happy Life. And because I
came naked into this World, let me willingly leave all Worldly things, which
may retard my flight to Heaven: O Lord Jesu, who for our sakes, did taste the
bitterness of Death, and in those Agonies of Mind, did sweat great drops of
blood; grant that by the Merits of thy Passion, I may never feel the bitter
pangs of Eternal Death:

CHAP. III. After Death there remains another Life, and Death is the entrance,
either to Eternal Happiness or Misery.
ALthough the Body after Death corrupts and putrifies, and returns to the Earth
from whence it was taken; yet for as much as the Soul is immortal, and the Body
shall arise at the last Day, and be again united to the Soul, and so the whole
Man shall be translated into another State: It is therefore requisite, that a
Christian should not confine his Meditations upon death only, but should be
very Solicitous, that his Life may be happy in the other World: Many Men indeed
lead such Lives, as if they did not believe there were a God, nor any other
life after this; but when they come to dye, they will be convinced of these
truths by their own Consciences, and by those notions which are implanted in
the minds of all Men, that good Deeds shall be Rewarded, and Wickedness
punished in the other World; and though they should not believe this, even when
they are dying, yet afterward they will feel it, to their unspeakable Sorrow:
However the immortality of the Soul has been believed by the whole Race of
Mankind at all times; and if we Consult either Sacred or Heathen Writers, we
shall find that another life after this, has been asserted by all; not to heap
up the many Testimonies of Holy Scriptures, this one of our Savior may
suffice, which Comprehends as it were the Sum of all the rest; The Hour is
coming, Joh. 5.28.
in the which all that are in the Graves, shall hear the Voice [ of the Son of
God, v. 25.] And shall come forth, they that have done good unto the
Resurrection of Life; and they that have done Evil, unto the Resurrection of
Damnation. And indeed if we consider the lives of those Persons, which the
Sacred Scriptures affirm to have lived devoutly, from hence we may have an
evident Testimony of a future Life, for in all Ages, how much Misery have they
undergone, who have endeavored to lead Pious Lives, and to be conformable to
the Divine Will; very Remarkable are the Calamities of the Holy Fathers under
the Old Testament; the Martyrdoms of Christ's Apostles under the New, and the
Tribulations of others, who have Worshipped God in Spirit and in Truth: But if
they had looked no farther than this Life, no doubt but they would have
followed the common way of the World, and have indulged themselves in Ease and
Pleasures, as their Lusts and Appetites bid them: Which since they did not do,
it is a convincing Testimony, that they sought a more happy and a better Life
after the Miseries of this: For as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.19.
If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all Men most miserable.

Now if we Consult the Heathens, as often as we hear them commend Piety and
Justice, and other Virtues, so often we are to think they declare Man's
Immortality and a Future Life; for to what purpose were it, to follow Virtue,
and suffer Evil, if there remained no hopes of another life: This Doctrine the
Wise Men in all Ages taught, Zoroaster, Hermes, Trismagistus, Orpheus,
Phocylides, Theogenis, Homer, Hesiod, Pindar, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato,
Aristotle, Cicero, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Seneca, and all the Wise Famous
Philosophers; and from hence it was, that all Nations had a Religion, and
certain Rites whereby they worshipped the Gods, and believed a Hell and Elysian
fields: If we run over the whole World, we shall find that the most Rude,
Barbarous and Savage People, even those who scarcely seem to have any Humanity
in them, have all by a common consent embraced this Faith; for this Notion was
not bred in the Schools of Philosophers, and so spread abroad in the World, but
it is implanted and engraven in the Breast of every Man; Romans 2.14.25.
and if some Men have endeavored to persuade themselves that things are
otherwise, yet could they never bring their minds firmly to believe so; for a
wicked Man as that Platonic said, would not have his Soul to be Immortal, for
fear he should suffer the due Punishments of his Crimes; but he prevents the
Sentence of his Judge, and condemns himself to be guilty of Death: But there is
no need of saying more on this Argument, since amongst Christians, it is certain
and undoubted, that after this life, there remains another.

But forasmuch as the future State of Men after this life is not alike, but
some shall abound with all felicity, whilst others shall suffer all kind of
miseries: hence we see that the success of a Man's happiness depends upon his
death, and that all our felicity or infelicity happens either from a good or a
bad death; and that on one moment depends an Eternity either of infinite
blessedness, or unspeakable misery: for in what ever condition death finds and
leaves any Man, in the very same shall he appear at the last judgment, Eccl.
11.3.
if the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where the
tree falls, there it shall be. And thus as every Man dies, the same shall he
be in the other life: for as St. Paul says, we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10.
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad, so that as every one is found at the hour
of death, such shall he be judged: They shall live happily in the other World,
that die well: they miserably, that die ill: And thus it is that the hour of
death separates the good from the wicked at the greatest distance. To the good
death is the end and determination of all troubles, and the beginning of
Eternal Felicity and Blessedness: but to the wicked death is the privation of
all the delights, and pleasures, and riches of this life; and is the beginning
of Eternal Misery, and never ending Punishment.

The Prayer.
O Merciful Father who did create me for a far more blessed condition then
this miserable life which the brute animals enjoy, vouchsafe so to direct me in
my passage through this World, that I may never set my affections on things
below; but use them with such indifferency, that I may at length attain to the
joys and glories of the blessed life above; and that knowing I have here no
continuing City, I may with the greater earnestness seek one to come, Heb. 13,
14.

CHAP. IV. The Consideration of the last Judgment.
AFter Death comes Judgment: Think therefore O Man, that immediately after
Death thy Soul must appear before God, Ecc. 12.7.
and that at the last Day it shall be joined again to thy body, and then thou
shall be Judged before Gods Tribunal, in the presence of all the Angels and
Saints: Consider that thou must appear before a Judge, whose unerring Wildom
thou can by no means deceive, whose power thou can by no ways avoid, whose
Justice thou can by no means corrupt: A Judge who will enquire into thy
vainest words, and thy most trivial thoughts, who is now present at, and
beholds all the words and actions of the whole World: Who is there so bold, so
desperately wicked, that dares contumaciously violate the Laws, and commit
Crimes worthy of Death, in the presence of his King? And yet more than this
dare Men do, who spightfully break the Commands of God before his face; but
this Judge, who knows all our actions, Eccl. 12.14. Romans 14.12.
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good or whether it be evil: so that every one of us shall give an account of
himself to God: For he which is Lord over all, Wisd. 6.7.
shall fear no man's person, neither shall he stand in awe of any man's
greatness; for he has made the small and great, and cares for all alike. Let
therefore your thoughts be always employed in meditating on this severe
Judgment, in which there will be no more place for pardon; nothing shall then
be granted either by Prayers or Tears; but either this merciful Sentence shall
pass on the Righteous, Matthew. 25.23.
Well done good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord. Ver. 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World: or on the contrary this terrible Sentence shall be
thundered out against the wicked by the most just Judge, Ver. 41.
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels: What can our minds conceive more sweet and pleasant, than to hear
God saying to us, come ye blessed? what more sad and dreadful, than depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire: In this day of Judgment, wealth will not
help the rich, nor power, nor honors the great Ones of this World: Knowledge
will not absolve the wise, nor will force preserve the strong: This Judge will
not be pleased by flatteries, nor bribed by rewards; no Prayers will move him,
no Tears will appease him; Psalm. 9.8.
but he shall judge the World in righteousness, and shall minister judgment to
the People in uprightness: Then (as it is said in Wisdom) shall the righteous
man stand in great boldness, Chap. 5.1, etc.
before the face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of his
labors; when they see it they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall
be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all that they
looked for. And they repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say
within themselves: This was he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a proverb
of reproach. We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without
honor. How is he numbered among the Children of God, and his lot is among the
Saints! Consider farther, O man, who they are that in this future Judgment
shall hear this joyful word, come ye blessed, and shall be made partakers of
eternal Glory; and on the contrary, who they are, on whom this dreadful
Sentence shall be pronounced, depart from me ye cursed; and so shall be cast
into Hell fire; and then give all diligence that you may be found in the number
of the blessed, and not amongst the miserable: Now, who both these are, the
Holy Scriptures do sufficiently declare: Our Savior himself tells us, Mat.
13.41.
that the Angels shall gather the wicked together, and cast them into a furnace
of fire: John 3.36.
He that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him: John 3.19.
And this is the Condemnation, that light is come into the World, and men loved
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil: But the fearful and
unbelieving, Rez. 21.8.
and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in the Lake which burns with
fire and brimstone; which is the second death: 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9.
The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord: Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
the Kingdom of God: be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with monkind. nor
thieves, nor coveteous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the Kindom of God. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these; Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like, of the which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: On the contrary we are told, who they are
that shall be saved. Joh. 3.18. Mark 16.16. Romans 5.1.
He that believes on the Son of God, is not condemned: He that believes, and
is baptized, shall be saved: Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace
with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Prayer.
LOrd Jesu Christ, guide me by thy Holy Spirit, that I may walk in thy ways;
and always have in my mind this sum of the whole Duty of Man: Eccl. 12.13, 14.
fear God and keep his Commandments: For God shall bring every work into
Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
O let every moment that voice sound in mine ears: arise ye dead, and come to
judgment. And at the last let me hear thy gracious voice saying, come thou
blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for thee from the beginning
of the World. I acknowledge indeed and confess, that by my sins I have deserved
the pains of Hell: but thou by thy Passion, Death, and Resurrection have
redeemed me from them, and merited Heaven for me: In thee therefore, in thy
merits and mercies I put my whole trust and confidence, and joyfully expect thy
glorious coming, Amen: Come Lord Jesus, Amen. Rev. XXII. 20.

CHAP. V. The Joys of the Life eternal.
ALthough it cannot be imagined, much less expressed in words, what difference
there is between the joys of Heaven, and the pains and miseries of the damned;
yet for as much as many live as if it mattered little or nothing, whether after
death they were to be admitted into the blessed Life above, or to be cast into
the bottomless pit: it therefore well becomes a Christian daily to consider,
how vastly the miseries of Hell differ from the glories of Heaven, that so he
may be convinced how necessary it is earnestly to endeavor to avoid the one
and obtain the other: For who is there so void of sense, that for the hopes of
gaining one Farthing, would run the hazard of losing an hundred thousand
Crowns? and yet this they daily do, who defile themselves with sin, that they
may follow after the riches, pleasures, and honors of this World: for all
these things, and even the whole World (could any man gain it to himself,) are
more vile, if they be compared to eternal lise, (which is utterly lost by sin)
than the smallest mite compared to the greatest sum imaginable: Or who is there
so desperately wicked that would dare to commit crimes worthy of death, in the
sight of a Gibbet, a drawn Sword, or a flaming fire, and in the presence of a
Judge, who he knew would immediately condemn him to these torments; and yet
this they do, who well knowing that the pains of Hell are so plainly set before
their eyes in the Holy Scriptures, do yet daily commit such sins, as justly
deserve those infernal plagues.

Now eternal Happiness consists in these two things: In the absence of all evil
things, and in the enjoyment of every thing that is good: Rev. 21.4.
For God shall wipe away all tears from the eyes of the blessed, and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain: And, as it is written, 1 Cor. 2.9.
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him: For what greater
felicity can there be than to have no calamities to disturb us, not to be
terrified with the fear of death, to behold the face of God, to be amongst the
Quires of Angels, to serve our Creator with the blessed Spirits, and all the
Saints; and with perpetual Hyms and Praises to magnify his glorious Name? If
you value and desire Health, there shall be constant soundness and eternal
Life: If you are delighted with the friendship of good men, there you shall
have the familiar acquaintance of all the blessed inhabitants above, who will
all have one Heart and one Soul: In short; there will be nothing wanting that a
man can wish for. What (says St. Quid, inquit Augustinus, hac vita beatius,
ubi non est paupertatis metus, non agritudinis imbectllitas? nemo laeditur,
nemo irascitur, nemo invidet, cupiditas nulla exardescit, nullum cibi
desiderium, nulla honoris, aut potestatis pulsat ambitio, nullus Diaboli metus,
insidia Daemonum nulla, terror gehennae pracul, mors neque corporis neque
animae, sed immortalitatis munere jucunda vita. Nulla ibi discordia, cuncta
consona, cuncta convenientia, Sanctorum omnium una erit concordia. Nox ibi
nulla, nullae tenebrae; sed lux summa: quoniam Dominus inluminabit civitatem,
and Incerna ejus erit Agnus and Sancti fulgebunt sicut stellae and sicut
splendour firmamenti. Dabitur ibi consociare choris Angelorum, intueri
Patriarchas and Prophetas, videre Apostolos atque omnes Sanctos. Gloriosa sunt
hac sed multo glorisius erit D E V M intueri. Manual. cap. 17.
Augustine) can be more happy than this life, where there is no fear of Poverty,
nor the weakness of Infirmities? no body is hurt, no body is angry: none envies
another: no lust inflames them no longing after food; no desire of honor and
power disquiets them: there is no dread of Satan, no snares of the Devil, no
fear of Hell: there is neither death of Body or Soul, but by the means of
immertality a most delightful life: there will be no evil, no discord, but a
perfect harmony, because there will be a mutual agreement between all the
Saints: there will be no night, nor darkness, but the greatest light, for the
Glory of God will enlighten it, Rev. 21.23.
and the Lamb will be the light thereof, Dan. 12.3.
and the Saints shall shine as the Stars, and as the brightness of the
Firmament: there we shall associate with the multitudes of Angels and
Archangels, and all the Heavenly Powers; there we shall behold the Patriarchs
and Prophets, the Apostles and all the Saints: these are glorious things, but
it will be yet much more glorious to behold GOD himself: for the happiness and
glory of eternal life does chiefly consist in the vision and enjoyment of God,
who will then be all in all. But how great this future felicity will be, the
mind of man is not capable to conceive: however we may make some faint
conjectures: for seeing God is the Creator and Preserver of all things, it
must needs be that all the things in the World which to us appear fair and
beautiful, are in him so, much more eminently: if therefore the prospect and
contemplation of the Creatures be sweet and grateful, the Creator himself must
needs be much more ravishing and delightful: so that since we shall see God
face to face, all, even the most beautiful things in this World, will be
surmounted by the transcendent beauty of God: He shall be all in all, the
satisfaction of all desires, and the perfect felicity of the Saints: Psalm. 84.4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will always be praising thee:
Psalm. 31.19.
O how great is thy Goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee!

The Prayer.
ALmighty Lord God, forasmuch as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has
it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive those good things which thou have
prepared for those that love thee; I must needs confess that through the
dullness of my Senses, which cannot comprehend these things, I have not so
earnestly sought after eternal life as I ought to have done: Vouchsafe
therefore to illuminate my mind, that I may in some measure understand the
Excellency of Heaven; that my Soul may long after its joys, and being
captivated therewith, I may despise this World, and value it as nothing in
comparison of the Glories of that blessed and eternal Life: so direct all my
thoughts and actions that I may at length attain to that blessed and happy
State, where no misery nor sorrow dwells; that I may see thee face to face with
all thy Saints, and enter into the full possession of those immense glories and
felicitlites, which are at thy right hand for evermore, Amen.

CHAP. VI. The pains and miseries of Hell.
AND now should there be any one so detestably wicked as not to be allured by
the happiness of eternal life; yet surely the miseries of Hell would terrify
him: Now Hell in holy Writ is called a furnace of fire: Mat. 13.42.
eternal fire: and that cannot be quenched: Mat. 25.46.
an everlasting punishment: Apoc. 9.
destruction: the bottomlejs pit: outer darkness, Mat. 8.12.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Mat. 25.41.
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Romans 2.
tribulation and anguish: Apoc. 21.8.
a Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. All which names of Hell admonish
us, that the pains of the damned shall be eternal, most grievous, infinite,
inexpressible, and accompanied with the Society of Devils. As to the eternity
thereof (which is the longest, and also endures the longest) pious Antiquity
has illustrated it with such similitudes as these: suppose there were a
Mountain of Sand heaped up to Heaven, and that once in a thousand years a
little Bird should take from thence one grain of sand: there would be hopes
that after many million of years, and a long space of time that can scarcely be
conceived, the Mountain would at last be consumed; but in eternity no such
thing can be hoped for: Or, suppose a scrol of Parchment so long as to
encompass the whole Globe of the Earth, nay even the highest Sphere of Heaven,
on which should be written nothing but closely joined Figures of Nine
throughout; now though no Arithmetician can compute this number, yet does it not
by far reach eternity: and should you add a thousand more, nay, a thousand
thousand of the like numbers, yet could you by no means comprehend eternity;
since then eternity is so unmeasurably long, certainly none but men that are
desperate, can be careless and negligent how they are to spend it, or rather
since it can never be spent, not to consider whether they shall be happy or
miserable in the other World: What madness is it, for trifles and things of no
value to be cast headlong into Hell, there to be punished with unspeakable
torments for ever and ever? Should any one bring you to a furious flaming fire,
and there ask you, for what price, or for what part of voluptuousness, you
would be willing to be tormented in it, for a day, or for but one hour? would
you not easily answer him, that you would not buy such tortures, for all the
pleasures the Earth affords, no nor for all the World? how then is it, that for
some petty-gain, some deceitful honor, some flitting short-lived pleasure, you
choose to burn in the eternal flames of Hell? you are afraid of the fire for an
hour, though you should gain the whole World, and yet you cast your self into
the eternal torments of Hell, for things of no value: De reparat. laps.
Tell me, says St. Chrysostom, how long a season of luxurr, how much
voluptuousness, would you set against eternal torments? an hundred years, we
will give to pleasures, and an hundred more, and if you please, a thousand
more: alas! what compensation is this for eternity? is not all the time of our
life, which we spend in pleasure and luxury, like the vain dream of one night,
if it be compared to eternity? is there then any one, who for a pleasing dream
one night, would choose to undergo eternal torments? and be willing to receive
these, so he might but enjoy that? Pleasures pass away like a shadow, but the
punishments remain without end; and although the same space of time were
allotted for the delights of this World, and the pains of Hell, yet is there
any one so foolish and void of Sense, that would choose to Juffer one days
Infernal Plagues, for one days Worldly Pleasure? When as one hours pain, any
Torment of the Body is wont to make us forget all the time past of our Lives,
which we have spent in pleasures:

Nor are the pains of Hell only Eternal, but also infinitely grievous and
inexpressible: For nothing so sad or terrible can be imagined, but those
Eternal Torments are still more grievous; All the most dreadful, inhumane, and
cruel things which the Barbarity of Tyrants have ever invented, are not to be
compared with these pains of Hell: For not only the Body, but the Soul also
shall be afflicted: The remembrance of past offenses, which have occasioned so
many Evils, the continual sense of Racking Pains, the Hatred and Detestation of
God and all the Saints, and principally the thoughts of being for ever rejected
from the most blissful sight of God; all these things do miserably torment the
Sinner: There will be heard the doleful Cries, Sighs and Lamentations, the
Cursings and Execrations of Parents, Children, Brethren, Sisters, and Friends,
who by their Example or Negligence, have thrown others into that place of
Torments; for they will be most furiously enraged against those whom above all
others in this life they loved most dearly: At the sight of them, they shall be
provoked and incensed, as against their greatest enemies.

And now though these Torments are of themselves very sad and terrible, yet are
they still made more grievous by the perpetual Society of Devils and damned
Spirits. Any one that has seen a Man possessed with the Devil, or if he has
not seen one, yet has read out of the Gospel or other Histories, the
deplorable condition of those men that are possessed; will easily believe what
a most woeful thing it is to be under the power of the Devil. Who is there of so
undaunted a Courage, that is not afraid of Apparitions, which are disguised
Devils, and does not tremble at the sight of them: And yet the Devil in
possessed folks, or when he terrifies Men by his Evil Spirits, has no more
power over Men, than God is pleased to grant him, and has not yet a full
Dominion over them: But in Hell, where the Damned are delivered up by God to be
Tormented, he uses his own Liberty and Authority, and exercises such Cruelty
on them, as the mind of Man is not capable to conceive: Think then, O Man, how
great their Misery shall be, who must live in the Society, and under the
Dominion of Devils, and undergo their Rage and Malice to Eternal Ages: Think, O
Man, what great Misery it would be, to be shut up in a close Room for a Month
together with Mad folks, or such as are possessed, and from thence you may
Conjecture, how wretched their condition will be, who must be forced to live
with many Myriads of outrageous Devils to all Eternity: Oh! How will the Devils
Tyrannize, not only over the meaner and baser rank of Men, but also over
Emperors, Kings and Princes, those of the highest Order and Quality! How will
the Great Ones of this World be greatly tormented and plagued by the Devils,
and scoffed at with biting Taunts and Jeers! After the same manner will they
insult over all ranks of Men, and will as much as they can, increase their
punishments by Revilings, Reproaches and Mockings; they will laugh at, and make
a jest of the Damned, that they should precipitate themselves into the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone for trifles, for momentary Honors, decaying Riches, fading
Pleasures, or vain Joys; and that they should sooner believe them, who they
knew were their sworn Enemies, than the great and good God the Maker, and
Redeemer of Mankind.

And then lastly, there is not only the Society of Devils, but also of the
Damned, which will still farther aggravate their Punishment: Nothing will there
be seen, but the Eternal and Horrid Plagues and Tortures of the Damned Fiends,
nothing will there be heard, but Stripes and Wailings, Curses and Accusations
of those who by Counsel, Admonition or Example, were the causes and occasions
of their sinning; and more remarkable will be the Expostulations of Parents
with their Children, that for their sakes they were cast into these Torments,
whilst they endeavored by all means right or wrong, to heap up Riches and
Wealth for them; and on the other side, the Children will accuse their Parents,
and impute the cause of their Damnation to them, that by their Examples or
Indulgency, they gave them the occasions of Sinning.

The Prayer.
OLord Jesus Christ, guide and illuminate my mind, that I may daily remember,
and attentively consider, what a vast difference there is between the Joys of
Eternal Life, and the Miseries of Hell: And direct me by thy Holy Spirit in the
ways of thy Commandments, that I may walk in that narrow Path that leads unto
Life; and suffer me not to be seduced by Satan into the broad way of the
Wicked, which leads to Destruction, least I fall headlong into that Lake of
Fire and Brimstone, from which thou have Redeemed me by thy most precious
Blood; but by the Efficacy of thy Merits, let me live with Thee for ever and
ever in Heaven. Amen.

Who amongst us can dwell with the devouring fire?

Who amongst us can dwell with everlasting burnings?

CHAP. VII. To die well there is great need of a careful Preparation.
SInce then there is so great a difference between that Blessed Life above, and
the Miseries of the Damned; that death is the passage either to Eternal Blifs
or Punishment; and that the everlasting Happiness or Misery of all Men, depends
on one Moment, that blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: but for ever
miserable are they, that die the death of the Wicked: And that our Eternal
Salvation depends upon an happy death: It certainly ought to be our chiefest
care and concern to learn to die well, and to prepare ourselves aright for an
happy departure: Now he dies well, who has lived well, and whom Death does not
find unprovided: De discipl. Eccl. cap. 2.
For, as St. Augustine says, Non enim potest male mori, qui bone vixerit.
it is not possible for him to die ill, who has lived well: But great need
there is of preparation for any one to die well: For if we never undertake any
matter of small importance, as the going of a Journey or the like, without some
provision, and often thinking on it beforehand; it certainly is much more
necessary to be very Solicitous, and attentively to consider after what manner
we are to demean our selves at the hour of Death, that so we may obtain the
Felicity of Eternal Life, and avoid the Pains and Miseries of Hell.

Now the preparation for Death is Twofold: The one General, and to be performed
every day: The other Special, and is necessary when Death approaches.

The Prayer.
OLord God and most Merciful Father, for as much as my Salvation depends upon
an happy death, do thou vouchsafe so to direct my mind, that I may be always
very careful how to secure to my self an happy passage out of this World, and
so to order my self and all that belongs unto me, that at what ever hour thou
shall please to call me hence, I may be found ready, and through the gate of
Death, I may be Translated into thy Glorious Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. The general and daily Preparation for Death: The first
Consideration, that Death is certain, Life is short, and the hour of Death is
uncertain.
THE general and daily Preparation for Death, we shall treat of in the
following Chapters, desiring the devout Christian to consider: 1st. That death
is certain, life short, and the hour of death uncertain: 2ly. That death is not
to be feared: And 3ly. the Christian Duties that are daily to be performed by
him:

1st. Then it is fitting for a Man that intends to die well, often to ponder in
his mind the certainty of Death, the shortness of Human Life, and the
uncertainty of the hour of Death.

For in the first place the continual Meditation of our Mortality, may be a
very effectual means to prepare us both to live and to die well; nothing can
better show us the way of holy living, no exhortation to piety and virtue more
prevalent than the remembrance of death; nothing more powerfully calls us off
from our sins, and from a fond desire after worldly things, than the serious
consideration of the frailty, instability, and approaching dissolution of our
bodies: for as that last moment of our lives will take off all the salse
colors and disguises from earthly things, and represent them clearly to our
view, as they are in themselves, vain and despicable; so the frequent
premeditation of that hour quickens the sight of our minds more plainly to
perceive the same Truths; for whilst our minds are full of the thoughts of our
mortality, those things which follow after death will presently insinuate
themselves; then will sinners see Hell open before them, and the unquenchable
fire ready to devour them, which will so terrify their consciences, that
neither honors, nor riches, nor pleasures, nor any other worldly thing can any
longer please or entice them.

And as nothing is more profitable for us, than the daily meditation of death,
so on the contrary nothing is more hurtful, than our forgetfulness of it; and
yet this is very common with the rich Men and great Ones of this World, who, as
if they were to live the age of Methusalah, lay up Provisions for many years
continuance here, and in the mean time think little or nothing of the life to
come; and so when they fancy they have attained to the top of their desires, on
a sudden, with the rich Man in the Gospel, they are forced to depart out of
this life, and too often descend into eternal destruction: and forasmuch as the
Devil well knows, that nothing more powerfully excites men to holiness or
better secures their souls from his snares, than the meditation of death, he
therefore employs his greatest care and diligence to put these thoughts out of
men's minds; which if he can but obtain, he easily gets every thing else he has
a mind to, and takes men captive at his will: It is a sign of a mind altogether
depraved, and out of order, which does not care to hear Discourses and
Conferences of Death, which is sad and uneasy at the thoughts of it, and
therefore strives to divert it self with witty sayings and merriment, with full
bowls and all kinds of delight and pastime: But on the contrary, he who is in
favor with God, whose Soul is not plunged in sensual pleasures, it is his
delight to think often and to discourse of death, for he knows it is the only
necessary way to everlasting bliss.

Secondly, Toward our preparation for death, we are to consider the shortness
of our lives; for how little time does God allow us to live here? many Infants
expire at their very entrance in to life; some die in their Childhood, others
in their Youth; fewer arrive to their middle age; but very few attain to old
age: from hence it is that in Holy Scripture our life is compared to those
things that are most frail and momentary: as the trace of a cloud, a mist, a
spark, Wisd. 2. Job. 14.2. Psalm. 90. Job. 5.6.9.
a shadow, a flower, a weavers shuttle, a post, a swift ship, and an eagle that
hastes to his prey: This also the Heathen declared, and therefore Pindar
called man, the dream of a shadow, Aeschylus, the shadow of smoke; M. Varro, a
bubble: and with good reason are these names attributed to man; for we die
daily, and some part of our lives are every day taken from us; our whole state
is nothing else but a journey, a race to death.

And then, Thirdly, Consider that in this short life the time of death is
uncertain; for though it is appointed for all to die, yet the hour of death is
unknown: some die in their Infancy, some in their Youth, and some in their old
Age, whilst others are overtaken by an unexpected death, so that no one can
assure himself of to morrow; neither is the place or manner of our death known
to us, which is daily confirmed to us by the dead Corpses we see carried by:
For all that die do not keep their Beds, afflicted by a long continued
sickness; for some are taken away suddenly, or in a moment lose their Senses by
Appoplexies; others are choked by violent Catarrhs; some are killed by falls,
some by the ruins of Houses, whilst others are trod under feet by Horses; some
are drowned in the Water, and others are struck with Lightning, whilst others
unexpectedly fall into the hands of Thieves and Enemies, and come to an
untimely end, which they never were afraid of: Now what happens to one, may
happen to all; and what may happen to all, every one ought to expect may happen
to them: For man also knows not his time, Eccles. 9.12.
as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught
in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls
suddenly upon them; being then men, we ought to think that whatever is common
to man, and does sometimes happen to others, may also befall us: Now hereby we
are admonished to be every minute ready and prepared for death: For God was
pleased to let us be ignorant of the time of our death, that the uncertainty
thereof might be a means of exciting in us a constant practice of virtue and
avoiding of sin, and a perpetual care and endeavor to secure our eternal
welfare, for how dangerous is it to live in such a condition, that if a sudden
death should surprise us unawares, our salvation is utterly to be despaired of?
and who can ascertain us, that at the end of our lives, when death comes on us
like an armed man, we shall be in so good a disposition as to be able to bewail
our sins, and implore the grace and mercy of God? Indeed were we permitted to
die often, and return again to life, their rashness and security were
excusable, who so seldom think of death; but since it is appointed unto all men
but once to die, and that there is no leading of our lives over again, it is
manifest what great danger they run, whom death overtakes before they are
provided for it, since it for ever takes away from them all hopes of salvation:
Let us then be always prepared for death, let us fly from sin, and not defer
our repentance, let us not cherish anger and revenge, evil affections, and a
fond desire of living long in this World; but let us account every day to be
our last; and when we go to sleep, let us so demean our selves, as if we were
never to arise again from our beds; and when we arise in the morning, let us so
spend every hour of the day, as if we were never to lie down in our beds again;
let us so use the good things of this World, as if we were to leave them every
moment: let us not vainly promise our selves along continuance here, with that
rich man in the Gospel, who said unto his Soul, Luke 12.19.
Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink,
and be merry: whereas that very night, his Soul was required of him: but let us
daily pray with holy David, Ps. 39.5.
Lord let me know my end and the number of my days, that I may be certified how
long I have to live; and let us not neglact that wholesome Admonition of our
Savior, who says: Mat. 24.46. Vsque ad fin.
Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes, shall find watching;
Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him Ruler over all his Goods: But,
and if that Evil Servant shall say in his Heart, My Lord delayeth his coming,
and shall begin to smite his fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with the
Drunken. The Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when he looks not for
him, and in an hour that he is not a ware of: And shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his Portion with the Hypocrites: There shall be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth; but let us be wise and faithful Servants, that are always
ready, expecting their Lord, for we know not what hour he will come, Mark 13.35.
whether at even, or at midnight, or at the Cock crowing, or in the morning:
Least coming suddenly, he find us sleeping, and unprepared for him. St.
Augustine tells us, In quo enim, quemque invenerit suus novissimus dies, in hoc
eum comprehendit mundi novissimus dies. St. Augustine. cap. 11.3.
that in what ever condition our last day leaves us, in the same state will the
last day of the World find us: For as a Man dies in the one, so in the other he
shall be judged. To this purpose that saying in Ecclesiastes is usually
applied, if the Tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place
where the Tree falls, Com. Sup. Eccl. cap. 11.
there it shall be. This St. Hierom thus interprets, that as a Tree certainly
lies, which way soever it salls; so when thou art cut off by the stroke of
Death, thou shall always remain such, whether your last Moment found you Cruel
and Unmerciful, or Meek and Charitable. Could any one tell for certain, that he
had but one day more to live, and evidently knew that he must die to Morrow,
surely such a Man were extremely wicked, if he could not, Abstain from sin for
so short a Season, and should not employ all that little space of Life in the
Exercises of Piety and Virtue, when as that Judgment which is passed on us at
our Death, shall most assuredly always remain firm and unalterable: And who is
there can warrant himself to morrow? Who is there that knows, as a thing sure
and undoubted, that he has another day, nay, another hour to live? O Man,
whosoever thou art, there will come an Evening, whole Morning, or a Morning,
whose Evening thou shall never see; and whether this may not be to day or to
morrow, thou know not: So that they are without all manner of reason, who
are not afraid to defile themselves with deadly sins, when they know not
whether they shall be allowed the space of one hour, of one moment to bewail
their Crimes, and beg pardon for them at the hands of God: God has indeed
promised Pardon to the Penitent; but he has never promised to the Sinner any
portion of the time to come: Make no tarrying therefore to turn unto the Lord,
and put not off from day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come
forth, Eccl. 5.8.
and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and perish in the day of
vengeance. This the wiser Heathen well understood, insomuch that it is a shame
Christians should be out done by them in this matter. For thus Seneca speaks;
Qui ut bonus sit, in senectutem differt, aperte astendit, se nolle virtuti
dare, nisi tempus ad alia omnia inidoneum. Et alibi Audies plerosque dicentes,
a quinquagesimo in otium secedam, sexagesimus annus ab officiis me dimittet. Et
quem tandem longioris vitae praedem accipts? Quis ita, sicuti disponis, irae
patietur? Non pudet te ad reliquias vitae te tibi reservare, and id selum
tempus bonae menti destinare, qued in nullam rem conferri possit? Quum serum
est, tunc vivere incipere, cum desnendum est? Quae tam stulta mortalitatis
eblivio, in quinquagesitnnm and sexagesimum annum differ sana consilia, and
inde velle vitam inchoare quo pauci perduxerunt? Seneca de Brev. vitae.
He who desers being good till old Age, shows plainly, that he is loath to give
up himself to Virtue, until he is fit for nothing else. And in an other place;
you shall hear almost every one saying, after fifty I shall be at leisure; when
I am threescore years Old, I shall be free from all Offices; but what Security
have you now for a longer life? Who will undertake for you, that all things
shall go just as you have ordered them? are you not ashamed to reserve your
self the relics of your life for your own good, and set a part that time only
for wisdom and goodness which is worth nothing? How late is it then to begin
your life, when you must be forced to leave it? how foolish a forgetfulness of
your mortality is it, to put off all good counsel, till you are fifty or
threescore years old, and to begin to live at an age to which few arrive? What
penance it is to leave your Harlots, when you are forced to leave them whether
you will or no? to begin to be temperate when you can no longer taste what you
eat or what you drink? To this purpose says St. Maledictus qui florem
juventutis diabolo, foces Senectutis DEO consecrat.
Augustine discreetly: Cursed be he that dedicates the flour of his youth to the
Devil, and the dregs of old age to God. When once the last moment of our Life
is past, there is then no longer time for repentance; and in a little time a
Man will be made sensible of that State which can never be altered to all
Eternity: therefore whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end, Eccl. 7.
ult.
and thou shall never do amiss.

Let us then every moment be ready to receive the summons of death, by
preparing our selves for it, whilst we are in our health: It is a very
unseasonable time to begin to fit our selves for another World, when we are
just on the confines of death, and are struggling with the agonies of it; for
then the lively powers both of mind and body languish and decay: then the man
is so distracted with pains, and other grievances, which his sickness
occasions, that he can never seriously apply himself to die well: nay, many
times a frenzy seizes on the sick person, and on a sudden deprives him of the
use of all his reason: we often see that even good men cannot list up their
thoughts unto God, as they ought, when an acute pain in their teeth, or eyes,
or ears, or any other part troubles them, but their whole mind is carried
thither where their grief is. Now if this happens to good men, when the disease
is not dangerous; what can we think shall befall those, who never had any
serious thoughts of God, who know not how to search out, or confess their sins,
who can scarcely tell what repentance means? how will they be tormented, when
the pangs of death are upon them, to consider that they are now leaving their
dear Wife and Children, and that all their riches which they have hoarded up
with so much care will now stand them in no stead? What madness then is it to
defer a business of such weighty consequence, on which our eternal salvation
depends, to so improper, so unfit a time? it is rightly said, that late
repentance seldom happens to be true and serious, and God by a just judgment
oftentimes disregards those when they are dying, who thought it grievous to
remember God when they were well in health: Of these the Divine Wisdom thus
speaks: Prove. 1.24, etc.
Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no
man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes;
when your fear comes as desolation, when distress and anguish come^h upon you.
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me: For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord; they would none of my counsel; they despised all my
reproof.

The Prayer.
O Most infinite Wisdom, thy thoughts are not like our thoughts! since then it
did not please thee, to reveal unto us the hour of our death, grant, that I may
be always prepared for an happy departure hence, that at thy coming, I may be
found watching and ready: let not the hour of death surprise me in my sins, and
let me never spend one day without true repentance: Inliven my Soul to be
perpetually aspiring after thee, and loving thee, that so all things that
happen to me, may work together for good, and nothing may be able to separate
me from the love of Christ Jesus thy Son our Lord, Amen.

CHAP. IX. That Death is not to be feared.
SInce then it is certain that all must die, that life is short, and the hour
of death is uncertain, and that therefore it becomes us to be every moment
prepared for an happy departure hence, unless we will run the hazard of losing
our Souls for ever: the devout Christian therefore may prepare himself to die
well, if in the second place he learns not to fear death: This then is the
second head of those general and daily preparations for a blessed death, that
we bear the thoughts of death with a courageous mind, and that we never be
captivated with the false pleasures of life, and the fond desire after earthly
things: for the pleasures of life, and the blandishments of this World, are
chiefly to be reckoned amongst those things which make death most bitter and
formidable to us: We know no union more close than that of Soul and Body, so
that nothing can appear more terrible than death, which separates Soul and
Body, those two intimate companions: moreover in this life, there are many
things we much value, and which engage our affections to them: such as are,
magnificent Buildings, sumptuous Apparel, Vessels of Gold and Silver, Riches,
fruitful Fields, delightful Gardens, pleasant Vineyards, Parents, Children,
Wife, and Friends, of all which since death bereaves us, it is no wonder if we
account it bitter: Hence it is said in Ecclesiasticus: Cap. 41.1.
O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that lives at rest in
his possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things: But now a diligent consideration of the miseries and
troubles of this life, of which we shall speak by and by; and of the joys of
eternal life, of which we have before treated, will soon root out of our hearts
all fondness and complacency for earthly things; for these pleasures are false
and counterfeit; and under the sweet lies gall and bitterness: This made
Solomon, the wisest of Kings, who wanted nothing this Wotld could afford to
make his life happy, upon his own experience, say, that all things under the
Sun are vain and empty: Vanity of Vanities, Eccl. 1.2.
all is Vanity: In this World we live like Strangers and Pilgrims, why then do
we not desire to return into our own Country? what ever we leave behind us
here, shall there be recompensed with far more Excellent and Transcendent
Rewards? Thus our Savior advises us: Mat. 6.19.
Lay not up for your selves treasures upon Earth, where moth and rust does
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: But lay up for your selves
treasures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through nor steal. Although many things here are pleasant
and grateful to us yet compared to Eternal Life they are nothing to be
accounted off: when we die we do not lose all those faithful Servants of
Christ, which were here so dear to us; they will follow a little after: When we
die we are gathered to our people, and go unto our Fathers; and we shall there
have the acquaintance of more and far better Friends; Angels, and Archangels,
without number: Dan. 7.10.
for thousand thousands minister unto God, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stand before him: what an unspeakable joy will it be to have a familiar
conversation with the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all the
faithful Servants of Christ?

And as the pleasures of this life, are as nothing, if they be weighed in an
even balance, with the glories of immortality, to which we pass by the gate of
death: so also death it self is not to be feared by us; for though it is called
the most terrible of all evils, because it separates those two intimate
Friends, Soul and Body; and delivers up the Body which was here so tenderly
beloved and provided for, to be eaten up by Worms: though death considered in
it self be the punishment of sin, and befalls us by the Divine Malediction; and
though death be to be dreaded by one who is involved in a multiplicity of
worldly business, and is not provided for his departure out of this life, and
so is very doubtful of his future state: yet forasmuch as by the death of
Christ, it is made the way and passage to eternal life; to a good man, who is
prepared for an happy death, it is not at all to be feared: that the day of
death is better than the day of ones birth: Eccl. 7.^
For when we are born, we enter into this World, which is a scene full of
miseries and calamities, but when we die, we leave them all, and are translated
into that other blessed life, which is replenished with all kinds of felicities.

We are first of all in this World subjected to the slavery of our corruptions
and original Sin, whilst afterward the seeds of many lusts spring up in us,
infidelity, ambition, covetousness, hatred, envy, uncleanness, and such like:
thus St. Paul complains, that he was sold under sin: Romans 7.14.
This is the height of misery, and to a man enflamed with a desire after an
holy life, and in whose breast one spark of piety remains, nothing can happen
more grievous, than the corruptions of the flesh: of this the Apostle farther
complains; Ibid. v. 18.
I know, that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing; for to will
is present with me, but how to perform that which is good. I find not: For the
good that I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not, v. 24.
that I do, etc. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? None can be wholly freed from this corruption of the flesh, in
this life, but after death, we shall be altogether delivered from it, and they
who shall be thought worthy to enter into the blessed life above, shall sin no
more.

And farther a great trouble and misery it is to pious Men, that they are
forced to live and sojourn amongst so many wicked Persons, Psalm. 120.5.
like Sheep amongst Wolves; this made David cry out, Woe is me, that I am
constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my Habitation among the Tents of
Kedar: Besides our Salvation is exposed to the greatest dangers, the Devil as a
Roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8.
walks about seeking whom he may devour. The World is daily exciting us to
Sin by evil Examples and fair Promises; the Snares wherewith Satan and the
World endeavors to entrap us, are every where laid for us; in Riches, in Meat
and Drink, in our Eyes and in our Ears, in our Words and in our Actions; now
Death wholly frees us from the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil: And not only from these, but also from all the Calamities and Misfortues
which so usually happen to Mankind in this Mortal Life: That this Life is full
of troubles, there needs not many words to prove; since both Sacred and
Profane Authors complain of the Miseries of Humane Life, Job 14.1.
whilst they teach that Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days, and full
of Trouble. And that the very name of Man, imports all miseries: This truth we
all daily experience: For how lamentable is our Nativity? To how many evils is
our Infancy exposed? Our youth, to how many injuries and dangers is it
obnoxious? With how many cares is our Manhood distracted? And how is our old
Age Surrounded with Calamities? What reason then we have to fear death, which
at once frees us from all these miseries, which is the only safe Haven to us,
who sail on this Stormy and Tempestuous Sea?

Nor does death only deliver us from Sin, and all the Troubles of this World,
but is also the gate through which we are to pass into Eternal Life; wherein
the just shall enjoy the most delightful Society of God the Father, of Christ
our Savior, of the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and of all the Angels and Blessed
Spirits: How great this future Happiness and Beatitude is, the mind of Man
cannot conceive, nor words express? And although our Bodies shall rot in the
grave, or be other ways dissolved, yet is there no danger that we shall be
separated from Christ, to whom we are joined by the Bond of the Spirit, but the
dead shall remain united to Christ, both in their Bodies and in their Souls,
and in the last Judgment, their Souls and Bodies being made one, shall arise
together to Eternal Glory: Hence in Holy Writ, Death is called, a Sleep; and
the Grave, a Bed or Dormitory:

For all these reasons the True Christian is so provided, that not only death,
but sudden death also does not affright him; men indeed do usually, not without
cause, dread sudden death; but if we duly consider it, a wicked life spent
without Repentance, is much more to be feared, than a sudden death; nor is a
sudden death bad, because it is sudden, but because for the most part it
overtakes Men unprepared, and impenitent, and so casts them headlong into
Destruction; whereas if it finds us ready, a sudden death is not evil, but
rather a more speedy passage from this, to an Happy and Eternal Life.

The Prayer.
MOst Merciful Father, open and enlighten the Eyes of my Mind, to see and
rightly consider the Misery and Vanity of this present life, that I may not set
my affections on the World, nor the things in it; but may with my whole Heart,
long after the Joys of Heaven: O Lord excite in me an ardent Desire after the
Celestial Life, and vouchsafe me some fore taste of it, by the sweetness
whereof, the bitterness of death may be so allayed, that I may be daily ready
to leave this World, and desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ our
Lord, Amen.

CHAP. X. The Duty of a Christian.
THE third Head of the Preparation for a Blessed Death, Non potest male mori,
qui been vixerit. de discipline christiana, cap. 12.
was to live holily, and to enter into such a course of life, as becomes a
Christian; for as St. Augustine says, No Body can die ill, that has lived well:
Now he lives well that performs the Duties of a Christian: He therefore who is
mindful of his Eternal Salvation, must diligently consider what the Duty of a
Christian is, or what way of living may best conduce toward the attaintment of
everlasting life after this: For he who would die like a Christian, must live
as a Christian: But he who lives wickedly, shall die wickedly; and shall arise
and be condemned with the Wicked: Now although there be many Duties which
belong to Christians in common with other Men, yet are they not peculiar to a
Christian, but are ordained for the preservation of Humane Society, and honest
Behavior in the World: One kind of Duty there is, which properly belongs to a
Christian, which only is needful, and which whoever performs, it will be well
with him hereafter for evermore: And what that duty is, the very name of a
Christian does sufficiently intimate: For whereas the Sects of all Philosophers
and Religions have received their Names from their Author and Master; whose
Precepts, Ordinances, and Institutions they follow; in like manner Christians
are so called, because they only imitate Christ, and as much as in them lies,
tread in his steps, and obey his command, and moreover (what cannot be said of
any other Religion) a Christian is one, who does not live himself, but Christ
lives in him by Faith, Gal. 2.20.
so that Christ is the life of Christians, who thenceforth manifests himself in
all their actions.

It is then chiefly requisite, a Christian should know who Christ is, whose
Name he bears, and to whom he gave up himself in the Sacrament of Baptism; what
he has done for our Salvation, and what he requires of us to do:

To this end, first we are to remember, that Man was Created by God after his
own Image; Genesis 1.
that is, as the Apostle explains it, Gal. 4.24.
in true Holiness and Righteousness, so that his understanding was comformable
to God, and gave to him alone all Honor and Glory: Him alone he loved,
reverenced and worshipped, and with Him hereafter he should have enjoyed an
immortal, eternal, and most blessed life:

Secondly, It Is to be remarked, that our first Parents fell from that primitive
Holiness and Righteousness, and so lost the Image of God; for after that by the
persuasion of the Devil, they had entertained a love of themselves contrary to
God, and to the love of their Creator, preferring their own Glory and
Delectation, before the love and glory of God, and desiring to be equal with
God himself; their understandings were presently overspread with ignorance and
blindness, instead of Wisdom: Their Wills grew Refractory and Disobedient to
God, and all their affections were perverse, irregular, and out of order, so
that now the thoughts of man from his infancy are evil; and thus man not only
fell from that eternal life, for which he was Created, but also became
obnoxious to eternal Damnation.

Thirdly, It Is firmly to be believed, that God took pity on fallen Mankind,
and sent his Son to take upon him Humane Flesh, and being made Man, did by
suffering and dying satisfy for us, and deliver us from eternal death: And did
by his Merits, relied on by a true Faith, again make us Heirs of that blessed
life, which by our sins we lost; and restored in us the decayed image of God,
and made us his, and Sanctified us by his Holy Spirit, that we might serve him
in Righteousness and Holiness all the days of our life.

From whence it plainly appears, who Christ is, and what is the duty of a
Christian; viz. Christ is our Redeemer, who reconciled us unto his Father, and
by his Merits made us his Brethren and Coheirs of his Kingdom, when we were
enemies to God, defiled with sin, and deserved to be punished with eternal
death: And a Christian (who derives his name from Christ) is one who
acknowledges that he was indeed created by God in Righteousness and Holiness,
but by the Wiles of Satan fell from, and rebelled against God, and so being
polluted by the stains of Original Sin, and contaminated with many actual
Transgressions, he became liable to the wrath of God, and everlasting
punishment; from which he is freed and redeemed by the alone Merits and
Righteousness of Christ, which by Faith is imputed unto him; so that now he is
to undertake such a way of living, as may be well pleasing not to the Devil,
but unto God, and therefore he is to avoid all sins, from which he is redeemed
by the precious Merits of Christ, and to serve God alone in an holy and
religious life:

And from hence arises a threefold duty of a Christian: The first is to
acknowledge himself a sinner, and to bewail his sins: Secondly, To believe
Christ to be his Redeemer, and to trust only in his Merits. Thirdly, To obey
his Laws, to follow the guidance of the Holy Spirit, not to relapse into sins,
from which by the death of Christ he is redeemed, but to love God above all
things, and his Neighbor as himself: Or to comprize all in a word; the life of
a Christian is a continual Repentance. For since he is defiled with Original
Sin, and even the Just Man falls seven times: Prove. 24.16.
He will therefore be always sorrowful for his sins, and sly to the Merits of
Christ; and serve God in true Righteousness and Holiness: In sum, it is the Duty
of a Christian to believe in Christ, and to live holily; which if he does, for
Christ's sake he will be acceptable unto God, and shall in the end, inherit
eternal life: But if he shall be deprived of this happiness, if he is not in
favor with God, although he should possess the Riches of the whole World,
although he were Monarch over all the Earth, although he were wiser than the
best Philosophers, yet would all be in vain, and to no purpose: Vanity of
Vanities, Eccles. 1.
all is Vanity, except to serve God, and to please him: There are indeed many
things to be done, which are allowed of God; but there is one thing necessary:
None shall be Condemned in the last Day, that they were not rich, that they
were not in high places, that they did not enjoy great honors, that they were
ignorant of many nice Subtilties of Nature: But they alone shall be Condemned,
who do not believe in Christ, and who are not the Children of God.

The Prayer.
GRant, O Lord Jesus Christ, that I may never forget those Vows wherewith I
have obliged my self unto thee, in the Holy Sacrament of Baptism, but that
renouncing the Devil and all his Works, I may obey thy Commandments with my
whole Heart; and confessing my self to be a Miserable Sinner, I may confide in
thy Merits, and serve Thee in Holiness and Righteousness, all the days of my
life. Amen.

CHAP. XI. That we must repent: And first of sorrowing for our sins.
FOR as much as the Christian knows, that he is conceived and born in sins, and
that in this corruption of Humane Nature, no body can sufficiently resist the
Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; that there is no Man which
sins not; 2 Chr. 6.36. Prove. 20.9.
for who can say, I have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my sin? and that
even the Just man falls seven times; Prove. 24.16.
therefore he hates and bewails his sins, and confesses that by them, he has
provoked Gods anger against him, so that he justly deserves the eternal pains
of Hell: But the Christian must bewail his sins seriously, and from his heart:
2 Cor. 7.10.
For that is godly sorrow which works Repentance unto Salvation, not to be
repented of, (that is a true sorrow for sins joined with faith:) Now this grief
and sadness, the Holy Ghost excites in us, as also does the Consideration and
Meditation of Christ's Passion: As if a Man considers, who he is, whom he has
offended, who it is that is angry with him, and that his sins were the cause of
his Saviors Passion: For Man from himself is nothing, but he is Gods Creature,
and whatever any one has, he has it from God: But God is the Creator of all
things, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Omnipotent, Immense, most Wise,
most Good, and most Great; insomuch that between Man and God, there is no
proportion: And yet Man by his sins rebelled against God, and delivered himself
up into the Bondage of Satan, and so provoked the infinite anger of his God
against him: Now the Passion of Christ is the Mirrior of the Divine anger: And
whoever considers with himself the reasons that moved the Son of God to become
Man, to suffer and to die, and confesses that it was the sins of the World,
which could no other ways be atton'd for, than by the Death and Passion of the
Son of God himself; he who shall consider that Man, who is Dust and Ashes, fell
away from his Creator, the great and good God, and listed himself under the
Devils Banner, and so by his sins, provoked Gods anger enough to have thrown
him headlong into Hell; and withal shall confess it to be in part his own
fault, that the Son of God underwent such Grief and Torments for others Crimes;
no doubt but such an one will abhor himself, and be amazed at the consideration
of his own guilt; and if he were left to himself to rely upon his own strength,
and knew no ways of appeasing the wrath of God, he must of necessity be driven
to despair.

The Prayer.
WOE is me O Lord, who was conceived and born in sin! the thoughts of my heart
are inclined unto evil from my Youth! Woe is me who have sinned against thee my
Creator, and bountiful Lord, and have done evil in thy sight: But I
acknowledge mine iniquity, and my sins are ever before me: Jet. 9.1.
Oh that my head were waters and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for my sins, whereby I have so often offended thee my Lord
and Creator, whether shall I fly? who will intercede for me? who will deliver
me in the day of thy fierce anger, that I perish not for ever: Alas! there is
none to save but thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ: But forasmuch as faith in him
is not our own work, but thy gift, blessed Lord, let thy Holy Spirit excite,
preserve and daily increase in my heart a true and lively faith: Mat. 11.27.
O Holy Father since no man knows the Son but thou only; neither knows any
man thee, save thy Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal thee; draw me
I beseech thee unto him, that he may lead me unto thee, least I die in my sins:
Vouchsafe to strengthen my weak Faith, and perfect that good Work which thou
have begun in me: Establish in me a firm Faith in my Savior to the last breath
of my life, that amongst the many various errors and opinions of this World, I
may not in the least be perverted from the true faith, but may always ask and
obtain the remission of my sins from thee, through the merits and intercession
of the same thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

CHAP. XII. That we are to fly for refuge to the mercies of God, and to believe
in Christ.
BUT the Christian is not to despair, although he must acknowledge himself to be
a sinner; John 3.16.
but for as much as he knows that God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life; he therefore puts his whole trust and confidence in the
mercies of God through the merits of Christ: For the merciful God has promised
pardon of sins to true Penitents; this we find in diverse places of Scripture.
Ezekiel. 33.12.
As for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby, in the day
that he turns from his wickedness; 2 Pet. 3.9.
for God is long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance: As I live says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 33.11.
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way and live: A broken and a contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17.
God will not despise: Therefore also now says the Lord, turn ye even to me
with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, Joel 2.13.
and with mourning: And rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto
the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil: Zechar. 1.3.
Turn ye unto me says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto you: Ps. 69.33.
Mat. 12.20.
Seek ye after God, and your Soul shall live: A bruised reed shall he not
break, and smoking flax shall he not quench: Act. 3.19.
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out: And
therefore the true Penitent may with affiance approach unto God, and say; Ps.
130.3.
If thou Lord should mark iniquities; O Lord, who shall stand: Father I have
sinned against Heaven, Luke 15.21.
and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son: Ps. 51.1.
But, have mercy upon me according to thy loving kindness; according unto the
multitudes of thy tender mercies: Lu. 18.13.
And, God be merciful unto me a sinner. Nor let him in the least doubt of the
mercy of God, whilst he relies on the merits of Christ; Mat. 18.11. 1 John 1.7.
For the Son of Man came to save that which was lost; and the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin. 1 John 2.2.
And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole World: Romans 8.1.
There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus; so
that he may rest quiet in the mercies of God, and in the merits of Christ, as
knowing that a full ransom was paid for his sins, and that a most absolutely
perfect righteousness, able to stand before the judgment of God, was purchased
and obtained for sinners by the most holy Obedience of Christ, which he
performed to his Father, both in his life and death; and which the Holy Spirit
offers to all the World in the Word and Sacraments, desiring them to accept of
it: And to those who do not resist these means, he excites, increases, and
confirms their Faith, that they may receive the grace of God purchased by
Christ's merits, and tendered unto them in the Divine Word and holy Sacraments:
so that they may be confident, that he who has begun a good work in them, will
also perfect it, and preserve them in grace unto the end of their lives: For,
says St. Paul, I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height,
Romans 8. ult.
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The Prayer.
BEhold, O Lord, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive
me: I know that in my flesh dwells no good thing; and I see another law in my
members waring against the law of my mind: from this corruption of nature it
proceeds that I am so disobedient to to thy Laws and Commandments; even from my
infancy until now, I have infinite ways transgressed them in thought, word, and
deed; the good things which I ought, I have not done, and the evil things which
I ought not I have committed; so great is the number of my sins, that I can no
longer remember them all. O Heavenly Father, I am not worthy to be called thy
Son; but I acknowledge my transgression, and my sin is ever before me: Have
mercy upon me therefore, O God, according to thy great goodness, and cleanse me
from all, even my most secret sins; enter not into judgment with thy Servant,
and remember not the sins of my youth: Lord, despise not a broken and a
contrite heart, for with thee there is mercy and plenteous redemption: To thee
then, O thou Son of God, and my Savior, I fly for succor: Thou came into
the World to save sinners; thou have called unto thee all that are weary and
heavy laden, and have promised to give them rest and ease: Behold I come unto
thee, bowed together with the weight of my sins, O do thou lift me up; for thou
art the Lamb of God that take away the sins of the World; thou did that
all that believe in thee should not perish, but have everlasting life: Lord
Jesu I believe in thee, O pity and help my infirmities, Amen.

CHAP. XIII. That we must live Holily.
BUT it is not enough barely to know, that Christ died for sin: Since the
Devils are not ignorant of this: mere knowledge which puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1.
is one thing, and a vain boasting of Faith is another, and a true lively Faith
is another; which as by an inward formal Act, it receives and apprehends Christ
with all his benefits to Justification, Gal. 5.6.
so also outwardly it works by love: And therefore Christ having redeemed us
from the hands of our Enemies, we ought to serve him in Righteousness and
Holiness all the days of our life: To this purpose St. Paul exhorts us: 2 Cor.
5.15.
That Christ died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again; For the
grace of God that brings Salvation, Tit. 2.11.
has appeared to all Men: Teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly
Lusts, verse. 12.
we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World: verse. 13.
Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ: Who gave himself for us, verse. 14.
that he might Redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
People, zealous of good works: All they therefore that think to have their sins
remitted, whilst they go on in their wickedness, deceive themselves, and make a
mock at the Merits of Christ, and may so fall away, Heb. 6.6.
as even to Crucify unto themselves the Son of God afresh, Heb. 10.29.
and put him to an open shame: And account the blood of the Covenant wherewith
they were Sanctified, an unholy thing, and do despite unto the spirit of
grace: For since Christ has redeemed us from the Slavery of Satan, and
restored us again to our former liberty; it is very fitting that we should lead
a new life, bid farewell to all iniquity, and serve God with a pure heart
fervently. Now this restoring Man to his pristine state, in which God at first
created him, and from whence by sin he fell, is in holy Writ called a
Renovation: Or a new Creature: For so says the Apostle: Ephesians. 4.22, 23, etc.
Put off concerning the former Conversation, the old Man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful Lusts: And be renewed in the Spirit of your mind;
and put on the new Man, which after God is Created in Righteousness, in true
Holiness: Wherefore putting away lying, speak every Man truth with his
Neighbor, for we are members one of another: Be ye angry and sin not, let not
the Sun go down upon your wrath: Neither give place to the Devil: Let him that
stole, steal no more; but rather let him labor, working with his hands, the
thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needs: Let no
corrupt Communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the
use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the Hearers: And grieve not
the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption. Let
all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put
away from you with all Malice. And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you: And a
little after: Ephesians. 5.3.
But Fornication and all Uncleanness, or Covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you: Although it plainly appears from this Exhortation of the Apostle,
what a Regenerate Man (whose sins are pardoned) is to do, and what he is to
avoid; yet we may briefly comprize the whole exercise of Godliness under these
two Heads, viz. the love of God, and of our Neighbor: This is the Sum of all
the Commandments; as our Savior himself teaches us, Mat. 22.37. Luke 10.27.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Strength, and with all thy Mind; and thy Neighbor as thy self.

The Prayer.
O Merciful Father, who in thy Son Jesus Christ, have pardoned all my sins;
what shall I render unto thee for all the Benefits which thou have bestowed on
me? Grant that I may delight my self in thy Commandments; that I may not love
the World, nor the things in it, but may Crucify my flesh, with its Affections
and Lusts; guide me with thy Holy Spirit, that I may daily persevere in true
Repentance, may war a good warfare, keep Faith and a good Conscience, and
increase more and more in Righteousness and Holiness, working that which is
well pleasing in thy sight: And for as much as of my self, I am not able to do
any good thing, do thou, O Lord, who give both to will and to do, perfect
that good work which thou have begun in me, and bring it to an Happy Issue, and
keep me in all my ways, that I depart not from thy Statutes; Lead me in the
paths of thy Commandments: Thy word is a Lanthern unto my Feet, and a light
unto my paths: Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have
Dominion over me, Ps. 119.133.

CHAP. XIV. That God is to be loved above all things.
FOR as much as God at first created us; Christ by his Death redeemed us from
eternal Death; and the Holy Spirit sanctifies us, and leads us to everlasting
life, therefore are we to love God above all things whatever: Love naturally
desires what is good and excellent, and what any one loves that he always
esteems best, most profitable, and beautiful; now there is nothing can be
supposed better and more beautiful than God, and therefore he is to be loved
above all things: This is the first Commandment; Exodus 20.3.
Thou shall have no other Gods before me: Deuteronomy. 5.7.6.4. Mar. 12.29.
And hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord: And thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might:
He who loves God above all things, has no other Gods; but who ever loves any
thing more than God, he makes that his God; for he prefers it before God, and
sets it up as an Idol in his Heart: Therefore a Christian is to despise all
things in respect of God, how great and profitable, how beautiful and desirable
soever they may appear, and whatever he loves, he therefore loves them, because
they are dear and acceptable unto God; but whatever God hates, that the
Christian is to despise: Thus our Savior teaches us: Luke 14.26, 27.
If any Man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wise, and
Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. Joh. 12.25.
He that loves his Life, shall lose it, and he that hates his Life in this
World, shall keep it unto Life Eternal. That is to say, a Christian ought to
despise himself, and all that he has, and every thing in the World in respect
of God; to desire nothing, to love nothing that may alienate his affections
from God, however specious it may seem, or how much so ever it may tend to the
gratification of his pleasure, profit, fame or glory: So that though he studies
the practice of Virtue, yet he does it not to advance his own vain Glory and
Honor, but because no knows it is acceptable to God; and so whatsoever he
does, he does all to the glory of God: This is truly to die to the World, when
we can despise Pleasures, Riches, Honors, and all the World enjoys; when God
is dearer to us, than any thing besides, and when we dare not do any evil for
the love of any Man or thing in the whole World: If this seem hard, yet is it
very just and reasonable: For if we love any thing because we find it
profitable to us, consider, that every thing we possess, we have from God; if
we love any other things because they are good; God is the chiefest good, yea,
goodness it self: If we love Riches, all things are Gods, he is Lord of Heaven
and Earth, he fills the needy with good things, and dispenses Riches to whom
he pleases: If we love Honor, what greater Honor can there be, than when the
Son of Man shall come in great power and glory, that they who have loved him,
and for his sake have left all things in the World, should also sit upon seats,
and Judge the Tribes of Israel? All Worldly things are changeable and
Momentary, and the various vicissitudes of Humane Affairs, occasion nothing but
Cares, Sorrows and Vexations of Soul: But the love of God causes perpetual
Peace and Tranquillity of Mind; according to that of David: Ps. 73.36.
My Flesh and my Heart fails: But God is the strength of my Heart, and my
portion for ever. If for the sake of God we lose our Worldly goods, the great
God alone is more worth than all, and whoever enjoys him, has all things else:
For in God are all things that we can wish for or desire; as says our Lord:
Every one that has forsaken Houses or Brethren, Mat. 19.29.
or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my names
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life: Joh.
14.23.
And again: if a Man love me, my Father will love him, and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with him. This may seem hard to Flesh and Blood, but
Chris^^^nity cannot otherwise subsist: The true Christian loves nothing better
than God, and whoever does, prefers the Creature before the Creator.

In short, the Christian does all to the glory of God; he seeks not his own
pleasure or profit, or honor in any thing, but does all out of love to God,
and for Gods honor: And he that loves God truly and sincerely, loves only
those things that are dear and acceptable to God; and hates all things that God
hates: This Holy Men in all Ages studiously performed, especially the Martyrs;
the World indeed esteemed them as fools, but they were the most prudent Men
living: For is not he the wisest Man, that despises vile and trifling things,
and sets a just value upon things that are best, and most useful? For as our
Savior says, Mat. 16.26.
what shall it profit a Man, to gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?

Virtue it self, and good works are not pleasing to God, if in them a Man seeks
his own glory, and not the glory of God alone: And from hence it appears, how
vain the thoughts of Men are; they spend many Days and Nights in Labor and
Study, that they may get Learning, and appear renowned in the World; but to be
made partakers of the Divine Nature, to acquire a Blessed and Eternal Life,
they can scarcely spare so much time from their business, as to recite one
serious Prayer: What troubles do Merchants undergo, how many dangers do they
run in hopes of being rich? And of how little value are the things they gain?
Nay, were they as truly great and precious as they seem to be, yet Death would
quickly deprive them of all: But on the contrary, how great are those good
things, which God will give in the other life to those that love him? Of which
we have already treated in the fourth Chapter. That life will be void of all
evil, and replenished with all the good and happiness that can be desired,
there we shall openly behold the Glory and Majesty of God, and enjoy Communion
with him; there we shall not only hear the Hymns and Songs that are sung
without intermission in praise of the Eternal King, by the Angels, Archangels,
and all the Blessed, but shall also assist in their Quire, and praise God for
ever and ever: Oh! How Blessed, how beautiful is the Heavenly Jerusalem! Very
glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God: In thee there is no
darkness, no night, no cold nor heat, no alteration of Seasons, no hunger nor
thirst, no labor nor weariness, no sickness nor death; the glory of God shall
enlighten thee; and the pure immaculate Lamb shall be thy Light. Rev. 21.23.
There God shall give us meat, of which whosoever eats, he shall hunger no
more; and drink, of which whosoever drinks, he shall thirst no more: God
shall be our strength, our health and our life: God will there be all in all.

And now who in his right mind would not despise and loath these vain Worldly
things, and love God alone above all things else, that so after Death, when all
things here below vanish and disappear, he may be made a partaker of this
Blessedness, wherein God will be all in all?

The Prayer.
O Merciful Lord, inlighten the Eyes of my mind, that I may consider what
immense benefits I have received from thee: When I was nothing, thou did
create me after thine own Image; when by my sins, I was justly doomed to the
pains of Hell, thou did redeem me there from by the Death of thy Son, and
have sanctified me with thy Holy Spirit: Lord, by how many Bonds am I obliged
to love thee, my only good! How vain and empty are these Transitory things,
which after this life is ended, must all be left behind: Grant therefore that I
may set my affections on things above, that I may desire thee alone, and be
inflamed with the love of thee, that after Death, I may be translated to the
joys and blessedness of thy glorious Kingdom, and live with thee for ever and
ev^^ Amen.

CHAP. XV. That we are to love our Neighbor.
AFter God, our Neighbor is to be beloved, whom a Christian ought to love as
himself: And these two, the love of God, and of our Neigheour, are joined
together by an indissoluble Bond, so that the love of God can never be
separated from the love of our Neighbor: If any one shall say, I love God, and
hate his Brother, he is a Liar. He who is angry with his Brother without cause,
does not love God; no one can hurt his Brother, but at the same time he offends
God: And therefore amongst the Characters of a Christian, this is one of the
chief, to love our Neighbor: A new Commandment, says our Savior, John 13.34,
35
I give unto you, that ye love one another: By this shall all Men know that ye
are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. Although a Christian be
endued with all other Virtues, yet without Charity, they will all profit him
nothing? Of which St. Paul thus speaks: 1 Cor. 13.1, etc.
Though I speak with the Tongues of Men and of Angels, and have not Charity, I
am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. And though I have the gift
of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all knowledge, and have no
Charity, I am nothing, etc. In the last Judgment, the Faith of Men shall be
judged by their Charity: Whilst the Just Judge shall say to the Blessed: Mat.
25.
I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I
was a stranger, and ye took me in, naked and ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye
visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me; for as much as ye have done
it unto the least of these, ye have done it unto me. And on the contrary, to
the wicked he shall say: I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me not in,
naked, and ye clothed me not, sick and in prison, and ye visited me not; and
forasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me:
By this Christians are distinguished from the Heathen; they indeed love their
Friends; but Christians must love their Enemies, as our Savior teaches us:
But I say unto you: love your Enemies, Mat. 5.44, etc.
Bless them that Curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you: That ye may be the Children of your
Father which is in Heaven, for he makes the Sun to rise on the evil and on the
good and and sends rain on the Just, and on the Unjust: For if ye love them
which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if
ye salute your Brethren only, what do ye more than others, do not even the
Publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect: For in this the Eminency and Prerogative of a Christian consists,
in overcoming the World and the Flesh: Accordingly St. Paul thus advises us;
Romans 12.17, 18.
Recompense to no Man Evil for Evil: Provide things honest in the sight of all
Men: If it be possible as much as lies in you, verse. 19.
live peaceably with all Men: Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves -- If
thine Enemy hunger, verse. 20.
feed him, if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing, thou shall heap Coals
of fire on his Head. Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil with good.
verse. 21.


The Prayer.
LORD Jesus, who have given us a new Commandment, that we should love one
another; and wentest before us by thy Example in doing good, and praying for
thine Enemies, grant that we may bear a brotherly love and kindness to all Men,
that we may hurt no body, but do good to all Men, even to our Enemies, and
commit all Revenge to thee alone: Take from us, O Lord, Anger, Hatred, Malice,
and all bitterness of Spirit, that the Sun may not go down upon our wrath, but
that we may forgive those that have Trespassed against us, even as we desire
thee to forgive us our Trespasses; grant unto us kindness and good will, that
our Faith may work by love, and all Men may say, that we are thy Disciples
indeed.

CHAP. XVI. That we must guard our minds from Capital Sins.
ALthough a Christian, if he loves God above all; and his Neighbor as
himself, and orders all his Actions by the love of God, and of his Neighbor,
will not easily be tempted to commit any Heinous Crime; yet because sins do
easily insinuate themselves under the mask of good; and the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil do endeavor a thousand ways by allurements, by deceits, or by
force, to tempt us from our good purposes and resolutions of living well; it
therefore behooves a Christian to arm himself against the Assaults of all
Capital Sins: For as in War, he that knows the Enemy is near, provideth himself
with all necessary Weapons, keeps Watches and Sentinels, that so he may at all
times be in a readiness to oppose the Enemy: In like manner it is our Duty, to
have always our Spiritual Armor at hand, with which we may resist the Enemies
of our Salvation, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: This is that Warfare by
which we overcome the World, and our own selves, and we ought daily to improve
our selves in it: Wherefore if Men would but take half the pains in vanquishing
their Lusts, and implanting Piety in their Minds, as they do in getting Riches,
hunting after Honors, and resolving nice and intricate Questions, there would
be fewer offenses in the World, and the exercises of Virtue would be much more
frequent and vigorous amongst Men.

And whereas all that are in the World, are the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of
the Eyes, and the Pride of Life; or the love of Pleasures, Riches, and Honors;
1 John 2.16.
and those Enormous Sins which arise from hence, as Pride, Covetousness,
Luxury, Envy, Anger, Enmity, and Hatred, and the like: It is therefore the Duty
of a Christian diligently to consider, how he may best fortify himself against
these vices:

And first against Pride: The Christian may easily cure himself of this Evil,
by accustoming himself to Humility, and considering how little one Man is
better than another: We are born all alike, one wants Meat and Drink as well as
another; and all the labor of Man is for his Mouth, and yet the Appetite is
not filled; one is sick as well as another, and we all die, and return unto the
Earth from whence we were taken: And indeed this consideration alone, that in a
short time we must all die, is sufficient to keep us from Pride, and lifting up
our selves above our fellows; for should any begin to be high minded, and boast
themselves of their Noble Extract, their Beauty, Wisdom, Honors, Riches, and
such like gifts of God; let them consider, that in a little while, they must
descend into the Grave, and then sure their Haughty Spirits will be brought
down and humbled: They must soon leave all their Worldly Enjoyments, and be
laid in the dust, and perhaps be trampled on by those very Men, who before they
despised and oppressed: Why then is dust and ashes proud? Whosoever is proud,
let him go to the Vaults and Tombs of the Dead, he will there find no
difference; nothing within but stench and rottenness; and let him consider that
of the Psalmist; I have seen the Wicked in great power, Vidi potentes impios
Gravique fastu turgidos Virescere instar laureae Amaena propter fluminae.
Specto repent, en lubricae Imago nusquam gloriae, Nusquam manens vestigia
Cunctis gravis potentiae. Buchanan in Ps. 37.35, 36.
and spreading himself like a green Bay Tree: Yet he passed away, and Lo, he
was not; yea, I sought him, but he could not be found: And therefore according
to the advice of Tobit: Love thy Brethren, Tob. 4.13.
and despise not in thy Heart thy Brethren, for in pride is destruction, and
much trouble: This cast Lucifer from Heaven: For God resists the Proud, and
gives grace to the Humble. 1 Pet. 5.5.
If thou should find any thing in thy self, for which others praise thee,
say with the Apostle; 1 Cor. 15.10. Ps. 115.1.
by the grace of God, I am what I am, and not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy Name, give glory. And, Lord I am not worthy of the least of all thy
Mercies: For what have thou that thou did not receive? Genesis 32.10.
And since thou did receive from God all that thou have, it should rather be
an occasion to humble thee, than to make thee proud: If you find any thing good
in you, you ought to think that others are better, that so you may keep your
self humble; neither shall we be acquitted by our own, but by the Judgment of
God, who is oftentimes displeased with what we like very well; be not too
curious in judging others, but rather turn your Eyes on your own self: In
judging others, one may easily mistake, and very often sin: But our labor will
not be in vain, if we examine and judge our selves: Neither is it lawful for
the Rich Men of this World, to be proud of their Wealth, and prodigally to
spend it after their own Lusts: for they as well as others, are but Stewards of
those Riches which God has committed to their Trust, and the more they have,
the more they must give an account of: And thus Holy David prayed when he was
dying: All that is in the Heaven and in the Earth is thine: Thine is the
Kingdom, and thou art exalted as Head above all: 1 Chr. 29.11.
Both Riches and Honor come of thee: And by the Prophet Haggai, God says: The
Silver is mine, and the Gold is mine: Hag. 2.8.
And if God gives them unto any one, it is not to make them haughty; or that
they should spend them prodigally, but that the poor should be partakers with
them; be careful therefore not to be listed up, or abuse thy Riches and power;
for a sharp Judgment shall be to them that are in High places: Wisd. 6.5, 6.
For Mercy will soon pardon the meanest, but mighty Men shall be mightily
tormented.

And then against Covetousness, let the Christian Arm himself with this
Consideration of Job: Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I
return thither, Job 1.21.
and with that of Solomon: As he came forth of his Mothers Womb, naked shall he
return, to go as he came, Eccles. 5.15.
and shall take nothing of his labor, which he may carry away in his hand. As
also that of St. Paul; we brought nothing into this World, 1 Timothy 6.7.
and it is certain we can carry nothing out; let us not vainly deceive our
selves with the Rich Man in the Gospel, who said to his Soul: Soul thou have
much goods laid up for many years, Luke 12.19.
take thine ease, Eat, Drink, and be Merry, least we hear from God the same
Sentence as he did; Thou fool, verse. 20.
this night shall thy Soul be required of thee, then whose shall those things
be which thou have provided? Let us therefore always remember the Apostles
Advice; ^ Tim. 6.8.
if we have food and raiment, let us be therewith content: Puer fui. nunc sum
(...) Open destitutum (...) Videre memini, (...) Ejus petentes libe^^^.
Buchauan. Ps. 37.25.
And that of the Psalmist: I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not
seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread Remember also our Lords
Counsel; seek ye first the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33.
and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you: No Man
can serve two Masters, God and Mammon: Did we but thoroughly consider how much
trouble and danger, and evil too, Riches bring with them, we should not so
greedily covet after them: The love and desire of Money is more vexatious, than
the use thereof can be either pleasing or profitable; Riches are never got
without trouble, and seldom without sinning against, and offending God; they
are never kept without Care, nor lost without Sorrow: What good has the
Richest Man in the World from all this Treasures more than this, that he may
live upon them? And since our lives are so very short, what need is there for
Hoarding up for so many years? At the end of our Lives, the condition of him
that has possessed but little, will not be worse, but better than his that
has possessed much; for he has had less trouble whilst he lived, and has a
less account to give up when he is dead; what then, O Man, do those things
profit thee, which are good for nothing after thou art dead? Nor is there any
need to scrape together a great deal of wealth, that we may leave an Estate to
our Children and Heirs; this indeed seems plausible, and has deceived many:
But who knows what our Heirs shall be, whether thankful or ungrateful? And it
is certain that great Riches left to Children, do more often prove the
incitements and occasions of Wickedness, than of Virtue: If any one diligently
examined, what daily happens in the World, he would find, that very many poor
Men's Children did raise themselves to Wealth and Eminency, and on the contrary,
many Rich Men's Children did prodigally spend the Estates left them by their
Parents, and became miserably poor: In short therefore, godliness with
contentment, is great gain.

Another Vice the Christian is to Arm himself against, is Luxury: Now to
extinguish these exorbitant and unruly Lusts and Desires of the Flesh, and to
hinder us from treating it with softness and delicacy; let us often consider
that a little while hence, our Bodies will become stinking Carkases: For what
is our Flesh, how finely soever it be treated and clothed, and fed, and
pampered, but food for Worms? Luxury chiefly comprehends Lust and Drunkenness.

Against Lust a Christian ought diligently to fortify himself: The prize of
Chastity is of all the most difficult, the Conflict is perpetual, but the
Victory rare: Remember therefore what St. Paul says: Flee Fornication, 2 Cor.
6.18.
every sin that a Man does is without the Body, but he that commits
Fornication, sins against his own Body: Our Body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, the Tabernacle into which is received the Holy Body and Blood of Christ:
Take therefore the Advice of Ecclesiasticus: Cap. 9. v. 7, 8.
Look not round about thee in the Streets of the City, neither wander thou in
the Solitary places thereof: Turn away thine Eye from a Beautiful Woman, and
look not upon another Beauty.

Drunkenness, which is the other part of Luxury, is amongst other Vices more
especially to be avoided, because now a days it is by many thought no sin, but
rather accounted praiseworthy, although there be no plague more dangerous to
Christianity, and nothing more severely forbid than this: Isa. 5.12.
For the Drunkard regards not the work of the Lord, neither considers the
operations of his Hands: 1 Cor. 6.10.
Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: Wine and Drunkenness,
captivates the Heart of Man, so that the Holy Spirit will no longer reside in
him: It is very dangerous even to be once Drunk: For our Savior advises us to
take heed to our selves, least at any time our Hearts be overcharged with
Surfeiting and Brunkenness, but to be sober and to watch unto Prayer, because
the hour is uncertain when the Son of Man will come; we therefore ought always
to keep our selves free from this sin, because we must appear before the
Tribunal of Christ, in the same state as we were in at the hour of Death; let
every one therefore consider what a terrible thing it would be for a Man whilst
he is Drunk, to be taken on a sudden out of the Land of the living, by some
unexpected fall, by the Sword, or some other Violence, or by a fit of an
Apoplexy; and withal, let Drunkards consider how many poor Christians there are
in the World, who would think themselves happy, if they might have their fill
of Bread and small Drink, whilst they so unjustly and lavishly wast the
precious gifts of God; let them beware, least at last it happens to them, as it
did to that Rich Glutton, who when he had fared Sumptuously every day, and
denied poor Lazarus the crumbs that fell from his Table, he was buried in Hell,
where not so much as a drop of water would be allowed him to cool his Tongue in
those infernal flames.

And because Idleness administers the greatest fuel to Luxury; therefore more
especially avoid idleness: Be always intent about something or other: Meditate,
Read, Write, Pray, Work, or follow diligently the business of your particular
Callings; and by these means the love of Pleasures will be more easily damped
and exstinguished.

Another sin we are to arm ourselves against, is Envy, which is a divelish
Vice, and according to some, was the cause of Satan's fall, and which made him
endeavor the overthrow of Mankind: Against this let us consider, that all the
good things we enjoy, are not from our selves, but are dispensed and
distributed amongst us by the great Lord of all, as he sees best: Why then, O
Man, should thine Eye be evil, because he is good and kind to thy Neighbor?
It is rather thy Duty, when thou see all things succeed well with thy
Neighbor, to give thanks unto God, and to think that thou art not worthy of
such prosperity, or that it would not be profitable unto thee: Why should
thou envy another those things he possesses without thy loss or hurt? When as
if he had them not, thou would not have them: Is it not a property of the
Devil, when thou art by the just Judgment of God under any Misery or Trouble,
to wish that others were miserable also? Lastly, consider what good envy does;
most certainly thou can not by it, transfer thy Neighbors goods unto thy
self: Thou hurtest thy self only; whilst thou breakest thy Heart with Vexation
and Languish, thou art only thy own Tormentor and Executioner. After all, the
most present Remedy for Envy, is to be Humble, to avoid Pride and Covetousness,
from whence Envy generally proceeds: For whoever lives contented with his own
condition, never envies the Honors and Riches of other Men.

And to name no more, the Christian ought to fortify his mind against, Anger,
Enmity, and Hatred, Slandering, and false accusation, by considering that all
the while a Man is out of Charity with his Neighbor, so long he is
unacceptable to God; insomuch, that such an one under the Old Testament, could
offer no Sacrifice to God; and under the New, cannot say that Prayer which our
Lord has taught us: For thus our Savior Admonishes us, Mat. 5.23, 24.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother
has ought against thee; leave there thy gift, and go thy way, first be
reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift: And in the Lords
Prayer we Pray; Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors, which is farther enforced at
the end of the Prayer, by this reason, for if ye forgive Men their Trespasses,
your Heavenly Father will also forgive you: verse. 14, 15.
But if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
you. Let us also reflect on those severe words of our Savior: Mat. 5.22.
But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the Judgment, and whosoever shall say to his Brother,
Raca, shall be in danger of the Council, but whosoever shall say, thou fool,
shall be in danger of Hell fire: and in another place: Luke 6.27.
Love your Enemies, do good to them which hate you: verse 28.
Bless them that Curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you: verse
31.
-- And as ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye also to them likewise,
verse 32.
for if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? For sinners also love
those that love them: verse 35.
-- But love ye your Enemies, and do good, and your reward shall be great, and
ye shall be the Children of the Highest, for he is kind unto the unthankful,
and to the evil. verse 36.
Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful. verse 37.
Judge not, and ye shall not be Judged, Condemn not, and ye shall not be
Condemned, Forgive, and ye shall be Forgiven. The Apostle St. Paul reckons
these amongst the works of the Flesh: Gal. 5.20, 21.
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Envyings, and such
like, and pronounces, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. And St. John says, 1 John 3.14, 15.
He that loves not his Brother, abides in Death: Whosoever hates his
Brother, is a Murderer. We have good reason to bear with the infirmities of
others, because there are many things which others must bear with in us: For no
one is perfect: You see plainly, that you are not able to bring your self to
live according to those Rules which you could wish, and why then should you be
angry with others, if they do not live just as you would have them? Mat. 7.5.
first cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye, and then shall thou see clearly
to cast out the Mote out of thy Brothers Eye; let us therefore bear one
another Burdens, Gal. 6.2.
for there is no body without fault.

And then farther let us endeavor to keep our selves from Slandering, and
Calumniating of others, by not being too curious in enquiring into the Words,
and Actions, and Lives of our Neighbors; for what, O Man, is it to thee, what
another says or does? Romans 14.4.
Who art thou, that judge another Man's Servant? To his own Master, he
stands or falls. Do thy best, to give a good account of thine own Words and
Actions to God; and he also is obliged to render an account of his to the same
God, to whom all things are naked and open; he sees all things under the Sun,
and knows what every one thinks and desires, and to what end they direct their
Actions; therefore commit all to him, rest contented, and do not disquiet thy
self with others cares.

The Prayer.
O Lord our most Merciful Father, who in thy Son Jesus Christ has called me to
Eternal Life, and forgiven me all my sins, let thy Holy Spirit also direct and
rule my heart, that I may daily persevere in a true Repentance, continually
strive against my sins, and increase more and more in all virtuous and godly
living. And for as much as my own strength is not sufficient to contend against
so many Enemies, and to bring my good purposes to effect, do thou, O Lord
stretch forth thy Right Hand to assist me, least I saint in the Warfare, and
Satan get the Dominion over me.

Thou, O Lord, resistest the Proud, but give grace to the Humble: The proud
in heart is an Abomination to thee, vouchsafe me therefore, O Lord, an humble
Spirit, devoid of all Highmindedness, according to the example of our Blessed
Lord, who being in the form of God, humbled himself even to the Death of the
Cross, that he might exalt us unto everlasting life: Make me to consider that I
am but Dust and Ashes, and have no reason to lift up my self; let me not be
proud of those gifts which thou have bestowed on me, and scornfully despise
others, but confess that what ever good is in me, I have received it all from
thee.

O Lord, naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, but thou have bountifully given
me, Meat and Drink, Clothing and Habitation, and all things necessary for the
preservation of my life. Make me to be contented with my Daily Bread, that my
mind may never be possessed with Covetousness: But may remember, that I must go
out of this World naked as I came, and therefore may lay up my Treasure in
Heaven, which I may enjoy to all Eternity:

And because I know that in me dwells no good thing, and the Flesh always
Lusts against the Spirit, and is daily enticing me to the pleasures of this
World; grant O Lord, that by the assistance of thy Holy Spirit, I may crucify
and mortify the Flesh with its affections and Lusts, and may live soberly,
righteonsly and godly in this present World, and serve thee in pureness of
Spirit all the days of my life.

Grant also, that according to thy command and example, we may love one
another: Root out of our Hearts all bitterness and malice, that the Sun may
never go down upon our Wrath, but that we may do good to those that hate us,
and forgive all that have offended us.

Lord, I beseech thee, take from me Pride, and give me the Spirit of Humility:
Extinguish in me the desires of the Flesh, and inflame my Heart with the love
of thee: Cast out of my mind, the fury of anger, and implant therein the gift
of Patience; Remove from me the love of Vainglory, the bitterness of Envy; and
bestow on me the sweetness of Charity and Humility, the gift of a meek and
quiet Spirit, which is in thy sight of great price.

CHAP. XVII. A Diary of the practice of Piety.
BUT for as much as the Exercises of Piety ought to be every day performed,
because no body can be certain which shall be that last day, when he shall
depart out of this life, and every day, for ought we know, may be our last: It
will therefore be very useful to have both in our view and memory the course of
one day regularly disposed, according to the pattern whereof we may lead our
lives, that so every day we may be prepared for an happy Death.

First then, O Man, when you awake out of sleep in the Morning, let your
earliest Meditations be on God, nor ever let any thing but the thoughts of God
first enter into your mind: For serious Contemplations of God being once
admitted into our minds, will keep out all evil Devices; think then first, that
God will easily hereafter raise you from the dead, as now you are awakened from
your sleep.

Afterward when with opened eyes you behold the light of the Sun think with
your self, how great the Glory and Majesty of the last day will be, when so
many hundred thousand glorious Bodies shining like the Sun and Stars, shall go
with Christ their Judge, like so many Suns, into eternal life; and therefore
use all diligence that you may appear one of that blessed number.

Afterward revolve in your mind, that the Devil, like a Roaring Lion, 1 Pet.
5.8
walks about, seeking whom he may devour: That he was not far from you the
night past, and had a desire to hurt you, and could have done it, unless God
had defended you by the Ministry of his Holy Angels: And withal, think that the
Holy Angels were encamped all night round about you, that now you are rising
from your Bed, they stand by you, and therefore take care to behave your self
Circumspectly, as being placed in the presence of God and the blessed Angels.

When you put on your Clothes, think that they are the Tokens of guilt, with
which we cover our shame and nakedness, and therefore you have no cause to be
proud of them: and whilst you cover your Body, let not your Soul be naked, but
put on the wedding Garment, even the Righteousness of Christ; and think how
unsuitable it would be, to have a mind filthy and stained with sin, under a
fair and clean garment.

Never undertake any business, unless you have first humbly composed your mind
and body to Prayer: Thank God from your very heart, that he has been pleased
to preserve you the last night, and even all your life, from the Snares and
Violence of Satan, and to keep you and yours from all outward perils and
dangers; and pray unto him, that he would mercifully forgive you all your sins,
for the Merits of Christ, that he would preserve you and yours; all the
faithful, and the universal Church, from the power and subtilty of the Devil;
that he would please to defend you from all dangers of Body and Soul, and so
guide you by his Holy Spirit, that you may not offend him this day by any sin;
but that all your Thoughts, Words and Actions, may be directed to the glory of
God, and the good of Mankind; that he will please not to take you out of the
World unprepared by a sudden death; and that if he should think it fitting to
take away your life this very day, he would be merciful unto you, and receive
you to himself.

Every Morning renew your resolutions of serving God, and as if this were the
first day of your returning to God, and that hitherto you had done no kind of
good, firmly purpose in your mind, to love the Lord your God, and serve him
only: And humbly pray unto God, that he would please to keep and assist you in
these your good Resolutions of serving him. In the Morning, advise with your
self what you are to do that day; in the Evening take an account of what you
have done: And that you may have comfort at night, steadfastly determine to
spend the day well.

Having offered up your prayers to God, read a Chapter or two in the Holy
Scriptures, and attentively consider, what there is contained in it for your
Consolation, or Instruction, or Admonition: From the Sacred History you may
observe, how great Gods anger is against sins, and with what terrible plagues
he has punished sinners; and on the contrary, with what signal Rewards he has
recompensed Holiness, and how wonderfully he has conducted his own People. In
short, so read the Scriptures, as thereby to confirm your Faith, and excite in
you the practice of Piety. Do the same also at night when you are going to Bed,
and thus in no long space of time, you will have read over the whole Bible, and
so will be provided with a sure guide in the paths of Virtue all the days of
your life. As Holy David says, Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, Ps. 119.105.
and a Light unto my Path. The Law of the Lord is perfect, Ps. 19.8, etc.
converting the Soul: The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making Wise the
simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the Heart; the
Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes. The fear of the Lord is
clean, enduring for ever: The Judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous all
together. More to be desired are they than Gold, yea, than much fine Gold:
Sweeter also than Honey, and the Honey Comb. Moreover by them is thy Servant
warned, and in keeping of them there is great reward.

Be careful therefore not to read the Holy Scriptures out of Custom only, and
as it were by the by, but stay a while in the Meditation of what you have read;
for there is no Chapter but will yield very profitable matter for Holy
Contemplations, to wit, on the Wisdom of God, his Omnipotency, Infinity,
Goodness, Mercy, and Justice: On the Corruption of Humane Nature; our own sins;
the Snares and Temptations of the Devil; the punishments of the Wicked, and the
Rewards of the Righteous; on the frailty, shortness and mortality of Humane
Nature: On Repentance; Faith; the exercise of Holiness: On our Blessed Saviors
Incarnation, Nativity, Miracles, Passion, Death, Resurrection, Ascension,
Intercession, and his Redemption of Mankind: On the last Judgment, the Happy
State of the Blessed in the life to come, and the misery of the Damned in Hell.

These and the like, as they offer themselves, are to be heedfully attended to,
and some time Meditated upon, until some sorrow of Mind, some ardor of
Devotion, some act of Faith, some Divine flame of love springs up in your Soul:

Having thus performed your Devotions, from which never suffer your self to be
withdrawn by any thing whatever, since there is nothing so serious and weighty,
as to be preferred before God, you may then apply your self to the Duties of
your Calling with a full intention to discharge them faithfully; for the due
performance whereof, you are not only diligently to beware of offending God,
either in Thought, Word or Deed, and of injuring your Neighbor, but you ought
also to direct all your Actions to Gods glory, and the good of others.

First, as to what concerns your thoughts; although the godly by reason of the
Corruption of Humane Nature, cannot avoid all evil thoughts, yet be careful
least you too much indulge them, but suppress them betimes, and be sure never
to bring them forth to act, nor suffer your self to be seduced in your
Affections to any thing contrary to Honesty and Piety, and which may in the
least alienate your mind from the happiness of the life Eternal: Never seek
after popular Fame: Be not Ambitious after Honors, Riches, or any Worldly
thing, but more especially do not prefer them before God; be humble, and
contented with a competency, and a good Conscience; he is very happy, and has
every thing, who has God for his Friend: He is most miserable, and has
nothing who has God for his Enemy: When ever any sinful affections begin by
little and little to steal into your mind, as Avarice, Voluptuousness, Envy,
Anger, Enmity and Hatred, and such like, as we have before mentioned in the
precedeing Chapter, be diligent to stifle them in their first motions.

As to what concerns your words and discourse, so govern your self, as always
remembering that severe expression of our Lords; Mat. 12.36.
That every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof
in the day of Judgment. And therefore in your jesting, observe, never to cast a
blot upon Religion, or Scandalize any one, or offend against the Rules of
Honesty and Modesty: So order all your Speech, that you never Scandalize your
Neighbor, but endeavor to build him up in the most Holy Faith; to this end
pray with David: Set a Watch, O Lord, Ps. 141.3.
and keep the Door of my Lips. There is no true joy, but what is joined with
the love of God, and a good Conscience, We often laugh, when if the great
danger we are in were rightly considered, there is more need we should weep;
let your words and your Heart go together, and let both always agree with
truth; avoid lying, and desraud none with deceitful words; when ever you speak
of God, or Holy things, do it reverently and discreetly, and take not the name
of God in vain; speak ill of no body, neither maliciously slander any person
whatever.

And then as to your Life and Conversation, commit your ways unto God, and
whatever you take in hand, begin it in his Name, and do all to the glory of
God. What ever you are about to do, think first, whether you would approve of
it, if another did it: For why should you do your self, what you would not like
in another? What ever you hear and see another speak or do that is good and
praiseworthy, do you endeavor to imitate it: But if you observe any one to do
things for which he deserves to be blamed, beware least you do the like:
Moreover consider whether you can give a good account of what you are going to
do before the great Judge at the last Day: Your own Conscience will be a better
Judge of your Actions, than all the World; and although Men are ignorant of
what you do, yet remember that God sees you, and that you can do nothing so
privately, but your own Conscience will be a Witness and a Judge of it.

In the duties of your calling trust in God, nor ever attempt to discharge them
by unlawful means which God has forbidden: Never think any thing gainful or
expedient, which may in the least hinder the Salvation of your Soul. Do what is
right and just, and never prefer the praise of Men, before the favor of God;
if God be gracious to you, be not concerned though the World hate you: In
short, let this be your constant rule, to direct all your actions to the glory
of God, and to the good and profit of your Neighbor, so that whatever offends
against this, forbear it, however goodly and specious it may appear. In all
your Conversation, behave your self as becomes a faithful Servant, that you may
one day hear that joyful voice of God, Mat. 25.21.
Well done thou good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee Ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord.

When you are about to eat or drink, pray for Gods Blessing on it, that it may
succeed to the health of your Body; and take so much as may suffice for the
satisfying of your hunger and thirst; after you have done, render thanks unto
God for all his gifts and graces bestowed on you, and desire his blessing may
go along with them: And when your Body is full, take care, that your Soul be
not empty, but beg that it may be replenished with the Grace of God:

All the day long, whatever your Employment be, lift up your Heart unto God in
frequent and short Ejaculations, rendering him thanks for all his benefits, and
commending you and yours to his Protection and Governance.

On Holy Days, or any others appointed by the Church for Prayers or hearing
Gods Word, let no business ever detain you from joining your Prayers with those
of the Congregation for the obtaining public and private Blessings from God,
since our Savior has promised his gracious presence, where two or three are
gathered together in his Name.

It is also requisite toward our dying Happily, that we frequently receive the
Holy Supper of our Lord, that amongst other Fruits of this Divine Banquet, we
may be Admonished of our Union with Christ, and so be fortified against the
fears of Death; for although our Bodies putrefying in the Grave, or be any other
ways dissolved, yet is there no danger of our being separated from Christ, with
whom we are made one by the Bond of the Holy Spirit, but when we are dead, we
still remain united to him both in Body and Soul, and in the last day, when our
Bodies shall be again joined unto our Souls, they will arise unto Eternal
Glory; for it is not possible that our Bodies should remain in their Graves,
when they are united to the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.

Moreover for as much as none can be certain of the hour of their Death, nor
promise themselves to morrow, and that on our last hour depends our Eternal
State, and that after Death, we shall be translated either to the joys of
Heaven, or to the everlasting Torments of Hell; it is therefore our great
concern to be always thinking of that hour, on which depends our Eternal
Happiness or Misery: He is a prudent Man, who thinks that every hour may be the
last hour of his life: Such a one will not easily fall into notorious sins, but
will use the things of this life thriftily, and look upon them as vain and
transitory: But this cannot be done without Gods assistance, so that it will be
very fitting as you regard your Eternal Salvation, to pour out your Prayers
unto God with Ardent affections for his direction and assistance in such a form
as is at the end of this Chapter, or any other that suits your Devotion.

When the day is finished before you go to sleep, be sure you never omit to
examine your own Conscience; which judging of the Conscience, being a thing so
very useful, was even by the Heathen much approved of, so that it will be a
shame for Christians to come behind them in the study of Virtue, and will
hereafter be very dangerous. Pythagoras has described this Examination of the
Conscience in very elegant Verses; the sense whereof is, that at night before
we compose our selves to rest, we ought to call to mind the Actions of the day
past, and chiefly to enquire into three things: what we have done? what we have
lest undone? and wherein we have transgressed our Duty? and as we find our
actions to have been, accordingly we are to behave our selves, to be grieved
and displeased with our selves, for what we have done amiss, and to take
delight in what we have done well:

This Examination of the Conscience, Seneca did not omit even amongst the Noise
and Distractions os the Court: I use, says he, this Authority, V^or hae
p^testate and quotidie apud ^e causam dico, (...) sublatum Conspe^^e lumen est,
conticu^t u^^^, (...) conseta, ^^^ium (...) sirutor fac^^^ and (...) remeti^r,
(...) semdo, (...) enim: (...) mels (...) cere; vide, ne (...) saclas, nunc
(...) Lib. 3. de (...)
and daily plead my cause with my self; when the light is withdrawn from my
sight, and my Wife is silent, being now inured to this custom, I examine with
my self the whole day past, and review all that I have said or done: I hide
nothing from my own Serutiny, I pass by nothing; for why should I fear any
thing by reason of my Errors? When as I can say, see that thon do^t it no more,
and for this time I will pardon thee. Much more necessary then will it be for
thee, O Chris^^an, to recall to your mind every day what things you have done,
and compare them with what you did the day before; when Evening comes to summon
your Conscience to Judgment; to set in order the miscarriages of the day past,
to see what things you have omitted, that you ought to have done, what you are
to do the day following, and what you are to beware of: Nor is this a business
of small importance: For although our sleep may be quiet and pleasing without
it, yet it can never be safe. He only rests securely, that is reconciled unto
his God, and has adjusted his accounts with him, so that whether he dies in
the Night, or awakens in the Morning, he is sure to have God propitious to him:
But it is most impudent rashness, most pernicious presumption, to indulge your
self in sleep, whilst your Soul is defiled with guilt; your Conscience wounded
in the day by sin: And not made sound again by Repentance: For should death
seize on you in your sleep, before you are restored to Gods favor by
Repentance, whether will your Soul go? they therefore very foolishly consult
their own Welfare, who spend the Evening in Drunkenness and Jollity, and when
they are satiated with Wine and Mirth, and rest invites them, they go the next
way to their beds, and are soon quite overcome with sleep: Such precipitancy as
this, is most desperate madness. If therefore you would have your sleep quiet,
and without fear, first examine your own Conscience, bring to your remembrance
the Divine Favors; if you have done any good that day, rejoice and give God
the glory, but if any evil, bewail it, beg Gods Pardon for your sins, and
firmly resolve to live better for the future: But if you do not not daily
follow this course, and that not negligently, but with care and diligence, the
same sins, after diverse months and years are past, will still live and thrive
in you: Whereas on the contrary, such an examination of the Conscience is a
powerful incitement to virtue; he who daily examins himself, neither desires
others praises, nor stands in need of their Admonitions or Reprehensions: He
does not seek aster the praise of Men, but he has the applauses of his own
Conscience; for says the Apostle, Our Rejoicing is this, 2 Cor. 1.12.
the Testimony of our Conscience: And those Reproo^^ which he does not hear
from others, he has within from himself. There is no one so cautions, who does
not daily sometimes forget himself, allowing himself too much liberty, or
falling into the snares of Passion, Idleness, or some other Vice: Now in the
Evening, it is in his own power to recover his steps, and again set himself
free from the cruel Bondage of sin: And thus every day reproving and correcting
himself for his Errors, he will at length utterly extirpate the whole Body of
sin in him. When ever you find your self to have transgressed (for there is no
Man that sins not) if you have not time for more, yet devoutly and from you
heart say, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Have mercy upon me, O God, after
thy great goodness, according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine
offenses. But if you neglect this Examination, and hush your Conscience to
sleep, whilst it is grieved, and guilty of sin, and out of favor with God, you
are ruined, and for ever undone, if this night should be your last; and what
security have you for your life one night longer? Now he frees himself from
these dangers, who searches diligently into his own Soul, before he betakes
himself to rest, endeavors to appease his offended God, by a lively Faith and
sincere Repentance, through the Merits of our Savior, for should his Soul even
that night be taken away from him, yet would he die well and happily: And more
especially, if by any Temptation, you should be drawn aside to strife and
contentions with your Neighbor, do not suffer the Sun to go down upon your
Wrath, but be reconciled unto him, and forgive him, even as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven you.

Furthermore it is necessary before you go to sleep, that you read some portion
of the Holy Scriptures, and then humbly return thanks to God for all the
Mercies and Benefits of the day past, and pray unto him, that he would
mercifully forgive you all your sins, by which you have so grievously offended
him; that he would please to preserve you the following night from the power
and wiles of Satan, and from all perils and dangers of Soul and Body; and with
your self commend all yours, and all faithful Christians to the protection of
God.

When you put off your Clothes, bethink your self that the time will surely
come, and that for ought you know very speedily, when you must for ever leave
all things in this World.

Lastly, When you lay you down in your bed, let it put you in mind of your
Grave, in which your body is to sleep till the day of Judgment; let your bed
mind you of the Earth that is to cover you; your Clothes, your Winding Sheet in
which when dead, you are to be wrapped; and let your approaching sleep mind you
of Death it self: And as you desire to awake safe, and in good health in the
Morning, so desire of God, that you may joyfully arise our of your Grave at the
last day, and may with good assurance stand before the Throne of Christ our
Judge; and at last when you are going to sleep say; I will lay me down in
peace, Ps. 4. ult.
and take my rest, for it is thou Lord, only that make me dwell in safety.

The Prayer.
O Eternal and most gracious God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who have
been pleased mercifully to preserve me in safety to this present day, and have
defended me from the violence of Satan, let thy Holy Spirit direct and rule me
in all my ways, that I may know how frail I am, how few and evil the days of
the years of my life are, that so I may apply my heart unto Wisdom: Forgive me,
I beseech thee, all the sins which from my Childhood until now, I have
committed against thee, by Thought Word and Deed, and by omitting to do those
good things which thou have commanded me to perform. Have mercy upon me, O God,
according to thy loving kindness; according to the multitude of thy tender
mercies, blot out my Transgressions: And enter not into Judgment with thy
Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified: And grant,
O Lord, that I may spend the remaining part of my time in working out my own
Salvation with fear and trembling, doing always such things as are well
pleasing in thy sight: O let the thoughts of death be continually in my mind: O
let the apprehensions of that strict account which I must make before thee at
the last day, deter me from Transgressing thy Laws, that I may so spend every
day and hour of my life, as if they were the last I had to live. Establish in
me a full purpose of mind, to direct all my Thoughts, Words and Actions to the
glory of thy Holy Name: The good of my Neighbor, and the Eternal Welfare of my
own Soul. O let me not dare to sin against thee, for the sake of any thing in
the World, but grant that with a constant resolution of serving and pleasing
thee, and by a lively Faith in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I may be
always provided for an happy departure out of this life. Ah! Merciful Lord, let
not a sudden death overtake me unawares, but ^nable me to War a good Warfare,
to keep Faith and a good Conscience, that so wheresoever or whenever it shall
please thee to call for me out of this World, I may follow thee cheerfully, and
without delay, and joyfully stand before the Tribunal of my Redeemer Jesus
Christ, and receive that Crown of Righteousness, which is laid up for all those
that love his appearing.

O Father of mercies, and God of all Consolation, let thy Holy Spirit never
depart from me, especially when I am yielding up the Ghost, but vouchsafe me
his Divine help and Assistance, to vanquish all the difficulties of this World,
and all the Temptations of the Flesh and the Devil: Grant me grace to fix my
mind on nothing but thee, thy goodness and mercy, and to put my Trust and
Confidence in the alone Merits of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to the last
breath of my life, and then, O Lord, receive my Soul. Into thy hands I commend
my Spirit, O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; O Blessed Trinity, O Eternal Unity,
save and defend me in this life, and at the hour of Death, O do not leave me,
nor forsake me.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the more special and particular preparation for Death.
HAving now treated of the general preparation for Death, which is to be
performed the whole course of our life, even whilst we are young, and in our
greatest health and vigor: We now come to that more special and particular
preparation, which is necessary to be done, when we are worn out with old Age,
or taken with any sudden and dangerous Disease, so that we think the time of
our departure is at hand: For Death, when we look on it at a distance only,
does not much affect us; but when we find it making its approaches near us, we
are then very pensive, and disturbed with the thoughts of it. When ever
therefore, O Man, any Disease seizes on you, think that sickness is the
Harbinger of Death, and that you are now admonished from Heaven, as Hezechiah
once was by the Prophet; to set thine House in order, Isa. 38.2.
for thou shall die. And rather look for Death than life: For the event of
sickness is very uncertain, though at first it may seem but a light
indisposition; and it often happens that the Disease gaining more and more
strength, does unexpectedly deprive a Man of the use of his Reason, and of all
serious Thoughts: So that as soon as ever you find your self ill, prepare your
self for Death; for if you should soon be well again, yet your Care and Labor
would not be in vain; but if Death should come upon you before you are provided
for it, you run the hazard of losing your Soul for ever; Heb. 9.27.
For it is appointed unto Men once to die, but after this the Judgment: It is a
most false and foolish opinion which has obtained amongst some, that the sick
person will most certainly die, if he makes his Will, and receives the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: This has, no doubt,
been suggested by the Devil, and spread abroad by ill Men, that by this means
they might frighten Men from fitting themselves for an happy Death.

Now this pre-paration consists in two parts, the first thereof respects the
dying Man, and the other his Neighbor.

As to the first; the dying Man is to take great care to reconcile himself to
God, whom he has offended; and to arm himself against all those Temptations,
which usually happen at that time: To this end it will be necessary for him, to
search into his own Heart, and examine over his whole life from the beginning,
to confess and bewail all his sins to God, to pour out most Ardent Prayers and
Sighs by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, for the obtaining pardon of his
sins, and Reconciliation with God in Christ our Savior; Examples of such
Prayers may be found in the Penitential Psalms, the prayer of Manasses, and the
like.

And although the sick Man ought chiefly to conless his sins to God, against
whom they were committed, yet it is fit, by the advice of the Apostle St.
James, James 5.16.
that he should confess his faults to his Brethren; to the Ministers of the
Church and word of God, to whom Christ has committed the keys of binding and
absolving: Of remitting and retaining sins. And chiefly let him confess those
Crimes which most trouble his mind, and with which Satan most disquiets him,
such let him repose in their Bosoms, who are ready to assist him, and to
Administer suitable Consolations; for sick Men's minds are many times not sedate
enough for Divine Thoughts and Meditations, and the Devil is very ready to
divert those that offer themselves: It Is therefore the part of the Minister of
Gods Word, and his Friends to pray for the sick person, that he may obtain
pardon of his sins, and not be overcome by the Temptations of the Devil.

It often happens, that when Satan cannot drive Men to despair, he then puts on
another disguise, and puffs them up with an opinion of their Merits: This
Temptation is diligently to be withstood: For Satan exalts those, whom before
he could not sink down, that so he may cast them headlong with a more grievous
fall: Therefore O Man, if ever such thoughts as these flatter thee; consider
that it is owing to Gods grace, and not to your self, if you are innocent from
such and such offenses, and remember how many other ways you have offended him:
Or if you have been diligent in the performance of many good deeds, and these
come into your mind, say with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.10.
By the grace of God I am what I am, it was not I, but the grace of God which
was with me. Ps. 115.1.
And, not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory: Remember
that Admonition of our Savior: Luke 17.10.
When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable Servants; we we have done that which was our duty to do. 1 Ephesians.
1.8.
And that of St. John if we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and
the truth is not in us. As also that of St. Vae omni laudabili vitae hominum,
si remota misericordia eam discutias, Domine. Cons. lib. 9. Cap. 13.
Augustine: Woe to the most perfect life of Man, if thou, Lord, should lay
aside thy mercy, and examine it: If we read the Histories of dying Men, or the
advice and Counsel which the Holiest Men have given to such as were ready to
depart this life, we shall find them all have recourse to that of David: Ps.
143.2.
Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant O Lord, Ps. 130.3.
for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified: If thou, Lord, should
make iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? The best Men in the World when they
have been in the agonies of Death, have begged earnestly of God, for the
Remission of their sins; nor could they expect or desire Salvation from any,
but only from our Lord Jesus Christ; for there is none other Name under Heaven
given among Men, whereby we must be saved.

A Man thus seriously reconciled to God, will easily struggle with, and
overcome all the Temptations which are wont to press in upon dying persons: For
although the remembrance of all the sins of your past life, and those too
aggravated by the malice of Satan, and with all, the rigor of the last
judgment, and the severity of the Judge, should come into your mind; yet to
these Terrors you may oppose, the Mercies of God the Father, the Merits of
Jesus Christ, and the most assured promises of forgiveness of sins, which, as
you ought always, and in your greatest health to remember, as has been said
before, so, when Death approaches, you ought more especially to have them in a
readiness, the principal whereof are contained in these following Texts of
Scripture: Isa. 1.18.
Though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, Isa. 43.25.
though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. I even I, says the
Lord, am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for my own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. Isa. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly Pardon: Zek. 18.32.
I have no pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says the Lord God;
wherefore turn your selves, and live ye. As I live says the Lord God, Ezekiel.
33.11.
I have no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way and live. Thou Lord art a God full of compassion and gracious: Psalm.
86.15.
Long suffering and plenteous in Mercy and Truth. Psalm. 147.3.11.
The Lord heals the broken in Heart, and binds up their Wounds. The Lord
takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his Mercy. 1 John
1.7. Mat. 18.11.
The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. The Son of Man came to
save that which was lost. This is a faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1.15.
and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save
Sinners, of whom I am chief. 1 John 2.2.
He is the propitiation for our sins, and for the sins of the whole World:
Whosoever lives and believes in him, John 11.26.
shall never die Eternally: John 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the World: Mat. 26.28.
He shed his Blood for the Remission of sins. Isa. 53.5.
He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: He
that believes on him, shall not be Condemned. Romans 8.33, etc.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies. Who is he that Condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right Hand of God, who also makes
Intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
Tribulation or Distress, etc. 2 Pet. 3.9.
The Lord is longsuffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to Repentance; 1 Timothy 2.4, etc.
He would have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the
Truth: For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus: Who gave himself a Ransom for all.

You are therefore in no wise to doubt of the Mercies of God, and of the
forgiveness of your sins; for the Mercies of God are infinitely greater than
the sins of all Mankind: It is an Article of our Christian Faith, I believe the
forgiveness of sins: So that if we confess our sins, God is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Our Blessed
Savior invites all sinners unto himself with the kindest expressions; saying,
Matthew. 11.28. Joh. 3.16.
Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. For God so
loved the World, that he gives his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: Joh. 5.24.
Verily I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent
me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed
from death unto life. He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall
he live. Joh. 6.35. etc.
I am the bread of life; he that comes to me, shall never hunger, and he that
believes on me, shall never thirst: All that the Father gives me, shall come
to me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. And this is the
Father's will, which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. And this is the
will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son and believes on
him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. My
sheep bear my voice, and I know them, Joh. 10.27, 28.
and they follow me. And I give unto them elernal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. For I am perswad^d that
neither death, nor life, nor angels, Rom 8.
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor an other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And every one that is grieved
for his sin, may say to himself, as Paul and Silas heretofore said to the
Keeper of the Prison at Philippi, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved.

If it should happen that your mind should be disturbed with such thoughts as
these, that though Christ perhaps made satisfaction for some, yet sure not for
all, nor for grievous sins; let some of the same consolations be ready at hand:
As these, the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. If any man sin,
1 John 1.7.
we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world. 1 John 2.1, 2. 1 Timothy 2.6.
He gave himself a ransom for all. Come unto me all ye that labor, Joh. 1.29.
and I will give you rest. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins
of the world.

And that your sorrow for your sins may not exclude all hopes of mercy, call to
mind the examples of many grievous sinners, who obtained pardon from God; 2 Samuel 11. 2 King. 21.
such were David, a Murderer and an Adulterer: Manasses a very great sinner:
Matthew. 26.
the Apostle Peter, who denied Christ: Luke 5.
Matthew, a publican, sitting at the receipt of custom: Zacheus, Luke 19. Joh. 8.
which was the chief among the publicans. Mary Magdalen, a sinner and an
adultress: the thief on the cross: the Apostle Paul, a persecutor of Christ,
who writes thus of himself; This is a faithful saying and worthy of all
acception, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am
chief: Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ
might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

But if you should still be tempted to think that you are a grievous sinner,
and that therefore your sorrow for your sins cannot be sufficient to obtain
your pardon: against this temptation consider, that the greatness of the Divine
Mercy is not founded in your sorrow, but in the merits of Christ: and remember
what our Lord says, Mat. 11.28, 29.
Come unto me all that labor and are heavy laden, and I will resresh you, and
ye shall find rest unto your souls: and, Joh. 9 37.
Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. To this purpose St.
Chrysostom speaks very well: Ne suae confidas paenitenti s^a namque
paenitentia, tanta^equit peccata delere, s^ sola foret poenitentia, jure
timeres: Sed postquam cum paenitentia commiscetur Dei misericordia, conside,
quontam vicit tuam nequitiam. Multum enim est misericors Deus, and tantum
clemens, ut neque filio pepercerit, ut ingratos servos reaimeret. Hom. 8. ^d
Popul.
Do not rely on your own repentance: for alas your repentance can never blot
out so many sins: if you had nothing to trust to but your own repentance, you
might well be afraid: But for as much as the mercy of God is joined to your
repentance, be of good courage, for that has overcome your wickedness: For God
is very gracious, and so merciful, that he has not spared his own Son, that he
might Redeem his ungrateful Servants.

If any objection should disturb you of a partial Redemption, or of Gods
absolute Decrees, let his universal promises, confirmed by an Oath comfort you.
Isa. 53 6. Col. 1.19, 20.
God has laid on Christ the iniquities of us a^l: It has pleased the Father
by Christ to reconcile all things unto himself: Tit 2.14. Joh. 3.16.
Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity. So God
loved the World, that whosoever believes in his Son, 1 John 2.2.
should not perish. He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole World. 2
Pet. 3.9.
The Lord is long suffering, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to Repentance He would have all Men to be saved: There is one God,
and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a
Ransom for all. Seek then for your Election in Christ, and do not frighten your
self with any absolute Decrees of Reprobation; since the Father with an Oath,
the Son with Tears, and the Holy Ghost by the voice of the Apostles have all
testified, that they desire the Salvation of all, even of those that perish: It
is your part not to hinder the workings of the Holy Spirit by the Word and
Sacraments, either by obstinately refusing his grace, when it is offered you;
or maliciously casting it away, when it is conferred; so shall ye be certain for
the future, of the love of God toward you, through the Merits of Christ
received by Faith, and cannot doubt of your Election.

And now do not by any means mistrust the grace of God, but confirm and
strengthen your Faith by receiving the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ: For when you spiritually eat the Body of Christ, and drink his Blood,
you may be assured, that you are thereby made a partaker of all the benefits
which Christ purchased for you on the Cross by his torn Body, and his Blood
poured out, and that now, by the satisfaction of Christ, you are in favor with
God, have your sins pardoned, and have received the earnest of Eternal Life and
Salvation. This Divine Banquet is the Medicine of Immortality, the Antidote
against Death, the preservative of life in God, through Christ, (...). Ep. 11.
ad Ephesians. Isa. 42.3.
as Ignatius speaks: Nor let the sense of your own unworthiness deter you from
partaking of so great a Treasure, but rather remember that our Savior has
promised, not to break the bruised Reed, nor to quench the smoking flax: That
he will receive him that is weak in the Faith: Romans 14.1.
And pray with Christ's Disciples, Lord increase my Faith: Luke 17.5.
And with the Father of the Lunatic, Mar. 9.24.
Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief: And then with a full Trust and Reliance
on God, say with the Apostle; 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that,
which I have committed unto him, against that day.

Lastly, When the Devil has tried all other Temptations in vain, he may
perhaps raise doubts in your mind concerning the truth of the Christian
Religion, and so by ruining the Foundation, endeavor to overthrow the whole
Superstructure of your Faith. Which if Satan does, do not enter into a dispute
with him, but consider well the weakness of Humane understanding, and its
ignorance even in natural things: And on the other hand, the infinite Wisdom
and Power of God, far exceeding our Apprehensions, and his Eternal Truth, which
cannot deceive nor be deceived: Call to mind the Sacred Mysteries of our
Religion, which were revealed unto us by the Prophets and Apostles, and
confirmed by Miracles, more especially in the life of our Blessed Savior, all
which receive with a firm Faith without any doubtfulness; and pray unto God,
that he would please to Aid and Assist the Infirmities of your Faith, and
assure you by the inward Testimony of his Holy Spirit, that the Sacred
Scriptures are Divinely inspired by his word, which, with the Sacraments, are a
means of begetting and confirming this belief in you.

After the sick Person is thus Reconciled unto God, and by a firm trust in the
Mercies of God, and the Merits of Christ has armed his mind against sin, the
Devil, and other Temptations; it will be fitting farther to strengthen himself
against some others, which often happen to dying Persons: Which will be best
done, if instead of thinking any more on Death it self, he rather transfers his
thoughts, and fixes them on the most Happy State of the Heavenly life, to which
he is hastening: Apoc. 14.13.
For Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord; they rest from their Labors,
and their Works follow them: For although Death be the Wages of Sin, yet by the
Death of Christ it is changed into a happy passage to a true life; by which
being set loose from the Prison of this World, from the Bondage of Trouble, and
from the Chains of sin, we come unto Christ: By the Dissolution of our
Corporeal Tabernacle, we are Translated from our Earthly Pilgrimage, to dwell
for ever with the Lord: By Death we leave this valley of Tears, this Dungeon of
Misery, and mount up to the Heavenly Jerusalem, where there is no crying, nor
pain, nor Death, but perpetual Pleasures, and rejoicing for evermore: Hence the
Apostle truly calls Death, the gain of the godly; for is it not great gain to
leave evil things, and to possess an infinite good?

The sick Person may perhaps be sad and melancholy, when he thinks that he
must now endure a great deal of pain, and when he is dead, must be left by all
his Friends, and Travel alone into an unknown Region; but to confort him
against this, let him consider, that he enjoys the presence of God, and the
Divine assistance, according to Gods promise, that the Blessed Angels will wait
on him, to Conduct his Soul to the Palace of the Great King; for they are all
Ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. ult.
sent forth to Minister unto those who shall be Heirs of Salvation. That as no
Body is born into the World by chance, so does no body die by chance neither,
but that Diseases and Death happen to us by Gods appointment: And let him
Meditate on such Texts of Scripture as these. Thus says the Lord; Isa. 43.1, ^.
when thou passest through the Waters, I will be with thee, and through the
Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: When thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Call upon me in
the day of Trouble, Ps. 50.15.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Though I walk through the
Valley of the shadow of Death I will fear no Evil, Ps. 23.4.
for thou art with me. Ps. 43. ult.
Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my Countenance, and my
God. Ps. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee. verse. 26.
My Flesh and my Heart fails, but God is the strength of my Heart, and my
portion for ever. verse. 28.
It is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my Trust in the Lord God.
Mat. 10.29. verse. 30. verse. 31. Joh. 8.51.
One Sparrow shall not fall to the ground without your Father, and the very
hairs of your Head, are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, if a Man keep my saying, he shall never see Death: That is, not
only he shall not see Eternal Death, but also shall not feel the bitterness of
the Temporal Death. Romans 8.31: 2 Chr. 20.21.
If God be for us, who can be against us. O our God, we know not what to do,
but our Eyes are upon thee. 2 Pet. 2.9.
The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations. Shall we receive
good at the hand of God, Job 2.10.1.21. Job 13.15. Job 19.25.
and shall we not receive evil? Blessed be the Name of the Lord. Though he slay
me, yet will I trust in him: I know that my Redeemer lives, and though after
my skin worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. 1 Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be Tempted above that ye are able,
but will with the Temptation also make away to escape that ye may be able to
bear it:

But suppose you should feel some of the cruel pangs of Death, yet consider
that they befall you by the Will of God, to whom the very Hairs of our Head are
known, and without whose Pleasure, nothing in the World happens. That they are
Tokens of Gods Favor, rather than his Anger; Heb. 12.6.
for whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth. However these pains are very short
and Momentary, and by them we have admission into Eternal life: Our Nativity is
attended with Sorrow and Crying: But the sharper these pangs are, the sooner
they will be over, and then succeeds everlasting Joy and Gladness: Romans 8.18.
For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. 2 Cor. 4.16.
For which cause we faint not, but though our outward Man perish, verse. 17.
yet the inward Man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which is
but for a Moment, increases for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory. If we die with him, we shall also live with him. 2 Timothy 2.11.
We must through much Tribulation, enter into the Kingdom of God; and the God
of all grace, 1. Pet. 5.10.
who has called us unto his Eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have
suffered a while, will Establish, Strengthen and Settle you. Chronical Diseases
may perhaps be troublesome and painful for some time; yet all, even the longest
are but a moment in respect of Eternity: Therefore wait on the Lord, Ps. 27.14.
be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine Heart, wait, I say, on the
Lord: For though he should seem to hide his face from thee for a Moment, Isa.
54.8.
yet with everlasting kindness, will he have Mercy on thee. His anger may
endure for a Moment, Ps. 30.5.
but in his favor is life, weeping may endure for a Night, but joy comes in
the Morning.

If any should be concerned, least in the agony of Death, their Ears should be
deaf, and their Senses fail them, and so should be destitute of necessary
Consolations; let them remember, that the Spirit it self will bear witness with
our Spirits, Romans 8.16.26.
that we are the Children of God: Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered. He is the true and only Comforter; who when our Eyes are darkened,
inlightens our Heart, when our Ears are shut, will speak Consolation to our
Souls. Let them also attentively meditate on what our Savior said a little
before his Passion, Now is the Prince of this World judged; Joh. 16.11.
that is, he who brought Death into the World is overcome by my Death, and
condemned, and is deprived of all power of hurting: Joh. 10.27, 28.
As also: My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And I
give unto them Eternal life, and they shall never perish: And therefore he may
say with David; Ps. 27.1.3.
the Lord is my light, and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Though an Host should encamp
against me, my Heart shall not fear. Yea, Ps. 23.4.
though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil;
for thou art with me.

It is often a great trouble to Men when they are dying, to think that they
must leave their Wife and Children, their Brethren and Sisters, their Relations
and Friends: But whereas this care proceeds either first from that natural
Sympathy which we bear to those we love; or else from a fear, that our Wife and
Children should suffer damage for want of our Advice and Assistance: It is
therefore fit in the first place to remember, what has been before spoken of,
Chap. 14.
that we are to love God above all things, and not to set our Affections upon
any Creature more than God: Of this our Savior Admonishes us. Luke 14.26.
If any Man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be
my Disciple. Neither are we quite separated from our Friends by Death, but we
shall be again united to them in the other life, and not to them only, but we
shall also enter into the Society of Angels and Blessed Spirits. In the second
place it ought to be considered, Psa. 68.5.
that a Father of the Fatherless, and a judge of the Widow, is God in his Holy
Habitation. And therefore every one ought to commend their Relations to his
Care and Protection. God, who is your God, will be also the God of your
Posterity. Hear what the Royal Prophet says: Ps. 37.25.
I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the Righteous forsaken,
nor his Seed begging bread. Ps. 112.2.
The generation of the upright shall be Blessed. Ps. 10.18.
Thou will judge the Fatherless and the Oppressed. Ps. 146.9.
The Lord preserves the Strangers, he relieveth the Fatherless and Widow. To
this purpose speaks Moses, Deuteronomy. 10.17, 18.
saying, the Lord your God, is a God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God
and mighty. He does execute the Judgment of the Fatherless and Widow, and
loves the Stranger, in giving him Food and Raiment. And by the Prophet
Jeremiah. Jer. 49.11.
Thus says the Lord, leave thy Fatherless Children: I will preserve them
alive, and let thy Widows trust in me.

As to what concerns the Body, the sick person ought to take what care he can
of his life, so long as it lasts: For to live or die, is not in our own power;
as says St. Paul, Romans 14.7, 8.
None of us lives to himself, and no Man dies to himself; for whether we
live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the Lord, whether
we live therefore or die we are the Lords. So that our life is diligently to be
regarded, until he that gave it, require it of us again; and the great Ruler of
the World call us hence: And therefore those Helps and Provisions which God
has allowed by Physic and Physicians for the preservation of Health, are not
to be despised. Though in the mean time, the sick Man ought not to flatter
himself with certain hopes of recovering his health, nor should his Friends put
the thoughts of Death out of his mind, and confidently promise him longer life;
for a Man thus persuaded that his life is not in danger, will easily be drawn
off, from fitting himself for an happy Death; and if afterward it should
happen that an unexpected Death should seize on him, and notwithstanding his
vain hopes, and the assurances of his Friends, he sees that he must die, he
would hereby impatiently bear the Hand of God upon him, and might run the
hazard of his Eternal Welfare: It is therefore very requisite for him wholly to
commit himself to the Divine Will and Disposal, and often revolve in his mind
the aforecited passage of St. Paul, Romans 14.8.
Whether we live, or whether we die, we are the Lords: And if his sickness be
any thing dubious, he ought rather to be solicitous how he may die, than how he
may recover his health, saying with the Apostle: This one thing I do forgetting
those things which are behind, Phil. 3.13.
and reaching forth unto those things which are before, verse 14.
I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus.

We come now to that other Duty which is incumbent on the dying Man; and this
respects his Neighbor, which is twofold; the first is, that he reconciles
himself to all, and from his Heart forgives all Injuries and Offenses
whatsoever; that he desires forgiveness from all whom he has offended; and
that he does not so much consider how injuriously he has been used by this or
that Person, as how many and grievous things there are, which he has need to
beg Pardon at Gods hands for.

The second is, that they who are Magistrates and Governors over others, do so
dispose their Affairs, that the Duties and Offices which God has committed to
them, be fully discharged before they die, and that they take care as much as
in them lies, that the peace of the Church be secured; and that Religion and
Justice be preserved sound and entire, after the Example of Moses, Joshua,
David, etc.

He who is the Master of a Family, ought to settle every thing under his Care,
and think that what Isaiah said to Hezechiah, is said also to him; Isa. 38.1.
Set thine House in Order, for thou shall die, and not live. And therefore let
him endeavor what he can, to agree things that are to be agreed, and to set in
order such things as are consus'd. But if it should happen that any one should
be so involved in a multiplicity of intricate Affairs, that he cannot apply his
mind to them, and take care of his Soul too; it will be much better to dispatch
his Worldly Business quickly, or rather to cast off all care for his Earthly
concerns, and wholly give up himself to provide for the Eternal good of his
Soul: According to the advice of our Savior, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God,
Mat. 6.33. Mat. 8.23.
and his Righteousness: And. Follow me, and let the Dead, bury their Dead.
There will be enough left to order and compose the things of this World; but no
Man can repair the loss of Eternal Salvation, which depends upon a
Reconciliation with God: But if Worldly Business may be done without any hurt
to the Soul; in the first place, let him dispose of his goods, and if it be
needful, make his Will, which ought to be plain and intelligible, comformable
to the Law of Nature, to the Word of God, and to the Laws of the Country
wherein he lives, that so there may be no occasion given to his Heirs and
Executors, to have any Litigious Disputes and Lawsuits after his Death; and
this he ought to do, whilst his Mind, and Tongue, and Hand, can perform their
Functions, and not to defer it till he is not able to make his mind known
clearly and distinctly, either by word or writing: And indeed they do most
conveniently, and to the purpose, who make their Wills whilst they are in
perfect health; on the contrary they very ill consult their own Affairs, who
put off the making of their Wills, till some dangerous sickness assaults them,
and then perhaps they are suddenly taken out of the World, or the Disease
causes a Frenzy, and so their minds become utterly indisposed for the settling
of their Worldly concerns.

If the sick Person remembers that he has taken any thing away from any Man
wrongfully, let him restore it again to the right owner, or if he be Dead, and
that cannot well be done, let him appoint it to be given to pious uses, to the
poor of the Church or State: For as St. Augustine says, Si res aliena, propter
quam peccatum est, cum reddi possit, non redditur, non agitur poenit^ntia sed
fingitur. Epist. 54. ad Ma^don.
A Man is an Hypocrite, and not a true Penitent, if he does not restore goods
wrongfully taken, when it is in his power to do it. And let those also who
abound in Riches honestly gotten, take care, that some portion of them be given
to good and pious uses, and that amongst the rest of their Legacies, something
be left and assigned to Christ. Moreover the sick Person ought to look after
such things as concern the Souls of those under his care, and to commend unto
all his Family, that Religion which is contained in the Word of God, and
diligently to exhort them to a Holy life, to the love and service of God:
Although as it has been said, such things were better to be ordered, and
provided for, when we are well and in good Health; because Death takes away
many on a sudden, and some Diseases are of such a Nature, that they presently
deprive a Man of the power of thinking on, and ordering such things; so that it
will be most safe and prudent for the sick Person to put off all thoughts of
Earthly things, and not to distract himself with any cares, but to fix his mind
wholly upon God, and on his happy passage out of this life.

And now when the sick Man finds his end approaching, that the time of his
departure is at hand, and that he is now to struggle with the pangs of Death,
laying aside all Worldly cares, let him entirely submit himself to Gods Will,
and in no wise withstand it; and say, Father, thy Will be done, whether it be
by Life or by Death: And then let him endeavor that he may die in the Faith of
Christ, and rest in the Lord; that is, let him give himself up wholly to the
grace and mercy of God, in the Merits of Christ, and to the Consolations of the
Holy Spirit: For since in that last hour, this World and all things in it,
Friends and Relations, Riches and Pleasures, and whatever else is taking and
delightful, must be quite abandoned, it is very fitting that his mind should
bid farewell to all things here below, and by Faith lift up it self to God
alone: And the Man being thus placed as it were out of himself, he ought with
the most earnest Affections, and with the most Ardent Prayers, and Fervent
Sighs to fly unto the Mercy and Goodness of God, and say with David, Ps. 73.26.
My Flesh and my Heart fails, but God is the strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for ever. In thee O Lord do I put my trust, Ps. 31.1.
let me never be put to Confusion, deliver me in thy Righteousness.

And then at last when he is just going out of the World, let him commend his
Soul unto God, as unto a faithful Creator, and most Merciful Savior, and say
with Christ. Father, Luke 23.46.
into thy Hands I commend my Spirit: And with St. Act. 7.59.
Stephen Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: If any of the foregoing Temptations
should be suggested by Satan to the sick Person, when he lies under the agonies
of Death, let him not trouble himself to give an answer, but commit himself
wholly to Christ, and depend only upon him, and presevere to the last in pious
Prayers and Ejaculations: As also those that are present with him ought to do,
especially when they find his senses begin to fail him: For the Prayers of the
Righteous avail much, and our Lord has promised, that where two or three are
gathered together in his Name, there will he be in the midst of them, and that
whatsoever we ask of the Father in his Name, he will give it us: Now wherever
Christ's gracious presence is, the Devil of necessity must flee before him:
Neither can the Devil tempt any Man beyond what God permits him: And therefore
every one ought not to be admitted to the sick Person when he is at the point
of Death, but only such who are Religious, who by Devout Prayers can commend
the departing Soul to God, but such are not to be suffered to come to him, who
may in the least excite in him an hatred against any Man, or a love toward any
Worldly thing: Or if they are permitted to come to him, care must be taken that
they behave themselves so, as not to raise in his mind any evil affection,
which he had before laid aside and forsaken. For a Soul that would depart
happily out of this life ought to be inflamed with the love of God alone, and
not to be moved either by the love or hatred of any Creature whatever.

And more especially let care be taken, that the Dying Man may be visited and
assisted by some Minister of Gods Word, of good Learning and Judgment, that he
may know how to speak a word in season to the wearied Soul, that he may so
govern and temper his Discourse, as neither to deceive the departing Soul by
too much condescension and flattery, nor to drive him to despair by an
unseasonable sharpness and severity, but may be able to instruct and fortify
him against all the Temptations of Satan, with Divine Counsels and Consolations.

The Prayer.
O Lord God and my most merciful Father, who have now sent unto me the
messenger of death, and have chastised me with sickness; I confess my self to
be a grievous sinner, and that I have oftentimes offended thee, even from my
very infancy; and therefore I acknowledge that this punishment is justly
inflicted on me, and that I desire death it self; but I beseech thee of thine
infinite mercies, blot out all my transgressions. O Lord rebuke me not in thine
anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure: If I consider what I have
done, what I suffer is not so much: what I have committed is grievous; what I
suffer is but light; righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments:
O Lord, deal not with me after my sins, neither reward me after mine
iniquities, but according to the multitude of thy mercies think thou upon me, O
Lord, for thy goodness: Thou, God art my strength and the horn of my Salvation:
thou make sore, and bindest up, thou woundest and thy hand make whole, thou
killest and make alive, thou bring down to the Grave, and bring up: if
therefore thou please to permit my Soul to remain any longer in this Earthly
Tabernacle for thy Glory and Service, O Lord, help thy afflicted Servant, and
give me patience: But if thou see it fit to take away my Life thy Will be
done, and let thy Servant depart in peace: Protect me against all the
temptations and assaults of Satan with the Shield of thy mercy: Grant that my
faith may not fail me, nor my hope be shaken, nor the weakness of my Nature be
cast down by the terrors of Death: but after my Eyes are dim my Tongue
faulters, and my senses have lost their power and faculties, grant that my Mind
and Soul may be continually fixed on thee, and by the Assistance of thy Holy
Spirit may be firmly united to thee, and with my last breath I may commend my
Soul into thy hands, O Lord, who live and reignest for ever and ever. Amen.

II.
Blessed Lord, forasmuch as I must bid farewell to this World I commend unto
Thee all mine. Thou who relievest the Fatherless and the Widow, be their Father
and Protector; It is not for me to intermeddle with what is thy prerogative;
but give me Grace to use all Diligence to make my own calling and election sure
before I go hence and be no more seen: All my other care I cast upon Thee: Be
thou pleased to provide for all mine: Bless them O Lord, and replenish their
hearts with a godly fear and love of thy holy Name: Give them health of body,
soundness of mind, and all good things which thou see fit for them: Keep from
them all such things as may alienate their minds from Thee, or any ways hinder
them from the profession of a true faith, or the practice of a Holy Life.

III.
O Eternal Lord, I now see all things in the World leave me; but do not thou
forsake me, O my God. In thee is my trust, leave not my Soul destitute, I flee
unto thee for succor; Make have to help me, O Lord, my Salvation; O my God be
not far from me, in this my last hour: I confess indeed I am not worthy to be
called thy Son, or even the meanest of thy Servants; but I cast my self at thy
feet, and fall down before thy Throne of Grace; O deal with me according the
multitude of thy mercies, and enter not into judgment with thy Servant: I do
not hide my transgressions from thee, but humbly confess them before thy Divine
Majesty: but according to thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O
Lord, look upon my affliction and pain, and forgive all my sins, for the merits
and Death of our Lord Jesus Christ: Cast me not away from thy thy presence
since thou have redeemed me with the blood of thy Son: O keep my Soul and
deliver me, let me not be ashamed for I put my trust in thee. O dear Jesu, thou
art my Redeemer, and my Savior; thou have overcome the World, Sin, and Hell it
self, that they can do me no harm: Lord, I come unto thee, do not reject me; O
do not leave me in this my hour of Death: Into thy hands I commend my Spirit:
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Amen. Amen.

O Man remember Death and Eternity; and whilst you live here, consider where,
after Death you are to live for ever and ever. FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by Sam. Keble, at the Great Turks-head,
in Fleet street.
MONASTICON ANGLICANUM: Or, the History of the Ancient Abbeys, and other
Monasteries, Hospitals, Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches in England and
Wales; with diverse French, Irish, and Scotch Monasteries formerly relating to
England. Collected and Published in Latin, by Sir William Dugdale, Knt. late
Gartor King of Arms, in Three Volums, and now epitomized in English Page by
Page, price 10 s.

The Historical Parts of the Old and New Testament in Verse, with One Hundred
and Twenty Cuts, being the best use of Poetry and Sculpture, 12o. price. 2 s.

EPICTETI Enchiridion: Or, the most Excellent Morals of Epictetus. Made English
in a Poetical Paraphrase. By Ellis Walker, M. A.

A Collection of Private Forms of Prayers for Morning, Noon, and Night, and
other special Occasions by the Author of the Weeks Preparation to the Sacrament.

Degrees of Marriage, that which is ordered to be had in all Churches.


