NINE BOOKS OF PHYSIC AND CHIRVRGERY Written by that Great and Learned
Physician, Dr SENNERTUS.

The first five being his Institutions of the whole Body of Physic: The other
four of Fevers and Agues: With their Differences, Signs, and Cures.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Lodowick Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhill, 1658.

THE INSTITUTIONS OR FUNDAMENTALS Of the whole Art, both of PHYSIC AND
SURGERY, Divided into five Books.

Plainly discovering all that is to be known in both; as the Subject and end of
Physic; the Nature of all Diseases, their Causes, Signs, Differences, Events
and Cures.

ALSO The Grounds of Chemistry, and the way of making all sorts of Salves, and
preparing of Medicines according to Art; nothing of the like nature in English
before.

Written first in Latin by that Great and Learned Phycitian D. Sennertus,
Doctor and Professor of Physic.

Made English by N. D. B. P. late of Trinity College in Cambridge.

London, Printed for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at his Shop next door
to the Sign of the Castle in Cornhill. 1656.

To the Lovers of the Study of Physic, especially those who desires to attain
to the true knowledge thereof.
OF all the Arts and Sciences that the Sons of Men so much covet after, there
is none so pleasant and profitable as Physic; Physic does not only teach
thee to preserve thy self from the assaults of those manifold Enemies which
Nature is liable unto, but it teaches thee to restore Health when lost, and to
heal thy self though wounded by thy greatest adversary; besides in the
Anatomical part it entertains thy fancy with the wonderful work of Nature
where the unsearchable wisdom of the Creator is as legible, as in those things
we count more sublime and Celestial; which if considered, Physicians cannot be
so Atheistical as the world reports them to be. I undertook not this work out
of design to prejudice the College, by making that English, which they would
have remain in Latin; nor to advantage my self by any private gain, but to
benefit those who are unskilled in the Latin, but lovers of the Study. I say
for the benefit of such, have I put this into English. Although by my
Profession I am otherwise obliged: its something unsuitable to my spirit to
have that Monopolized into the hands of a few, which should be in common to
all: such is the practice of Physic, yet would I not have those to Administer,
who are ignorant of the Institutions of Physic, as too many have done of late,
to their own and others detriment: He that can but well digest this Book, his
understanding will sufficiently be enriched in the very inside of the whole
body of Physic, and will need no other foundation to go upon, being the best
that ever the Doctors met with for their own informations. I shall not need to
acquaint thee with the Authors Method, that thou will find by the Contents of
Chapters before the Book, nor of the Authors worth, for that thou will
sufficiently understand by his works, which speaks aloud in their Masters
praise, whose fame and worth is well known to the Commonwealth of Learning
throughout the world.

If thou meetst with any Errata 's in thy reading, thou art desired to correct
them, the Translators absence sometimes from the Press occasioned them.

The Contents of the Chapters of the five following Books.
BOOK. I. CHAP. I.
OF the nature of Physic. page 1 Of the division of Physic. p 2 Of Health. p
3 Of Temperaments. p 6 Of innate heat. p 10 Of Spirits. p 12 Of the natural
constitution of or ganick parts, and the common unity of parts alike, and not
alike, called simular and dissimular parts. p 14 Of the faculties of the soul,
and of the differences of actions in Man's Body. ibid Of the natural faculty,
and first of nutrition and augmentation. p 15 Of Generation. p 20 Of the vital
faculty p 23 Of the animal faculty, and first of the external senses. p 25 Of
the internal senses. p 27 Of the intellective faculty. p. 29 Of the desire and
moving faculty. ibid
Book. 2. Part. I. Of Diseases.
OF the nature of a disease. p 31 Of the differences of diseases. p 32 Of
diseases of intemperature. p 33 Of diseases of the whole substance, or of the
hidden qualities. p 34 Of organick diseases. p 35 Of diseases of confirmation.
p 36 Of diseases of number. p 38 Of diseases of magnitude. ibid Of diseases of
composition. p 39 Of diseases of solution of unity. p 40. Of the accidental and
common differences of diseases. ib Of the times of diseases. p 44
Book 2. Part. 2.
O Of the causes of ^iseases. p 46 Of things which are the causes of a disease,
and first of non-naturals. p 49 Of internal causes of diseases, and first of
fulness of blood. p 52 Of phlegm. p 53 Of choler. p 54 Of melan^holy. p 55 Of
the serous humor, and of wind p 56 Of humors according to the opinion of later
Phisicians and of Chemists. p 57 Of the generation of stones and worms p 58 Of
the causes of diseases of intemperature without matter. ibid Of the causes of
distemper with matter p 59 Of the causes of Diseases of the whole substance. p
60 Of the causes of organick diseases. p 61 Of the causes of diseases of
solution of unity. p. 63
Book 2. Part 3. Sect. 1.
OF Symptoms. Of the difference of Symptoms. What a Symptom is. p. 65 Of the
causes and differences of Symptoms in general. p 66 Of the differences in
general, of actions hindered. p 68 Of the Symptoms of the natural faculty. Ibid
Of the Symptoms of the vital faculty. p 71 Of the Symptoms of the external
senses. p 72 Of the Symptoms of the internal senses. p 73 Of the Symptoms of
the motive faculty. p 75 Of the Symptoms wherein all, or most part of the
animal actions are hurt. p 77 Of the Symptoms of the changeable qualities of
the body. p 78 Of the Symptoms of excressions and retensions. p 79
Book 2. Part 3. Sect. 2. Of the causes of Symptoms.
OF the cause of the Symptoms of the natural faculty. p 81 Of the cause of the
Symptoms of the vital faculty. and of the hindrances of respiration. p 95 Of
the causes of the Symptoms of the external senses. p 97 Of the causes of the
Symptoms of the internal senses. p 103 Of the causes of the Symptoms of the
moving faculty. p 108 Of the causes of Symptoms wherein all, or most animal
actions are hurt. p 113 Of the causes of Symptoms, which happen to qualities
changed. p 116 Of the causes of Symptoms in those things which are sent forth
and retained. p 118
Book 3. Part 1. Sect. 1. Of signs in general, of the difference and Heads of
Signs.
OF the Necessity and benefit of the method of signs: p 122 OF the differences
of Signs. p 123 Of the Heads of signs. p 125
Sect. 2.
OF knowing the temperature of man's body, and of his principal parts of the
signs of a wholesome body. p 127 Of the signs of bodies differing from their
best constitution. p 129 Of the signs of the constitution of the Brain. p 132
Of the signs of the constitution of the heart. p 136 Of the signs of the
constitution of the Liver. p 138 Of the signs of the temperature of the
Testicles. p 139 Of the signs of the constitution of the Stomach. p 140 Of the
signs of the constitution of the Lungs. p 141
Book 3. Part 1. Sect. 1. Of Urines.
OF the abuse of inspection of Urines p 142 Of the difference of Urine; and
first of the substance of Urine. p 143 Of the Conteints in Urine. p 145 Of the
causes of the various consistency of Urine. p 147 Of the causes of colors in
Urines. p 148 Of the causes of an oily Urine, and the other differences p 150
Of the causes of smell, quantity, and such like accidents. p 151 Of the causes
of Contents in Urines of those that are sick. p 152 Of the causes and changes
in Urines. p 154 What is to be observed in the inspection in Urines. p 156 What
may be discerned and foretold by Urine. p 157
Book 3. Part 3. Sect. 4. Of Pulses.
WHat a Pulse is. p 158 Of the simple differences of Pulses. p 159 Of the
compound differences of Pulses. p 160 Of an equal and unequal Pulse. p 161 Of
the order and harmony amongst Pulses. p 164 Of certain things necessarily
requisite to distinguish Pulses by. p 165 How to know the differences of simple
Pulses. p 166 How to know the respective differences of Pulses. p 167 Of the
causes of Pulses in general. p 168 Of the causes of the simple differences of
Pulses. p 171 Of the causes of the respective differences of Pulses. p 172 Of
the causes of varying of Pulses. p 174 What the simple differences of Pulses
signify and presage. p 176 What the other differences of Pulses signify and
presage. p 177 What Pulses presage health or death. p 179 Of signs to be
observed from the Tongue. p 179
Book 3. Part 2. Of the Diagnostick Signs.
OF the signs of causes in general. p 182 Of the Signs of causes and of humors
in particular. p 184 Of the Signs of Diseases. p 187 How to know the parts
affected. p 189 How to know Symptoms. p 194
Book 3. Part 3. Of the Prognostic Signs.
OF the several kinds of prognostic signs. p 195 Of those kinds of signs by
which the times of diseases may be known. p 196 Of the signs of times of
diseases in particular. p 198 Of the signs by which we may foretell the events
of a disease. p 199 How to presage of life and death, from the error and faults
of actions. p 2^2 Of the signs of life and death, which are taken from
excretions and retentions. p 207 Of the signs of health and of death, which are
taken from the mutations of the qualities of the body. p 212 Of knowing the
times, longitude, brevity and event of a Disease. p 214 How many mutations
there are of Diseases, and the manners, and what a Crisis is. p 215 Of the
causes, differences, manner and time of judgment. p 216 Of critical days. p
218 Of the causes of critical days. p 219 Of the signs of Crisis in general. p
221 Of the signs of differences in Crisis. p 222 The signs of Crisis to come,
by excretion and imposthumation. Ibid Through what places there will be
excretion, and where there will be imposthumation. p 223 Of the time of the
Crisis. p 225
Book 4 Part 1. Sect. 1.
WHat things appertain to the Doctrine of the preservation of health; and how
many kinds there are of necessary causes for the preservation and ^efence
thereof. p 227 Of Air. p 228 Of Meat. p 231 Meats from Plants. p 232 Meats
from living creatures. p 239 Of ^rink. p 261 Of the passion of the mind, and of
the exercise and rest of the body, p 266 Of sleeping and waking. p 267 Of
hathes. Ibid Of Ex^retions and Retentions, and of Venery. p 268
Book 4. Part 2
OF those things which are to be observed by all, for the preservation of
health. p 270 Of the cure of little ones not yet born; and of the diet of women
with child. p 272 Of the diet of Infants, and thence forwards, until twenty one
years of age. p 274 Of the diet of middle age. p 275 Of the diet of old men, p
280 Of the diet of such as are out of temper, and of Neuters. p 282
Book 5. Part 1. Sect. 1. Of the Materials for cure of Medicines.
What a Medicine is. p 285 Of the faculties of medicines in general. p 286 Of
the first faculties of the medicines. p 289 Of medicines proper to every part,
or of corroborating medicines. p 293 Of extenuating and preparing of humors. p
297 Of Emollients, relaxing, rarefying, etc. p 298 Of medicines easing pain and
causing rest. p 301 Of drawing and repelling medicines. p 302 Of ripening
things, and such as generate quitture; also of such as generate flesh and
brawny flesh; of such as dry and cleanse green wounds, and cause cicatrising;
and of such as generate Seed and Milk. p 303 Of such things as make the skin
red; of such as cause blisters, and of such as cause scabs or pustules; of
burning things of Corrosives, Putrifactives, and of such things, as take away
hair, and extinguish milk and seed. p 305 Of medicines purging through the
paunch. p 307 Cholagogues, or the milder purger of Choler, p 308 Stronger
purgers of choler. p 310 The milder purgers of phlegm. p 311 The stronger
purgers of phlegm. Ibid The milder purgers of melancholy and black humors. p
313 The stronger purgers of melancholy and adust humors. Ibid Hydragogues, and
such as evacuate Aqueous humors. p 314 Of Medicines that cause vomits. p 315
Of Medicines causing Urine. p 316 Of Medicines causing sweat. p 317 Of
Diaphoreticks, and medicines discussing wind Ibid Of provoking courses,
expelling the secun^ine, and a dead child. p 318 Of Medicines that break the
stone. p 319 Of Errbines, Sternutatories, and Apophlegmatismes. Ibid Of things
causing spittle, p 320 Of Medicines killing and expelling worms. Ibid Of Druggs
good against poison. 321 Of the manner of finding out the virtue of Medicines.
ib.
Book 5. Part 1. Sect. 2. Of Chyrurgery.
OF Chyrurgery in general. p 323 Of putting together, and binding in general. p
325 Of swalling Ibid Of Cerots or Bolsters. p 326 Of Splents. p 327 Of Binders.
p Ibid Of fit placing of a member that is bound. Ibid Of Coaptation of bro^en
bones. p 328 Of restoring of bones that are out of joint. p 330 Of the putting
together of the soft and fleshy parts. p 331 Of correcting of bones that are
represt or set awry p 333 Of disjunction in general, and of dissection of soft
parts. p 334 Of Section of bones. p 337 Of burning. p 339 Of drawing of things
out of the body, which were sent into the body from without. p 340 Of drawing
out of things generated in the body according to nature, but retained in the
body beyond the limits of nature. p 343 Of taking away the corrupt parts of the
body. p 344 Of freeing and taking away things generated in the body contrary t^
nature. p 345 Of restitution of parts that are lost, or of the Chyrurgery of
imperfect parts. p 346
Book 5. Part 2. Sect. 1.
OF the method of healing; and of Indications in general. p 348 Of Indicants. p
350 Of the concord and discord of Indicants. p 353 Of Indicants. p 354 What
m^r^ist^ue causes indicate and peculiarly of purging a juice in the body which
causes ill digestion. p 360 Of the time fit for the purging of a disease. p 363
Of the preparation and concoction of humors. p 365 Of the quantity of
purgation. p 371 Of the pl^^e by w^^ch purgation ought to be made p 372 Of the
^^ue administration of purges. p 374 Whether it be lawful to sleep, having
taken a purge. Ibid Whether it is be^^ after purging to use cleansing and
abstergent me^^oines. p 375 Of evacuation by ^rine. Ibid Of evacuation by
sweat. p 376 Of particular evacuations. p 378 Of the abating abundance a blood
with Leaches, Cuppinglasses, Scarrifications, etc. p 379 Of opening a Vein. p
382 Of revulsion. p ^85 Of derivation. p 3^8 Of repulsion. ibid Of
interceptings. p 389 Of discussing. p 390 Of softning and ripning of matter. p
391
Book 5. Part. 2. Of showing how to Cure.
OF diseases of Intemperature. p 392 Of curing diseases of the whole substance.
p 394 The cure ^f diseases of confirmation. p 395 Of the cure of diseases of
number. p 397 Of curi^g of diseases of magnitude. p 398 Of curing diseases in
s^ituation and connection. p 3^9 Of the cure of solution of continuity. p 400 Of
the cure of oppressing and urging Symptoms. p 402
Book 5 Part. 2 Sect. 3. Of the Vital Indication.
WHat does indicate Diet in those that are sick. p 404 What things belong to
Diet. p 4^5 How many sorts there are of Diet, and which agrees to which
^^seases. p 406 Of the right administration of a dict of sick persons. p 407
Book 5 Part. 3 Sect. 1.
OF preparing and compounding of Drugs in general, of necessity and profit of
preparing and compounding of simple Medicines. p 409 What things are necessary
for the Artificial preparation and composition of Medicines. p 411 Of the
weights of Medicines. p 412 Of Physical measures. p 414 Of Dozes of Medicines.
p 416 Of the Dozes of Purges. p 417
Book. 5. Part. 3. Sect. 2.
OF operations necessary for the preparation and composition of Medicines. Of
the parts of Pharmacopaea. p 419 Of the kinds of heat. p 420 Of the first rank,
or form of operations of breaking, sleeking, or making plain, shaving and
filing: p 421 Of the second rank and form of operations: p 424 Of the third
manner of operations. p 428
Sect. 3.
OF the forms of Medicines. p 429 Of the division of medicines. ibid Of
Decoctions. p 433 Purging decoctions. p 436 Of infusions and other purging
potions. p 437 Of medicinal wines, drinks of Honey and water sodden together,
of wines mingled with honey, of Oxymel, of medicinal vinegar, decoction, or
barley-water; also of clarified juices. p 439 Of distilled water, and spirits.
p 443 Of oils. p 444 Of Syrrops and Julops. p 445 Of Emulsions and Ahes,
mixtures bringing, or causing milk, and of strengthening things. p 448 Of
tinctures, and extracts, and liquid dissolutions. p 450 Of conserves,
preserves, and medicinal juices p 451 Of Electuaries. p 453 Of Eclegmays and
Lohochs. p 455 Of Boles. p 457 Of Powders and Trags, or Comfits. p 458 Of
Salts. p 459 Of Crosses. p ibid Of flowers and sublimates. p 460 Of
precipitates. ibid Of Glasses, Regons, of certain chemical powders p 461 Of
Comfits, little round cakes and morcels, and such like. ibid Of Troches. p 464
Of Pills. p 465 Of Suppositors. p 468 Of Clystors. p 470 Of Injections into the
womb, and of Pessaries p 472 Of those things which are injected into the Yard
and Bladder. p 473 Of the washing of the mouth, and Gargarismes. ibid Of
medicines that draw away phlegm. p 474 Of medicines that rub and cleanse the
teeth. p 475 Of medicines put into the nose, and to provke sneezing. p 477 Of
sweet smells, perfumes, and odcrifierous Balsomes. p 478 Of those things which
are put into the ears. p 479 Of liquid medicines for the eyes. ibid Of oils
and balsomes. p 480 Of linements and ointments. p 481 Of Cerots and
Emplaisters. p 482 Of Cataplasmes. p 485 Of medicines to take away hair, Salves
made of Mustard, and medicines causing wheales, or pustles in the body,
Vesitatories, or medicines that cause blisters. p 486 Of Epithems (which are
something moister then Plasters) Medicines made of Vinegar and Roses, and of
medicines applied to the Temples to stop fluxes of Rheum) from falling to the
eyes. p 427 Of medicines applied plaister-ways to mitigae pain, and of little
bags. p 489 Of Embrocations, Lotions, and Baths. p 490 Of Sopes p 491 Of
Cauteries. p 492
THE FIRST GROUND OR FUNDAMENTALS Of the whole Art of PHYSIC, AND SURGERY.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Physic.
THE word Medicina, The name of Physic.
sithence it is derived (...) Medendo, that is, helping such as are sick; does
properly belong indeed to the Therapeutical part only; which part being the
most necessary, was first invented and garnished, and in this sense the word
was formerly taken. The Definition of Physic.
Yet afterward when that part was added, which showed the preservation of
present health; the same ancient Appellation was still retained, and is now
attributed to the whole Art. Physic is an Art (as far as it is possible) of
preserving man's present health, and restoring it when it is lost.

Physic is most properly set down amongst the Arts, The Genus of Physic.
because it propounds to it self, not knowledge only, but effecting somewhat;
namely, gaining of health. For the distinction betwixt Disciplines are taken
from their next end: neither does Physic observe the other principles that are
requisite in a Science.

The Subject of Physic is man's Body, The Subject of Physic.
as it is endued with health, and obnoxious to diseases. And this Subject has
one excellency peculiar to it self, beyond the Subjects of all other Arts; in
that they do nothing, only they perform obedience, and undergo the operation
of the Artificer; but this has a certain inbred power striving for health of
its own accord.

The End of Physic is Health; The End of Physic.
and that is the true and last aim of it, the first mover, and that for which
it is; but the scope or means, and that to which it aims is to heal, as J. C.
Scaliger in his first Book of Plants teaches; for although the Physician do
not always obtain his chief end, since it is impossible to cure all that are
sick, yet the ^hysitian has performed his Office, if he have omitted none of
those things that are in the power of Nature and Art.

For out of those two the Excellency and Dignity of Physic is manifested; The
Excellency of Physic.
for it is employed about man's Body, of all natural Bodies the most noble. The
end it aims at is health; then which (amongst all things that may be called
good by Mortals) nothing is better; and that which alone is sought by it self.
Whereas all the rest of the Arts aim at nothing themselves; but perform all
things because of some outward end.

CHAP. II. Of the Division of Physic.
SEEing that the end of Physic, The division and parts of Physic.
is to preserve present health, and to restore it when it is lost; it is
properly divided into the Preserving and Curing part; yet there are also higher
things pertaining to these parts which are necessary to be known by the
Physician, and they are to be added. For sithence a Physician cannot heal
unless he know the Subject whereon he ought to work, and since all Arts begin
from the knowledge of their end: first he should acquire the knowledge of man's
body, wherein he ought to work, and wherein health does consist, it is necessary
he should understand; and since that a disease is repugnant to health, he ought
to know the nature, differences, causes and effects of a disease; and by what
rules to find these in every individual. And so Physic is conveniently divided
into five parts, the Physiological, Pathological, Semeiotical, Hygieinal, and
Therapeutical.

Physiologie handles the subject and end of Physic; Physiologie
and so treats of man's body, and shows the constitution thereof, and all its
parts, their uses and actions, and the faculties of the mind.

Pathologie teaches the nature of diseases and Symptoms, Pathologie
their differences and causes, and explains all things whatsoever, by which
man's body recedes from a natural constitution.

The Semeiotick part shows the Signs, Of signs of sickness and health.
whereby we may know whether a man be sick or well, and by which we may
discover diseases and causes that lie hid in man's body, and the events of
diseases.

The Hygieinal part shows, by what rules present health may be preserved, Of
preservation of health.
and how a man may beware beforehand (as much as is possible) lest he should
fall into a disease.

The Therapeutical part teaches, by what means health is to be recovered; and
how diseases with their causes and symptoms may be repelled and taken away. Of
curing diseases.


If there be any other besides these which are counted parts of Physic, they
are not principal, but lesser, into which these are sub-divided, such are the
Diatetical, Chirurgical, and Pharmaceutical parts, and such like.

CHAP. III. Of Health.
FIrst, as for the Physiological part, indeed very many dispose of it, and
place it otherwise, What Physiologie handles. Of things called Naturals.
and in that comprehend things called Naturals, without which our bodies cannot
subsist whole, and they account them seven, Elements, Temperaments, Humors,
Spirits, Parts, Faculties, Actions; but since the handling of them as they are
such, is properly the work of a Physician; they are considered by a Physician
in this place, as they conduce to the knowledge of the subject, which is man's
body; to the explication of the end, which is health: to which also we are
willing to order the handling of them. And indeed, to it belongs, principally
the description and knowledge of all the parts of man's body; which since it is
more copious then to be contained in a Compendium, that is to be sought in
Anatomical books; but especially by seeing bodies dissected: afterward
follows the explication of the end of Physic which is health.

But since that all men do then think themselves wel^, The defin^tion of health.
when they can rightly perform the natural and necessary actions of life,
Health is defined fitly to be a power of man's body to perform those actions
which are according to nature, depending on the natural constitution of all the
parts: for health does not consist in the action it self, since that those who
sleep, or are quiet in what manner whatsoever, and cease from certain actions,
are sound, and as Galen has it in the 2 cap. of the differences of diseases;
not to operate, is to be well, but to be able to operate: nor is he only well
who performs his natural actions; but also he that does them not, so that he be
able to do them: And so the formal reason of health is, a potency of body to
perform natural actions; but because Galen in the place abovementioned, makes
health to be a natural constitution of all the parts of the body, and in the
first Chapter of the Differences of Symptoms, a framing made according to
nature fit for operation, or a natural constitution of all the parts of the
body, having power to undergo those things which are according to nature;
therefore it comes to pass, that that position or constitution is rather
subject to the actions of a Physician, then to the power of acting.

The subject of health is a living body, The Subject of health.
or the parts of a living body, as to that, to which alone the power of acting
belongs; but those which live not, and have no power to perform natural
actions, those are neither said to be sick nor well.

But the cause of health, The efficient cause of health.
or that whereby a body and its parts are said to be sound, is a natural
constitution of them: But seeing there is a twofold constitution of a body, and
of all its parts, the one Essential, which consists of matter, and substantial
form; the other accidental, which follows the former, and is such a disposation
of qualities and other accidents in the several parts of the body, by which the
essential form may exercise all its actions, and according to its diversity, it
acts variously: Health does not consist in the essential but accidental
constitution; for the mind cannot be hindered or hurt, but remains always the
same and unchanged; so that it have instruments constituted in the same manner.
The Essential constitution also, so long as a man lives, is immutable, and at
length is changed by death; but the accidental constitution of the body is
subject to many alterations, whence the same soul in the same body acts one way
and another way.

And because the parts of the body are several, the natural constitution of
them also is not the same. The definition of similar and dissimilar parts.
The parts of the body are twofold, similar, and dissimilar. Similar parts are
such whose particles have the same form, and are alike to the whole, and to one
another; and indeed, some are truly and exactly such, wherein no difference
can be found, neither by accurate sense, nor by reason: such are a Bone, a.
Gristle, simple flesh, a very small vein, Fat: Others are so only to the
sense, which although at the first sight they seem such; yet if they are viewed
more diligently, they are perceived to be composed of more, as flesh of
muscles, substance of Veins, Nerves, Arteries.

Dissimilar, are such as are compounded of more, Of a Dissimilar. Whether a
similar part be opposite to an organick.
which are also called for the most part organick. For although, if we may
speak properly, an Organick is not opposite to similar, but a dissimilar or
compound, and similar may be organick also, as you may see in bones, which have
their organick constitution: Yet because singular parts, for the most part, do
not perform a whole and entire action, which Galen requires in an organick part
strictly so taken, hence it comes to pass the Physicians, for the most part,
oppose an organick to a similar.

But the constitution of similar parts, The constitution of similar parts milar
parts
even as of those which consist of Elements, and other mixed bodies, consists
in the lawful mixture of the four primary qualities.

But besides that temperature of primary qualities, Occult qualities.
other qualities also are in them which are more occult, arising from their
forms, which parts all of them possess, as is manifest by their sympathy and
antipathy with other natural bodies, and by several actions, and kinds and
manners of actions, which are beyond the force of Elements.

The natural constitution of organick parts, The constitution of dissimilar
parts.
consists in a composition fit to perform actions; namely in number, magnitude,
conformation, composition or situation.

There is a common unity in them both, as well similar as dissimilar and
organick: for not only the whole body, but every part thereof, whether similar
or organick, ought to be whole and entire. And if our bodies obtain these three
things, it is sound, if either be wanting, it becomes sick.

Yet, there is a certain latitude of health, The latitude of health.
nor do all men acquire the same perfection of performing actions; but in
regard of age, sex, and other circumstances, some do perform all or certain
actions better then others, yet all of them nevertheless are sound; but
Physicians call all those that deviate from perfect health, Whether there be a
Neutral disposition.
and yet are not sick, Neuters; and place a neutral constitution, as it were,
in the middle betwixt the sick and well. For although, if we rightly weigh the
matter, there is no such thing as middle disposition, differing from health and
a disease, and every man is either sick or well; yet Physicians consider
Neuters, not as the mean betwixt sick and well; but as differing from perfect
health peculiarly, and distinguish Neuters from those that are sound, not as
differing in kind, but in respect of more or less.

CHAP. IV. Of Temperaments.
BUT that the nature of health may be the more manifest, something shall be
spoken particularly of this threefold constitution of a body which is
necessary to health; What a Temperament is.
and first, for what belongs to the constitution of similar parts, as they are
such, that is a Temperament, which is a quality arisen from the mutual action
and passion of primary qualities, and resulting out of them separated and
joined together. But not the form it self of a mixed substance; sithence it is
subject to the senses, acquired by change (or motion) subject to alteration,
and has its rise from the primary qualities; Nor is it only a harmony
(although there be a certain proportion of qualities in a Temperament) since it
is the immediate instrument of actions, which does not belong to a bare
proportion which is an accident.

But from the Temperament, A Temperament of a mixed body twofold.
things are said to be temperate or intemperate; and indeed, any thing is said
to be temperate two ways, either simply and absolutely, and in its own kind,
or in relation to some other; for if there be that proportion of qualities,
that they wholly concur in equal strength, such a Temperament is said to be
simply and absolutely such, and such a Temperament is commonly called a
Temperament ad pondus, To weight.
or according to weight, (as if it were weighed in a balance) and is of an
Arithmetical proportion; But if there be a certain inequality of qualities in
relation to their strength, To Justice.
it is called a Temperament to Justice, and this is called a Geometrical
proportion; although, if you strictly regard the proportion of the qualities
amongst themselves, it is then an Intemperament, not a Temperament.

Now this Temperament (as we call it) wherein there is not an equality of
primary qualities, takes its denomination from that quality, which does exceed
the rest, whether it be one or two. And the action which proceeds from the
Temperament, is ascribed to the quality that does predominate; although the
rest are no ways to be excluded from having a share in the action.

Of these Temperaments some are simple, Temper te to Justice two-sold. Simple.
others compound; Simple, is when one quality only exceeds its contrary, and
therest are equal, whereof there are four kinds, according to the number of the
primary qualities; Hot, wherein heat does rule over cold the moisture and
drowth being equal; Cold, where cold overcommeth the heat, but the moisture and
dryness are equal; Moist, wherein moisture exceeds dryness, the heat and cold
being equal; Dryness, wherein drowth dryes up moisture, the heat and cold as
before being equal.

But when two qualities exceed their contraries there arises a compound
Temperament: Compound. The latitude of Temperament.
whereof there are likewise four kinds according to the combinations, (as far
as possibly they may combine) of the four primary qualities: to wit, Hot and
Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, Cold and Dry. In every one of these there
is a great latitude, and in the simple Temperament some have more, some less
of heat or cold by much then other. In compound Temperaments some one,
sometimes both qualities, exceed the rest in an extraordinary, yet different
manner.

Any thing is said to be Hot, Cold, Moist, or Dry, How many ways any thing is
said to be hot, moist cold, and dry.
not only simply regard being had to the universal nature of mixed bodies,
wherein if you consider a middle sort of body exceeding in neither, and in
respect of this you account all others that differ from it Intemperate, and
from the quality excelling is called, Hot, Cold, Moist or Dry; but besides
this, there is made a comparison to three: First, the comparison is made to the
next Genus, or kind in nature, as if in the whole sort of living Creatures, you
appoint one living Creature to be temperate, all others in respect of that, are
called intemperate; Secondly, a comparison is made with a middle sort of the
same kind, so a Boy is said to be hot, an old man cold; Thirdly, respect is had
to every individual, that so this compared to that as being Hotter, is Cold,
but compared to a colder is hot.

Man, for whose sake these things of Temperaments are spoken, In man there is a
twofold Temperament.
since his body is not simply mixed but organick and living, there is required
in him a double Temperament, one of the body, as it is absolutely and simply
mixed; The other as it is living. This is lost by death, and is often changed by
old age; but that remains sometimes in the dead carcass after death; yet at
length by putrefaction and corruption of that which is mixed it is dissolved. In
that also, according to Heat, Cold, Drowth and Moisture, there is a great
diversity of parts. But the matter which is proper to living Creatures in all,
is Heat and Moisture.

Again the Temperament of a living man is twofold, Temperament, Innate,
Influent.
the one Innate, the other Influent. Innate, is that which is imbibed in the
living parts of man, and by reason of the Innate heat is inherent in him from
his first being. Influent, is that which flows from the principal parts, and
is communicated to the whole body. And that it is not the same with Innate, is
manifest from those that fall into a Swoun; when the body becomes extreme cold,
and yet the Innate Temperament is not changed. These three Temperaments though
they may be considered severally: Yet they concur to constitute one Temperament
of a sound man. And, therefore although without all doubt, amongst all other
living Creatures man is of the most temperate, so that other living Creatures,
as also medicines compared to him, are said to be Hotter, Colder, Moister, or
Dryer;

Yet simply and absolutely he is not temperate; The Temperament of a man, of
what sort it is.
for commonsense tells us, that Heat in man is predominate over the other
qualities; for the Temperature of a man to perform his actions best is Hot and
Moist, and our lives consist of Heat and Moisture: on the contrary, coldness
and dryness lead us to death, and by how much sooner a man is cooled and dried,
by so much sooner he grows old and dies.

Yet, The differences of the Temperaments of man.
that heat and that moisture have their degrees. For if the heat exceed the
cold and the moisture the drowth moderately, that Temper is best and is
accounted Temperate. All others differing from this are called either Hot and
Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, or Cold and Dry; although all in general
are Hot and Moist.

These differences of Temperaments are commonly explained by the names of
Sanguine, Sanguine, Choleric, Phlegmatic, Melancholy.
Choleric, Phlegmatic and Melancholy Temperaments. These differences and
appellations may be admitted of, if they are not taken from the diversity of
excrementitious humors, in various bodies; but from the variety of blood,
which is the nutriment of the body.

For those whose Blood is temperate, Occult qualities.
or moderately hot and moist, are called Sanguines: Those who have hotter and
dryer blood, and their bodies from thence become hotter and dryer, are called
Choleric Persons: Those who have colder and moister, and their bodies from
thence grows colder and moister, are called Phlegmaticks: Those who have cold
and dry blood, and their bodies from thence become cold and dry, are
Melancholians.

But we must not rest at the Primary qualities; for there are others more noble
and more abstruse, the causes of many actions, and of Sympathy, and Antipathy,
with other alterations that must be granted; although in this humane
imbecility, for the most part, they are unknown to us.

The Astrologers, The opinions of the Astrologers.
that they may some way express the various Constitutions of Bodies, according
to the occult diversities of Stars, call some Solar bodies, born under the
influence of the Sun; so Jovial under Jupiter; others Martial, Venereal,
Mercurial, Saturninal, as being born under one of those; and also admit of mixed
constitutions born under several Planets; nor indeed absurdly altogether, since
there is a great agreement and consent betwixt Superior and Inferior bodies.

But since there are diverse parts of a body, and each part has its peculiar
Temperature, not only proceeding from the mixture of Elements; but some are
hotter, some have less heat in them; nevertheless they agree together, to
make the Temperament of the whole, which is hot and moist; and so heat with
cold, moisture with dry things are equaled. So that from thence there
proceeds a certain Harmony, and the Temperament of the whole, is moderately
hot and moist.

But to constitute that Temperament of the whole, The Temperament of the whole
wherein it depends.
the noble parts of the body perform more then the rest, and most especially
the Heart, the Fountain and Treasury of the native heat, and vital spirits.
From whence all the parts of the body receive the influent spirits and heat.
Next to it the Liver, which furnishes the whole body with aliment, namely
blood; afterward the Stones; then the Brain, the shop of Animal spirits; last
the Stomach, the place for the first Concoction.

Concerning the Temperament of several parts, The Temperament of the parts of
the body. The Hot Parts.
the most Temperate is the skin; especially that in the Palm of the hand, to
which as to the mean, the other parts being compared, tend to heat, cold,
drowth or moisture.

The Hot parts are the Heart, of all the parts the hottest, the Fountain of
native heat, and Closet of vital spirits. Also the Liver, flesh of the Muscles,
Spleen, Reins, Lungs, Veins and Arteries, Fat also and fatness.

The Cold, are Bones, Gristles, Ligaments, Tendons, Nerves, Cold.
Membranes, Spinal Marrow, the Brain.

The Moist parts are Fat, the marrow of the bones, the Brain, Moist.
the marrow of the back, the Duggs, the Stones, the Lungs, the Spleen, Reins,
flesh of Muscles, the Tongue, Heart and softer Nerves.

The Dry, are Bones, Gristles, Ligaments, Tendons, Membranes, Dry.
Arteries, Veins, hard Nerves.

There is a certain difference of Temperaments in man's body by reason of Sex
and Age: As for what belongs to Sex, The Temperament of Sex.
Females are colder then Males, as having contracted a colder nature from their
principles of generation, lest that the blood necessary for future generation
by a stronger heat should be consumed.

The Temperament is also changed according to age; to wit, The Temperament of
ages.
the age which is principally ordained for certain internal changes by heat and
moisture. Authors for the most part divide man's life into three ages,
Childhood, Manly-age, and Old Age; or Youthful, Age of perfection,
Declination; or if you please, into the first, middle, and last age; to which
differences other ages, spoken of by Authors, may be referred.

The first age therefore is our Infancy, which remains till the seventh year;
the second our Childhood, which for the most part continues to the fourteenth
year of our age: then our youthful age from the fourteenth to the five and
twentieth, when our growth for the most part in stature cease. And sometime
Hippocrates in his first Book of Aphorisms and fourteenth chap. accounts these
ages before mentioned, ages of growth. From thence to the five and thirtieth is
our manly of flourishing age; from thence to the forty eighth year is our prime
or most principal age, then begins old age; which has its degrees also, for
each age has its Temperament, Infants and Boys are hot and moist; youthful age
is most Temperate, and obtains the most convenient temper for humane actions;
the flourishing manly age, or prime Viril age is hot and dry; lastly old age by
reason of the wasting of the Radical moisture, and defect of the promigenial
Innate heat is cold and dry; and by how much the older, by so much the colder
and dryer.

CHAP. V. Of Innate Heat.
THat those things may the better be understood which we spoke concerning
Temperaments, Innate heat.
we will say something of primigenial heat; for these things are the chief
Instruments of the Vegetative soul. By the innate heat we do not understand
that heat which belongs to the mixed body, as mixed; but that heat which is
proper to living Creatures; the which with the radical moisture is the next and
immediate subject and domicil of the Soul, diffused through all the parts of
the body. Nor by heat and moisture do we understand the bare quality, but the
quality, with the Subject; to wit, a body hot and moist; the matter namely or
Subject wherein heat is, and the quality from whose predominancy the Subject
has its name; to wit, the most pure, subtle, and hottest portion of the
similar parts, and especially of the Spermatick parts. This heat is otherwise
called both by Physicians and Philosophers, by the name of the within seated
spirit, or the native spirit; and it is more conveniently called, the within
seated spirit, then the innate heat. For although in all the substance be hot;
The Innate heat.
yet heat is not sensibly perceived in all bodies, but only in living
Creatures, and the more perfect of them, which by touching are perceived to be
hot.

This Innate heat consists of three things, Whereof the Innate heat consists.
which make up its ^ssence, Radical moisture, the within seated spirit, and
heat; hence ^ernelius defines it to be the Primigenial humidity spread ^rough
all the body, by the innate heat and spirit. And these ^ree, Heat, Spirit, and
Moisture are linked together by the nearest conjunction in the world; for since
that heat ought to be (as it were) Governor and Ruler of our lives, it is
only of an aericus or spi^^ual nature, and so by it self moveable and
separable, or apt to be dispersed, it could not subsist alone, but that life
might be prolonged, (...) ought to subsist in a more stable, moist and durable
body, more ^ermanent; namely, not a thin and watery body, but a fat and oily
body which is inserted within the fibers of the similar parts, and is called
the radical moisture.

Concerning the nature and original of the innate spirit and heat, Of the
original and nature of the Innate heat.
there is a great controversy amongst Physicians and Philosophers, and it is
disputable, whether it be Elementary, or of another nature; And although in
such an obscure thing, since very learned men disagree, it be very hard to
determine any thing, yet I think theirs to be the more probable opinion, who
consent with Aristotle in his second Book of Generation of living Creatures,
and third Chapter; That Innate heat is not Elementary, nor has its original
from fire or other Elements; nor yet is it of a Heavenly nature, but
proportionable to the stability of Stars. For every specifical form requires
its peculiar domicil and proper subject, and the more noble form requires the
more noble habitation, and a more Divine power then Elementary, requires a more
noble manfion then a body that is composed of Elements.

Moreover, more noble actions, The subsect of the Innate heat.
and Sympathy and Antipathy are in it, which purely from Elements cannot
proceed; and again this Innate heat and inborn Spirit, in many Plants is
preserved in winter time, and in the midst of frosts safe and secure; Moreover
this Innate heat, and radical moisture is founded in the parts which are
fashioned in the first generation of an embryon; but the greatest plenty of it
is in the heart, which from thence is called by Galen, the fire-fewel of the
Innate heat.

This inborn heat, is the chiefest instrument of the soul, The use of the
Innate heat.
by which it perfects, undergoes all the actions of life and whatsoever healthy
thing in us, and profitable in generation, in nutriment, or in expulsion of a
disease, is performed by that. From this benefit and excellency of Innate heat,
The Innate soul is not a soul.
some have taken it and the Soul for the same thing, and have called it the
Essence of the vital faculty; the faculty governing us, the substance of the
soul, and the Author of all our actions; but since the Innate heat is neither
the soul, nor the chief cause of our actions, it is only the chief instrument
in performing the actions of the soul, in operation, which is not corporal.

This Innate heat does not remain always the same, The changing of the innate
heat
but is changed in the course of our age. For at our first coming into the
world, it is most, and age increasing, the radical moisture wasted by degrees,
and dries up. So that in the end the radical moisture being clearly gone, the
heat also wanting wherewithal to support it self, goes out, and a natural
death follows.

CHAP. VI. Of Spirits.
BUT although every part of the body have this heat innate in it yet that alone
suffices not to undergo all actions, Influent Spirits.
but requires heat and spirits flowing from elsewhere; by which it may be
stirred up and cherished; for by it self it has no power to perform all
actions, but soon languisheth, and so is scattered and vanishes, except it be
daily stirred up, nourished, and strengthened by the spirits of the principal
parts, especially the heart.

Although the name of Spirit may admit of various significations yet in this
place it is taken for the purest, What the influent spirit is.
finest, thinnest, hottest, most moveable body, proceeding from the most purest
and subtilest part of the blood; and although the name of Spirit be attributed
to the Innate heat, yet it especially belongs to those that are most fluent and
moveable. The Use of Spirits.
These Spirits are the bond by which the body and soul are united, and the
chief instrument of performing our actions, and being wrought in the principal
parts of the body are conveyed through their channels into the whole body, and
are joined with the Innate heat, that they may help the powers and faculties to
perform their actions. Spirits are not the Vehicle of the faculties.
But that is false which some teach, That the Spirit is the Vehicle of the
faculties, and that the faculties and power of performing, are carried by these
Spirits from the principal parts; for the faculties of the soul are unseparable
proprieties, and the soul is fitted with its faculty in all its parts, nor does
it take them from any other parts, but there uses them, where it has fit
instruments.

These Spirits are of three sorts, Spirits how many forts.
Natural, Vital, Animal. The Natural are generated in the Liver, and are said
to flow from thence into all the parts of the body; but although the name of
Spirit may in some measure be attributed to the most thin and subtle parts of
the blood, which oftentimes comes forth out of the Veins with the blood: yet
there is not a little difference betwixt them and the other Spirits, properly
so called; The natural Spirit.
and so properly does not deserve the ^^me of Spirits, as the rest do, since
they are not the proper instru^ents of our actions, nor the bond of the soul,
which uniteth it ^^th the body, and is not generated in any peculiar cavity as
the ^^ital Spirits are. Its use.
The use of the Natural Spirits are to strengthen ^^e Innate Spirit in all its
parts, that it may supply the Vital Spirits ^^th matter, and may serve for the
more convenient distribution of blood through the Veins.

The Vital Spirit is generated in the heart, The Vital Spirits whence generated.
of the thinnest and purest blood, or the natural Spirit, commonly so called,
and aer, by h^^p of respiration drawn, and by the dilatatian of the Arteries in
the left Ventricle of the heart, and being there freed from all fuliginous
vapors is distributed through the Arteries into all the parts of the body; but
the Blood out of which this Spirit is generated, for the most part is conveyed
through the arterious vein, from the right Ventricle of the heart into the
Lungs, and from thence with aer drawn by breathing in is carried through the
arterious vein into the left Ventricle of the heart. Their Uses
Now this Spirit with its innate heat in the heart, is not only the chief
instrument of the actions of the heart, but is distributed through the Arteries
into the whole body, and stirs up, cherishes, increases, and strengthens
the innate heat in all the parts, and does, as it were, give action and
perfection thereunto, whence it is called by some, the Influent heat; besides
which it affords matter fit for the generation of the animal spirits.

Thirdly, The Animal Spir^t.
there are Animal spirits really different from the Vi^^l, for they are
generated in a peculiar place, namely the Brain, and ^om thence through
peculiar Channels, to wit Nerves, are disper^d over the whole body; nor can the
Vital Spirit perform what the Animal can, fince it is a living part, orespread
with a Vital Spirit. Nevertheless being touched may be deprived of sense and
motion ^^rough the defect of the Vital Spirit. They are generated of the ^urest
part of that blood, Where and whence generated.
which is contained in the comers or ca^ities of the brain, which comes from
the mixed vein and artery, and is orespread with the vital and natural Spirit,
the purest part ^eing poured out through little branches and small furrows in
the ^bstance of the brain; for in this, and not in the Ventricles of the brain,
the purest and most subtle part of the blood is changed into animal spirits.
Its Uses.
The Animal Spirit serves for the use of living ^^eatures; namely to perform
internal and external senses; as al^^, it serves for motion in Animals, and its
presence occasioneth ^he faculty of the soul, actually to perform the
operations of the ^nternal and external senses, and it perfecteth animal
motion, and ^an occasion local motion.

CHAP. VII. Of the natural constitution of Organick parts, and the common Unity
of parts alike, and not alike, called similar and dissimilar parts.
THe natural Constitution of the Organick parts, The natural constitution of
the Organick parts.
consist ^^ the due composition, and a convenient knitting of the (...) milar
parts into one form, fit and profitable for action for making up whereof these
things ensuing are necessary.

First, Their Number.
a certain number of the parts compounding, which in some are less, others
more, according as the instrument are more or less compounded, till at length
there is made up a perfect instrument, which can perform perfect actions.

Secondly, Magnirude.
a due magnitude of the parts compounding, being neither bigger nor lesser then
they ought.

Thirdly, Conformation.
due framing: which comprehends first a convenien^ figure; secondly, cavities
and pores, that in case a part be no^ solid, but porous, it may contain the
just number and magnitude of those pores; thirdly, a certain disposition of the
secundary qualities, namely, that some parts may have a sharp superficies, some
parts light, others heavy, some soft, others hard, some colored others not;
light color, or dark color, according as the nature and use of the part
requires: Site and connection.
Fourthly, situation and connection, that every part may be in its own place,
and may agree with others. Lastly, it is requisite that there be a common
unity, a^ well of parts alike, as disalike, which is a coherence and growing
together of diverse bodies into one; Unity.
which if it be wanting and taken away, the natural action is hindered.

CHAP. VIII. Of the faculties of the Soul, and of the differences of actions i^
man's body.
AFter that we have showed wherein health consists, The actions and differences
of the faculties of the mind.
and what i^ requisite for the performing of actions, now we are to explain^
what are the differences of the faculties of the mind, and of actions in a body.

Physicians (whom we here follow) divide Actions (for their purpose) into
Natural, Vital, and Animal, according to the three principal members, the
Liver, Heart, and Brain, by which all Actions in the body are governed. For
Physicians purposes are not the same with Philosophers, to inquire or search
the kind^ or differences of Souls of living creatures, which appears by the
di^^inct manners of life, which is in Plants, in brute beasts, living
^treatures, and man, but only ought to find out in man the dif^erences of
actions, whose actions it is their business to preserve, and if offended to
restore; and moreover a Physician does not so much consider the faculties
themselves, which hurt not, as the Organs and instruments, and then distinguish
actions according to the differences of them.

CHAP. IX. Of the Natural faculty; and first of Nutrition, and Augmentation.
THat we may begin with the natural faculty, The principal natural faculties.
I mean the Natural faculty so called peculiarly by Physicians, (for as it is
taken generally it is opposed to preternatural, and so the Vital and Ani^mal
faculties may be called Natural;) The Natural faculty by the Philosophers, is
called a growing or flourishing power. All its actions tend to the preservation
of its kind, or else of the Individuals of its species. Now to the preservation
of its individuals belongs Nutrition, and Augmentation, to the preservation of
its kind Generation belongs.

The nourishing faculty whose action is called Nutrition, Nutrition, or
alteration.
is that which turns aliment into the substance of the body living, and
restores what is taken away, and performs this work during all ones life time.

The faculty increasing whose action is called Augmentation is, Augmentation.
that which extends the body to its due and just bigness, whose office is
most performed in our growing age, and is extended till it compleateth and
perfecteth its due magnitude.

The generating faculty whose action is called Generation is, Generation.
that by which man by his kind continues to perpetuity, which by Individuals
cannot be done.

And these three faculties being as it were the Princes, The servile faculties,
Attraction, Retention, Concoction, Expulsion.
have others as it were their servants added to them; The Attractive, the
Retentive, the Alterative or Digestive, the Expulsive.

The Attractive draws profitable nourishment to the parts; The Retentive,
reteins it so long there till it be digested. The Digestive alters aliment,
changes it, and renders it fitting for that which is living. The Expulsive
faculty rejects that as excrementitious, which is dull and unfit to be
converted into the substance of the body.

The Attractive, Retentive, and Expulsive faculties perform their actions
principally by the benefit of the fibers. Attraction is made by the right
fibers placed along the length of a member; Retention by the oblique or
flanting fibers; Expulsion by those that pass overthwart; but Digestion or
Concoction are performed by the Heat of the member. But in the other parts of
the body, the same faculties want not the help of the fibers, but perform their
operations only by the help of the Innate heat which is in each part.

But although aliment in nourishing be in a capacity to be like to the body yet
actually it is unlike at the first; and therefore is changed by little and
little until it be rendered like to that into whose substance it is to be
turned, which is performed by several Concoctions.

Concoction is either private, One Concoction is public, another private.
and is appointed only for nourishment and use of the part where it is made;
or public, which is made for the common use of the whole body. That is made in
the several parts: this in the Stomach, Liver, and Spleen. Hence there is
commonly accounted three Concoctions necessary for nourishment of the body: The
first is that which is made in the Stomach, the second in the Liver, from which
that of the Spleen is not to be excluded; the third in the several parts of the
body. There are other actions which pass through the Fabric of the whole
body, such as that of the Vital spirits in the Heart, the Animal in the Brain,
and that of milk in the Duggs, the generation of seed in the Stones, unless you
will refer this to the Generative faculty; not by reason of the part wherein it
is generated, but by reason of the end for which it was instituted (namely)
public use.

The first Concoction is made in the Stomach, The first Concoction is made in
the Stomach.
which first prepares Nutriment for the whole body: To which for this reason,
not only the power of Concoction, but also a double Appetite is given;
Natural, by which it desires nourishment necessary for it self; Animal, by
which it requires nutriment for the whole body. The Natural Appetite does not
sensibly want nutriment; Appetite twofold. Natural. Animal.
but as the other part by a natural instinct requires and draws nutriment. But
the Animal Appetite has an exquisite sense joined to this desire, living in
the upper Orifice of the Stomach, by which it can perceive not only its own
wants, but the wants of all the body besides. For after the whole body is
emptied, it draws out of the Veins, and the Veins which require to be filled
again, suck upward again from the Stomach, and their sucking is again received
in the Orifice of the Stomach, The first preparation of meat. in the mouth.
whence arises the Animal Appetite, which is twofold, Hunger and Thirst. But
before Food descend into the Stomach, it is first prepared in the mouth, where
it is chewed into pieces by the teeth, moistened by the spittle and by the heat
of the mouth, and of the tunicle which is common both to the Ventricle and the
mouth, it is altered by attraction.

The meat chewed and so altered in the mouth by the motion of the tongue, is
sent down through the gullet into the stomach, which by the help of the oblique
fibers is there retained and imbrace^, until by the Digestive faculty and
proper heat of the stomach and the ad^acent heat it be changed into one form
and masle, not unlike to the scum of Ptisan, and is called Chyle. Meat being
taken, The Chyle.
that ani^nal appetite cease, or hunger and thirst cease, to wit the
twitching and plucking for want of Aliment cease; but the natural appetite is
not satisfied, except perfectly nourished and refreshed with the blood of its
own body. The Chyle generated in the stomach is sent down through its lower
orifice into the first guts, by which, with their digestive force which they
have by reason of their community with the stomach, is here somewhat wrought
and perfected.

But seeing that all nourishment is proper for nourishing certain parts of the
body; Nature in this concoction separates nourishment, The excrement of the
first concoction twofold: thick.
whence their arises a double sort of Excrements, the one thin, the other
thick. The thick which is called the ordure of the paunch, whilst the Guts
contract themselves up by the circular or transverse fibers, and the Muscles
coming in the Guts by the paunch, the paunch is pressed and the siege is thrust
out, and voided through it. The other thin and watery which is not forthwith
sent out through the paunch, but continues mixed with the chyle, Watery.
that it may the more easily pass through the narrow Veins of the Mesentery,
of the Port and of the Liver, afterward it is separated by the veins and
expelled by Urine.

The Chyle being separated in the Guts from the thicker dregs, is drawn by the
Meseraick Veins, and is somewhat altered by them, The second concoction in the
Liver.
and first it receives the rudiments of blood, and hence it is carried to the
branches of the gate Vein, and Liver; and there by the innate heat and power of
the Liver is turned into blood, which action is Sanguification, or turning into
blood. The Liver reteins a part of this so gotten blood, that it may by it be
nourished, the rest through the hollow Vein, in which some part of it is
hitherto retained and perfected, it distributes it through the whole body.

That the purer blood may be generated in the Liver, the Spleen draws to it
self from the trunk of the Meseraick Veins, The use of the Spleen.
before the Chyle be carried to the Liver by an inbred faculty through the
splenick branch of the gate Vein, the more earthy and thicker part of the
Chyle, and generates blood, though not so good blood, yet fit and proper for
its own nourishment, and for the nourishment o^ the more ignoble parts of the
lower Ventricle, that thereby the pun^ and better part of the Chyle may be
drawn through the branch (...) the right side of the gate Vein, called the
Mesentery to the Liver and there purer blood might be generated; and so in one
work the Spleen serves to cleanse the blood from dreggs and generate worser
sort of blood; For the Spleen is not appointed only for the drawing and
evacuating the Melancholy blood from the Liver. The beginning of the Splenick
branch, which arises not out of the Liver but the gate Vein; The Symptoms of
Diseases in the Splee^ do show the constitution of it to be near that of the
Liver, and the^ is a connection of the Spleen with the stomach by Vessels. But
the which cannot be turned into blood by the Spleen, by convenien^ passages is
evacuated, and the thick and dreggish matter for the most part is sent through
the paunch, either with the excrements o^ without them through the Haemerod
Veins, and trunk of the gat^ Vein; yet sometimes it is evacuated by Urine. The
acqueous matte^ most commonly is drawn through the Splenick arterics to the
Vein^ and purged out there; yet sometimes that also is expelled by the paunch,
by sweats, by the stomach.

In Sanguification in the Liver, two excrements are generated Yellow Choler and
Urine. The excrements of the second concoction. Yellow choler.
The Yellow Choler is gathered into the bladder of the Gall, and from thence
the most part is sent into the Guts, and the sharpness of it stirs up the
expulsive faculty to do its office, to stir the dreggs of the paunch, and is
cast out with the ordure. But the serous matter and the aqueous humor is drawn
by the Veins, through the emulgent vessels, and is transmitted through the
Ureters to the bladder; Urine.
by which afterward it is cast out, and is called Urine.

The Urine therefore consists, first of aqueous and potulent matte^ sent with
the Chyle to the Liver, but unprofitable to nourish the body, Urine consists of
three things.
afterward of a clammy or salt excrement of blood, and thirdly of natural
contents in sound bodies, but in bodies diseased of many other things which are
mingled with the Urine. And so Urine is properly called an excrement of the
second concoction, to wit, wherein the serous part of Urine is separated from
blood, and mixed with potulent matter, affords Urine.

Blood thus separated and cleansed from its excrements, The parts of the mass
of blood.
nevertheless is said to contein in it self many humors; Nor is that mass of
blood so elabourated and wrought in the Liver, and contained in the Hollow Vein
plainly Homogeneal or of the same kind, but some parts in it are Temperate,
others colder, others hotter, others dryer, others moister; The most Temperate
in its kind is called blood, the hotter and dryer part by reason of its
consanguinity with choler is called Choleric blood, the colder and moister is
called Pituitous blood, the colder and dryer is called Melancholy blood. Yet
all these parts of blood are contained under the form or essence of blood, and
are profitable for the nourishment of the body. Nor do the humors in a sound
body constitute a mass of excrementitious blood, neither in the Veins of a man
most healthy are these humors Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, acounted excrements.

Hence arises the decision of the question, whether our body's be nourished by
blood only, or by the four humors; For when Aristotle Tays that animals that
have blood in them are nourished by blood only, he intended the whole mass of
blood; but Physicians when they say that our bodies are nourished, not only by
blood but by other humors, by blood they understand the most temperate part of
blood, or one part of the mass of blood, and this they would have, that not
only that part, but the rest of the mass, to be profitable for the nourishment
of the body. But that our bodies are nourished by excrementitious humors, no
man in his wits ever said. The third concoction.


The blood being perfected in the Liver, is distributed through the branches of
the Hollow Vein over the whole body, to nourish it and all its parts: That
change by which it is assimilated to other parts, is called the third
concoction, which is performed by the innate heat, in each part. Four secondary
humors.
In this concoction the blood before it assimilates the parts, receives some
external dispositions, and is changed into four humors called secondary humors.
The first is called Innominate, or without a name, The first In nominate.
when the blood passes through the capillar Veins, and admits of a sensible
mutation by reason of the heat of the external parts, and in the Spermatick
parts turns white, in the fleshy parts remains red. 2 The second is Dew, The
second Dew.
namely that blood which passes without the orifice of the Veins. 3 The third
is called Glue, The third Glue. The fourth is cambium or exchange. The
excrements of the third concoction twofold; thick, thin.
because while it is still more concocted it becomes clammy and thick. 4 The
fourth is called dry Exchange which turns into the substance of the part, and
exchangeth and changes its nature with it.

This third concoction has also its excrements; one thick, to wit filthiness
in the skin, which is collected in the garments, also in the brain, eyes, and
ears; the other thin, which is dissolved by insensible transpiration, sometimes
also it is evacuated by sweat. For although all things are rightly performed in
the body, and the nourishment be well concocted, and moreover nothing external
and violent befall the body, as Baths, Heat, Violent exercises, no sweat pass
through the skin in the night; yet because even in the most healthy all things
are not ever exactly performed, and many deviate from their best condition as
to health, and moreover many errors are committed in diet; Nature uses to
expel such superfluities by sweats.

Another office of the natural function is Augmentation or increasing,
Augmentation.
by which man's body, out of nourishment taken and assimilated to the parts, is
extended in all its dimensions, and acquires magnitude convenient to perform
actions. Nutrition and Augmentation how they differ.
Although this function arises from the same soul with nutrition, and is
perfected with the same Instrument, Innate Heat; has the same matter out of
which it proceeds, blood; the same subject, a living body; yet it arises from
another efficient determinate cause, to wit, from the increasing faculty; it
differs in form, which in nutrition is a coagulation of aliment, but in
augmentation there is a motion of Extension of the whole and of every part
thereof; it differs also in regard of the end, which in Nutrition is only a
restoration of that which is taken away; but in Augmentation an acquiring or a
getting of a greatet magnitude to exercise perfectly all the necessary actions
of our life; and lastly in time, for Nutrition dureth the whole time of our
lives, Augmentation to a certain time in our life. For man as other living
creatures does not always grow, but to the certain time of his age; which
comes not to pass by reason of the soul, which always reteins its force and
strength, but by reason of the body, especially of the bones, which in process
of tims are so hardened, that they are not apt to any farther extension of
growth.

CHAP. X. Of Generation.
BUT since man although he be nourished, cannot live perpetually and in
individuals, as other living Creatures also cannot endure to perpetuity; The
generative power.
the generative power is granted and given by the Creator of all things, that
mankind might be preserved, and the third kind of Natural actions is
Generation, which by ejaculation of seed begets his like. For although this
faculty and Action be common to plants, yet in man and other more perfect
Creatures it requires greater preparation, and distinction of sex, as male and
semale concur in Generation, and it is necessary that both of them do some way
help and conduce to Generation, and the male not in himself but in another, The
distinction of Sexes. The instruments of generation.
but the foemale in her self does generate. For the male ejaculates his
prolifique sperm into the female womb, which mingled with hers, is cherished by
the same, it is also nourished, and retained until it has the shape of a
perfect man. For which purpose the Creator has made necessary Instruments for
both Sexes, for the male Testicles, Vessels preparing, and conducting sperm,
and a yard necessa^y to ejaculate it into the part most fit to receive it, for
the Females, Stones, seminary vessels, and the womb.

There are two principles which concur to the Generation of a Child, the seed
of the male and female, and the menstruous blood. The Principles of generation.
Seed.
The seed is a body hot and moist, and full of that divine Spirit of the first
Principles (or Elements,) and proportionable to the Quintessence or Element
whereof Stars were made, fit for the propagation of the Soul, and generation of
a living Creature like it self; and is getherated in the Stones, whither the
purest part of the blood and Spirits, and heat, is sent through the Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves, from the remote parts of the body, and is changed into a
white frothy or slimy matter; The male and female seed both confer, seeing the
same Instruments are appointed (by nature) for generating and semitting of
sperm, and the same cause efficient, and the same ^matter in each; for the
forms of each alike do manifest themselves in the offspring, Blood.
although the power and force be greater in the male then the female. But the
menstruous blood is only the material principle; wherefore it is ordered by the
Creator, that at the time when semales are apt and fit for procreation; which
for the most part is from the fourteenth till the five and fortieth year of
their age, that blood which the other parts wants not, each month is sent to
the womb to supply what may be wanting for a little one, or if the female be
not great, may be by it evacuated. Menstruous blood.
This menstruous blood of it self is not offensive, nor is it expelled because
it is hurtful, but because it abounds in quantity; but when it becomes
pernicious, it is by reason of its remaining too long in the body and by its
comixture with other humors.

The forming of the young is caused by the Soul, The formation of the young.
which is in the seed, and there shows it self in two actions, in putting life
into the conception, and forming of all the parts: and the Soul, as Scaliger
writes out of Themistius, is its own architect, which builds a convenient
domicill for its own habitation; But it receives this power from the Creator,
whose Instruments and hands as it were the Souls are, and he has given this
energy to them at the Creation of them, then which nothing can be more
wonderful to be thought on.

The Generative faculty, has two others whereby it performs its Office; The
Alterative and Formative. The Alterative. The Formative.
The Alterative is that which changes the generative matter into the substance
of the young, and all its parts; the formative is that which Forms all the
members and gives them their quantity, figure, number, place, and the rest. The
Instrument, which the Soul and formative power uses, is the formative or
plastic heat, or that Spirit proportionable to the Element of the Stars, for
the seeds being received into the womb are mingled together, retained,
cherished, and the power which lies hidden in the seed is stirred up by the
innate heat of the womb, and then a Conception is said to be made, Conception.
and then begins a sending forth of the instruments of the body to be made, and
then is it called a Conception, which commonly is said to continue til the
seventh day.

But first of all, The order of frameing. Firs the membrances, whereof are
framed two. Chorion, Amnios. The Secondine. The Spermatick parts are described
together. Theumbilisall vessels. The Veins belonging to the Navel. Two
Artcries. Urachus. The time of formation.
the membranes about the Child are formed, by which the seed is shut in, and
the Spirit and heat thereof is covered, and as it were entrenched. They are two
in number, the first is called Chorion, and covers the whole Child, and is
fastened to the vessels belonging to the Navel, and by their intervening the
whole cleaves to the womb: the other coare does immediately cover the Child
and is called Amnios. These two coats in the birth seem to be one as it were,
and come forth after the Child, and are therefore called the Afferbirth.

But the solid and Spermatick parts shall be explained in the first place, and
afterward according to their nobleness, and as necessity requires, the rest
shall be perfectly shown.

The Infant in the womb does not take that nourishment, which it receives by
the mouth, but from the Mother, for the receiving whereof there are appointed
by nature four vessels belonging to the Navel; namely a Vein which is a branch
which comes from the Gate-vein, which is as it were the infants nurse, two
Arteries branches arisen from the Iliak Vein, by which the Infant breaths
(although later Authors, who teach us that the vital Spirits by which the Child
breaths proceed not from the Mother, but from the Child's own heart, do assign
another use to the said Iliak branches; to wit, that the Vital Spirits should
be carried from the heart of the Child to the exterior parts thereof, namely
the Secondines) and the Urine-passage which is carried from the bottom of the
bladder unto the Navel.

The time from the conception to the bringing forth, Physicians divide into two
parts; the first is called the time of formation, from the conception till the
time when first the Child begins to move; the second the time of adorning,
which is the time from its motion till its coming forth. Of adorning.
Hippocrates in his book of the Nativity of a Child, makes the time of Females
formation to be two and forty days, but males thirty days, which is to be
conceived from their more imperfect formation; but afterward nature more
elaborately frames the parts, which are not framed in males till three months,
nor in females till the fourth month.

When all the members are framed and rendered more firm, the Infant begins to
spring and kick, in males in the third, in females in ^e fourth month as it is
commonly reported, so that the time of ^rmation being doubled is the time of
quickening, The time of motion.
the time of mo^^on being trebled is the time of bringing forth. Yet one
quickening (...) more obscure, another more manifest, which about the middle of
time of a Woman's going with Child, as all Women commonly persuade themselves,
is first perceived.

The time that Women go with Child although it be uncertain and various; yet
for the most part, The time of birth.
it is nine months end or the beginning of the tenth month, that a natural
birth happens: for the most part such Children as live come into the World at
that time, and that time for humane birth is most natural. But before half a
years time experience tells us, that a Child can hardly be brought forth and
live; and if it so happen that before the scaventh month be ended, a Child be
borne and live, it is a great rarity and very strange. But in the seventh
month because the perfection is finished of all the parts, the Child may live,
and especially, which, as Hippocrates in his book of beginnings says, is of two
hundred and ten days, that is, about the end of the seventh month brought
forth. But Hippocrates says that a Child borne in the eighth month cannot live.
Yet others say, that some that are borne in the eighth month may live. After
the tenth month, the Child being great wants nourishment and room to be in,
although we read some are delivered after the tenth month, yet that is seldom.
The time of legitimate birth.
For a legitimate birth (according to the Law of Nature) is then when there is
not room enough for the Child to live and move in, nor aliment enough to
satisfy him, for then it is time to shake off his shackles those tunicles, and
endeavor to make away for its own birth, and the Mother finds pains, and the
womb strives to put out that bagg, and by its expulsive faculty sends forth the
young, which thing the Voluntary endeavor of the mother much helps, which is
done by her contracting her Spirits, and depression of her Midriff and
squeesing the muscles of the paunch.

CHAP. XI. Of the Vital Faculty.
THE Vital faculty which Physicians call the second faculty, although some
would refer it to the Animal, The Vital faculty differs from the other
faculries.
some to the Natural faculty, and others think it to be mixed of them both; Yet
since it differs not only from those actions, which are performed by the
natural and Animal faculties, but also goes forth by its own organs, nor does
it move hither and thither by the assistance of the Animal Spirits, but by its
own proper Spirits, which from thence are called Vital Spirits, it is
deservedly to be esteemed a peculiar faculty, di^^inct from the Vegetable and
Animal faculties.

There are three sorts of Vital faculties, Its actions are three.
and so many motions of the heart wherein they relide. The first is the
generation of the Vital Spirit and heat; The second is the Pulse; The third is
the Irascible faculty.

The first to wit, Generation of Vital Spirits. A Pulse. Its definition. Of
Dilating. Of Contracting.
is the generation of the Vital Spirits, and influent heat; The second, without
the which the first cannot perform its office is the Pulse, namely the motion
of the heart and of the Arteries, consisting in dilating and contracting, that
so the Vital Spirits may be generated and distributed, and the natural heat may
be preserved in its natural harmony: By Dilatation the heart is filled, and
attracts to its self air, with blood from the right Ventricle, by the Venous
Artery (which goes from thence to the heart) and attracts from the lungs air
and blood by help of the Arterial Vein into the left Ventricle of the heart;
for the generation and refreshing, and restoration of the Vital Spirits and
heat. By the Systole or Contraction of the Heart, it distributeth the Vital
Spirits and Arterious blood through and by the help of the great Artery into
the whole body, and sends the fuliginous excrements to the Lungs by the
Arterial Vein. In like manner the Dilatation of the Artery through its little
Orifices, terminating in the skin, attracts to it self ambient air to form and
cool its heat; the Orifices that are terminated near the Heart, draw from it
the hottest and thinnest blood, full of Vital Spirit; But as the mouths of the
Arteries with the Orifices of the Veins, do draw the purest and finest Spirits
to fostet and cherish their heat, but by Contraction they exp^l fuliginous
excrements, which action is called a steaming through or transpiration, which
is made through the hidden Pores of the skin, and by the Latins is called
Transpiratio.

In the third place the Irascible faculty belongs to the Vital faculty, The
Irascible faculty.
from whence, Anger, Joy, Fear, Sadness, and terror, and other passions of the
mind arise. And that its residence is in the Heart is most evident, because the
motion of the Heart and the Pulse of the Arteries are most evidently changed in
the passions of the mind.

Respiration is also added to the Vital faculty as principally necessary to
further its action, Breathing.
and has the same end and purpose, as the Pulse has, and is instituted for
the benefit of the Heart. It is performed principally by the Lungs, and the
Lungs are as it were the fan or bedows of the Heart, and are the primary
Instruments of breathing, and are endued with a peculiar power of moving
themselves, even as the Heart is, differing only from the Animal faculty. Nor
are the Lungs moved only by the motion of the breast, but by their proper force
and power. The motion fo the Lungs.
And although the motion of the Lungs and Breasts are made together; yet
neither are the cause of the others motion, but they therefore move together,
because they conspire to bring one end to pass: for the Lungs are st^e^ched
that air may come into them, as into a pair of bellows drawn wid^, and are so
much dilated and extended, as the dilating of the B^east will give way to; and
on the other side the Breast is dilated more or less, as there is more or
less air to be drawn in

As the Pulse consists of two motions Dilatation and Contraction, A twofold
motion of respiration. Inspiration, Ex^^iration.
so Respiration is performed by a doub^e motion, Inspiration, and xspiration.
By inspiration, the Lungs and Breast being ex^ended the air by the mouth and
nostrils is drawn in: by expiration the Lungs and Breast being contracted, the
hotter air and fuliginous vapors are sent forth at the mouth and nostrils.

CHAP. XII. Of the Animal Faculty, and first of the external senses.
THE Third sort of faculties and actions in man, The Animal faculty.
Physicians call Animal faculties, which either are resident in the brain, or
derived from it, and takes necessary helps or the p^rformance of its actions
from adjacent parts. They distingui^^ the Aminal faculties, into the sensitive,
motive, and Princes, and under the sensitive only the external senses are
comprehended; under the Princes, the internal and rational power is involved:
we will handle them in this order; first we will treat of the external senses,
afterward of the internal and rational faculties, at last of the appetite and
moving faculty. The external senses are five.


The external senses are those by which we perceive and judge sensible external
objects, without the precedence of any other faculty. But that a perception may
be made four things ought to concur, first the mind perceiving, secondly the
instrument which is double; first the Spirit, secondly the member, whe^ein the
sense is; thirdly the object or perceptible things, fourthly the medium
interceding betwixt the instrument and the object.

The external s^nses are five, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, The five
external senses. Seeing.
Touching or Feeling.

The Sight is an external sense, discerning and knowing by the benefit of the
Eye, the several kinds of visible things; whose adaequate Instrument is the
Eye; the Eye consists of diverse Tunicles, the adnate or conjunctive, the Horny,
the Grapy, in the middle whereof is a round hole, which is called the Pupil,
and is the inlet and window as it were of visible Species; then the Tunicle in
manner of a Net, the Pannicle without a name, the Cobweblike and the Vitreous
Membranes; three humors, the watery, Crystalline, and Vitreous; a nerve optic
and muscles. The object of sight is whatever is visible, to wit, colors, which
are visible in potentia, in that they are capable of being seen, but in action
to be visible light is required. The medium is any transparent and diaphanous
body.

Hearing is an external sense, Hearing.
perceiving by the benefit of the ear any sound that is audible; the adaequate
instrument, or that without which a sound cannot be heard is the Ear, but
especially as Galen teaches in his first Book and third Chapter, of the causes
of Symptoms, the term and exrremities of the Auditory Pores, where the end
being dilated, the Auditory Nerves receive part of the sound. The Object is
whatever is audible, or sound: the medium which it is conveyed through, is
water and air.

Smelling is an external sense discovering smells by the benefit of the Nose,
Smelling.
or mammillary processes. Its adaequate instrument are the Nostrils, but
principally the mammillary processes; Its object odours, the medium by which
odours are conveyed, is air, and water.

Taste is an external sense, Tasting.
perceiving savours by help of the tongue; Its proper Instrument is the Tongue,
a thin flesh soft and spungy, like to no other part of the body; the Object is
savours, the medium a spongy skin, or porous cover of the Tongue, and spitly
moisture.

Touch lastly is an external sense, Feeling.
discovering by the benefit of a membrane all Tangible bodies. But though the
skin be the chiefest instrument of the sense of feeling, and covers the whole
body, that it may descry external objects and injuries happening to the body,
and the skin in the hand be the chiefest rule to try all tangibles: yet there
is no adaequate Instrument of touch; since it is more largely diffused, and
other parts are likewise endued with that sense. But the adaequate organ that
is of touch is a membrane; For wheresoever a membrane is there may be a touch,
and wheresoever a membrane is not, there cannot be a touch, and the skin it
self obtains that whereby it is sensible, as it participates of the fibers and
little membranes of the Nerves.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Internal Senses.
THE Internal Senses are those, The Internal Senses are three.
that are conversant about sensibles revealed by the external senses; and they
are three, according to the diversity of their functions and operations, which
are administered by them; The Common sense, the Fantasy and the Memory.

The common sense is an internal sense, The common sense.
perceiving all external objects by the help of the external senses, discerning
them asunder, judging of their absense, and bringing sensible Species to the
Phan^asie.

The Fantasy is an Internal sense, The Fantasy.
which considers more diligently, and longer retains the sensible Species
received from the common-sense, and those Species that are formed by it self.

The Memory is that which receives and retains the sensible Species, which
are known by the Fantasy, The Memory.
and when occasion requires exhibits and brings them forth again. But there
are two acts of the memory, the one is called by the name of the faculty of the
memory, the other is Reminiscence. The memory is a prompt apprehension or
repetition of any thing heretofore known and perceived, as it was perceived and
repeated and that readily. Reminiscence.
Reminiscence is that which out of the remembrance of one or more things spoken
of, by regression comes to remember that, which before could not come readily
into the mind.

The principle and immediate Instrument of all the internal senses, and of all
principal actions is the brain, which other things show, but this especially;
That if that be hurt these actions are hurt, and because that in curing these,
the remedies must be applied to the brain.

Now all these action are performed in the substance of the brain, nor are
those faculties distinguished by their seats or places in the brain, neither
are their distinct operations performed in distinct places of the brain. For
there is not sufficient reason given why the common sense should be seated in
the former part of the brain: for although it be the Center where all the
external senses meet and concur; yet the Nerves that are subservient to the
external senses, take not their beginning from the fore most part of the brain.
So no evident reason can appear to persuade why the Memory should be separated
from the Fantasy, and by consequence from the reasonable faculty; and why the
Fantasy in the former, the Rational in the middle, and the Memory in the
hinder part of the brain should be placed; for the Imagination and Memory are
conversant about the same things though after a different manner; But although
oftentimes one of these faculties being offended the others remain
unprejudiced, as oftentimes the Memory is lost, the imagination, and rational
faculties not hurt, and on the other side the apprehension and ratiocination
offended, and the Memory sound and perfect; yet that comes not so much to
pass through the diversaty of organs, parts of the brain from whence those
actions arise, as by the change of their proper dispositions, and of those
things which are required to perform those actions.

The affections of those senses hitherto explained are sleep and watchfulness.
The affections of the senses are two. Sleep.
Sleep is a cessation of the natural and commonsense, and of the external
senses ordained for the health of living Creatures, by detaining of the Animal
Spirits in the brain, and hindering them from flowing to the Instruments of
sense and motion. The causes that bring it to pass that the Animal Spirits
flying into the brain, are there detained, and are as it were smitten and
cease, are several, whereof some perform it by taking them away, as watching,
labor and other things in the like nature; or by rendering them less moveable
and, benumbed, or as others conceive by penning in, and stopping their way as
vapors ascending after taking of meat and drink, or as it were pleasingly and
contentedly stopping, inviting from motion to rest, which sweet melodies,
murmuring streams, gentle rocking and the like occasion; The end of sleep is
the refreshing and strengthening of the Spirits and external senses, by taking
away their motions and operations, and from hence comes a recovery of their
strength and vigor.

Watchfulness is opposed to sleep, Watching.
and it is nothing else but the efficacy or force of sense, or solution rather
of the senses, proceeding from the hinderance of the free flowing of the Animal
Spirits into all the members of the body. Man waketh or is stirred up out of
his sleep after a twofold manner; Either of his own accord, when concoction is
performed, the vapors that hindered the Spirits coming forth are discussed and
separated, or sharp vapors are carried to the brain and trouble the Amimal
Spirits, that they cannot freely flow into the instruments of the senses; or by
an external cause, when from a more violent external cause, as Clamor, or
touch, the sensitive faculty being stirred up converts its self to perceive.
Nor do the organs of the senses wholly want Animal Spirits in sleep, but some
stil^ remain in them, sufficient to discern more vehement objects.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Intellective Faculty.
AT length we come to the understanding or rational faculty, whereby a man is
elevated above other living Creatures, and is near to, and as it were like unto
his maker. The understanding abstracts things from their matter, and without
considerations of matter, without quantity, without figure, knows things,
undersands things freed from their matter; it is almost capable of
infi^iteness, it reflects back upon its self, and knows it self, and
understands that it does understand, and because of that it has an unatiable
desire of the knowledge of eternity and blessedness. It per^orms its functions
without all corporeal instruments; yet it has ^eed of the Fantasy as its
object to understand, and the Imagination supplies the mind with intelligible
matter; And therefore although it have not its seat in the brain, as in its
organ by it self; yet because it works by the help of the Fantasy, and it
behooves the understanding to watch the Imagination, by accident and by the
consequence its seat is appointed, where the imagination is, namely the brain.

The reasonable soul comprehends two faculties, The Understanding. The Will.
the Intellect whereby we apprehend things, and the Will whereby we are carried
to chose things which we understand under the notion of good; And things, as
they are beings, we know them; and as they are good, we desire them.

CHAP. XV. Of the desire and moving faculty.
BEsides the knowing faculty, Appetite twofold, sensitive; rational.
there is given to man an appetite and force of moving; The Object of man's
appetite is good, whether it be really so, or seemingly so. The appetite is
twofold, sensitive and rational: sensitive is that which desires that which
seems good to the senses, rational is that which desires that good, that seems
so to reason, and the motions of the sensitive faculty are often resisted by
the motions of the rational faculty, and there arises strife and discord
betwixt the sensitive and rational faculty. Out of the appetite, as its
actions, arise the affections and passions of the mind, as we call them.

Voluntary Animal motion follows the desire, Voluntary motion.
for after that an external object is brought by the external senses, and
common sense to the Fantasy, it is known as profitable, and acceptable, or as
hurtful, displeasing. Love, or hatred follows this knowledge, or the desire
of what is pleasing, and flight of what is displeasing. Motion presently
follows the desire in brute beasts, but in man there is t^^ Judgment of the
intellective faculty, which values what is truly go^ and what hurtful. The
motive faculty.
Then the motive faculty follows that motion which is commanded by the rational
or sensitive faculty, as the o^ or the other over-ruleth, by the contraction of
the muscles the ad^ quate Instruments of motion, which draw the tendons, these
t^ bones, and they being moved, the members and whole body is ca^ ried from
place to place, either to accept of what is grateful, or to resist and fly from
what is hurtful.

But although a muscle be the adaequate instrument of motion yet the chiefest
part of it consists of fibers or small strings, The Instrument of motion.
which being contracted, the muscle is contracted and motion performed Although
their are four different motions of the muscles, while^ they are contracted, or
extended, or moved transverse, or remai^ straight, as Galen says in his first
Book of the motion of muscles an^ eighth Chapter, or as others explain it,
contraction, conservation o^ contraction or tonick motion, relaxation, and
perseveration of relaxation: yet contraction only, to which tonick motion
belongs, is the proper action of the muscles; but extension which is a passion
rather then an action, is not the immediate cause of motion; for whilst a
muscle contracted by its opposite muscle is extended, it suffers, it does not
act.

THE SECOND BOOK.
PART I. OF DISEASES.
CHAP. I. Of the nature of a Disease.
WHereas we have hither treated of those things that are incident to the body
according to Nature, Thingspr^ter-natural how many.
and so have discoursed about health; now I will speak of those things that
are preter-natural or contrary to Nature, (for I do not intend to make any
distinction betwixt these) They are in number three, a Disease, the cause of a
Disease, and Symptoms: in the handling whereof the Pathological part of
Physic is delivered.

And first for what belongs to a disease; Although as the name of health is
generally attributed to all things that happen to a man according to nature, so
the name of a disease is given to all things that befall a man contrary to
nature, and those are said to be morbifick: yet if we may speak properly, these
three, a Disease, the cause of a Disease, and Symptoms, as they differ in the
thing, so they may be discerned by their names also.

But whereas a disease is conrrary to nature; The formal reason of a disease.
but health is that power of acting which is to be performed according to
nature: a disease is an impotency of performing natural actions; and as those
who are apt to do those things which are according to nature, are said to be
sound; so those are deservedly said to be sick, who are unapt to perform those
actions.

Moreover the Subject of a disease, as also of health, The Subject of a disease.
is only the living parts of a body, as being those to which alone a power of
undergoing natural actions is given; But all those things which are not in the
number of the living, as humors and other things, which are not able to perform
natural actions in a man, cannot be the subject of a disease.

The cause of a Disease or of impotency to perform actions, is an ill
constitution of the parts, The causes of a disease. The definition of a
disease. The Galenicall definition of a disease.
as the cause of health is a right disposition of the same.

Hence a Disease is defined to be an impotency of the living parts of man to
perform natural actions, arising from their constitution contrary to nature.

Although according to Galen also to be sick, is not to be able to operate, and
so this definition is not contrary to the sense of Galen: yet that out of the
definition of diseases, differences, and profitable observations may the better
be drawn, Galen retains the same terms of the definition, but places them
otherwise, and in the second Chapter of the differences of Diseases, defining a
Disease says; That a constitution of a vicious function contrary to nature is
the cause thereof, and in his first Chapter of the differences of Symptoms
calls it a disposition contrary to nature, by which action is hurt. Namely as
health is a certain quality, or harmony in the qualities in magnitude, number,
figure, and other things neceslary for the constitution of each part, by reason
whereof the body is disposed, and made fit to perform natural actions. So a
Disease is such a quality by reason of which the same body is rendered unfit to
perform the same actions. Diathesis what it is.
For the word Diathesis taken generally signifies every quality according to
which a man is well and ill disposed, whether it be easily or difficultly taken
away. And therefore as certain later Physicians will have it, A Disease is not
only a privation.
a Disease is not simply the want of health, and nothing positive, but such a
want as proceeds from a disposition contrary to that disposition, on which
health depends, which is wholly something positive, and when a part is wounded
or diminished, a quality and disposition is brought into it contrary to that
which was present there before in time of health: as a hand that is wounded, is
otherwise difposed then that which is well, and that which has four fingers,
otherwise then that which has five. In brief; a Disease consists not only in
privation of a good constitution, but in a contrary and vicious constitution.

CHAP. II. Of the differences of Diseases.
THE differences of Diseases are twofold; The Essential differences of
diseases.
Essential or Proper, which are taken from the essence it self of a disease,
and so agree to one kind that they cannot be common to another; or accidental,
which are taken from those things which follow the essence of a disease, and
from other circumstances. But because as it is said before, there is one natural
constitution of the similar parts, as they are such and another of the
organick, and a common Unity in them both: the regression from that natural
constitution of every one affords several kinds of Diseases.

First therefore, Diseases of the similar parts.
the proper Diseases of the similar parts are Diseases of Intemperature, when
that due proportion of the primary qualities is not observed, but when one does
excel the other three, or two overrule the other two, contrary to nature.

Moreover there are found in similar parts Diseases of hidden qualities, or of
the whole substance, as they call them; when there is not only in the
constitution of the similar parts, a due congruity of the primary qualities,
but a certain disposition also of the occult qualities is requisite.

Secondly, Diseases of Organick parts.
there are so many signs of Organick Diseases as we have said, are requisite
for the composition, and constitution of an Organ; namely four, Diseases of
Confirmation, of Number, Magnitude and Composition.

Lastly, the third kind of Diseases, Common to both.
which are common to them both; They call solution of Unity, or continuity.

CHAP. III. Of Diseases of Intemperature.
DIseases of Intemperature, as is said, Diseases of Distemper.
are when that due proportion of primary qualities is not observed, which ought
to be, but either one overcomes the other three, or two the other two. Whence
one distemper is said to be simple, another compound. Simple is that wherein
one quality exceeds, and this according to the number of the four qualities
is quadruple, hot, cold, moist, dry. Compound is that wherein two qualities
exceed, and this according to the quadruple mixture of the primary qualities is
fourfold, hot and moist, hot and dry, cold and moist, and cold and dry. And so
in the whole there are eight Diseases of Intemperature.

But these distempers are again distinguished diverse ways, Distemper without
and with matter.
which distinctions nevertheless produce not new kinds but differences, which
are found in many differing in kind. For first, one distemper is with matter,
another without matter. Intemperature with matter is when it has a humor
joined with it, and is cherished by it; Distemper without matter, is that which
is cherished by no preternatural humor, as when heat is sent into any part
from the fire or heat of the Sun.

Moreover one distemper is equal, another unequal: Equal intemperature.
equal is that which is a little and equal in all living parts, and affects
them all alike, Unequal.
and equally: Unequal, is that which is more intense in one part, and more
remisle in another, and affects one more, another less. For since that the
members of our body are constituted of many particles, it may come to pass,
that all may not be equally affected by the altering cause, but some more,
others less, whence an unequal distemper arises. But if the action thereof
proceed so far, until that all are altered and affected equally, that is an
equal distemper; Whence an unequal distemper is joined with pain and trouble,
as being that wherein the part is as yet to be altered; but in an equal
distemper no pain, nor molestation is perceived, as being that wherein the part
is already altered, and the Intemperature becomes as it were familiar and
domestic.

CHAP. IV. Of Diseases of the whole substance or of hidden qualities.
IT is a controversy amongst Physicians, whether there are any other. Whether
there are any Diseases besides those of Intemperature.
Diseases in the similar parts, besides those of Intemperature. Truly the
ancient Physicians make no mention of them; but the Modern do and principally
Fernelius in Lib. 1. Pathol. Cap. 2. and Lib. 2. of the Hidden causes of
things, Cap 9. and afterward he largely endeavors to prove that there is yet
another kind of Disease besides Intemperature in the similar parts, and that is
twofold: the one is of the whole substance; the other in the matter, which may
be seen in the fore-quoted places. But it is not our purpose largely to reckon
up the opinions of others, for this Epitome will not permit it.

But that we may briefly propound our opinion, There are Diseases of hidden
qua. lities. The reoson.
we determine that there is another kind of Disease in the similar parts,
besides Diseases of Intemperature, being so persuaded for these reasons; first,
because every agent which acts, desires to make the patient like it self. But
there are agents from the whole substance or such things, whose actions can be
reduced into no manifest quality, and which are beyond the power of Elements,
as elsewhere is proved: It necessarily follows that those agents from the whole
substance, whilst they bring in Diseases, and act in our bodies, do not change
the primary, but Occult qualities, and introduce Diseases agreeable, and
correspondent to their nature. Also because contraries may be cured and
resisted by their contraries: But the whole substance, or things acting in
Occult qualities cure many Diseases; It necessarily follows that their are such
Diseases to which such Medicines are opposed: and unless there should be
certain Occult Diseases, in vain are Medicines invented which act in the whole
substance. Thirdly, since there are actions hindered or hurt which neither can
be referred to any Disease commonly known, nor to any external error, as may
appear in the plague and other Venomous Diseases, hence we may well conclude
that there are other Diseases of Intemperature, from whence these kind of
mischiefs happen.

But which and what those Diseases are is likewise controverted. We setting
aside the opinions of others determine, Which are Diseases of the whole
substance.
those Diseases of the whole substance, or of hidden quality, to be those which
consist in a certain occult, and malignant disposition of the similar parts,
and to be no other then such whose mischiefs cannot be referred to the primary,
qualities, and such as the agent cause excites, which is endued with a
malignant, venomous and occult quality, and which are cured not by primary
qualities, but by those things which are said to act in the whole substance.

But Diseases of matter which Fernelius brings there, Whether there be ary
Diseases of matter.
are no new Diseases of similar parts, but either Organick Diseases, as
softness and hardness in parts, wherein they ought not to be such, or
Symptoms, or causes of Diseases.

CHAP. V. Of Organick Diseases.
THE second kind of Diseases, are of the Organick parts, Organick Diseases.
which in general are called Evil composition; namely when the natural
constitution of the parts, as they are Organick is vitiated, which although it
may agree also to the similar repears, yet it happens to them not as they are
such, The difference of Organick Diseases.
but as they are Organick. Again the differences hereof are so many, as there
are qualities belonging the natural constitution of an Organick part; Nemely,
first a definite number of the parts constituting, then a convenient magnitude
of the same; Thirdly a due framing, or conformation; which comprehends a decent
figure, cavity, or solidity, and smoothness and roughness, and such like
qualities. Lastly, (...) is also necessary that every part may enjoy its own
natural place, and be joined with those which it ought.

Therefore from all and every of these things, which belong to the constitution
of an Organick part, sithence a regression may be made to the state that is
contrary to nature, there arises so many kinds of Organick Diseases also,
namely Diseases of Number, ^^^nitude, conformation and composition; But if you
would divide Diseases of conformation into those three or more, which belong
unto them: namely Diseases of figuration, of cavities, and of superficies, and
secundary qualities, there will arise six kinds of Organick Diseases; which
moreover, if you are pleased to divide Diseases (...) composition into those of
situation and of connection, there wi^^ arise seven kinds of Organick Diseases.

CHAP. VI. Of Diseases of Conformation.
A Digression from the natural conformation causes Disease of conformation,
How many Diseases of Conformation.
but seeing that three things are require^ to the natnral conformation of an
Organick part, a convenient figure, hollownesse of passages, smoothness and
roughness of the superficies, there are also three kinds of Diseases of
conformation constituted in figure, cavity, and superficies: But because other
qualities are required also in some Organick parts, besides smoothness, and
roughness; namely that some may be soft, others hard some thin, and full of
pores, others thick, some colored; other void of color, some dark, others
perspicuous, and the change (...) these qualities breed Diseases, because when
these qualities a^^ changed, the Actions of those parts are hindered.

A Disease in regard of figure is when the natural figure of a part is so
vitiated, Diseases in figure.
that by reason of it the action of the part is hurt; namely when those, which
are straight are made crooked, or otherwise disposed contrary to nature; those
are affected with such Diseases which we call crook legged, when the legs bend
inward, crooklegged outward; such as are disfigured with the small pox,
splayfooted; to these belong crook backed, and flat-nosed persons.

Moreover Diseases of conformation are when the passage, How many Diseases ^f
Jassages.
through which matter passes from one place to another, such as are the
throat, wind pipe, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Ureters, Guts, Pores o^ the Skin,
Cavities, and Receptacles, such as are the stomach, bladder, womb, when they
are affected. As for Diseases of the passages, they consist either in number,
or multitude, or differ from the natural condition in magnitude; Excess and
Defect in multitude, in magnitude. The difference of opening of Vessels.
and again both of them either in excess or in defect.

Excess in multitude of passages, is when there are more pores, o^ ways then
there ought to be according to nature. Defect in number is, when they are Fewer
then they ought. Excess in magnitude is when any way or passage is dilated
more then it ought; Defect in magnitude is when it is become straiter then is fit.

To excess belong those infirmities which are called Anastomasis, Diapedesis,
and Diairesis.

Anastomasis is when the mouths of the vessels are opened and dilated too much.
Anastom Diaped. Diairesis.
Diapedesis is when the Tunicles of the vessels are become so thin, that the
humors may as it were sweat through them; Diairesis is when from some cause
that happens by Erosion or by breaking, some passage is opened which ought not.
That Diairesis, which is made from some incident cause, or by breaking, is
called (in Greek) Rexis, that which happens by Erosion is called Diabrosis.

Defect on the other side according to the variety of causes that occasion it,
is five-fold, Obstruction, Constipation, Coalescence, The differences of
narrowness of Vessels. Obstruction Constipation.
Compression, Descension. All which in general are called straitness of passage.

Obstruction, which the Greeks call Emphraxis, is when some passage is stopped
either by plenty of humors, or thickness of them, or clotted blood, or Gravel,
or such like. Constipation which the Greeks call Stenochoria, is when a passage
is stopped by some tumor in it, Compressure which the Greeks call Thlipsis is
when a part is pressed together by some external matter.

Coalescence is when (after an Ulter) the sides of the passage grow together.
Coalescence


Subsidence in the Greek Sunizesis, is, Conjunction and Constriction.
when the parts of the vessels consent as it were in pressure and squeezing of
themselves together, to which no constriction is added, when from some external
causes, or by reason of cold the passages are contracted.

Diseases of cavity are either in multitude, or magnitude: Diseases of Cavity.
in multitude it seldom happens unless from ones nativity, there happen more
or less passages in the body then there ought. In Magnitude passages offend
either in excess or defect: excess of magnitude is too great dilatation of the
receptacle, or cavity; defect in magnitude is when they are too strait, which
is either from our first original, or afterward, from repletion, compression,
subsidence or constriction.

Thirdly, Diseases of the superficies, Diseases of Superficies.
are ruggedness and smoothness, for when according to nature, some parts are
rougher, and others smoother; if those which should be more rough become
smoother, or those that should be smoother become more rugged, and so any
action be thereby hindered from thence, arises Diseases of the superficies.

Softnes and hardness, as we said before, Softness and Hardness. Rarity, Density.
may be referred to these Diseases, as when the bones which ought to be hard
are become soft, or the tendons are so hardened, that they cannot be contracted.
Also Rarity and Density, when a part which ought to be full of pores lose them,
and become thick.

Hitherto belongs color in the eye, Color in the face.
for although color be not necessary for the conformation of other parts, yet
that the eye may become the fit instrument for sight, it is necessary that it
be so fashioned, that it may be fit to receive (for such there are) visible
species* Therefore it is requisite that the horny coat, and the watery, crystal,
and glassy humors of the eye be not only clear and transparent, Darkness.
but without color. If the eye lose this natural constitution, and that those
parts which ought to be perspicuous and void of color, are darkened or
colored, the sight is hindered, and visible species either are not received, or
are received in a color differing from their own.

CHAP. VII. Of Diseases in Number.
THE second sort of Diseases of Composition or Organick Diseases are Diseases
in number; Of Diseases in number.
for when there is a certain number of the parts compounding to make up the
natural composition of every organ, how often soever that is not observed a
Disease in number does arise.

A Disease in number is twofold, The difference of a Disease of number.
Abounding.
either in defect, when that is wanting which should be present, or in excess,
when that is present which should be wanting.

That which abounds is either to nature, as the sixth finger, or
preter-natural, as stones, and Worms are according to Galen; which nevertheless
is disputable. Nor indeed are such things, since they are substances, as such
Diseases; but as some conclude causes, by which an aptness and a certain
disposition against nature is brought into the part, whether it be in respect
of number, or passages, about which authors disagree.

Deficiency in number, Wanting.
is when there is a Disease by which either a whole part perishes, or is
wasted: those which are wholly wanting are clearly according to nature, nor can
it be a defect against nature; such a Disease may they be said to have who want
their number of fingers, or of teeth.

CHAP. VIII. Of Diseases of Magnitude.
THirdly, Diseases of magnitude.
amongst Organick Diseases, are Diseases of Magnitude, when the natural bigness
of the part is so altered, that for that reason it cannot perform its natural
action.

Diseases of Magnitude are twofold, either when there is an increase or a
Diminution of Magnitude, according as the whole or part be increased or
diminished. To the increasing of magnitude belong all tumors, and growth of
parts contrary to nature; to diminition belongs leanness and wasting of parts.

But because Diseases in Magnitude, and in Number, are sometimes complicate,
therefore they are thus to be distinguished; If a whole part be wanting or
abound, it is properly called a Disease in number. But if only some particles
of a part be wanting, or that it be bigger then it ought, it is called a
Disease in magnitude. Secondly, if with a portion of any organ many particles
are taken away, a Disease is deficient in number, and diminished in Magnitude.

CHAP. IX. Of Diseases of Composition.
THE last kind of Organick Diseases are Synthetical, Diseases of Composition.
commonly called Diseases of Composition; but although Avicen does account all
Organick Diseases, Diseases of composition, yet in this place we do not, we
only take them for a peculiar kind of Organick Diseases.

Since that two things are to be considered in Diseases of composition,
situation and connection; Twofold.
Diseases of composition are of two kinds, the one is when the parts do change
their situation, Diseases in site. In Connection.
which is called a Disease of place: The other is when they are not knit
together as they ought, but they are separated which ought to be joined
together, and the contrary, as when the eyebrowes grow together, which are
called Diseases of connection or vicinity, others call them Diseases of consent,
society, colle, iate.

The most common Disease in place, is a loosing of a joint, Luxation.
the Greeks call it Exarthrosis, when the joints or heads of the bones go out
of their hollow places or cavities. Yet other parts besides the bones go out of
their places, which happens in ruptures, when the paunch or guts fall down
into the Cods, or when by great wounds the guts come forth: also in the falling
out of the womb, or of an eye.

Another kind of Disease of composition is, when the parts are separated, that
ought to be joined together; which happens if the bonds by whose intervene
they are linked together are loosened, made longer or broken, which happens
sometimes in the womb and other parts of the body; or it happens if those are
joined together, that should be parted a sunder; as when one is tongue-tyed, or
the eyelids grow together, or two fingers grow together, or the fundament be
closed.

CHAP. X. Of Diseases of Solution of Unity.
THE third kind of Disease is common to similar and Organick parts, Diseases of
Solution of continuity.
and is called Solution of Unity, when the parts which ought to be one, and
continued, lose their continuity and are divided.

There are many differences of Diseases of Unity, principally taken from the
part affected, Their differences.
and the causes dissolving Unity. Those things which dissolve Unity, some of
them cut and prick, others erode, others bow and break, others beat in pieces.
But the parts which are dissolved are either soft or hard; if a soft part be
dissolved by a thing that cutteth, A wound.
it is called by the Greeks Trauma, by the Latins Vulnus, i. e. a wound.

But if a soft part be dissolved by a sharp instrument pricking, A puncture.
Contusion.
it is called a Puncture.

But if a soft part be offended by a blunt weapon and a hard one, and be
straightened within it self, it is called a Confusion, the Greek Thlasis and
Thlasma.

If a soft part be broken by any thing that bends it, Rupture.
it is called a Rupture, and in the nervous parts peculiarly, it is called a
Spasme.

But if there be solution of continuity in a hard part or bone from any other
cause then Erosion, Fracture.
namely from cutting or contusion, it is called a fracture, Caries.
in Greek Agma and Catagma; but if by Erosion it is called Caries, in Greek
Teredon, i. e. rottenness in bones.

If continuity be dissolved in soft parts by Erosion, An Ulcer.
it is called Elkos in Greek, in Latin Ulcus ( Anglice an Ulcer.)

Lastly, An Apospasme.
if there be solution of Unity of compound parts, and those which naturally are
different from each other in kind are nourished and grow together, they are
called Apospasmes, as when the skin from a membrane, the membranes from the
muscles, and a muscle from a muscle are separated.

CHAP. XI. Of the Accidental and common differences of Diseases.
HItherto we have spoken of the effential differences of Diseases: The
accidental differences of Diseases.
there remains the accidental differences, which are taken from those things
which follow the essence of a Disease, or from the subject, and causes, and
other circumstances, and are also common to many.

First, a body sometimes is sick of one disease, One disease.
sometimes of anther: and that is said to be one disease which only seizes on
one part, and offends its actions, or when one disease afflicts the whole body;
but there are many diseases, Many diseases.
which in a different manner affect many and different parts of the body.

A disease which occupies one part of a body, is either simple, A disease
simple; compound.
or compound. Simple, is when no other disease is joined with it. Compound, is
when it is coupled with one, or more other diseases, in the same part, whether
they are of the same nature, or of some other; but diseases which are knit
together, not with other diseases, but with some grievous symptoms, are not
properly called complicate diseases; Fernelius calls them diseases of
fellowship, Diseases of fellowship. Solitary.
even as he calls those that are neither joined with any other disease, nor
with any grievous symptom Solitary diseases. As for diseases that are not
joined together in one part, there are many, they are divided by Fernelius into
separated, and implicit; connexed and consequent.

Separated are such as consist in diverse parts, Separated.
which neither have common use, nor action, neither do they communicate the
affect by turns from one part to another: as, the Podagra, or Gout in the
foot, the Ophthalmie, or Inflamed Eye.

Those are called implicit diseases which afflict diverse parts which have one
common use, and action, Im plicite.
as if diverse parts of the breasts are afflicted.

Moreover, he calls them connexed and consequent diseases, Connexed.
when one disease is the cause of another, which principally comes to pass
when one part communicates its effects to another.

Secondly, from the manner of generation and subsistence, Making.
some are called diseases Making, others Made.

Diseases Making are such, Made.
that although they are produced out of their cause, and now are; yet they
cannot subsist without their efficient cause, but their cause retreating, they
also withdraw from their subject.

Made diseases may continue, though their efficient cause be taken away.

Thirdly, in respect of the subject, Universal. Particular.
one disease is called Universal, which afflicts the whole, another
particular, which affects any part of the body, another external which
occupies the outward parts of the body; another internal which possesses the
inward parts thereof. Some diseases also are congruous, such as are agreeable
to the Temperament and constitution of the body; Others are Incongruous, and
disagreeable to the Temperament, and constitution thereof. Of Age.


Fourthly, in respect of age, some are diseases of Infants, others of children,
Sex.
others of boys, others of youths, others of young men, others of middle aged
men, and others of old men: as also in Relation to sex, some of Males, others
of Females.

Fifthly, By the being of a thing. By consent.
diseases some are by Idiopathy, or Essence, others by sympathy, or consent. A
disease by essence is that which has its beginning, from a cause begotten in
that place wherein the disease is stirred up. By sympathy, or consent is that
which is stirred up by matter severed from the part, where the disease is.

Sixthly, L^gitimate. Spurious.
some diseases are legitimate, others Spurious, Legitimate are such as proceed
from one simple and only cause; Spurious are such as proceed from mixed humors.

Seventhly, some diseases are inherent to man from his first beginning, others
happen to him after he is begotten. Those which come from our first beginning,
Hereditary
are twofold; first, hereditary whose causes, and dispositions are derived from
the seed and menstruous blood of the parents to their children; and cause a
disease, in them which they were troubled with; secondly, from ill conformity
some evil may happen to the child, Congenite.
from its first beginning, although the parents ware not troubled therewith;
and therefore all diseases communicated to man from his generation are not
Hereditary. They seek a knot in a bull-rush, who think such recess from the
natural state and condition, Whether a Congenite deformity he a disease.
ought not to be called a Disease, but a sault; and they conceive that not
every defect, and regression from the natural state; but those only they
think, ought to be called diseases of defect, which are defects of perfections
which they once had. But a Disease is not only a privation of perfection once
had, but to be had, which agrees to every one of the Species: and as a man is
said to be sound, which has that perfection in all the parts of the body,
which ought to be in mankind; so he may be said to be born sick, to whom any
of those perfections are wanting.

Eighthly, Contagious. Not contagious. Common.
some diseases are Infectious which transfuse their seed, and pullution into
other bodies, and affect them with the same disease. Not Infectious, are such
as cannot infect others with their venom.

Ninethly, some diseases are spread, as when many diseases of diverse kinds
invade. Some are common, wherewith many are affected at the same time, with the
same disease. These again are divided into Endemiall, and Epidemicall. Endemiall
Endemiall are (as it were) native, and genuine diseases, which often frequent
one place, and afflict the inhabitants of one region by reason of their common
and domestic cause: such is the Scurvy to the inhabitants of the Baltic Seas.

Epidemicall, are such as infect many from one cause, Epidemical. Diseases of
the severll times of the year.
but not genuine to that people at the same time.

Tenthly, in respect of the time of the year, some are Vernall, some Estivall;
some Autumnall, and others Hibernall, namely, such as are agreeable to this or
that season of the year. In respect of the time of the day, some are called
Diurnall, others Nocturnall.

In the Eleventh place, some diseases are called great, Great.
others small. A great disease is said to be such, either by its self, or by
accident. A disease is said to be great by it self three ways; first, How
manifold.
in regard of dignity, when it hurts the organs, and instruments, that are
most necessary for the preservation of life, and in this sense, Diseases of
Intemperature, amongst Diseases are of greatest dignity; Next those Diseases of
solution of continuity; next to them diseases of composition: 2. By it self a
disease is said to be great, in respect of its going back from its natural
state, for by how much the more it recedes from that, by so much is it the more
venement: 3. It is said to be great in respect of ill Manners, as when an ill
quallity is joined with it. By accident it is said to be great, in respect of
the best part which it possesses, in which regard a disease which otherwise
was small, is said to be great, as a wound in the heart, or in the brain, which
in musculous flesh, were not dangerous. 2. When it hurts the faculty that
governs our body.

In the twelfth place from the manner, a disease is benign, Benign.
or malign: Benign is when besides its own nature, no grievous symptom is
joined. Malign, Malign.
is when it has worse symptoms joined with it, then the nature of the disease
affords of it self, from some occult qualities.

Thirteenthly, in respect of duration, some diseases are short, Short. Long.
some long, which soon terminate, or continue long, before they come to amend.

Fourteenthly, some are acute, others not acute, Acute. Not acute.
and all acute diseases are short, but all short diseases are not acute. That a
disease may be said to be acute, it is requisite that it may not only be
terminated in a short time, but may have some grievous symptoms joined with it,
Which acute.
that may speedily not without danger end it in health or death; For an acute
disease is that which swiftly with violence, and danger comes to its height.
Acute diseases are again distinguished into very acute, How manifold.
simply acute, and such as degenerate from acute. The very acute terminate by
the seventh day; the simply acute end by the twentieth day; such as degenerate
from acute are extended beyond the twentieth, even to the fourtieth day; But
all those diseases that are extended beyond the fourtieth day, are Diurnall,
and Chronicall.

Fifteenthly, Salutary. Deadly.
in regard of the end, some diseases are salutary, which terminate with the
health of the sick, others mortal, which destroy the sick; and both either
absolutely, or secundum quid. Simply and absolutely, those are Salutary that
terminate with the perfect health of the sick; Mortal, are such as kill the
sick; on the other side, salutary and deadly may be such, secundum quid, when
they terminate in health; but not sound and perfect health.

Sixteenthly, Continual.
some diseases are continual, which continually afflict, and intermit not, in
the whole term of their duration.

Intermitting, Intermissive. Ordinate. Inordinate.
are such as have certain periods, and do sometimes intermit, or cease between
while.

Seventeenthly, some are ordinate, which afflict at certain times, which the
Greeks call at Periods, as Tertian, Quartan Fevers: Inordinate, are such as
observe no certain periods.

CHAP. XII. Of the Times of Diseases.
SUch as age is said to be in living creatures, time is said to be in diseases.
The times of discases.
For as animals are first generated, thence increased, and come to their
perfection and state, and then waste, and lastly dye, so diseases have their
beginnings, increase, vigor, afterward they decline, are lessened, and at
length vanish.

The times of diseases are twofold, Universal.
Universal, and Particular. Universal times are said to be such wherein the
course of the whole disease is included; for since there are diseases which
have certain Intervals, Particular.
and again new fits, or certain extentions, and remissions; Particular times
are limited by the end of the fit.

The Universal times are four. Universal times how many. Beginning. Increase
The beginning, The augmentation, The state, and Declination.

The beginning is that time, when the morbifique matter of the disease is yet
crude, and no signs of concoction appear.

The augmentation is when the symptoms become grievous, and the signs of
concoction begin to appear in such diseases, as tend to recovery of the sick,
or contrary signs in those that are mortal.

The state is when the greatest contention is betwixt Height.
a disease, and nature, and when all the symptoms are most vehement.

The Declination is, when a disease begins to abate, Declination.
being conquered by nature.

But all diseases have not these four times, but such as tend to health only;
in deadly diseases, the sick (nature being overcome) may dye either in the
beginning, increase, or state, for such come not to the declination, for no man
ever dyed in the declination of a disease.

In the same manner Particular times may be limited, Particular times.
and every course has its fit, which course Remissness, or an Intervall
follows. A fit has its beginning, increase, state, and declination, which
Particular times may happen during the Universal times.

The end of the first part of the second Book.
THE SECOND BOOK. PART. II. Of the Causes of DISEASES.
CHAP. I. Of the Causes of Diseases.
SEeing that nothing can perfectly be known unless the causes thereof are known
whither can diseases be avoided unless the causes are shunned; neither can the
same be taken away, unless the causes if they are present, be first taken away:
We will now treat of the causes of Diseases.

Although by the Philosophers there are rightly constituted four kinds of
causes, The sorts of causes.
the Material, Formal, Final, and Efficient; yet here we are to speak only
of the Efficient causes of diseases; for the form, such as accidents have, is
already explained. Diseases have not matter unless it be the subject wherein
they are inherent; The Physician treats of efficient cause. The causes of
diseases are fourfold. The proximate. The remote
the end also is not since they arise from the want of perfection, and
therefore Physicians when they handle the cause of diseases understand the
efficient cause only.

But Efficient causes of Diseases are considered either in respect had to a
disease and a body, or absolutely, and as they are things which can take upon
them the nature of mortifique causes. If causes as they are referred to a
disease, or its effects, they are considered thus; first, one cause is
proximate and immediate, another remote. The proximate is that cause betwixt
which and the disease nothing intercedes. The remote is that betwixt which and
the disease there comes another nearer cause. The proximate (since nothing can
come to pass without a cause) is in all diseases; but the (...) is not so.

Secondly, since that of those causes which conduce to the generation of a
disease, and indeed such as some matter does exeite, Containing.
some are nearer, others more remote, and oftentimes there is a long rank of
them: Physicians call some causes containing, others antecedent, others
primitive.

A cause containing, which is also named consummative, Containing.
is that which proximately adheres to a disease in a body, and cherishes it,
and which being put the disease is, being taken away, the disease is taken
away: so a stone is the cause containing of obstruction of the bladder. A
humor in a turnour is the cause of increasing of Magnitude, but a cause
containing and immediate, is not absolutely the same, for as much as all
diseases have a proximate cause, since nothing can be done without a cause, but
they have not all the cause containing; namely, these oak of a sword is the
proximate cause of a wound, but not the cause containing. And those diseases
only have a cause containing, which are joined with matter, and are cherished
by it as tumors, obstructions, putrid Fevers. Yet you are here to be
admonished that these things which are here spoken of a cause containing, as
also of the differences of other causes, are all spoken of in respect of a
disease, defined by Galen, per dispositionem, or casually as they say; for in
respect or this, not all but some diseases only have a cause containing. But if
a disease be defined formally and through impotency, all diseases whatsoever
have a cause containing, namely some vicious disp^sition of body. The antedent.


The antecedent causes are certain dispositions lying hid in the body which go
before a disease, and out of which a disease may arise. For although that be
most properly called a cause which does now act; yet Physicians call those
things causes which as yet produce not any disease, so that they may produce
them. Antecedent causes are defined not by the act, but by the power of
effecting, so some vicious humor which lies lurking in the body, produces
not a disease as yet; yet it may gonerate one, The primitive. How causes
differ. The manifest evident. The manifest external.
that is called the antecedent cause thereof.

The primitive causes which anciently they called Prophasis, are such as move
the antecedent in a body, and give occasion that they may become proximate
causes; such are watchings, cares, ange, too much exercise, and motion, and
such like. But primitive causes and evident are not the same, for every
Pro^atarcktick is evident or manifest, but every evident and manifest is not a
Primitive, as a sword is the evident cause of a wound, but not the primary; for
an evident or manifest cause is whatsoever produces a disease in a manifest
manner, whether it be immediate or remote, but the primitive can never be the
proximate, but always requires preceding preparation of the body, and a nearer
cause in the body which it may move.

Nor is the primitive cause the same with the external; for external is only
in respect of the body, and every thing which is without the body, after what
manner soever, it produces a disease, it is called an external cause, but
Primitive is spoken in respect to other causes, and is that which stirs up
and moves the hidden causes of the body, either within the body or out of the
body; whence Sleep, Watchings, Passions of the mind, and other causes which are
in the body, are named primitive, not external.

Thirdly, Evident causes. Occult.
some causes are evident, others hidden, and obscure: evident and manifest are
such as are obvious to the senses, neither is there need of any other signs to
know them by. Occult and hidden are such as lurk in the body, and require
signs to be known by.

Fourthly, Internal. External.
some causes are internal, others external; internal are such as are within
the body, external are such as are without the body.

Fifthly, Perse By accident.
some causes are by themselves, others by accident. Causes by themselves are
such as produce dieases by their own proper force and violence, and not by the
assistance of other causes; so fire heateth, water cools. A cause by accident
is when it performs ought by the intervening of another cause, and not by its
own force; so cold water by accident is the cause of heat, whilst by its
binding, and closing the pores of the skin, the hot exhalations are detained
within, which otherwise would evaporate by insensible transpiration.

Also some causes are common, Common. Proper. Positive.
as Air, Meat and drink, when many use them in one place; others are proper
which are peculiar to certain men.

Lastly, some causes are positive, others privative; positive are such as by
their presence produce an effect like themselves, Privative.
after which sort water cools. Privative are such as by their absence produce
an effect like themselves; so heat returning to the internal parts, and
leaving the external, is the cause of refrigeration of the outward parts.

CHAP. II. Of things which are the Causes of a Disease, and first of
Non-naturals.
MOreover the efficient causes of Diseases considered absolutely, or as they are
such; all things are the causes of Diseases, which can hurt the natural
constitution, and turn it into a preternatural: and such things are either
without the body, or within it.

Things that are without our bodies, are either necessary, External Causes.
and to be suffered by all, and none can avoid them; or not necessary, but may
be avoided. Of the first sort are those things called non-naturals, and are in
number six, Air, Meat and Drink, Necessary. Unnecessary. Non-natural things.
Sleeping and Waking, Exercise and Rest, Repletion and Inanination, and the
Passions of the Mind; whereof the four latter are rather to be called evident
then external. Things befalling us not necessary, are those that wound us,
knock us, or in such like manner hurt our bodies, which befall us by chance,
which are not included within a certain number.

But both those, as well necessary as unnecessary, Four ranks of things
non-natural. Those which are taken. Which are carried.
may be reduced to four heads; those things which are taken in, those which are
carried; those that are put out and retained; and lastly, those that befall us
externally.

Under the notion of those things which are taken, are comprehended Air by
breathing, Meat and Drink, and Medicine inwardly taken.

By those things that are carried about, we comprehend all the motions of the
body and mind, of what kind soever; such as the perturbations of the mind,
anger, grief, joy, sleep, waking, rubbing the body, navigation, the course of
our lives, and such like.

By Excretion and Retention is understood whatever is thrown out of the body;
such are the Ordure, Urine, Which are retained and rejected.
all sorts of Humors, Seed, Menstruis; for these as those that are emitted,
alter the constitution of the body, belong to those which are called
Excretions; and the same when they are detained, are referred to Retentions.

Moreover those things that externally happen to us, Those which happen
outwardly.
comprehend them that encompasse us, as the Air, Baths, and those things that
are applied to our bodies; as Garments and Coverings, Oils, Unctions, and such
like. Lastly, those things that by force and impulsion befall us, as Wounds,
Contusions, and such like; but since there is no certain number of them, we
will only speak of non-naturals, as they are the causes of Diseases.

First from the air is made a great alteration, Air.
as being that wherein we continually live, and without which we cannot live a
moment; for it alters us in a twofold manner; namely, as we draw it in by
breathing, and as it encompasseth us, and by the Pores penetrates us, and
communicates that distemper which it has to our bodies; The effect of hot Air.
for the hot Air heats our bodies, dissolv^ humors, melts, attenuates,
increases choler, and whets, inflames the spirits, so begets hot Diseases; for
by calling forth and dissipating the natural heat, it weakens the concoction.
The cold Air, Of Cold. Of moist.
on the contrary, cools, condenseth, closes the Pores, thickens the humors.
The moist moistens the body, hapeth up superfluous humors, drives out the
natural heat, generates crude distillations, especially joined with cold. But
if joined with heat, Of dry.
it is the greatest cause of putrefaction. Dry Air dries our bodies, and being
joined with heat, burns them.

First the constitution of the Air depends upon the season of the year, The
constitution of the Seasons of the year. Of Wind and of Situation. Pestilent
Air.
whereof the Spring is temperate, the Summer hot and dry, Autumn cold and dry,
Winter cold and moist; and hence several Diseases happen at the several seasons
of the year; of which Hypocrates in the third of his Aphorisms, 4, 5, 6.7, 8,
9.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23. The winds also conduce to the
alteration of Air; so do Countries and Situations, of which Hypocrates 3.
Aphorism, 15, 17. And in his Book of Air, Water, and Places; and it does not
only affect our bodies with primary qualities, but impresseth in us a
malignant and pestilent disposition (if it be infected therewith) and can
communicate to us those effects which it has, and so excite malignant and
epidemical Diseases in us; of which is spoken in the doctrine of malignant and
pestilent Fevers.

Secondly, Meat and Drink. It offends in quantity.
Meat and Drink, if either it be taken in too great measure, or be unwholesome,
or if any fault be committed in the taking of it, may be the occasion of many
diseases. Diet then offends in quantity, manner of taking it, and quality;
for if too great a quantity of meat stuff the stomach, it cannot be well
concocted, but sends abundance of vapors to the brain, which offend it,
and is the cause of diverse fluxes of Rhumes; and when the error of the first
concoction is not corrected in the second, that Crudity is the occasion of many
Diseases which arise afterward in the whole body; and as an immoderate
quantity of meat and drink, is the occasion of many Diseases. So the want of
them is hurtful; for thereby the good humors of the body are wasted, and the
body dried, 1. Aphor. 14. In an impure body it stirs up ill humors, Manner of
using.
whence diverse parts are ill affected; for it is hurtful to eat meat whilst
any is unconcocted in the stomach: variety of meats is also hurtful.

As for the qualities of meats, Quality.
those which have in them certain qualities, by which they can alter our
bodies, are called medicamental, and they are changed into humors of a like
qualities with them, and in a sound body cause a like distemper; and in a sick
body may introduce an unlike and contrary distemper; to wit, if they are
contrary to the preternatural distemper, but if they agree with it, they
increase it. Meats differ not only in the first qualities, but also in others,
nay in the whole substance; some thick, others thin; some much, others little;
some cause good Asiment, some bad; of which Galen in his books of the faculties
of the Aliments, and in his book of good and evil Juice treats; and we shall
speak more in our fourth Book.

Thirdly, sleeping and waking moderately preserve health, Sleeping and waking.
immoderately destroy it, 2. Aphor. 3. For too much sleep hinders the natural
evacuations and excrements, and dulls the heat of the body, and so is the
occasion of cold diseases, and principally of Distillations. On the other side,
too much waking dissipates the Spirits, dryes the body, and whilst the humors
are kindled and become adust, they are of themselves the causes of hot
distempers; and whilst they dissipate the Spirits, the native heat is weakened,
and the radical moisture is consumed, and by accident are the causes of cold
diseases.

Fourthly, there is the same reason of exercise and rest; Exercise
for idleness and too much rest fills the body with Excrements, dulls the
native heat, and renders the body slow and feeble; on the other side, too much
exercise dissipates the Spirits, consumes the body, and by consequence cooles
the whole body, hinders concoction; the veins and vessels often break, stirs up
untimely humors, heats them, and causes fevers; and especially if the body be
full of vicious humors, they being stirred are carried through the whole body,
and stir up fevers and other distempers and symptoms.

Fifthly, Passions of the mind,
the affections of the mind make great alterations in the body; in anger the
Blood and Spirits become extreme hot, and are hurried to the external parts
from the internal, whence they inflame the whole body, and often kindle Fevers,
and raise other Symptoms. Too much joy may so dissipate the Spirits, that it
is observed one may die therewith; in fear and trembling the Spirits and heat
desert the exterior parts, and fly to the heart, and suffocate the heart;
sorrow by degrees dissolveth the Spirits, cools the Body, dryes, spoils
concoction, causes watchings, and begets melancholy diseases.

Lastly, Excretions and retentions.
those things that are retained in, and sent out of our bodies, are the causes
of Diseases; for if the profitable humors be untimely sent out, it debilitates
the body, and consumes it; but if the excrements are retained, diseases are
bred that are like unto them.

CHAP. III. Of the internal causes of Diseases, and first of fullness of Blood.
INternal things which are the causes of diseases, Internal things, the causes
of diseases.
either are generated in the body according to nature, or are found in the bedy
contrary to nature; those which are generated according to nature, are those
three of Hypocrates, containing, contained, and doing violence; or as others
would have it solid, humid, and spirituous; those are called preternatural
humors, which are found in the body contrary to nature; as stones, gravel,
worms, and all things that are generated in the body differing from natural;
whereunto belongs those things that are sent into the body, and there stick
and remain, as darts, bullets of lead, and such like.

But these things are made to be the causes of diseases, How many ways.
either as they are in their whole kind, contrary to nature; or as they offend
in quantity, quality, motion, or place.

The fault of humors in Specie is divided into Plethorick and Cacochimick; The
fault of humors twofold. Plethorie.
for humors are either apt to nourish the bedy, or not fit: plenty of the one
^s called Plethorick, of the other Cacochimick; for Plethory is when blood and
humors profitable for the nourishment of the body abound, Plethorie towfold.
To the vessels. To the strength.
and are beyond mediocrity. This plenitude is twofold, either as to the vessels
when blood so abounds, as that the vessels wherein it is contained are
stretched beyond their ordinary bigness; the other as to the strength, when
there is more blood then the strength can bear; to which Horatius Augenius adds
this mixed of them both, to wit, when there is so great plenty of blood as
stretches and extends the veins, and so great pains, that the strength
cannot bear it,

Chacochimy is an excess of other humors besides blood, Chachochimy.
namely, when natural excrementious humors offend in plenty, or preternatural
excrementious humors abound, and whilst either these or those putrify, and
bring in a strange nature. The seat of Plethory and Chacochimy. Both pure and
spurious. Pure Plethory. Pure Chacochimy. Spurious. The causes of Plethory.


The seat of Plethory is only in the veins; but Chacochimy is not only in the
veins, but also out of them, and in the whole body, or some parts, especially
the bowels.

But sometimes Plethory and Chacochimy are mixed, whence both are divided into
spurious and legitimate; pure Plethory is, when there is too great plenty of
pure blood and humors, without any vicious ones. Pure Chacochimy is, when
there is too great plenty of ill humors, and no good blood with them; but when
good juice abounds, and ill humors are mixed therewith, it is called a
spurious Plethory, or Chacochimy, according as blood and ill humors do more or
less abound.

There are many causes of Plethory, as plenty of Diet supplies matter to cause
it; nourishment of good juice, and great plenty of such nourishment: the
Efficient causes are Constitution of the Body, and principally of the Heart and
Liver, hot and moist, and youthful age, which may be occasioned in the Spring
time, and a temperate constitution of the Air, idleness, moderate sleep, a
life without care and pains, suppression of accustomary evacuations of blood,

Chacochimy according to the variety of excrementitious humors is manifold;
The kinds of Chacochimy.
for sometimes phlegm, sometimes choler, sometimes melancholy, and adust
melancholy, and sometimes serous humors abound; of which humorsthere are
again various differences.

CHAP. IV. Of Phlegm.
THere are diverse kinds of Phlegm which are commonly divided into natural and
preternatural. The kinds of Phlegm Natural Phlegm.
Natural is a cold and moist juice, or blood not perfectly concocted; but if we
rightly observe the matter, this humor is not properly to be reckoned amongst
the excrementitious humors, because the blood is crude, and may be turned into
the aliment of the parts.

Of the preternatural Phlegm there are four kinds, unsavory, The kinds of
preternatural Plegm. Unsavory.
sharp, vitreous, salt.

Unsavory Phlegm peculiarly and principally may be called a Crude Humor, which
for want of concoction has not acquired that perfection which it ought in the
stomach; and therefore can no where in man's body be turned into good substance.

Acride Phlegm is also crude and called so from the taste it relishes of to
them that void it, Acride.
and proceeds from the defect of heat.

These two kinds proceed from the same causes, which according to greater or
lesser power they have of introducing coldness and crudity; so sometimes this,
sometimes that kind is generated: such are cold meats, hard to be digested;
too great plenty of meat and drink, and taken at unseasonable times, a cold
constitution of the stomach, and the adjacent intrails which way soever
occasioned.

Salt Phlegm, Salt.
so called from the savor, and is occasioned by the mixture of a serous
humidity, and a salt with Phlegm: whence it is not simply cold, but mixed with
heat and dryness; and as there is more or less of the salt humor mixed, so
is it more or less hot.

Lastly, Vitreous.
Phlegm is vitreous, so called by Praxagorus, because in substance and color
it somewhat does resemble melted glass; this is exceeding cold, clammy, and
thick.

CHAP. V. Of Choler.
Choler is threefold, The kinds of Choler.
Alimentary, Natural, and Contrary to Nature; but the first is not an
Excrement, but the hotter and dryer part of the Mass of Blood, of a different
nature, from that which is in the bladder of the Gall. Excrementious Choler is
twofold, Natural, and Contrary to Nature.

Natural is yellow, Yellow Choler.
and is generated by Nature; and that only is properly called Choler: it is
an Excrement of the second concoction, and generated in the Liver, and
collected into the Bladder of the Gall; it is generated out of the hotter and
dryer parts of nutriment.

Preternatural is that which is not generated in our bodies according to the
law of Nature, Preternatural.
whereof for the most part we account four kinds, Vitelline, Leekeblade color,
Verdegrease color, and Woad color, or a bluish green.

The Vitelline is so called from the yolk of an Egg; Vitelline.
it is yellow, hotter and thicker; it is generated of yellow and burnt Choler,
whence it is sometimes called roasted Choler: And there is another kind of
Vitelline Choler, but not so properly so called, which is neither so hot nor
so yellow, which is compounded of Phlegm and yellow Choler.

Leekgreen Choler, so called, Leekgreen
because it represents their greenness, which is often voided with the
Excrements of children by the panch, and is often generated in the stomach by
corrupt nutriment, and sometimes also in the Veins, and about the Liver, out of
the Vitelline, from the great heat of the Liver, and it is of a venomous nature,
and it is hot and very biting, the likest to Verdegrease.

The Aeruginous which comes near to the color of rusty greenish Brass, is
generated out of corrupt aliment, Aeruginous.
when the heat is more vehement in the Stomach, in the Liver and Veins from the
inflammation of the Liver, and the too great heat of the Veins.

Lastly, Woad color, Bluish green.
or a bluish green Choler is more deep in sense then the Leek color, and is
caused by more adust Aeruginous Choler.

Aliment hot and dry, Causes of Choler.
affords matter fit for all the kinds of Choler, and especially sweet and fat
things. A constitution hot and dry, has regard to the Efficient cause, and
those things that add to it are youth full age, Ait that is hot and dry,
watching, anger, too much exercise of the body.

CHAP. VI. Of Melancholy.
THe third is the Melancholy humor, Melancholy.
which commonly is distinguished into Alimentary and Excrementitious; but
Alimentary is nothing else then the colder and dryer part of the Mass of Blood.

The Excrementious is twofold, Natural and Preternatural; Twofold. Natural.
Natural is that thick and feculent Excrement, which in sanguification which is
made in the Spleen, as is abovesaid, is collected and separated for the
generation, whereof much meat conduces, It Is of a terrestrious and thick juice
of every sort, especially being hardened with salt and fuliginous vapors, old
Cheese, Cabbage, all sorts of pulse, as Pease, etc. a cold and dry constitution
of air, cares, fear, sorrow.

The black Melancholy which is generated contrary to nature, Preternatural.
although it be sometimes also called by the name of melancholy; yet
Physicians for the most part call that Excrement which is naturally generated,
black Juice, not black Melancholy; but that which proceeds from adustion is
called black Melancholy; and that Excrement is naturally cold and dry; but
this Preternatural hot and dry, the worst of all humors.

But adust Melancholy is commonly accounted threefold, Its kinds.
One is that which is occasioned by adust blood, and is counted the least; the
second is that which is generated of Melancholy humors if they are burnt. The
third is that which proceeds from adust color, which is of all the worst.
Hence it is manifest, that although all which can generate Melancholy humors,
or yellow Choler, conduce to the generation of black Choler: yet the
generation of black Choler, principally depends upon the too great heat
burning the humors.

CHAP. VII. Of the Serous Humor, and of Wind.
AMongst the humors that are the causes of diseases, Serous what.
we are not to slight Serous Humors and Wind; by Serous Humors we sometimes
understand all thin humors and watery: sometimes peculiarly we mean not those
only which are watery, but have a saltness joined therewith, which Galen
calls A salt serous moisture: the greatest part of this serous humor turns to
Urine, and is ejected by it; yet some part thereof is mingled with the Blood to
clarify it, and make it more easy to be distributed: and lastly, through the
Pores of the skin, or insensible transpiration, or sweat is emitted. Of this
serous humor there is found but small quantity in the Veins in sound bodies;
yet sometimes for some causes Preternatural, there is found greater quantity.
The matter that breeds it, are Meats that contein much Whey in, and watery
juice in them, Its cause.
much Drink, Obstructions and Distempers of the Bowels, by reason whereof this
serous matteris not rightly separated, it is detained and gathered together,
because the reins do not draw enough, and by reason of the weakness of the
expulsive faculty, and the suppression of its passages by Sweat and Urine. Of
humors oftentimes are generated Vapors and Wind, Wind.
which are the causes of many evils; windy meats afford matter for wind; so
does much drink, especially when yellow and black Choler is spread over the
stomach. Also wind is generated from debility of heat, which rusheth out of the
abundance of matter, that it cannot overcome it all; and that is such, either
simply and in its own nature, or in respect of the matter, from the plenty
whereof, although it be otherwise strong enough, it breaks out.

CHAP. VIII. Of humors according to the opinion of latter Physicians, and of
Chemists.
ALthough some Chemists plainly reject these things that have hitherto been
said, The opinion of Chemists about humors.
according to the opinion of the Galenists; and having rejected them, they have
in their stead and place put the names of Salt, Sulpher, and Mercury; yet they
have no reason for it; for as Galen in his first Book of Places affected, and
second Chapter writes, That that which put, we are diseased; and which taken
away, we are freed; It Is taken for granted by all to be the cause of a disease;
but we see the humors being present we are diseased; and being taken away, we
are freed; therefore humors are the causes of diseases. Yet this we grant,
that humors are not confined to the first qualities, but that they have in
them secondary qualities; such are, bitter, acide, salt, sharp, which may
offend and hurt the body no less then the primary, as Hypocrates of ancient
Physic teaches, which he calls the Powers and Efficacies; also the force
and strength of humors. Whence Galen also, and other Physicians, call them
Salt, Nitrous, Aluminent Humors, which plainly manifest themselves in many
diseases, as the Gout, Scurvy, Cankers and others. Venomous humors.
And so such humors are not to be rejected, but to be explained by the
principles of Chemists; and such things as have affinity with themselves: and
hence venenate humors bred of poison and poisonous matter, do not seem so
properly to be referred to Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy; although in color it
seems to have some affinity with some of these, yet their nature is far
different, and therefore are to be described by their Powers Hyppocratically.
The Melancholy humor explained.


Lastly, of the Melancholy and black humor. It is to be noted, that by it
self it is thick, earthy, feculent, or salt, and for the most part it is so
much moystened by many serous and watery humors, that it becomes like unto
Lee, which consist of watery adust, and salt parts; and therefore it is called
by some Water.

CHAP. IX. Of the generation of Stones and Worms.
BEsides Worms there are other things found and generated in the body, Stones.
which are the causes of diseases: as stones and worms; that Stones for the
most part are generated in all bodies; experience and the observations of
Physicians do manifest.

They are generated of feculent matter, earthy, slimy, muddy, and of moisture
apt to putrify; which when the passages are straiter and narrower in the body,
sticks, and of its own accord tends to coagulation and concretion.

Worms also may be generated in most parts of the body, Worms.
out of corrupt and putred matter, containing in it Seed, or some
proportionable principle to Seed, namely, some vital principle.

CHAP. X. Of the causes of Diseases, of Intemperature without Matter.
HItherto we have explained the causes of Diseases general, The eauses of hot
distemoen.
now we will handle them severally. And First, for Diseases of Intemperature:
Galen accounts five sorts of Diseases of distemperature by heat; Exercise.
which causes heat by too much stirring of the humors and spirits.
Putrefaction.
is called forth by the external, and being outward, The proximity of a hot
thing.
and impressing their qualities on our bodies. Costivenesse of body, and
Retention of the hot steeme which should pass through our Pores. Lastly,
mixture with some hot thing, or hot things taken into our bodies, as Air, Meat,
Drink, hot Medicines. Galen in his fourth Book of the Causes of Diseases of
Distemperature by cold, Costiveness.
reckons these. The presence of cold things, Mixtures of a hot thing. Causes of
a cold distemper.
idleness and immoderate exercise: all which, and if there be any other, may
conveniently be reduced into four ranks. For, whatsoever brings a cold
distemper to the body, do it either by altering, and by its proper force
cooling the body; such are cold things, whether outwardly applied to the body,
or taken inwardly, or suffocating the innate heat; such are those things that
prohibit the ventilation and blowing of the fuliginous vapors; Dissipation
or dissipate the same by overmuch exercise of the body or mind, a hot
constitution of Air, and such like, or through want of food, which poverty may
occasion, or by letting too much blood.

Hence it is manifest, Drawing away food. Moist.
by dissipating, extinguishing, or suffocating the innate heat.

The causes of overmoist Distempers, may be reduced unto two, the proximity to
moist things, or those things that hinder transpitation, and so retain the cold
steem of the body.

Dry distemper is occasioned by the contrary causes, to wit, Dry,
by alteration of drying things, and want of aliment.

Compound distempers are from compound causes; Of compound distempers.
and if the causes of simple distempers are joined together, there arises a
compound distemper: yet complication of causes is not always necessary for
production of compound distempers; since there are many causes which have in
them double qualities, which therefore, if they have equal strength and force,
cause a compound distemper; so that the body be so disposed, as it be fit to
receive the actions of them both alike.

CHAP. XI. Of the causes of distemper with matter.
SInce every humor has its peculiar Temperature, The causes of distemper,
with matter.
and communicates it, and impresseth the part which it adheres to, The blood
which is hot and moist, heats and moistens; yellow Choler which is hot and
dry, heats and dryes; Phlegm which is cold and moist, causes a cold and moist
distemper; Melancholy which is cold and dry, causes a cold and dry distemper.

The matter which is the cause of distemper in the affected, A collection of
matter.
either is collected by degrees, or else falls on it on a sudden; It Is
collected either through the error of the Aliment, or default of the part;
through the fault of the part it is collected, when either the faculty of
concoction is weak, and does not rightly elaborate the Aliment, and from thence
causes excrements, which either the expulsive faculty can expel, or the
weakness of expulsion is such, that it cannot expel; that too great quantity,
or some disease of conformation, and straitness of the passages, suffers not
the Excrements to be cost forth; But by default of the Aliment the matter is
collected, when that is not good, but such, by reason whereof great store of
excrements are generated, or slimy and viscious humors are produced, that the
expulsive faculty cannot expel them.

A flux is either when humors are drawn to a part, A flux made by drawing.
or sent to a part. Attraction is principally through heat and pain; not
because they draw, but because they afford occasion for humors to flow to the
part, to which you may add, for the supply of vacuity.

But humors flow to the parts affected, Transmismission.
though they are not drawn for two reasons; first because the humors collected
in the vessels, by their own violence begin to flow into some part, according
to its situation, and its respect to the vessels. Secondly, because the parts
which have strong expulsive power, tire, or decay in their strength, or
quality, or being burdened with plenty of humors; unlade themselves, and lend
that which is troublesome to another part; either the whole body sends forth
vencmous humors, or else some parts.

Yet that there be made a flux, there is required not only the part flowing,
but the part receiving, which is either weak, or apt and disposed to receive
fluxions.

CHAP. XII. Of the causes of Diseases of the whole substance.
DIseases of the whole Body, Causes of diseases of the whole substance.
or of Occult qualities which are in the similar parts, besides diseases of
intemperature, are all produced from causes of the whole substance, or acting
in a hidden manner; such are all venomous, malignant things, and such as act in
a hidden manner: Of such causes some are produced in the Body, some happen to
it from without.

Those which are in the body are humors and excrements, Internal.
if they contein in them malignant and venomous qualities; as putrified Blood,
Seed, and other corrupt humors.

As for external causes, External.
First venomous and malignant Air. Secondly, Virulent and contagious Diseases.
Thirdly, Poison drunk, or after what manner soever taken into the Body.
Fourthly, Poisons which come by the smitings, or bitings of venomous creatures,
or some other way communicated to the body externally.

Venom is either generated in the Air, or else the Air receives it from some
other thing; Air.
It receives it from some other thing by malignant exhalations and vapors,
from Cattle, Marish grounds, dead Carcasses, and other such like exhalations.
Poison is generated in the Air, by reason of its hot and moist constitution,
or the occult influences of stars.

Contagion is a Granary, or if you please, Contagion
an Affect contrary to nature, which is communicated to another body, from a
body affected likewise contrary to nature. This Infection is twofold, either by
touch, when the body which is infected touches that body which is next to it;
or at distance, when a body far distant from another, by that which it emits,
it infects the distant body.

Poisons taken into the body, are either Plants, Poisons taken. Poisons from
without.
or living Creatures, or Minerals, or poisonous Metals.

Poisons which happen externally to the body, are the biting of venomous
Creatures, Strokes, Exhalations, or venomous Unguents and Powders.

CHAP. XII. Of the causes of Organick Diseases.
NOw for the causes of Organick Diseases, and first the figure of Conformation
is vitiated either by it self, or by accident.

By it self it is vitiated first in the womb, The causes of the figure
vitiated,
through some error of the formative faculty. Secondly, out of the womb through
violent motion, either of those things that happen externally, or those which
are with us, or in us, or by the errors of our Midwives, Nurses, or
Chyrurgions. Thirdly, by too great repletion and increase, and on the contrary,
by Inanition, or Defect of Aliment, and lesning the due magnitude, or in
default in number. By accident the figure is hurt, when any parts grow not, as
they ought, but another way, through loosening of Nerves, Convulsion,
Inflammation, or swelling, a Scyrrhus or hard bunch on the Liver, the cutting
of a Nerve or Tendon, or by some hard skin growing in them.

Moreover to what belongs to Diseases in the Channels of the Body. Diseases in
the Channel, are either in excess or defect; Diseases of the passages.
in excess the passages are too much dilated by something, filling them
contrary to nature, and stretching them sometimes too much; But straitness of
the passages is either from our first formation when our stomachs are narrower
then they ought, or by repletion, or when in an Empyema, an Impostumation or
Ulcer is generated in the breast, and there broken, and flows, and makes it
narrower; or whilst a stone grows in some hollow part; or by compressure,
when from what cause soever a hollow member lying under its Cavity is pressed
too close, or by the closing of its outsides, or by constriction, when by too
much use of binding things the stomach is contracted.

Diseases of the passages since they are in excess or in defect; The causes of
Diseases of passages Anastomasis. Diaresis.
An Anastomasis is caused first by the too great quantity, or the quality of
humors initating the expulsive faculty, or the mouth, of the vessels opening
themselves; moreover sometimes by Medicines, and other things which have power
to relax and loosen the mouths of the vessels. A Devision is made by some
gnawing or cutting cause, such may be sharp humors, or fretting Medicines,
either stretching them too much, as too great store of humors, Diapedesis.
or else breaking them, as violent motion, clamours, heavy burdens, knocking.
An opening the Tunicles of the vessels is by moistning and rarefying things.
The causes of defect and straitness of passages. Obstruction. Constipation.
Coalescence. Compression.


The causes of the defect of passages, or of narrowness of them are five;
Obstruction, Constipation, Cealescence, Compressure, Subsidence. The cause of
obstruction is, first, that which is contained in a passage, and is not
generated, for such are thick or viscide humors, clots of blood, quitture,
hard dung, stones, worms, and too great abouncance of humors.

The cause of Constipation is hard flesh; as when there is a Tumor, the flesh
grows in the passage; Coalescence is caused when after a wound the walls of
the passages grow together.

Compression is made by things externally happening, which have power by weight
and violence, or otherwise, to p^esse the passages, and have strength to force
them inward, as diverse tumors and bones out of joint, are amongst the internal
causes; amongst the external, Bones, Con^usions, Strokes, and such like;
Subsidence.
Subsidence is when the outsides of the passages, by too much moisture are made
looser then they ought: to which some add Constriction, by cooling and
astringent things.

The causes of Diseases on the outside, The causes of Diseases in the
Superficies.
or extremities of the body, are such as make it rough or smooth; rugged things
make it rough, so does gnawing things, and such as dry overmuch, as sharp
humors, and medicines endued with such qualities, sharp vapors, Wind, Smoke;
sharp Meats, things endued with contrary qualities make the body smooth.
Moist^ning things make the body soft, contrary to nature; drying things make it
harder, the mixture of black humors, and such as give a tincture, spoils the
clearness of complexion.

The cause of Diseases of defect, Causes of Diseases in number.
in number are either from a man's birth; namely defect of matter, or
imbecility of the faculty, drawing matter, being not able to retain and
elaborate the same, or error of formation: Or else after one is born, by
outting, burning, gnawing, putrefying, and too much cooling; either natural
things abound contrary to nature, and that from our beginning, the cause
whereof is either too great plenty of profitable matter, and the strength and
error of the formative faculty; or after our birth, as is a Membrane, a
Tubercle, the cause whereof is plenty of good matter, and by it occasion is
given of breeding an Ulcer; or somewhat contrary to nature abounds, as Warts,
Stones, and such like; the cause whereof is peccant matter.

Magnitude is increased contrary to nature, Of Magnitude increased.
either according to some dimensions only, or according to all. First, it is
increased by things contrary to nature; as by wind, as in a Timpany, and a
windy Tumor; or by water, as in a Dropsy; or by the falling of one part into
another, as when one is bursten. Augmentation is made according to all the
dimensions, by the spreading of humors over all the substance of the body,
which comes to pass either by reason of profitable humors, which happens to
fat people, and in the increase of certain parts; or from an unprofitable and
Excrementitious, which happens in diverse kinds of tumors.

Magnitude is lessened by weakness of virtue, Diminished.
and want of sustenance, or by cutting, burning, gnawing, putrefaction,
refrigeration.

Lastly, parts change their places by reason of the looseness, Of changing
place.
or solution of unity of those parts wherein they are contained, or contraction
of ligaments, or when they are violently put out of their places.

The vicinity and connection for the most part is hurt by the same means;
namely, Of Connection.
if the parts by whose intervening they are knit together, are loosened,
broken, or wounded.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the causes of Diseases of Solution of Unity.
THe causes of Diseases of Solution of Unity, Causes of Diseases of Solution of
Unity. Of cutting
although they are very many, yet all may be reduced into five ranks; for all
things that dissolve the continuity of any part, either cut, or gnaw, or knock,
or bend and break, or burn: those that cut are all sharp bodies, which whether
edglings, or wound with the point, as all kinds of weapons and darts, thorns,
the biting of living Creatures, and such like. All sharp things erode, as
humors, Eroding.
and all sharp, eroding, putrefying, burning medicines. Those that are heavy,
and great, and blunt, knock, as stones, woods, Knocking and breaking. Eating.
dashing the body against hard things; which if they happen to a part that can
give way to it, they bruise it; if they happen to a hard part which cannot
yield, they break it; they knock and break those things that fill the part, as
plenty of humors, and store of wind, or they powerfully dry or violently
dilate the part, as dancing, and all loud singing, and heavy burden
oppressing, to which belong immoderate cold. Lastly, hot Irons burnt, Burning.
and other metals, and hot and fiery things.

The end of the Second Part of the Second Book.
Book. II. PART. III. OF SYMPTOMS.
SECT. I. Of the Differences of Symptoms.
CHAP. I. What a Symptom is.
THE name of Symptom, The word Symptom.
although sometimes it be taken generally for every thing which befalls the body
contrary to nature; so that both Diseases, and causes of Diseases are
comprehended under the notion of Symptoms. Yet Physicians take not this name
so generally; But by Symptom understand something different from a Disease,
and a cause of a Disease,; and so a Symptom is an affect, or accident contrary
to nature in those things which are necessary to perform natural actions,
without the constitution of the parts, some other thing contrary to nature
following: Its definition.
or it is an accident different from natural, and changing the natural
constitution of the body, which to perform natural actions, is no necessary;
whether the action it self be hindered, or some accident contrary to nature in
the humors and excrements, or even in the living parts, so that it hinder not
their actions; for a Symptom may consist even in the living parts. For example
heat caused by a Bath, or exercise, so that there be not any effect which can
hinder action.

CHAP. II. Of the causes and differences of Symptoms in general.
SO that in respect of the causes, Its division.
a Symptom is properly divided into a Symptom of a Disease, a Symptom of a
Cause, and a Symptom of a Symptom; for they labor in vain^ who endeavor to
draw all Symptoms from Diseases.

A Symptom of a Disease is that which immediately follows a Disease, A
Symptom of a Disease. A Symptom of a Cause.
no other affect contrary to nature coming between, as when an ill concoction
follows a distemper of the stomach, which is called in Greek Cylosis. A
Symptom of a cause is when the action is hurt, although the faculty, and its
organ be well; the faculty being hindered by an external fault, as when the
Liver, though sound, cannot sanguifie, by reason of vicious chyle; Whether hurt
by external means be Symptoms
they trouble themselves exceedingly here, who endeavor to deduce every
Symptom from a Disease, and actions hindered, which happen without a Disease,
no way worthy the name of a Symptom, but think them worthy to be called
certain natural differences, or imbecilities, since that they are accounted to
perform nothing beyond their own strength: but they plainly err in the matter,
for that any work: may be perfected, not only the agent, and that rightly
disposed, but also the patient which receives the operation of the agent, is
required: For as in voluntary actions; as for example, in gesture, or lifting
of a weight, the business is in the free will of man, but that some work may
be performed in the body; as for example, Sanguification, Nourishment. It is
necessary that the patient be joined and coupled with the agent, but since the
action of him that moves, and the patient moveable is but one motion, and
differ only in reason, as Aristotle teaches, in the second Book of his
natural Philosophy, Chap. 3. Title 23. Diservedly therefore in natural actions,
when that is not performed which ought to be, especially in natural
concoctions, all that which either is hurt, or frustrated, is deservedly called
a Symptom, whether it be done by reason of the agent, or of the patient; for
although, in respect of the agent, it be impotent. Yet some fault does happen
by reason of the patient; and therefore it is the office of a Physician if he
will govern a man's body aright, to govern as well the patient, as agent in such
actions.

A Symptom of a Symptom is that which follows another preceding Symptom, A
Symptom of a Symptom. A division of Symptoms.
no other affect contrary to nature coming between.

Moreover there is a common division of Symptoms into an action hurt, errors
of excretion, and retention, and qualities changed, namely such as do not
hinder the actions of our bodies.

Actions hurt are of two kinds, Manner of actions hurt.
the one is so called when the faculty is hurt; The other by reason of some
external fault, as is said.

When the faculty is hurt, the action is said to be hurt; How many ways are
actions heart when the faculty is hurt.
since the agent is not right, or since the instrument (for the faculties of
the mind cannot be hurt) is affected contrary to nature. That the natural
constitution of the part, which is the next instrument of the faculty is
vitiated, which being spoiled, the mind cannot perform its actions. Again, some
divide the faculty hurt into the faculty hurt alone by its self, and into
certain actions hindered. The faculty hurt by it self they say is, when the
next instrument which it uses, in performing whereof that action is ill
affected: as for example, when the Bladder does not expel Urine, by reason that
the Fibers which are used in expelling, are ill disposed. Again, to the good
constitution of the instrument is required not only as abovesaid, constitution
of the part, as it is mixed, temperatenesse, and innate heat, but spirits, and
influent heat, which being deficient, the faculty cannot rightly perform its
actions, as most plainly appears in the senses. But they then say the faculty
is hindered, when the next instrument of the faculty is well, yet the faculty
is hindered in its action, by some Organick Disease; as when the expulsive
faculty in the Bla^der will not send forth Urine, though it be well, by reason
of obstructions of the Uriters, occasioned by the Stone.

On the other side, if the agent and instrument are in all respects sound, and
they be well constituted; Through some external error.
yet nevertheless for some other cause, which is without the constitution of
the part, the faculty is frustrated in acting, and is hindered that it cannot
perform its action. The action is said to be hindered by some external error.

To external error first belongs the patient or object, betwixt which and the
agent, there ought to be a proportion; for if the patient be not fit to receive
the operation of the agent, a perfect action is not brought forth. Hitherto
belong all these things by which actions are performed, or without which they
cannot be performed, as time, place, and order in some, and moreover the use
and necessity of actions.

The other two kinds of Symptoms, The cause of excretions, and retentions, and
of qualities changed.
to wit, the fault of excretion and retention, and the qualities changed by
hurting of the natural actions, depends on them, and the humors proceeding
from them; for from evil concoction proceeds ill excrements: and hence also the
qualities of the body are changed; for such as the humors are in the body,
such colors, smells, tastes, and such like qualities the body sends forth.

CHAP. III. Of the differences in general of actions hindered.
MOreover of actions hindered, The differences of actions. Abolished.
Diminished. Depraved.
there are accounted commonly three differences; namely, actions abolished,
diminished and depraved; an action is said to be Abolished when it cease: to
be lessened when nature acts weakly, and imperfectly, and performs its actions
either in longer time then is fit, or else never acquires that perfection which
it ought, or if there be any other manner whereby it may deviate from its
perfection; but an action is said to be depraved as often as it is performed
otherwise then it ought to be, and erroneously.

But not undeservedly ought we to add to these; Increased.
Action increased, which is performed more strongly and violently, then ought
to be in its kind; such are too much watchings, strong breathings, and
pulsations, much hunger and thirst, and other such like, which exceed
mediocrity.

CHAP. IV. Of the Symptoms of the Natural faculty.
BUt that we may handle the kinds of Symptoms severally, The differences of
Symptoms of natural faculty.
first the Symptoms of the natural faculty respect nutrition, augmentation, or
generation; which again have their servants, attraction, retention, concoction,
and evacuation, and indeed every action is abolished, or weakened, or made
worse, or increased. Whence arise great variety of the Symptoms of the natural
faculty,

First, Nutrition taken away.
for what belongs to the action abolished, which they call the third; nutrition
is taken away to our senses, or rather it is diminished in an A trophy, when it
will not nourish well, Depraved.
and in leanness either of the whole body, or some parts thereof, but the
nutriment is depraved in a Cachexy, or ill habit of the body, Itch, Scabs,
Leprosy, and such like affects thereof. Symptoms of concoction of the
Stomach. The appetite increased and depraved. Thirst. Symptoms of swallowing.
Symptoms of retention.


Those Symptoms which happen in the first and public concoction, which is in
the Stomach, are first appetite, and truly first when the appetite is
dejected,; when a man desires not meat, whereunto belongs also daily abstinence
from meat. Secondly, appetite is lessened. Thirdly, increased, as in a
Boulomia, or insatiable desire to meat. Fourthly, Depraved, as in a Malalachia.

As the desire of Meat, so desire of Drink is either increased, diminished,
depraved, or abolished.

Secondly, the Symptoms of swallowing are, when it is taken away, as when a
man can swallow nothing; or it is lessened, when one swalloweth with difficulty;
or depraved, when we swallow with panting, trembling, twitching.

Thirdly, the fault of the retentive faculty, is when the Stomach cannot retain
meat as it ought, or cannot retain it at all, or not long enough, when occasion
requires; or offends in all these: the Stomach does not rightly retain meat,
when it embraces it, with panting, or with twitching, or with trembling, or
shaking. If meat be not retained, or not long enough retarned, it turns into
corruption, or is distributed with unconcocted meat, or ejected by ordure, as
in a Lyentary. If the embracing of the meat be weak, swimmings, or flatulencies
are occasioned.

Fourthly, the errors of concoction in the Stomach, The errors of concoction.
Symptoms of expulsion. The Hiccock. Loathing.
or the errors of the Chyle are Crudity, slow, or dull concoction, or
corruption of the meat.

Lastly, the Symptoms of expulsion are Hiccock, mutation in the uppermost
parts of the Stomach, whereby it strives to put and cast out that which is
offensive, and sticks in the orifice thereof.

Disposition to vomit, or loathing, or abhorring of meats is a depraved
mutation in the Stomach, when it is straightened in the lower part of it, and
dilated in the upper, and stirs to cast forth upwards what offends it, but
cannot cast it forth.

Vomiting is a depraved motion in the Stomach, Vomiting.
whereby the things which are contained in the Ventricle of the Stomach are
cast out at the mouth of it.

Choler is a depraved motion in the Stomach, Choler.
whereby the peccant matter is evacuated by both Orifices.

Belching is an excression of Wind from the Stomach out of the Mouth, Belching.
with noise.

To the expulsion which is made by this concoction; those vicious Symptoms
belong which happen to the guts. Alientary.
Alientary, which is a flux of the panch contrary to nature, whereby meat and
drink is cast out unchanged.

A Caeliack affect, A Caeliak affect. A Diarhaea.
which also is a Flux of the Belly, is, when Crude and unconcocted Chyle is
ejected.

A Diarhaea, is a plentiful and often emission of excrementiticus humors by
the panch.

A Dysentary is an avoiding of the excrements of the Belly contrary to nature,
A Dysentary.
wherein the biting matter is cast forth with blood, twitching and pinching of
the Guts.

A Tenesme, A Tenesmus.
which is an immoderate and continual desire, yet in vain, of going to stool,
where nothing is ejected from the body, but a little slimy matter and blood.

The contrary fault is the suppression of the panch when it is dull, A slow
panch and shut. An Illiak.
and puts forth nothing in a long time.

To these belong the Illiak, which is, when the dung, which ought to be ejected
by the panch, that being closed, it is cast out of the mouth with the meat.

For the other public concoction, Symptoms of Sanguification.
which is made in the Liver, Sanguification is either abolished, when for the
most part there is no change of the Chyle, and in stead of good blood, serous,
and Petuitous is generated, or else it is diminished, when half raw blood is
elaborated; or it is depraved, when hot and adust blood is generated.

The Symptoms which belong to the evacuation of the excrements of the second
concoction, Symptoms about making Water. Iscury. Dusury. A Strangury.
Incontinency of Urin. Diabetes. Bad milk.
are an Iscury, or suppression of Urine, or stopping of Water, or a Dusury, or
difficulty in making Water, a Strangury, or dropping of Urine, when it comes
away drop by drop, and that there is a continual irritation to expel Urine.

Incontinence of Urine, is when it goes from us against our wills; Diabetes,
or plentiful making Water, is when whatsoever is drunk comes away by Urine,
not changed at all, or altered very little.

Hitherto belong the Symptoms which belong to the generation of milk, when too
much, or none, or not enough is generated, or it proves scurvey, and is
coagulated and curdled.

Hitherto we refer the Symptoms, Gonorhaea. Flux of Months.
which belong to the other concoctions, as the running of the Reins,
suppressions of Courses, diminishing, dropping, flowing in too great plenty,
the Flux of the Womb.

Increasing is hindered, when either the whole body, Symptoms of increasing.
or some part is not increased enough, and cease to increase before it comes
to its just magnitude, or it increases too much, and grows to too great a
bigness.

Lastly, there are some hurts of the generative faculty, Symptoms of
generation.
for generation is either taken away when no Children are generated, or
diminished when few and weak ones are begotten, or depraved when Monsters, or a
Cripple, or any way an imperfect thing is begotten: and because to the
generation of mankind, there is required male and female joined; hitherto
belongs impotency in men, extinction of lust in women, barrenness and other
Symptoms of this kind.

CHAP. V. Of the Symptoms of the vital faculty.
FOr the Symptoms of the vital faculty there is a palpitation of the heart (a
Lypothymy, Palpitation of heart
or an absence of Spirits for a short time) or an Aphyxy, or no Pulse.
Palpitation of the heart is when there is a depraved motion of it, swifter then
it ought to be, when the heart leaps and strives to fly from that which
troubles it.

A Lypothymy, A Lypothymy.
or want of vital spirits is when the Pulse beats swift on a sudden, and then
cease to beat at all, or is suddenly taken away with a small, slow and weak
Pulse, to which some add an Eclusie, or absense of the vital soul.

A Syncope again is a motion depraved, A swooning. Absence of Pulse.
when the Pulse is much lesser, slower, and weaker then a Lypothymy.

An Asphuxy is a total absence, as it were, of the Pulse, and the highest
degree of swooning, and nearest to death: of the other preternatural
differences of Pulses we will speak in another place.

Respiration, which is caused by the heart, Respiration hurt. Taken away.
Depraved. Shortbreathing. Shorter. Shortest.
either is wholly taken away, Which Symptom the Greeks call Apnoia, or is
depraved, which they call Dyspnoia; besides these, the respiration is either
too great, or too small; too often, or too seldom; too swift, or too slow;
equal, or unequal. And lasty, of swift and slow breathings, there are some
differences, according to more and less; for the first degree is a Dusopme,
the second is an Asthma, the third is an Orthopnie, when the sick are forced to
fit upright to breath.

Of the Symptoms of the external senses.
FOr as much as belongs to the external senses, Symptoms of sight:
first of the sight, that either is wholly lost, as in blindness, and the
Disease called Amagrosis, or it is diminished in the disease, which is called
Ambluopia and dimnesse of sight, or Muopia which is to see as Mice do; that is,
to discern objects which are near us, and seeming less to us then they are.
Depravation of sight.
Nutolopea is when any one sees well by day, but very bad in the evening and
not by night, or the sight is depraved. When these things which are white seem
red, or yellow, those things which are strait, crooked, those things which are
whole, seem half, and perforated, those things which are single, double; when
Cobwebs appear before the eyes, and Flies, and Gnats, when shinings and
glistnings appear, which the Greeks call Marmarugase.

The hearing is either taken away, Symptoms of hearing.
which disease is called Deafness, when the diseased can neither hear a great
nor small sound, or it is diminished when loud sounds are heard, but with
difficulty, small sounds not at all; which disease is called hardness of
hearing; the Greek name Barucoia, Ducecoia, Hypocophosis; or it is depraved
when there is a hiding in the ears, which disease the Greeks call Ecos and
Sorigmos, i. c. a hiding, a whistling, a hissing.

The smell is hurt when it is abolished, Symptoms of smelling
diminished, or depraved; when things seem to stink, have in them no ill smell.

Moreover the taste is either plainly taken away, or else diminished or
depraved, Of tasting.
when a thing seems to taste otherwise then it does.

The touch is either wholly lost and can feel nothing, or is diminished, Of
feeling
which is called Numness, or it is depraved, as in pain, or itching, hitherto
also belongs want of sense in the teeth.

CHAP. VII. Of the Symptoms of the Internal senses.
THe Symptoms of the Internal senses are watchings and sleepings, when either
of them are contrary to nature; Symptoms of the common sense. Too much
watching. Too much sleep.
as likewise dreams; the error in watchings are when men either sleep not at
all for a long time, or if they do, they sleep too little.

Sleep is opposite to watching, if it be too much, which comes to pass when it
is natural, but not absolutely such; but longer either from the repletion of
the head by vapors, and exhalations, as in drunkenness, or by the consuming of
the heat and spirits through too much labor.

But preternatural sleep is such as does proceed from a morbifique cause, which
is a Cataphora, or a Co^na, that is, a diminution of the action of the common
sense, which, as it were, a wreathing, neither suffers the Animal Spirits to be
diffused into the external senses; nor being entertained by them, does know,
and judge aright of other objects. A Coma is twofold, Coma twofold. Somnolent
Vigilant.
somnolent and vigilant; somnolent is that which is oftentimes called an
absolute Coma; with which disease those that are affected, the eyes being shut,
do sleep sound and too much: but a vigil is when the sick have a propensity to
sleep, yet nevertheless they cannot; but only shutting their eyes and winking,
they are possessed with too great a desire of sleep.

In sleep there oftentimes happens dreams, wherein the action of the fantasy
does concur; Dreams.
for dreams are nothing else but the deliriums of the brains of sleepers,
although dreams happen to those which are well, yet contrary to cu^^ome, they
often remain longer, and during the whole night, or are terrible, and trouble
the mind exceedingly, and bring great anxiety in sleep, and wearisomness when
one is awake.

To these kind of Symptoms belongs an ecstasy, An Ecstasy.
and that natural, which is nothing else but a heavy sleep, with heavy dreams,
and hence sometimes comes a delirium therewith.

As also the affects of Sleep-walkers, who whilst they sleep, Sleep-walkers.
arise out of their beds, walk, and perform certain works, as w^king people do,
at that time when they ought to rest; yet if the imagination be together
offended, these Symptoms may be referred to that rank wherein many internal
senses are hurt.

As for what belongs to the offending of the rest of the Internal senses,
Whether the Phantafie, and reasonable faculty be always hurt together.
sometimes one of them is offended, sometimes many together; for the most part
the Fantasy and Ratiocination are offended together, yet not always; for
although the understanding be busied about Phantasms, yet the understanding
acting, illustrates the Phantasms, and frees them from their supposed matter,
and runs from one thing to another, and is busied about the Idea's retained by
the memory, by which the error of the Fantasy may often be known, sometimes
also the memory is together offended; yet sometimes remains safe from the
errors of the fantasy, and the reasonable faculty.

But those actions are either abolished, The Memory abolished and diminished.
or diminished, or depraved; nevertheless the memory whose office it is not to
judge, but only to receive representations, may be so much debilitated and
abolished, namely when it does not receive, and retain those things which it
ought, or it receives nothing, and retains nothing, and so a man forgets all
things: it cannot be depraved, but if sometimes it receives and retains false
objects that is not to be ascribed to it, but to that faculty which discovers
absurd and false representations, the memory seems then to be depraved to some,
when it does not render things in that order which it received them, but errs
in order; but this seems to happen only by reason of the weakness of the
memory.

The principal actions are abolished and diminished in the imbecility and
dullness of the mind, The Fantasy, and rational faculty diminished and
abolished. Folly. Foolishness. Madness.
slownesse of the Wit, stupidity, when a man has a certain knowledge of the
chief things, and draws some conclusions from them, but with great labor.

The greatest fault, and the greatest hurt of the Fantasy, and Ratiocination,
yet without delirium, is fatuity.

But when a man is so destitute of all ingenuity, and the fantasy and
Ratiocination are so hurt that they can neither know the first principles, and
can beget no conceits, it is called foolishness, and madness; especially if
the action depraved concur, and a man judges not only a little but false.

But the imagination and reasonable faculty is depraved in deliriums, A
Delirium.
whereof there are several kinds; for a deliri um is either with a Fever, or
without a Fever; with or without a Fever, Melancholy.
is either simple, viz. A moderate delirium, and without madness stirred up by
hot vapors in a Fever, or by watching, or drinking too much Wine, which the
Greeks call Paraphrosune, or Paraphrora.

A Frenzy is with a Fever, which is a continued delirium, arising from the
inflammation of the Brain and its Membranes.

But a delirium without a Fever is Melancholy, and madness; Melancholy is a
Delirium without a Fever, with sorrow and sadness, as it is commonly defined;
or a failing of the Fantasy and reasonable Faculty about one certain thing:
and indeed the Fantasy is principally offended, but the reasonable Faculty
not always nor in all, but the memory for the most part is safe.

To melancholy Deliriums also is referred Mad Love, wherein concur various
passions, Mad love.
now they conceive joy with hope of obtaining the thing beloved; where they do
many things, and speak beyond decency, and now sorrow and anger when they
despair of obtaining the thing beloved.

Madness is a delirium without a Fever, with Fury, Fear, Madness.
Audacity, Anger, Quarrels, and Ferosity.

To madness are referred Wolf-madnesse, Dog-madnesse, Badger-madnesse, fear of
Water, viz. a Disease wherein if one be bitten with a Dog, a Wolf, a Badger,
or any other ravenous Animal, he becomes altogether averse to all liquid and
potulent drinks, although as for other things, they do not shun them; also
those that are bitten by a Tarantula, leap and dance, and a Corea or company of
S. Viti, which is a kind of delirium and madness, with which those that are
affected strive to dance night and day.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Symptoms of the motive Faculty.
ANimal motion is either abolished, diminished, Symptoms about motion. Palsy.
or depraved; motion is abolished, not only in the Palsy, which is impotency
of motion, wherein the next instruments of motion are relaxed, and ceased from
their action, and are not contracted, but cannot be moved by reason of putting
out of joint, fractures of bones, wounds of the muscles, Lassitude.
dryness and induration of the parts serving for motion. It is diminished in
the green sickness, or in laziness when the motion is become weak.

It is depraved in trembling, which the Greeks call Tremos, Trembling
wherein the part cannot move freely, but is now elevated, and anon depressed:
for although in respect of the motive faculty, trembling is only imbecility of
the motive faculty; yet because the motive faculty does not wholly fail, but
the member which contrary to the dictate of the will is depressed by its own
weight, it endeavors in some measure to elevate it self; here is made a
depraved motion, where in the smallest intervals of time the member is lifted
up, and depressed in a continual course.

As also in the Convulsion, Kinds of Convulsion fits.
which is a preter-natural contraction of a Muscle, toward its beginning,
contrary to the will; and a violent stretching out of the part, into which a
Tendon is inserted. A Convulsion is either Universal or Particular, Universal
is threefold, Emprosthotonos, i. e. when the Neck and the rest of the Body is
bowed forward, so that the diseased cannot set himself upright. Opisthotonos,
when the body is bent backward. Tetanos, when the body is so stiff that it
cannot bend any way. A particular Convulsion in regard of several particular
parts, has diverse names, Aspasmos Cynicus, a Convulsion of the Muscles of the
Mouth. Trismos, a Convulsion of the Muscles of the Jaws, with grating and
grinding of the Teeth. Strabismes, a Convulsion of the Muscles of the Eye.

To these belong Convulsive Motions, Convulsive motions.
wherein is made a Contraction of the Muscle toward his beginning, but
continues not in one difference of Location; but it happens with various
concussions and agitations of the Member, as in an Epelepsie.

Sometimes also a Palsy and a Spasme are complicate, A Palsy. Cramp.
Complicate Voice hurt.
so that by changes and turns they afflict, and so the part is sometimes
contracted, and sometimes dilated.

Hitherto is to be referred the error of the voice, which either is abolished,
as in Aphonia, or dumbness, or diminished, as in an inward and obscure, or
small and low voice, or it is depraved, being broken in a shrill, sharp,
hoarse, or trembling voice.

The speech also is hurt, Hurt of speech.
which is either taken away, as in those which are called mute, or else it is
difficult, as in those who pronounce certain Letters, especially R, with great
difficulty; or it is depraved, as in those who in speaking now stop, and anon
precipitate their speech, which evil, the Greeks call Traulates and Psellotes,
the English, Stammering.

Amongst these errors of Motion, those Symptoms are to be reckoned wherein the
natural expulsive Motion, being stimulated by a preternatural cause, arises up
to expel; it cannot perform motion without the help of the animal virtue, and
Organ, such as are a cough, sneezing, yawning, quaking, stretching.

A Cough is a depraved motion, A Cough.
and vehement efflation occasioned from the sudden constriction of the Lungs,
and Breast, whereby that may be expelled, which was troublesome, and be sent
forth by the instruments of breathing.

Sneezing is a motion of the Muscles, primarily of the Brain, Sneezing.
secondarily of the Breast, and inferior Muscles, whereby that may be expelled,
which is troublesome to the Brain.

Yawning, or Gaping, Yawning.
is that motion whereby nature endeavors to expel the flatuous vapors by
breathing them out of the mouth.

Stretching is a distention of the members in the whole Body, Stretching
discussing the vapors in them.

Shaking fits, that is a concussion of the skin of the whole body, Horror.
to shake off some troublesome thing.

Cold fits, that is a shaking of the whole body, Cold fits.
to put off that which offends it.

CHAP. IX. Of the Symptoms wherein all, or most part of the animal actions are
hurt.
BUt sometimes it happens that either all, or most of the animal functions are
offended together: amongst these Symptoms, a Vertigo is the first, the Greek
Dinos and Iliggos, A Vertigo.
it is such a mischief, and depravation of the imagination, sometimes of the
common sense, that all things seem to run round in a circle, and for the most
part, the motion is so hurt, that a man falls down. Sometimes the external
senses are affected likewise, which if it happen at the same time, the eyes are
obscured by a fuliginous mist; the Greeks call it Scotoma, and Scotodinos, i.
e. a shady disease. Sometimes the hearing is somewhat depraved, or some certain
swimming arises, or some other senses are affected.

Moreover an Incubus, or a riding of the Mare, An Incubus.
or an hindrance of breathing, and interruption of speech, and hindrance of
motion, as it were, an oppression of the body, with a false dream of a weight
lying upon the breast.

A Lethargy, which is a perpetual desire of sleeping, A Lethargy.
with a giddiness of the head, with forgetfulness of all things, or it is a
continual Delirium, with a weak Fever, heaviness to sleep, and destruction of
memory.

A Carus, which is a profound, or dead sleep, A Carus.
wherein the sick hear not, and being pricked, scarce perceive it, or a deep
sleep with diminution, or taking away of sense, motion, and imagination, the
breathing being gone.

A Catoch, A Catoch.
or Catolepsis is a Diminution of the principal functions, or external senses,
especially of feeling, and voluntary motion by abolition; or it is a sudden
apprehending, whereby those which are affected being stiff, remain in the same
place and gesture of body as they were in when they were taken, and opening,
and not moving their eyes, they neither see nor hear, nor perceive; the breath
and pulse only remaining safe.

An Epelepsie is an ablation of the principal actions, An Epelepsie. An
imperfect Epelepsie.
and of sense and voluntary motion, with a preternatural Convulsion, or
Convulsive motion of the whole body.

To the Epelepsie also are referred certain Diseases, as it were, small
Epelepsies, wherein the sick are not velified in the whole body, neither do they
fall down, but some parts only are twitched, as either the head is shaken, or
the eyes are drawn, or the hands and feet are snatched this way and that way,
or the hands are held shut, or the diseased is turned round, or runs up and
down, and in the mean time speaks nothing, hears nothing, perceives nothing.

Lastly, An Apoplexy.
an Apoplexy, which is an abolition of all animal actions, to wit, of motion
and sense, in which the whole body, with the hurt of the principal faculty of
the mind, respiration after a sort being safe.

CHAP. X. Of the Symptom of the changeable qualities of the Body.
THe second kind of Symptoms are those which consist in a simple affect of the
body, The difference of qualities changed.
or the qualities of the body changed; namely, when some natural quality of the
body is changed, by reason of which change, there follows no hurt of the
actions; their differences are to be sought out of the number of the external
senses.

The visible qualities changed are colors contrary to nature, Colors changed.
either in the whole body, as in the yellow Jaundice, or in a Cachochimy, or
ill habit of the body, or in some part, as in the Face, Tongue, an
inflammation, black Teeth, yellow Nails, and such like.

Smells contrary to nature are changed, Smells changed.
when a man breaths forth an ill smell, either out of the whole body, or from
some part, as the Mouth, Nose, hollow of the Armpits, or soals of the Feet.

Tastes or Savours are changed when the spittle, Taste changed.
or any thing else which swims in the Mouth is spit out, and gives a sharp,
salt, bitter, or other taste; but since these qualities are not the parts of
the Body, but Excrements; they may be more fitly referred to the third kind of
Symptoms.

To the fourth belong Tactil qualities only, Change of Tactil qu^lities.
as they are contrary to nature, and troublesome, but do not hinder actions, as
Heat, Cold, Softness, Hardness. Hoarsenesse.

To Hearing may be referred, sounds, warbling, crackling, grinding of Teeth,
and such like, which are perceived by hearing.

Lastly, hitherto are to be referred common sensible things, as Figure,
Magnitude; if they are preternatural, and all those things which are spoken of
in the Hypocratical Face, and are described in his First Book of Prognostics.

CHAP. XI. Of the Symptoms of Excretions and Retentions.
THe third sort of Symptoms comprehend the errors of those things which we
ought to be cast out of the body, Errors of Emission and Retention.
or use to be retained in it, contrary to nature; in which kind of Symptoms
regard is not to be had to the excression it self, or action of casting forth,
whose faults are the Symptoms of actions hurt, but only to the matter which
is cast out, which as it recedes from the natural state, constitutes this or
that sort of Symptoms.

Retentions and Excretions offend either in the whole substance, or in quality,
or in quantity. First, Excression and Retention offend in substance.
in the whole substance they offend, which ought never to be found in the whole
body, in the stead of an Excrement; such are Stones, and diverse sorts of
Worms, little Hairs, and such like. Secondly, those which in their whole
substance are not contrary to nature, but are cast forth in this or that
manner, or place, contrary to nature; such are the Courses out of the Nose,
Eyes, or Teats, the Ordure by the Mouth. Thirdly, those things which are plainly
natural, yet ought rather to be retained then evacuated, as too much profusion
of blood by the Mouth, Panch, Nose, Bladder, Pores of the Skin, which happens
in a bloody swear. To these belongs particular ejections out of the Lungs, and
other parts. In quality they offend many ways, in heat and cold, moisture and
dryness; In color, smell, and taste, in quantity, excretions offend, when
either more or less then ought to be are cast forth, which often happen in the
dregs of the Panch, Urine, and Courses.

The end of the third Part and first Section; of the second Book.
Book. II. PART. III. SECT. II. OF THE CAUSES OF SYMPTOMS.
CHAP. I. Of the causes of the Symptoms of the natural faculty.
SIthence we have reckoned all the differences of Symptoms, The cause of want
of nourishment.
order now requires that we may show their Causes in the same order we have set
down them; and as for the Symptoms of the Natural Faculty, amongst them the
first is Atrophy, or want of nourishment; and that is either in the whole, or
in some part. In the whole.
Atrophy in the whole is occasioned through the debility of the faculty, or
default of the nourishment; the vertne is weakened through a dry distemper, and
sometimes hot, which principally proceeds from the Heart, laboring with the
like distemper, as in Hekticks, and other Fevers; yet sometimes from the defect
of other parts which may communicate their affects also with the Heart,
diseases may perform the same. Atrophy is occasioned through defect of Aliment,
when either it is not communicated in sufficient quantity, or when it is
affected with some ill quality: It Is wanting when too small a quantity is
received, or although sufficient quantity be taken, yet it is not concocted
through the weakness of the bowels; or being concocted, it is not distributed
by reason of the narrowness of the Veins about the Liver; or it is dispersed,
or not conglutinated, by reason of distempers of the parts, especially hot and
dry. Atrophy is made through the pravity of nutriment, when ill blood by reason
of the distemper of the bowels is generated, especially hot and dry, and not so
profitable. In part.
Atrophy is in some part whilst its force is weak, through cold distemper and
defect of native heat, or through want of nourishment, by reason of the
straitness of the passages, by which it should be communicated to the part, or
occasioned by what cause soever.

The immediate cause of depravation of nutrition, The cause of ill habit of
Body.
and of ill habit, is vicious and raw nourishment in the bowels, appointed for
public concoctions, arising from the vicious disposition there; to which
sometimes a cold and moist dsstemper, and habit of the body is added.

The Scabs, Of the scab, leaprosie. etc.
the Leprosy and other known cutanious diseases have their original from ill
nourishment, but not crude, but sharp, salt nitrous, or having some other
pravity which since it is various, various diseases from thence do arise.

But amonst the Symptoms which happen to the concoction which is made in the
stomach. The cause of the appetite taken away and diminished.
The first is when the appetite is hurt, and the reason of abolishing or
diminishing of the appetite is, because either little or no juice is made, or
else is not perceived; juice is not made, or very little is made, when many
crude and watery humors comp^ess the mouth of the stomach, or the chyle hither
to sticks in the stomach, or because aliment abounds in the body, which may be
when it is not evacuated, by reason of the thickness of the skin, or
idleness, or weak heat, or because it is not attracted, through some distemper
of the Veins, or straitness of the Meseraick veins, and of the hollow Vein of
the Liver, or because concoction and distributiis hindered in the stomach. The
sucking is not perceived either through the error of the sensitive faculty,
when the animal spirits which should flow are desicient, or when the action is
converted another way, as in such as are out of their wits, or when the nerves
of the conjugation are defective, or when the mouth of the stomach is ill with
some distemper, as swelling, or ulcer, or by the dullness of the stomach
occasioned by some stupefactive Medicines, The cause of daily abstinence.


Hitherto belongs the daily abstinence of those men who abstained not only
some days and months, but years also from all meats; of which wonderful
Symptom, although it be not easy to render a reason, yet it is probable that
all such had not need of restoring, and that because nothing is taken away, or
not in a long time wasted, because of the humors which preserves our bodies,
is so disposed, and proportioned to the heat of the same, that it could not be
destroyed by it.

On the contrary, The cause of the appet ite increased.
the cause of the increase of the appetite is too much sucking, which comes to
pass either from some humor sticking in the stomach; such is Melancholy,
which by its sharpness and austereness binds the stomach, or through want of
nourishment, which happens by reason of Worms, which consumes the Chyle, or by
too much labor and exercise, watchings, long fastings, evacuations of blood,
vomiting, or from some old distemper, binding the stomach.

But the appetite is depraved by a vicious humor peculiarly corrupted and
fixed to the Tunicles of the stomach, which is either generated in the stomach
by ill food, or else flows from some other part, especially the Womb, into the
stomach.

Thirst is abolished, or diminished, either from cold, sweat, The cause of
diminishing of thirst.
unsavory, petuitous, aqueous, many humors generated in the stomach, want of
meat and drink, or flowing from some other parts, continually moistening the
stomach, or because the stomach does not perceive its want of drink, as it
often comes to pass in Frensies and burning Fevers.

Again the Thirst is increased through want, Of increased.
and dryness of humors, which proceed from those things which have drying
faculties, and such as consume the primogenial humidity of the stomach; such
are all drying and heating things, as hot humors, sharp and salt, a hot and
dry distemper in the mouth of the stomach, proceeding either from the whole,
which is in Fevers, or in some part near to the stomach, which either sends hot
and dry vapors and humors to the stomach; or by reason of the communion of
the Tunicles and Membranes which cover the stomach, the orifice of the stomach,
the Windpipe, and the neighboring parts, communicating a hot and d^y
distemper to the O^fice of the stomach: external causes which are evident
perform the same as those which have a power of heating, drying, and consuming
the humidity in the O^ifice of the Ventricle.

Vicious thirst is caused by some vicious humor in its whole kind contrary to
nature, Vicious thirst.
sticking in the mouth of the stomach,

The swal owing is hurt either when the faculty is offended, Of swallowing hurt.
or through some external error; and indeed the faculty either natural, or
animal may be hurt: the natural is hurt whilst either the attractive faculty
cannot draw meat through the strait fibers of the internal Pannicle into the
parts; or the expulsive through the Transuerse fibers inserted into the
external Tunicle, cannot thrust food which is drawn into the mouth of the
stomach, farther down into the stomach; which is caused through the relaxation
of the fibers of the Orifice of the stomach, by reason of a cold and moist
distemper, when the matter flows from the head to the chops; or by reason of
their dryness occasioned by some Tumor, Ulcer, or Excoriation.

The animal faculty is hindered when the Muscle which is before the gullet,
either is inflamed, which use to be in the Quinsie; or it is contracted either
by Convulsion, or Palsy; it is hindered also by reason of the straitness of
the entrance into the stomach, which proceeds from diverse causes, as Tumors in
the Throat, Relaxation of the Vertebraes of the Neck, and Back: external things
being swallowed, as when Fish-bones, Pins, and other things stick in the mouth
of the stomach, as also Worms.

The swallowing is hindered by some external error when any thing, hard, dry,
sharp, rough, viscid, or ungrateful is swallowed.

The retention of meat swallowed is hindered, when it is abolished, The causes
of Retention of meat hurt.
diminished, or depraved. Retention taken away and diminished proceed from the
same causes, the one from the greater, the other from the lesser: and this
comes to pass if the Retentrix be weak. The Oblique fibers loosned by a cold
and moist distempers, or if any Tumor, as an Inflammation or Ulcer be present.
The cause of windiness in the stomach, is windy meats, and a stomach not cold
enough, but the cause of floating with a noise, is when the stomach is freed
from that which might be turned into wind, yet still remaining full of drink,
or extremely cooled.

But the retentive faculty is depraved when the stomach does not ^ightly infold
the meat, Of Palpitation.
and indeed a Palpitation with floating and noise happens through the weakness
of retention and thick winds penned into the stomach, Of Convulsion.
which arise either from the causes or crudity, or from flatulent meat, or
yellow, or black choler spread over the stomach; But a constriction, and a
certain sighing, or Hiccock happens, when after emptiness and defect of
aliment, the stomach too violently contracts it self, having newly received
meat.

T^embling is caused by the imbecility of the retentive faculty from a cold
distemper, and the wait of the meat oppressing: Of trembling. Of Shaking. The
cause of abolishing and diminishof concoction in the stoma^h. Faculty hurt.
External error.
and a certain Quavering when the Ventricle is molested by any biting thing,
especially choler.

For as much, as what belongs to the concoction hurt, is either abolished or
diminished in the stomach, they both proceed from the same causes, they only
differ according to Major and Minor, and the concoction is hindered, either
primarily and by it self, when it cannot do its office withour the hurt of the
rest of the faculties. Or secondarily, and by accident, when it is vitiated by
the retentive or expulsive faculty. For unless meat can be retained so long as
it ought. The concoction cannot be rightly performed. The concoction is hurt by
its self, either when the faculty is hindered, or by some external error, the
faculty being hurt is hindered through some distemper of the stomach, from what
cause soever arises, or other diseases of the stomach, tumors, ulcers, and
such like which hinder concoction; the concoction is hindered through external
errors; first, by reason of Excrements, which if they abound in the stomach and
offend with cold, they are the cause of abolition, and diminition thereof.
Secondly, by meats which offend either in quantity, or else diverse and various
kinds are taken, or in quality, if the meats are cold, or hard, and clammy, and
hard to be concocted. Thirdly, by reason of the time of taking food; namely, if
meat raw betaken before it is boiled. Fourthly, after the taking of meat, if a
man watch the whole night, or sleep very little, or exercise himself
violently, or suffer the passions of the mind.

The corruption of meat is twofold, the one nitrous, Depraved.
the other acide; the nitrous has its beginning from a hot distemper of the
stomach, the chollerick excrements being collected in the ventricle by hot
aliments which are obnoxious to corruptions; such as are sharp, oily, pinguious
things, Milk, Mushrooms, garden Fruit, and such like; but crudity produces
acidity, through the cold distempers abounding with cold aliments; cold,
pituitous, and melancholy humors in the stomach.

We have said the Symptoms of the expulsive faculty of the stomach, are
Hiccock, Loathing, Vomiting, Choler, Belching.

The immediate cause of Hiccock is something troublesome to the superior part
of the stomach, Hiccock.
especially to the Orifice thereof, which it endeavors by that motion to put
away and expel, but the causes which trouble the stomach on this manner, are
either in the Stomach it self, or in the parts which can draw the Ventricle by
consent. The cause of Hiccock in the Stomach it self, is matter either
oppessing by its plenty, or offending in quality, as sharp meats, and biting,
and such like humors, sharp medicines, malignant and foul vapors, either
generated in the stomach, or sent thither from elsewhere, Worms, an immoderate
cold distemper, and those things which outwardly press the stomach, which may
happen by the pressing and bending the extremities of the ribs to the stomach.
But Hiccock by consent happens when the nerves of the sixth conjugation suffer
together, in an inflammation and percussion of the brain; as also
inflammations of the Midriff, the Eungs, the Liver, the Gutflion.

Loathing and Vomiting have their rise from the same causes differing according
to Major and Minor, Causes of loathing and vomiting.
either in the stomach it self ill affected and weak, or from something
contrary to nature, tearing the stomach. The stomach is ill affected by a cold
and moist distemper; or by conformation thereof, or by a certain native
straitness thereof, by reason of dryness and leanness, swelling an Ulcer,
whereunto belongs frequent vomiting, which indeed it self disposes the
stomach to more frequent vomiting: as also the shutting of the inferior
Orifice of the Ventricle by some tumor, as an obstruction also of the Guts and
mesentary, and inverted motion of the fibers of the Guts. The diseases called
the Chollick and Stone, by the communion of the Membranes; and lastly, wounds
and hurts of the Brain and its Membranes. But the matter which Irrirates the
stomach to expel, either loading it with its plenty, or twitching it with its
sharpness, or moilifying the superior Orifice, or by stimulating it with a
malignant quality it does it; whether it be meat and drink, or medicines,
poisons, worms, blood, quitture; choler effused into the stomach, which
happens to those which have a vicious implantation of the Pores or the Vessel
that carries the Choler into the bottom of the stomach. The evident external
causes are too much exercise of the body, and the sight of loathsome things.

The cause of Choler is offensive, Moist Choler.
and sharp matter irritating the expulsive faculty of the stomach by its
plenty, and its quality to expulsion, and stimulating it to evacuate, upwards
and downwards. Such is Choler collected about the Liver, Pancreas, and parts
adjacent, also sharp adust humors, salt, nitrous, and other peccant humors
bred of corrupt food, as Mushrooms, Garden-fruits, and such like strong purging
Medicines and Poisons do the same, and stir up this matter.

As for the difference betwixt the other Choler and this, Dry Choler.
which we have newly explained, that is dry, this is moist, the cause is a
flatuous and sharp spirit stirred up by yellow, black, and adust Choler spread
over the stomach.

Belching is occasioned by thick and fuming vapors breaking out upward, and
stimulating the stomach to expulsion. Belching.


Concerning a looseness, Alientary and Celiack affects.
the causes of a Lyentary and Coeliack affects are for the most part the same,
differing only in magnitude; And in this also that a Coeliack is rather a
Disease of the Guts, then of the Stomach, although its name seems to signify
otherwise; For in a Lyentary, as has been said, the meat is cast forth crude.

In a Coeliack the Chyle is ejected contrary to nature; and therefore the cause
of a Lyentary is the hurting of the retentive faculty of the Ventricle and
Intestines, by reason whereof the meat before it be perfectly concocted,
descends into the Guts and is cast out, And indeed in a Lyentary the retentive
faculty of the stomach is principally hurt. Nor can it be that meat unconcocted
can be cast forth out of the Panch, unless it be sent too soon into the Guts,
by reason of some fault of the retentive faculty of the stomach; but the
Coeliack is occasioned rather by some hurt of the retentive faculty of the
Intestines, because Chyle generated in the stomach, ought to remain some time
in the Guts; that it might there be in some manner elaborated, and be
conveniently drawn by the meseraik veins, and the ordure should be thoroughly
elaborated: If the retentive faculty of the Intestines be hurt, all these
things cannot be performed, but the Chyle untimely, and in some, as measure
crude is cast out of the Panch, but the retentive faculty of the Stomach and
Guts is hurt either of its self, or by accident: of it self through a cold
and moist distemper, and that either alone, or joined with a phlegmatic
humor, as also by cicatrising after a disentary, and the immoderate use of fat
things, and such as cause Lubricity. By accident it is hurt when the expultrix
being stirred up exceedingly, drives the meat presently downward, by reason of
the ulcerous disposition of the Stomach and Guts caused by biting and sharp
humors, sometimes also by a hidden quality, or from hurtful and poisonous
meats, or ill disposition of air.

A Diarhaea proceeds from the expultrix of the Guts stirred up by plenty of
humors, A Diarhaea.
crudity, or pravity, whether they proceed from corruption in the stomach, and
guts, or flow from the wholebody, or any part to the guts, from what cause
soever they are generated and collected, The more remote caus^s of Diarhae a
are imbecility of concoction, and distribution, through the distemper of the
stomach, and parts adjacent; ill diet, untemperate air, omitting exercises of
the body, or taking a strong purge.

The cause of a Dysentery improperly so called, or of voiding of blood without
exulceration of the Guts are the opening of the mouths of the Mesentary Veins,
A Dysentary.
either by too great plenty of this blood, or by crudity, by reason of the
concoction of the Liver, or being retained too long in the Liver Veins, and by
a burning with a preternatural heat. But as for Dysentery properly called, the
causes are sharp and biting humors, whether they flow from the whole, or from
some part to the Guts, or are generated in them, and are peculiarly troublesome
to them, of which kind also are sharp gnawing drugs, ^speciplly violent purges,
sharp quitture and poisons,

A Tenesmus, or desire to go to stool and cannot void any thing but blood, A
Tenesm.
comes for the most part from the same cause, yet principally, salt phlegm, and
a sharp humor, clammy, thick, closely sticking to the skin of the Gut, called
Rectum.

The Belly on the contrary is suppressed either because the expulsive faculty
of the Intestines is hurt, Suppression of the helly.
or because the Muscles of the belly do not help to expel, or because the
ordure does not stimulate, or because the Guts are not always sensible of
pricking and stirring up: the expulsive faculty does not expel, either because
it is hurt or frustrated by some external error, or fault in the object. It Is
hurt either because it is weakened by a cold and dry distemper, or it is
hindered by the strength and dryness of the retentive faculty, or by the
narrowness of the Guts which proceed, first from astringent and drying things.
Secondly from their inflammation, or a Tumor bred in them. Thirdly, from
growing together, especially of the Fundament. Fourthly, from the going out and
turning of them which happens in a Rupture. Fifthly, from obstruction, by
reason of the hardness of the siedge, Worms, Stones, viscous Phlegm. Sixthly,
from the Muscles refrigerated and straightened, shutting the Gut Rectum.

The belly is suppressed through default of the object when the Ordure is too
thick, viscid and hard, the Muscles of the Panch do not help to expel, either
because they are weak, or because they, or the parts under them endure pain;
the Ordure does not stimulate when either there is but little, or when there is
no mordication, or it has no sharpness, or by reason of eating of cold meats,
or because yellow Choler is not mingled therewith.

The Guts are not sensible of stimulation, either because their preception is
dull, or because through long retention they are accustomed to, and become
familiar with the Ordure, or because they are stopped with phlegm.

The Illiack passion has its original from the inverted motion of the fibers
of the Intestines, Illiack.
which proceed from some inflammation, or obstruction, from hard dung, or from
a Rupture, or from Exulceration, or a Canker, or from a high flowing of humors.

Moreover for what belongs to elaboration of blood, Sanguification hurt.
that is hindered either primarily, and by its self, or secondarily, and by
accident; Primarily it is offended either when the faculty is hindered, or by
some external accident; when the faculty is offended, it is done by reason of
some diseases of the Liver, distemper (by reason of which alone, without any
other manifest disease of the Liver; those which are troubled with its
imbecility are called Hepaticks) obstructions, tumors, ulcers. But it is hurt
by some external error, when either the Chyle is not rightly elaborated in the
stomach, or when it is thoroughly elaborated, some peccant matter is mingled
therewith. Secondarily, or by accident it is hurt, either when the attractive
faculty is hindered, by reason of diseases of the Liver, or obst^uction of the
Mesentary, or because the retentive faculty in like manner is hindered through
some disease of the Liver, and especially through its moist distemper, opening
and gnawing of the ressels, and thinness of Chyle, or by the expulsive
faculty; principally by cold distemper, and obstructions of the gibbous parts
of the Liver, by reason whereof the blood cannot be distributed.

But as for the Symptoms which happen in making of Urine, The cause of an
Iscury, and of little Uria
the first is an Iscury, or suppression of Urine, and making of less Urine:
it is properly to called when the Urine is in the Bladder, and is not ejected,
or very little is cast ou^; which Symptoms arise from the same causes,
differing only according to Major and Minor; but the Urine is suppressed, or
little is made, because the xepulsive faculty is either hurt and weakened, or
hindered. It is hurt whilst either the sensitive faculty o^ the Bladder being
hurt, does not perceive the pricking of the Urine; namely, when the proper
Nerves of the Bladder are affected either by some stroke, sliding, loosening of
the Vertebraes in that part, wounds of the spinal Marrow and Tumors, as also
stupefactive Medicines being applied thereto, or it may happen when the
expulsive faculty is hurt, and the transverse fibers of the Bladder appointed
for expulsion, or affected with some cold moist distemper: or are extended over
much, that they lose their tune or note; so that afterward they cannot be
contracted, which comes to pass when the Urine is too long retained, or the
Muscles which help and assist the Bladder to expel Urine, are affected so that
they cannot be contracted. But the expulsive faculty is hindered whilst the
Neck of the Bladder and Urinary Passages are not open, and is either stopped by a
little Flesh or Callous Substance in the passages, or is obstructed by Gravel,
clotted Blood, Quitture, or thick humors; or it is comprest by a Tumor in
compassing the Neck of the Muscle of the Bladder, or of the neighboring parts,
or it is shut by contracting of the Muscle of the Neck, or it is pressed and
wreathed by the falling of the Bladder out of its place. Urine also is not made
when too great plenty thereof is long retained, too much dilating the fibers of
the Bladder, so that afterward they cannot contract themselves, nor cannot
squeeze out, nor expel Urine, which comes to pass either when the Urine (men's
business being urgent) of its own accord is retained long; or when the
pricking of the Urine, as is said before, is not perceived. Lastly, Urine is
not cast out through its accustomed passage, if by some Wound, Ulcer, Fistula
of the Bladder and Urinary passages, the Urine which ought to pass through
them, goes out by a way opened elsewhere.

There is another Iscury less properly so called, or suppression of Urine,
when little or no Urine is sent, and comes into the Bladder, which happens when
the attractive faculty of the Reins is hurt through distemper, especially cold,
or is hindered by obstruction and straitness of the emulgent vessels, or when
the Urine is carried to another place, and is cast out of the Panch, or by
Sweats, or is collected in the Panch, and stays in the first passages, as in a
Dropsy,

But a Dusury properly so called, Difficulty of making Urine.
or difficulty of making Urine, is when the time of making water, and the
quantity, is a little altered, yet in the very making water, the Urine does not
pass out freely, but is made with great striving, pain, and burning, which
comes to pass by some fault of the Urinary passage; namely, whilst it is
affected with some Ulcer, and is eroded, or the Urine it self being sharp does
it, or the passage was formerly ulcerated.

The cause of a Strangury is either some sharp thing which stimulates nature
continually to expel, Of a Strangury.
but because nature is sensible of pain, it hinders free emission, the Urine is
made drop by drop, and dribling, which is caused by crude Urine unconcocted, or
having a sharp humor mixed with it, by Gravel sticking in the neck of the
Bladder, or some fault of the Urinary passage: whereunto belongs Intemperature
of the Bladder, and inflammations of the same, and of the parts near thereunto:
hot humors, also exulceration of the neck of the Bladder and Urinary passage.

Involuntary pissing, Of Involuntary pissing.
which happens both to those that are sleeping and waking, is caused for the
most part when the contractive power of the Muscle Sphincter of the bladder is
taken away, which is occasioned by a Palsy, proceeding either from a cold and
moist distemper of the same, or by hurting of the Nerves which come to this
Muscle, by compression in loosening the turning joints of the back near the
Hucklebone by a stroke, a fall, or some tumor, or obstruction, or by hurting of
the same Muscle, or certain fibers, in cutting the stone of the bladder; yet
sometimes Urine is made against our wills, when the Muscles of the Panch are
exceedingly drawn together, so that the Urine by reason of their constriction
and compression of the belly is, as it were forced out of the bladder, as also
sometimes it happens to those that are great with Child in their last months.
For the same reason they cannot contain their Urine.

But if a man contain his Urine waking, Of pissing in ones sleep.
and in his sleep let it go from him. That happens by a certain imbecility of
the Sphincter of the Bladder: Yet there concurs a more deep sleep, and a
certain negligence of the superior faculty, as also custom.

It is not easy to explain from what cause a Diabetes does proceed; To this
obscure matter I say, Diabetes.
It seems probable that the immediate cause is the hurting of the retentive
faculty of the Reins, by too great plenty of Urine; which when the Reins
cannot endure, they suffer it to flow into the bladder, This plenty of Urine
seems to be occasioned by the heat of the bowels, liver, and spleen, and the
veins, drawing drink very powerfully, and melting of the humors in the veins,
to which for the most part there happens imbecility and relaxation of those
parts which carry the watery humor from the Stomach to the Liver, and Spleen;
by reason whereof the drink is suddenly carried to the Reins.

The causes of those Symptoms which are deservedly joined to these, The cause
of defect of milk.
and belong to the generation of milk, seed, and courses of women; milk either
is wanting, or corrupt, it is wanting either when it is generated in too small
quantity, or through some distemper of the Paps, or some disease or straitness
of passages, by reason whereof they cannot draw and elaborate suffitient
quantity of blood.

Vicious and corrupt milk is generated either through the pravity of the
matter, Vicious.
and fault of the blood, or by some distemper of the b^ests.

Lastly, Coagulated.
Milk grows thick, and coagulates whilst either it is burnt by too much heat,
or if it abound in quantity, and is retained 100 long in the breasts, or if any
vicious humor be mingled the ewith, which has a power to coagulate.

A Gonorliaea, Gonorhaea
or emission of Sperm against ones will, happens without erection of the Ya^d;
and desire of Venery; it is occasioned either by the hurting of the retentive
faculty, or some exrernal error; the faculty is weakened through distemper,
principally moist, rendering the spermatick vessels more loose: whether it
proceed from too great a flux of phlegmatic humors, or too much coition, or
other causes. But from external hurt, or fault of the seed, whether it be too
cold, watery, thin, or crude, sometimes also a Gonorhaea happens by convulsion,
as in such as have the falling sickness.

The cause of Nocturnal pollution is too great plenty of seed, Of nocturnal
polution.
heat and sharpness, stimulating the expulsiye faculty; and therefore this
infirmity principally happens to those whose Reins and parts adjacent are very
hot, and to those who have sharp humor flowing to the spermatick vessels, and
then especialiy, when nature in venereal dreams is irritated to ejaculate seed,
or their loins are become hot, by lying on their backs.

But the cause of a Venereal Gonorhaea is poisonous seed, A Vencreal Gouorhae^.
corrupt, sharp and foul stirring up, and stimalating the expulsive faculty:

The cause of suppression of Courses, The cause of suppressions of Courses.
is the narrowness of the veins belonging to the Womb, and the foulness of
the Blood, as for the straitnefle of the veins, they are most frequently the
cause of suppression of Menstrues, by reason of thick blood, and dull humors;
sometimes they grow together with the vessels after abortion, or compression of
the same, by some Tumors of the parts near the cunto, or from condensation,
contraction, and dryness of the ^^^tance of the Womb, but by default of the
blond, the Courses are suppressed whilst that is thick, viscid and unapt to move.

The same cause, Causes of diminishing of Courses. The dropling of Courses.
but more gently occas^oneth small evacuation of Cou^ses, viz. They eith^ flow
in less quantity, or else more slowly.

The coming down of Courses when they come out drep by drop, and with pain is
occasioned through default of the blood when there is too much, and is thick,
viscid, biting, and sharp, and flowing down to the Womb with too great
violence, some way obstructs the passages, and extends them, and stirs up pain,
or else through default of the passages, or veins about the Womb, and in the
Womb when they are become narrower then they ought.

Too much slowing of the monthly Terms, Of too much flowing.
a^iseth when the vessels are opened, either by an Anastomasis, when the mouths
of the veins are opened, or a Diair^sis, when they are divided, or when the
blood being hotter, thinner, more moveable, sharp, and troublesome to narure,
stimulates the expulsive faculty to expel.

Now for the Causes of increasing vitiated Terms; Causes of increasing vittated.
it is manifest what things show the causes of diminution thereof, from what is
spoken of want of nourishment. But the cause of too much increase is too great
plenty of blood, from too plentiful use of meat and drink, full of nourishment,
an idle life, much sleep, too frequent use of baths, of fair water, and manly
strength, which converts the blood into the substance of the parts.

And these are the causes of the Symptoms of the natural faculty so far, The
causes of generation hurt.
as they belong to the preservation of individuals. Now follows the causes of
Generation hurt, and that either taken away, or depraved, there is no
generation made; and bartennesle happens either in respect of the Man, or of
the Woman.

In regard of the Man, In respect of the man.
it is hurt either through default of the seed, or by vicious ejaculation of
the same: unfruitful seed, or not sufficient, is generated, or the faculty is
hurt through some distemper of the Stones, especially cold and moist; whence
unripened, thin, and less spirituous is generated, or else some hot, whence
too sharp seed proceeds; or through default of matter, whilst the blood and
spirits necessary for the generation of seed, or by old age, or some disease
drying the body, or its principal parts, or by fasting are defective, or when
the vessels which are necessary for generating, and carrying of the seed be
wanting, or when the nutriment turns into fat, or when the blood is vicious.
The emission of the seed into the Woman's Womb is vitiated by the Yard, either
shorter, whether by nature or by a disease, or crowded through the shortness
of the ligament.

The action is hurt by default of the Woman, In respect of the Woman.
either when no seed, or unfruitful seed, is generated and emitted for the
reasons lately mentioned, Secondly, if she do not draw and receive the man's
seed, by reason of her cold and moist distemper of the Womb; or by reason of a
Tumor, Ulcer, or Straitness of the neck of the Womb. Thirdly, if she cannot
retain the seed received, because of the moist distemper of the Womb; an Ulcer,
opening of the mouth of the Womb, a flux of Courses, and other humors.
Fourthly, if the Seed be not well tempered by the womb, or being some other way
affected, is not rightly cherished. Fifthly, if the blood necessary for the
forming of the young be deficient, or very little.

Generation is depraved when the young are very weak, or when monsters are
generated, which comes to pass through the foul Seed of the Father, or the^
imagination of the Mother.

Lastly, Abortion.
the causes of abortion, are either too great bigness of fruit, or defect of
necessary nourishment; or humors which are contained in the Membranes; which
when they are broken, are poured into the Womb, putrify, and become sharp, and
stimulate the expultrix, or by a breaking and loosening of the vessels by which
the Child adheres to the Womb.

CHAP. II. Of the Causes of the Symptoms of the vital faculty, and of the
hindrance of respiration.
THe Symptoms which happen about the vital faculty, Causes of the Palpitation
of the heart.
or as has been said Palpitation of heart, swooning and sudden deprivation of
the senses; the causes of the Palpitation of the heart are, first, things
troublesome to the heart, meeting with it which it desires to remove from it;
namely, vapors, either in plenty, or quality, either manifest, or occult, or
both; troubling the heart: putrid humors, sharp, hot, abundantly rushing into
the heart, or pressing it, also tumors, and fleshy excrescencies and callous
flesh bred about the heart, or Worms molesting it in the Chest thereof;
moreover some moderate defect of the vital Spirits, through want, too great
evacuations, passions of the mind, vehement grief, too much exercise, which
the heart strives by more vehement pulsation, to restore and strengthen.
Thirdly, preternatural heat increased, not only consumes and scatters the
Spirits, but also enflames them, which that nature may restore temperate and
cool; it appoints this motion of the heart.

The causes of Sypothymy, are defect and want of vital Spirits, Of Sypothymy.
which either are not generated, whether by defect of matter, namely, of air
and blood, or the debility of the generative faculty, and from disease of the
heart, or being generated, or taken away and destroyed, whilst either they are
suffocated, or dispersed, or corrupted by some occult, or malignant qualities.

These causes if they are very grievous, produce swooning. The changes of
Pulses shall be spoken of in their due place.

Respiration is hurt, first when the moving faculty is hurt, The cause of
Respiration hurt. Faculty of Lu^gs hurt. Of the Breast.
and that either of the Lungs, or Breasts; the faculty of the Lungs is hurt
either by its self, when its temperament is destroyed, and the innate heat is
deficient, as in such as are dying, or it is hindered, and hurt by accident,
when the breast by what means soever becomes straiter, and the Lungs have not
space wherein to dilate themselves. The faculty of the Breast is said to be
hindered by its self, or by accident; by its self when the animal spirits
necessary to motion is wanting, or because it decays, as in such as are dying,
or its influx is not made, as in an Apoplexy; or it is not received through
default of the Nerves carrying the animal Spirits to the Muscles of the Breast
and Midriff; but it is hurt by accident, when by reason of the pain of the side,
or parts adjacent, or matter and blood contained in the Breast, or Wind, or
Tumors, or something in the Panch, the Breasts, and Midriff cannot freely be
moved; or when the Bowels in the Panch hanging about the Midriffe are
obstructed exceedingly, and swell so that by their weight between breathing,
the Midriff suffers not them to move freely.

Secondly, Of Instruments.
Respiration is hindered by reason of the Organs, when there is any Organick
Disease, or solution of continuity in the Lungs, Midriff, Muscles of the Breast
and Panch, the Windpipe.

Thirdly, In regard of use.
when the custom of breathing is changed; namely, when it is too violent
through the fiety heat kindled in the Lungs and Heart.

Lastly, Of Air.
Respiration is hindered, by reason of the sharpness which we draw in in
breathing, if it be not fit for cooling, and fanning of the heat.

The difference of an Astma and an Orthopnae, The causes of an Astma, and
shortness of breath.
which are peculiar diseases of shortness of breath, is this, when a man
constantly breaths with great difficulty, without a Fever, such as do, those
who after a violent ^ace and exercise stop, The immediate cause is straitness
of the mouths of the Lungs, or the use increased, by reason of the narrowness
of the Pipe of the Lungs; but that straitness is caused by stoppages, or
pressure of the Lungs, or of the Windpipe of the Lungs; and both obstruction
and compression are caused first by thick and viscid humors; but sometimes by
thin and serous humors, but in great plenty: Moreover a Crude Tumor, or by
some swelling, or gravel sticking in the ^ungs, which cause obstructions when
they stick in the Pipe of the Lungs, but compression when they are in the
substance of the Lungs, or its Veins, and Arteries. This matter sometimes is
gathered by little and little through its weakness, sometimes it flows from
elsewhere, and most commonly it is thought to flow from the head by the vulgar;
but to me it seems more probable to flow through the Arterious Veins, from the
Liver into the Lungs, whilst crude humors are generated therein, or abound in
a venomous kind, which even that shows that in an Astma the cough is not
always present, which nevertheless perpetually accompanies a Catarrh, and
because these that are troubled with an Astma, have always an ill habit of
body, and the signs of debility of the Liver.

A Crude Tumor may consist not only in the Wind-pipes, but without it; which
when it happens, and consists about the smooth Arteries, yet it presses the
rough Arteries, and respiration is thereby hurt, and the Heart is drawn into
consent, and an uneven pulse is produced.

CHAP. III. Of the causes of the Symptoms of the external senses.
SInce order requires that we speak of the causes of the Symptoms of the
Animal faculty; first of all the the sight is hurt diverse ways by reason of
diseases of parts constituting the eyes, and the default of the optique and
spirits.

The Tunicle called Cornea, which comes in the first place, since it is
transparent, and void of color, that it may permit the passing through of
visible species, if it lose its transparency, Faults of the Cornea.
or be affectd with a stange color it hinders the sight: it loses its
diaphanity if it be thicker, and become more dense, or be moistened, or
pustules, or little skins cover it. It grows thicker, and more dense by drying,
and that either the whole, which disease is called Caligo, or else some part,
is become white, which is called an Albugo, Caligo. Albugo.
which spot if it be perfectly white, and darkning, so that it permit no
passage for visible species, and cover the whole Pupil; it causes blindness;
but if it be not perfectly white, nor hinders all the passage for visible
species; it cavseth only debility of sight, or brings forth some depravation,
and deception: If it does not cover the whole Pupil, so that things seem as if
they were divided; the same comes to pass by reason of cicatrizing left after
wounds, and ulcers. By its moisture it loses its transparency in an
inflammation of the eye: Moreover by pustules bred therein; and the nail of
the eye which the Greeks call Pterugion, or a Tunicle. But if the Cornea be
affected with any strange color which very seldom happens, the sight is
depraved, and represents visible species in other colors, not their own.

Secondly the Aqueous humor offends either in quantity, or manner of
substance, or color. Defects of the Aqueous humor.


It offends in quantity if it be wanting, or lessoned by a wound or ulcer, when
the Cornea being cut, or eroded by a sharp humor it flies out, or by quotidian
diseases, or extreme old age, and as it is waming more, or less: it causes
blindness, or diminution, or depravation of ^ght. Sometimes it offends in
substance, when it is become thick or impure, or any thing is mingled with it
of a different substance; if it only become thick, the sight is made duller,
and those things which are obvious to the sight are seen, as it were, through a
cloud; and if they are remote, they could not be discerned; but if they are
near, they are not exactly seen.

But if the mucous and thick matter be mingled therewith, A perfect Cataract.
and be so thickened, that it loses all transparency, and fills up the
hollowness of the Pupil, it causes blindness, and that disease is called
vulgarly a Suffusion, or a Cataract; but if the whole aqueous humor be not
obscure and dark, but only some part thereof obscure and dark, if through that
part which is dark, visible species are not received, but only through that
which is perspicuous at once not more, but fewer things are discerned; but if
in the center and middle of the Pupil only a particle of such a thick and dark
humor be present, and all the parts round about of the aqueous humor be
transparent, whatsoever is beheld seems not to be whole, but perforated and
hollow in the middle; but if the little dark bodies are not continuous, but
divided and many of them stick in the aqueous humor, Gnats, Flies, Cobwebs, and
such like, seem to appear in the air; but i^ the extremities are obscured with
such a humor, the object is not discerned whole: when you look foreright. The
same also may happen in a disease which is called Hypopuon, Hypopuon.
when there is purulent matter collected under the Cornea

There is also another Suffufion, A spurious Cataract.
which is called Notha, or a bastard Cataract, which is when vapors are
carried to the eyes from the rest of the body, through the A teries and Veins,
the aqueous humor being safe, which happens to those which are drunk, and in
burning Fevers. Lastly, if the aqueous humor be affected with some strange
color, there arises the same depravation of sight, as when the Cornea is
discolored, and all those things which are brought before the eyes, represent
that color, wherewith that humor is died.

The Pupil which is as it were the window of the eye, Diseases of the Pupil.
four ways recedes from its natural state. 1. Whilst either it is dilated, or
contracted, or closed, or is removed into another part, or broken, or
obstructed. The Pupil is dilated by the extending of the Unca, when it is
stretched, or through dry distempers, or by a Tumor, or by wind included, or
some spirit or humor, for those which have a broad Pupil; in the night time,
Contracted
and in an obscure place see best; but in the day time, and a light place see
worst; but it is become narrower, when by its moisture it is loosned, and falls
as it were into its self: moreover when the aqueous humor is wanting. 3. When
some thick matter sticks in the aqueous humor, for those who have a narrow
Pupil discern more clearly in the day, not so well in the night: Dislocated and
broken
the Pupil is dislocated and broken, which when it happens, and changes its
place, those things are seen better, which are set on the sides of the eye;
then those that are set opposite to it, and those which are opposite seem not
to be so, until the sight shall be moved thither where it may be opposed to the
visible things, A strabismos.
which affect is called a Strabismos, in English squinteyed.

The Crystal humor recedes from its natural state, Diseases of the Crystal
humor.
either according to the manner of its substance, and quality, or according to
its situation. As for the manner and quality of the substance; If it be
somewhat more solid, thicker, more obscure, so that it wants greater
illumination night-blindness arises; but if in some part, Nyctalonia.
or altogether, it loses its clearness, there follows debility of sight, or
blindness. If it contracts a gray color, it is called Glaucoma, Glaucoma.
with which disease those that are affected seem to see through a cloud, as it
were, and through smoke, but if the same humor change its place and decline
downward, or ascend upward, all things seem double, if toward the sides,
things seem more to the right hand, or the left, then they are; It is recedes
toward the middle, or center, things nigh are ^ightly, sar off are not
distinctly seen: if it should go back beyond the middle and center toward the
Nerve Optique, things remote would seem lesser, and those which would discern
them truly, must needs put them close to their eyes, which disease is called
Mouse-sight and Pu^-blind; Myopia. Lusciositas
but if the contrary happen toward the fore part of the Pupil those who have
the Christaline so placed, things nigh seem less, and things a far off bigger,
which happens to old men, and especially to those who were employed all their
life times in reading, and other businesses where their eyes were continually
busied.

If the vitreous humor either change its place by some contusion, Diseases of
the vitreous humor.
and some part of it is carried before the Crystal humor, and puts the
Crystal besides its place, ochanges its clearness and perspicuity, or is
become thicker, diverse diseases of the eye do happen.

But if the whole eye, Diseases of the whole eye.
or most of its parts are not rightly placed, the sight is diversely hurt, and
is either plainly abolished, and blindness follows, or it is weakened, or
depraved; namely, when the whole eye wants nourishment, or changes its
situation in coming out too forward, by what means soever occasioned, as also
in a Strabismos, or Convulsion of the Muscles of the Eye, or it is not moved as
in a Palsy, or more humors are fallen out of the eye, by reason of its wide
wounds, inflammations, and ulcers.

The sight is hurt by default of the Optique Spirits (where we also conclude
the errors of the Optique Ne^ves) if they are deficient in the brain, Diseases
of the visive spirits and of the Optique Nerve.
being hurt through cold distemper, compression, obstruction, and then for the
most part, the other senses both internal and external are affected, or at
least that part of the brain is affected from whence the Optique Nerves have
their o^iginal, and then the sight only is taken away, or by default of the
Nerve Optique it self, which is its narrowness, or by rupture which proceeds
from obstruction of the Optique Nerves, compression, percussion, a stroke by
chance, contorsion, or by any violent motion whatsoever.

Lastly the cause of Splendour and Glittering of the Eyes is reflection of the
Rays of the internal light, Causes of glittering eyes.
by reason of the Object, a more thick body or vapors, or thick humors, if
they are mingled with the Christaline, or vitrious, humors, or cover them.

The hearing is hindered through default of the Organ of hearing, Causes of
deafness.
or of the spirits; and first of all if the external ears are wanting, sounds,
and articulate voices seem like the warbling, or purling of Waters, or singing
of Grasshoppers. Secondly, if the auditory passage either wholly, or in part br
hindered, either from an external cause, as a little Stone, a Kernel, Water; or
an internal cause, as a Tubercle, an Ulcer, and such like; and so either
deafness is occasioned, or hearing diminished, or depraved. Thirdly, if the
Membrane which they call the Drum is too thick, or moistened too much, or is
loosened, whether it be from the first birth, or afterward from internal, or
external causes the hearing is hurt. Also if it be too much dried by any
grievous diseases, or old age, deafness does arise; But if it be broken either
by internal force, as by the violent putting in of an earpicker, or by an
extreme shrill sound, or is eroded by an Ulcer, deafness is occasioned.
Fourthly, if the other parts of the ear be not rightly constituted, and the air
implanted be impure, or deficient, or the Nerve being dilated is cooled, or is
made thicker, or affected with a Tumor, or those three little bones either are
not well framed by nature, or are moved by some violence out of their places,
or the internal passages are filled with vapors and humors flowing contrary to
Nature, or the Arteries passing under the ears are filled with too much spirit,
and heat, and too much agitated; or lastly, the auditory Nerve either is not
rightly framed from our first beginning, or is obstructed and compressed by a
humor, according to the diversity of the disease, the hearing is sometimes
abolished, sometimes diminished, or depraved. Lastly, the hearing is hurt
through default of the Spirits either through the straitness of the passages of
the brain, as in an Apoplexy, or through its perturbation, as in an Epilepsie.
or through cold distemper, by reason whereof difficulty of hearing is
occasioned.

The smelling is hurt through default of the Organs, Causes of smelling hurt.
or Spirits, or some external error; the faults of the Organs are the
narrowness of the Adaequate senses, and external Nostrils, whether from
compression, or constipation, or obstruction of the Scive-like bone, and its
Membrane, as happens in such as are great, or by the distemper of the chief
Organ of smelling, the mammillary precess; but especially moist distemper, or
obstruction of the same, from matter flowing, which happens in Catarrhs, and
according to the variety of these diseases, the smelling is sometimes
abolished, sometimes diminished; the smelling is offended by reason of the
animal spirits, if either they are deficient, which are in those which are
ready to dye, or are hindered from flowing, as in an Apoplexy, an Epilepsie,
and such like diseases of the brain. Lastly, the smelling is depraved through
some external errors, whilst a vapor, or some filthy and stinking matter
sticks in the ways through which the smell passes, for here it is infected by
the foul smell thereof, to that things having no ill smell, seem to the sense
of smelling to stink.

The taste also is hurt through default of spirits, Cause of taste hurt.
or by some disease of the Organs, or some external error: The taste is hurt by
reason of spirits when they are deficient, which uses to happen to such as are
dying; or the taste cannot flow to the Organ, either through straitness of that
part of the brain, from whence the Nerves appointed for the taste arise, or
from obstruction, compression, or wounds of the said Nerves. The taste is hurt
through default of the tongue, as of an instrument, whilst it is troubled with
cold and moist distemper, or cold and moist matter is poured on it, or whilst
it is dried, or is troubled with Pustuls, or an Ulcer, and according to the
magnitude of diseases, the taste is either wholly abolished, or diminished.
Lastly, the taste is depraved by external error, or from external causes; as
from something taken into the mouth, whose savor is not easily taken away, or
from an internal cause, as a humor, or a vapor wherewith the tongue is
imbued, being communicated from the stomach, the Lungs, the Brain, and other
parts to the tongue.

Lastly, Cause of fieling hurt.
for what belongs to the causes of hindering the touch, insensibility and
dullness happens through defect and diminition of the animal spirits of the
O^gan touching; this come to pass either because the animal spirits are not
generated through imbecility of the native heat, which happen to them in years,
or defect of matter, by reason of great evacuation, or whilst they are
resolved, or scattered, or cooled, or stupefied by a Narcottique Medicine, or
when they cannot flow to it, through the narrowness of the Nerves, obstruction,
constipulation, compression, solution of continuity of the same.

The proximate cause of pain is solution of Unity in a membranous part, Cause
of pain.
whether it be occasioned by some primary quality, or secondary, whereof this
stirs up solution of continuity not so manifest, but rather contemplable, by
reason; but that is manifest, which therefore is properly called solution of
Unity.

Lastly, Itching.
itching is stirred up from thi^, salt, and sharp Exerements, collected in the
skin, moving man to scratch.

CHAP. IV. Of the causes of the Symptoms of the internal senses.
OVer much watching is occasioned by too much effusion of the animal spirits,
Causes of too much watching.
to the Organs of the senses: through defect of restraint of the first sense,
and too much irritation of the common sense, the bond of the first sense, or
sweet exhalations are defective, either because they are not generated in the
body, which comes to pass by long fasting, or the use of meats, which do not
produce such exhalations, or because they are consumed, scattered, and called
away from the brain, which comes to pass in a hot and dry distemper, either of
the whole body, or of the brain, and when hot humors and vapors are elevated in
the brain, which often happens in Fevers and Delitiums.

The same causes also, for the most part have a power of stirring up the common
sense, and besides those, principally grief, which in what part of the body
soever it is, when it violently affects the sense of touching; it also stirs up
the common sense, which once moved irritates also the rest of the senses, and
so it is necessary that over much watchfulness must ensue. Cause of too much
sleep.


The causes of too much sleep, and first the cau^es of non-natural, are all
those things that hinder the spirits from being sent forth to the external
parts, Non-natural.
in due manner and season; such are those which dissipate and consu^ne the heat
of the spirits beyond measure, or they are called back too much into the
internal parts, or hinder the spirits that they cannot go out to the remote
parts, as too much exercise, pains taking, too much watching, baths, and such
like, which fill the brain with halituous vapors.

Moreover the causes of a preter-natural and diseased sleep so called, are also
against nature; namely, Preternatural.
those things which detain the spirits against nature, so that they cannot
freely pass to the Organs of the senses.

The cause of a Coma, Coma and Cataphora.
or a dead sleep is a plentiful vapor, whether cold and moist, or hot and
moist, either generated in the brain, or sent thither out of the whole body, or
part of it; but principally stupifactive, rendering the animal spirits heavy and
drowsy.

When there is too greedy desire of sleep, Coma vigil.
the same stupifactive vapor is the cause, but because hot and sharp vapors
are mingled with it, and many various and absurd imaginations are brought to
the fancy, the sleep is troubled and interrupted.

The causes of immoderate dreams are impure vapors, Of immoderate dreams.
black and melancholy, arising from food and humors, causing exhalations of the
same nature, and stirring up the animal spirits, or a distemper of the brain,
stirring the vapors ascending from the inferior parts and spirits in the brain.

A natural ecstasy has for the most part the same causes, Of an extasic.
for those which are troubled therewith, have in their deep sleep various
shapes and images represented to their fantafie, about which, the imagination
being too much busied and fixed, the rest of the senses ceasing: when they
awake they account those dreams by reason of the too much intentiveness of the
fantasy for truths; and think and say to themselves that those things did
really happen.

The cause of such as walk in their sleep, Sleep walkers.
is a stronger imagination from an internal object, represented by a dream, the
fantasy being violently affected, stimulates the desire, and thence the motive
faculty, to perform something; the senses for the most part being bound, and
the rational faculty obscured, but the imagination does depend either on some
vehement diurnal disease, which has gone before, or on the disposition of the
spirits, which the vapors thicken, which are not only mingled with the
spirits, but also have force of binding all the spirits, and set before you
many clear dreams.

The memory, Abolishing and diminishing of the mentory and fantasy.
as the imagination, is either abolished, or diminished, principally through
the fault of the instrument, which is the brain: through its too cool a
distemper thereof, whereunto belongs, not only innate heat, but default of
spirits: the default of innate heat is either native, and contracted from our
birth, or happening afterward from our birth. Heat is deficient to those who
have too great heads, or a brain weak, and cold by nature, and mixed with too
much moisture, or a head too little, and therefore little brains, or a figure,
too concise, the figure also it self of the head, may hinder these actions.
After a man's birth the native heat is deficient through old age, and what other
causes soever, which may destroy and debilitate the innate heat, and may cause
foul spirits, whether they be internal, and diseases and vicious humors, or
external, as cold meat, moist, thick, corrupt and impure air, overmuch
watching, strokes and wounds of the head. Besides the defect and cold distemper
of the native heat, the memory also is weakened, yea and taken away, sometimes
by too much moisture of the brain; the same also is hurt sometimes by external
error, namely through the fault of objects, whilst in certain diseases it is
confounded, and distracted, by almost innumerable objects, which may likewise
happen to such as are well; who whilst they are busied in telling any story,
by reason of some object happening by chance, they are so called aside, that
they cannot make an end of their story.

But the reasonable faculty is not diminished nor abolished of its self, nor by
reason of its instrument, but because the fantasy is hurt, and sometimes the
memory, and sometimes both.

The depravation of the imagination and ratiocinatination happens in diverse
kinds of Deliriums, and all have their rise from some default of the animal
spirits, which being ill disposed, represent objects so disposed to the
fantasy, and whereas for the most part, the imagination, and ratiocination are
both affected in a Delirium; and the imagination uses a corporeal Organ with
its Spirits, but the rati^^ination uses none, but only beholds fantasms. In
every Delirium, the next cause of the hurt of the imagination, is the
vitiousnesse of the animal spirits, but the depravation of the rational faculty
is caused by the fantasms.

The imagination and understanding hurt, called Paraphrosune has its beginning
from hot vapors, which in burning F^ve s and inflammations of the interior
parts are elevated to the brain, and disturb the animal spirits, yet
moderately, which thing also may happen if any one should take in his meat or
drink that which may trouble the spirits. On this manner comes sottishness,
and such as is caused by Wine, the weed Darnel, Hops, and such like.

A Frenzy is caused by a hot Tumor of the Brain and its Membranes from whence
the hot vapors being advanced continually trouble and stir the spirits in the
brain. A Frenzy.


The cause of offending the imagination in Melancholy, Of Melancholy.
is dark animal spirits, but the causes of depraving of the rational faculty,
are dusky fantasms, but the animal spirits are become dark and black two ways;
first when the spirits themselves are pure in their own nature; but some
strange foul and blackish matter is mingled with them. Secondly, when the
spirits themselves are darkish in their own nature, and gene^ate such; the
former is caused three ways; the first is when the matter dark and impure
clouding the spirits is contained in the vessels in the head. Secondly, when
the matter is communicated to the brain from the whole body, and principally
from the greater veins. Thirdly, when it is transmitted principally from the
Hypocondries, which is thence named Hypocondriacal Melancholy: the latter is
occasioned two ways, either when the vital spirits are generated vicious and
impure in the heart, which when the matter of the animal spirit is such in the
brain, it is necessary that there be generated in such black animal spirits in
the brain, or because although the vital spirit be good and pure;
neverthelesle the constitution of the brain is vicious, which changes the pure
vital spirit into a black animal spirit.

The cause of mad Love is sorrow and conti nual solitation, Of mad Love.
to which anger is often joined, arising through the desire of a fair thing
whether it be really so, or seem so to be; for although the amorous herb
Philtra may stir up desire to lust, yet that desire is not terminated in any
definite person, nor can the mind of a man be compelled to love that which he
is unwilling to love, and that Philtra does not cause love, but madness also,
as experience often teaches.

The cause of madness is a hot and fiery disposition of the animal spirits;
Madnss^e.
such hot and fiery spirits proceed from a hot distemper of the brain, or hot
vapors mingled therewith, which black Choler will set foreward, sometimes in
the veins of the head only, other times in the whole body, especially in those
that are great with child, and when it resides about the womb, whether they are
generated of fervent blood, or adust color, or dried Melancholy.

The disease which causes men to think that they are turned into Wolves, is
called Lycanthropie, Lycanthropie.
if it proceed from a natural cause; and not from the Devil; It arises from
the depravation of the imagination and ratiocination, and the blood of living
creatures being drunk, may be very powerful to cause the same, yet for the most
part it becomes from poison communicated to us by the biting of any mad living
creature, or by the froth of their mouths thrown upon us, by spittle, by
receiving their breath with our mouths, by eating the flesh of ravenous
animals, whence Wolf-madness, also Dogmadness, and Badger-madness do arise, as
Hydrophobie, which is when one is distractedly timorous of waters, which
nevertheless may be occasioned without the biting of any mad animal by poison
in man's body, but principally is occasioned by terror of the observations of
Physicians do witness, and then the disease is not to be referred to madness,
because those Symptoms which are proper to those that are bitten with mad
creatures, do not appear in these, but only the di^eased are adverse to all
liquid things, and neither can swallow liquid things, but also at the sight and
noise of them, they fall in danger of swooning and death, which nature is
peculiar to this poison, nor can any other cause be rendered from manifest
qualities.

But the disease of Tarantators, Of Tarantulas and a company of S. Viti.
occasioned by the venomous biting of a Tarantula, and the Chorea of S. Viti.
so called, has its rise from a venomous and malignant humor somewhat like to
the venom of a Ta^antula, begotten in man's body, and indeed is the cause of the
Symptoms of the rest of the poisons in general, but because they dance in this
manner, that is proper to this poison only, neither can there be rendered any
manifest cause thereof, but here it is necessary to fly to that sanctuary of
ignorance; and to say that this poison is destroyed in an occu^^ manner by the
force of music, and this little creature is harmoneous, and delights in music.

CHAP. V. Of the causes of the Symptoms of the mooving faculty.
IN the first place the cause of a Palsy, Cause of the Palsy.
or deprivation of motion in one part, or more, is the defect of animal spirits
in the Organs appointed for motion; the spirits are deficient when they are not
sent out by the Nerves from the brain, as happens in an Apoplexy, sometimes
also this disease is called a Palsy; for although they are emitted yet through
the ill disposition of the part they cannot exercise motion, and sense therein;
they are not admitted through default of the Nerves, and spinal Marrow; namely,
when they endure some cold distemper and moist, especially; yet sometimes hot
and dry, or are dull, or are cut, or knocked, or beaten, or are made narrower,
or by obstruction, or compression, by reason of some humor, or tumor, or
tubercle, whether they are in the Nerves themselves, as after wounds of the
Nerves, and contusions of the same, scars do arise, or in the parts near
thereunto by some contusion, by a stroke or a fall, by a sudden relaxation made
of the Vertabres, or being bound.

Besides a Palsy there are other impotencies of motion, Cause of taking away
motion.
the cause whereof, besides that of the Nerves, even now explained in a Palsy
is the fault of the part instituted for motion, a vicious disposition and
disease, namely, if the bones in the joints which are framed for them cannot
move, o^ cannot rightly be removed out of their place, through ill
conformation, fracture, relaxation, if the ligaments which come about the
joints, and continue in motion in a natural state are broken, cut asunder,
eroded, attenuated, or become softer, or on the contrary are dried, hardened,
and filled witk a hard and knoty substance, if the Muscles and their Tendones
are cooled too much, and their native heat be, as it were, dulled, or moistened
by some humor contrary to nature; or on the other side if they are dried and
hardened, if any tumor, knot, bunch, hard flesh arises in them, if they are
wounded, if the Tendones are so stretched out by violent motion, that they
become longer then they were, or wont to be, or as it were broken with bonds,
or if a painful tumor be in a Muscle.

The cause of Laziness is the reception of trouble in the Muscles, and parts
appointed for animal motion, Of Laziness.
but since this slownesse is twofold, voluntary, and against our wills, the
one comes without much exercise, and labor from vicious humors, burning the
parts appointed for motion; the other which is also called Excicrative, comes
after too much labor and motion, the parts serving for motion, being dried and
the spirits consumed.

The cause of trembling is the imbecility of the motive faculty, Of Trembling.
which cannot keep the member in that part wherein it is placed. The faculty is
become weak through the faintness of the strength, and some defect of animal
spirits, whether they are not generated, by reason of some distemper of the
brain, or defect of the vital spirits, either scattered, or consumed, both
which may be occasioned by too large evacuations, long fasting, watchings, long
and tedious sickness, too much Venery, or through diseases of the Nerves, as
distemper, especially cold contracted by what means soever, or want, or loss
of sense is occasioned by stupifactives, or by straitness, but less then in a
Palsy.

The cause of Convulsion is the irritation of the expulsive faculty, Of
Convulsion.
of the Fibers and nervous parts in the Muscles, by reason of something
troublesome, which draws the part joined to it into consent, and stirs it up to
this motion, whereby the Fibers being contracted, the Muscle is drawn back to
its original. Emprosthotonos, Emprosthoton^s. Opisthotonos.
is made in the Muscles, which bends the body of such as are affected,
forwards. Opisthotonos by the Muscles affected, bends the body backward.
Tetanos is from an equal contraction of the Muscles. T^tanos Spasmus Cynious.
The Spasmus Cynichus, or troublesome Cramp arises from a convulsion of the
Muscles of the Mouth; Trismos from contraction of the Muscles of the Jaws.

Also the cause of convulsive motions is a humor, Of grinding Teeth. Of
convulsive motions.
or a vapor, an enemy to the whole generation of Nerves, irritating the
expulsive faculty in them, and stimulating them to expulsion, yet is not fixed,
but has various motions through all nervous parts, and so the member is
agitated in various motions, and for the most part it happens that the brain
is affected, and matter is se^^ from thence into all the Nerves.

When the Cramp and Palsy are complicate, Of the complication of the Crump and
Palsy. Privation of speech.
the ^^mour is of a mixed nature, which has force partly o^ loosening Nerves,
partly of vellicating and twitchi^^ them.

Privation of speech happens through default either (...) the Spirits and
Nerves which carry them, or of the part which are necessary for the bringing
forth of a word. The spirits are deficient in an Apoplexy, Epilepsie, an^^
Dumnesse, properly so called. Men are become du^^ through the fault of the
Nerves when either the Nerve^^ of third pair are affected, from whence the
tongue also receives its Nerve; which defect if it be native, for the most part
the hearing is abolished, by reason of the communion of the Nerves of the
tongue and the ear, that fellowship is hurt, or when the Nerves of the sixth and
seventh conjugations, and those going back, and voc^ Nerves are either cut, or
stretched, or cooled, or intercepted, or hurt by what means soever. The voice
is hurt through organick diseases thereof, if either the Membranes of the
Larinx, or top of the Windpipe are filled with some humor, and grow soft, or
some chink thereof be shut, by what means soever, or if the tongue be cut
about, or maimed, or the Muscles which move the Larinx, Tongue, or Throat are
hurt, or relaxed, or knock^, or wounded, or any other way affected contrary to
nature or lastly through desault of the windpipe, if that be cut, exulcerated,
or closed.

The same causes are if they are less, Of the voice and speech diminished.
diminution of voice and speech is occasioned, yet more frequently the cause
remains in the tongue, namely, if the ligament be too long from one birth, so
that it extends to the extremity of the tongue, or if after a child's birth it
be wounded, exulcerated, swoolen, or be affected with a Palsy on the other
side.

The cause of depravation of voice and speech, Of stammering.
and first of stuttering, and stammering is principally a moist distemper of
the instruments of voice and speaking, and sometimes a dry; also an ill framing
of the Tongue and its Muscles, a Tumor borne under it, as also the fault of a
swelling at the entrance into the Throat, and want of the fore teeth.

Hoarsenesse arises from over much humidity of the outsides or the instruments
for speech, Of hoarsenesse.
whether that matter flow from the head, or be cast out of the breast, from
looseness and inflammation of the Columella, or a fleshy substance in the
entrance into the throat, as also from external and evident causes, first from
air violently straining the voice daily, which causes inequality of the
Windpipe.

All the causes of the Cough are those which hinder the instruments of
breathing, whether they be internal, Of a cough.
or external causes, either by Idiopathy, or by Symptothy stir up the Cough by
Idiopathy, an unequal distemper, principally cold causes the Cough, which is
the greatest enemy to the breast, sometimes also distempers hot and dry;
moreover the roughness of the Windpipe which happens either through
distemper, or through biting humors flowing from the head, or by Medicines, or
sharp drinks, or obstruction by a humor, thick, or thin, a pimple, gravel,
worms, a little hard swelling, clod of blood. By Sympathy the Cough is raised,
if the other parts which can draw the Organs of respiration into consent be
affected, namely the Midriff, Liver, Spleen, Stomach, which by reason of the
common Tunicle, they have vellicate the instruments of breathing, or send
vapors to them, or press the Midriffe, by reason of some Tumor, ot
obstruction. But the external causes are cold air, dry, cold water, too much
desire of drink, cold medicines applied to the breast, dust, smoke, sharp
vapors, sour aliment, sharp things, and whatsoever contrary to the order of
nature slide into the windpipe, straying, or wandering in the gullet, if it
intercept the way, or stop it, or exasperate the Artery, or any way molest the
Windpipe.

Those things cause sneezing whatsoever does stimulate the Nost^ils, Of
sneezing.
and the fore part of the Brain to excretion, whether generated in the body, as
humors flowing from the Brain, or those things which affect the Nostrils by
communion with the interior skins by Sympathy, which comes to pass when worms
stick in the Guts, or whether they happen from without, as whatsoever sharp
things are d^awn by the nose, smells also and sharp vapors, the splendour of
the Sun, and over much light.

Gaping, Of yawning.
or Yawning is when ^alitious vapors stick in the Muscles appointed for
chewing, and moving the lower chop, which nature endeavors by this motion to
cast off, but some times imagination is the cause thereof.

Stretching arises from such vapors as may be emitted through the Pores, Of
stretching.
which nevertheless are not sharp, but being store of them they cause trouble,
in the spaces of the Muscles of the whole body stirring up the expultive
faculty to expel, which the nature may discuss, it uses such a motion of the
Muscles by constriction of them.

Lastly, Shaking fits and trembling.
Horror and Trembling, which are Symptoms near alike, as also are vehemence,
and greatness of motion; and so is the difference of the cause, they are
stirred up by something that offend in the circumference of the body suddenly
vellicates the sensitive parts, and stimulates them to expulsion, which it
strives to perform by a natural concussion. But the causes which bring forth
that twitching, are either external and evident, as whatsoever befalls the
body, or vellicates the sensitive parts, or cause the sharp humors contained
in the circumference of the body to be stirred and moved as a spark of sire
cast on, scalding water thrown upon, a biting medicine applied to an Ulcer;
piercing cold, and such like for internal, as humors, or sharp vapors, either
generated in the parts themselves, or drawn, or sent from elsewhere.

CHAP. VI. Of the causes of Symptoms wherein all or most animal actions are
hurt.
THe cause of a Vertigo is inordinate and circular motion of the animal spirits
in the brain; Of a vertigo.
but the causes which perform this circular motion in the brain are internal,
or external; internal is an inordinate motion of a flatulent spirit, moving the
animal spirits circularly, and exhibiting a false representation of the moving
of external things, and of its own body; but this flatulent spirit takes the
occasion of its motion, either from its self, seeing that every spirit by
nature is moveable and fluid, especially if it be hotter, and more fervent then
ordinary, or moved by somewhat else, whereas hereafter shall be shown, which
the straitness of the vessels, or of the Pores of the brain occasioneth; for if
both the flatulent spirits, and animal spirits are moved in passages that are
obstructed, they return back and move circularly, they are generated either in
the brain, whence a Vertigo by Idiopathy arises, or are sent from elsewhere
upward, either from the whole body, as in some Fevers, or from some part, as
the Stomach, Spleen, Womb, whence it is called a Vertigo by Sympathy, the
external and manifest causes are whatsoever humors can suddenly turn into and
dissolve into vapors, or stir up an inordinate and circular motion, with
winds, and spirits; such as when the constitution of the air is suddenly
altered, immoderate and untimely exercise, emptiness, baths, anger, turning
round of the body, the beholding of bodies swiftly turning round, or otherwise
moving with violence, looking down from a high place, shaking of the head, a
fall and such like.

The cause of an Incubus, or riding of the Mare, Of an Incubus.
is a thick vapor ascending from the lower parts of the body and obstructing
the hinder parts near the Spinal marrow, and hindering the passages of the
spirits to the muscles of the breast, whence respiration is hindered, which when
a man perceives in his sleep, considering various causes, he faineth and
advises with himself, and even from this or that, he imagines himself to be
oppressed and suffocated in his dream. This vapor is, elevated from thick
phlegm, or a Melancholy humor residing in the Hypocondries, or proceeds from
surfeiting, or swelling by lying supine, or flat on the back: in children also
a vapor of the same nature is occasioned by worms.

A Lethargy commonly proceeds from a phlegmatic humor thickning in the brain;
Of a Lethargy.
and so the matter of its self is cold, yet by accident it happens to be hot,
but it is impossible that out or phlegm only putrified, both a fever and a deep
sleep should arise; for this humor is neither apt of its self to admit of
putrefaction, especially in the head, neither if it should admit of it, can it
utter so much as will diffuse the heat over the whole body, and kindle a Fever,
and heart the Heart especially if it putrify without the substance of the
Brain, or its vessels in its bosoms and turnings; but it is more agreeable to
reason that this drowsiness either is not a primary disease of the brain, but
occasioned from stupifactive and pituitous vapors rendering the animal spirits
dull, and are the Symptoms of a Fever, which are called companions; namely, of
a continued Quotidian of a bastard Tertian, and Semitertian, or if it be a
primary disease of the Brain, it does not seem to have its beginning only from
putrified phlegm, but rather from a petuitous inflammation of the Brain, or from
an inflammation arising from the blood mixed with phlegm. In both these
Lethargies there is present great heaviness, and hurt of memory, by reason of
stupifactive, and pituitous vapors, but a delirium, by reason of vapors risen
out of the putrid humors troubling the animal spirits.

The cause of a Carus is either the straitness of the Brain by compression, Of
a Carus.
or obstruction near the bottom thereof from cold humors, or a moistning,
cooling, and repletion of the Brain from a c^ld and pituitous humor, and an
alteration of the spirits by the same, or a stupefactive power, rendering the
animal spirits unfit for the actions of the senses and motions; wherewith not
^nly stupefactive medicines are endued, but also some poisons, humors in
certain Fevers, Smoaks, and Vapors of Coals, new Wine, and new strong Beer, etc.

A Catoche has its beginning from a cold and dry vapor, A Caroche.
endued with a peculiar force of fixing the animal spirits rushing into the
brain, and in some sort stopping the spirits, rendering them immovable, and, as
it were, congealing them, which for the most part is stirred up by a Melancholy
humor; such also is the force in a Thunderbolt, and it is sometimes taken from
the vapors ascending out of the earth in an Earthquake, and breaking out of
their cells, but the spirits serving for imagination, and ratiocination are
rather fixed and stopped then those which lately were dispersed into the members
of the body, which is apparent from hence, that although those that are
Cataleptick move no member, yet if they are moved by another the power of
moving exercises its self, and being struck they fall down, and moreover
spreading their eyelids they keep their eyes open.

The immediate cause of an Apoplexy is a flowing of the animal spirits into the
organs of the body, Of an Apoplexy.
hindering sense and motion; but the influx of the animal spirits is hindered
either by the passages through which they should flow into the organs of sense
and motion, or the narrowness of the beginning of the Nerves, or through the
unaptnesse of the animal spirits themselves, or by too great a quantity, or
perturbation of the same. The straitness of the passages of the animal spirits
is made when the beginning of the Nerves in the bottom of the brain is so shut,
that the passage and way for the animal spirits and motion into the organs of
all the external senses are intercepted; a few only resisting, which flow from
the Cerebellum, which scarce suffice for the motion of the breast which striveth
exceedingly for respiration. The beginning of the Nerves cause this
straitness, first the phlegmatic humor poured into these places performs it by
obstruction, or compression, which the Ancients took for the principal, nay
some for the only cause of an Apoplexy. Secondly, blood poured out of its
vessels by a stroke, or any other cause whatsoever into the basis of the Brain,
and pressing the beginning of the Nerves. Thirdly, placing of phlegm when the
vessels of the Brain, their being plenty of blood, are filled and stretched
that the substance of the Brain is compressed, and the Pores and passages being
made narrower, a free ingress for the animal spirits into the Nerve is
hindered. Fourthly, a blow, or fall violently pressing the Brain it self, and
so the beginning of the Nerves, rendering the animal spirits slow, as it were
degenerated from their nature, and are made altogether unfit to perform animal
actions, bring forth vapors which contain in them a stupefactive power;
moreover the effusion of animal spirits by deep wounds, and troubling of them
by a stroke, and by a great fall and commotion of the Brain may take away all
sense and motion from a man, but that Apoplexy which arises from a pituitous
and stupefactive power is the chief, and is understood for the most part when
mention is made of a perfect Apoplexy, to wit, which is occasioned by its sefe,
when the other Apoplexies by reason of the differences of causes, either are
occasioned by some external and violent cause, as by a stroke, by a fall, or
they follow other diseases.

An Epilepsie is occasioned from a vaporous and thin matter, Of an Epilepsie.
whether by its acrimony, or venomous and malignant quality vellicating and
molesting the Brain and all the Nerves, and together afflicting the animal
spirits, darkning and troubling of them: and there are to help this matter
forward not only certain humors corrupted in a peculiar manner, and fit for
an Epileptical disposition, but also parts of the body corrupted in like
manner, as Worms, Afterbirth, and such like.

An imperfect Epilepsie has the same cause with the perfect Epilesie, but mote
gentle and less store of humors, which otherwise could not vellicate all the
Nerves, yet may trouble them all, but cannot trouble and darken the animal
spirits in the Brain.

CHAP. VII. Of the causes of Symptoms which happen to qualities changed.
ANd these are the causes of the actions hurt, Causes of color changed.
or of the first kind of Symptoms which con^ist in the actions hurt: the
second kind, or color of the whole body, or of its parts changed, contrary to
nature are humors of the body, such are the colors of the whole body, or its
parts, as are the humors in them, so in the yellow Jaundice, by reason of
yellow choler effused into the body, the whole body is colored with the
yellow choler in a Dropsy by stegm it waxes pale.

The teeth grow black either through default of aliment, Causes of change of
the color of teeth.
or when any slimy matter flowing from the Stomach, Brain, or elsewhere, or
also from meat left behind sticks to the teeth; and putrefying corrupts and
make them black.

The Nails change their color through peccant matter nourishing them. Of
Nails.


Fifthly, Of stinking smells.
smells and exhalations are breathed out of the whole body, when hot and moist
bodies produce plenty of crude humors, which when they cannot be overcome by
heat, become putrid, and send forth a stinck from the whole body.

A stink is sent out of the mouth, Of stinking breath.
when either many crudities are heaped together in the Stomach, which are
corrupted, and send forth putrid and stinking exhalations by the Palate, or
when filthy vapors exhale, from the putrefaction in the Lungs, or when such
matter cleaves to the Teeth, Gums, or Palate, and infects the air which is
breathed out with its stink.

The smell of the Armpits which they call Goats smell, Stink of the Armpits.
proceeds from excrementitious humors, which are sent from the heart, and
internal parts in such abundance to these places and emunctories, that all of
them cannot easily be discussed, but corrupt, and send forth filthy smells.

The faetid smell of the Groin comes from the same cause, namely, Of the Groin.
too great plenty of excrements which are sent out from the Liver and Veins to
those emunctories.

The foul smell of the Nostrils is caused by excrementitious humors there
collected and putrefying by a Polipus, a Canker, or an Ulcer in the Nostrils.
Of the Nostrils.


The ears stink by an Imposthume and Ulcer in the internal Ear, or by vicious
humors sent out of the Brain. Of the Ears.


Lastly, Of the Feet.
the Feet send forth an ill smell, when the moist excrements in them, which are
of a hot and moist constitution, and given to surfeit, are collected and
putrify in the Feet, being drawn thither by their motion, especially when they
are covered with such garments, that they cannot freely expire vapors.

The c^uses of tactil qualities changed, Of tactil qualities changed.
appears by those things which are spoken of the Causes of Diseases when
sometimes they are referred to the rank of Diseases, sometimes to the number of
Symptoms; namely, as sometimes the actions are hindered by them, sometimes
they hinder not the actions, but only cause trouble to the touch.

CHAP. VIII. Of the causes of Symptoms in those things that are sent forth and
retained.
AS for what belongs to excretion, and those things which in their whole kind
are contrary to nature, Causes of excrements contrary to nature.
and may be generated in the body, as stones, worms, since the same belongs to
the causes of Diseases they are spoken of before in the second Part, and the
ninth Chapter; but artificial things, as instruments of Iron, Knives, and such
like cannot be generated in man's body, but by the enchantments of the Devil are
insinuated into the body, or are fitted to parts without, through which they
cannot come back, and are there shown, as it were, going back.

If those things which are wont to be cast forth naturally are cast out another
way, ^^eressions through unaccustomed passages.
which comes to pass because the accustomed ways either are grown together, or
obstructed, or some way or other shut, for then nature by reason of plenty of
matter, which it was wont to evacuate through the usual ways, they being shut,
it wearied seeks new ways, either more open, or otherwise, to which some
pricking humor leads it, or which it chooses of its own accord.

Thirdly, the effusion of blood contrary to nature through what place soever
happens because the Veins and Arteries are opened contrary to nature, Of
bleeding contrary to nature.
for those reasons which before in the Second part and thirteenth Chapter are
explained; and particularly sweating of Blood happens through the thinness of
the Blood, rarity and laxity of the skin, and debility of the retentive
faculty. Small pa^cels are cast out of the body, when from any internal part
which was wont to be evacuated that way, or in that way by an Ulcer,
Putrefaction, and eroded by a sharp humor, and separated from the body.

As for the causes of excretions offending in quality hot ordure is cast out,
if choler and hot humors are mingled. If the Liver and Guts are too hot, if
hot meats are used. The siege is cold by the extinguishing of the native heat,
the use of cold meats and the mixture of cold humors.

Moist Excrements are cast out either through crudity, when the meat is not
concocted, or by obstruction of the Meseraik Veins, Causes of excretions
peccant in quality. Hot. Cold. Moist. Hard.
by reason whereof the Chyle cannot pass to the Liver, and therefore being
mingled with the ordure sends it out moist, or by taking of meats that loosen
the belly, or by defluctions from the Head to the Guts, or by the effusion of
Choler, and other thin humors to the Guts.

But the ordure is become hard by too much heat which consumes almost all the
humidity, whether it be that internal heat of the Liver, or of other parts near
thereunto, or of the whole body, either natural, or preter-natural; moreover
from the dryness of the Guts, or of the whole body. Thirdly, if there be too
much Urine, or if there be a continued sweat. Fourthly, by thickning and
astringent meats. Fifthly, by long stay in the Guts, by reason whereof the
moisture is sucked out. Sixthly, through want of aliment in the parts, Of
sharp. Faetid.
and too much attraction of the members. The dung is sharp through the mixture
of sharp homours, and use of sower meats; It Is become faetid through the use of
stinking meats, and ill concoction, especially by the mixture of diverse sorts
of meats, as also by the humidity and heat of the body, which disposes it to
putrefaction. Ordure is cast forth with a noise through the mixture of much
wind violently breaking forth. It becomes white, White.
when choler is not mingled therewith, as in the yellow Jaundice, through the
use of meats that are whitening, being mixed with plenty of phlegm also. Yellow.
It becomes yellow through much much mixture of yellow Choler. It becomes
green through aeruginous choler. It grows black by reason of a black humor, by
the use of Cassia, and such like. Red. Black. Frothy.
It becomes red by the mixture of blood, or adust yellow choler. It becomes
frothy by reason of slimy phlegm and a defluxion of windy matter from the head,
and mixture of wind.

The causes of the the changed qualities of Urine shall be explained in the
following b^ok.

Hot sweats proceed from hot humors either whilst the humors wax hot, Causes
of sweat preter (...)
or especially when the matter is overcome, is attenuated and concocted, cold
are caused through plenty of cold matter, which cannot be so easily overcome as
heat, or by the resolution of spirits and extinction of the native heat, or
through the malignancy of the matter ^he sweat smells by reason of too great
plenty of stinking filth, they are yellow in the yellow Jaundice by the mixture
of yellow choler. Green by mixture of leek-coloured choler, red and bloody by
the watrishness and thinness of the blood, looseness of the skin, and
weakness of the retentive faculty, yet there are administered Wines, which
being drunk in some discolor their sweat. They are salt for the most part,
which consist of a salt and serous excrement. Bitter by the mixture of Choler,
sharp by the mixture of sharp humors.

The menstruous blood offends in quality whilst it is white, Of vicious
Courses
yellow, black, or has any ill color; moreover whilst it smells foul, and is
too watery, which comes to pass whilst the like humors are gathered together
in the body, or about the womb, and goes out through it with the menstruous
blood.

The spittle is too thick if it be contained too long in the Mouth, Of the
spittle changed.
and its thinner parts consumed; or if thick matter distill from the head, or be
mingled with it, or if it be thickened by heat, which happens in Fevers. It
becomes frothy through the mixture of spirit, and much air. Spittle borrows its
tastes from salt, bitter, sower, humors, especially cleaving to the Stomach.
It receives its color from humors in the bowels, and the vapors going out of
them. It Is become white from phlegm; Yellow from Choler; Red from Blood; Black
from Melancholy, or thick dried Blood; Green from aeruginous Choler; it
acquires a foul smell from inward putrefaction, especially from an Ulcer of the
Lungs,

At length the excressions err in quantity, Causes of excrements changed
the excrements of the belly are cast forth in greater quantity then is
convenient; First by reason of moist food, especially if after the use thereof
store of drink be taken. Secondly, by reason of meats containing little
alimentary juice, but much excrementitious. Thirdly, through the ill
distribution of Chyle. Fourthly, by conflux of Excrements from the other parts
to the Guts. But fewer then is convenient are ejected for contrary reasons;
namely, if the meat be hard, and principally if little drink be taken after it,
if the meat be of good juice and nourishment, and be taken in small quantity;
if the Chyle be greedily snatched from the Meseraik Veins; and if Choler,
(which is, as it were, the Goad to stimulate and expel dregs) come not much
into the Guts.

The quantity of Urine ought to answer likewise to the quantity of drink, but
that also is sometimes made in greater or less quantity, the causes whereof
shall be showed in the following Book.

The causes of plenty of sweat are rarity of body, Cause of store of sweat.
strength of the expulsive faculty, aboundancy, and tenuity of Excrements; and
therefore in the Crysis of a disease great sweats arise, whilst all the
excrementitious matter together, and at once is put forth. Little sweat is
occasioned by contrary causes; namely, by the smalnesse, or thickness of
Excrements, straitness of passages, weakness of expulsion, by the vehemence
of the matter which destroys heat.

Lastly why Courses sometimes flow more plentifully, Of Courses
sometimes more sparingly then is convenient; above in the Third Part, Second
Section, and First Chapter, where we have spoken of suppression, diminution,
and flowing of Months.

The end of all the Second Book.
Book. III.
PART. I.
SECT. I. OF SIGNS In General. Of the Difference and Heads of Signs.
CHAP. I. Of the necessity and benefit of the Method of Signs.
SInce we have hitherto explained what health is, Necessity of the Semiotick
Method.
and wherein it consists, and what is the difference of things contrary to
nature; we now rightly come to the Method of healing and preserving health, and
are to teach by what means health may be preserved, and diseases taken away,
The benefit of it.
but nevertheless since arts are conversant about individuals, and a Physician
does not cure in general man, but Peter and Paul, etc. The Method and way is
first to be explained whereby the present constitution of every man, both sick
and well may be known, which now lies hid in individuals, they may be found out
by the signs of a disease, and what may be known and hoped for, of the event
and end of diseases, and the Method of signs are to go before. Moreover there
is that benefit of this Method, that whilst the sick, see those things that
may happen to them, being known to the Physician, they may trust the more to
him, and obey him; for the Physician when he foresees those things which shall
happen to the sick may have time to prevent them, and avoid the reproaches of
the vulgar, whilst he foretells those things which shall come to passs, and
that they may not rail against the best Medicines, being given to those that
are desperately sick

By the name of Signs we do understand all those things which signify any
thing, A Sign what it is.
or all evident things which lay open a hidden matter, or as the Author of
Physical definitions speaks, A sign is a manifestation of somewhat hidden, or
every thing that shows any of those things which are in the Method of healing,
and can demonstrate them, and make them manifest.

CHAP. II. Of the differences of Signs.
OF Signs of this kind there are certain differences; Differences of signs
wholesome and unwholesome.
first according to varieties of Bodies, some Signs are counted wholesome,
which show soundness and health; others unwholesome, which show unsoundnesse,
others are neutral, which show a disposition to neither.

Secondly, certain Signs are called Diagnosticks and Deloticks demonstrating,
and demonstrative, Diagnostick.
which demonstrate those things which show the present constitution of the
body, whether it be according to nature, or contrary to nature; certain are
Prognostics, Prognostic.
which foreshew what shall come to pass; Anamnestick.
certain are Anamnesticks which call to memory the state of the body which is
newly past.

Thirdly, Proper. Common.
some signs are proper, others common, proper are such as agree to one disease
only, Common are such as are found in many diseases. Galen, in the first of
the differences of Fevers appoints three kinds of proper Signs, and the one he
calls unfeparable, another proper in its kind, a third proper and inseparable;
also he calls those unseparable, which cannot be separated from the effect
which they show, and agrees to every such effect, but not only proper, are
such as agree to those alone, but not to all, Proper and inseparable are such
as agree to such an effect alone, and to all.

Out of this division there arises other differences of Signs, they are called
by the Greeks Pathognomonick, Synedruors, Epiginomens, Epephanomens; in English
^^separable, sociable, concomitant, subservient, and such as appear afterward.

Pathognomonicks are such as follow the disease also and necessary inhere in
it, Pathognomonicks.
and therefore prefently in the beginning of a disease is present and cannot be
separated from it, and agrees to every such disease, and always where they
are, they show the disease that must necessarily be there present, yet it
seldom happens that there is one Pathognomonick sign, but for the most part the
Pathognomonick signs are constituted of more joined together, which if they are
taken severally are not Pathognomonicks.

Synedruons, Synedruons.
that is sociable ones, are such as are not inseparable from a disease, nor do
they necessarily cohere to the essence of a disease, nor are always present,
but besides the Pathognomonicks, sometimes they appear presently at the
beginning, sometimes they follow afterward, and sometimes they are not present
at any time of the disease; and therefore they do not show the disease it
self, or its kind, but signify some condition thereof.

Epiphanomenaes and Epiginomenaes are such as neither show the kind of a
disease, Epiphanomenaes and Epiginomenaes.
nor the condition thereof, but show only its mutation, and they are
threefold; some signs are of concoction, and crudity, others signify health
and death, others are Critic, or decretory which foretell the termination of a
disease.

CHAP III. Of the heads of Signs.
OF the heads of Signs, although there are many, Fountains of signs. 1
Essentially inhering.
yet they seem to be reduced to theee; the first are taken from the nature and
essence its self of the thing, or as Galen speaks from things essentially
enhering in the substance; whether it be a disease, or a cause of a disease, or
a Symptom; namely, when a thing in its own nature is so manifest to the senses
that there needs no other signs.

Secondly, signs are sought from diseases, that is, From the effects.
from all things which follow health; a disease and the causes of diseases,
accidents and Symptoms, whether they be actions, or excrements, and
retentions, or qualities of the body.

Thirdly, from causes whether they be external, From the cause.
or internal, by themselves, or by accident, or what other soever.

Whereunto belongs ability and disposition of body, and from hence it is easy,
or difficult to fall into this, or that disease, for this shows alike temper,
that a contrary, such as help also, and such as hinder; as those which
increase a disease are an argument that the disease has an agreement with the
thing, which increases it, but that which delights, and profits is a token that
there is in nature something contrary to the disease.

To these heads of signs some add such as are alike and disalike,
understanding by those things, Things alike and unlike
either a body which is compared to another body, or a part, which is compared
with another part, or with it self, yet others think that similitude and
dissimilitude is not a peculiar head of signs, but rather a reason of fitly
c^mparing other signs among themselves, but the comparison may be right the
manners properly, and nature of the sick should be known, wandering diseases
commonly belong to these; when if many happen to be sick of one common
infirmity, and he which is sick begins to be so as the rest were, it is to be
suspected that he has the same disease.

Sect. 2. Of knowing the Temperature of Man's Body, and of his Principal Parts.
CHAP. I. Of the Signs of a wholesome Body.
AFter we have spoken of the Signs in general, we come now to handle the
several kinds; and because bodies are twofold, Sound, and Sick, and there is a
certain difference and latitude of a sound body, which embraces neither of
these; first we are to speak in what manner the various constitutions of a
sound Body, and of its parts are to be known; and going back from thence, even
from a natural state may be understood how a diseased, and it is not difficult
to discern a sound from a sick: and all those that are to be accounted for
sound, who can perform all those actions which belong to a man. Yet how such
counterfeit diseases are to be found out. Galen teaches in a peculiar Book; but
since there is a great latitude of health, first of all the signs are to be
proposed of the best constitution of body, which is, as it were, a rule for the
rest, and to which, as to the statue of Polycletus, the natures of men of all
of Ages, Sexes, Countries, and Conditions are to be compared. The signs of such
a Constitution, as also of others differing from it, Galen in his art of
Healing, and fifth Chapter draws from two heads; first from those which
essentially inhere, and which according to the nature of the essence are in
them. Secondly, from those which necessarily follow those in their operations
and accidents.

First, Signs of a sound body.
therefore it is necessary that a sound body may obtain the most convenient
temperature and constitution of the simular parts, fittest for all actions.
Secondly, a convenient number it ought to have of organick parts, and likewise
magnitude, figure, situation, connection with others, and all things in all
respects, which are required to the constitution of a part, as it is organick.
Thirdly, all the parts in order ought to be united and joined, but in respect
of actions, a man that is very sound does very well perform all the actions
convenient for a man, natural, vital, and animal; So that there is no defect in
them, and observes moderation in them all, and is very little subject to
diseases, and withstands all the causes of diseases, violent excepted: the
excrements observe their natural substance, quality, quantity, time, and
convenient part on it; which to be ejected, the qualities which follow the best
constitution of a Body, are a rosy color of the face, nay and of the whole
body, calidity, frigidity, softness and hardness, smoothnesss and roughness;
a sound body well constituted observes mediocrity, the body is neither bald,
nor too rough, but the hairs themselves keep mediocrity, and in youthful age
tend to yellowness, in manly to blackness; the habit of the body is the
middle betwixt too corpulent, and too slender, good flesh, and good stature,
out of all which the handsomeness of the body proceeds; yet all these most
evidently appear in the middle and flourishing age.

CHAP. II. Of the Signs of Bodies differing from the best constitution.
BUt Bodies which differ from the best constitutions, either are sick, which
are d^scerned from sound Bodies, by the hurting of the actions; and the sign
which distinguishes betwixt a sound and sick body, is sensible hurt of the
actions; Or they are hitherto sound, which have not their actions hitherto
sensibly hurt, whereof there is a great latitude, and some in the temperature
of the simular parts, some in the composition of the organick parts,, some of
them both deviating from the best constitution.

And first those bodies which are too hot, Signs of a hot body.
yet moderate in dryness and humidity, such discover themselves to the touch,
hair abounds in the whole body, and is yellow and thick. They are thinner, as
to matter of fat: they are swift and strong for motion, prone to anger, the
color of the face is redder then of a temperate body, they are easily hurt by
hot causes.

If dryness be joined to the heat, Of a ho^ and dry.
which they call cholle^ick, the body shall be hot, hard, thin, and lean,
hairy, and the hairs are black, cu^led, the Puise of the Arteries are great,
and the Veins great, they are angry persons, which are endued with such a
temperature, obstinate levers of brawlings, they desire few things, they are
fit for the generation of Males.

If moisture be joined to the heat, Of hot and moist.
which temperament they call Sanguine, the bodies shall be hot, and soft,
abounding with much blood, fleshy, endued with large Veins, and those which are
so in their youth, often have the Hemorrhoides of the Nose; and if the humidity
somewhat abound, they are apt from their youth to discases of putrefaction.

If the body be too cold, Of a cold.
such a body is perceived by the touch, it is white, at, slow, soft and baid,
it is easily hurt by cold things, it has a narrow breast, and without hair, and
narrow veins scarcely appearing, the hairs are thin and of small increase for
the most part, they are fearful that are of that temperament.

If moisture be joined to the cold, Of a cold and moist.
not much, nor that coldness great, the body shall be white in color, fat,
thick, soft, red hair, inclining to palenesse; but if the frigidity with the
humidity be more intense, the body shall be thick, colored yellow, exceeding
bald, the hair smooth, the veins lying hid, such temperaments are dull and slow
of apprehension, and for the most part altogether idle, no ways ready, simple,
and not prone to anger.

If frigidity is joined to dryness, Of a cold dry.
such a body is discerned by the touch, those shall be lean, bald, pale, which
are of such a constitution they are slow in going on, dejected in countenance
with their eyes fixed.

And for what belongs to Melancholians in particular, Of Melancholians.
not only whom the vulgar, but whom Aristotle in the thirtieth Section, and
first Problem accounts ingenious; wherein the said Aristotle writes that much
and cold choler is black; these are foolish, and idle, wherein there is much
and hot choler, those are quick-sighted, and ingenious, apt to love, propense
to anger and lust, and some greater bablers: but those whose heat is more
remiss, more temperate, and as it were reduced to mediocrity, those are much
more prudent, and although they less exceed in some matters; yet in others they
are far better then the others, some in the study of Literature, others in
Arts, others in Commonwealths; namely, those Melancholians are ingenious, who
by nature abound with good and plenty of blood, wherewith some part thicker and
dryer is mingled, which adds, as it were, strength to the blood, and when
attenuated, and, as it were, poured, it is spiritual.

And whereas the differences of bodies are constituted according to
Astrologers, Saturnines
and according to the number of Planets. Those that are born under Saturn have
a dry skin, black hair, and are delighted with those black things; they have
little eyes, small pulse, a slow and dull gate, they are fearful, sad, love
solitude, they are busiebodies, covetous, slow of endeavoring, silent,
laborious, they have terrible and obscure dreams.

Those under Jupiter are fair, Jovials.
and have rosy countenances, with a pleasant and venerable aspect, they have
black eyes, are of a fit stature, and handsome composure of all the parts,
their habit of body is good, flesh, blood and spirits, pure and in great
plenty; hence they are mild, joyful, ingenious, bountiful, moderate lovers of
friends, just, and all their manners composed with comeliness, and their gate
is moderate.

Those under Mars abound with choler, Martial.
have a lean body, rather then a fat, have red faces and shadowed, burning and
threatening eyes, a broad breast, an upright neck, they are propense to anger,
contentious, bold, and often precipitate, contemners of danger, seditious,

Those under Sol are of a yellowish, Solares.
or a Saffron color tending to red, they have yellow hair, golden, and curled,
black eyes, swelling, full faces, moderate garbs, and have hotter blood and
spirits; hence they are courteous, wise, open hearted, honest, strong,
magnificent, and aspiring to high things, and sometimes proud.

Those under Venus are fair, Venereus.
coming nigh to the feminine beauty, and softness, delicate color is red, or
of white, inclining to red, their eyes shining, sparkling, and casting
lacivious looks, the brows and lips thin, they are quiet, joyful, pleasant in
conversation, delighted with jests, company, singing, delighted with Music,
lacivious and principally love neatness, and ornaments of the body,

Those under Mercury are rather little in body then great, in face somewhat
pale, they have little eyes, Mercurians.
and those buried within their orbs, thin lips and nose, and youthful face in
manly years, very thin beard, quick voice, light spirits, whence they are wise,
subtle, studious of sects, and subtle things; prevalent in memory, eloquent,
but unconstant, and sometimes also crafty, deceitful, witty liars.

Those under the Moon are great in body, fat, thick, Lunar.
white, unstable, and sometimes delighted with one thing, and sometimes with
another.

CHAP. III. Of the signs of the constitution of the brain.
NOw follows that which belongs to the constitution or parts, and first of the
Brain; although a just constitution of the Brain be necessary to perform animal
actions proper to the Brain, yet to perform them, a right composition and
conformation of the head, and of the brain depending thereon, do much avail;
wherefore following Galen in the art of Physic, we will propound in the first
place certain signs of the constitution of the brain, drawn from the figure and
magnitude of the head.

A little head if the body be great is an ill sign, A little head.
for the brain also in such a head is little, because it will generate but few
animal spirits, or if it does generate animal spirits enough, yet they cannot
be moved well enough in so narrow a ^oom, but either being penned in they stick,
or being stirred up they move too violent, whence the animal actions are the
weaker; and those that have such a body are unstable, and do many things
inconsiderately; the brain also in a little head for the most part is
intemperate and dry, and it argues unaptness, and debility of hear, and of
matter in their formation, and especially a little head is naught, if it also
have an ill shape.

A great head if it be well shaped, A great head.
and have the joining parts, as, to wit, the neck, the spine of the back, and
all the Nerves correspondent, it signifies the brain is well constituted, and
is a token that the formative virtue is powerful, which can rightly inform and
elaborate plentiful matter; but if that be wanting, it signifies only plenty of
matter: but weak power, which is unfit for such matter, and therefore is no
token of a good constitution of the head, and such for the most part are dull
and unapt.

The natural and best figure of the head is most like to a sphere, The best
figure of the hea^.
gently pressed on each side, so that that compression may be lengthned from the
ears toward the forepart, and those which have that excel in wit, judgment,
and memory, are strong in body, but those which differ from that best figure
are generally accounted Phoxa, that is, vicious; figure, namely, to wit,
wherein the anterior part, or posterior, or both of them are deficient in their
excellency, so that either behind, or before, or upward, such heads seem ugly;
but if some excellency be deficient, and the rest well raised up, or grows
narrow at top, Galen calls it a^^itious formation of growing sharp. and those
which have this figure of the head, are the most unwise, impudent, fraudulent,
and most basely corrupted with other vices, that there be a rising up of the
hinder part of the head, and the other bones answer to it, is a good sign, for
much good matter is present, if it have a handsome figure also, not else: but
if in a thin, too long, and a weak neck, the hinder part only rises up in
greatness, or is deformed; it is an ill sign, and signifies only plenty of
unprofitable matter, and weakness of the formative faculty. The former part of
the head, the hinder part not being altogether deficient in rising up, if it be
more lifted up is a good figure, and all the senses are well; and therefore
it is no ill sign, but on the contrary, if that magnitude be joined with a
deformed figure, and the senses are weak, it signifies imbecility of the
formative faculty; those whose foreheads are low, have weak senses, and are
stupid, yet they often have good memories, and strength of body; on the other
side, those whose hinder parts of the head are not raised enough up, have all
their senses whole, but are destitute of memory and strength of body; but those
that lack raising up before and behind, and the head rises much in the middle,
are called Oxucephaloi, sharp pointed, those are unfit for all animal actions,
and weak through the narrowness of the brain; if the head grow great near the
ears on each side, it is a token of unfit matter, and of a weak motive faculty.

But for what belongs to the constitution of the brain, Signs of ^ temperate
brain.
they manifestly show themselves by their animal actions, and those things that
follow them; namely, a temperate brain, does perform all animal actions well;
unless there be any fault in the organs of the external senses, it easily
resists external hurts, and injuries. Its excrements are moderate in all, and
are cast out at convenient places, especially the Palate, their sleep is
moderate, their hair in Infants are yellowish, in Boys more yellow, in young
Men yellow; in figure indifferent betwixt curled and strait, nor does it soon
fall off, nor they become bald.

Those which have a hot brain are changeable in their opinions, Of a hot.
swift in motion, ripe in their wits, they use little sleep, and not very
sound, the excrements of their heads are few and concocted, so that no error be
committed in their diet, they are easily offended by hot things, their face is
redder, and veins apparent in their eyes, their hair soon grows, and soon
falls away, it is strong, thick, and curled, and for the most part tends to
blackness.

These which have a cold brain, Of a cold.
their senses are slower and weaker, and their apprehension, memory, and wit
dull, and the motion of their body, not so lively and quick; They are
moderately inclined to sleep, they abound with excrements of the brain,
although they are not full of brains; from without they are easily offended by
cold things, which easily occur, especially by the north wind: those parts
which are near their heads are neither so warm to those that touch them, nor so
red to those that behold them, and the veins which are in their eyes are not so
discernable, their hair is strait and reddish at middle age, bred more slowly,
yet they are lasting; first they are thin, but age coming on they are more
burley.

Those which have a dry brain have sharp senses, Of a dry.
piercing and subtle, they are very watchful, and have very few excrements,
strong hair, and often curled, which do so soon grow, and soon fall away, and
are hurt by drying things.

Those which have moist brains their senses are duller and more turbulent, Of
a moist.
they are accustomed to much and profound sleep, they have store of excrements,
thin hair, soft, whitish, and durable; and they are seldom or never bald, they
are comforted by dry things, and offended by moi^t.

Those who have a hot and dry brain, Of a hot and dry.
are ingenious, and industrious in taking in hand, and performing of business,
the force of apprehension is most exquisite in them, and they are fit for
motion, yet more active for the most part, then behooves them to be, they are
also most vigilant and sleep very little, and have few excrements of the brain;
to those that touch them, their head appears hot, their face until they come to
full ripeness of years is red, afterward the heat decaying more pale, they are
offended with air, and other hot and dry things.

Those which have a hot and moist brain, Of a hot moist.
if either quality a little exceed, the excrements of their heads are many, the
color of the head is white, mingled with red, the veins in the eyes great, the
hair strait and yellowish, and do not easily fall away; they are easily hurt by
heating things, and are pained in the head, and many excrements are collected
to the other especially, if they are moist, but if both qualities abound, the
senses are not so sharp, they cannot watch long, yet their sleep is not
pleasing and continued, they have diverse dreams, and strange ones, their heads
are obnoxious to many diseases; since it collects more excrements then it can
discuss, they are easily hurt by heating, and moistning things, and
principally by the South Wind; but if one quality overcome the other, there
shall be more evident signs of the one, and more obscure of the other, which is
to be taken notice of in the other temperaments also.

Those which have a cold and dry brain are too ripe witted, but in process of
time, Of a cold and dry.
sharpness of the wit and senses abateth, and they grow old and dye before
their time; especially if a distemper of the Heart and Liver concur with that
of the Brain; the same are unhealthy, and are easily offended by external
causes, by cold air, and error in their diet; the head to the touch is cold,
nor have they good complexions, unless they have the better color, from the
hot distemper of the Heart and Liver, the Veins of the Eyes do not appear,
their hair grows slow, and is thin and reddish, and if the dryness overcome the
cold they are well,

Lastly, whosoever have cold and moist brains, Of a cold and moist.
are slow and dull of apprehension, and their senses not so sharp; they collect
many excrements, they sleep much and sound, they are easily offended with the
coldness and moisture of the air, and are apt to cold distillations; they have
long and soft hair, and whitish from their childhood, they are never bald.

CHAP. IV. Of the signs of the constitution of the heart.
IF the heatt be temperate, Signs of a temperate heart.
mediocrity is observed in its motion, the Pulse of the Arteries and
respiration, and those who have such a heart, they are endued with good
manners, not effeminate, nor mad headed, or angry, but humane, not covetous,
nor prodigal, but liberal, not dissemblers, nor proud, but candid, without
haughtiness of mind, benign, temperate, not precipitate, nor medlers; nor
busybodies, but mature in counsels, not envious, but desirous of others good.

Those who have a hot heart, Of a hot.
their whole body is hot, the motion of the heart, the pulse, respiration,
through urgent use, exceeds all mediocrity in magnitude, celerity, and
frequency, they are courageous, and swift, and unweary of undertaking
enterprises, and bold in undergoing dangers: they are rough, and full of
brisilely hairs in their breast, and the breast in comparison of the head is
great.

The signs of a cold heart, Of a cold.
are contrary to those which are of a hot, the whole body is less hot, unless
the liver be hotter, the motion of the heart, puise, and respiration when
custom does not so require it, is not so great, and sometimes small and slow,
if there be a greater recesse to frigidity; and such a heart argues slowness to
anger, fear, distrust, slothfulness, and lingering; whence such are effeminare,
contemners of glory and honor, their breasts are without hairs, and in
comparison of their heads little.

Whose heart soever is dry, Of a dry.
their pulse is hard, they are not prompt to anger, but being stin'd up to
anger are implacable and mad, and they can dissemble their anger, they are
obstinate, and covetous, the whole body for the most part is too dry, unless
the moisture of the liver correct it.

Moreover be whose heart is too moist, Of a moist.
his pulse is soft, they are apt to an^e, but easily pleased, the habit of the
body is dryer, except the dryness of the liver resist it.

The signs of a hot and dry heart are a hard pulse, Of a hot and dry.
great swift, frequent, great respiration, swift and frequent, those who have
such a heart are fit to take in hand and perform actions, courageous and bold,
apt to anger, and unplacable, envious, proud, and if there be excess of heat,
and drouth, are mad, cruel, unmerciful, and sparing none; the same are hairy,
especially in the Breasts and Hypocondries, the whole body is hot and dry,
unless the constitution of the Liver hinder it, the Breast broad and wide.

The signs of a hot and moist heart, are soft pulses, Of a hot and moist.
great, swift, and frequent, and the respiration answers to the pulse, so that
the breast answers to the heat of the heart, and those who have such a
constitution of the heart, are industrious, and prompt to actions, and not
wild, they are apt to be angry, yet it is not sharp and durable, but placable,
and this temperature, so that humidity do not too much exceed, most fit to
prolong life, but if the humidity does much overcome the heat, putrefaction is
easily caused, and putted fevers are generated.

Those who are cold and moist in the heart, Of a cold and moist.
bring forth a soft pulse, little, slow, thin, those which have such a
temperament, are not bold, but fearful, and distrustful, effeminate, slow,
and not apt to anger, and if they are stirred up to anger, it is not violent,
but easily appeased, they are also gentle, shame-faced, desperate in adversity,
and altogether endued with a soft and effeminate mind, their breasts are bare,
and the whole body, and the breast answers to simple constitutions in amplitude.

Moreover in those who have a cold and dry heart, there is found in the pulse
hardness, smallness, thinness, Of a cold and dry.
and slowness, and such is their breathing, if their breasts be ample, they are
no ways propense to anger, but being stirred up, and as it were forced to
anger, retain it very long, they are also covetous, and of all others most
naked in the breast.

Yet here you are to be admonished, Whether men's manners are according to their
temperature.
that those things which are spoken of signs, of the moral actions by
Physicians, are not of acquired manners, and such as are completed by
education, discipline, and custom, but are to be understood of the native and
congenite manners, which Galen calls Hormas,; and when Physicians tell us that
manners follow the constitution of the body, that is to be taken of the native
and ingenite manners, not such as are acquired.

CHAP. V. Of the signs of the constitution of the Liver.
IF the Liver be temperate, Signs of a temperate Liver.
the habit of the whole body is in the middle, betwixt being too fat, and too
lean, the color of the body is rosy, and for the most part, the rest of the
signs appear, which are found in a temperate body, the Urine is excellent.

If the Liver be too hot, Of a hot.
yellow Choler abounds, and in middle age black, or chollerick, and adust
blood, the Veins are broad, and ample, the whole body more hot, the Belly and
Hypocondries rough and hairy; and those which have such a constitution of
Liver, are carried away by pleasures, especially by meat and drink, they are
offended with hot meats and drinks, and hot air; but cold air and cold meat and
drink help them; their Panch is dry, they are thirsty, unless the coldness and
moisture of the stomach hinder it, and they are very obnoxious to het diseases.

In a cold Liver all things are contrary, the veins are strait, Of a cold.
the blood colder; and hence the whole body colder, except the heat of the
Heart hinder it, the belly smooth.

The signs of a dry Liver, Of a dry.
are little blood, and thick hard veins, and the habit of the whole body thin
or lean.

The signs of a moist Liver, Of a moist.
are abundance of blood, and that thin and watrish, and the whole body more
moist.

The signs of a hot and dry are amplitude and hardness of veins, Of a hot and
dry.
and hotter blood, thicker, and dryer; the Hypocondris are exceeding rough, and
the whole body hotter and dryer.

But if the Liver be hot and moist, Hot and moist.
more store of blood is generated, and that of an indifferent consistence, the
veins are great and broad, and soft, and the habit of the whole body moister
and softer, the Hypocondries hairy enough, and if either quality do much
exceed, those who have such a constitution fall into many diseases, which
proceed from putrefaction.

If the Liver be more cold and moist, Cold and moist.
crude and pituitous blood is generated, the veins are narrow, and the whole
body, if the heart hinder it not, is colder and moister, and the Hypocondries
are void of hair.

Moreover the signs of a cold and dry Liver are little blood, and so the
nutrition not so happy, Cold and dry.
less store of hair, and the whole body is colder and dryer, unless perchance
the heart do correct the frigidity of the Liver.

CHAP. VI. Of the signs of the temperature of the Testicles.
THose whose Testicles are in good temper are fruitful; those whose Stones are
too hot, are lecherous, Signs of temperate Testicles. Hot.
and apt for Venus betimes, and fruitful also, and beget boys, and they also
have hair in their privy parts betimes, and have beards also very young.

Those who have cold Stones are not apt for Venus, Cold.
nor fruitful; and if they do generate, they rather procreate Females then
Males, and their genital parts are more bald, and have less hair, and they
slowly, or never put forth a beard.

Those who have moist abound with much seed, Moist.
but watery, and have broad beards.

Those who have dry ones, generate little seed, Dry.
and that indifferent thick, and are apt to have little beards.

Those who have hot and dry Testicles generate thick seed, and are fruitful,
and are timely stirred up to Venus, Hot and dry.
and yet are easily hurt by Venue, they beget Males, unless the sluggish nature
of the woman hinder it; hair comes betimes in the genitalls, and plentifully,
and in all the parts near, upwards in the parts nigh the Navel, downwards to
the middle of the Thighs.

Those who have heat and moisture, Hot and moist.
do more abound with seed, they affect Venus moderately, and can easily brook
it, if the constitution of the rest of the body agree, nay sometimes they are
offended by retaining of the seed, they generate as well Males as Females, and
are no so rough about the Genitals.

Those whose Testicles are cold and moist begin to use Venus late, Cold and
moist.
neither are they prone to Venus, and they are also unfruitful, or if they
generate fruitful seed, it is more fit to procreate Females then Males, and the
seed is thin and watery.

Lastly, Cold and dry.
those that have cold and dry Stones, Generate thick seed, and but little, and
are more hurt after Coition then cold and moist ones.

CHAP. VII. Of the signs of the constitution of the stomach.
A Temperate Stomach shows it self moderate in all things, Signs of a
temperate Stomach.
it desires so much as it can concoct, and concoct it well, and neither
corrupts soft meats, which are easy to be digested, no^ leaves hard meats
unconcocted, and crude, nor is it easily hurt by meat that overwhelms it.

But a hot Stomach concocts better then it desires, Of a hot.
it digesteth meat hard and difficult to be concocted, happily, bur on the
other side, it corrupts soft meats, and such as are easy to be digested, and
brings forth a nitrous crudity; it is delighted with hot meats and drink, and
that so powerfully, that it is not hurt by the moderate use of cold things, but
is preserved from the farthest decay, which will be preserved by heat; Thirst
is greater then the desire of meat.

A colder Stomach more greedily desires then it can concoct, Cold.
and principally cold meats, and such as are hard to be digested, are not
easily well concocted by it, but easily grow sower in it, and a little after
eating pleantifully, a sense of heaviness is perceived about the Stomach, and
floating, and loathing, and sometimes vomit.

A moist Stomach does not easily thirst, Scoist.
it is not easily hurt by much drinking, 'tis-delighted with moist food, and
easily brooks hunger.

A dryer Stomach is more thirsty, Dry
yet unless the thirst arise from some part near thereunto; it is hurt by too
much drink, it desires dry meat.

From these signs of the simple constitutions of the Stomach, may easily be
collected, the signs of the mixed construtions.

CHAP. VIII. Of the signs of the constitution of the Lungs.
THose who have hot Lungs do much dilate their breasts in breathing, they are
thirsty, Signs of hot Lungs.
and the thirst is not allayed unless it be in long time, and with cold things.

Cold Lungs are much hurt by breathing in of cold air, Of cold.
the respiration in those who have cold Lungs is little hot, that is less cold,
and is a friend to breathing; also in cold Lungs many excrements are gathered
together, which are sometimes cast out by coughing, sometimes by spitting only.

Dry Lungs-collect not many excrements, Dry.
and therefore has no need to cast up any by cough or spittle.

Moist Lungs on the contrary gather many excrements and therefore between
whiles in speaking, Moist.
it is necessary to spit often.

The woice also is shown by the constitution of the Lungs and Windpipe, Signs
by the voice.
a great voice and vehemence of efflation shows a wide Windpipe, and heat of
the Lungs; a small voice shows the contrary; the Windpipe rightly constituted,
causes a smooth even voice; a sharp voice but joined with clearness,
signifies dryness of the Windpipe, a sharp voice with hoarsness, and obscurity
proceeds from a plentiful humor moistning the Arteries, and rather belongs to a
preter-natural constitution then a natural; a sharp voice shows narrowness of
the throat, and consequently coldness of the Wind pipe; on the contrary a great
voice shows wideness of the top of the Windpipe, and therefore signifies heat
strong from their infancy.

Book. III. PART. I. SECT. I. OF URINES.
CHAP. I. Of the abuse of inspection of Vrines.
AFter we have spoken of those things which are to be known about the
constitution of a sound body, The vulgar opinion of Inspection of Urine.
now we are to speak of the knowledge of things contrary to nature; but because
amongst signs Urine, and Pulse do arise from the fountain, we will speak of
them in the first place: and first for what belongs to Urine, although a false
opinion is deeply seated in the minds of many, that by the inspection of Urine
alone, and wholly, the state and condition of the sick, and what ill he
suffers, either within or without, from what cause soever may be known, and
whether the sick be a man, or woman, whether a woman be great with child or
not: yet such like are beyond the power of the Art of Physic, by the Urine to
divine. In the mean time the Inspection of Urine is profitable, but as
Hypocrates also 1. Aphor. 12. teaches that Urine may teach many things of the
condition of a disease; but that there may be a right judgment of Urine, the
differences and causes of the differences are to be known.

CHAP. II. Of the differences of Urine, and first of the substance of Urine.
FIrst in Urine too things are to be considered, The substance af Urine.
in regard of the substance thereof, the liquor, and that which is contained in
the liquor. In the liquor again two things, the Consistence and the Choler.

First for the Consistence, some are thick, Consistence of Urine. Thin Urine.
some are thin, others indifferent.

That Urine is thin, which for the most part consists of watery and potulent
matter, but of serous and salt matter, that which is separated in the Veins and
Liver; or of another humor, which has little or no mixture with it.

On the contrary, Thick.
a thick Urine is that which contains much mixture of serous and salt humidity,
or also of other humors. Indifferent.
The middle is that which has so much of that serous excrement, and aqueous
humidity mixed with it, as for the most part is wont to be in a natural
constitution of the body.

Moreover some Urines are clear, others troubled, Troubled and thick Urine no
the same. Troubled.
or foul; those are troubled, through which the sight cannot pass; but it is
not the same thing for Urine to be thick and troubled, when as other liquors;
so Urines also are accounted thick, which neverthelesle are clear, and
perspicuous; but a clear Urine is either made clear and so remains, or else
it is made clear, and afterward is troubled, which is properly called troubled
Urine; but troubled Urine, properly so called, is that which is made so, and
either remains such, which Urine commonly is called subjugal, which is like the
contents of the Urine, or is made foul, or troubled, and afterward become
clear, and becomes so afterward, as is spoken. Moreover in respect of the
color, there are accounted several differences, but the principal colors,
according to which the Urines differ are six. First white; secondly, pale;
thirdly, flame color; fourthly, yellow; fifthly red; sixthly, black.

First to the white Urines belong the aqueous, White Urine.
which bare the color of pure water, then those which represent thin wine, or
fair water, into which is cast a little Oker, or Choler, as also snowy Urine,
which represents the whiteness of snow, as also milkey and light gray, or such
as represents the color of clear horn.

The second is pale like the color of Oker, Pale.
or subpallid, which is seen in water tinckted with Oker, but some call these
Urines spicious, or the color of ears of corn, Straw color. Flame color.
and subspicious, and compare this color to the color which is seen in chaff
that is old, or in straw.

The third color is flame color, such as is that of a Citron, and in fire
burning clear, which if it be more remiss, it is called subfulgent; Actuarius
calls these golden Urines, and subaureous, because they are like gold.

Fourthly, Yellow.
the next and nearest to this fulgent is yellow, yet so differing from it, that
this inclines more to white, Brighter yellow.
that is more shining and splendid, or near to the color and splendour of the
Stars; that which is not so deep but clearer, then yellow is called subflavous;
Actuarius calls these colors croceous, or saffron colors, or subcroceous,
such as are in waters wherein saffron, or whilde saffron flowers are mixed.

The fifth color, or red, whereof Galen makes three sorts, Red.
and places red in the middle, extreme red, the highest, and reddish the
lowest, and those he places in Bole-Almonack, and Vermilion, and red, in
Cherries and Apples; others make four differences, and first they place the
color that is a mixed red, such as is the hair of those who are said to be red
hair'd, which again is distinguished into red, and reddish; the second is
Rosy; the third purpurious; the forth sanguineous.

To these Actuarius joines a vine colored Urine, Vine color.
which represents the color of a red Urine inclinable to black, to this be
adds the color of dry grapes, like new Wine (out of doubt of red Wine) boiled
to the third part, Blakish.
or which is pressed out of dried Grapes, or of Cherries, inclining to a black
color.

Moreover there is a black Urine, Black Urine.
under which some-Physitians comprehend more colors, green, yellow, black, and
such like; although there be innumerable differences of green plants, yet two
here are the chief, Leek-colour, which is seen in the blades of Leeks;
Eruginous
and Eruginous which is like Verdy-grease, and yellow, which represents the
color of red Lead, and therefore called plumbeous.

To these differences they refer Oleagenous Urine, Oily Urine
which represents the color and consistence of Oil.

Now these differences which are taken from the substance and color are
complicate, and constitute, The smell of Vrines.
compound differences, amongst which the chief are seven, Urine thin and
white, thin, pale, thin flame color, or fulgent, thick white, thick red, thick
black

Moreover besides these there are other differences less principal, which are
taken from other qualities and circumstances; first from the smell, for some
Urines smell little, others very little, and have that odor which is natural
to Urine, others stink exceedingly, and others smell pleasant.

From the sound, for some Urines whilst they are poured out make no noise,
others make a noise.

From the quantity, for some Urines are made in an indifferent quantity, others
more sparingly, others more plentifully.

From the manner, for some are made without difficulty and pain, others with
pain, some drop by drop, and others altogether.

CHAP. III. Of the Contents in Urine.
A Content in a Urine is every corpulent and visible thing which is mingled
with the liquor of the Urine; some Contents are essential, Contents what, how
many fold.
others accidental; the essential are those which appear for the most part in
all the Urines of sound persons, and most of sick, but the accidental are those
which neither always nor most frequently are discerned in Urines.

Essential in respect of site or place, in which they abide there are three;
the sediment, the suspension, and the clouds, the altitude of the whole Urine
is to be divided, as it were, into three parts, into the bottom of the Urinal,
and the highest region of the Urine, and the medium betwixt these two extremes.

The subsidence or sediment of Urine, The sediment of Urine. The suspension of
Urine. The nubecula.
is that in Urine which descends toward the bottom, and settles in the
bottom.

Suspension, or subliment is that which is contained in the middle, and is, as
it were, suspended.

The clouds and little clouds is that which hangs in the higher part of the
Urine like a cloud, yet suspension in Urine is sometimes taken by Hypocrates by
the names of a cloud, as in the second of his Prognostics, in the 29. Title is
manifest.

Yet these Contents do not always exactly keep their natural place, for the
sediment sometimes plainly sticks in the bottom, and sometimes ascends higher,
and tends to suspension, and sometimes suspension also ascends a little higher
from the middle sometimes descends lower; so also Clouds plainly overspread the
extremities, sometimes incline toward the middle.

In these three Contents, The difference of Contents.
other differences moreover are to be considered from the substance; a Content
is said to be thick, or thin, equal, or unequal, plain and smooth, or rugged;
equal is when all the parts of the Content are of the same thinness or
thickness; unequal is when one part is thick and another thin; plain and smooth
is that which observes continuity of parts divulsed, or rugged, is when there
is no continuity for the color, A Content is either white, red, or black, or
tinctured with a color near to one of these. In respect of quantity it is
either little, much, or indifferent, out of which complicated diverse other
differences again do arise.

Concerning the accidental differences which are contained in the Urine
contrary to nature, Accidental differences.
some settle in the bottom, others in the middle, others in the superficies,
some stick to the fides of the Vrinal, others are confusedly mixed with the
Urine.

Of the first kind are farenacious sediments, Farenacious sediment like leaves,
like Pulse.
which represent thick bran^, little flakes which are like leaves, grainem,
which represent a kind of pulse, or corn, besides these sometimes in a Urine,
there are clots of blood, small sands, stones, little rags of flesh, quitture,
worms.

In the middle of the Urine there sometimes swims little bodies like Attomes,
threads, or rags, and hairs, Hairs in Urine.
and sometimes small sands, cleave to the sides of the Vrinal, representing the
substance of Tartar.

But in the superficies there appears principally four things preter-natural,
bubbles and those various, froth, Bubbles. Froth. A crown.
a crown according to the common opinion; when notwithstanding it is nothing
else then a shadow, or light, passing through the circumference of the Vrinal,
received within the compass of the Urine, and so is not properly called a
Content, and Fat, yet besides these sometimes fine Sand swimming in the
superficies of the Urine

CHAP. IV. Of the causes of the various consistence of Vrines.
AFter we have mentioned the differences of Urine, Causes of Urine of an
indifferent consistence. Thin.
next we must find the causes of all those differences; and first the cause of
a Urine of an indifferent consistence is a serous excrement of blood, mingled
with an indifferent quantity of water which happens when the faculty concocting
is well.

The cause of a thin Urine which has little of that serous excrement mixed with
it, is debility of concoction, especially in the Liver and Veins, which
coldness of the Stomach may occasion, but principally store of drink, also a
cold distemper of the Reins. Thirdly, obstruction, and straitness of the
vessels through which thick humors cannot flow with the Urine. Fourthly, the
changing and converting of the matter in another part.

Thick Urine is made by the mixture of any thick matter which happens when
crude humors, Thick.
which are cumulated in the Veins, are expelled by nature this way, or when any
obstruction is opened out of the Spleen, Liver, Reins, and other parts, or an
imposthumation is broken, or ulcer, the thick matter is mingled with the Urine,
or if there be store of serous and salt humors.

If the Urine be made clear and remain so, Clear.
and be of good consistence, it is a token that such clearness proceeds from
the natural heat rightly elaborating the matter, for nature elaborates not only
aliment, but excrements also, as much as it can, Thin and clear.
and impresses convenient qualities in them; but if Vein be thin and clear,
also it is a token of crudity; neither has nature then begun concoction of
humors, and if Vrines have any other color, then such waterish, they obtain it
from collerick humors mixed therewith.

But if the Urine be made clear, Troubled.
and afterward be troubled, and that be in a sound body, it is a sign that he
declines from his best health, and is prone to some disease, especially a
Fever, and it signifies the humors in the Veins to be indigested, which nature
now has endeavored, yet hitherto has not perfectly concocted: but if the
same happen to those that are sick, it signifies that some concoction is now to
be made, and something of the peccant matter to be mingled with the watty
substance; but that mixture not to be so exact; and happening by some occasion
from the external air, or the heat vanishing of its own accord; the vicious
matter is separated from the other humors.

But if Urine be made thick, Troubled, which grows clear.
and afterward become thin, that happens because the natural heat begins to
perform and concoct the matter, and to stir it, and mingle it, which
notwithstanding since it is not exactly mingled, the heat afterward ceasing,
the Heterogeneal parts are separated of their own accord, and the thicker
reside in the bottom. The same comes to pass if the Urine be thin, but some
matter may be mingled therewith in its passage; but since it is not exactly
mingled with it, but only confused afterward of its own accord, it settles in
the bottom.

Lastly, Troubled which remains so.
if the Urine be made thick and remain so, it signifies great confusion of
humors is made in the Veins by the heat stirring the humors, but not rightly
concocting them, nor is there good concoction made, which the excrements
elaborate to make after their manner, and indeed if such a Urine appear in the
beginning of such a disease, wherein no concoction seems hitherto to be made by
the natural heat; it is a token that it is caused by the fiery heat contrary to
nature agitating and troubling the humors in the veins; but if the Urine in the
beginning is not made thick, but clear, and afterward becomes turbulent, it is
a sign that the disease grows worse, and that the heat acting upon the matter
contrary to nature is increased, yet always this and also other signs must have
regard to the rest of the conditions of the Urine, and hence it is to be
collected, whether such signs be made by the strength of nature working upon
the vicious humors, or by the increase of the preter-natural heat, and
putrefaction, or debility of strength.

CHAP. V. Of the causes of colors in Vrines.
COncerning the causes of colors in Urine, The causes of a golden color in
Urine.
a golden color, which agrees to the Vrines of sound men proceeds according to
the vulgar opinion from some portion of yellow choler, or rather from a serous
and salt excrement, yet that also something tinctured with choler, which is
mixed with the Urine.

A white Water is made, Of a whit.
either because nothing is mingled with it which may color it, which is
properly called aqueous, or because some white body is mixed therewith.

The first cause of aqueous Urine is Crudity and weakness of the native heat,
by reason whereof this excrement is left, Of an aqueous.
as it were imperfect. Secondly, obstructions of the passages through which the
matter uses to flow to the Urine. Thirdly, if choler, and therewith that salt
humor be carried to another place, as happens for the most part in acute
Fevers, and Phrensies with them. Fourthly, much drink. Fifthly, heat of the
Reins and Liver, which plentifully draw drink to them, but do not concoct it.
Sixthly, Gravel in the Reins, or Bladder, too much of that which is salt, and
thick adheres, but the aqueous flows out.

Vrines of another kind are made by the mixture of some white substance,
whether it be phlegm, or quitture, or seed, Of milky
and these Vrines we call milky, yet for the most part they are made thick, and
afterward become clear, and the matter settling in the bottom of what kind it
is, may be easily discerned.

A Urine is somewhat pale, Of palish. Of pale.
when pale choler in a sufficient quantity, or a little of yellow is mingled
with the Urine, but if much pale choler, or yellow in an indifferent quantity
be mingled with the Urine a pale color arises.

If yellow be mixed in greater quantity, Of yellow.
the Urine becomes yellow, yet some times other causes besides internal,
external may give a tincture to the Urine, as Rhubarb, Saffron, the leaves of
Senna, and such like.

A ruddy color in Urine is caused by choler and blood, Of blood red.
and indeed if the Urine be colored with blood it does not look clear, and is
properly called Urine dyed with blood, and has a color like water, wherein the
flesh of animals newly slain have been washed, and is made either in some open
vessel for what cause soever, or by the weakness of the Liver and Reins, by
reason whereof they cannot contain blood and assimulate it to themselves, or
because nature at set times evacuates the blood abounding in the whole body
with Urine; but the blood which is mingled with the Urine, is either thin, and
the Urine is made red or reddish, or thick, which if much be mingled, the Urine
is made exceeding red, but if little either simply red, or of a pale red, but
that Urine which is colored by store of choler, the choler coloring it and
and making it redder, it shines, and is as it were like flame, sometimes also
it is made red and thick by plentiful mixture of adust choler, like wine of a
blackish, or deep red.

Wine like Urine is made by the mixture of ceruleous choler, Of Vine color.
Of grape color.
or representing the color of Woad, as also by the mixture of plenty of red
choler: Grapy by the mixture of yellow choler exceedingly dried, and as it
were changed into a Violet color and degenerating toward black.

A green Urine is caused by plenty of Aeruginous, Of green.
and Leck-like color.

Yellow and black Urine are sometimes caused by the mixture of external things;
Of yellow and black.
as for what belongs to the internal causes, the Urine is made black when
either the melancholy humor is evacuated with it, which happens in those which
cumulate melancholy humors in the Spleen, or black choler is mixed with the
Urine, or when the heat and spirits are extinguished in the veins, the blood is
corrupted and becomes black.

CHAP. VI. Of the causes of an oily Urine, and of other differences.
O Leaginous Urines either have only fat swimming in the superficies, Of oily
Vrines.
or represent Oil in substance and color: the first difference proceeds from a
melting of the fat, and is rather to be referred to the differences in the
Contents; but that Urine which seems like Oil in substance and color, and yet
is nor truly fat, has its beginning from the mixture of excrementitious
humors, especially of pale and black Choler, as also of Phlegm, from whence
proceeds a crudity with a certain greenness like Oil; Black Urine always thick.
but when the difference in substance and color are joined, a black Urine
cannot be thin, but if the black humor makes it black, it is necessary that
there is so great plenty thereof mixed with the Urine, that the Urine must
become thick.

A light red Urine is thin from the small portion of blood mingled therewith, A
light, red, thin.
but if it be made of a pale red, it is by choler which cannot happen unless
there be so great plenty thereof, as may render the Urine thick.

A pale and thin Urine is made when a small portion of choler is mingled with
an aqueous Urine, A pale and thin. A pale, red, thick.
but a pale red and thick, when choler is mixed in greater plenty, but if any
choler be mingled with a thick white Urine, the Urine is dyed pale.

CHAP. VII. Of the causes of smell, quantity, and such like accidents.
THe Urine which obtains the natural and usual smell, Cause of the smell of
Urine.
signifies that the natural heat is right, and concoction is well performed;
but if the Urine smell not, or less then the Vrines of those that are well use
to do, it is a token that the native heat is weak, and almost no concoction
performed, Of no smell.
nor is the serous and excrementitious humor mingled therewith.

Sweet Urine, Of smelling well.
or that which smells well does not proceed from any internal natural causes,
but if any such be found it has acquired that smell from meats, or medicines
taken inwardly.

Stinking Vrines are caused first from meat and drink, Of Faetid.
and certain medicines taken, also from crudity and corruption of meats,
erosion, and especially from putrefaction, Fourthly, from daily retention of
Urine in the Bladder.

Urine naturally ought to answer to the drink, Of store of Urine.
but it is made more plentiful then is fit: First, if meats are administered
which are full of aqueous humidity. Secondly, if the aqueous and serous
excrements, which use to be discussed by motion, or evacuated other ways be
retained in the body. Thirdly, if nature from the other parts, or the whole
body expels the vicious humors through the passages of Urine, which uses to
happen in Critic, and Symptomatick evacuations, as in a Diabetes, or
incontinence of Urine, Fourthly, if Dyuretick medicine be taken.

On the contrary, little Urine is caused by contrary causes, Of little Urine.
namely, not only by reason of small quantity of drink taken, but of dry meats,
moreover if the aqueous matter be consumed which uses to be in burning fevers,
as also by motion and too much exercise. Thirdly, if the Urine be converted to
other parts. Fourthly, by reason of the straitness of the passages, by which
the Urine ought to be expelled.

CHAP. VIII. Of the causes of Contents in Vrines of those that are sound.
THe matter of a Content, The matter of a sediment in sound men.
or Sediment in the Vrines of such as are sound (for in Vrines of those that
are exactly well, there is scarce any Content save only a sediment) is some
part of aliment which escaped concoction; for since it neither can be changed
into perfect blood, nor into the nutriment of any part, after the third
concoction it is sent to the Reins and cast cut through the Bladder, and there
is scarce found a Urine of a sound man, The causes of diversity of Contents
wherein the natural sediment does not appear; because scarce any body is so
exactly sound which does not generate some such excrement; and no nourishment
is to be found which cannot afford matter for such an excrement. Whence
according to the diversity of meats, and natures thereof there arises
diversity of Contents: For although the Contents settle in the bottom, and in
those that are exactly sound; yet in those which do not enjoy most perfect
health, The cause of the quality of the sediment.
or do not eat the best meats, it does not enjoy its natural place; but in
some, and those which eat grosser food more then is convenient, it does settle
in the bottom; in others it ascends higher then is fit, by reason of the heat
which cannot subdue it.

A Sediment is naturally white and takes this color from the veins and parts
which are wont to impress a white color on those things which they change:
Equal and continued is not divided by reason of heat rightly concocting and
rendering this excrement equal, and obtains the figure of a Pyramid, which
although all parts seem to the senses to be equally thick; yet in truth some
are thicker, which settle underneath, others thinner which consist in the
superior part.

A great sediment is through plenty of crude juice which affords matter for a
sediment; Quantity.
whence boys through much eating, and those that live in idleness, and those
whose accustomed evacuations are suppressed, and females also have a more
plentiful sediment; but men because they are hotter, and have not so many crude
humors, have less sediment: the same happens in Summer through fasting, too
great evacuations, and other causes consuming the humors, also obstructions,
and much and thin drinks, which are distributed and cast forth before it can
receive any mixture, or digestion with meat.

CHAP. IX. Of the causes of Contents in Vrines of those that are sick.
AGain in sick people the sediment consists of the more crude part of the
aliment which cannot turn into nourishment ^f the parts; The cause of a
sediment in the Urines of the sick.
with which notwithstanding other vicious humors also are mingled, nay
sometimes vicious humors only may afford matter for a sediment, but by how
much the more the Contents of those that are sick are like to those that are
well, by so much they are the better, and show great concoction, but by how
much the more they recede from those either in color, or other qualities, by
so much they are the worse, and indeed the differences of colors of Contents
are borrowed from the humor whereof they consist; but as for what belongs to
the diversity of substance, that proceeds from the variety os burning heat and
various disposition of matter: a farenacious sediment, as Galen teaches, is
made from thick dried blood, Causes of a fernacious sediment. Frothy. Bran-lik.
Pulse-like
or flesh unequally consumed by a fiery heat, but rough or scaly, when the
solid parts are unequally consumed, and scaly particles are cast forth with the
Urine, and bran-like sediment proceeds from a flamy and consuming heat of a
Fever, and a sore in the bladder or veins: a sediment that represents pulse
proceeds from melting, as Actuarius teaches, when a Fever comes to the flesh
and melts it, but it is not thought credible by the late Physicians, that by
the melting or flesh any thing so thick can be mixed with the Urine; and
moreover those sediments they account do proceed from a scabby, and exulcerated
bladder, or from a crude and melancholy humor.

Small Sand and Gravel proceed from thick and feculent matter which sometimes
contains in it self a principle of coagulation, and a light occasion being
offered, Of sand and gravel.
it concreates of its own accord.

Clods of blood are discerned when either from an ulcer, Of Clods of blood.
or otherwise from a hurt, broken or open vessel in a part through which the
Vein passes, blood is cast out.

Quitture appears in the Urine when an imposthume, Of quitture in Urine.
or ulcer lies hid in the Reins, Bladder, or otherwise through which the Urine
passes; or when from the superior parts, as the Breasts, or Lungs, nature
evacutates matter through the Vrinary passages.

Small pustles of flesh called Caruncles in the Urine of exulcerated Reins, are
aprts of the substance. Of Caruncles. Of slimy Ecrements.


Slimy, thick, and tough phlegm like the snot of the nose, if it be made with
the Urine, and be voided with pain, for the most part it is a token of the
Stone in the Bladder, but that which is made without pain Fernelius says does
proceed from a crude ulcer of the Reins, or parts thereabout, or from an
imposthume; and truly for the most part, such matter being present in the
bladder as it is the beginning, so it is a sign of the Stone of the Bladder;
and moreover being sent out it coagulates into a lapidious hardness; but
sometimes phlegm which is cast forth in great plenty, is the offspring of crude
matter, and ill digestion in the parts beyond the Reins.

Worms if they appear in the Urine proceed from corrupt and sordid matter, Of
worms.
as in other parts.

Small strings and little bodies like hairs, Of fibers and hairs.
and cobwebs, if they are put forth with the Urine have their original from a
thick humor, either in the veins, or in the reins, or dried in the ureters,
and reduced into this form by the longitude of the vessel.

Bubbles and froth are generated from wind included in viscous matter, Of
bubbles and froth.
which when it cannot exhale extends the matter into a tumor, and those bubbles
may be of diverse colors according to the nature of the humor in which the
enclosed wind stirs them up.

A Crown shows what kind of humors are contained in the greater vessels, Of a
crown
and according to the diversity of humors has diverse colors, and is seated in
the upper part of the Urine, and in that circle many things are obvious to our
eyes, which cannot be discerned in the rest of the humors, because the light in
the superficies of the liquor is otherwise divided and received then in the
middle.

Lastly, Of fat.
if fat swim upon the top of the Urine it proceeds from melting of the grease,
but this proceeds from heat, therefore if the fat continually swim in Urine
like cobwebs, it shows consumption and melting of the body; yet Fernelius
writes that he would advise you of Oil taken inwardly, least any small bodies
of Oil swim in the Urine by that means.

CHAP. X. Of the causes of changes in Vrines.
BUt Urines vary also in those that are sound, Causes of changing of Vrines.
in regard of temperaments, sex, age, time of the year, sleep, watching,
exercises, passions of the mind, and such like, which are called the causes of
variations of Urines.

As for the temperaments, Urine of those that are hot and cold.
hot temperaments have higher colored Urines, and thinner and less sediment,
or in stead of a sediment a cloud, or Nubecula; but colder have Urines paler
colored, and few Contents also, unless raw juice, which proceeds from weaker
concoction be mingled with the Urine.

In respect of age, Of Boys. Youths. Old men. Of middle age.
Boys have white Urines, thicker, with a plentiful sediment; youths thinner
with few Contents, but higher colored; old men have white Urines, but thin and
without Contents, unless many excrements meet together, which if they are
mingled with the Urines, it happens that the Urine is made thick, and full of
Contents; those that are of a middle age have indifferet Urines,

In regard of the Sex, the Urines of men are far higher, Of men.
or deeper colored then the Urines of women, thinner, and have fewer Contents,
but the Urines of women are paler, and by reason of crude humors, thicker with
more plentiful sediment; yet nevertheless the Urines of men and women do not so
vary, that they can be known by certain signs, whether it be a man's or woman's
water, Of women great.
for reasons may be given also in men which produce such Urines, as otherwise
are familiar to women; although as in such as are great with child there may be
some change of Urine, when the Menstruous blood is retained in them, and from
thence no small change is made in the body; yet that change does not afford a
certain sign whether a woman be great, when the same causes of change may be
shown in other women which are not great, but in some which are more lively,
there is little change of Urine.

As for the time of the year, Change of Urine according to the time of the year.
the Urines of every kind in the middle of the spring are moderate, as also in
the middle of autumn, but by how much the more the year goes on toward Summer,
by so much the more the color of Urine is increased, and the thickness, and
Contents are diminuished: in the Summer also the Vrines are higher colored,
thinner, and have less sediments; in autumn the color of Vrines and tenuity
are lessened: the Urines in the Winter come nearest the best state.

In hot Regions, According to the Region, and degrees of Heaven. To exercise
and rest.
and under the hotter degrees of Heaven Urines are made deeper colored;
thinner, and of little sediment. In colder Climates they are nearer to the best
state.

Those which exercise and labor moderately make well concocted Urines, and in
color, substance, and contents moderate, but those that exercise and labor
immoderately, in those first the color is increased, and the thickness and
contents diminuished; but if the exercise continue long, the color and tenuity
is lessened, when the streng this weakened, but those that live idly make Vrines
not much colored, and moreover thick and with many sediments.

In immoderate watchings, first the color is increased, According to sleeping
and waking.
but if they continue long it is abated: sleep if it be moderate causes Urine
to be good in all, but if it be immoderate, it increases the color of the
Urine, but abateth the contents and substance, but if it be protracted longer,
it becomes crude.

The passions of the mind, since some increase the heat, Passions of the mind.
some diminish it, according to the calidity and frigidity which they bring
upon the body, they alter the Vrines.

Lastly, Meat, Drink, and Medicines.
Meats, Drinks, and Medicines change the Urine, and Meat taken moderately
causes a moderate sediment; more plentifully, a more plentiful; thin causes
none; Meats, also Drinks and Medicines have a power of changing color and smell
lof Vrines.

CHAP. XI. What is to be observed in the Inspection of Vrines.
SInce all these things are spoken of Vrines for that end that from thence
diseases and the causes of diseases maybe known, and the events foretold, that
this may be rightly done, we are to admonish you what things are to be observed
in the Inspection of Urine.

First the time in making water is to be observed, those Vrines which are made
presently after eating and drinking, When Urine is to be received.
signify nothing certainly, especially if much drink be taken, since the
decoction is not performed, Urine is rather to be looked upon after a perfect
concoction, and about the morning. In Fevers regard is to be had of the fits,
because in time of the Paroxism the morbifique matter is expelled another way.

Secondly, it is to be weighed whether any meat, drink, or medicine, be taken
which may change the Urine.

Thirdly, The whole Urine to be taken. It should first settle. In what place
should be kept. Inspection of troubled Vrines.
the whole Urine made at once is to be be taken, not to be mingled with waters
made at several times.

Fourthly, judgment is not to be given of Urine before it has settled, and the
Contents enjoy their proper place.

Fifthly, you must beware least the Urine by cold air, or winds especially in
an open vessel, being exposed thereunto, should be changed, or corrupted, yet
it may be changed no less by too much heat then by too much cold.

Sixthly if the Urines are troubled they are to be settled by the heat of fire,
or rather warm water, that they may return to their former state; yet it is
convenient to look upon troubled Urines before they become clear again, since
often times in troubled Vrines the substance of the Urine is more manifest then
in clear, and often times Vrines which be not troubled seem to be alike, when
troubled they differ exceedingly; and in troubled Vrines oftentimes that matter
of the Urine shows it self, which scarce any one could believe had been
contained in it when 'twas clear.

Seventhly the Vrinal in Inspection ought to be quiet, and not to be stirred,
only after Inspection it may be lawful to stir the contents.

Eighthly, the Glass wherein the Urine is to be viewed ought to be clear,
perspicuous and void of all color.

Ninthly, the Urine is to be cast neither in a place too shady nor too light,
yet the colors in a small shade, so not too dark, may be discerned best, but
the Contents in a lighter place.

CHAP. XII. What may be discerned and foretold by a Urine.
ALL diseases and affects cannot be discerned by Urine only, since there are
diseases of many parts which alter not the Urine, What can be known by Urine.
but without dispute the Urine may show that disposition which is in the Liver
and Vrines; since the Urine is an Excrement of the Veins, of the Reins also and
passages through which the Urine flows, and the diseases of the Bladder and
Yard without controversy the Urine may show; for if any thing be contained in
the ways through which the Urine passes contrary to nature; it is easily
mingled with the Urine: moreover the diseases of those parts which send matter
to the Veins, may be dscerned by the Urine. Whence if any peculiar part be
affected, and the Urine changed also; if in the part affected there be also
made any peculiar change, it is a token that such matter is transmitted from
that part to the Reins and Bladder. On the contrary, also when the matter which
is contained in the Veins is carried sometimes to other part s, and causes
various Symptoms; the diseases of those parts may also be known by the Vrines,
especially if other Symptoms agree with those of the Urine. Lastly, when
Fevers and venomous diseases may be joined with the diseases of many parts,
although the Vrines then do not first indicate that very disease of the private
part; yet it is not unprofitable then to consider the Vrines, and to observe the
signs from thence of life and death.

And thus what may be known, and foretold of every Urine is manifest, from
those things which are spoken of the causes of all the differences which happen
unto Urine.

Book. III. PART. I. SECT. IV. OF PULSES.
CHAP. I. What a Pulse is.
A Pulse which the Greeks call Sphugmos and Sphuxis, A Pulse what.
is a motion of the Heart and Arteries proceeding from the vital faculty,
consisting of dilatation and contraction, and is appointed for the preservation
of the Harmony of the native heat. Instruments of a Pulse.
Instruments of the Pulse are the Heart and Arteries, and the Heart is the
Fountain, Chimny, and Elaboratory of heat and vital Spirits; but the Arteires
are the Channels through which this vivifying heat is derived from the heart,
as from a Fountain, and dispersed through the whole body, which work that they
may rightly perform, power is given to them by nature whereby they can dilate
and contract them selves by perpetual motion, Efficient cause.
by which means Arteries Blood with the vital Spirits, is diffused through the
whole body, the vapors are expelled, and cold air is drawn in; neither is the
motion of the Heart and Arteries made only by the fervent heat of the Blood and
Spirits; nor is this motion to be accounted accidental, Vital faculty.
and, as it were, violent, but the heart by a peculiar faculty which it has in
its self, which they call Vital and Pulsisique is moved; neither are the Heart
and Arteries dilated, because they are filled, but they are filled because
dilated. Neither is this faculty denied to the Arteries, although in its own
manner, it depends on the heart,

The use of the Heart and Arteries, The use of the motion of the heart and
arteries.
and the end of their motion is the preservation of the native heat, the
generation of vital spirits, and the distribution of them through the whole
boby; but the native heat is preserved (as being hotter) whilst it is cooled
and fanned, and the matter fit for the generating of spirits is drawn, but the
fuligenous vapors are expelled. The motion of the Heart and Pulse performs
these duties by that double motion, out of the which as of parts it is
composed, namely by Sistole and Dyastole, or dilatation and contraction. But
because these two motions are opposite, and a thing cannot be moved against its
opposite unless first it be quiet. It is necessary that these two motions admit
of two cessations between; the one is that which follows the Systole, the other
the Dyastole. And indeed attraction is made by dilatation; for the cooling and
fanning of the heat, and the generation of spirits. But contraction is made for
expulsion; for the heart when it is dilated attracts blood, the matter of vital
spirits and arterious blood, and air from the Lungs through the arterious
veins; But the Arteries draw some of the thinner blood from the Veins,
especially they draw air through their small orifices, opening to the Pores of
the Skin: by contraction the Heart expels fuliginous vapors, and together emits
arterious Blood and Spirits into the Arteries, but the Arteries expel
fuligenous excrements, and together communicate some Spirits and arterial blood
to all the parts.

CHAP. 2. Of the simple differences of Pulses.
THe differences of Pulses are either absolute, or relative; The differences of
Pulses. Absolute. Respective.
absolute differences are when a Pulse has any difference absolute, and in its
own nature, when we consider it without comparing it with any other. Respective
are those which arise from comparing of the Pulses amongst themselves. Absolute
again are twofold, simple and compound.

But seeing to the Pulse, as also to every local motion, Simple.
five things are required. 1. The thing moving. 2. The space through which the
motion is made. 3. Time. 4. The rest between the two opposite motions. 5. The
instrument: according to these also the simple differences of Pulses are
constituted, and every simple difference regards one of these, and so there are
ten simple Pulses, a great and small in respect of space, swift and slow in
respect of time, thick and thin in respect of rest between, vehement and weak
in respect of moving, hard and soft in respect of the instrument. And if
amongst the opposite motions we account a mediocrity, or moderate in every kind,
there will arise 15. simple Pulses And if there may be added to these other
differences, either they are not comprehensible by the touch, or they are
unprofitable.

A great Pulse is that which exceeds the space, A great and a small Pulse.
which by nature is granted for the motion of the Artery. A little Pulse is
that which does not wholly keep that space. A moderate Pulse is that which does
observe its definite space for its motion; but whereas in space, longitude,
latitude, profunditude may be considered, some divide a great and small Pulse
into other differences, to wit, long and short, high and deep, narrow and
broad, to which if a moderate Pulse be added, then there will be made five
kinds, all which kinds if they are joined together, amongst themselves make
twenty seven differences, which comprehend eighty one Pulses; of which Galen in
the first of the differences of Pulses, Cap. 5.

A swift Pulse is when an Artery runs through his space in a short time, A
swift and slow.
a slow when in a long time moderate, when in an indifferent time.

A thick, Frequent and thin.
or frequent Pulse is performed, little rest interposing between. A thin when
long; an indifferent is performed in the middle of those extremes; but that a
frequent and thin Pulse may be rightly perceived, The Pulses are to be divided
into the stroke, and the intervall; the stroke is the motion of the Artery
resisting the touch; but the interval is the time interposed betwixt two
strokes, whereby the Artery is contracted and dilated, which by how much the
shorter or longer it is by so much the Pulse is said to be more frequent or
thin.

A vehement pulse is that which strikes the hand of him that feels it, Vehement
weak.
and resists it: and as it were reverberates. Weak is that which gently strikes
the hand. Moderate is the middle betwixt these two.

A hard Pulse is when the Artery is hard, Hard. Soft.
and resists the touch. A soft is when the Artery is soft and fainty, and
gives way to the touch.

CHAP. III. Of the compound differences of Pulses.
OUt of these differences of simple Pulses, compound differences are easily to
be found, which although they are very many, yet these are the chief.

Great. Swift. Frequent. Vehement. Soft. Great. Swift. Moderate. Moderate.
Moderate. Great. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Swift.
Frequent. Vehement. Hard. Moderate. Swift. Thin. Weak. Soft. Moderate.
Moderate. Frequent. Vehement. Soft. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Vehement.
Hard. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate.
Moderate. Weak. Soft. Moderate. Moderate. Thin. Weak. Soft. Moderate. Slow.
Thin. Weak. Soft. Little. Swift. Frequent. Vehement. Hard. Little. Moderate.
Moderate. Moderate. Moderate. Little. Slow. Moderate. Moderate. Moderate.
Little. Slow. Thin. Weak. Hard.

CHAP. IV. Of an equal and unequal Pulse.
REspectively or Relatively, Respective differences of pulses, equality and
inequality.
for either respect is had to the equality and inequality, or to order, or to
proportion or number; equallity and inequality of the Pulse is nothing else but
a congruity or difference of one thing in pulses when compared with another.

Equality and inequality is either simply and absolutely such; or Secundum
quid, How manifold equal. Absolutely equal. Absolutely unequal.
and which is at least in a certain kind such.

Absolutely and simply, a Pulse is said to be equal which neither changed in
magnitude nor in swiftness, nor in frequency nor in vehemence, nor in
swiftness, and if equality be observed in neither of these, it is called a
Pulse absolutely and simply unequal; but if a Pulse keeps not equallity in all
these, neither is made unequal in all these; it is said according to
something, and in some respect to be unequal, the denomination is to be taken
from that wherein it observes not equality.

Moreover these unequalities again are divided into systematicall or
collective, Systematique inequality. An unequal pulse equally. unequal.
which is observed in more strokes, and singular, which is in one stroke;
collective, again is double, unequality equally, and unequality unequally;
unequal Pulses are equally when the first is so to the second, as the second
is to the third, the third to the fourth, and so forward, unequal; unequal
unequally are those which are not alike in their change, neither is the first
so to the second as the second is to the third.

We call an unequal Pulse equally Myouron, Myoures.
from the similitude of the tail of a Mouse, which as the tail of a Mouse
from some thickness by little and little and equally tends to sharpness, so
these Pulses in magnitude are lessened by degrees and equally, and the
following stroke is always less then the former, which some call maimed
Pulses.

These again are either deficient Myourn which perpetually are lessoned till
at length they plainly cease to strike any more; or such as at length cease to
be lesned, Deficient Myouroi.
and do not plainly give off and rest; and both of them again are various, for
some keep that pravity to which they are come others do not persevere therein;
but return again to magnitude, Maimed reciprocal.
which the Greeks call maimed Pulses running again, reciprocal shortened, or
running Pulses, and these again either return to their former magnitude, or to
lesser, or to a greater.

Unequally, unequal Pulses also are various according to all the simple
differences of Pulses, but the chief, and those which the Ancients gave names
unto, are the intermittent, deficient, the intercedent, or intercurrent.

The name of intermittent is attributed to that inequality which is in pravity
and rarity, Intermitting.
or only rarity, namely when the artery is so hindered in cessation, that one
pulsation seems to have two or three, between two which seem to be deficient,
and after one or more strokes, Intercurrent.
the intermittent begins to beat again.

Intercurrent, or such as go between, are opposite to intermittent, and amongst
them after certain strokes, one or more strokes intervene, which causes
inequality of frequency.

A deficient Pulse is when an artery after it has made unequal strokes,
Deficient.
plainly seems to be defective in motion and to cease; which if it return to
its former motion, it is called a reciprocal deficiency, Reciprocal defictent.
and this is the difference between an intermitting and deficient Pulse, that a
deficient reciprocal after a long space between, whereby the man seems to be
destitute of a Pulse, returns, but an intermitting at the highest returns
after intermission of five Pulses.

A singular inequality is either in one part of an artery, A singular
nequallity.
or under one finger, or more, or all; inequality under one finger is, when in
dilatation and contraction a certain diversity in celerity is observed, so
that one part of one motion is swifter, another part is found slower, and this
inequallity Authors divide into three parts, namely an intermitting Pulse, an
uneven Pulse, and a hasty Pulse, or striking double.

Intermitting in one Pulse is when the dilatation of the artery before it can
come to its term and external rest, Intermitting in one Pulse.
is interrupted in the middle of its motion, and is refreshed in its rest, yet
so that it cannot remain in rest but performs motion, and comes to its
accustomed term and External rest.

Of this kind some Authors make many differences, Caprisons.
amongst which the chief is an uneven Pulse, when in the Diostile as it were
in the middle of its rest it is interrupted, yet so that after rest the faculty
arises higher and perfects motion, whence in an uneven Pulse in one dilatation
there is as were a double stroke, and indeed the latter swister then the
former. Uneven.


An even hasty Pulse is when the motion is continual and interrupted by no
rest, stirred up.
but the part of the distending one is slower, another swifter, as if the
motion of distention begins slowly and afterward ends swiftly, or the
contrary. Dicrotus.


Dicrotus or a double striking Pulse is when the Artery begins to be moved, but
before it perfects its motion it goes back and a small contraction being made
it rises again to perfect its motion, and strikes the second time, so that a
double Pulsation seems to be made, which nevertheless consists of one
distention or dilatation.

In equality in one Pulse, but under more parts of the Artery happens, when in
one dilatation the Pulse strikes two, three, or four fingers, but those
unequally, so that in one finger the Pulse is otherwise perceived then in
another, and that in a twofold manner, for either the motion is interrupted, so
that some fingers perceive motion, others not, or it is a continued motion,
when the Artery is otherwise moved under other fingers; Myourus on Pulse.
and indeed those which are made unequal in magnitude in one Pulse are called
Myourus, namely when the Pulse under the fore finger is greater, less under
the second, less then that under the third, but if the Pulse under the middle
fingers be greater, under both extreme fingers less, they are called
prominent Pulses or Myouroy, changing about unto every part.

Out of these simple differences of inequality other compound do arise,
Prominent.
for either a Systematicall inequality is complicat with a simple, or a
Systematicall with a Systematicall, or a singular with a singular; out of which
compound differences the chief are first, a rugged or uneven, second full of
surges, third when it bears as if a worm did creep under ones finger, four
that feels as if it were a Pismire, five a serrate Pulse, six a hectic,
seven a trembling.

In an uneven Pulse whereof we have spoken before in equality is twofold in
swiftness and violence, Caprisons.
for one part of the motion is swifter the other, more vehement then the former.

In a Pulse full of waves there are two inequalities, A surging pulse.
in magnitude and frequeney, namely when the Artery is moved, the motion not
interrupted, but unequal, so that magnitude may appear first under the fore
finger, afterunder the second, then under the third, hence under the fourth;
according to the manner of the waves.

The Pulses like the moving of a Worm or Pismire, Virmicall.
differ from a surging Pulse only in magnitude, for there is the same
inequality in that Vermicular as in the waving, but the Artery is less and
slower lifted up, and it renders the Artery as it were into the form of a
creeping worm.

This Vermicular Pulse being less and slower, Formicant.
but very frequent is a Formicant motion, so called from the creeping of a
Pismire, which indeed makes quick steps, but goes less way in longer time.

A Serrat Pulse is when one part of the Artery is more lifted up and strikes
the fingers more, A serrate.
the other is less lifted up, and strikes the fingers less.

A Hectic Pulse is so called from the similitude of a Hectick-Feaver, A hectic
it always persists in the same in equality what ever the inequality be.

Lastly a trembling or fainting Pulse has inequality in many Pulses, A
trembling.
in magnitude, frequency, and vehemence, in the same manner, as you may observe
in the panting of the heart,

CHAP V. Of the order and Harmony amongst Pulses.
THe second difference of relative Pulses is constituted in respect of order,
^nordinate pulse.
and it agrees at least to unequal Pulses, for equal Pulses are always
ordinate, but that is an ordinate Pulse, which although it be unequal, yet it
keeps some order in striking, but an Inordinate is that, which is unequal and
keeps no order in striking; Inordinate.
as if it should happen that an Artery should make four equal Pulses, and the
fifth differs from equality; and again an Artery makes four equal Pulses, but
the sift differs again from equality, it is called an Ordinate Pulse, but if
the first and second be equal, but the third less, the fourth fifth and sixth
again equal, the seventh unequal, it is an Inordinate Pulse.

Inordinate Pulses again either are absolutely so or not, absolute inordinate
are, if whilst more circuits are considered, those that follow no way answer to
the first; not absolute Inordinate are, if the latter circuits, although
amongst themselves they are not alike, answer to the first.

The last differences of relative Pulses is constituted in respect of
proportion or harmony now concord is nothing else but a proportion of the time
of dilatation to the time of contraction. Harmony is either equal or unequal;
Rythmus. in pulses.
equal according to the opinion of Ancient Physitiansis when the time of
contraction is equal to the time of distention; unequal is when the time of
Diastole is greater or less then the time of Sistole, and a Pulse according to
the opinion of the Ancients is harmonious, which observes a proper meeter, Good
order. no order.
to the age, temperament, and sex: Incongruous is that which differs from the
proper Harmony of age, temperament and sex; but since a dilatation can scarcely
be fully known, Galen does not constitute a Harmony by comparing of the time of
contraction with the time of dilatation, but rather by comparing of the quality
of motion, as of swiftnessc and slownesse, so that to him a meeter or Harmony
is nothing else but proportion of dilations amongst themselves, and a congruous
Pulse is that, wherein the Sistole and Diastole are equally swift; but an
irregular is that, wherein the celerity of dilatation and contraction is
unequal, the inequality of which irregularities or discords may again be
divided into nine differences, according to the variety of dilatation and
contraction in celerity and tardity.

CHAP VI. Of certain things necessarily requisite to distinguish Pulses by.
BUt that a Pulse may be rightly perceived certain things are required in the
Physician, certain in the sich; Those things that are requisite in a Physi^ian
that he may know pulses.
in the Physician first there is required that he have an exquisite sense of
feeling, and a soft hand, especially in the Pulse of the outmost joint of the
fingers, not very hot, nor too cold, but temperate; secondly that presently
after his commig in he may not touch the Artery, least perhaps the sick being
troubled by the coming of the Physician, the Pulse be changed, but let him
wait a little while, until he understands that the sick is quiet, thirdly let
him touch the Artery of the wrist of either Arm.

For the fingers rightly are to be applied to the Artery, namely the first
four or three fingers, are to be put to the Artery that the more differences
of Pulses may be apprehended; moreover since there is a threefold application
of the hand to the Artery, compression, when the fingers do as it were press
the Artery, softly when the hand is gently applied to the Artery, the medium
when in an indifferent manner or with some small pressure it is put to the
Artery; pressing is most convenient for the knowledge of contraction, if it may
be, and for vehement pulses, but in languishing pulses it takes away the
greatest part of the Pulse^by handling fearfully and softly, the vehement
Pulses are not enough perceived; thirdly the medium is betwixt these two, and
neither lightness of feeling is observed in vehement, nor compression in
languishing.

In the sick is required first what time the Physician touch the Pulse, In the
sick
that he be free from all passions and preturbations of the mind, lest those
mutations, which happen through the passion of the mind to the Pulses should
hinder the Physician. Also neither is the Pulse to be tried presently after
motion of the body; lastly the hand of the sick ought to be placed right and
free from all voluntary motion, and the sick may not bend his fingers much or
distend them, but keep them in their middle and natural form, and the sick
also may not lift up his hand with his strength, least he tremble and causes
the Pulse to vary.

CHAP. VII How to know the differences of simple Pulses.
FOrasmuch as what belongs to the knowledge of Pulses, The knowledge of a great
and small Pulse.
if we observe the Artery to be dilated and extended more then naturally it
ought, and by reason of its great extending does as it were resist the fingers
or make them pit in, we account it a great Pulse, but if they resist but a
little we account it but a small Pulse.

If it be considered that the Artery is moved by violence from term to term,
Of a swift and flow.
nimbler and swifter then in a temperate or sound man, that is called a swift
pulse, but if the space is completed by the Artery by a slower stroke, it is
called a slow Pulse.

If the intervall between each stroke be longer then in a temperate or sound
man, that is a thin Pulse, if shorter, Of a frequent thin.
a frequent Pulse.

If the Pulse strive against, Of a vehement and weak.
and as it were opposes it self to the application of the hand that presses
it, it is a vehement Pulse, and if not, it is a weak Pulse.

A hard Pulse, if the Artery be gently touched, Of a hard and soft.
does not resist the finger, as a vehement one; but if it be pressed harder, it
does not so strongly resist as a vehement Pulse, hardness also is never joined
with magnitude, nor vehemence with smallness.

CHAP. VIII. How to know the Respective differences of Pulses.
WHen we know the simple differences of Pulses, by that means we may know the
compound, therefore the Physician should first of all diligently exercise
himself about the knowledge of simple differences: it is very difficult and
almost impossible to find out the inequality of Pulses in one Pulsation and
under one finger, but yet if it may be known, it is known only in the greatest
and most vehement Pulses, which resist compression; afterward slacking, and
sometimes the middle betwixt both is to be used, sometimes one, sometimes two,
now three, then four fingers are to be applied, so that if happily that
inequality be not perceived under one or more fingers, yet it may be found
under some or other.

But if the inequality of one stroke be to be tried under several fingers, you
ought to apply four fingers to the Arteries,

To know the order and preturbation of order, Order how it may be known.
it is necessary daily to apply the hand; but if in a long Series of Pulses there
be some diversity observed but keeping order it, is called an orderly Pulse;
but if no order be observed amongst diverse Pulses, it is an Inordinate Pulse.

The knowledge of Harmony, Rhythmus.
since the whole depends upon the knowledge of contraction and dilatation, and
the comparing of these motions amongst themselves: but to know the Systole in
all pulses, if it be not impossible, yet it is very difficult; hence it
appears that the knowledge of meeter is not easy; and for the knowledge
thereof nothing is more necessary then those things which are required of, or
the knowledge of swift pulses.

CHAP. IX. Of the causes of Pulses in general.
THe causes of pulses are divided by Physicians, Causes of pulses of generation.
into causes of generation, or immediate and proximate; and causes of mutation
or remote; or into primary or secundary; those they call primary which make the
pulse, and which being put there is a pulse, and being taken away there is
none; Of commutation.
those which do not make a pulse but alter and change it are three, the
faculty, or use or end; these are many, whereof some belong tonaturall things,
as temperaments, sex, age, habit of body; others to things not natural, as
air, meat and drink, exercise, rest, sleeping, weaking, excretions,
retentions, passions of the mind; others to preter-naturall namely, diseases,
causes of diseases, and symptoms.

The causes of pulses containing, each of them have two differences, Proper and
unseperarable pulses.
for the faculty is either strong or weak, the use is increased or diminished,
the instruments are soft or hard, hence some pulses do perpetually arise of one
cause only, which Gallen calls the necessary consequent, others call proper,
and unseparable; and such like pulses only follow the faculty and iustruments,
but not the use, and of necessity a strong pulse necessary follows a strong
faculty, a weak pulse, a weak faculty; hard arteries, make a hard pulse, soft
arteries make a soft pulse, some although they are made more from one cause
containing then another, yet they do not arise from that only, Familiar.
but it is necessary that others concur also, which they call familiar; the
familiar pulses of a strong faculty, are great, swift, thin, weak small,
slow, frequent; the use increased, great, swift, frequent; diminished, little,
slow, thin; a soft artery, great, swift, thin; hard artery, little, slow, thick.

Compound causes make compound differences, and sometimes two, sometimes three
causes, are complicate; first, The saculty with the use changed; what pulses it
makes.
a strong faculty, and the use increased; the instruments obtaining a natural
constitution make pulses, great, swift, frequent, and moreover vrhement, a
strong faculty and the use lessened brings forth pulses, moderate in magnitude,
slower, thinness, yet vohement; from an infirm faculty and the use moderately
increased comes a pulse moderate in magnitude and celerity, frequent,
languishing; but if the force be very weak, the pulse is little, slow, very
frequent, weak; from a faculty weakened and use dimished arises small pulses,
flow, thick, fainty; and if there be very great debility, the very least
intermittent and defirent pulses arise.

Secondly, if the use and instrument be joined together, The use changed and
instrument.
the use increased with a soft instrument, makes great pulses, swift, moderate
in frequency; or if there shall be great excess, frequent, and soft; the use
increased, and instruments hard, bring forth lesser pulses, swifter, more
frequent; if hardness abound; but if use, greater; if indifferent, there is
excess of them both; if moderate in magnitude, they are swift, frequent; the
use diminished with a soft instrument, causes moderate pulses, in magnitude,
slow, thin, soft; the use diminished with a hard instrument renders the pulses
less, slow, hard: and the instrument exceeding in hardness inclines the pulse
to smalness, rather then to slowness, contrariwise it happens when
refrigeration exceeds.

Thirdly, if the faculty and instrument be complicate, Faculty and influment.
and the faculty be strong, the instrument soft, the pulses are manifestly made
greater, somewhat duller, thinner, and softer; a strong faculty, and hatd
instruments bring forth small pulses, frequent, and for the most part swifter,
namely if hardness abound, but in an equal recess of them both, the pulses are
moderate in all, yet harder; a weak faculty with soft instruments makes for
the most part pulses in magnitude, and swiftness moderate and soft, but in an
immoderate recess, they shall be little, slow, frequent. And if the faculty be
very infirm, the pulses be come small, dull, and frequent; Lastly, if the
faculty be infirm with the instrument hard, pulses that are little, slow,
thick, and hard do arise.

But sometimes all these three are complicate, Faculties, instruments and use.
and indeed, first the faculty strong, the use increased, the instruments soft
make great Pulses; swift, moderate, in frequency, vehement, soft.

Secondly, if these should be complicate, a strong faculty, the use increased,
and the instruments hard; and that hardness be little, but the use very much
increased, the pulses are made greater then is fit, swifter, and more frequent;
but if the hardness be not great nor the use much increased, the pulses are
moderate in magnitude, and become more swift and frequent.

Thirdly, if the faculty be more strong, the use diminished and the instrument
soft, the pulses are moderate in magnitude, slower, thinner, vehement and soft,
and if the use be much diminished, are plainly less, slow and thin.

Fourthly, If the faculty be strong, the use diminished, and instruments hard,
the pulses are lesser, In celerity and frequency moderate, or also if the use
be great, and that there be a recess of the instrument from mediocrity, the
pulses are slower and thinner, but the hardness of the instrument abounding,
there is a great recess of the use from Nature, and the pulses are small, slow,
and more frequent.

Fifthly, If the faculty be weak, the use increased, and instruments soft, the
pulses are become moderate in magnitude and celerity, yet more frequent, but if
the power be exceedingly weakened, it makes a small pulse, slow and most
frequent.

Sixthly, If the faculty be weak, the use increased, and the instruments hard,
the pulses are made little, slow, and frequent.

Seventhly, If the faculty be weak, the use diminished, and the instrument
soft, the pulses are lesser, moderate in frequency, or rather thin.

Lastly, if the faculty be weak, the use diminished, and the instruments hard,
pulses are made small, slow, frequent, but yet not always of the same
smallness, slowness and frequency, but according to the excess of the causes
are, lesser, slower, or more frequent.

But here it is to be noted, first, that the force and power of causes are more
to be valued then nuthe mber, fince one more potent cause can do more in
changing pulses then many weaker; secondly, the hardness of the Artery always
does resist the magnitude of the pulse, but not the celerity and frequency;
thirdly, there is no more efficacious cause of small pnlses then weakness of
strength and virtue.

CHAP. X. Of the causes of the simple differences of Pulses.
ALthough it may be easily collected from these things what the causes are of
every pulse, Concomitant causes of pulses.
yet because certain familiar causes concur, which may afford some benefit
to the generation of pulses, namely grosness of body, leanness, an empty place
about the artery, weight of the body lying next above the artery, and propriety
of formation of parts, let us join those to the rest, and let us here add
some to these.

The causes of a great pulse containing, are strong force, The causes of a
great pulse, of a little. Of a high.
the use increased, the artery soft; a little pulse is made especially by the
weakness of power, as also diminution of use as also diminution of use and
hardness of the artery.

The causes of a high pulse are, strong force, the use increased, and when an
indifferent grosness of body happens, and the place is straight and narrow
about the artery; Of a low.
a low pulse proceeds from a languishing faculty, to which happens groseness of
body, as being the concomitant cause; sometimes also, the artery is buried
deeper by the natural framing of the body, whence the pulse is lower.

A broad Pulse is made from a power not altogether so weak, Of a broad.
Accidents as being complicate causes are joined therewith, the place wide, and
the bodies next over it are heavy; Of a thin.
the cause of a thin pulse is a weak faculty and a hard artery, the
concomitant causes are leanness of body, and thinness and dryness of the skin.

The cause of a swift pulse is the use increased, Of a swist.
the virtue indifferently strong, and the instrument soft; the cause of a slow
pulse is weak power, or the use diminished, Of a slow.
or the joining of both these together.

The cause of a frequent pulse is the use increased with debility of virtue, or
hardness of the artery; Of a frequent. Thin.
of a thin pulse, strength of virtue with use diminished, is the cause.

Of a vehement pulse, Of a vehement, weak.
strength of virtue is the cause, of a weak pulse languishing strength,
proceeding from what cause soever.

A soft pulse proceeds from the softness of the Artery, Soft, hard.
a hard from the hardness of the same, from what cause soever it come.

CHAP, XI. Of the causes of the respective differences of Pulses.
NOw follows what belongs to the respective differences of pulses, The causes
of inequallity of pulses. Of a singular inequality and of an intermitting pulse.
and first for inequality, the cause thereof is a weak faculty, and an Artery
either obtruded, or pressed or too hard, or too soft.

The reason of an intermitting pulse is because the use requires dilatation,
and the faculty is ready and prepared that it may satisfy the use, but either
it is laden with plenty of humors, or it is hindered by obstructions or
compressure of instruments; the same causes of inequality in motion, of
swiftness and slownesse are rendered, but they are lighter.

The cause of Dicrotus or double striking pulse is an unequal distemper of the
heart and Arteries, Of a Dicrotus.
or the faculty varied by reason of an unequal distemper which striving by a
contrary cause in the middle of its Journey, is compelled as it were to begin a
contrary motion.

Unequal pulses under many fingers do proceed either from weakness of the
faculty, or plenty of humors, or softness of Arteries.

Declining pulses which are called Myouroi, Of Myourey.
proceed from weakness of the faculty, whose action by how much the more
remore it is from the heart, by so much it is the weaker, or from the placing
of the artery, part whereof is more remote from the heart, and is placed more
in the outside.

The cause of a congregation of many in equalities together are weakness of
the faculty whither is oppressed, A Sistematicall inequality.
or distracted, or irritated, and the fault of the instrument, when the artery
is either compressed or obstructed, or filled; pulses are made
unequallyunequall, from the faculty not weak by its self, but rather
burdened, and oppressed, Myourei Reciproci. Of a deficient.
and moreover from the ill disposition of the artery, and it is either pressed by
some body that lies on it, or some humor, or tumor, but unequal equally are
made by an infirm faculty; and indeed reciprocal Myouroi do proceed from a
faculty not so weak as those which are deficient.

Intermitting and intercurrent pulses proceed from the same weakness of the
faculty, Of the intermittent intercurrent.
and the instruments compressed and obstructed, yet the faculty; labors more
in an intermitting, then an intercurrent, and in it does almost lie still.

Concerning the causes of unequal compound pulses, Caprizantes.
the cause of an uneven pulses is when the faculty, otherwise strong enough,
but now is oppressed by too great plenty of humors, or is hindered by
obstruction.

The causes of surging pulses are weakness of the faculty or plenty of
humors, or exceeding softness of instruments, Like waves.
and the faculty is so burdened, and oppressed with its load that it staggers
and becomes unconstant.

From the same causes proceeds a vermicular pulse, Vermicular, formicant.
only that in a vermicular the faculty is not oppressed, but is weak of its
self but in a formicant, it is very faint, and the use striving, and softness
of the instrument being joined therewith.

The causes of a serrine or serrate pulse is a strong faculty and the use
increased, Serrate.
together with hardness of the artery; and this pulse is familiar in
inflammations of the internal membrances. Trembling.


A trembling pulse is made, whilst either the pulse is not perceived by reason
of the trembling of the part, or it goes out trembling, or when the heart
trembles, and communicates that affect to the artery.

The cause of a hectic pulse is somewhat that is fixed and stable, and sticks
to the solid parts, also weakness of strength. Hectic. Rhythmorum.


The harmony is not changed, unless the magnitude and celerity of the
dilatation and contraction, be altered, but these are not changed except the
use be changed, so all the causes of Harmony depend upon the use, for if the
Diastole be swifter then the systole, there is a great heat present then, and
a great necessity of refrigeration or expulsion of fuliginous excrements, but
if the systole be swifter and greater then the Diastole, there is more
necessity of protrusion of fuliginous vapors then of cooling.

CHAP. XIII Of the causes of varying of Pulses.
ANd in like manner diverse differences of Pulses proceed from causes
containing, Of the Temperants of a Pulse.
which are secundary causes, and first natural things, those which are hot by
nature have a hotter Pulse, and that comes from the use increased; those which
are cold, the contrary; the Pulses of such as are dry and lean are greater and
thinner by much, and somewhat more vehement, but in grosser bodies when the
Artery is covered with much flesh, and cannot be freely distended, the Pulse is
made somewhat smaller and more frequent.

Men have a greater Pulse for the most part then women, Sex.
a little duller, and thinner; women on the contrary have less Pulses, swifter
and more frequent, but if a woman be hotter then a man, she will have a greater
and more vehement Pulse.

The Pulses of boys are great, Of age.
very swift, frequent, in vehemence moderate; of youth they are very great, and
vehement, in celerity and frequency moderate; Pulses of old men are the least,
slowest, thinest, and weakest.

As for the times of the year, Time of the year.
in the Spring Pulses are greater, more vehement in celerity and frequency,
moderate; in the Summer they are fainter, small, swift, frequent; in Autumn
weak, in magnitude unequal in celerity and frequency; in Winter, small and
moderate, slow, thin, and weak.

Meat and drink immoderatly taken cause great, Meat and drink how to change
the pulse.
swift, frequent, too vehement, unequal, and Inordinate Pulses; moderate
lesser and weaker, and in the beginnings swifter and more frequent, afterward
slow and thin, the use of wine especially makes great Pulses, swift, frequent,
and vehement, and mutations which proceed from wines suddenly comes, and
suddenly goes.

Natural rest in the beginning make the pulses lesser, Sleep.
weaker, slower, and thinner, afterward greater, and more vehement, and the
slownesse and thinness, by little and little is increased; moreover if the
sleep be too long, they return again to pravity and debility, and retain
their sloth and thinness; when a man is stirred, up or awakned, the Pulses
begin to be greater, more vehement, swifter, more frequent; equally indeed if a
man be awakned by degrees, but unequally and troubled if he be suddenly
awakned, yet a little afterward the pulse again becomes moderate: long
watchings cause little and weak pulses, yet swift, and frequent, at length the
faculty being weakened, they become dull and thin.

Exercise and motion moderate, cause great pulses, Exercise.
vchement, swift, frequent, but overmuch exercise cause little, faint, swift,
frequent, when the use may be increased, and the faculty debilitated, at length
they are little, slow and thin.

Moderate use of baths make great pulses, swift, frequent, Baths.
and vehement, but if they exceed measure, little, faint, swifter, and more
frequent. Passions of the mind.


As for the passions of the mind, anger causes great pulses, swift, frequent,
vehement; joy makes great pulses, thin, and slow, moderately vehement, but if
it be overmuch it renders them unequal and inordinate; In sadness they are
little, languishing, slow, thin; fear soon makes the swift, pulse vehement,
Inordinate, unequal, but they are of as long continuance as those are in
sadness.

Immoderate evacuations, Evacuations.
because they debilltate the faculty bring forth pulses like to those caused by
a weak faculty.

But as for those things which happen contrary to nature, Preternaturall things
how they alter the pulse.
although they are various, yet they change the pulse, because either they
change the use, or affect the instruments, or faculty; in the first place when
the faculty is affected, many changes are made of the pulses, for whether the
faculty be diffolved, and weakened by those things which dissolve the Spirits
and sollid parts, such as are soul diseases, great distempers, vehement and
diurnall greifs, fastings, too great Evacuations, or whether they are
burdened, or oppressed by plenty of humors, or by diseases of instruments,
inflammations, or other tumors, the pulses are made less in the first place,
and swift, frequent, feeble, afterward the least, most slow, most frequent,
most faint, and at length the faculty being almost prostrated, intermittent,
deficient, declining, vermiculant, formicant, all which running through the
various kind of affects contrary to nature, and principally out of the doctrine
of fevers are made more manifest.

CHAP. XIII. What the simple differences of Pulses signify and presage.
ALthough from the causes of pulses, Great pulses what they signify.
it easily appears what every pulse signifies, and portends: yet that we may
add something of each in particular, a great pulse although principally its
familiar use be in increasing, a strong faculty, and a soft instrument; in
those which are sick it signifies a hot disease, and a great pulse, unless it
be hindered, follows all fevers, and it cannot be much dilated with the
Artery, unless the power be strong, or at least not weak; a great pulse in
all fevers is good sign.

A small pulse argues either debility of the faculty, or remissness of the use,
or hardness of the instruments; and indeed if a small pulse shall be also
faint it is a token that its weakness proceeds from a weak faculty, if small and
hard, from the Artery; if neither debility; nor hardness be perceived in the
pulse; it is an argument that it comes from the diminution of the use: whence
little pulses with a weak faculty foretell death; the rest of pulses that are
small for the most part presage long and difficult diseases.

A swift pulse signifies that the use is increased and the vigor strong, A
swift.
or certainly not very weak, whence in those that are sound, a swife pulse
signifies heat, stirred up by motion, exercises, baths and such like causes,
which if it be also great, the strength is not yet debilitated, but in those
which are sick, a swift pulse signifies a hot disease, and is proper to those
which are feverish, and if magnitude be joined therewith itshewes that the use
is increased, with strength of nature, but if frequency be adjoined without
magnitude, it shows that the powers are weakened; if hardness of the
instrument, the use being increased, hinders dilatation, that hardness is to
be perceived by the touch.

A slow pulse shows, Slow.
the contrary, to wit, little heat and the use diminished, and then it is
only thin, and the vigor not firm enough, and withal it is feeble.

A frequent pulse signifies the use to be increased, Frequent.
or the faculty weakened, or the instrument hard; if it proceed only from the
use increased, it is not faint, nor hard, and magnitude, frequently goes
before, and then extraordinary great heat is discovered in those that are sick;
if it proceed from debility, or hardness of the artery, that is discerned by
the pulse.

Thin pulses are made, either through a strong faculty, Thin.
and a soft instrument, or from the use diminished; in sound bodies it
signifies a cold constitution, but in sidk a cold disease, and coldness of the
heart, and that which is contained therein, and therefore it is accounted an ill
sign.

A strong and vehement pulse, shows a strong faculty, Vehement.
and if its vehemence exceed the bounds of nature, it signifies also great
irritation.

A faint pulse on the contrary, Faint.
signifies powers to be dejected, and that either by dissipation of spirits and
resolution, and then it is also small, and if use hinder not, slow, or by
oppression, occasioned by plenty of humors, and then the pulse also is
inordinate, and unequal.

A soft pulse shows softness of the artery, Soft.
and moreover in a sound body, signifies immoderate drinking, or diet over
moistning, or a bath, or idleness, but in a sick a moist habit of the body.

On the contrary hard pulses, Hard.
show the hardness of the artery, and indeed either by extending in
convulsions, Tumors, or by repletion of vessels, with humors and wind, or by
drying as in burning Fevers, Hecticks, consuming Fevers, Quartans, and other
drying causes.

CHAP. IV. What the other differences of Pulses signify and presage.
NOw for the other differences of pulses; and first, Equality, and inequality,
of that of equality, and inequality, equality although it show a fixed
disposition of matter, yet it signifies firmness of nature, and therefore
affords the better hope, but all inequalities are worse, and either signify
obstructions of vessels or compressions, or abundance of humors, hindering the
force, and indeed a single inequality, is more dangerous then systematick, or
mixed: whence intermitting pulses in one pulse, are more dangerous, then
intermitting in many, if both of them proceed from debility of the faculty.

Uneven pulses, Vnalike stirred up Myouri Dicroti.
therefore being stirred up, and Myouri, and such, as striking double, are very
evil, yet in an uneven pulse, that is quickened is less evil, then an
intermitting; because although it signify the faculty declining, yet it shows
not it to be extremely weak.

A Sistematick inequality, Systematical inequality.
or complication of inequalities unequally made is less dangerous then an
equality equally made, because that for the most part is caused by, default of
the instrument, but this happens by the imbecility of the faculty.

Intermitting pulses with imbecility, Intermitting.
fince they proceed from the debility of the faculty, are altogether dangerous,
and indeed the longer they are quiet, and the more strokes they intermit, by so
much they are the more dangerous, yet old men and boys are in less danger in
this pulse, then young men in whom the faculty is weak, and offended by a small
occasion, but where the faculty is strong, not without a great cause.

A deficient Pulse is yet more dangerous, Deficient.
because it shows great imbecility.

An intercurrent pulse is the most secure of all unequal pulses, Intercurrent.
which indeed signifies the strength to be laden, yet hitherto strong and
whole, and promises victory.

Deficient reciprocal pulses show great imbecility of the saculty, Reciprocal,
deficient.
yet with striving against the preter-natural causes.

Adescending or a declining pulse, Miourus vern^iou^ar formicant.
and a vermicular, show the faculty to be much weakened, but the formicant pulse
is a token that the faculty is yet more dejected, and if it be perceived in
Fevers, and quotidian diseases, it is a certain token of death.

A surging pulse signifies that the faculty is burdened, Surging.
and weakened, and it is an ill sign if it be changed into a vermicular, yet
sometimes it signifies, that the strength is great, and the arteries moistened
with the humor, and moreover with decretory sweat

A serrate pulse is ill token, Serrate.
and signifies an internal great, and dangerous inflammation.

But as for Order since it signifies a fixed, Order of pulse what it shows.
a perpetual cause, the perturbation of order being troubled; if the pulse be
otherwise profitable, order signifies firmness of power, but inordinate show
that the faculty is oppressed by fuliginous excrements, but if the order of the
pulse be together unprofitable with the inequality, it signifies the highest
weakness, and is a very ill sign.

Lastly, change of harmony signifies variation of the use. Rhythmes


CHAP. XV. What Pulses presage health, or death.
ALthough it easily appears from hence what pulses signify safety, or death,
yet that we may handle them singly; What pulses show a strong faculty.
great pulses, swift, vehement, double striking, surging, signify that the
faculty is strong, and indeed amongst those the vehement is in the first place,
afterward the great; hence the swift, and surging. Lastly the double striking.
But small pulses, languishing, intermitting, declining, Languishing.
vermicular, formicant, and all pulses which descend from mediocrity, to the
extrcame (in defect) except the most vehement; signify that the strength is
failing, and weak: and these pulses of themselves do show that the faculty is
weak, if they are equal, but if they proceed from the faculty burdened they
are unequal; hence the vermicular, formicant, intermitting, and declining, are
deficient evils, by how much the pulse is fainter and lesser, by so much it
argues the greater debility of strength.

Hence it plainly appears that the pulses which promise health, Health,
are those which little decline from the pulses of sound men, and are equal,
ordinate, great, vehement; but amongst the fainting ones, little, eunqual, and
inordinate, those which are least, these (so that malignity be absent) are
least dangerous.

On the contrary seeble pulses, little, slow, and such like, Death,
indicating the faculty weak, portend danger or death; if together other ill
signs also do appear; also all those pulses are evil, which come to extremity,
except the most vehement, and amongst those, the least, most faint, most slow,
and most thin, are the worst of all, but of the unequal, those are less
dangerous, wherein are many great, and vehement strokes, the dangerous are the
declining, intermitting, intercurrent, vermicular, and formicant as is said
before.

Lastly, Manner of event.
pulses conduce to the knowledge of the manner of the event, for pulses which
are weaker; duller, and thinner to the Judgment, signify, that the disease
will not give off, but rather by solution wear away by little and little; but
unequal pulses, vehement, great, swift, and frequent inform the Judgment,
that the disease will soon be at an end, and in a critical day (or day when
there is a conflict of nature, and a disease, and a change expected) the pulses
are inordinate, and unequal, and if they become strong from weak, and become
great from little, it shows the next Crisis, or judgment, and they presage
good; if in unequal pulses there are more great then little, swift, then slow,
moderate, then frequent, vehement, then faint.

CHAP. XVI. Of signs to be observed from the Tongue.
But besides the urines, The tongue a figne of diseases.
and pulses, the Physician also shall consider sweats, excrements of the paunch,
spittle, the Tongue other things, but since we have spoken before of the
former, and hereafter I shall speak again, here we will only add something of
the tongue, which show certain signs, especially in Fevers, and as often as
any change happens of its own accord, either of color or taste in the tongue,
it is certain that so often there is some change made in the body.

But why the tongue should change its natural constitution, Causes of the
changeing the tongue,
there are two principal causes, humors, exhaling out of the veins and arteries
of the tongue, and principally affecting the coat of the tongue; moreover,
vapors and humors ascending from the inferior parts, to which notwithstanding
sometimes humors flowing from the head are added.

The color of the tongue is changed, and is become white with the spittle
wherewith it is moistened, The color of the tongue changed.
and it is dried by heat, which often comes to pass in Fevers, a white color
is often changed into a yellow, mud color, or black, whilst other humors are
communicated to the tongue, and that external skin is changed by the fuliginous
feverish vapors. Whence the color of the tongue may show both the nature,
and the time of the Fever, for as Hiprocrate; says, in the beginning the
tongue is white or yellow (in his Third Book of diseases) in progress of time
it grows black, and if it grow black in the beginning of a disease, the disease
will the sooner be over; but if in the latter end, 'twil endure the longer nay
oftentimes the tunicle of the tongue, is so polluted with fuliginous vapors
ascending, that sometimes it rots away; but when the Fever declines the color
of the tongue returns to its natural condition; and the humor which is spread
about the Tongue, is taken away, and that which was corrupted is separated, and
that change first appears in the top of the tongue: hence that other part
toward the chops also by little and little becomes pure. Lastly, the root, and
if any one daily do diligently observe the tongue of the sick, the declination
of these may be known no less from thence then by the urine.

The taste of the Tong^e being changed, Savor.
signifies abundance of humors; from choler the taste is bitter; from sweet
phlegm sweet; from a salt, salt; from an acid humor, sour or sharp.

The tongue is made rough and dry by defect of the humidity, which was consumed
by the feverish heat, yet in roughness there is a greater defect of humidity
then in dryness only.

THE THIRD BOOK. THE SECOND PART. Of the Diagnostick Signs.
CHAP. I. Of the Signs of Causes in general.
BUt now that we may come to the Kinds, Antecedent Signs.
and that we may explain the Anamnestick, Diagnostick, and Prognostic signs:
concerning the Anamnestick signs we only admonish you of this; that the causes
which have gone before are known either by the effects which are left, or they
are known by some profitable, or hurtful thing, which they occasioned.

As for the Diagnosticks, Diagnostick signs of a disease at hand.
they are either of a disease near at hand, or present: Of the signs of
diseases near at hand this is a general rule, that every mutation in actions,
accidents, and excrements, after what manner soever happening contrary to
custom, and without any external cause, Of a present.
threatens a disease; for when all these things are right according to the
natural constitution, they are signs of health; as soon as any thing in them
begins to change from its natural state, it signifies a falling from health
into a disease, and the same signs, if they are gathered together, and
increased, indicate a disease to be now present.

But since it does not satissie a man to know that a disease is imminent, or
that it is present, but it is necessary to know what the disease is, the signs
are to be propounded severally, both of Morbifique causes, and places affected
of diseases, as also of symptoms: and that we may begin from the signs of
causes, which lead us unto the knowledge of diseases; concerning the necessary
signs of causes, and by which any thing may be known certainly; some are
proper, others common, but collected together by a race or current, and are
limited within their proper subject. Proper signs of humors from the tast^
The proper signs are savor, color, and motion of humors, as to taste, blood
is sweet, phlegm, watrish and unsavory, choler, bitter, salt phlegm, causes a
salt taste, phlegm and melancholy an acid, a sharp adust melancholy causes a
brackish taste.

The blood is red, as also choler is red; From the color:
phlegm that is white has a white color, pale choler, a pale; yellow a
yellow; Leek color a green, an Aeruginous, is like Verdegrease; melancholy
has a black hew, troubled; black choler black, splendid, and when one savor,
or color agrees with two humors, we may know the humor from the taste and
color joined together, so that when acid phlegm and melancholy are joined,
it is acid by the white color, acid phlegm is known, by the black melancholy.

Moreover the humors have their determinate motions several days; the phlegm
is moved, the day between each, From the motion
choler; Melancholy is moved the fourth day, if such a motion be wanting the
blood offends, choler also for the most part is moved about noonday,
melancholy in the evening, phlegm in the night, the swiftness also, and
slowness of motion, indicate the humors of a disease, for a swift disease
depends on a thin humor, hot and choleric; a slow, on a dull and thick.

But because those signs lie hid in the innermost parts of the body, so that
the humors cannot be known, Of the common signs. Current.
a current of common signs then ought to suffice: the causes and affects, or
the antecedents and consequences supply us with such signs; antecedents are
supplied by two fountains, namely external, and evident causes, or things not
natural, and the disposition of the body; but the consequences are all
symptoms, and whatsoever help, or hurt.

Non-natural things dispose the body and bowels to the generation of this or
that humor, Antecedents.
according as they either heat the body, or cool it, or make other changes in
it, of which is spoken before, Lib: 1, Part 2. Chap: 2.

Moreover, the dispositions of the body have great power in generating humors,
without which those evident causes can do little in producing them. Now these
dispositions may be reduced to four heads. First, there is an hereditary
disposition of the body. 2ly. age: 3ly. Constitution of the body. 4ly.
Intermission of some accustomed evacuations fit to generate this or that humor.

The consequences are symptoms, Consequence.
namely actions hurt, excretions, and retentions, and the qualities of the body
changed; also diseases arising from humors. Lastly, all things helping, and
hurting.

CHAP. II. Of the Signs of Causes, and of Humors in particular.
AS for what belongs to the signs of every humor in particular gone before,
Signs of Plethory.
signifies that blood does abound, and a plethory as to the vessels is present,
as is expressed before in the Lib: 2. Part 2. chap: 3. The habit of the body is
fleshly and firm, overspread with an habituous vapor, the veins are fuller,
and especially after exercise and heat swel; the muscles are extended, the
strength of Nature is increased, with a certain proportion of blood, and if the
blood fill the veins so full that they cannot be cooled, or fanned enough, it
grows thick, and seeks to weigh down the inferior parts, hence the muscles of
the legs being filled with blood are moved with pain, and wearisomness
arises. Respiration is more difficult after labor, in their behavior they
are merry and pleasant, and their discourse and memory duller, their sleep is
profound, and more durable and pleasing, with flattering dreams, and of red
things, and blood; the pulse is great and strong, all natural actions are
excellently performed; the urine is more plentiful, and moderate in substance,
and color, and the contents therein are plentiful, the color of the whole
body, and especially of the face is red, and rosy, the reins of the cies are
red, the skin being touched is hot, yet that heat is gentle, they easily
tolerate evacuations of blood, by what means soever made, sparing diet takes
away the wearisomness, and quenches thirst, but they are offended by hot and
moist things, and all things which increase heat; idleness and food, increasing
blood hurts them, but a plethorick constitution is known as to its strength, by
gravity of body, an unequal pulse, signs of crudity, and oftentimes by signs
of putrefaction; begin Sweet phlegm abounding is known from the causes which
conduce to the generation of phlegm, if they have preceded, Phlegm.
of which above Lib: 2. part 2. ch: 4. Moreover, those which abound with phlegm
are dull, flow, lazy, and unapt for motion, more stupid in their senses, dullet
of apprehension, propense to sleep, and sleep more soundly, they dream of
waters, and rain, snow, hail, ice, and of drowning, their manners are
unbeseeming, they are not easily angry, the pulse is little, dull, thin, and
soft; they are not troubled with thirst, their desire is weaker, they are
affected with cold diseases, moist, and durable; they send forth many
phlegmatic excrements, and abound with spittle, their urine is white, pale,
sometimes thin, sometimes thick and troubled; their dejected ordure is crude,
and pituitous; the whole body is thick, white, soft, and more cold to the
touch; heating and drying things, cutting and atenuating, and evacuating phlegm
advantage them, they easily endure fasting. On the other side all cooling, and
moistning things, and thickning, and those which retain and increase Phlegm,
offend them; if the Phlegm be sour, all those signs are the more vehement, but
salt Phlegm is known from the preceding causes, of which is spoken before,
thirst is present, a salt taste, those things which are cast out are crude, but
withal biting. Moderate salt things delight them; too much drying and heating
things hurt them.

Choler is known to abound if the causes, Of Choler.
and dispositions of the body have gone before, which conduce to the generation
of Choler, proposed before, lib: 2. part 2. chap: 9 as if a man be not drowsy,
but watchful; if he dream of fire, thunder, and lightning, and contentions,
and is full of activity in motion, and rash or precipitate in consultation, is
easily angry, the pulse vehement, swift, frequent, hard; if his concoction be
depraved, and turned into a nitrous crudity, if the appetite of meat be less
then the appetite of drink, hot and dry diseases afflict him, and those which
have a swift motion, and symptoms arising from choler; if the urine be yellow,
and splendid; the excrements colored with cholour, the habit of the body is
dry and lean, and carries with it lively heat, the color of the body is
yellow; cold and moist things, and such as purge choler, as also acid things
delight them; hot and dry things, as also fasting hurts them.

Melancholy is known to abound from the causes and dispositions going before,
Melancholy.
propounded above lib: 2. part 2. chap: 6. For what belongs to the
consequences, those which abound with a melancholy humor are silent, full of
thoughts, stable, and pertinacious, and slow to anger, who nevertheless are not
easily pacified; their sleep is turbulent, perplexed with horrid and terrible
dreams, they are sad and fearful without any manifest cause, they have a little
pulse, dull, thin, and indifferent hard, their color is yellow, dun or duskie,
almost black, they desire meat and Venery moderately, they are void of thirst,
and abound with spittle, they make much Urine, and if none of the melancholy be
evacuated therewith, it is thin and white, or if some of it flow with it, it is
thick and black, and they sweat plentifully in their sleep, the Hemorhoids
either flow, or are suppressed, much wind is in the body, and they are apt to
four belchings, the habit of the body is lean, sharp, and hard, the color
yellow, the spleen sometimes swells, and grows hard within them; tubercles
appear in the veins, and they are affected with other melancholy diseases.

Black choler is a sign of yellow choler and melancholy mixed together, Black
Choler.
and the indications of melancholy appear, but joined with manifest signs of
heat, whence madness, a canker, a Leaprosie, and such like diseases arise.

Abundance of serous Humors are collected, Of the serous humor
not only from the antecedent causes, whereof we have spoken before, but also
from a somewhat moist and pale body, and the Urine is crude and aqueous.

Moreover, Wind.
winds discover themselves by those signs which are reckned above in the lib:
2, part 2, chap: 7, moreover fluctuations, and rumblings and tumblings in the
guts, and Hypochondrias are perceived, and switching pains without gravity, and
wandering, and such as suddenly arise, and suddenly vanish; also a humming and
buzzing in the ears, pantings of some parts of the body, belching, breaking
wind backward, or in the paunch are discovered, and the Urines are frothy.

Malignant and pestilent humors, Poisons.
how they may be known is spoken amongst fevers, but the signs that poison is
drank are, if any biting happen in the stomach, or guts, to any sound man,
after eating and drinking, and if the belly or stomach be moved to expel, and
their color within six hours turn yellow, and spottie; if the extreme parts of
the body grow cold, and swounding, palpitation of the heart, and swelling
happens, but if one be hurt by the biting of any living creature, or with a
prick, or sting, or froth, and the offended part should mortify, become
putred, should be inflamed and swel, and the pain be great, and those
symptoms before mentioned appear, it is a token that the living creature was
venomous.

CHAP. III. Of the Signs of Diseases.
SOme signs of diseases indicate the kind of diseases; Causes, what diseases
they show.
others the magnitude, others the manner, and they are taken from those three
fountains, the causes, those things which necessarily inhere, and the effects
of the causes, and what force each has is spoken of in lib: 2. part 2,
Disposition of the body.
and therefore if any causes are present, or has gone before, it is a sign of
a disease which that cause is apt to produce, but amongst the causes, the
dispositions, or inclinations of the body are to be weighed, which are apt to
produce this, or that kind of disease; for every body either falls into a
disease like its own constitution, sooner then contrary to it; and that
disposition depends on the age, sex, course of life, and manner of diet.

Neither are those things to be past over, which help and hinder, for if hot
things are advantageous, cold things are mischeivous, and a cold disease is
understood; the contrary comes to pass if the disease be hot: the same reason
is of other tempers also.

Out of those things essentially inhering, Essentially inhering.
or in the proper essence, diseases are easily known in the external parts, and
are obvious to the senses, but diseases of the internal parts, although they
may be known by those things which essentially inhere, yet not immediately; but
others coming between; so a tumor of the bowels is known by the skin
mediating, which is lifted up, by the subjacent parts, and it self is become
swollen.

As for what belongs to the effects and symptoms, Effects and symptoms.
an action that is hurt, if it be not by some external error, it signifies that
a disease is present in that part whence the action is hindered, and indeed an
action abolished, and diminished, signifies a cold distemper, that a greater,
this a lesser; but depraved actions signify for the most part a hot distemper,
and since an alteration cannot be made suddenly, nor does the distemper
suddenly cease when the alteration is introduced, if the action be suddenly
taken away, and suddenly restored, it does not indicate a disease of
intemperature, Excretion and retentions.
but an organnick: but if the actions are presently taken away, and remain
absent long, either obstructions occasioned by thick matter, or a cold
intemperature is signified; the excrements too much colored, signifies a hot
disease, as also does dry ordure, but clammy, thick and white dreggs show a
cold distemper, Qualities changed.
qualities also changed indicate diseases; softness signifies a moist
distemper, a pale color of the body signifies a cold distemper; but a red
color a hot.

As for the magnitude of a disease, Signs of a great disease.
if a great cause, and that which has great force of acting has gone before
in what kind of disease soever, without doubt 'twil generate a great disease,
the proper nature of a disease will easily betray it self, for by how much the
more the pathognomick signs (or the signs that discover a disease) shall be
greater, or lesser, by so much it shows a greater or lesser disease; hither to
belongs also the worthiness of the part affected, for by how much the part
affected is more noble, or can draw more noble parts into consent, by so much
the disease is counted the greater moreover the symptoms by how much the more
and greater they shall be, to which this happens, that if the disease do not
give way to exquisite, and great remedies, by so much the greater the disease
shall be, it is deservedly accounted great.

A malignant disease is likewise known by malignant venomous causes preceding.
Of a Malignant,
Moreover, it is the nature of certain diseases, that in the same manner is they
are known, they indicate malignity, such are the Morbus Gallicus, Leaprosie,
and such like. Thirdly, malignity discovers it self by the effects, for when no
dangerous, or vehement symptom is present which might trouble, the sick
nevertheless is unquiet and weak, and the disease after small remisness is
swiftly, and vehemently exasperated by sweats, and other excrements, and the
sick perceives no manner of ease, especially if frigidity of the extreme parts,
or watchings should happen, if in the beginning of sleep, sleep
seemetroublesome; if the sick without a cause be afraid, waxes exceeding hot,
drops blood, and the other ill signs be present, which are spoken of amongst
malignant fevers, it argues amalignant disease.

Acute diseases are known from hence, Of Acute diseases.
that they are suddenly moved, and immediately after the beginning afford
grievous symptoms.

CHAP. IIII. How to know the parts affected.
The fountains of the signs whereby the parts affected are known, Signs of
places affected.
Galen in his first Book of the places affected, Chap: the 5th: accounts five,
the actions hurt, excrerions, situation, proper accidents, and propriety of
pain; which notwithstnding are comprehended under those foundations before
proposed.

Amongst the causes the first are those things which are taken in, whereof some
have power of hurting this, Causes.
others of offending that part; moreover to those things which are carried
about us, belong arts, and course of life, from whence it happens, that
sometimes this, sometimes that part is more hurt, as sleeping, and watchings,
which principally offend the brain; anger which principally hurts the heart;
as also other passions of the mind.

Thirdly, those things which are retained, they more offend that part wherein
they are detained. 4ly. Those things which happen and befall us externally, they
also show the part affected: if any one use mercuriall vunctions, it is
probable that the nervous parts are hurt, that evil which commonly overspreads
signifies that part to be hurt, which is manifest, does labor in other sick
persons. By things essentially inhearing, here are understood both the
proprieties of the parts, and the diseases themselves inhearing, for although
diseases are not of the essence, of a part as it is a part; yet as it is an
effect centrary to nature: diseases themselves seem to be in a part
essentially; inherent diseases therefore indicate parts affected, a tumor
appearing any where signfies either that part is affected, or the part which is
placed above it; and the situation and figure of the Tumor, and the motions
hurt will show it in its kind; a falling of the guts into the codds signifies
a rupture of the peritoneum, or rim of the belly; gibbosity signifies hurt of
the spine, or marrow; the propriety of parts shows places affected as they are
proper to those parts, so if we see stones come forth with Urine, without doubt
we conjecture the veins or bladder to be affected.

As for the effect, Effects. actions hurt.
first an action hurt shows that member by which it is offended, unless it be
hurt by some external error; so ratiocination being hurt, imagination, memory,
they signify the brain to be affected; as likewise by sleep, watchfulness,
exercise of the whole body; The visive faculty is hurt by an affect of the eye;
the hearing, of the ear; the smelling of the nose; the taste spoiled is a token
of a disease of the tongue; if the urine be suppressed, the cause is to be
sought in the reins, uriters, bladder, or urinary passages, if yellow choler
be not purged from the blood, blood, it is a token that the bladder of the gall
is distempered. Pain,


Hitherto belongs pains, which shows that some sensible part is affected, yet
a differing pain may be a sign of diverse parts; a pricking pain is proper to
inflammations of membranes; a striking pain, is caused by parts sensible which
are inflamed, containing arteries; a burdensome pain agrees to the whole
substance of the bowels, lungs, liver, spleen, reins; inward, deep and
profound pains, as it were breaking the part, signifies the membrances of the
bones to be affected; a broad pain, and spreading it self every way about, is
a token that the membrances are affected; streightness shows somewhat belonging
to the extending of the nerves.

The vital actions being hurt shows that the heart labors. Lastly, natural
actions hurt in what part soever, show a sign of that part which is affected,
but more manifestly in public parts, more obscurely in private parts.
Excretions


Secondly, in excrements which also afford signs, more things are to be
considered, namely the kinds, qualities, manner of casting them out, quantity,
order; the kinds of excrements are twofold, for either something is cast out
of the substance of some part, and signifies that part to be affected, as if a
little skin orflake, or little piece of flesh should be cast out of the mouth,
it shows the lungs, the windpipe, the Epiglotis, the gullet or ventricle, to
be corroded; and if it be cast out by a cough, it is a sign that it comes from
the breast, but if it be cast out by vomit, it is a sign it comes from the
stomach; or that it is not the substance it self, but that which it contained
in it, and is familiar to it, that is so ejected, so meat, drink, or chile cast
out by reason of a wound, shows that the stomach is proforated, or that the
guts are too thin, and if the stomach be hurt, the sick will belch much; if the
guts, the wind goes out by the seat; urine flowing out through an Ulcer or
wound, shows that the bladder, uriters, or reins are hurt; but which of these
parts are affected, the situation of the wound discovers. The dreggs of the
belly ejected through a wound, or the smell of the dung perceived in the wound,
shows that the guts, especially the thick, are hurt. So also of other parts.

But seeing that the same things may often come forth from many parts; the
quality of the excrement, and manner of its coming out, shows which is the part
affected: if the blood be thinner, hotter, more florid, and comes out leaping,
it shows that the artery is cut; but if it be thicker, and comes out without
leaping, or dancing, it shows that the veins are hurt; blood that comes from
the paunch, showing like that wherein meat has been washed, shows that the
liver is affected; if any come forth only by spitting it shows that the mouth,
or parts next to it are affected, unless perhaps it flow from the head into the
mouth; if by spittle, the chaps or larynx are affected; if by cough the
windpipe, or lungs, so that it does not raise a cough by defluxion from the
head; if by vomit, the throat and stomach, so that it come not into the stomach
from the liver, or spleen, or other parts adjacent.

The quantity also of excrements afford signs; if much blood is cast out, it
is a Token of an affect of the lungs; if little, of the wind pipe.

That blood which flows from the reins is more; from the bladder less.

Moreover, order in excrements is a token of the place affected; if first
blood, and afterward dreggs are cast out, it signifies that the fundament, or
some gut is affected within; if first dreggs come forth, afterward blood, it
shows the guts are thin, or the parts above them are affected; so if quitture
which is brought forth in the Urine come before, it shows there is an ulcer in
the gut colon, if it follow it shows that the superior parts are ulcerated.

Thirdly, Qualities changed.
qualities changed also affords signs of places affected, red color of the
cheeks signifies inflammation of the lungs, the color of the body, but
principally of the face, pale or yellow shows that the bladder of the gall is
not right, the flesh and skin being yellow, in dicate the bones that are under
them to be corrupted, a filthy smell exhaling from the nostrils, shows that the
parts within the nostrils are affected; if from the mouth, it shows that the
teeth, chops, lungs, or stomach are affected; if from a wound of the paunch, it
signifies that the guts are wounded; hardness of the right Hypocondrie is a
sign that the liver is affected, of the left that the spleen is affected.

Lastly, certain diseases pertain to effects following, other diseases of the
place affected, which are therefore called symptomatick, or familiar, and are
discoverers of the primary disease. Signs of parts affected by consent.


But least that we should err in knowing the place affected, by the actions
hurt, and should take the part which is hurt by consent, for the primary
affects; First the anatomy and functions of man's body, and the use and consent
of all the parts ought to be known whence a part receives its nerves, arteries,
and veins, and from what parts it can send any thing to them, and receive any
thing through them, therefore if in a member sense, or motion be hindered, and
the part suffer no ill, we must observe what nerves are inserted therein, what
muscles move it, and whence those muscles take the nerves, and it is to be
enquired, whether those parts have suffered any evil; so a nerve being hurt,
it is easily communicated to the brain, the evils of the arteries to the heart,
the hurts of the veins to the liver, and again, the brain being affected,
sense and motion is hurt; the heart, the vital actions are hurt, nutrition is
weakened through default of the liver,

Moreover it is to be enquired whether a part be primarily hurt, or by consent
of other parts; that is known first from ^he precedent causes. Namely if a part
which is affected be hurt by no evident cause, but a part with which it has
consent, has suffered some evil, it is probable that that part is affected by
consent. Secondly, if any hurt coheres with the hurt of another member, that by
increasing of the one the other increased, and by the decrease thereof it be
diminished, and that ceasing, it caseth; it is a token that such an affect is
stird up by consent: but from that part where the disease first declined, it
shows that to be the part affected by consent; but by essence that wherein the
disease remained longest; thirdly an affect by consent does not presently
infect, but for the most part by intervals; fourthly if two parts are together
affected, and by applying things that are helpful to the one, or hurtful, the
other be helped or hurt; it is an argument that it is an affect by consent. Sign
that the head is affected.


But although any one from these Fountains of signs may come to the knowledge
of all parts affected, yet that for example sake we may add some in particular,
first Animal actions hurt, afford signs of diseases of the head and brain,
whither they are diminished or depraved, yet this is to be noted of the
external senses, and motion hurt; since that the brain is not the immediate
Organ of those actions, but only supplies animal Spirits, it is to be inquired
whether the cause of these actions hindered be in the brain, or in the proper
Organ; the excrements also of the brain sent forth through the Emunctories
indicate the brain to be affected.

The signs of diseases of the heart, Of the heart.
for the most part are taken from vital actions, and the qualities changed of
the body: Actions hurt are respiration which the preternaturall heat of the
heart changes, palpitation of the heart, the pulses much changed; for
according as the heart is, so is the heat and color in the whole body.

The signs of the liver affected, Of the liver.
are first when its action is hurt, which is Sanguification, a token whereof
the urine and dregs of the paunch afford; moreover when the habit of the body
is changed, and their is an ill color of the the whole body, and penury of
blood is in the veins; sometimes also by default of the spleen, or by reason of
excrements regurgitating from elsewhere into the veins, the color of the whole
body is changed; thirdly distribution of blood is hindered, which is known by
the leanness of the body and flux of the belly; fourthly a perception of
gravity in the right Hypocondrie, as also a tumor encompassing the liver.

When the stomach is ill disposed it is known by its Of the Stomach.
actions hindered, such are the appetite hurt, the concoction vitiated, which is
perceived, because those that are sick either are sensible of pain after
meat, or the stomach is blown up with wind, or are troubled with belching,
loathing, vomiting; also if the dejection be slower or swifter, without any
fault of the liver, then is fit, the stomach is to be suspected. Of the breast


The first sign that the breast is affected, is difficulty of breathing; the
second, a cough; the third, pain; lastly those things which come out by
coughing, as blood, quitture.

Lastly, Of the windpipe.
the signs of the affects of the Windpipe are the same, but principally they
are taken from the change of the voice, sometimes also a cough is joined, more
may be read of these things in the practical part.

CHAP V. How to know Symptoms.
ALthough Symptoms for the most part are obvious to the senses, Signs of
Symptoms. Of the natural faculty lying hid.
yet sometimes they lie hid, and had need have signs, which are taken from
causes, and effects: nutrition, if it be not rightly performed, the body is
extenuated and grows lean: if augmentation be not rightly perfected, the body
is less nourished; if the generative faculty be hurt, either none, or weak
Children are generated; attraction and retention being hurt, are known from
their effects, especially digestion is known by the excrements of its
concoction; so that which is in the stomach, by the dregs of the belly; that
which is in the liver and veins, by the urine; those excrements which are in
the breast, by the spittle; lastly the expulsive faculty is known to be hurt, if
those things are retained which ought to be expelled.

The vital faculty is known to be hurt by the changed pulse of the heart and
Arteries. Of the vital. Of the animal.


As for the animal faculty, the Physician knows the depravation of the
principal faculties from the words and deeds which are different from
comeliness and congruity. In the same manner also other animal actions may be
known to be hurt from their effects.

THE THIRD BOOK, PART THE THIRD: Of the Prognostic SIGNS.
CHAP. I. Of the several kinds of Prognostic Signs.
YEt there remains the Prognostic Signs by which we may know those things
which are to come, Of what things are to be foreknown in the sick.
which may happen to thesick: For the Physician ought especially to know before
hand three things concerning the Patient.

First, what the event or the end of the disease will be.

Secondly, at, or about what time the disease will have an end.

Thirdly, how, or by what means. Of Prognostic signs.
Of each of these before we speak in particular, we must speak in general of
the Prognostic Signs: and we will premise some things of knowing the times of
diseases; Namely, some signs are of crudity and concoction, others of life and
death, others critical, or judicatory.

The signs of concoction and crudity, are Urines, Of concection of crudity, of
life and death. Critical.
Excrements of the Paunch, spirtings, and spaulings, and catharrous matter; The
signs of life and death are those which are sent forth with Urine and
Excrements of the Paunch; also swears, easy and difficult respiration, easy
or difficult enduring of the disease, the pulse, the face, and comely lying
down, like unto what they were wont, and the contrary to these: Moreover,
critical signs are such as show sudden mutation and perturbation, and some of
these are both signs and causes as Vomit, Excrements of the Paunch, much Urinc,
blood flowing from the Nose, the Parotides, or swelling of the Gumms, or about
the Chops, settling of humors in one place, and then in another, which are
called dissolving by Hippocrates, because they put away the disease; some are
only signs of a Delirium, watching, stupidity, pain of the head, difficulty
of perception, out of quiet, difficulty of breathing, and darkness arising, and
appearing before the eyes, a noise of the ears, shinings before the eyes,
unvoluntary tears, a troublesome night, without any reason, agitation of the
lower lip, great stifness, the face and eyes looking red, a retraction of the
Hypocondries, a loathing, but there is not the same force and reason of all
these signs; the signs of concoction are never ill at what time soever they
appear, nay the sooner they appear the betterr: but judicatory Signs are not
accounted good, unless in the height or state of a Disease; so neither are
those good which are wont to indicate those in the beginning of a Disease.

Signs of concoction, some are proper to one sort of diseases, as spittle to
the diseases of the breast, others are common to many kind of diseases, such as
Hyppocrates, 1. Aphor. 12. reckons, the Urine, excrements of the Paunch,
sweats. The excrements of the belly are signs of that concoction which is
perfected in the belly, but the Urine of the concoction which is made in the
Liver and arterious vein.

For when the Urines afford proper signs of the parts through which they pass,
as of the Reins, Arteries, Bladder, Yard, we must have a care least we are
deceived in univerfall and acute diseases, by those particular and proper
signs of those parts; and what is spoken of Urines may also be said of
excrements of the Paunch.

CHAP. II. Of those kinds of Signs by which the times of Diseases may be known.
IT is exceeding profitable to know the times of diseases, Signs of the times
of diseases.
but especially the state, but the signs of times are taken first from the
form, and Idea, secondly from the time of the year, and other such like things:
Thirdly from the comings (or fits) and circuits, increasing and decreasing.
Fourthly, from the Symptoms of diseases, or from the Essence, and Idea, the
causes, and those things that precede the disease, and by the Symptoms, and
those things that accompany a Disease.

As to the form of a Disease, From the Idea of a disease.
by how much the motion of a Disease is swifter, by so much it is nigher to its
height, and is a token that the Disease will be shorter, but by how much the
flower the Disease is moved, by so much the more remote it is from the state.

Secondly, Time of the year. Region. Temperant of bodies. In respect of diet.
that Disease which happens in the Summer is nearer to its height, that which
happens in the Winter is more remote: In hot Regions, Diseases are more acute
and short, but in cold, longer; those that are hotter by nature, are subject to
hotter Diseases, and so shorter; those that are colder, to more cold, and
consequently more lasting; hotter, and dryer Victuals, generate hot humors,
and thereby shorter Diseases; colder, and moister diet generates pituitous
humors, and so more lasting Diseases; great strength of nature in a Disease
that is not mortal, Strength of nature.
shows that the Disease is short, but weakness shows it will continue
longer; but strength in a disease that is mortal, shows that it will continue
longer, but weakness signifies that it will be shorter.

Thirdly, From the course of fits.
in the fits the hour is to be considered in which the Paroxysme returns, the
time of duration, and the vehemence of Symptoms, for if the fits return
sooner, and the latter be longer then the former, and more vehement, it is a
token the disease is increased: on the contrary, if the latter fits return
slower, and endure a shorter time, and are not so violent, it is a sign the
disease abates; but sometimes Paroxysmes, enveigh equally and all of them
return at the same hour, which most commonly is a sign of a long disease, but
sometimes they come not equally, but at several hours, which shows that the
disease will be shorter, and is nearer to the state.

Moreover, if the fits come sooner, and that equally, the signs of concoction
not appearing, it is the beginning, but if they anticipate more hours then
before, it is in the increase; when they observe equality again a good while,
it is the state; when lastly the omitting or abating of the fits happens to be
various, it is the declination: If the order of the fits, so that sometimes
they come too soon, sometimes too late, and sometimes equally, and at certain
times. When the fits do equally invade without the signs of concoction, it is
the beginning, but when they anticipate not, it is the augmentation; when they
observe equality, it is the estate: And lastly when the coming late happens
again, it is the declination; but if the order of fits be various, so that
sometimes the Paroxysmes invade equally, sometimes anticipate, and sometimes
come later; when the fits equally invade without signs of concoction, the
beginning is; when they come too soon no more, the state is; but when they come
too late, the declination is.

As for the longitude and magnitude of fits, In longitude.
if the time of intermission or declination be short, and they are neither
plainly intolerable, nor altogether free from Symptoms, it is a sign of the
increase. On the other side, if the abating or the intermission be long, easy
to be endured, and free from all Symptoms absent, declination is shown.

But the most certain signs of the times of diseases, are digestion and
crudity, for whenever a sign of concoction appears suddenly, it shows the
disease will be short and terminate in health, but a sign of crudity shows the
disease will continue long, or even prove deadly; and if grievous Symptoms
grow upon the sick, so that they come with signs of concoction, they need to
trouble no man, but if they happen without signs of concoction and with
crudity, they portend danger.

CHAP. III Of the signs of times of Diseases in particular.
ANd that we may speak something peculiarly of knowing of the times of
Diseases, the beginning of a disease is as long as the disease is crude; Signs
of the beginning of a disease, of augmentation, of the height.
An evident and manifest concoction is a most certain sign that the beginning
is finished: And in the beginning the Symptoms are hitherto more mild, but in
the augmentation all of them increase, and in the state, when the greatest
contention is betwixt the matter and the disease, all of them are most
vehement: but this comes to pass sometimes soon, sometimes late; for in very
acute diseases immediately they have extreme pains, 1. Apho. 7 but in Chronick
the times are extended longer.

CHAP IV. Of the signs by which we may foretell the event of a disease.
ANd these things are spoken of Prognostics in general, now we are to speak
of those three, The event of a disease fourefold.
which use to be presaged, namely the event of a disease, the time of the end,
and the manner: but the event of a disease is fourfold, for some diseases kill
the diseased, others plainly leave them off, so that the sick return to their
perfect health; others neither kill the sick, nor leave them off, but accompany
them even to deaths door; others are changed into other diseases, and sometimes
into worse, sometimes into milder.

The event of a disease is known by comparing the strength of nature with the
disease, and by the longitude of a disease, When it may be known.
or the state with the time to come; for if the sick pass over the state,
there is no need, that he should any more fear the danger of death by that
disease; because after the state no man dies in the declination by the power
of that disease.

The signs of strength and weakness of nature are sought principally from
causes, and effects: Signs of strength and debility of nature.
the proximate cause of the strength of nature is a natural constitution of the
parts. And this, by how much the nearer it is to the natural temperature,
constitution and naturalll unity, by so much it signifies the firmerstrength;
by how much the more remote, by so much the weaker. For strength of nature
principally depends upon a natural temperament, whereunto belongs age also and
sex; for in men and youths the strength is firmer; in women, old men and boys,
weaker. Remote causes are all those things, which by whose intervening the
strength of a natural constitution is increased, or preserved, or diminished;
such are those things, that are taken in, which are carried about, which happen
externally, and that are evacuated, and retained; for if all these things have
been moderate heretofore, and are moderate, it shows strength of nature; if
immoderate, imbecility. Amongst the effects are first, actions, which, by how
much the more they are observed according to nature, by so much the more they
signify health: on the contrary, by how much the more or more noble they are,
or by how much the more they are hurt, by so much the more they show the
strength to be weakened: Secondly, Excrements signify nature to be powerful,
when in their substance, quantity, and quality they are most like to natural,
but they signify the contrary, if they are contrary. Lastly, qualities
changed, by how much the nearer they shall be to the qualities of sound men, by
so much they show the greater strength in the diseased; by how much they differ
from them, by so much the more imbecility.

The strength of a Disease is known from things essential, Signs of a strong
discase.
inhering causes, and effects, or consequent Symptoms.

As for what belongs to a constitution contrary to nature, the difference which
follows the form of a Disease, or the causes, or the subject, afford signs of
the event; if the Difease be great it indicates danger and death, if little
health, and by how much the fewer and more gentle those Symptoms are that show
what the disease is, by so much the less the strength of the disease is shown;
but by how much the more or greater they are, by so much the more vehement is
the Disease: but principally malignity ought to be suspected always; a disease
also, by how much the more it resides in a noble part, or may draw in a noble
part by consent, by so much the more dangerous; but that which is in an ignoble
part is out of danger.

The causes are such, as either bring forth a disease, or dispositions which
have gone before it. or such as are helpers and supporters of a Disease.

The efficients are either Internal or External, internal are either solid
bodies, or fluid; Diseases therefore which proceed from solid matter, as from
stones, gravel, especially such as is great, for the most part are incurable;
Diseases which arise from humors are dangerous, if they offend in the whole
substance, and are malignant, if they are very purred, if plentiful, endued
with mischievous qualities, and inhere in a noble part, and are crude; those
which are contrary indicate the Disease to be less dangerous: Diseases which
arise from blood for the most part are wholesome, from yellow and pale choler
not very dangerous, from leek colored choler, and the color of the Yolk of
an Egg, for the most part deadly.

The Aeruginous for the most part all are mortal, as those from black. A
Disease also from an humor perversely thin, is more dangerous then if it be
mingled with some other more mild.

Diseases also which proceed from many vicious humors mixed together, are more
dangerous then those that arise from a single humor, regard nevertheless
being had to the nature of the peccant humor.

Diseases also are more dangerous which proceed from a humor causing a tumor,
then from a quiet, so that it does not adhere quietly to a noble part. As for
the external and evident causes, this is to be noted of them in general, if
they trouble the body long and violently, and are withal malignant, and
continue long in the body, they signify a dangerous Disease; those which are
contrary tend more to health, and are less dangerous. Of the dispositions of
bodies, Hippocrates 2. Apho. 34. writes thus.

Those are less dangerously sick, whose disease is suitable to nature, or age,
or custom, or time of the year, then they whose diseases are agreeable to none
of these.

Moreover, if Adjuvants, Effects and Symptoms.
whether they are external or internal, or from nature, or from art, help,
they signify a healthy Disease, and not a dangerous; but hurtful things, if
they hurt not, show that nature is well: On the contrary, if those things which
ought to help, do not help, they show that the Disease is dangerous and deadly.

Thirdly, for what belongs to effects and Symptoms, by how much the Symptoms
are lighter, by so much the Disease is more gentle, by how much they are
greater, by so much the Disease is more violent.

The plurality of Signs are not only to be handled here, Dignity of signs.
but the gravity and dignity of good and evil signs are to be considered and
compared amongst themselves, and with the strength of the Sick; for the dignity
of signs is principally to be valued in respect of life, and always those are
counted most worthy which indicate the force or imbecility of the vital
faculty.

CHAP. V. How to presage of life and death from the error and faults of actions.
AFter that we have spoken those things in general of knowing the event, we
will speak something in particular of what may be foretold by Symptoms,
whereof this is the sum: Those things which are most like or agreeable to
nature are healthy, those which are most unlike, or different, The third Book,
and part of the fourth. Animal actions hurt what they presage.
are deadly,

And first for actions hurt, and what belongs to the animal faculty, in what
disease whatsoever, to have the right use of ones reason, and to be well in
respect of those things which are taken in, is a good sign, but the contrary
is an ill sign, Hypocrates 2. Apho. 33. and to do any thing contrary to
custom, and to will something formerly not accustomed, or the contrary, that
is, either to speak little or much, or madly, or absurdly, or obsceencly, to
move the hands untowardly, to read wanton things, to uncover the body, and
denudate the privy parts, not to be sensible of pain, untoward, and next to
being frantic, Delirium.
2. Coac. Sect. 1. Apho. 10. But principally to continue well in understanding,
is good in those diseases wherein the brain is affected, or is drawn into
consent: But although to be well in mind, in diseases of other parts, be a good
sign, yet it is not sufficient to signify health, for many dye that are
perfect in their understandings.

Although no ravening be safe, yet that which is with laughter, and good
signs, and is light, and not continual, is more safe, but that which is with
violence, continual and vehement, is more dangerous, but that which is with
boldness and rashness, is the worst of all; yet other things which are joined
therewith are to be considered; first, the Pulse, respiration, and appetite,
which if they remain safe, it is a good sign, as also if sleep follow; but on
the contrary, if ill signs are joined with ravening or madness, they threaten
death, for deadly signs denote certain destruction.

Ignorance with shaking fit is evil, The me^^ry hurt.
it is hurtful also with oblivion, 1. Prorrh. Com. 2. Apho. 30. yet that
oblivion which comes with a Delirium is less dangerous, so that the Delirium
wherewith it appears be not dangerous.

Sleeping and waking if they are customary, Sleeping and waking.
and from a natural course, it is good, but sleep and watchings if they are
eccessive evil, 2, Apho. 3. but yet if watching happen before a Crisis, the
matter being concocted, it denotes no hurt; a Coma or Disease that causes long
sleep, in the beginning of a Disease, signifies the Disease to be dangerous, as
also that which happens in the height of a Disease, and by so much the more
dangerous is the Coma, by how much the more grievous Symptoms are joined with
it.

As for the mischiefs of the external Senses, if the sight, Hurt in of the
external senses. Of sight.
the time of judicature being instant, be hurt with the signs of concoction,
it indicates no evil, but that sight which is hurt without the signs of
concoction, and after an ill Crisis, wants no danger, Call. 4. Aphorism 49.

The hinderance of hearing also, if it happen during a good Crisis, is not
evil, but if without a Crisis, it is evil; and in acute Diseases for the most
part it denotes the brain to be affected: And in the first place, that is
mortal which is made by reason of decaying of the strength and extinguishing
the faculty; those evils also which proceed from evil evacuations, 3 Prorrh.
37. The sound also and continual humming of the ears, if it happen with
signs of crudity, and in a day that is not judicatory, and the strength
languished, it signifies a mortal or deadly Frenzy; when it happens
otherwise in the vigor of a disease, and decretory days, it indicates the
Hemerodes of the Nose.

The mell and taste being offended, Of Hearing
is a certain sign rather of the peccant humor, then of the event of a
disease, but yet if the sick, the faculty being extinct, should be deprived of
taste, it is a deadly sign.

The sudden want of the sense of feeling, Of Touching.
which happers in diseases, is an ill sign, since it is a token, either of the
dilating of the vicious humors so sar as to the brain, or of the extinguishing
of the native heat.

If inflaming pains which presently appear in the beginning, Pain.
and are not too vehement, nor continual, and are taken away in a short time,
or are abated, especially, after a plentiful evacuation, occasioned by nature,
or art, and no dangerous sign be joined, it is good; but those which continue
long, presage an impostumation, but those which happen, the disease
increaseing, are not evil, because they denounce a Crisis. It is good also if
when a concoction appears, the pains invade the remote parts from the bowels,
and that principally on the critical day, but all those diseases are evil
which afflict the principal parts, especially if they are joined with a
continued fever, and other ill Symptoms; but diseases of the noble parts are
good, if they happen after concoction, and do not vanish in a short time, and
the sick are other ways the better by that means; but if they happen in the
beginning, the matter being hither to crude, and the disease not abated
thereby, or if shortly they vanish without any manifest cause, or beginning
from a more ignoble part, and ascend to a more noble it is an ill token: also it
is evil not to be sensible of pain in any part.

The same reason for the most part is from wearisomnesse, Lasinesse.
for that lassitude which is promoted by the humors, flowing from the noble
parts to the external, with signs of concoction, is a good sign, and
especially if it vanish after some evacuation, but if it happen without the
signs of concoction, and with other perverse Symptoms, and is not abated by
evacuation, it pretends evil.

As to the Symptoms of motion; Motion.
if bodies are moved aright and easily, it is good, but not afight, or with
difficulty, it is ill 2. prog. text. 6.7.

Hitherto we may refert the decubiture, Lying down.
for it is good for the sick to lie on either side with his hands neck, and
legs, a little bent, his body straight, not bending toward his feet 1. prog.
text. 13. for it is evil to lie supine, with the hands, and feet stretched and
dejected, but it is worst of all to slide down the body to the feet, to
observe no order of lying in one's bed, nor to be quiet in one place, raving
and striving to fly out of the bed, to uncover his hands, fecte, and
nakedness, ib. textu. 14. and seq. but if a critical anxiety or trouble, it is
not so hurtful, all the rest are evil 2. prog. 27.

That convulsion is most dangerous wherein it appears that the motion is most
depraved, Convulsion.
and the contraction more vehement, and lasting, and which occupyeth more
parts, and nearer to the brain, which renders respiration difficult,
interrupted, and sighing, or from a flux of blood, or which happens from much
purging, which happens in acute fevers, which succeeds a Phrenfie, as also in
the iliack, passion and watchings, but the convulsion which happens to Children
is less dangerous, Galen 1. Epid. comm. 4.24. and that which is caused by too
much motion of matter to the head or stock of nerves, or that which is
occasioned through the mordication of the ventrilcle by the sharpness of the
humor, or a medicine, or by straining in vomiting, and does not last long.

A Hiccock is like to a convulsion which if it come withour a fever or any
disease; Hiccock
and be occasioned by meat or drink it portends nothing of eminent danger,
but after too much purging, and with inflammations and fevers, hiccocks are
always dangerous, especially if they happen to old men; unless a Crisis of
vomiting afterward be present, especially if other dangers and deadly signs
joined therewith.

Trembling is evil if it happen in the beginning of diseases without an
evident cause, Trembling.
and indicates the diseases to be dangerous, especially if it shall be longer
and more grevious, and other weighty Symptoms are joined therewith, as those
which happen in an Apoplexy and Lethargy, but that trembling which happens
afterward, and is occasioned by the critic expulsion of humors, from the
interior to the external parts, is a token of no evil, nor is that trembling
evil which succeeds a palsy, since it is a token that nature overcomes the
disease.

A shaking fit which incontinued fevers happens in that hour wherein the
pain uses to gripe, A partxisme.
when the signs of concoction go before, it is a token of a future Crsis, and
therefore accounted good, if some good evacuation follow; otherwise if it happen
in the beginning of a disease, or with an ill and difficult crisis it is adjudged
evil.

Cold fits which happen at certain times in intermitting fevers, Cold fit.
signifies no evil; nor are they ill signs in continued fevers, which happen
after signs of concoction, and are tokens of critical evacuations; and after
which the body grows hot again, and some critical evacuation follows. But
those which are occasioned whilst the matter is crude, by reason whereof the
body cannot grow hot with evil evacuations, or when no evacuation follows,
and which happens with ill signs, are all evil.

Sloth of apprehension, Torpor.
specially of the body caused by cold, is perpetually evil, and without a
fever or Apoplexy, it pretends manifest danger in fevers, by reason of the
extinguishing of the native heat.

Moreover the signs of defaults of speech are to be observed; Hurt in the
voice.
a shrill voice threatens danger, since it denotes exceeding dryness of the
instruments of the voice; dumbness, although it be never good, nor without
danger, yet it is not always deadly, namely when the judicatory evacuation
follows, and when it does not continue long; the rest that are dumb, are all
for the most part mortal; and so much the worse, how many the more perilous
signs are joined.

Secondly, The strength of the vital faculty.
the strength and weakness of the vital faculty, which are of greatest force
in foreshewing safty, or death, we observed principally from the pulse and
respiration. Of the pulse it is spoken already, only we repeat this, that the
most languishing, most dull, and most thin, are the worst of all; after these
the least and softest, and hardest; next the most frequent, but not swift, nor
great; only amongst extremes the most vehement is the best, yet we must
diligently observe always, whither the change of the pulse arise from the
disease, or come from external causes.

Hereunto belongs the Palpitation of the heart, swounding and falling down, as
it were dead, which indicate dejection of the vital faculty, and great danger,
if they happen through some disease of the heart it self.

Respiration, Respiration.
of it be natural, signifies neither the breast, nor heart, not midriffe to be
any way affected with pain, nor any adjacent parts Galen 1. prog. Apho. 25.
and moreover it has great force in signifying tokens of health, when one is
sick in a fever, especially if other good signs are present Hip. ib. on the
contrary preternaturally respiration, although it be not always mortal, yet
it is always evil, but worst of all if it be joined with other ill signs;
great and swift breathings signify great store of fuliginous vapors, yet the
organs apt, and the faculty hitherto strong, a great and slow pulse happens
only to those that are disturbed in mind; a great and frequent pulse snew pain
or inflammation of the part serving for breathing; little and swift respiration
shows plenty of fuliginous excrements, but with pain, or inflammation of some
of the organs appointed for breathing; a little, and slow pulse shows not many
vapors, with pain or inflammation of some instrument of respiration, and with
other ill signs portends not a little danger; little and obscure respiration
is perpetually evil, and signifies dissolution of strength; but little and
thin is the worst of all, because it indicates the greatest debility of the
faculty, and if a cold breath proceed from the mouth and nostrills, it is very
destructive; but the worst of all, and the nearest to death, is when it extends
and is obscure, and sublime, wherein the breast is much dilated, and sometimes
the Shoulders, and grisly part of the nostrills, but that which is inspired is
very thick, and most frequent; but the worst respiration of all, is that which
is made with ordure.

Moreover for what belongs to the Symptoms of the natural faculty, Symptoms
of the natural faculty what they presage.
their perfection is known by their operations, of which it shall be spoken
hereafter, but that we may speak here something of the desire of meat and
drink; to have a good appetite to meat, and that proceeding from a natural
cause, and as Hippo. 2. Apho. 33. writes, in every disease to take easily
whatsoever is offered, is a good sign; on the contrary an ill appetite of
meat is bad 7. Apho 6. not to thirst also in hot and burning fevers, wherein
the tongue is filthy and black, perpetually signifies mischief, and a delirium,
or dissolution of the desiring faculty, or of them both; but as it is an ill
sign not to thirst, so it is a good sign to thirst in hot diseases, also to
thirst immoderatly and over much, is notgood,

CHAP. VI. Of the signs of life and death which are taken from excretions and
retentions.
AMongst exerements, urines principaly use to be observed, Prognostic from
urine.
but although it is spoken of already, what they show, above, part the first
See. 2. cap. 21. yet here we may briefly comprehend those things which portend
to death or life, namely, that urine is best which is most like that of a sound
person from this the rest differ in substance, color, quantity, and contents.
As to the substance, the goodness of the substance with a good color,
promises health; thin urines with a good color promise health, yet they show
a disease which requires longer time for concoction. Thin and red urins signify
a crude disease 2. prog. 30. but thick, which are made so after the beginning
of a disease are also good, if they were thin before, much urine if it be made
on a critical day is good, which sometimes is profitably made with sharpness,
and pain.

Troubled urine, not settling in the bottom, because the strength of the
diseased persists, argues for the most part the disease to continue long; if
imbecility of the fick be present, it denotes their death, but those which grow
clear are better. As for the colors of waters, a pale red, a light safron
color, and a kind of clear clay color are good, neither is a reddish color
with a reddish and light sediment to be found fault with, but on the other side
bright shinning urines, and white are evil; and especially if they appear
such, in Phrensies, 4. Agho. 72. principally, if they are so in the beginning
of a disease, and continue so long; thin, and red, signify the disease is
crude, and moreover it is dangerous if they continue so long; black urine in
acute diseases, unless they are emitted on a critical day, always denote
great danger; after black, the oily are the worst, yellow, and green also are
naught, and green urines if they appear so suddenly in men that are in other
respects sound, with biting of the heart, it is a sign they have drank poison,
and they are in danger of death, but in fevers they are mortal signs;
especially if they appear in the beginning of the discase.

As for the quanity Hippo. 3. Epid. com. 3. tom 4. condemns thin urins made in
great quantity; as also much urine, thick, not residing and no way helping; and
all urines are made in great quantity in the beginning, are disliked; small
quantities of urines in acute fevers are also naught.

As to the contents, those urins are evil which have no sediment, and nothing
that swimmeth in the urinall in the midst of the urine, nor a little cloud;
unless the sick has fasted long, or watched, or labored: or because the body
is exceeding full of choler; thick waters also without a sediment are
dangerous, and a sediment representing, the form of thick brain, is evil, but
worst of all, if it reside in a manner like scales of Fish, but if it be thin
and white it is vicious; but that which is furfuraceous or like Bran is worst of
all, Hippo. 2. prog. 28. a nubecula, or little cloud, which is carried in the
Urine, if it be white it is good, if black it is nonght; it is evil also for the
sick to make water and not know of it.

Secondly, Of dejection of the helly.
the dejections of the belly afford us signs two manner of ways; first, as
they show the concoction of the stomach and guts, also as they manifest the
humors flowing from other parts to the guts; As for the first kind, that
ejection is best if it be gentle and constant; and sent forth at that time when
it is wont to be in the best health, if quantity be according to what has been
eaten, 2. Apho. 13. The latter is good if it be critical, and with signs of
concoction in the state of a disease, and happen on a critical day, and ease
the sick, 1. Apho. 2. On the other side ill dejections, and those which portend
destruction, derogate from the good in substance, color, smell, time wherein
they appear, nor are they voided with ease.

As to their substance and quantity, dry excrement and rolled up in clods are
signs of fiery heat, and if besides they shall be black, they declare a
burning disease to be in the middle of the body, and for that reason are evil:
On the contrary liquid excretion is not evil, if it have other good notes; but
the watery ordure is worse, and proceeds from greater crudity; and moreover in
choleric diseases, with ill Urines it is deadly, but in more mild it signifies
the disease will continue long. A glutinous, white, light, fat, and foetid
ordure, and little, are condemned, 2. Prog. 21, 22. Clear dejections also in
acute diseases are condemned, 2. Prorrh. 15. and froathy, and choleric
ejections in acute choleric diseases are accounted evil, ibid. Apho. 18.

As to the color, excrements which differ from the natural color, are white;
red, bloody, watery, green, yellow, black, full of mixed colors, unless they
are emitted critically they portend danger: Yet in all these ejections in
judging of them, regard is to be had of the meat, and to take heed you observe
whether that quality has its rise from diet that has been taken; for they
become white either by the obstructing of the passages through which choler
descends to the guts, or through the motion of the choler to some superior and
more noble part, Red are also of themselves dangerous, yet if they are extruded
after the victory of nature, they rather show hope of present health, then
portend any thing of evil.

Black Excrements since they proceed either from blood or melancholy humors,
or from black choler, that blackness which comes from concrete blood, or a
melancholy humor, is not always evil: but pure black choler can never be
sent out of the body without destruction of the sick.

Green and aeruginous ordure which proceeds from aeruginous choler tending to
black, is an argument of a pernicious disease, if it be cast out from any
principal part, and the bowels be affected with an Erysipelous; if the
Excrements are yellow, they signify vehement cold in the internal parts, and
as it were a certain mortification: Ejections also of diverse colors are evil,
2. Prog. 23.

Faetid Excrements are evil also, and the worst of all, and few are preserved
whose excrements in acute fevers are foetid, yellow, fat, black, and blew, or
lead color.

Those vomitings are good which truly purge the causes of diseases, Of
vomitings.
or which are made critically, and when concocted matter appears on the
critical days, and are suitable to the nature of the disease, and take away
or abate the same; but on the contrary, all those are evil which happen in the
beginning, when the matter is not yet concocted, and which take not away the
morbifique matter, and the disease; and they are so much the worse if other
pernicious signs be present, such as are sincere Vomits, leek colored, lead
colored, black, stinking, and foetid, from the guts, Ileon, and very little.

Sweats are good which happen after decoction is made, Os sweats.
and on a critical day, and coldness, and stiffness, proceeding and flows
out hot and plentifully from the whole body, and lessen and abate the disease:
on the other side, those are evil which happen whilst the matter is crude,
which are too much, or too little, and those which are cold, or flow not from
the whole body, and neither diminish nor take away the disease.

The Hemorodes of the nose are good which happen in the state of a disease,
From the Hemerodes of the nose.
with signs of concoction, nor is that always to be condemned which happens
in the augmentation, and also in the beginning, seeing the blood wants no other
preparation, neither do the other humors. Good Hemerodes ought to be large,
but yet not over much, but to be made with ease, and the symptoms of the
Fever to be abated, and to happen in a critical day, and in those diseases,
wherein bleeding is proper to their nature and condition; and moreover the blood
ought to flow from a part opposite to the part affected: on the contrary, those
are ill Hemerodes which happen in the beginning, unless other good signs are
present, and if they appear with dangerous signs, and those which are too
large, or too little.

Dropping of blood from the Nose is evil, if it be caused by pervernesse of
matter, multitude, imbecility of force, or all these, especially in the
beginning, or on the fourth day, if the blood be black, sincere, and without
mixture: But it be a token of a future Crisis, it is no ill sign, which happens
when the signs of concoction have been before, and the disease is not
dangerous.

Spittle is of great use in showing of diseases of the breast, From spittle.
and that is good which is concocted, white and equal, and is spit out
conveniently, and easily in a short space of time, without great pain, and a
great cough: on the contrary, it is evil if it be crude, yellow; worse, if it be
green, worst of all if black, especially if it be without mixture, if it
appears more dull, and is spit out with great difficulty, it is also evil; when
the spittle is bloody, for it proceeds from erosion, or from breaking of
Vessels.

Lastly, decretory Imposthumations are good, Ulcers.
if they happen with signs of concoction, and other good signs, and break on
a judicatory day; they are good by nature which are removed from the bowels and
more noble parts, which persevere, are suppurated, and help the sick: On the
contrary, those are evil which break forth without signs of concoction, the
matter as yet being crude, and on a day that is not critical, if they are too
great, or too little, or happen to be in the fingers, or toes, if they are lead
color, or too red, inclining to black, and those which decrease and vanish,
without any reason, and without any precedent evacuation, those which are not
well suppurated, which are corrupted, and they bring either that part where
they are, or the whole body into danger.

CHAP. II. Of the signs of health and of death which are taken from the
mutations of the qualities of the body.
MOreover to the mutation of the qualities of the body, What may be foretold
by the habit of the body.
and first concerning the whole body, it is a good sign if it be rendered not
much unlike to a sound body in habit and color.

It Is no good sign for the most part in a great Disease, when nothing is
changed, 2. Apho. 28. It Is also an ill sign when bodies are extenuated in the
declination of a Disease, and although they take food are not thereby
refreshed. For in acute Diseases, it is an ill sign when the body is puffed up and
swelled, unless critical humors are then remitted.

The color of the body when changed contrary to nature, From the color.
and especially in the yellow Jaundice, is a good sign. In Fevers if it come
to pass by natures driving the choleric humors critically to the out side of
the body, and the skin; but that which is contrary is to be adjudged evil.

Those signs which are in the face are of great force, From the face.
but that face is best which is like to theirs which are in health, but if it
be contrary it is vicious, Hip. 1. Prog. 5. but a face may be unlike to their
faces that are well many ways, and by how much the more it recedeth from the
face of sound people, by so much the greater evil it denotes.

All which signs Hippocrates in his description of a face, Hippo. face.
which differs from a face of a sound person produces, which therefore is
called an Hippocraticall face, 2. Prog. 6, and 7. sharp Nose, hollow Eyes, the
Temples straightened, or narrow, the Ears cold and contracted, and their fibers
inverted, the skin also about the Forehead hard, fixed, and dry, and the color
of the whole countenance green, or black, which change of the countenance is
very deadly, especially in the beginning of a disease, unless it so happen to
be from some evident cause, and mends night and day, but that face which is of
a purple color, mixed with blew, unless the Hemerodes of the Nose, or an
Imposthumation behind the Ears be to follow after, is an ill figne, and
denotes a very hot disease of the brain.

As the eyes are affected, so the body, By the eyes
and principally the head, 6. Edip. Comm. 4. tom. 28. for if the eyes are like
to theirs that are well, have a natural color, are full, splendid, and endure
the light without trouble, if they open their eye lids well, and shut them
without tears, and without excrements, they are good signs.

But there are diverse mutations in the eyes, and as Hippo. 1. Prog 10. writes,
if the eyes avoid the light, or shed tears against the will of the sick, or are
perverted, or one shall be less then the other, and the white become reddish,
or of the color of lead, or black Veins, or phlegm appears about the sight,
or look divinely upward, or are hollow, or the color of the whole countenance
varies, all these are to be accounted evil and destructive, but worst of all
if the sick see not, hear not, and if this happen in a weak body, death is nigh
at hand.

A sharp Nose, and a Nose that is turned, or wreathed, By the Nostrill.
after what manner soever, is an ill sign; if the Nose itch contrary to
custom, unless it indicate a flux of blood imminent, it shows that a
Delirium will follow.

The Ears if they are of a wan color, By the ears.
black contracted and cold, it is a sign of death.

The grinding of the teeth is an ill sign, By the teeth
it is an ill sign also when any glutinous humors sticks to the teeth.

When the Tongue is like theirs who are in health, By the Tongue.
it is a very good sign, but it is very evil if it be green, black and exceeding
dry, cleaved, or chopped, rough, and as it were burnt: But principally dry,
hard, and black Tongues indicate danger, if they appear with other ill signs,
and most of all if when the Tongue is rough and dry, the sick be not thirsty.

The Chops ulcerated with a Fever is hard to be cured, By the Cheps.
3. Prog 15. and if in acute diseases of the Chops, if pains, and abjectnesse,
and stoppings, without a tumor happen, they are pernicious, 1. Prorrh. 11. and
if the Fever being detained, he suddenly turn his neck awry, and can scarce
swallow, no tumor being present, it is mortiferous, 4. Apho. 35.

It Is a good sign if the Hypocondries are without pain, By the Hypocondries
if they are soft and equal, on either part if they are not extenuated; yet
sometimes when the Hypocondries are stretched it shows a crisis to come, but
then also other critical signs are present; on the contrary it is an ill sign,
if the Hypocondries are troubled with inflammation, or pain, or are stretched,
or unequally affected, on the right, or left part; also when extenuated, By the
extremities of the body.
and beating, unless a Crisis be present.

Lastly as to the extremities of the body, if in intermitting fevers, the
extreme parts grow cold, and the internal burn, and they thirst, it is mortal
7. Apho. 1. but it is very good if all the body be equally hot, and soft; it is
evil also, and for the most part deadly if all the body be heavy, and
especially if the nails and fingers are black and blue, or black, if the
genitalls, and stones are drawn up together, also filthy smells indicate great
putrefaction and danger.

CHAP. VIII. Of knowing the time, longitude, brevity and event of a disease.
THe length, Which diseases are ended in the fi st quartarnary.
brevity, time, and event, of a disease are known principally by the signs of
concoction and crudity, and the vehemence of a disease, by the celerity, and
tardity; for if in the first day in an acute fever, the signs of concoction
are present in the urine, and no danger be perceived, it argues the disease
will end about the first quartarnary, third, fourth, or fifth day, if the
disease be contrary to this, and presently after the beginning have the worst
Symptoms, Which are extended to the second.
the fifth day, or before, he will dye.

But if signs of concoction appear the first and second days, and the
disease be neither benign nor vehement, the disease may be extended, to the
second quarternary, but as long as such seavers can continue the first day, it
can scarce be known, but afterward each quartarnary are to be considered, and
the signs of concoction in them are to be wieghed and compared with the
vehemence of the disease, towit, if in the fourth day signs of concoction
appear in the urine, it is a sign that the matter is apt to be concocted, and
that the disease will terminate on the seventh day; on the contrary, if in such
a fever, on the fourth day there appear no signs of concoction but ill
signs are also increased, it is an argument that the sick grows worse, and may
dye about the seventh day; unless some error be committed, or some other cause
of change be present.

But if the signs of crudity, remain till the fourth or: Which to the third.
seventh day, the disease shall endure beyond the third quartarnary, but if on
the fourteenth day, it shall have an end, the eleventh, which is the index of
the fourteenth will show it, for if then signs of concoction appear, either
before the fourteenth day judgment may be given, or on the seventeenth day; but
if on the eleventh day there appear not as yet sufficient signs of
concoction, there is no hopes that the disease will be judicatory on the
fourteenth, and therefore the signs of concoction are to be sought in the
following quartarnaries, for if the signs of concoction appear about the
twentieth day, there is hopes on the first quartinary, after the twentieth day,
that the disease may be judged of, but if no mutation hitherto appears it may
be extended to the fourth week, and those diseases which retain all the signs
of crudity to the four and twentieth day, cannot be decreed, before the
fourtieth day, and those which are extended beyond the fourtieth are not ended
with a Crisis, but with slow concoctions.

Sometimes not only the day but also the hour of the end of a disease may be
foretold, The hour of the event of a disease how to be known.
namely if we consider particular fits, for if we think any one will dye on any
day, it is probable he will dye in the worst time of his fit, or in a particular
declination, when the strength, in the height of a discase is dejected, by the
cruelty and vehemence of Symptoms.

CHAP. IX. How many mutations there are of diseases, and the manners, and what
a crisis is.
THe third thing which ought to before known by Physicians is the manner of
event, and end of diseases: Changes of diseases how many.
they are terminated six several ways, as well to health, as to death, for
either the disease is suddenly fully dissolved, and the sick recovers
immediately his firm health, or there is a sudden change to better, and the
sick is transferred from a worse state into a better, after which, at length
also he recovers to be well, or there is a conversion of the disease by little
and little to health, or contrary the sick suddenly dies, or the disease is
suddenly become more dangerous, which change at length ends him.

That mutation which is made by degrees, tending to death, is called a Marasme,
or Wasting; that mutation of a disease which is made by little and little, and
tends to health, is called a loosing, but that sudden and hasty change which is
made in Fevers, especially acute and tend to health, Crisis.
or death, is called a Crisis; but that change cannot be made unless vicious
humors which oppress nature are moved, which indeed cannot happen without
great perturbations of the body, and vehement symptoms, a Catalogue whereof
Galen recites in his 1. of critical days, Cap. 1.

CHAP. X. Of the causes, differences, manner, and time of Judgment.
SInce that in Judgments many things happen, The cause of a crisis.
Conturbat^on.
conturbation, evacuation, and sudden mutation, tending to safety or death,
that conturbation which is a heap of those judicatory symptoms, which proceed
from agitation and molestation of humors which the body affords, and this
comes to pass either from an external cause, as influence of Stars, or an
internal, irritating and provoking as well nature as the matter.

The cause of evacuation is the expulsive faculty, Evacuation.
which either is stird up by the plenty or the quality of matter, yet
critically expels that which does molest.

There are four differences of Crises, Differences of Crisis.
according as nature is sometimes stronger, sometimes weaker, and sometimes
oppressed more by v^tious matter, sometimes less, for either the sick
forthwith recover their former health, or suddenly dye, or undergo some change,
tending to safety or death, Good Evil.
yet immediately they neither recover, nor dye: From whence afterward other
differences will arise, for some Crises are good, some evil; those are good
which tend to the recovery of the sick, those are evil which discover the
death of the sick.

Again some are perfect and very good, Persect. Impersect.
which free the sick perfectly and wholly from the disease, and leave none of
the morbifique matter, but the imperfect leave some of the morbifique matter
behind.

Again, some are faithful and secure, Secure. Not secure.
which so take away the disease, that there is no fear of a relapse;
unfaithful is that which leaves a doubt of falling into it again.

Moreover it is called a safe Crisis which happens without danger of Symptoms; A
safe. Dangerous.
but a dangerous which is joined with perilous Symptoms.

Some Crises are with good signs, Eusemes.
and have their indications from the days going before them, and are called
good signs; but that which happens without signs, and is, Asemos.
as it were, unseperated, is said to be an ill sign.

But all these differences depend on three things, The differences of Crisis
whereon they depend
the strength of nature, the nature of a disease, and the condition of the
matter which ought to be expelled; and that a good and perfect Crisis be made,
it is requisite that nature be strong, and Heaven favorable, the disease not
dangerous, and the matter benign and facill; in all other Crises one, or more
of these are wanting.

All Crises are made two ways, either by excretion, Crisis, how many ways
made. By excretion, by translation.
or emitting, or else by removing the matter: By excretion a Crisis is made
when peccant humors are expelled by vomit, Seidgs, sweat, plenty of Urine,
Hemerodes of the Nose, flowing of the months, and Hemerodes: A Crisis is made
by translation, when the matter is not expelled out of the body, but is removed
into another place, and that either into internal parts, or external, the
former Crisis is the better, because the matter for the most part is thoroughly
cast out from the center of the body; by so much also a Crisis is the better,
that is made by translation, by how much the matter is transferred to a more
ignoble and remote place; so much the worse, by how much the place is more
noble and nigher to the seat of the former disease: An Imposthumation also, or
Ulcer ought to be out of the region of the part affected, and to have the other
notes of a good Imposthumation; an abscesse also ought not to vanish suddenly,
but to remain until either it be turned into quitture, or till it be
dissipated by degrees.

But the best Crisis never happens unless it be toward the end of the height,
when the concoction is perfected, A good crisis, when it happens.
for that which happens in the augmentation before the state, is imperfect, and
is so much the worse, by how much it is longer distant from the end of the state;
sometimes also evacuation which is made in the beginning of diseases, and is
symptomaticall, is not to be accounted evil, especially if those humors are
evacuated, from whence the disease had its original, and the strength of
nature can endure it.

CHAP. XI. Of Critical days.
WHereas the Crises are made more frequently and better on certain determinate
days then other days, Critical days.
those dales therefore are called critical; but other days wherein a Crisis
seldom happens, or such a one as is not good does happen, are called not
critical.

Critical days are of three kinds, some are those which are simply, and
according to preheminency called critical, wherein Judgments are made better
and more frequently, all which are bounded within the circuit of a septinary
number, and are these, the 7.14.20.27.34.40. for days are not taken whole, but
shorter.

Moreover, there are some which are called indicant and contemplable, from
whence the Crisis to come is shown, and they are the middles, or quarternaries
of every seventh morning, as 4.11.17.24.

Others are such as come between, Intervening.
which the Greeks call Parempiptontes, others call them provocatory, wherein
from some accident contrary to nature, or by the violence of a fit, or by
reason of some external cause, nature is provoked to hasten to untimely
expulsion, such are the 3.5.9.13.19. and according to some 15.18.

Vacant or not critical days are those wherein no crisis happens, Vacant.
or very seldom, and unperfect, and evil, such are the 6.8.10.12.16.18. to
which some add 22, 23.25.29, 30.32, 33.35.38.39. which days are also called
medicinal, because the Physician on those days may safely administer purging
Medicines.

After the 40. day diseases languish, and by a slow concoction, and by
Imposthumations, rather then Crisis are terminated; after these some diseases
are judged by months, others by years, and especially in climactericall years,
when changes are made even of diseases which have been contracted from their
Mothers Womb.

From this doctrine nevertheless of Hippocrates, and Galen, which Galen
reduces, as it were, in brief, in the 1. of decretory diseases, cap. 5. the
ancients now long since have departed; Asclepiades, Archigenes, Celsus, and
others, which accounted the third critical year not the twentieth, but the one
and twentieth, the fourth, not the twenty seventh, but the twenty eighth.

The Astrologers also do not simply observe days and numbers, The opinion of
Astrologers.
but referring all the reason of critical days to the motion of the Moon,
note those days wherein the Moon comes to every quadrangle, or fourth corner,
and comes to the diameter in respect of place wherein she was found when the
disease began, as now in the causes of critical days shall be shown.

CHAP. XII. Of the causes of Critical days.
THat we may omit the opinions of others, The cause of critical days.
of the causes of critical days, no offense to any other judgments, we
appoint critical days to depend on the Moon, and the condition and
disposition of peccant humors, and the expulsive faculty, for what mutations
soever the Moon in her conjunctions, oppositions, and quadrangles makes in
these inferior bodies is very well known, and therefore that power which is
attributed to quaternaries, and septinaries do all depend on the motion of the
Moon, yet nevertheless that this, or that Crisis may be made betwixt those,
the motion of the Moon alone is not sufficient, since not always the seventh
or fourteenth day is not always critical, and sometimes a good and an ill
Crisis is made on the same day, and therefore the condition and disposition of
peccant humors are to be joined; and lastly, the expulsive faculty is to be
added, which being stimulated by the motion of the Moon and disposition of
humors, is the next and immediate cause of a Crisis.

First seeing the order of critical days cannot proceed only from the faculty
of the body, nor from morbifique matter, The Mo^n.
but a celestial cause is to be joined therewith, and the Moon in every
quarternary, and septinary, and according as it takes up one and another place
of the Zodiac in its motions, and by reason of the light from the Sun varying,
shows to us various lights or representations, it may make great alterations in
sublunary things, it is not therefore without a cause determined, that great
mutations arise in diseases in those places which have regard to the place
wherein the Moon was in the beginning of the disease, with a quadrate or
opposite ray; and when she is come so far as that she has a new shape, and
manifest mutation of light; for the motion of the Moon and her progress to the
quadrate, and opposite signs, and the changings of the shape of the Moon are
to be joined whatsoever they are; yet the crises are stronger when the
Septinaries exactly fall into the quadrates of the Moon.

But in the computing of the critical days, A periodicall month in critical
days to be observed.
the month of wandering or traveling is to be observed as being natural and
according to which many changes are made in this inferior orb, which for the
most part is made in twenty seven days and eight hours, which if they are
divided into four weeks, the first will be ended, in six days and twenty
hours, the second in thrirteen days, and sixteen hours, the third in twenty
days and twelve hours.

Therefore on what day soever any one fall sick at the first onset of the
disease, a conjunction as it were is made of the Moon and the disease, hence
when the Moon has measured three fignes, or past over ninty degrees, and
comes to the first quadrate, the first critical day is made; when she has
past through six signs, or an 180. degrees she comes to the opposite sign,
and the second critical day begins; when from the opposite signeshe passes to
the second quadrate, the third crisis begins, if the disease be prolonged till
then, lastly when she returns again to the place where she was at the beginning
of the disease the fourth crisis begins, and she shows as she did at first.
Prognosticall diseases.


The same reason is of indicatory days, for when the Moon has passed over
two signs or 60. degrees from the sign wherein she was when any one began to
fall sick, and is said to come to a sextile, the first indicatory is begun;
when she has past over four signs, or a 120 degrees, and becomes triangular,
the second indicatory is made; and when from the opposite sign again she
comes to be triangular, then is the third indicatory; lastly when she has gone
from the second quadrate to the second sextile, the fourth indicatory is.

But here the days are not to be numbered according to the diurnall
indifferent motion of the Moon, Which motion of the Moon is to be observed in
critiball days.
which is thirteen degrees, ten minutes, 35 sec. but according to the true
motion of the Moon, for the Moon is sometimes swift, sometimes slow in
motion, nor does she pass through alike number of degrees each day, whence it
comes to pass that she arrives sometimes sooner, sometimes later, to the
quadrate and opposite sign, and hence without all doubt it comes to pass,
that most admirable Physicians vary in defining of critical days, and
Hippocrates as also Galen account the twentieth, and seven and twentieth:
Arch^genes, as also Diacles count the one and twentieth and eight and twentieth
for critical days; neither are always distinct aspects to be observed, but
often times, plarick are sufficient.

Secondly besides the motion of the Moon, The disposition and motion of
humors. The nature of a body.
^the disposition and motion of humors are to be considered and which is the
cause that the crisis happens sometimes sooner, sometimes later.

Lastly the nature of the body is to be adjoined, which being assisted by the
motion of the Moon, and stirred up by the humors, begins a combat with the
morbifique matter, and expels the same, and makes a crisis.

CHAP XIII. Of the signs of crisis in general.
BUt crises are made as it is also said before, only in acute, In what diseases
crists are made.
and violent diseases, arising from hot, thin, and acrid matter which may tire
out nature; but if sometimes in durable or chronick diseases also, critical
evacuations as it were, are made, it is necessary, that there be certain periods
of time before the disease become vehement and become of the same nature with
acutes: Moreover that the crisis may be made, it is requisite that there be
strength of nature, according as ought to be: thirdly, to the foreknowledge of
a crisis certain perturbations in the body conduce, which use to arise before a
crisis, Signs of crisis.
and signs which Galen in the third of crisis Cep. second at large describes,
and, he briefly comprehends in the same book Cap. the tenth when he writes,
that when a crisis is to come there is some new alteration, either about
respiration, or concerning the mind, or the sight, or hearing, or about some of
those which we call briefly, by one name, critical accidents or signs.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the signs of differences in Crisis.
A Good crisis is thus known. The best sign of crisis.
First because critic signs have precedes. Second, because the signs of
concoction have gone before especially in urins and other excrements. Third,
because it is shown on the judicatory day. Fourth, because it happens on the
judicatory day. Fifth, because convenient excretion is made according to the
nature of the disease. Sixth, because the sick after the Crisis is almost freed
from the fever, the Symptoms abate, and the face is of a better color.

But these Crises that differ from the best are known thus; Of the declining
from the best.
because the signs of exquisite concoction have not gone before, nor have they
happened in the state, nor a little before, but in the augmentation, they are
not made on a critical day, the evacuation does not plainly answer to the
nature of the disease, the sick does not well endure that evacuation, the
Pulses are not better, the sick is not eased of his disease, and in the night
which follows the crisis he is not more lightsome, yet amongst the other
evacuations which are went to happen before an absolute concoction, the best of
them is the Hemerhodes.

An evil crisis is known by the signs which are contrary to the best crisis,
Evil.
namely because such a crisis first does not expect the time of concoction;
secondly in the judicatory day it was judicated by il^ signs, or it suddenly
grew upon him without preceding signs; thirdly it is not made on a decretorie
day, but for the most part on the sixth or eigth day; fourthly the evacuation
does not answer to the nature of the disease and the excretion of it self is
evil, fifthly the sick is not eased, the pulse is become worse, the strength
decays, and the sick does totally fall into a worse condition.

CHAP. XV. The signs of a crisis to come by excretion and Imposthumation.
BUt whether a crisis be to be made by emission of morbifique matter, Sgnes of
a crisis to come by excretion.
or by transposition of it into another place, or by imposthumation, the kinds
of diseases, and the motion, time of the year, nature and age of the sick do
show; for if the disease be very acute ariseing from thin and acrid matter, and
the crisis be to come after, the first periods, if nature be strong, the pulse
high, the passages open, and nature accustomed to sweat or some other
evacuation, if it be Summer time, it is a sign that there will be a crisis by
excrements. By an ulcer or imposthumation.


But on the contrary if the disease be not so acute and the matter be thick,
nature weaker, especially if the urines come forth thin and crude for a long
space, if their be debility of the external parts, and propensity of nature to
thrust out humors, to these places; if the time of the year be cold, it is a
token that there will be a crisis occasioned by imposthumation.

And indeed excretions are good when they are evacuated as they ought, and such
as ought, Signs of good or evil ex. cretions.
and in such manner as they ought, and when, and as much as is expedient;
namely when the humor which offends is evacuated, and concocted in due
quantiry, in a critical day, in a right manner, together, and through places
sending them out together; evil evacuations are contrary.

Good imposthumations are those which are made when the matter is concocted,
have laudable substance, Imposthumations good or evil.
namely a figure swelling externally, and sharpened, do equally ripen, and are
not hard round about, and are of a good color, red, yellow, or white,
indifferent bigness, when they continue and go not away until they are
suppurated, and are soon ripened; on the contrary, ill imposthumations swell
not enough without, and are not pointed, they suppurate not all alike, they are
hard about, and cloven into two, their color inclining to red, yellow, or
black, they are greater then is convenient, and they vanish before they are
suppurated, or are ripened very slowly.

CHAP XVI. Through what places there will be excretion and where there will be
impostumation.
THrough what place there will be excretion the inclination of the humor
teaches, and about those parts to which the humor to be expelled is moved, or
through which it is moved, a certain change is perceived.

When a Crifis is to come by the Hemerodes of the Nose, Signs of Hemerodes of
the nose.
the Hypocondries are wont first to be extended without pain, then when the
blood finds the way to the superior parts, it causes difficulty of
respiration, but not long continuing; afterward follows the pain of the head
and neck, and the pulse becomes more vehement, and at times the Arteries are
discerned to beat and pant, and the face and eyes become redder, and the eyes
shed involuntary tears, and shinings, or glistrings are observed in them, or
dimnesse arises, the imagination is also hurt, and a Delirium happens, and
certain red apparitions seem to be before the eyes; and moreover the Hemerodes
being now nigh, the sick begin to scratch their Nose with their fingers: and
these signs are the more certain, if the age of the sick, and nature, and the
time of the year, and the present constitution of the air consent.

If by reason of sweat which happens very often, Of a critic sweat.
a Crisis be to come, there happens^ suppression of Urine for the most part,
and a cold fit hinders it: but the signs of Hemerods are absent, as also the
signs of Vomits, and monthly courses, and when the sweat comes forth the pulse
is soft, waving and flowing, the exterior parts grow hot, and red, the skin is
soft, and a certain hot vapor breaks out through the skin.

That there will be a Crisis by vomit, the motion of the humors to the stomach
show, Vomit.
from whence arises biting of the stomach with pain of the head, a giddiness
and dark cloudy shadows or mists before the eyes, agitation of the lower lip,
much and thin spittle flowing out of the mouth, loathing and disdaining, a cold
chill fit, or trembling, and frigidity of the Hypocondries, a hard and unequal
pulse, and difficulty of breathing.

If a Crisis be to follow by reason of excrements from the Paunch, Excretion of
the ^elly.
there is no proper and exact rule to know it, but only thus, because signs of
a Crisis are present, but signs of a Vomit, or slux of blood, or sweat, or of
courses are wanting, therefore we may conjecture there will be a Crisis of the
belly, and especially if belching wind, rumbling, or breaking wind in the ^elly
be present; also pain of the loins, heaviness of the knees use to happen,
and the Urine is sometimes suppressed, or made more sparingly.

That there will be a Crisis in the same manner, By Urine.
is known by the absence of signs, which use to show the manners of other
Crises, and the sick are not much tossed up and down, nor are they much out of
quiet, but there is present a certain gravity of the Hypocondries, and a
perception of windiness about the bladder, and afterward the Urines begin to
be increased, the dregs of the belly to be retained, and the sick when he makes
water is sensible of certain pain.

It Is a sign that there will be a Crisis by the courses if signs of other
evacuations be absent, By courses.
but when the time when the terms are wont to flow, is present; and moreover
the heat and gravity of the loins concur, when there is pain and stretching
out of the Hypocondries, and other Symptoms which familiarly happen when the
courses are present.

By the Hemerodes that there will be a Crisis is collected, By Hemerodes.
If this flux be not otherwise familiar to the sick, and the signs of other
critical evacuations be absent, and the sick perceive some heat about the
marrow of the back, or pain or extending of the loins, or some pain in the
belly.

If critical excretions are to come through more places, By more parts. In
What place an Impostume will happen.
the signs of more excretions will give you notice thereof.

Lastly, if it be conjectured that nature will remove the morbifique matter
into another place, that place where the Impostumation will be, is known by the
inclination of the matter to those parts whether inferior or superior, although
the matter be thin, it shall rather be moved to the superior then the inferior
parts, and if nature be strong, it rather drives the matter toward the
inferior, then the superior parts.

CHAP XVII. Of the time of the Crisis.
LAstly, it is to be known at what time the Crisis will be, Signs of the time
of Crisis.
but that foreknowledge depends upon the foreknowledge of the State, of which
we have spoken before, but the chief signs are those of concoction and
crudity. If therefore on the first day a manifest sign of concoction appear,
and all the rest portend nothing of evil, the Crisis of the disease is to be
hoped for on the fourth day; but if on the first day there does not appear a
manifest figne of concoction, other days are to be consulted on; and if a
sign appear, in any of the decretory days, or the next quarternary the
Crisis is to be expected.

Moreover those things are to be joined with the signs of concoction; which
the Ideas, magnitude, motion, and manner of a disease affords; for of acute
diseases, some at the most are judged in four days, some are extended to the
seventh, some to the fourteenth, others longer: The alteration of a disease
also shows the Crisis, since it shows whether the Crisis will be on an even
day, or an odd: Also the times of diseases are to be considered, for in noisome
diseases the crisis appears not perfectly before the state, only an imperfect
crisis in the augmentation; but destructive are made either in the beginning,
especially if the disease be vehement and the strength weak: To these signs
also is to be adjoined the consideration of the time of the year, region, age,
temparature of the sick, and such like, of which Galen speaks in the third of
Crisis, cap. 4.

But that a Crisis is now present, Sign that of a present Crisis.
the critical signs spoken of and enumerated before, do show, namely, the
night wherein the Crisis is to come, which precedes the fit, uses to be more
grievous, 3. Aphor. 13. but various perturbations precede in the body,
according as nature is to expel matter through this or that part: Of which
before cap. 13. and Galen 3. of Crises, c. 2.

But oftentimes not only the day but hour of Crises may be foretold, for if
we know the day of the Crisis which is to come, we ought to consider in what
hour of the day the fit uses to come, and what time of the Paroxysme the sick
is most grieved, and that is principally to be observed.

Instead of a conclusion also, it is to be observed what certain, perfect, and
best crises may be known, and the rest to know no otherwise then by the most
probable conjectures, wherefore unless we can presage somewhat certainly
before hand, it is more safe to hold our peace, then rashly pronouncing to be
deceived.

Lastly, Signs of sttable and unstable change of diseas^s.
concerning the Crisis, the stability and instability of the event is to be
weighed, but stability of the event and certain health is to be hoped for, if
nature be strong, and no Symptom remain over and above; if all the rules of a
good Crisis be present, if the humors are thin and hot, which are easily
evacuated, but if nature be weak, and some Symptoms abound, as loathing, and
such like: all the good rules of a Crisis are not present, and the humor be
colder and thicker, it is lawful to presage unconstant health, and such may fall
into relapse.

THE FOURTH BOOK,
PART the I. Of things necessary for the preservation of Health.
CHAP. I. What things appertain to the Doctrine of the preservation of Health,
and how many kinds there are of necessary causes for the preservation and
defense thereof.
HItherto we have explained three parts of Physic, which, as it were, prepare
the way to those things which are proper to Medicine: Now the next is, that we
explain those principal parts of Physic, the Hygeeinall and Therapeuticall,
or the preservative and restorative; yet first of all we will place before hand
certain common Axioms and Maxims to be observed in the method of them both.

1. Nature does nothing rashly.

2. Too much of any thing is an enemy to Nature, Common Maxims.
2. Apho. 51.

3. Nature is the Physician of Diseases, but the Physician the Servant of
Nature, and ought to imitate her, she acting aright:

4. Custom is a second Nature, and those things which are accustomed along
time, although they are worse, they are wont to be less troublesome, then
those things which are not accustomed, or which men are not used unto.

Now concerning the Doctrineof the preservation of Health, The Doctrine of the
desence of health.
it may conveniently be comprehended in two parts; the first is the knowledge
of those things which are, as it were, the materials of health, or the
knowledge which is required of wholesome causes, and of things called
Non-naturall. Secondly, a method necessary for preservation of health, which
teaches how, or in what manner those non-naturall things are to be used to
preserve health.

First, for the causes which are necessary for the maintaining of health, they
are comprehended under the notion of things called non-naturall, and are
conveniently reduced into four ranks, into those things which are taken, those
things which are carried, those which befall the body without, and those things
which are emitted and retained: First therefore we are to speak here of Air,
Meat and Drink, Passions of the Mind, motion, and exercise of body, and rest,
sleep, and watchings, Venery, Bathes, Excretions, and retentions.

CHAP. II. Of Air.
THe Air affects our bodies two ways; Air.
either as it incompasseth us extrinsically, and insinuates it self through the
pores of the skin, or as it is attracted by inspiration, both ways it alters
our bodies, and impresseth its force on them, but that Air is the best which
is temperate, The best Air.
as to the primary qualities, and is pure, and infected with no pollutions, but
is serene, moved or stird with the winds, breathing sweatly with pleasant
gales, and which is sometimes moistened with wholesome showers: Corrupt.
On the contrary, that Air is vicious which is infected with exhalations and
vicious vapors, breaking forth on every side, or is encompassed with Marish
grounds, where are standing waters, or after what manner soever it be impure,
and such as cannot be purified by the blowing of winds; Situation of places.
change the constitution of air.
that which is troubled, or too hot, too cold, too dry, or too moist.

But the constitution of the Air may be polluted through diverse causes; first,
the constitution of the Air depends on the situation and nature of places;
for some Regions are hotter then others, others colder, for by how much the
more any Regions receives the direct beams of the Sun, and by how much the
longer the Sun remains above their Horizon, by so much the Country is the more
hot; for the contrary reasons it is so much the colder.

Yet this cause only does not suffice, The earth and nature of the place.
neither is the same constitution of air in all the inhabitants under the same
parallel; secondly, the mould and proper nature of the earth conduces to the
constitution of the temperature of the air, where in is to be observed what
the nature of the ground is, fat, dirty, filthy, gravelly, stony, sandy,
whither the place be high or low, what situation there is of mountains, and
valleys, what winds it often admits, and from what climates, whether the the
sea, or any lakes be near it, whether it brings forth mettalls from whence
malignant air may be exhaled.

The mountains also change the constitution of air, Situation of Mountains.
according as the blowings of certain winds drive away, and admit it, and if
the mountains drive away the North Wind, but admit the South, it comes to pass
that the places are hotter and moister, but on the contrary if by situation of
the Mountains, the blowing of the South be hindered, and the North admitted the
place is colder and dryer.

The winds bring forth great mutations, Winds.
also the Oriental winds are more temperate, as also the Occidentall, but
these are moister, the Notherne are cold and dry, and have power to bind and
dry our bodies, the Southern are hot and moist, therefore as the Region or
situation is more or less disposed to this or that wind, so it obtains this
or that constitution of Air: Regions, and Countries exposed to the Oriental
Sun, are more wholesome then those which are exposed to the Septentrionall, and
hot winds; as also then those which are exposed to the West.

The vicinity of the Sea also and lakes conduce much to the peculiar nature of
Air, The vicinity of the Sea and of lakes.
unless interjected Mountains prohibit, for from moist places of this nature
many exhalations are drawn up, which mingles themselves with Air and moisten
it, and indeed the humidity will be increased if the Sea or a lake be situated
on the South, but if toward North, the frigidity increase; if a lake of the
Sea be Oriental, and the rising Sun not far off, it draws abundance of moist
exhalations to those places, but if the Sun be more remote, the Vapors with
the beams of the Sun wax hot and bring dryness to that place, but less
moisture comes from lakes, and waters situated to the West.

Metallic pits for the most part sends forth filthy malignant Vapors,
Metallic Mines.
and communicates them to the neighboring places; Dens do the same and Caves,
exhaling venomous Air; Woods that are too thick, take away the light of the
Sun and Moon, and hinder the motion and agitation of the Air.

Thirdly the seasons of the year change the Air which indeed Astronomers
constitute equal according to the motion of the Sun, Times of the year.
and Zodiac being divided into four parts, but Physicians principally regard
these times, according to the temper of the Air, and call that the Spring when
the constitution of the Air is more temperate, when we neither grow stiff
with cold, nor sweat with heat; but the Summer when the same is hot and dry;
Winter when it is cold and moist, neither do they appoint these seasons to be
equal in all Regions.

Hence the Spring as being the most temperate, The spring.
or as Hippocrates calls it, hot and moist, that is, when calidity moderatly
overcomes frigidity, and humidity moderatly exceeds dryness, it is the most
wholesome time of the year, and although diseases are generated in the Spring
time, yet the Spring of its self does not produce them, but the vicious
humors which are gathered together in the Winter time are driven out by the
heat of the Spring.

The Summer, Summer.
because it is hot and dry makes bodies hotter and dryer, rarifies, dissolves,
and renders them weaker, it attenuates humors, and kindles them, from whence
choleric and sharp humors are collected.

Autumn, Autumn.
because that in the same, Morning and Evening, the cold prevails, about mid
day heat, its constitution is mixed with cold and heat, and by reason of this
inequality of Air, it is very obnoxious to diseases, and the blood at this
time of the year is diminished, and mellancholly abounds, bodies are thickened,
and pores shut.

In Winter as being cold and moist, Winter.
phlegm is chiefly increased, and bodies are rendered obnoxious to
distillations.

All which nevertheless are so to be received if you compare one hour with
another, or the times of the year observe their natural constitution 3. Apho.
8. but if the seasons of the year are unstable, diverse diseases according to
the various constitutions of the year, arise, of which in the self same Apho.
6.11.12.13.

Out of all which it is manifest that those scituations of places are more
wholesome wherein the constitution of the Air is temperate, the Spring
temperate, The most wholesome situation of places:
the heat of Summer sufficient to ripen fruits, and grains, Autumn colder,
Winter cold, yet not offending our bodies with two much frigidity, where there
is also a fruitful soil, men endued with a comely habit of body, well
colored in the face, laudable in their manners, ingenious, and rejoicing in
their prosperous health.

CHAP. III. Of meat.
AS for what belongs to meat and drink, Aliment what it is.
wherewith the substance of our bodies is renewed and increased, it is aliment,
which can increase the substance of our body, and it is either properly so
called, because it nourishes our bodies only, or Medicinal, because it also
does alter our bodies.

But aliments are taken from two kinds of things, Food whence to be taken.
either from plants growing out of the earth, or from living creatures; and
those things which are taken from living creatures, are either the parts of
animalls, or those things which proceed from them, as eggs, milk, and those
which are made from these, as butter, cheese, honey, and such like. Differences
of aliments.


The difference of food is great, for some meats are of a good, others of an
ill nourishment and juice; some are easily, others with difficulty concocted,
some are easily corrupted in the stomach, others not. The best meat.


That is the best food which is easily concocted, nourishes much, affords much
aliment, is not easily corrupted, nor endued with any ill quality, and leaves
few excrements, Unwholesome.
but that food is unwholesome, out of which an ill juice is generated, and
which easily putrifies.

That food is accounted firm which brings forth much nourishment, but wants
great strength of heat for concoction, Firm.
but that is infirm which is easily concocted; and nourishes, but affords but
little nourishment, and such as is soon dispersed.

Meats from plants.
THe most ancient, Fruits or Grains.
and most familiar kind of aliment are plants, and those things which grow out
of the earth, amongst which in the first place are all sorts of Corn and
grain, which the Greeks call by the name of fitou, and in the first place truly
Corn is hot and moist, and beyond all the rest affords much nourishment and
that firm and most wholesome, out of which although diverse kinds of food are
made, yet the best amongst them is bread, but that leavened, which agrees to
every age, and is conveniently taken with all meats.

A sort of Barley which they commonly call spelt, Spelt.
is the next in nature to Corn, and is the middle as it were betwixt wheat
and Barley, and it nourishes more then Barley, but it is weaker then Wheat, out
of this spelt is made a kind of frumenty, or Barley broth, Frument. Bye.
of which Pliny 18. Book 11. Chap.

Rye, of which bread is made for the most part in Germany, and other parts, is
hotter then Barley, yet not so hot as Wheat, and the bread which is made of it
has more aliment then Barley bread, and that stronger, yet it is something more
hard of concoction, then Wheaten bread.

The bread which is made of Barley is colder, and yields not so firm
nourishment, Barley. Partisan of Barley.
of Barley also is made ptisan, which being taken after what manner soever,
affords good nourishment both to those that are sick, and those that are well,
and is no way or clammy, or viscide, but easily passes through and cleanses
the passages, yet the aliment which it affords is a little thinner,

Rice is hot and dry, Rice.
or rather temperate, it nourishes much, especially being boiled with milk it
increases seed, it does not easily putrify, stops the Looseness, it is hardly
concocted, and yields nourishment somewhat thicker, and the frequent use of it
may easily occasion obstructions. Millet.


Millet and the grain like it, called in Latin Panicum i. e. Indian Oats,
are almost of the same nature, and are cold, and dry, and stop fluxes of the
belly, neither do they afford much nourishment, nor very profitable, yet millet
is the better: Oats are hot and afford nourishment of a better account;
Pottages and Broathes are made of them, which may be given to those that are
sick or well, which stops Looseness of the belly.

The Corn called Saracenicum, Saracenicum.
of which Pottages are wont to be made, yields nourishment profitable for men
that are given to daily labor, and it is hard of concoction, it begets wind,
and offends the eyes.

Beans are cold and dry, and flatulent, Beans.
hard of concoction and crude, and yield excrementicious nourishment, yet not
visced, but have some cleansing power, they make the senses dull, and noises
seem troublesome.

Pease are cold, and dry, and flatulent, Pease.
especially the green, yet they yield better nourishment then Beans, but not
so plentiful.

Parsenips are hot, and dry, Parsnips.
and have greater force of cleansing then Beans, and therefore more useful in
Physic then dyer.

Lastly Lentils are the worst food, cold, and dry, thick, Lentills
of evil and vicious juice, and hard of concoction, they fill the head with
thick Vapors, they hurt the eyes, they engender thick blood, and are chiefly
hurtful to melancholy persons.

After grains, instead of food, Pot-herbes are given, Pot Herbs.
and the leaves of the Herbs, Branches, Roots, and the fruits of them, as also
of Trees, which nevertheless, yield not so good and profitable aliment as
Corn, but many or them are too Medicinal; yet all of them are better boiled
then raw.

Lettice that is sown is esteemed the best of all Pot Herbs, Lettice
and affords more nourishment then other Pot Herbs, yet it is cold, and moist,
and Medicinal, and moreover, in a hot constitution of Air, it is conveniently
given to young men, and those which abound with choler, and those which have
hot stomaches, it provokes sleep, allayes the heat of the reins, yet too much
use thereof diminishes the natural heat.

Cabbage is accounted by most to be cold, and dry, Cabbage
yet in the juice thereof a certain bitterness and acrimony is perceived,
which has a force to stir the paunch, it is hard of concoction, affords little
nourishment, and that thick and Melencholy; from whence fuliginous Vapors fly
into the head, and produce turbulent sleep, and weaken the sight, its malignity
is corrected if it be boiled with sat meats, the staulks are worse then the
broad leaves, and are to be eaten only by those which are used to much labor.

Spinnage cools and moistens, Spinach.
affords little nourishment, yet not so evil as Orach, or Blitum, which is a
kind of Beet, it generates cold and serous humors in the stomach, unless it
be corrected with pepper and, oil, or butter, it is not laudable, and it
begets wind.

Beets, Beets.
Blitum, Orach, and Mallows can scareely be used with profit, or benefit for
aliment only, but are more beneficially taken, when there is need to loosen,
refrigerate, and moisten the belly; and Beet indeed is hot, and dry, and takes
away obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and has a different substance, the
juice is detergent, wherefore it loosneth the belly, but the substance stops
the same.

Blitum, Blitum, Orach, Mallows.
Orach, and Mallows loosen the belly only by humectation, they nourish little,
they yield a watery juice, and have of themselves no pleasing savor unless
they are dressed, with Butter or Oil, and other Sawces.

Asparagus, Asparagus. Young Hops.
to which the young branches or tender sprigs of Hops are next like unto,
neither heat, nor manifestly cool, they are grateful to the taste, and cause
appetite, yet afford little nourishment, and therefore do afford not so good
nourishment; they have a detergent faculty, and provoke Urine, they cleanse the
Reins, and open obstructions of the Liver, and of the other Intralls.

Garden, Cresses. Mustardseed.
or Water Cresses, and Mustard Seed may be used instead of Sawces, but not as
nourishment, they are hot and dry, and of a biting taste, they attenuate crude
meats, as also crude and thick humors.

Onions afford little nourishment, Onions.
they are acrid and have a heating, cutting, and extenuating faculty, and
inflame the blood, and together with the discussed thinner parts they leave
behind them a thick juice, they irritate Venus, they are all hurtful to the
head, eyes, teeth, and gumms, they cause turbulent Dreams.

In raw Garlic there is almost no nourishment, Garlic.
in boiled very little, and that bad, but there is manifest heat and dryness
in it, and a power of extenuating thick and viscide humors, and of cutting
them, and taking away cold, and it is the best remedy to convert the pravity of
waters, as also against the Plague, Leeks.
and venomous air: Leeks have almost the same power.

Raddish.
The Roots called Raddishes which we use being dipped in Salt affords little
nourishment, but are rather instead of medicinal knacks, they heat beyond the
second degree, and have a tart taste, they cut phlegm, attenuate, provoke
Urine, and expel sand from the Veins.

Wild Raddishes have the same force, Wild Radish.
but are more powerful, which are fit for sauce, but not of aliment.

Turnips, Rape-roots round are slowly concocted, Rape.
and fill the belly with wind, especially when they are raw, but boiled they
are easier digested, and afford aliment enough, and therefore not so hurtful,
but are hot and moist.

Long Turnips are almost of the same nature, Tu^nips.
but of a better taste, and yield less thick and flatulent juice, and afford
strong nourishment, they stimulate Venus.

Parsley is hot and dry, provokes Urine and courses, Parsley.
opens obstructions, purges the Reins, and bowels, yet it afford little
nourishment.

Garden Parsnips yield little, hot and dry, Parsnips.
and not very good nourishment, they cause lust, provoke Urine, and bring down
courses.

Red Beets which are pickled with Vinegar, Red Beets.
the seed of Carawayes, and the roots of wild Raddishes are used rather instead
of Sawces, then as food, since they nourish very little.

The fruit of Plants are various; Melons.
Melons are pleasant to the taste, and send forth an Aromatic smell, but they
are of a watery moist substance, not without coldness, whereby they quench
thirst, and causes Urine, they cleanse the Reins, but they are easily
corrupted, and being corrupted, become as it were of a venomous nature, and
stir up choler, or generate Fevers, whereby many great men are killed, and
therefore they ought to be eaten at the first course, that they may the easier
descend through the Paunch, and after the eating of them, some food of good
juice is to be taken, and good Wine is to be drank, that the corruption of them
may be hindered.

Cucumbers, are also cold, but not so moist, Cucumbers
and the juice not so hurtful, nor are they so easily corrupted in the
stomach, they are most conveniently taken, before they are ripe being pickled
in Vinegar, or Brine, and Pepper, and they are least offensive to those which
have hot stomachs. Artechocks


Artechocks heat and dry, to the second degree, they are hard of concoction,
and afford not very good nourishment, they are windy, and stimulate Venus,
unless this be rather to be attributed to the seasoning, or dressing of them.

Strawberies, Strawberies.
are cold, and moist, they are profitable to those that are troubled with
choler in the stomach, they cool the liver, they restrain the heat of the
blood and choleric humors, they allay thirst, and therefore are beneficial
in hot constitutions of bodies, they have thin juice, purge the reins, cause
urine, but are easily corrupted in the stomach, and therefore ought to be eat,
the first.

Now follows the fruits of Trees, Pears.
and frutices, first of pears there are diverse kinds, nor are they all of the
same faculty, the austere, and sharp are astringent, and cooling, and hurtful
to the stomach, and Guts; sweet are more temperate, yet almost all are of a
cold, and moist nature, only some are hot and moist. and moreover, more apt to
corruption, they are not unpleasing to the stomach, in the first place being
taken they stop a looseness, but being taken after other meat, they loosen
the belly, and shut the mouth of the stomach, they are better boiled, then raw.

There are diverse sorts of Apples which discover themselves by their taste,
Apples.
the sower are colder then the sweet, and of a thinner, and less flatulent
substance; the austere and sharp are yet colder, and of a thick substance, and
descend more slowly through the paunch, and stay it, yet their violence is
corrected by boiling; and sower, austere, and sharp Apples are to be used
rather instead of medicines then aliment, they all afford ill juice, but those
are most hurtful which are watery, and for the most part have no taste; the
best are sweet ones, with an aromatic taste and smell, and such as afford an
indifferent quantity of aliment, and that not evil, they strengthen the heart,
exhilerate the mind, and are very beneficial to those which are troubled with
Melancholy.

Quinces are cold and dry, Quinees.
and have an astringent faculty, they are harder of concoction, afford little
nourishment, and that thick, they strengthen the stomach, and stop vomiting,
and if they are taken after meat, they hinder Vapors so that they cannot
easily ascend to the head, and they loosen the belly, but being taken before
meals, they stop a looseness; being taken raw they hurt the nerves, and often
cause fits of the cholick

Peaches are cold, and moist, and are easily corrupted, Peaches.
and afford little nourishment, and therefore are to be eaten sparingly, and
warily, and indeed before meals, not after other meats, neither is water, nor
any cold drink, to be drunk after them, but wine; being dried they are less
hurtful, and especially being boiled in Wine, their pravity, if they had any,
it is taken away.

Apricoks which are well known to the Persians, Apricocks.
in goodness are beyond Peaches, and more pleasing to the stomach, and are not
so easily corrupted.

Medlers are cold and dry, Medlers.
and are not eaten till they are rotten, they afford little nourishment and are
slowly concocted, they stop the belly and all fluxes, they stay vomitting, and
agrece well with a choleric stomach.

Sour Sherryes have a chooling faculty, Cherryes.
are easily concocted, and descend through the belly, they cool the stomach,
and liver, they quench thirst, and raise an appetite, and are not so easily
corrupted, nor are they of so hurtful a juice, but the sweet ones are far
inferior to the sharp ones in goodness, by reason of the moisture abounding,
and are easly corrupted, and generated urred humors, and Worms, in putred
fevers.

There are diverse kinds of Plumbs, all of them cold, Plumbs.
and moist, the sweet ones are not so cold by nature, yet they mitigate the
acrimony of choler, and therefore agree most with colerick persons, they are
easily concocted, and pass through the belly, those that are fresh, alter most
powerfully, they mollify the paunch, being taken before meat, but with their
moisture they scatter abroad many excrements, and that crude, neither do they
generate so good juice, yet some are softerthen others, those which abound most
with a crude and moist iuce, they are the worst, the white, and waxen color,
or yellow, are the worst, and afford ill juice, but the best are Damask Prunes,
and those which are nearest to these are green, but the dry are more fit for
nourishment, and afford better aliment for those which are weaker in stomach,
Plumbs are not convenient; for they loosen itstone.

Mulburies moisten, cool, quench thirst, Mulburies.
mitigare the heat of choler, they nourish little, they easily pass through
the belly, but if they are retained, they easily are corrupted, and become
putred, and acquire an ill nature, wherefore they are to be eaten when the
stomach is empty only, and not overspred with peccant humors; that they may on
a sudden descend and pass through the paunch.

Figs are hot and moist, Figs.
by nature they nourish more then other fruits, they easily descend and go
through the belly, they have a penetrating, and abstergent faculty, yet too
much use of them begets wind; dry Figs are hotter, and dryer, yet acquire a
power of cleanseing, opening, and attenuating, yet they also loosen the belly,
drive humors to the external parts, being often taken and plentifully, they
cause sweates, and generate blood, not very good, but such as is apt to putrify.

Sweet grapes are hotter, Grapes.
and for that reason cause thirst; sharp, and austere are colder; those that
are fit to make Wine, are betwixt these extremes; those that are fresh
gathered, afford little nourishment, and are flatulent, and if they are
detained long in the stomach they are corrupted and dilate the belly, and stir
up cholick fits, they cause the spleen to swell, and fill the stomach and liver
with crude humors, and always the fresh gathered serve rather for pleasure,
then for health; the austere and sower Grapes, are colder, and strengthen and
bind the belly, the sweet ones are hotter and afford more nourishment; those
which have a mixed taste, obtain mixed faculties, but the sweet, which
participate something of sharpness, are commended before the rest, they are
pleasing to the stomach, grateful to the liver, as also they are said, by a
certain propriety, to be advantageous to the whole substance, they are helpful
to the breasts, and strengthen all the natural members; those which are without
stones are called Corinthian, they loosen the belly more, but those which have
seed strengthen the stomach.

Amongst Nuts, Almonds.
the best are sweet Almonds, they are temperately hot and moist, and yields
store of nourishment, and of good juice and moderate, they attenuate and
cleanse, for which reason they are the best food for immaciated bodies, and
they replenish the intrails, and the whole body with convenient nourishment,
and such as is not apt to corruption, they purge the breast, open the passages
of urin, and cause sleep, but they are not so convenient for a choleric
stomach, nor to be given in choleric Fevers.

Walnuts are hot and dry, especially dried, Walnuts:
for your green ones are moister, and are not so hot, and therefore are eaten
safer, but the dry generate choler, and offend the Orifice of the stomach, and
hurt the Gullet and Windpipe, and cause a cough, and generate pain in the
head, commonly the use of them is commended after Fish, because with their heat
and dryness they prevent the corruption of Fish.

Hasle-nuts afford more nourishment, then Walnuts, Haslenuts.
but they are colder, yet they are hot and dry, they are hardly digested, and
afford a thick juice, more earthly then Walnuts.

Chestnuts are hot and dry, Chestnuts.
and Galen conceives they have no ill juice, as all the rest of the fruits of
Trees, if they are well concocted in the stomach, yet they are harder of
digestion, and are distributed more slowly, yet they afford more durable
nourishment, they bind the belly, and if they are eaten in too great plenty,
they cause wind.

Toadstools and Muskeroms for the most part are cold, Musheroms
they yield a watery and thick nourishment; Toadstools are preferred before
Musheroms: yet all of these are not to be taken without danger, because they do
not only generate ill juice, but oftentimes there is poison in them.

Lastly, Oil.
Oil drawn out of ripe Olives affords nourishment temperate, and for the most
part agreeable to our nature, and can correct the pravity of other aliments,
and amend the crudity of Herbs, it also mollifies and loosens the belly, is
takes away all sharpness; it helps Ruptures, and such as are bursten, and
mitigates pain.

Meats from living Creatures.
IN the second place many living Creatures supplies us with convenient
nourishment agreeable to our nature, Aliments of living Creatures.
as being nearer and more familiar to our nature, and less exceed in the
qualities, and afford better juice.

Either the parts of living Creatures are taken as food, or those things which
are taken from them, yet are not the parts of living Creatures, and amongst the
latter the first is Milk, which is of a cold and moist, or rather of a
temperate and moist nature, and yields nourishment, the best by much if it be
rightly concocted in the stomach, and be good in its self.

There are three parts of milk, Parts of milk.
the butirous, the serous, and the caseous; the butirous is of an oylely and
hot substance, the serous is watery, yet having some mixture with saltness; but
the caseous is cold and try, and indeed Cowes milk is the fattest and thickest,
and contains more butter then the milk of other Animals, and therefore
nourishes more, and is most agreeable to us, and has more of the caseous part
then Ewes milk. Gotes milk is in the midst betwixt these. Sound Animals only
generates good milk, but sick generate vicious: Dry Herbs also cause the milk
to be thick, but green, and such as are full of juice makes better, wherefore
the milk at the latter end of the Spring is best, for by how much the thinner
it be, and more serous, by so much it is the easier concocted, and sooner
passes through the belly, Best milk. Antter.
and obstructs less, but it nourishes least; the best milk therefore is that
which is of a good smell, and sweet to the taste, of a middle consistence,
neither too thick, nor to thin, nor serous, nor caseous overmuch, of a white
color, which yields good aliment, and that plentifully and constantly enough,
especially for lean bodies, as being that which is elaboured by so many
concoctions, and is become familiar to our nature, that it is easily, truly
concocted, as in unwholesome bodies it is casily corrupted, in a cold stomach it
easily grows sour, in a hot, it is turned into an adust smell, and choler,
and causes pain in the head, wherefore it is hurtful to those that are sick
of putred Fevers, and to such as have pains in the head, as also to those
which are troubled with diseases of the eyes, or are obnoxious to breed
gravel, those that are obstructed in the Liver, and inflamed in the
Hypocondries, 5. Apho. 64. but the worst corruption thereof is, when it is
coagulated, which may be prevented, if any Salt, Sugar, ot Honey be added to
it: It is most conveniently taken on an empty stomach, nor are other meats to
be eaten presently after, especially the use of Wine after milk is unwholesome.

As for the parts of milk, Butter is used in our Countries instead of food, and
sauce, it is hot and moist, and almost of the same nature with Oil, yet it
nourishes more, and is a sauce for many things, it is used more advantageously
then Oil, it is pleasant to the taste, it is easily concocted, and nourishes much,
yet it agrees not with those that have a moist and slippery stomach, yet it is
far better to be taken before other meats, then after; nor is it so agreeable
to hot natures, it is most conveniently eaten with bread.

Sour milk is colder, and agrees not with colder stomachs, Sour Milk.
but with hotter, especially in the Summer, and in very hot weather.

Cheese is hardly concocted, and yields thick nourishment, Cheese.
and therefore stops the belly, opens the Pores, and affords matter fit for the
generation of stones; but that which is old affords ill nourishment, the new
yields better: the new and salt is as yet cold and moist, and of a flatulent
nature, the worst is the oldest, that which is of a middle age, which is
neither hard nor soft, and is moderatly sweat and fat, is the best, but
whatsoever it be, it is always to be eaten after other meats, and sparingly; but
since there is great differences of Cheeses, according to the nature of living
Creatures, and of place, and pasture: That of the Ewe is the best, it is easier
concocted then others, and affords better nourishment: Cowes milk is next to
this in goodness, the Goats is worst of all; yet that Cheese is better, when
the buterous and caseous parts are not separated, but are made altogether into
Cheese, but those Cheeses are worse which are made of the caseous part only of
the milk.

The serous part of the milk nourishes least, Whey.
and is instead of Medicine rather then aliment, yet it is most fitly used for
the evacuation of serous and adust humors; it consists of two parts, the one
salt and participating of acrimony, and is altogether hot, which is the lesser
part, the other is watery, and is the greater part, for which it is called cold
and moist whey

Eggs, but especially of Hens, are food with us; Eggs.
an Egg consists of two parts, the Yolk, and the White, those are moderatly
hot, and moist, and of the best nourishment; these cold and dry which afford
also much nourishment, and that lasting enough, but hard of concoction: The
newest Eggs are the best, and nourish most, and soonest, and yield good
aliment; but the stalest are the worst, and the corruption of Eggs the worst:
And they do not so well agree with those whose Liver or stomachs are filled
with vicious humors, and in Choleric and hot stomachs they are easily
corrupted, and turned into choler; As for the dressing of them, they are best
when they are soft, and to be supt, being boiled in seething water, but those
which are roasted in ashes are not so good; those that are boiled till they are
hard, although they afford more solid nourishment, yet they are worse, but the
worst of all are those which are fried in a Drying Pan, especially in Oil.

Honey is of a hot and dry nature, Honey.
in the second degree yet that which is whitest is not so hot, and is more
commodious for those that are sound, but all honey is medicinal aliment,
convenient for old men and those of cold natures, but because it easily turns
into choler, it is not fit for hot natures, nor for the Liver, but it is good for
the Lungs, otherwise it has a cleansing faculty, Sugar.
and resists putrefaction.

Sugar, although it be not taken from living Creatures, but is made out of
Reeds, has a great agreement with honey, yet it is less hot and dry then honey,
and therefore it is profitably mingled both with hot and cold things, yet in
those that are very hot, it easily turns into choler, otherwise it has an
abstersive faculty without sharpness.

Aliments which are taken from the parts of Animals are many, Food from the
parts of Animals. Feet.
which both according to the kinds of living Creatures, and according to their
parts do vary. The feet of Animals, of what kind soever, are cold and dry, they
have little flesh, and scarce any blood, they yield a cold juice, dull and
glutinous, by reason whereof the broth of boiled feet is congealed.

The Heart is of a hard and dry nature, Heart.
and fibrous, neither is it easily concocted, but if it be well concocted it
yields neither ill juice, nor a little, and that stable and firm.

The Liver it self is hard to be concocted, Liver.
and yields thick nourishment, which is slowly distributed, it is of good juice
and firm, but there is great variety in this part, not only according to the
kinds and ages of living Creatures, but also by reason of their food and full
nourishment; for Animals which are not grown to their full state, and which use
better and fuller feeding, have also a greater Liver, more delicate and fuller
of juice.

The Spleen affords little nourishment, Spleen.
and that melancholy, it is hardly concocted, and slowly distributed.

The substance of the Lungs is light and thin, Lungs.
and nourishes less, yet it is easier concocted, nor does it afford ill
nutriment.

The Reins afford not very good but thick aliment, Reins.
and the Reins of younger Quadrupeds, or Calves are of better juice, and are
easier concocted.

The Tongue excels the other parts in pleasantness of taste and goodness of
aliment, Tongue.
it is also easily concocted.

The brain yields pitutious and thick juice, Brain.
and is not easily concocted, nor distributed, and causes loathing.

The Stomach and Guts of Animals are of a harder substance, and of a colder and
dryer nature, Stomach.
they are harder of concoction, and not to be concocted except it be by a
strong stomach, and that they be well boiled, they yield little blood, and that
cold, and not very good.

Flesh that is full of Muscles, Musculous flesh.
which is frequently taken instead of food, differs principally according to
the kinds of living Creatures.

Swines flesh nourishes very plentifully, Swines flesh.
and yields firm nutriment, and therefore is most profitable, for those that
are in their flourishing age, sound, strong, and which are exercised with much
labor, yet because too much humidity abounds in it, it yields a thick and slow
juice, and many excrements, it agrees not with all men, especially with those
that are sick, wherefore many other sorts of meat are preferred before it.

Brawn, or the flesh of tame Bores, Brawn.
so that it be of younger Bores, is the best, because it has not so much
excrementitious moisture.

A Lamb before it is a year old has moist flesh, Lamb.
slimy and viscid, but when it is a year old, it is very good nourishment,
consisting of good and plentiful juice, and indifferent lasting, and easy of
concoction, but in those which are exercised with hard working, it is easy
discussed, and aliment that is not solid is made thereof.

But because Lambs that are of a longer growth, Weather Mutton.
become Sheep, and the flesh is then become ungrateful, and not of so good
juice, their stones are cut out, and they are made Weathers, the younger
whereof are the best meat, and it is easily concocted, and generates good blood,
and therefore agrees both with those that are well, and those that are sick.

But Mutton of Ewes is evil, Ewe Mutton.
both by default of the tempera^and by frequenting of copulation, and of
bringing forth young, it is hardly concocted, evil, and dull, and viscid juice
is bred thereof.

Veale is temperate, render, and affords good juice, Veale.
of a pleasant taste, yet it yields somewhat a thicker juice then Lamb or Mutton.

Beef is thick flesh, hard of concoction, B^ese.
and does not easily pass through the Veins, it does not participate of
viscidity and sliminesse, the frequent use thereof causes dry and melancholy
humors in the body, especially Cow-beef, or that of an Ox, which with age and
much working has contracted dryness and hardness of flesh, or is hardened
with salt and smoke.

Goats flesh affords good nourishment, Gotes-flesh
and may easily be preferred before the rest of Sylvestrous Animalls, in
goodness of aliment, facility of concoction, pleasantness of taste, and
paucity of excrements, yet they are something drier.

Venison is hard of concoction; Venison.
and generates melancholy juice, especially if the Venison be grown to
ripeness of years, and does obstruct the bowels.

Hares flesh is accounted a great dainty, Haresflesh.
yet by Physicians it is numbered amongst those aliments which yield a melancholy
juice, and therefore are not so good for those who have dry bodies, yet if they
are well concocted, they are thought to occasion a good color in the face, if
they are well boiled, the juice is not evil.

There are many kinds of Birds, amongst the which nevertheless, nay, amongst
flesh, the Hens are accounted the chief, Hens.
for they are temperate, easy of concoction, of good juice, and contain few
excrements, and thence they procreate good blood, and yield most profitable
food for those which are not much exercised with labor, yet there is a certain
difference amongst this kind of Fowl, the best is the flesh of a Capon; the
next is that of Chickins, yet their flesh is moister, Hens are dryer, the flesh
of Cocks is harder and dryer, the Hens flesh affords nourishment not firm
enough for those who are day-labourers.

A Turky-cock also yields much and laudable nourishment, Turkiecocks.
nor is it inferior to Capons, neither in taste, or goodness of juice, it is
profitable food for those which are in health.

The flesh of Patridge is temperate, Patridges
something inclining to dryness, it is easy of concoction, it affords excellent
juice and much nourishment, and few excrements, and is very good food for those
that are in health, and those that are troubled with the French Pox.

A Phesant and a Quail, Phesants. Quails. Pigeons.
which are the best nourishment and most excellent food for such as are in
health. There is no small variety of Doves, the better sort are those that are
of the Mountains and Woods, yet the flesh of all of them affords a thick
Melancholy and excrementious juice, and is not easily concocted; and it is
hurtful in putred Fevers.

The flesh of tame Geese does abound more with excrements, then that of wild,
Geese.
yet the flesh of them both is hard of concoction, and yield no good juice, but
vicious, and excrementitious, and such as is easily putrifyed, but if one have
a strong stomach, and it be well concocted, it affords plenty of nourishment,
but the liver of Geese that are well fatted, are temperate meat, most
pleasant, easey of concoction, of good juice, and much nourishment.

A Thrush is easily concocted, A Thrush.
yields good juice not excrementitious, and affords nourishment firm enough.

A Lark also, generates excellent juice, A Lark.
and is easily concocted, and by a peculiar faculty, it is reported not only to
preserve one from the cholick, but also to cure it.

The flesh of Black-birds both for pleasantness and facility of concoction,
Blackbirds.
and goodness of juice is somewhat inferior to that of the Thrush.

A Quail is hot and moist, hard of concoction, A Quail.
of ill nourishment and full of excrements, and affords matter fit for the
generation of fevers.

Fishes are colder and moister food, Fish.
then the flesh of terrestiall Animalls, and scarce afford so good juice as
Corn, and fruits, and other vegetables, they easily putrify also, and if they
are corrupted, they acquire a quality most averse to our natures.

But there is a great variety of fishes, Salmon.
a Salmon in the first place, has tender flesh, grateful to the palate, it is
easily concocted, affords good juice, and is the best amongst fishes; when they
are pickled with salt, and hardened with smoke, they are much worse.

Troutes amongst fishes which are bred in fresh waters are the best, and are
next in goodness to a Salmon, Trout.
easy of concoction, full of much good, and thin juice, but the greater of
them, have flesh not a little excrementitious, fat, and full of viscidity;
those are commended before others, which have red flesh, and many red spots,
and that have hard flesh and participate not of viscidity, and fat, those are
easier concocted, descend sooner, Soles.
and have less excrementitious juice.

Amongst Sea fishes, the sole is highly commended, which has delicate flesh,
and is easy of concoction. Gudgeons.


Gudgeons properly so called are the best of taste amongst the fishes, and very
wholesome aliment, easy to be concocted, and such, as remain not long in the
stomach, and are profitable, both for pleasure, and health, and may safely be
given to those that are sick, to which other little fish are alike, as dace and
minners, and such like.

A pick, A Pike.
especially of the smaller growth, has hard flesh, it is concocted easily, and
easily distributed; and has not many excrements, and may also be given to
those that are sick.

A Perch also has tender flesh, A Perch.
and such as will easily part asunder, and no fat, and glutinosity, it is easy to
be digested, the juice is not evil, yet it affords weaker aliment, and such as
is easily discussed.

A Breame has soft and moist flesh, A Breame.
and yields a juice very excrementicious, and is to be eaten as for the most
part, all other fish are, not; it is not to be mixed with diverse kinds of meats.

A Barbell, A Barbell.
whose eggs perchance gave an occasion to some to suppose, that he hears very
bad, it causes not only pains of the belly, but also vomiting, and disturbes
the paunch, and stirs up choler, from the use whereof we ought to abstain, but
the flesh thereof is very white, easy of concoction, and distribution; and
affords aliment of good juice.

The flesh of Eeles is sweet but glutinous with fat, and abounding with much
moisture, Ecles.
it generates ill juice, and the use thereof is not safely granted to those
that are sick, nor to those that are well, especially if they be taken
plentifully.

A Lampry is meat of a grateful and delicate taste, A Lampry.
if it be rightly prepared, and sauced, yet it puts not away quite its
slimynesse, and glutinosity by this means, and for that reason they are not
numbered by Physicians, amongst fishes of the best sort.

A Tench is neither of a pleaseing taste, A Tench.
nor easy to be concocted, nor good aliment; but yields a filthy slimy juice,
and such as is easily corrupted, neither is it easily distributed, and it
brings forth obstructions.

A Herring has white flesh, A Herring.
apt to cleave into small pieces, and has a good taste, not hard of
concoction, it affords good juice not thick, and glutinous, it is pickled with
salt, and hardened with the smoke, but then it is harder of digestion, and yields
not so good juice.

Amia a fish which has no English name, but is like a Thunny, Amia.
has soft flesh, yields good juice, but not much aliment.

A Sturgeon has hard fat, and glutinous flesh, A Sturgon.
which yields thick juice, yet not hurtful, and it is not easily concocted, yet
the younger are more pleasant to the taste, and easier concocted, and yield much
nourishment.

A Sole, Plaice, and Turbet, are white fish, A Sole Plaice. Turbet.
yield good juice, and plentiful nourishment, and such as is not easily
corrupted, but being dried, they become harder, and are harder of concoction.

Cod-fish, Stock Fish.
(or rather stock fish) although whilst it is fresh it is said to have friable
flesh, and tender, of good juice, and easy of concoction, yet being dried, it
becomes so hard, that it is to be knocked with Hammers, and Clubs, and to be
pulled into pieces in water before it be boiled, whence it affords thick
nourishment, and hard of concoction, and is to be eaten without damage only by
those who have very healthy stomachs, and are given to daily labor.

Oysters have a soft juice, Oysters.
and therefore irritare the belly to dejection, and stimulate Venus, they
nourish less, and are hard of concoction, and easily generate obstructions.

Terrestiall Cockels, or Snailes, Snailes.
are accounted for dainties by many, yet the flesh of them is hard of
concoction, and requires a healthy stomach and the addition of many sawces, yet
they remain hard, and generate thick, and black blood, but that part which is
said to be given in broth for Hecticks is only in the hinder part of the
snaile, which Aristotle in the fourth of the History of Animals Cap. the
fourth, calls Micona, that is poppey, as he pleased to call it, which has in
it a certain glutinous, and caseous substance, easily dissolved, yielding to
the teeth, tender, the which is not hard of concoction, and nourishes much.

Crab fish, which have no tails, and Lobsters, Lobsters.
and crawfish which have tails, and are frequent in our Countries, seem to
have no great difference in their nature, all of them are hard of concoction,
and are not well concocted, unless by a strong stomach, yet if they are well
concocted they nourish much and beget good juice.

CHAP. IV. Of drink.
Drink whereby the moist substance is restored which is daily consumed, and
the natural thirst allayed, The benefi of drink.
the fat, and thick moisture, carried through the narrow passages, and the meat
in the stomach is mingled, concocted, and powered forth, and an inflammation of
that fat, which is destinated by nature to nourish our bodies, is prohibited;
there are diverse kinds, The kinds.
Water, Wine, strong Beer, and water mingled with Honey, and certain liquors
made with Apples, Pears, and such like.

There is great variety of Waters, Waters.
all which are cold, and moist, but the best is that which is found to be pure
and fincere, by the sight, taste, and smell, and offers the savor of nothing
to the taste, Differences of Waters.
neither odor to the smell, which soon grows hot, and suddenly grows cold,
which is light, and wherein flesh, and fruit are soon boiled: some is Fountain
water other is River, some is Rain water, other lake, or Pond water, some
Marish, other Snow water.

The Fountain is the best which has these notes of good water, Fountain.
that which spreds toward the East, and runs toward the rising of the Sun,
and thrickles through sand, and gravel, that carries no mud with it, that is
hotter in Winter, and colder in Summer.

River water for the most part is Fountain water, River.
and arises from many Fountains flowing together, and therefore is of a mixed
nature, and receives also a mixed nature from the earth through which it flows,
and sometimes also, they are mingled with Snow melted in the Mountains, and
great Showers of water collected together, yet its crudity is corrected by the
beams of the Sun, whilst it runs through many parts of the Earth; before the
use of it, it should stand, and setle, in water-tubs, that whatsoever it
carries with it that is impure may settle in the bottom.

Rain water which falls in the Summer time with thunder is the thinnest, Rain.
and lightest, but since many Vapors are lift up by the heat, and mingled
with the Showers, these waters are not very pure, whence they are obnoxious to
putrefaction.

Well waters, Well waters.
since they are not raised above the Earth, and are lifted up on high, only by
the benefit of Art, they are thick and heavy, whence they continue long in the
bowels and offend them.

Lakes and marish waters are the worst, Lake waters.
they easily become purred, they are thick, and crude, and often times,
malignant, and Pestilent, from whence the stomach is offended by them, the
bowels obstructed, and humors corrupted and often times putred, and malignant
fevers and Pestilentiall do thence arise,

Waters of Snow, and Ice, are condemned, Of Snow and Ice.
for they are thick and hurt the stomach, and stir up grievous diseases of the
joints, nerves, and bowels.

But the malignancy of waters are corrected, by boiling, Boiling of waters.
whereby not only the crudity, and frigidity is amended, but also, the terrene,
and vicious parts are separated, which afterward when the heat vanishes,
settles in the bottom.

Wine has a heating, Wine.
and drying power which even the Spirit which is drawn out of it teaches, yet
because it easily nourishes, and increases moisture, and blood, fit to
nourish the body, it is said to be moist, namely Wine is a medicinal aliment,
hot, and dry, some in the first, some in the second, and some in the third
degree; for this reason, the use of it is forbidden boys, and by reason of
this drying faculty many use to mix water therewith, yet there is not a little
difference in heating, and drying, not only according to age, but also
according to the nature of the Wine it self, for some is very little
suffering, because in mixture it will endure but little water, but other Wine
is called winy Wine, because it may endure more water to be mixed with it.

But Wines differ according to taste, smell, color, Differences of Wines
Savor.
and manner of subsistence: as for what belongs to the taste, sweet Wines
properly so called, nourish best, and are not only most grateful to the
palate, but to the bowels, but because they are thicker, they easily produce
obstructions in the Liver, and Spleen, inflame the Hipocondries, and are easily
turned into choler, they are profitable for the Lungs, Chops, and Throat, nor
do they so hurt the head, nor offend the nerves.

Austere or harsh wines have the weaker heat, tarry longer in the belly, nor
do they easily pass through the veins, and penetrate through the passages of
the urine, whence they are good for a looseness of the belly, but hurtful in
diseases of the breast and Lungs, for they detain spittle; the best wines are
the middle sort which are neither very sweet, nor sour.

A fragrant smell is a token of the best Wine, Smell.
because it can increase Spirits, restore decayed strength, and recreate, and
suddenly refresh those that are languishing, even by its smell, and can
exhilerate the mind, and strengthen the whole body and all its faculties, and
principally it is good for old men, only that it fills the head, and hurts the
nerves, but Wines that have no smell are base, and neither received so greedily
by the stomach, nor are they so easily concocted, nor do they afford matter,
nor so fit aliment to engender Spirits, nor do they add so much strength to the
heart, nor do they so much refresh the body, but those which have a strange
smell, whencesoever contracted, are all naught.

White or pale Wines heat less, Color.
then full and yellow Wines, and are weaker, especially if besides their
whiteness they are of a thin substance, all black wines are of thicker
substance, and for the most part sweet and nourish very much, yet they beget
thick blood, and not so laudable, they cause obstructions, and continue long in
the bowels, and fill the head with many Vapors; between the white, and red,
there are middle colors, yellow, reddish yellow, a pale red, and perfect red;
a pale red are necrest to the white, and if the substance be thin, are the
best, such as are Rhenish Wines, the most apt to strengthen the heart, and to
renew strength; Greek Wines also strengthen the heart, and are beneficial to
to those that are troubled with cholick pains, and with the flatus of the
stomach; red Wines for the most part have not so great a force of heating, they
generate good blood, and do not load the head, but if they are of a thicker
substance, they are not so good for the Liver, and Spleen, by reason of the
obstructions, which they occasion; between the white, and red, is a Wine of a
mixed color, which also does not heat so much, nor offend the head.

As for the manner of subsistence, The manner of subsistence.
tenuity is in the first place in that which is watery, hence that which is of a
pale red, and yellow; crassitude is in that which is black, red, sweet and
sour, and thin wines easily penetrate, and soon refresh the strength, they
open passages, move sweates and urine, yet they nourish more sparingly, but the
thick nourish more, and are longer detained in the parts, and heat and dry them
more, and often times bring forth obstructions.

Wines also differ according to age, Differences of Wines according to age.
new Wine is thick and flatuous, begets the cholick, impeads excretion of
urine, yet it loosens the belly, and unless it does so, it is the more hurtful,
new Wine, and that which it as sweet, as Wine new pressed, is not easily
distributed into the body, but old Wine does work too much upon the nerves, and
offend the head.

That which is middle aged is more commodious for all uses, in which thing
nevertheless there is a great difference according to the nature of the Wine,
for some will endure age, others sooner loose their strength, and consume away,
and loose all their Spirits.

In places toward the Septrentrionall, Strong drink.
wherein there is not so great store of Wine, strong Beer, or Ale, is the
familiar drink, and indeed profitable enough, as experience shows.

But the strong drink is prepared, some of Wheat, Its differences.
some of Barley, others of them both, in Polonia it is made of Oats, and
preserved with Hops, the manner of preparing is very different every where, the
waters also differ, wherewith they are boiled, they are kept also in some
places in pitched Vessels, in others not pitched.

Strong drink made of Wheat nourishes more then that of Barley, and also
heats and moistens more, Drinks made with Wheat.
especially seeing the strong drink made of Wheat has less Hops, then that
which is made of Barley, but it generates more viscous juice, it causes
obstructions, it provokes urine, With Barley
but it loosens the belly.

Barley Beer, because of the Barley, heateth less, but because more Hops for
the most part are put into it, acquires no small force of heating, it
nourishes less, Mixed.
and yields a thinner juice, but is more diuretic, that which is mixed of
Wheat and Barley is of a middle nature.

That drink which is made of Corn, no way dried but by the heat of the Sun,
has more excrementicious humors, and often times brings forth obstructions.

All new drink is more unwholesome, especially, if it be troubled, for it
obstructs the passages, and breeds the stone, but that which is more cleansed
is wholesomer, but principally, strong drinks have their faculties, from
various waters of several natures.

Honey and water mingled, Hydromell.
for the most part heat and dry more then Wine, especially if Aromatic things
are added, but it easily turns into choler, by reason of the Honey and
therefore is not so good a drink for choleric persons.

CHAP. V. Of the passions of the mind, and of the exercise and rest of the body.
THE perturbations of the mind, Tranquillity of mind.
have great power in the preservation of health, for an Euthumie, or well
settled mind, and such as is at quiet does much conduce to the preservation of
health. Joy.


Next to that moderate joy is fitrest to preserve the health of body, and a
natural constitution, because it recreates the heart, spirits, and the whole
body, but if it be overmuch, it dissipates, Exercise of body.
and diffuseth the Spirits.

Motion of the body, and exercise, first brings a certain solidity, and
hardness to the parts, then it increases health, thirdly it moves and
agitates the spirits from whence the heart is made strong, and can easily
resist external injuries, and is fit to undergo all actions, happy
nourishment is made, and the excrementicious Vapors are discussed; on the
contrary, those bodies which live idly, are soft and tender, Kinds of motion.
and unfit to perform labors; under the name of motion, are comprehended
labors of every kind, dancing running, playing at ball, gesture, carrying,
ryding, swimming, walking, a stirrer up of the people, rubbing and such like,
but diverse exercises have different force, and some exercise some parts more
then others; in running and walking, the legs are most exercised in handling of
weapons; and laying them down, the arms; in singing, speaking with a loud
voice and clear reading, the face and breast; the whole body in playing with a
little ball, which exercise therefore is most convenient, whereof a peculiar
book of Galen is extant; there is also a certain diversity according to
violence, and magnitude in motion, swift attenuates, and thickens; slow,
rarifies and increases flesh; vehement extenuates the body, and makes it
lean, yet together hard, flourishing, and firm; too much motion exhausteth
and dissipates the substance of the spirits, and solid parts, and cooles the
whole body, it dissolves the strength of the nerves, and ligaments, it
sometimes looseneth, and distendeth the membrances, and breaks the lesser
veins.

CHAP. VI. Of Sleeping, and waking.
MOderate watchings stirs up the Spirits, and senses, Watchings.
and render them more flowrishing, distribute the Spirits, and heat into all
the parts of the body, they help distribution of aliment, and promote the
protrusion of excrements, yet if watchings are immoderate, first they consume
and dissipate the Animal Spirits, and dry the whole body, especially the
brain, they increase choler, they whet and inflame, and lastly the heat being
dissipated, they stir up cold diseases.

The strength being decayed is again kindled a fresh with moderate sleep, the
spirits, Sleep.
that are dissipated with diurnall labors, are restored, the heat is called
back into the inner parts, from whence a concoction of Aliments, and crude
humors is happily performed in the whole body, the whole body and especially
the bowels are sweetly moistened, the heat increased, and the whole body
becomes stronger, cares are taken away, anger is allayed, and the mind enjoyes
more tranquillity, immoderate evacuations besides sweat, are hindered, and sleep
is especially beneficial to old men; on the contrary immoderate sleep obscures
the spirits, and renders them dull, and causes an amazedness in the
understanding, and memory, it sends out the heat, being hindered with crude,
and superfluous humors accumulated, sleep also, which seizes on our bodies
after what manner soever, when they are empty, drys and extenuates the body.

CHAP VII. Of Bathes.
EVery Bath of fresh water, moistneth, A Temperate Bath.
but in heating and cooling, there is not the same faculty every where, a
temperate Bath of sweet water opens the pores of the skin, and softens, and
rarifies the part, and discusseth the excrements into the extreme parts, and
corrects the dryness of parts, and so takes away lassitude, but if it should
continue long 'twould discuss that which is dissolved, and weaken the strength.

Lukewarm Bathes, Luke Warm.
if they incline to cold, something refrigerate the body, nor have they power
of rarifying the parts and discussing excrements.

Cold water of it self cooles, Cold.
yet by accident the pores being shut, and the heat penned in heateth, whence
if through dissipation the native heat should be in danger, cold rhings being
timely applied, have power to recollect and preserve it.

Bathes oftentimes do hurt, and especially to those that are not accustomed to
them, and to Plethorick persons, and such as are filled with crude humors, as
also to those which are obnoxious to Catarrhes, and inflammations, or an
Erysipelas. The Romans often frequented Bathes, and they often bathed twice a
day, the preparation whereof you may see Galen 10. of the method of healing
Chap. the tenth; they used unctions also before and after bathing, whereof
Galen the second of simple faculties of healing Chap. the twenty fourth; and
the seventh.

CHAP. VIII. Of Excretions and Retentions, and of Venery.
THe body may be easily kept in its natural State, Excrements of the paunch.
if those things which are profitable for its nourishment, be retained, and
those things which are unprofitable, and ought to be cast out, are omitted, but
if those things which ought to be retained, in the body, are cast out, and
those things which ought to be protruded, are retained, the health is in danger.

The several concoctions have their several excrements; the excrements of the
paunch, if they are not evacuated in due season, hinder concoction whilst
putred Vapors exhale from thence to the stomach, and neighboring parts, for
the same reason they offend the head, stir up cholick pains, and other evils,
but too sudden cleansing of the paunch oftentimes hurt nothing, whilst those
things which are offensive nature does expel from the paunch of its own
accord, yet if any such thing happen too often or too lasting, it necessarily
defrauds the body of nourishment, and the strength is weakened, and the guts are
debilitated, and offended.

Urine if it be made in due season, Urine.
is commodious and profitable for the body, but if it be made sooner then it
ought, and especially, if it have bin retained longer then it ought, it brings
no small damage, for it oppresses the bladder, and often times so fills it,
that afterward urine cannot be expelled, and sometimes an inflammation of the
bladder, nay sudden death, follows; but if the reyns have not drawn whey as it
were, it remains mixed with blood, and stirs up grievous Symptoms in the whole
body.

Seed untimely retained causes heaviness, and dullness, Venus.
of the body, and if it be corrupted stirs up grievous accidents, all which may
be avoided by Venery, but let it be timely, and lawful, neither is there any
need to try any thing for the preservation of health, which is contrary to
divine laws, and the Creator of man is so much indulgent to him in this thing,
as it is necessary for him to shun all things which may hinder his health; but
too much Venery dissipates the natural heat, cooles and debilitates the whole
body, accumulates crudities, hurts the nerves, generates the running Gout, and
brings the Palsy, and debility of the senses and understanding.

THE FOURTH BOOK, PART II. Of the Method of the preservation of Health.
CHAP. I. Of those things which are to be observed by all for the preservation
of health.
AFter we have explayned those things which are necessary for the Preservation
of health, now we must show a Method how all those things are to be used for
the safty thereof; but their are some certain common precepts which are to be
observed by all; some peculiar precepts to be observed according to ages, sex,
and other Circumstances. The most common Precept here is this, that what ever
is according to nature is to be kept, but since that in some health exactly
such, in others difference from hence, which is called a newtrall constitution;
the former is to be exactly preserved with its likes, and nothing contrary to
be admitted, whereby the body may be put out of that natural state; but a
Newtrall constitution requires some change, yet that ought to be small, and by
degrees, if the course of life will admit thereof.

Yet that most general rule is to be observed by all, The most general rule
to desend health.
namely that mediocrity is to be ever accounted safest according to that of
Hippo. 2. Apho. 52. to much of every thing is good for nothing, or all excess
is hurtful to nature. As also that 2. Apho. 50, those things that we are long
accustomed unto although they are worse, yet are they less troublesome to us,
then those things that we are not accustomed to.

Moreover, we are to endeavor, that the natural constitution of our bodies,
consisting in a good moderation of cold and heat, occult qualities, due
conformation of the Organick parts, and unity may be preserved by those things
which are fitly borne to preserve it, namely by their likes, in case the body
be thoroughly well constituted, or somewhat with contraries, if the body decline
from the best state. But all things are to be avoided which may destroy it.

Likewise causes of health sometimes require things plainly alike, sometimes a
little contrary, Most health full air.
and therefore the Physician shall appoint the right use of those things which
necessarily happen to the body, namely air that is temperate is the best for
those that are temperate, and hurtful to no constitution of body. Moreover let
the purest be chosen, cold air when the fire is kindled is changed, hot air
is tempered by water that is cold, being poured out of one vessel into
another, or sprinkled on the floare, or by clothes moistened in water and hung
in the bedchamber, or Roses strowed in the house, or the leaves of Vines,
Willowes, Water Lillies and other cooling Herbs; moisture in excess may be
corrected by the kindling of fires, and burning of suffumigations of ^^^t
things; dryness is corrected with the moystnings of waters and sprinklings or
strowings of moistning Herbs.

As for Meat, meats of little juice are offensive to all, Meat and drink.
and profitable to none, nay even the daily use of thick, viscide, tenacious,
cold, hard, flat, and acrid meats are to be avoided by all, since they cannot
be well concocted, nor afford good nourishment: yet some regard is here to be
had of the appetite according to that of Hippocrates, 2. Apho. 38. a litter
worse meat and drink that is more pleasant, is to be preferred before that
which is better and ungrateful, as also of custom according to that 2. Aphor.
50 those things that we are long accustomed unto, although they are evil, are
wont to trouble us less then those things which we are not used unto. Moreover
meats are to be taken only in that quantity whereby our strength may be
refreshed not oppressed, that which has been spoken of meat is also to be
understood of drink.

Of the passions of the mind, Passions of the mind.
this in general may be spoken, that overmuch of all them are to be avoided,
and quietness of mind and moderate joy is to be cherished.

The excrements of the belly twice a day or at least once ought to be ejected,
Excrements.
urine likewise ought to be expelled as often as their is need.

We are to take heed likewise of that of Celsus, least in our best health we
take things adverse thereunto, and therefore we ought not rashly to trouble or
molest our bodies with purges or other medicines, but it is better to exercise
our bodies moderately every day, least excrements should be gathered together,
and if any disease seem to be coming upon us, to follow this counsel, that
is by quietness and abstinence many great diseases are cured.

CHAP II. Of the cure of little ones not yet borne, and of the diet of women
with child,
THese things being premised in general, what course of diet may best agree to
every degree of health (of which before, in the first Book and third Chap.) we
will now explain distinctly, and therefore we will handle good habit or the
preserver of the best State, called under the general name of the Hygeinall,
which governs sufficent health in all our actions. The Prophylactick is that
part which guides the neutrality of those that are falling away. The Analyptick
is that which brings neuters to be healthy; And first a method of preserving of
the health of such as are very well is to be explained; wherein notwithstanding
some things may be delivered, which may be accommodated to the other degrees of
health.

But in the first place it is to be noted that the foundation of our future
health fully depends on the conception and seed of our parents, Seed the cause
of future health.
and therefore as Fernelius in his first Book of Pathology Chap. 1. writes, If
Husbandmen being to sow Corn choose the small and young seed, having found by
experience, that ill fruit comes from that which is rotten, how much more
diligently ought we to observe the seed in the procreation of our Children.

Moreover when the Mother has conceived a Child in the womb, Dye^ of such as
are great.
she ought to beware of all things which might bring any detriment to the
young; or rather, she ought to be careful, that she may strengthen, and
preserve it safe; namely that she avoid foggy Air, that she beware of the
smell of candles newly put out, of brimstone, castor and such like, and of the
smell of herbs that are too fragrant, she should shun meats of ill juice, and
sharp, and such as cause urine, or cause loathing, or provoake sneezing, she
should not use many Aromatic things; if those that are great desire, any ill
meats, they are not altogether to be denied them, but if the food, which the
woman desires cannot be obtained by her; least any inconveniences should
happen to the young, they use to give her some honey with nutmeg; or water
distilled from the tender leaves of a Vine in the month of May; or of the barks
of Citron, or the pills of Oranges, or of the Root of Piony, being bruised and
prepared in Spanish Wine, or Malmesy.

For the strengthening are exhibited, the precious Stones, Strengthening the
young.
called Pearls, Coralls, the shavings of Ivory, the barks of Citron, Cinnamon,
Saffron, the wood of Aloes, Cloves, Quinces, Sugar of Roses, sweet Almonds,
corrected with high Country Wine, Water, called the Balsome of Children, the
confection of Gems, Diamargariti calidi, Malmsy Wine applied with Bread to the
belly.

The same things may hinder an abortion which is night at hand, and moreover
Vnguentum Comitissae, externally applied, Hindering abortion.
also those that are great should principally avoid hard labors and passions
of the mind, yet to be altogether idle is not so convenient.

The opening of a vein eafter the fifth month for the most part is prohibited,
Whether a vein be to be opened of the woman withchild.
but before the fifth month you may open a vein, in Plethorick bodies, nay
some unless they are let blood, before the fifth month miscarry, of purgation
Hippocrates writes in the fifth Apho. 39. thou shall purge those that are with
child, any time within four months, and sometimes until the seventh month,
but sparingly, and you are to use only lenitive medicines.

CHAP III. Of the Diet of Infants, and thence forward until 21. years of Age.
WHen a Child is brought forth into the World, before the teats are given him,
we ought to give him some pure honey, or Coral with Sugar, or the Sugar of
pennidice, with: Oil of sweet Almonds, whereby the Dregs may be drawn through
the Paunch, and an Epilepsie be prevented.

Afterward let the Infant be nourished with Milk, The Infant is nourished
with the mothers Milk.
and that from his Mothers Breast, as having most agreement with the Infant,
and it is generated of the same blood, by which before the little one was
formed, and nourished in the Womb, unless perhaps the Mother be sick or ill
disposed; the Infant is to be nourished with Milk, until it be two years
old, or certainly till the eighteenth Month, and it is to be accustomed in the
mean time to other meats by little and little; yet such as may be easily
concocted, commonly their is prepared for them Papp made of Bread, and water or
Milk, yet by reason of its clamminesse, it seems not to so good to many, and
therefore more wholesome may be made with crumbs of Bread, or certainly with
bread first dried in an Oven.

Afterward the Infant by degrees is to be accustomed to more solid meats, Diet
the first three years.
but the first three years, his food is to be moister, and the Infant is to be
nourished with good meats, and should use Bathes often, but not presently after
eating and drinking; near the end of seven years Age, the use of Bathes ought
to be more seldom, Infants and Boys should not drink Wine.

By how much the more a boy grows in years, by so much the more both the mind
and body are to be employed, yet the exercises ought not to be immoderate,
least that any member should be turned awry, or least the body should be dried
too soon with two much motion, and the growth of the body should be hindered;
of sleep, by how much the more Age increases, so by little and little we ought
to abate it.

In the second and third Septinaries more solid meats are to be afforded,
Dietin 7. and 3. S^ptinary.
yet not over much drying: Exercise also ought to be somewhat less then the
strength might tolerate, and in the third Septinary order of Diet convenient
for every course of life is to be begun, for those which are given to a
laborious kind of life ought to seed more plentifully in the third Septinary,
and with those meats, which being taken in no great quantity, nourish much,
and strengthen them for greater labors.

But those which apply their minds to learning at this age ought to be careful
of the animal spirits, Diet of. Scholars.
and diligently to endeavor that they may be plentifully generated being pure,
and clear, which may be if they live in a subtle Air, pure thin, by diet and
meats that are not thick, but which may afford matter for pure and lauadble
blood, and endeavor to evacuate all excrements in due time, not to accumulate
crudities, nor weaken their bodies with untimely studies, nor is the use of
Venery to be granted till the end of this Age.

CHAP. IV. Of the Diet of middle Age,
That Age which follows the third feaventh Year or from the twenty first to
the fiftieth, Diet for middle age.
is accounted the middle Age, and for the most part there is the same reason of
Diet, unless that the former half part or the fourth septinary, and the
latter half or the seventh does more agree with the diet of the Age, which he
has attained, then of that Age which is truly the middle. The rule of diet.
variety.


First for what belongs to meat, in meat is to be observed quality, quantity,
time of taking, manner, and such like circumstances; as to the quality of
meats, those are to be chosen, which are most temperate, quantity.
and most familiar to our nature, amongst which, Bread well baked obtaines the
first place, hence the flesh of Animals, and those things which are taken from
Animals, and always they are to be chosen which are of good juice, and to be
avoided, which have ill juice, yet something is here to be granted to custom,
2. Apho. 56. and to the various constitutions of bodies, and Celsus admoni^^eth
a sound man, and one which is in health to avoid no kind of meat which the
people use, which is principally to be observed by those, which necessarily
must live a different course of life; variety of meats please, and diverse sorts
of meat are eaten with greater pleasure, yet we are to beware lest meats are
eatentogether of different substances, and various faculties, whereof some are
thick, others thin, some easy, others hard of concoction, since from such
variety corruption of meats, may easily follow, but those which have a certain
similitude are rather to be chosen, that the same heat may be required, for
the concoction of the same.

Secondly that quantity of food is to be taken which may increase the strength,
Quantity.
and not hinder it, but you cannot measure that, neither by weight, nor number,
but it is to be found in this, in that you have regard to three things; first, to
the nature of aliment, secondly, to the nature of the body, and the course of
life and labors, and thirdly, to the time of the year, and constitution of
the air.

For first, meats hard to be concocted being taken in greater plenty, hurt
more, then those of easier concoction next meat brings less inconveniency if
it offend only in quantity, then if it also has an ill quality joined
therewith, regard is also to be had of pleasantness as is said before.

Moreover, one stomach desires more, another concocts more, in which matter the
counsel of Hippocrates is more safe, the 6 Epid. Comm. 4. Text 22. The study
of health is not to be glutted with meat, nor to be slow to labor: and
Avicenne admonishes us to rise from the Table, with those that are hungry;
lastly those which live idely, and live a life not so labourious concoct less,
those which are exercised in labor digest more.

Of the time of the year, Hippocrates writes, 1. Apho. 15. Their Bellies
which are born in the Winter or Spring are very hot, and their sleep tedious;
therefore at those seasons of the year they ought to eat more, forasmuch as
they have more heat, whence it comes to pass, that they want more plentiful
nourishment. And in the third of Diet he teaches, that we ought to eat more
in Winter, but drink more sparingly, but in Summer, the contrary. But
nevertheless if any one either through ill custom, or the allurements of
meats has any way offended herein, that afterward is to be be corrected by
fasting, or more sparing diet, sleep, quiet, or vomiting, and therefore it is
good to omit supping once a week, or else to eat very little supper.

As to the time, Time.
to eat often and much is neither commodious for the body nor mind, yet it is
better to eat a little often, then much at once, but it is most wholesome that
a man of middle age, well tempered, and that has government of him self, do
eat twice aday; so that he takes only so much meat, as may not oppress the
stomach; in other things some thing is to be granted to Age
temperatemperament, kind of life, custom and such, like but the time betwixt
dinner and supper ought to be shorter then that which is betwixt supper and
dinner again.

But whether supper or dinner ought to be larger, Whether supper or dinner
ought t^ be largest.
is severally understood amongst Physicians: that we may briefly conclude the
matter, if any dine more sparingly, and frugally, which the Ancients for the
most part did, the supper ought to be the larger, but if we observe our custom
and manners, since men about noon day dine more plentifully, and cannot
sufficiently concoct their meat in that short time, which is betwixr dinner and
supper; it is altogether necessary that they should sup more sparingly, since it is
not convenient to be twice filled with meat the same day, for then they shall
have a troublesome night, and in the morning perceive crudities, and
principally this to be observed by old men, because experience testifies, that
all old men are offended with large suppers.

As for the order of meats, it is of some concernment, Order.
whether we take this or that meat in the first or second place; namely, those
are to be taken in the first place, which mollify the Paunch, and make it
slippery, and those which are not of so good juice, are easily concocted, and
descend out of the Stomach, and are easily corrupted; to these are to be added
those things which may stop the belly, they are not so casily concocted, and
which descend slower, and are of better juice.

As for drink, quantit^y of drink.
of the qualities and differences thereof we have spoken before; as to the
quantity, as a little of Wine, strong Beer, and if their be any other kinds of
drinks like to these, the use of them moistens the body, cherishes the
spirits, corroborates the strength, helps concoction and distribution of meats,
provokes Urine, heates the habit of the body, and is a remedy against the
coldness, and dryness of old age, it causes sleep, corrects the acrimony of
choler, exhilerates the mind, and makes men's manners pleasing; so the
immoderate use thereof, and drunkenness is the Plague it self of health, and
of a man, for by immoderate drinking, the native heat is consumed, crude and
perverse humors are accumulated, the mind is troubled, and a kind of madness
is begotten

The most convenient time of drinking is betwixt meals Time fit to drink.
for so it conduces much to the concoction of meat, and the right
distribution of the same, but if you drink upon an empty stomach, the head and
the Nerves are extended; if after meat, the concoction is thereby hindered; if
the meat do not casily descend, the concoction being perfected, it is profitable
to drink something; drink also is to be avoided going to rest, but especially
after exercises and Bathes; sudden drinking of cold drink is unwholesome; it is
more commodious also to divide the drink then to drink it together, least it
cause a floating in the stomach.

The passions of the mind, Passions of the mind.
all of them that are vehement are to be avoided, and on the contrary, moderate
joy is to be cherished.

Motions of the body all of them, Exercise of body.
do not agree with all, yet for all sound men, deambulation may suffice, and
frication and such like exercises; otherwise to thinner bodies more moderate,
to stronger greater exercises are more convenient, yet regard is here to be had
of custom, according to that of Hippocrates, 2. Apho. 49. those which were
accustomed to daily labors, although they are weak and old, easier endure
exercises then those that are unaccustomed thereunto, although they are strong
and young; regard also is to be had of the time of the year, for in summer,
lesser and shorter exercises, in Winter greater and stronger are to be
appointed; so long also only the body is to be exercised, until a fresh
color appear in the body, and the body begin in some measure to swell, and
sweat to flow out: exercise and motion is to be used when the concoction is
performed in the stomach and liver, and as Hippocrates, 6. Epid. Sect. 4. Apho.
the last labor ought to go before meat, wherefore the most convenient time
for exercise is the morning, when the Stomach is empty, and the excrements of
the Paunch and Bladder are first sent out, the same time is most fit for study;
regard is also to be had of the place where exercises are, for exercise under
the Sun heates the body very much, powers out humors, and are very obnoxious to
those whose heads are weak or full of humors, but all exercises that are in
the shade are safer.

Rest is no less necessary then motion, for this is the remedy of weariness,
and repaires decayed strength, and therefore exercise and rest take their
interchangeable turns. Sleeping and waking.


The time also is to be appointed for sleeping and waking, the most fit time
for sleep is the night, appointed for man by God himself, but we ought not to
sleep presently after meat, but an hour or two after supper, otherwise the
head will be filled with many vapors; diurnall sleep likewise fills the head
with vapors, but if any one has contracted a sense of wearisomenesse, or has
past an unquiet night without sleep, it is lawful to cherish sleep so long in
the day time, and especially for old men, who seldom sleep the whole night,
but we are to sleep so long until the meat be concocted in the Stomach and
Liver, and the spirits that are taken away are restored, which space is not
equally in all, less then six hours scarce suffices, but beyond 9. hours
sleep is scarce to be extended, for the most part the space of seven hours is
sufficient.

But those which are studious principally offend in their sleep, if they wake
long after supper, Sleep for those that are studious.
and sleep after the rising of the Sun, for they do not only pervert the order
of nature, but also much hinder the concoction, whilst they impeade the
instauration of spirits, which were wasted with diurnall labors, and
watchings, and call them from the Stomach, and fill the head with vapors.

But we ought to lie down with our legs and arms a little bent, our head
something elevated, on either side, Manner of lying.
since lying supine hurts much, and first to lie on the right side, that the
concoction of the Stomach may be helped by the Liver, not under the canopy of
Heaven, nor the Beams of the Moon, and the windows are to be shut, and the
nocturnall air to be kept out, the bedchamber ought to be without any smell,
the bed should be soft, and fitted to drive away the frigidity of the Air,
when you please, the Head also is not to be wrapped with too many clothes.

Watchings after sleep should be moderate, Watchings.
for too much consumes the native heat, and dissipates Spirits, dries the
body, brings forth crudities, dulls the senses, and of^^nds all the actions.

There is no small profit also of Bathes, Bathes.
for the preservation of health, as is said before, part the first chap. the
seventh, yet the right use of them is to be appointed, neither are we to go
into a Bath before the meat be concocted in the stomach, least crud humors
should be carried into all the parts of the body. In a Bath we must abstain
from all meat and drink, and we are to go out before we are weary, and to
defend the whole body from cold, nor must we eat nor drink before the heat of
the bath be expired.

Lotions of the head open the pores of the skin and discuss Vapors, Lotions
of the head.
yet they are not to be used when either a Catarrh, or pain of the head
offends, but are to be used in the morning, or an hour before Supper, and
after the washing of the head it should be thoroughly dried with warm linen
clothes. Lastly the washing of the feet is not profitable, to hinder their
sweating, but to avert humors which would flow from the head thither.

Lastly we must endeavor that presently after sleep, Ex^rements.
the dregs of the paunch may be cast out, if the paunch answers not to desire,
it is to be moistened with Raisins of the Sun, the broth of a Cock, a decoction
of the staulkes of Burrage, Mallows, Bears breech, or six or seven Pruins,
boiled in the broth where Senna has been infused, to be taken for the first
course, or a little before meat, the excrements of the third concoction are to
be expelled by daily exercise, the head is to be combed in the morning, the
mouth to be washed with water, the ears, nose, and palate to be cleansed, the
eyes and the whole face, are to be washed in cold water, and the body,
especially the Arms, and the Legs are to be rubbed.

And if so any error be committed in the use of these things, which may easily
happen, afterward it is to be mended the next day by its contrary, and an
inequality being introduced the contrary cause is taken away.

CHAP. V. Of the diet of old men.
THat part of Physic which rules, Diet for old men.
or governs the age of old men is called, Geronomick, but because in old age
the body every day is more and more dried, and the native heat is consumed, we
are to endeavor that dryness may be prevented, and the native heat so much
as may be preserved.

Hotter and moister Air therefore is agreeable to this age, Air.
and unless it be such of it self, it is to be corrected by art, especially in
Autumn and Winter, which Air is chiefly offensive to old men.

The Aliment it self also ought to be hot and moist, Aliment.
of good juice, and easy of concoction, but thick meats, hard, glutinous, and
which fill the head, grow sour in the stomach, and are easily corrupted, are
to be avoided, and if hurt be contracted by the use of such things, it is to be
corrected, by the use of Diatrion, Pipereon, Diacalaminth, and such like.

Of the usual quantity also every day something is to be abated, for as
Hippocrates writes, 1. Apho. 10. there is little heat in old men, and
therefore they need little nourishment, since thence their heat is extinguished
with much; and therefore meat is to be given sparingly, but often, and indeed
very conveniently thrice aday, viz. breakfast, dinner, and supper.

The best drink for old men is Wine, Drink.
from whence Wine is called old men's milk, yet it is not to be taken in too great
plenty, and it ought to be of a hotter nature, and other things good and
generous, middle aged, but thick Wines which cause obstructions, and have an
astringent faculty or hinder urines, are not convenient for old men, wine
mingled with honey is good for old men also.

Old men should use moderate exercises before meat, Exercise.
yet so that no lassitude may thence ensue, but principally moderate frication
is commodious for them, especially in the morning.

Old men should sleep longer, Sleep.
and if they are troubled with waking, that remedied with the use of sweet
Almonds, Lettice boiled with Sugar, and dill being taken the last course, and
with Somniferous lotions of the feet and hands.

First of all let them avoid vehement perturbations of the mind, Perturbations
of the mind. Excre. ments.
and let them rather refresh their minds and bodies with honest pleasures.

Lastly let old men be careful that they void their excrements well, and
therefore, if the body be costive, the belly is to be moistened with convenient
meats or with honey of Roses solutive, but stronger, and more Phyficall things
are not to be given to old men.

CHAP. VI. Of the Diet of such as are out of temper and of neuters.
AS for what belongs to the Diet of bodies, Bodies that are neuters how
manyfold.
that are neutrals, there art two kinds of bodies deviating from perfect
health, for some are more remote from a sickly constitution, others are nearer
to it, and these are twofold as before is spoken lib. the first Chap. the
third, neuters falling away, which governing part of the Method of the defense
of health is called Prophylactick; in neuters tending to health and waxing
strong, the governing part of the Method of restoration of health is called
Analyptick.

But those former neuters which are as yet far from difeased, yet decline from
the best health, whether from their birth, or whether they have contracted such
a habit from custom and diet, it is hard to change, neither can it be done
suddenly, but by degrees, and with long diligence; but if leisure does not
permit, it is neither commodious, nor possible, for as Galen 2. of the defense of
health Chap. the third those who are busied in civil affairs, and distracted
with many businesses it is safer for such a one not to endeavor to change his
temperament.

Such bodies therefore, Diet of untemperate men.
if either leisure will not permit, and their minds are not bent to reduce them
into a better state, they ought to be preserved so by their likes, but if you
intend to reduce them to a better condition, you must use contraries by
degrees; yet a hot and moist distemper, since that it is more agreeable to our
nature, is by no means to be changed, because it introduces no disease, but
bodies which are become too dry, are always to be moistened as much as may be,
during the whole term of life.

Hot bodies therefore should avoid hot Air, Of such as are hot.
hot and sharp meats, their drink ought to be more plentiful, but smaler,
and strong drink rather then wine, their exercise ought to be moderate, the use
of bathes, of fresh waters warm, frequent; they must shun anger, too tedious
meditations, and their sleep ought to be longer.

If dryness be joined to the heat, let them avoid the use of hot and drying
things, and therefore let them beware of a hot and dry constitution of Air,
and vehement exercises, if humidity be joined and that be moderate, fince that
temperament is most agreeable to man, and conduces to the prolongation of
life, it is to be preserved as much as may be, and only to be forewarned that no
more of the heat and humors may be added, and cause diseases, and stir up
putrefaction, wherefore let these avoid Air that is too hot and moist, let
meat be given which has attenuating force, and let them endeavor that it may
be well concocted, let their exercises be such, as may discuss excrements, yet
not dry the solid parts; let all other things be moderate, and principally let
them endeavor, that the excrements of the belly and the urine may freely pass
from them.

Those which are cold are to be nourished with hot meats, let them use
exercises, which may stir up heat, Oscold.
let them evacuate timely the pituitous excrements.

Dry constitutions should use moist meats, Of dry.
and moistning drink, and bathes of fresh water, but the most unhappy
constitution is cold and dry, which represents old age from the beginning, and
hastens to it and therefore such are to use heating and moistning things, and
to be nourished with hot and moist food, their exercises should be moderate,
such as only stir up the natural heat, their sleep longer and the use of
bathes of fresh water frequent; Venery is very hurtful: cold and moist, if the
constitution of the body be so, Moist.
the frigidity is to be corrected, and the humidity preserved, to which purpose
moderate exercise conduces, and excrements if they are timely and duly
evacuated.

Neuters declining; which now incline to sickness, Diet of neuters declining.
diseases are imminent to them, especially for two reasons, Plethory, and
Cacochymie, both of them therefore are to be taken away; if the falling away
from health be but little, it may be done with rest and abstinence; but if it
be greater, opening of a vein, and purging is to be used, which is spoken of
in the following book, for this Prophylactick part is placed in the end of a
cure.

Only we here admonish two things, first that the Springtime is best for
preservation; as Hippocrates 6. Apho. 47. teaches, he says, to those that the
breathing of a vein or purging are profitable, to them the opening of a vein,
and a purgation is to be commanded, in the Spring; it is also profitable, to
purge black and Melancholy humors, before Autumn.

Moreover the use of aloes does much conduce to the preservation of health, Use
of the aloes.
since it gently purges the excrements which stick in the first passages,
which are oftentimes the causes of many diseases, it resists putrefaction and
corruption, and seldom reaches the Liver, but because aloes, if it comes to
the Liver offends it, it is not to be used too often, and in too great plenty,
least it should penetrate to the Liver, but it purges only the first
passages, which is performed profitably, if it be taken in a small quantity, a
little before Supper.

Lastly, Diet of neuters growing better.
for what belongs to the diet of those newters that are inclinable to health,
two things in the first place are to be observed in their diet, first that they
fall not again into the disease; secondly that they may suddenly recover their
former health: first when, as it is 2. Apho. 12. those things which are left in
diseases after a crisis are wont to cause relapses, if ought of the peccant
matter be yet remaining, that is to be taken away by degrees, and by helping,
and the principal parts are to be strengthened, but if nothing of the vicious
matter be present, the body is carefully to be refreshed with moist aliment,
and that which is easy to be concocted, namely the yolks of eggs, broathes
with Bread, Chickens, Hens, Capons, Fish; lastly Goats flesh, Mutton, Veale;
sleep helps concoction, unctions strengthen the stomach, before meat are
appointed frications also, moderate walking, Baths of fresh warm wa^^r, lastly
strengthening things are to be used, and such as may resist the relics of the
causes of imbecility, and of sickly disposition, but those things which may
call back the distemper, which trouble sick, these are to be avoided.

THE FIFTH BOOK,
PART 1. Of the Materials for Cure.
SECT. I. Of Medicines.
CHAP. I. What a Medicine is.
THere remains the last part of Physic which is the Therapeuticall, which
restores men that are fallen into diseases to their former health, and expells
those diseases from men's bodies which torment them, but that the Physician may
obtain this end, it is necessary that he be instructed in two things, first a
Method whereby he may find those things that are helpful by Indications,
secondly Instruments or Materials for cure, whereby he may perform that which
he found out by Indications.

The matter fit for cure is properly reduced to three heads, Instruments of
Physic.
diet, manual operation, and making up of Medicines.

First you are to be admonished that you are to distinguish cures, from the
materials used in curing, for cure is that whereby instruction is given from
the Indicant to perform or act something, and is always one, as to heat or
make hot, but the Matter of help is that whereby that is performed by the
Physician which the Indicant commands, which may be manifold, as whilst you are
to heat, it may be done with Pepper, Ginger, Wormwood. etc.

But since that of Dieteticall matter is spoken sufficiently in the former
book, it remains that we speak of Medicines, Medicine what is it.
and Manual operation, and first as for Medicines, by amedicine we understand
every thing that is a different thing from nature, which may alter our bodies
and reduce them to a natural state from a preternaturall. In which respect it
differs from aliment and Poison, for Aliment, as it is aliment, is only that
which increases the substance, or it renewes and increases our bodies; a
Medicince alters, but does not repair, but if any thing can together nourish
and alter our bodies, it is alimentall Medicine, or medicinal aliment; but
poisons neither nourish, nor alter our bodies, but are destroyers of our
bodies, and have power to corrupt them.

CHAP. II. Of the faculties of Medicines in general.
MEdicines are twofold, Medicines how manyfold. Simple Compound
some are simple, other compound; a simple is that which is such by nature
only, and has nothing mixed with it by art; compound are when more natural
things are mingled by art into the form of one medicine.

Simple Medicines are taken from Plants, Simple how many fold. Plants.
Animalls, Mineralls; and Plants are either taken whole or their parts, Roots,
Woods, Piths, Barks, Leaves, and Branches, Flowers, Seeds, Fruits, Juices,
Gumms, Rosins, Oiles, and Liquors, as Wine.

Animals also are used whole, Living Creatures.
or their parts, as Hartshorn, Marrow, Flesh, or those things that are
generated in them, as Milk, Eggs, or their works, as Honey, Wax, or their
excrements as Gall, Urine.

Under Mineralls are comprehended not only those things which are properly
called Mineralls, Mineralls.
Vitriall, Antimony, Sulphur, and Mettalls, and the excrements, but also
diverse kinds of earths, as Uermillion, Irish Slat, Bole-Arminack, as also all
Stones and Gemms, also diverse kinds of Salts, and concreted juices in the
earth, of which Naptha is one, also bathing-waters, in which rank Manna may be
put, if there be no other place fit for it.

The faculties are various, of so many different things, The difference of
Medicines Actual.
and from hence the divisions of Medicines are various, for first, some
Medicines are said to be such in action, others in power to be such; things as
are said to be such in action, which in them contain that which they are said
to be, the act being as it were present, and absolved, and so the operation is
in a readiness, and can affect our bodies at the first touch, with that
quality wherewith they are endued: so Water, and Ice, are cold in action,
because after what manner soever they are applied to a body, they can presently
cool the same; but those things are such in potentia, Potentiall.
whose force is not perceived at the first touch, but lies hid and as it were
asleep, nor does it discover it self by action, until it be some way changed
by our heat and be burnt, and reduced into action, so Pepper, and Wine,
although to the touch they are cold, yet nevertheless they heat.

But although the force of Medicines are various, Facultiei of Medicines
manifest.
yet they may conveniently be divided into manifest and occult; those are
called manifest which affect our senses, or which excite qualities in the
patient which are discerned by our senses, and whereof a manifest cause may be
rendered.

But occult are such which do not produce qualities in a Patient, obvious to
sense, Occult
but perform something by a hidden propriety, to wit, they purge a certain
humor, they strengthen a certain member, they resist poison, or being hung or
carried externally work upon the body, the manifest causes whereof cannot be
explained, and no other reason can be given, then that such a power or force is
in them, by a peculiar propriety of nature, although there are some who reject
hidden qualities, yet I. C. Scaliger rightly thinks that it is a high piece of
impudence to reduce all things to manifest qualities, in the 218. of his
exercises Sect. 8. and those which endeavor this, bring foolish and ridiculous
reasons, or deny those things which are confirmed by experience; and these
faculties and actions are different from those in their whole kind as also
from others, which are spoken of before in the 2. Book 2. Part. Cap. 12. both
from hence in the first place, because the strength of these qualities, are far
greater then theirs of the primary qualities, and their efficacy is great
oftentimes in the smallest body.

But both of them, The first the second.
the manifest and occult faculties and actions of Medicines are various, of
manifest qualities some are primary, others secondary, others of a third kind;
The third kind of qualities.
the first have power of heating, cooling, moistning and drying; the second to
soften, to harden, condense, rarify, resolve, attenuate, thicken, to draw, to
repel; the third, to provoke Urine, to cause and stay courses, to move vomit,
generate flesh, and to break stones, although the power of breaking stones may
more fittly be attributed to the propriety of the whole substance, as beneath
Cap. 17. shall be shown.

Occult are of three kinds, for either they evacuate a certain humor by a
peculiar faculty, or they have a sympathy with a cortaine part, whence they
are called cephalicks, or cardiacks, or they resist poison.

But the faculties of all Medicines according to the changes which they make in
our bodies, The kinds of faculties in Medicines.
may be referred to four ranks or forms, first some belong to an inducing of a
new quality, such as are those which are said to have the efficacies of the
primary qualities, to wit heating, drying, cooling, and moistning, but because
every thing that alters, cannot be safely applied to every part, appropriated
Medicines are conveniently joined to every member which do alter. Moreover
hitherto is to be referred those which are accounted amongst the number of
secondary qualities, such as soften and harden, loosening, rarify and condense,
stiptick, and obstructing, astringent and opening, attenuating and
incrassating, filling, and deterging or cleansing: lastly hereunto belongs,
Anodunes, Stupefactives, and Hypnoticks or such as cause rest.

In the second form are those which prevail in causing motion, attracting and
repelling; to the third form those things are referred, which consist in the
generation of any thing, ripening, generating quitture, breeding flesh,
Glutinating, cicatrizing, and procuring milk and sperme.

To the fourth form are referred those things which corrupt, corrode, putrify,
such as cause dry crust, burning, and such as do corrupt seed and milk.

The fifth form comprehends those things which belong to the taking away of any
thing, such things as make less, such as purge, such as cause Vomiting, Urine,
or sweats, or provoke courses, expel the secondine, or send forth a dead child,
such things as break and expel the Stone, Errhines, Sternutatories, and
Apophlegmatismes, such things as purge the breasts, and such as kill and expel
Worms.

They may be placed in the last form which resist poison and are the drugs
against poison.

CHAP. III. Of the first faculties of Medicines.
AS for what belongs to the first form, Altering temperate.
and first for altering Medicines, some of them being compared with man's body
are called temperate, which cause or bring forth no mutation in man either in
coldnesie, dryness, heat, or moisture; and these are either such simply and in
all the quallities, or else in two of them only; Intemperate.
but the intemperate are such as have power to change the heat or moisture of
our bodies.

Moreover these qualities are divided by Physicians into certain degrees,
Degrees of qualities.
which are left to be esteemed by their effects; the first degree is when a
Medicine alters our bodies obscurely and scarce senfibly; the second is, when
it manifestly changes our bodies, yet without hurting, inconveniency or
trouble: the third degree is, when it does not only manifestly alter the body,
but vehemently, and not without trouble, and pain, yet without corruption: the
fourth degree is that which alters the body not without pain, and that most
grieviously.

To either of these degrees there are appointed certain Latitudes, which are
commonly called mansions, Mansions of degrees.
as they alter more intensely or remisly, or betwixt both, which they call in
the beginning, middle, and end.

The temperate are, Venus hair, Sparagus, Temperate Medicines.
Licorish Sweet Oil, Pine-nuts, Jujubes, Figgs, Sebestens, Raysins, Dates, Gum
Elemie, and Tragacanth, Calves and Goats Suet, and Hoggs Grease.

The hot in the first degree are, Marsh-mallowes, Burrage, Hot in the first.
Buglosse, Beets, Cabbage, Camommil, Bindweed, Agrimony, and Fumitory, Flex,
Melilot, A lease that swims in Ditches without any Root, Spikenard, Wall-wort,
and Coltsfoot, the flowers of Borrage, Buglosse, Bettony, Oxe-eie, or Wild
Camomil, Melilot Camomil, black Poplar, Arabian Staechodos, an herb with gray
down like an old man's hair called Senecio in Latin: Fruits; sweet Almonds,
Chestnuts, Jujubes, Ciprusnuts, green Walnuts, Grapes, ripe Mulberies, sweet
Apples, Fragrant Seeds, Coriander, Fenegreeke, Flax, Grumwell, Lupines, Sesanix
rice, Roots, Marsh-mallowes, Bares Breech, Beets, Buglosse, Licorish,
Satirion, Barks, Guaicum, Tamarisk, Liquors, Juices, and Gummes, Sugar,
Bdellium, Ladanum, Al. 2. i. e. Others in the second degree, Gum of ivy, the
tallow of Goats, Does, Hearts, fresh Butter.

Hot in the second degree, Hot in the second.
Worme-wood, Pimpernell, green Dill, Angelica, Parsley, Mugwort, Bettony,
Calamus Aromaticus, ground Pine, Faenugreek, St. Johns-woort, Ivy, Hopps,
Bawme, Horehound, Motherwort, Sweete-ferne, Bafill, common-Burnet, Maiden-weed,
Poley, Rosemary, Summer or Winter Savory, Sage, Scabious, Scordium, Staechados,
Feaverfew, Flowers of Nightshade, Saffron, Gilliflowers, or Carnations,
Schaenanth, Lavender, Lupines, Bawme, Ros-mary; Fruits, as Capers, Nutmeggs,
Pistacknutts, dried Figs, dried Nuts; Seeds, as Dill, Parsley, Bittervetch,
Water Rocket, Pulse, or Vetches, Nettle seed. Roots, as Parsley, Caper-roots,
Mayden-weed, common Burnet, Turnips, Zedoarie, Rosewort; Barks, as the Barks
or Wood of Cassia, Cynamon: others in the third degree.

Frankincense, Roots of Capers, Liquors, Gums and Rosins, Wine that is new,
Ladanum, Aloes, and Galbanum, Myrrh, Mastick, Frankincense, dried pitch, Rosin,
storax; Fats, as Lions fat; Libards, Bears, Foxes.

Hot in the third degree are Mettalls, Hot in the third.
Flos aeris, which is that which comes from the Brass in melting, burnt
Brass, Squama aeris or the Scaling of Brass, Verdegrease, Dreggs of Brass,
Alum, Salt, Nitre, Brimstone, Red-vitriall; Herbs or leaves, as
Sowthernewood, Asarabecca, or the chaste Plant, Wake Robin, the Herb called
Jerusalem, or Ladies Rose, the herb Ammios, dried Dill, Bays, Dittany,
Carnations, Germander, blew flower, Bastard Saffron, Century the greater and
less, Celandine, (or Pile-wort) Calamint, Fleabane, Horsemints, Fennel,
Epithymum, so called, because it grows upon Time, Juniper, Elecampane, Hyssop,
Laurel, Marjerom, Marum an herb called Marjerom, Mints, Fennel flower, flowers
of the wild Vine, wild Marjerom, wild Woodbine, Parsley, Sneeze-wort,
Penny-royall, Oxe-stay, Rue, Savine, Wild Time, wild Mints. Al. 2. Time,
trifoile, Vervaine, Nettles, Fl owers of Agnus-castus, Epithymum, Violets, of
the wild Vine, of the wild Woodbine. Fruits, Iuniper-berries, Cloves, the fruit
of Balsimum, Anacardium, that is a fruit of an Indian Tree, like a Birds heart,
and the juice like blood, Pepper, Al. 4. Seeds of Ammi, and Anniseed of
Jerusalem, or Ladies Rose, Carawayes, of Garden Cresses, bastard Saffron,
according to Galen, Fern. 2. of Fennel, Cummen; Carrots, Fennel Flower,
Turnips, Parfly, Hartwort, Stavesager, of a Vine. Roots; of sweet Garden Flag,
others in the second degree, Asarabecca, wakerobbin, Sea Onion, or Squills,
Dittany, Leopards bane, Fennel, English Galingale, both kinds of Hellebore,
Elecampane, Orrice, Parsley, Raddish, Barks bf Mace, Liquors, Tears and Gums;
old Wine, and sweet Asa, stinking Asa, Ammoniack, Cedar, Pitch, Opoponax, Musk.

Hot in the fourth degree, Hot in the fourth.
are such as belong to mettalls as vitriol, Arsenick, Sandaraca, which is a
Gemme, Chrysocolla is a kind of a mineral found like fand in veins of Braffe,
Silver, or Gold, which Goldsmiths use to solder Gold, and Silver with;
Mysysory, is that which the Apothecaries call vitriol, Melantheria, Ink,
wherewith Chyrurgions consume putrifyed flesh, Herbs, or Leaves; Pepper-wort,
Garden, and water Cresses, some would have them to be hot in the third degree,
great headed Leekes, the fullers herb Thapsia, a Milk Thistle; Fruits, as
Pepper etc. Seeds as of both kinds of Cresses, Mustard Seed; Roots, as
Garlic, Onions, Costus, Leekes that have great heads, bastard Pelitory, or
sneezing wort, Euphobium.

Things cold in the first degree, Herbs, or Leaves, Cold in the first.
as Orack, sour Sorrel, Mallows, Mirtles, Pelitory of the wall, Flowers, of
Mallows, Roses, Violets; Fruits, as the substance of Citrons, Quinces, Pares,
Plumbs; Seeds, as Barley, Millet; Roots, of Mallows, Concreate Juices, Acacia,
others in the second, Draggons blood; Stones as a Hyacinth, a Saphir, an
Emerald.

Things cold in the second degree, Leaves, and Herbs, Cold in the second.
a kind of beete which some call Spinack, Spanish Succory, Lettice,
Ducks-meate, Endive or Succory, Violet leaves, Sorrel, Plantine, Knot-grass,
Fleawort, Nightshade; Flowers, of wild Poppies, Cichory, water Lillies;
Fruits, as Gourds, Cucumbers, Oak Apples, Oranges, Pomgranates, Damask
Pruins, Pippens, Peaches; Seeds, of Sorrel, Cichory, Winter Cherries, Wood of
Santalls.

Things cold in the third degree, Herbs, or Leaves, Cold in the third.
Purslan, Mandrake, life everlasting, Henbane, others think it hot in the
fourth degree; Flowers, as of Pomgranets. Fruits; as Oringes, Mad-Apples of
Mandrake; Seeds, as of Hemlock, Henbane, Poppy, Roots of Mandrake, juice of
the juice of Holly Rose.

Things cold in the fourth degree; Cold in the fourth.
Herbs or Leaves, Hemlock, Poppey; Fruits, Apples of Pern; Concrete Liquours,
as the juice of Poppy or Meconium, also Opium, according to the vulgar opinion,
which is not true, for they are hot.

Moist in the first degree; Moist in the first.
Herbs, Buglosse, Pellitory of the wall, Mallows; Flowers, of Buglosse,
Mallows, Endive; Fruits, as the substance of Citron, In jubes, sweet Almonds,
Seeds, of Mallows, Sesami, which is a white grain growing in India; Roots,
of Satyrion, Buglosse, Lycorish, Mallows, Rape Roots.

Moist in the second degree; In the second.
Herbs, as Violet Leaves, Water Lillies, Milk Thistles, a kind of Beet which
has no savor, which some call Spinach, Lettice, Ducks-meate, Purslan;
Flowers, of Water Lillies, Violets; Fruits, Gourd, Melons, Pompions, the juice
whereof some place in the third degree, Peaches, Damask Pruins, ripe Grapes,
Sugar.

Dry in the first; Dry in the first.
Herbs and Leaves, Beetes, Cabbage, Camomill, Fennill, Violets, or Purple
colored Lillies, Malabathrum i. e. a certain Herb, she swims in Ditches in
India without any Root appearing, Mirtles, Petty Mullein, or Longwort, Flowers
of Ox eye, Camomill, Saffron, Violets, Melelot, Roses; other in the second
degree, Fruits; as Juniper berries, Chestnuts; Seed, as Beans, Fenegreek,
Barley, Roots; of Briony, of the wild-Vine, of madder, Tamarisk, Marshmallowes,
Wake-robbin; Gums; Frankincense, others in the second degree.

Dry in the second degree, In the second.
Herbs as, Pimpernell, Mugwort, others say in the first degree, Green Dill,
Bettony, Bindweed, Calamus Odoratus, Endive, Sea Cabbage, Shepheardspowch,
Horstaile, Chervills, Mints, wild Mints, Plantine, Rosemary, Spikenard,
Walwort, Fumetory, Burnet, Sorrel, Vervine, Shephards rod; Flowers, of Piony,
Scarlet, Anemone or wind Flower, ground Pine, Wood-bines, Staechados; Fruits,
the Oily acorne, Capers, Quinces, Ciprus-nuts, Nutmegs, Pares, Pistach-nuts;
Seeds, Fennel, wild Saffron, Lentills Ervum, Millet, Rice, Poppy, Nightshade;
Roots, of Caper, Cichory, Raddish, Wood of a Santall Tree, Tears, Gums and
Rossins, as Galbanum, oppopanax, dry Pitch, Myrrh, Storax, Mastick, Honey.

Dry in the third degree, in the third.
belonging to metals, as flower of Brass, burnt Brass, the dregs of Brass,
Draggon-wort Salt, Solder of Gold, or Saltpeter, Brimstone, red vitriol; Herbs,
and Leaves, Fearne, Yarrow, Cinqfoile, Poley Mountain, Trifoile, Worme-wood,
Southernwood burnt, Dill burnt, Parsely, Asarabecca, Ammi, Calamints,
Germander, Ground pine, Epithimum, Hyssop, Juniper, Marjerom, Horehound,
Origanum, Maiden beets, Wildstone, Parsley, S^eezing-wort, Rue, Savine, Willow,
Water-mints, Time wild Bettony; Flowers, of Pomgranates, Epithimum, Ground
pine, Wildwood-bine; Fruits, of Cloves, the Fruit of Balsamum, Oake-Apples,
Pepper, Juniper Berries; Seeds, as Grains which Dyers use, I think he means
Cutcheneale. Dill, Parfley, Ammi, of the herb Jerusalem, or Ladies Rofe,
Anniseed, Carraway, Cumming, Coriander, Gith, bastard-stone Parfley, Millet of
the Vine; Roots and Barks, of sweet Garden Flag, the hollow Root of
Galingale, Squills, common Cinqfoile, Trifoile, Mountain Osier, Asarabecca,
Smallage, Leopards-bane, Hellebore, Cinnamon; juices, and Gums, Aloes, the
juice of Sorrel, Acacia, Camphir, Musk.

Dry in the fourth degree, Metalicks, Coppras, Arsenick, In the fourth.
Sandaracha, Borax, or green Earth found in the Mines of Brass, Silver, or
Gold, Misysory, that which the Apothecaries calls Vitroil, Milantheria or a
Metallic juice; Herbs and Leaves; Wild-rue, Garlic, Cresses, Mustard Seed

CHAP IV. Of Medicines proper to every part, or of corrobarating Medicines.
BUt whereas occult qualities are often adjoined to the primary qualities,
Medicines proper to every part.
the same things altering are not convenient always, nor accommodated to all
parts, but those things are to be chosen which have regard to every or any part
in respect of the whole substance, and by reason of some occult proprieties
have some singular Sympathy therewith, which Medicines therefore are called
Appropriated or Corroborating Medicines, for so occult qualities concur with
manifest, and conspire in acting, or performing together.

Cephalicks Heating and drying: Bettony, Marjerom, For the head heating and
drying.
Sage, Hyssop, Bawme, Rosemary, Bay Leaves, Bay Berries, Savory, Rue, Calamint,
wild Time, Spike, Lavender, Origanum, Herba Paralysis, I take it to be true
love or one berry (...) Flax, Asarabecca, Liver-wort, Squinanth, Spikes
Maudelin, Fennel, Parsley, Smallage, Sparagus, bitter Almonds, Elecampane, the
flower of Bettony, Raysins of the Sun, Pistacknuts, the hot Seeds,
Sweet-Garden-Flagg, etc. Wood of Cassia, Cinnamon, and the rest of the
Aromaticks.

Things cooling the Liver, Cooling it.
Endive, Cichory, Garden Endive, Lions Tooth, and those which belong to these,
Purslan, Lettice, Roses, Violets, Water Lillies, Sorrel, Straw-berries, the
greater cold Seeds, namely of Mellons, Gourds, Cucumbers, and Citrons, and the
lesser namely of Lettice, Endive, Garden Endive, Purslan, Barley, Santalls,
Camphire, Pomegranates, Currants, Barberies, Strawberries, Melons, Cherries,
Sorrel, whey of Goats Milk.

Things heating the Spleen, Heating the Spleen.
Ceterach, Spleen-wort, Epithimum, Wormwood, Fumetory, Hops, Rue, Calamint,
Parsley, Speedwell, or Fluellin, wild Germander, Ground Pine, Bawme, Garden or
Watercresses, Scurvy-grasse, Hore-hound, Broom, Elder, Asarabbecca, the
Roots of Polipody, Elecampane, Fern, Fennel, Smallage, Vine-roots, Tamariske,
Capers, Birth-wort, Madder, Bitter-almonds, Squils, Sweet-garden-flag,
Ammoniack, Bdellium.

Things cooling the Milt, Cooling the Spleen.
Mallows, Endive, Cichory, Purslan, and for the most part the rest of the
cooling Hepaticks.

Things heating the Reins, Heating. the Reins. and Bladder.
and Bladder, Venus hair, Rue, Saxifrage, Betony, Lovage, Fennel, Rocket,
Mugwort, Calamints, Eringo, Sparagus, Buttchers Broom, Burnet, Liquorish,
Parsley, Smallage, Nettles, Carrots, Dropwort, red Madder, red Parsnips,
Grumwell, Iuniper-berries, flowers of Camomill. Cardomoms, Turpentine Chervill,
Almonds, Pistack Nuts, the Kernels of Peaches, Cherries, Roots of Capers.

Things cooling the Kidneys, Cooling the Reins.
Mallows, Lettice, Purslan, Pellitory, Barley, the four great cold Seeds,
Poppy, Lettice, Fleawort, Quinces, Pepons, Stone-berries, Violets, Flowers of
Water Lillies, Camphire, Santalls, Sorrel, Juice of Lymons, Melons, Currants.

Things Heating the Womb, Heating the Womb.
Mug-wort, Mother-wort, Bettony, Dittany and Origanum, Penny-royall, alamints,
Marjerom, Sage, Time, Bawme, Summer or Winter Savory, Rue, Rosemary,
Bay Leaves, Flowers of Camomil, Cumminseed, Anni-seed, Fennel-seed, Carrot
seed, Parsley, Smallage, Roots of Birthwort, Red Madder, of Eringo, Fennel,
Parsley, Sparagus Burnet, Angelica, Valerian, Master-wort, the meat and liquor
of the Indian Nut, Bay-beerries, Iuniper-Berries, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Sweet
garden flag, Cinnamon, Worm-seed, Saffron, Galingale, Mirrh, Castor.

Things cooling the Womb, Water Lillies, Violets, Roses, Cooling the Womb.
Quinces, and the Sirrup thereof, Purslane, Lettice, Garden-Endine.

Hot simples belonging to the joints, the Gout, and diseases of the sinews,
Marjerom, one Berry Herb, Lovage, Bettony, Groundpine, Rosemary, Sage,
Bay Leaves, Lavender, Staechados, Mugwort, and most of the chephalicks, Castor,
earth Worms.

CHAP. V. Of extenuating, and preparing of humors.
OVt of this form of humors are sought digerent, Of cleansing and preparing.
digestive, or preparing things; so called, all which, since they hinder nature
in acting, take away and change the qualities, which resist the action of
native heat, namely they cool too much those things that are hot, and heat
too much those things that are two cold; they moisten dry things, and dry up
moist things, they attenuate what is thick, and incrassate what is thin.

Namely yellow choler is to be corrected with cooling, Cholers.
moistning and thickning things, Phleagme is to be prepared with heating,
drying and attenuating things; melancholy humors are to be corrected with
things moderately heating, moistning and attenuating; black Choler is to be
prepared with things that are very moistning and attenuating.

And those things are to be used which are fitted to every part, according as
the humor resides in this or that part, cold cephalicks prepare and digest
choler in the head; cold Thoracicks, in the Breast; cold Cardiaacks in the
heart, things cooling the Ventricle, in the stomach; cold Hepaticks in the
Liver.

Hot Cephalicks prepare Phlegm in the head; Phlegm.
hot Thoracicks in the Breast, hot things appropriated to the Ventricle prepare
phlegm in the stomach; hot Hepaticks in the Liver; things heating the Reins in
the Reins; hot things appropriated to the Womb in the Womb.

These things prepare Melancholy, Melancholy and black choler.
and black Choler, Fumitory, Buglosse, Burrage, Spleen-wort Bawme, a kind of
bind weed growing about flax, Venus hair, common Germander, ground pine, Hops,
Barks of Citrons, Fennel Rosemary, juice of Apples, Ceterach, Capers,
Epithymum, Violets, Butchers Broom, the flowers, and seed of Tamariske of
Basil, Ashen Keys.

CHAP. VI. Of Emollients, Relaxing, Rarfying. etc.
EMollients are those things which power our that which is concreate,
Emollients.
such are those things which neither are very hot nor exceeding dry; many hot
in the second degree, and something moist, and moreover having a clammy or
emplastick force, such as are the Leaves and Roots of Mallows, and Marsh
Mallows, the Roots of white Lillies, Orach, English Mercury, the Seed of
Mallows Sesami, (a white grain growing in India) Flax, Fenugreeke, Marsh
mallows, Fat Figs, Simple Oiles, the Fat of Hens, Sowes Fat, Calves, Kidds,
Sheeps Fat, and such like, almost all Marrowes, fresh Butter, Wax, Pitch,
Rosin, Bdellium, Amoniack, Storax melted, Ladanum, Galbanum.

To these are opposed hardening and binding things, Things hardening. Loosening.
which are cold and moist, Sengreen or life everlasting, purslan, Fleawort,
Ducks-meat Nightshade.

Things loosening are compared to those things which bind, which joining
together humors contrary to nature, become hard, and are especially those which
when certain matter, or a vapor or Wind fills the space of the parts, and
extends them, rarifies them, and attenuates and discusses an unsavory spirit
and matter, such are those things that are moderately hot, moisten more
largely, and are of a thinner substance, that they easily penetrate and are not
hindered by thickness, as Lillies, Oil of Camomil, Flaxseed, Fenugreek, Fats,
Butter, Greazy wool and such like.

Condensing things, Condenseing.
are of a more watery nature and contract more weakly, and moreover they close
the thin and external Pores, they contract and condense, but they cannot
contract the whole part on every side, and powerfully, such are cold water,
Purslan, Sengreen, Fleawort, Mouse-eare, Ducks meat, Thistles, green
Houseleek, the greater and the lesser.

Stiptick things are cold and astringent, Binding and Stopping condensing.
and of a thick substance, for being applied externally, by their thickness
they stop the pores, and by their frigidity and siccity they contract the part
and close them into one another, of that kind are those which are otherwise
called binding (or astringent) the Barks of Pomegranates, Frankincense,
Mirobolanes, the Roots of Tormentill, Rhubarbe Torrified, Plantine, Horsetaile,
little double Dazies Blood-wort, or Wall-wort, the Flowers of Pomegranates,
Flowers of Roses, Sorrel; seeds; as of Plantine, Roses, Purslan, Ciprus-nuts,
Mirtles, Quinces, Pares, Medlars, Mulberries not ripe, Ceruises, or (swallow
Pares,) the fruit of a Cornell or Dog Tree, Oak Apples, Kernels of Grapes,
Cups of Acorns, the red juice of Wax or Honey in the Hony-Combs; also such juice
of Wild Honey, Acacia, Mastick, Vermillion, Spode, which is soot arising in the
rising of Brass, Pearls, Coral, Bolearmenack, Irish flat, Alum, Lapis
Haematites or Bloodstone, Iron.

To condensing things are opposed rarifying things, Rarifying.
and to astringent things, opening things; rarifying things are those which
open the Pores of the Skin, and render the passages wider, that Vapors may be
blown or breathed out the better; such medicines are hot, but moderately, of
thin parts and not drying, as Marsh-mallowes, English Mercury, Dill, Flowers of
Camomill, of Melilot, of Elders, seed of Fenugreek, Flax, dry Figs, old Oil,
Butter.

Opening things are those as dilate the Orifices of the Vessels, whence they
may be called in general aperient, Opening the mouths of Vessels.
yet those are principally called aperient, which penetrate deeper and
attenuate the thick humors, and are hot in the second degree, endued with
somewhat a thicker substance, and are not easily dissipated until they have
performed their operation, A hemating and
to this purpose bitter things are very useful next to these are attenuating
and cutting, which divide, dissolve, and make less, those attenuate the thick,
these the viscide, and glutinous humors, and are moreover of a thinner
substance, and hot for the most part in the third degree; also sharp, and such
as appear biting and hot, to the smell, or taste, or to them both, and have a
nitrous and salt savor, or they are sharp and bitter, such are the five
opening Roots, Opening.
so called, that is, of smallage, Fennel, Sparagus, Parsley, and Butchers
broom, Grass, Cichory, Eringo Roots, Gentian, Fern, wild or Garden madder,
Century the greater, Asarabecca, Capers, of Tamarisk, of Ashes, Fumetary
Wormwood, Agrimony, Venus hair, Liver-wort Ceterash, Ground Pine, common
Germander, Bind-weed, Hore-hound, Calamints, Penny-royall, Scurvygrasse,
Brooklime, Watercresses, Anniseed, Fennel, seed, seed of Ammi, of Agnus
Castus, red Parsnibs, Lupines, bitter Almonds, Capers, Kernells of Peaches and
Apricocks, Cinnamon, Cubebs, Sorrel, Ammoniack, the juice of Lymons.

To these are opposed, Iucrassating.
Incrassating things, which make the thinner, and more liquid juices thicker,
such are cold or temperate, without sharpness, of a thick and terrene
substance, whereby, whilst they mingle themselves with thinner humors, they
make them become of a thicker consistence, as Bolearmenack, Poppy, Sorrel,
Rice, Lentills, Quinces, wild Pares, Amylums, it is a food made of Corn without
grinding, Chalybeate milk, the juice of Pomgranets.

Emplasticks, Playster-like things.
and those which have a clammy and Plaister-like force, are such as adhere
close to the passages of the body, and Plaster up the pores, as it were, fills
them, and stops them, and they are certain dry, and earthy things, yet without
mordication, and acrimony, and if they are bedaubed over the passages of the
body, they are hardly taken away, but some are also mixed with an aqueous, and
acrious humor, yet are tenacious, as sweet oil, such are Amylum, Pompholix,
which is the soil that runs off Brass, Cerusse, Chalk, Bole armenack, Irish
slat, Parget Litharge; burnt lead, the Roots of Marsh Mallows, Lillies, seed
of Fenegreek, all mucilages, and bran of wheat, Kernells of Pine nuts bruised
in water, Gume Arabeck, Sarcocolla, Tragacanth, fresh Grease, and Marrowes,
fresh butter, new cheese, whites of an egg, wax.

To these are opposed detergent things, Detergent things and such as open
obstructions.
and such as open obstructions, whereof these cleanse filth in the superficies
of the body, or skin, but those are of a more subtle substance, and penetrate
into the pores also, and open obstructions, and moreover have a drying faculty,
with tenuity of substance whether they be hot, or cold, for there are both hot
and cold abstergent things, such as are all salt things, bitter things, nitrous
things, as Hore-hound, Century the less, smallage, Wormwood, Southernwood,
Hyssop, Cresses, the bread of Lupines, and of a kind of Pulse called Orabus,
Agrimony, Beets, Germander, Tansey, Bitter Almonds, Roots of Birthwort, Orice,
Gentian, Solomon's Seal, Barley, Bran, Juice of Lymons, Nettle-seed, Roots of
Tamariske, Bark of Capers, Spleen-wort, Squils, Nitre, Honey, Sugar, all
Lixuviums, or Lee, Whey, the Galls of living Creatures, Verdy-grease.

CHAP II. Of Medicines easing pain and causing rest.
Lastly, in this form are Anodunes, Narcotticks, Anodunes.
and Hypnoticks, those are properly Anodunes which do not take away the cause
of a disease or dull sense of pain, but such as mitigate the pain, the cause
still remaining, and they are temperate and gentle, and endued with mild heat,
and are soft to the touch, and bring forth a pleasant and sweet pleasantness
and those perform that, which are endued with a lukewarm and gentle heat,
and are most like to our bodies in temperature, and for the most part are soft
and fat, and loosen, and mollify the part that it may be the less apt to be
sensible of pain, such are Camomil, Melilot, Dil, Elder, Mallows,
Marsh-mallowes, Seeds of Fenegreek, Flax, wheat, Barley, sweet Oil of middle
age, Oil of sweet Almonds, and other things prepared, with those above, fresh
Butter, Hens grease, Goose-grease, Whites of Eggs, the pulpe of White-bread,
warm Milk, and Hoggs grease.

Narcoticks or stupefactives, and Hypnoticks, Stupefactives.
which also cause sleep, but neither take away the cause of pain, but stupifie
the part and benumes it, least it should perceive that which is painful; but
this power depends on a hidden quality, such like are Lettice, Water Lillies,
Poppey, Nightshade, Henbane, Mandrake and Opium.

CHAP. VIII. Of drawing and Repelling Medicines.
IN the second form, Things drawing.
are drawing Medicines which attract the humors, and Spirits out of the body
into the superficies, but that attraction is made by heat, concurring with
tenuity of substance, and some are hot and dry in the second degree; which draw
moderatly; others in the third degree, which draw more; others in the fourth,
which draw most of all, and with their heat raise a tumor in the skin, with
redness, and lastly raise blisters, from whence medicines to take away hair,
Synapismes, Rubifying medicines are prepared, such are the Roots of both kinds
of birthwort, selandine, sow-Breed little Dragon, Gentian, wild Pellitory, or
sneezing-wort, Crowfoot, mustard seed, Cresses, Garlic, Onions, Leaven, an
Indian fruit like a Birds heart, and the juice like blood, Gum Amoniack,
Galbanum, sagapenum, Opoponax, dry Pitch, Propolis^ or that in a Honycombe like
wax, Goose dung, Pigeons dung, Hen dunge, and Cantharides.

Repelling Medicines, Repelling.
are opposed to attracting, and prohibit the Flux of humors, or represseth and
casts back that humor which has newly flown in, and moves therein, and is
not as yet settled; they perform this, either because they are cold or
astringent, or because they have both a cold and astringent faculty;
astringents are twofold, some are cold, others not, and indeed they do most
powerfully bind, which are both cold, and astringent; those things which repel
only by frigidity and are aqueous, or humid, are cold water, life for ever,
Purslan, Ducks-meate, Endive, Lettice, Nightshade, Coltrops of water, Venus
Navel, Fleawort, the white of an egg; cold things astringent are, Plantine,
narrow leaved Solomon's seal, Mouseare, Daizes, Horsetaile, the leaves of
service, or sherve Tree, Oak, Myrtle, Medler Tree, the Flowers of Rosemary,
Pomgranates, Mirtle-berries, Oak Apples, swallow Pears, Barberries, Mirtles,
the Barks of Pomgranates, the Roots of wild Damsons, the Roots of Barberries,
the Roots of Cinqfoile, Snake-weed, (or small Bistort) Tormentill, the juice
of Pomgranates, Acacia, Hypocistis, or sap of the Roots of Cystus, of
Mulberries not ripe, sorrel, Irish slat, Bolearmenack, sanguis Draconis,
Tutty, hot astringents are, spike, Aloes, Frankencense, Mirrh, Cypress,
Wormwood Cyprus Nuts, the Barks of Frankencense, sweet Garden Flag, Allom.

CHAP. IX. Of Ripening things, and such as generate quitture; also of such as
generate flesh and Brawny flesh, of such as dry and cleanse green wounds and
cause Cicatrizing, and of such as generate seed and milk.
IN the third form are ripening and concocting things, Ripening and concocting
of quitture.
and moving purulent matter, so called, because without them the generation of
matter cannot be easily performed by nature, to wit, such which by the
similitude they have with our bodies, defend and increase the substance of the
native heat, for they are temperately hot, and together moist and emplastick,
which shutting the pores or passages, keep in and retain the spirits and heat,
such are sweet Oils Oil, mixed with water, Butter, Hogs grease, Calves
grease, the seed, and Bran of Wheat, Wheaten Bread, the seed of Fenugreek,
Flax, Leaves and Roots of Marsh Mallows, Mallows, Bears breech, the Roots
of white Lillies, boiled Onions, dry Figs, Fats, liquid Pitch, (or Tarr) liquid
storax, Turpentine, whereof some if they seem, either too dry or too moist, you
must observe, that scarce ever one of these is used alone but are mingled with
others, so that the dryness with the one may be corrected with the humidity of
the other, and the humidity of the one with the dryness of the other.,

Sarcotticks or such as generate flesh, are such as conduce, Generatting flesh.
to the restoration of flesh, in a wound or ulcer, indeed nature, in the
generating of flesh is the chief workman, yet certain Medicines do as it were
help nature, whilst they remove excrements, which hinder nature in the
generation of flesh, and preserve the native heat of the part, of which kind
are those which moderatly heat and dry, and cleanse filth, without biting
according to the plenty of quirture, and according to the humidity or ficcity
of the body, sometimes they ought to be gentler, sometimes stronger, such are
Barley Bread, a kind of pulse, called Ervum, Fenugreek, Tragacanth, Orice,
Tears of jeat, Mastick, Frankencense, Scamony, Aloes, Mirrh, Honey, Walwort,
Saint John's Wort, Birth-wort, Brass Oar, Cerusse, Tutty, Pompholix, Litharge,
(or white lead.)

Next to these, are Glutinating Medicines, which are no way detergent, but
rather astringent, and by some are called Enaima, and Traumatica, because they
are used, in joining of bleeding wounds, although they are used in cleanseing
Ulcers, from which nevertheless, according to more or less, Epuloticks differ
from such as cicatrize, as being such dry more to the second degree; in the
number of Glutinatives, and Epuloticks are, Alum, Litharge, Circocolla, Aloes,
Bolearmenack, Lead, Brasse-oare, Birth-wort, the Flowers of Pomgranates,
Coral, Horse-taile, Plantine, Wal-wort, Tormentill, Cinqfoile, common
Thurrow-wax, the Barks of Pomgranates, Frankencense, Burnt-brasse washed,
Sanguis Draconis, Lapis calaminaris, Antimony.

Hereunto belongs Traumatick Medicines, or vulnerary which by a peculiar force,
so dispose the blood, that fit and laudable flesh by it may be restored, or any
other substance, which is lost, and afford matter, for potions, called
vulnerary, such are, great and little Cumfery, Sannicle, Cumfery, the middle
Sarracenous, Agrimony, Winter-green, Fluellin, Mug-wort, Plantine, Savine,
Horse-taile, Roots of Tormentill, of Gilli-flowers. Carduus Benedictus,
common, or water Burnet, Ladies-mantle, Periwinkle, Pimpernell, Goldenrod,
Mouse-eare, century the less, Adders-tongue, Bittony Saint John's Wort, Flowers
of Roses, Tansey, Veruine, Dragon, Rupture-wort, Cinqfoiles, Scordium
Crab's-eyes, Mace, Bolearmenack.

To Epuloticks Poroticks all such as generate brawny flesh are nere alike unto,
For wounds. Generating hard flesh.
namely, such as dry, thicken, harden, moderatly heat, and bind, some of those
are given inwardly as juice of Primeroses, or Cowslips, powder of the Roots of
Agrimony, of the juice thereof, but especially the stone called Osteocolla,
some are externally applied, as Bolearmenack, meal, Osteocolla, Aloes, Cypres
Nuts, Frankencense, Tragacanth, Acacia.

Lastly to this form belongs those things which generate and increase milk
and seed, Generating milk.
they help to generate milk which conduce to the generation of good blood,
and draw blood to the pappes, and have a peculiar consent with the breasts,
such are Fennel, and Dill green, Louage, Smallage, Poley Mountain, Rocket,
Milke-wort, yet some are said to conduce to the generation of milk, by a
propriety of substance, as powder of Crystal, Fennel, and Dill.

In like manner those things for the generation of seed, Generating seed.
which generate the best blood, which is the matter of seed, and what things
soever, draws the blood to the vessels, appointed for generation of seed, or
which fill the seed with wind, namely moderately moist, and temperatly hot,
such are, Leekes, Parsnips, a kind of a land Scinks, Satyrion, Rocket, Ashen
Keys, Flax, Garlic, Onions, Eringo-rootes, Turnips, Sparagus, Green-ginger,
Galingale, sweet Almonds, Pine-nuts, Pistack-nuts, Chestnuts, Dates, Beans,
Carrots, Rapes, Rice, Artechoakes, obstreae.

CHAP. X. Of such things as make the skin red, of such as cause Blisters, and
of such as cause scabs, or pustules, of burning things, of Corrosives,
Putrifactives and of such things as take away hair, and extinguish milk and
seed.
TO the fourth rank, belong those things which break forth, Rube-factives,
Escaroticks, and Causticks, which are all comprehended under the name of fiery
Medicines, which with their exceeding heat, as the heat of water, or fire,
burn our bodies, the most gentle amongst them, are Rube-factives which only
by heating make the skin red, and those things which lie deeper, they draw out
to the skin, Making red the skin.
such are Mustard Seed, Cresses-seed, Nettle-seed, the Roots of Thapsiae.

The stronger are called vesicatories, Vescicatovies.
because they raise Pustules, or Blisters, which for reason of the tenuity of
substance, burn only the Cuticle, or the outmost skin, and draw out a humor,
like scalding water, and pull the cuticle from the cutis, or thick skin, and
raise it into a bladder, such are, Cantharides, Mustard Seed, Leaven, strange
Clematis, Crow-foot, seed of Cresses, Thapsia, root of Sow-bread, bastard
Pelitory, sea Onions, Garlic, Doves-foot, Euphorbium, Pidgeons-dung, Soape.

The more vehement are Escaroticks, or such as cause, Burning the skin.
Pustules, or scabs, so called because they burn, not only the cuticle, but
also the cutis, and they are hot in the fourth degree, and of a thick substance.

Amongst these the most vehement are Causticks, Causticks.
and they are endued with extraordinary heat, and thick substance, which burn
not only the skin, but sometimes the flesh also, as burnt brass, Flower of
Brass, quicklime, vitriol, Ashes, or dust of the dregs of Wine, little Figs,
Ashes, of Ash, Savine, Pigeons dung, Ashes of a Pine Tree, white Hellebore,
Salt prepared of the lee, whereof soape is made, Arsenick, Oaker, Mercury
sublimate.

Besides these there are yet other Medicines which draw away flesh, Of
corroding Medicines.
and they are twofold, some of them are more mild and are called Cathereticks,
others are stronger which are called Stypticks; Cathereticks, or Corrafives,
are those which take away the soft flesh that is growing, and only the outmost
which they touch, they take away the superficies not suddenly, but by degrees,
but cannot be endured to penetrate deeper, and they are hot in the third and
fourth degree, the milder whereof are, Aloes, Alum, Ashes of Oystershells,
Ashes of an Oak and Fig Tree, the Roots of a white Vine, of black Hellebore,
burnt Lead, Antimony calcined, the stronger are quicklime, Flower of Brass,
burnt Brass, vitriol calcined, Quicksilver precipitated, sublimate vitriol,
Mysysory (a stinking metal) burnt lead, Things putrefying.
oil of vitriol, sulphur.

Stypticks, or Putrifactives, soften the harder flesh, and they are the
hottest, dryest, sharpest, pernicious to the native heat, which seeing they
destroy, and take away the radical moisture there follows corruption of the
substance of the part, and a deadly putrifyed disease, such are Arsenick,
Orpiment male, or Female stone-Ferne; Pityocampes, they are worms in a Pine
Tree, Monks-hood, sandaracha.

Hereunto belongs those things that take away hair, Taking away of hair.
and extirpate them, and make the part bald, and if they continue long in the
skin, they exulcerate and burn it, such are strong Lee, quicklime, Ants, or
Pismires eggs, sandaracha, Orpiment and Arsenick.

Moreover concerning the extinguishing and diminshing, Consuming of milk.
of milk and seed, the generation of milk is hindered, if the store of blood
be abated, which medicines do not perform, but spare diet, or exercise,
hinders the coming of it to the breast, such are Hemlock, Lettice, Ducks-meat,
Water Lillies, Gourds, Nightshade, Purslan, Poppy but milk that is generated,
is consumed, by the seed of Agnus Castus, Calamints, Cummin, Rue, sage,
saffron, Bean-meale, Lupines, Basil, some whereof are thought to do it by a
hidden propriety.

Certain things consume the seed by a hidden propriety, E^tinguishing the of
seed.
Rag weed, the lesser, as the greater, increases seed; seed of Agnus Castus,
some by a manifest quality, cold things as Hemlock, Gourds, Henbane, Lettice
Water Lillies, Woodsorrell, Ducks meat, sorrel, and sower things; hot,
Calamints, mints, Dill, Rue, Hemp seed, hereunto also belongs Saccharum
Saturni, Camphir, which J. C. Scalliger denies.

CHAP XI. Of Medicines purging through the Paunch.
IN the first rank of Medicines, Purging.
namly of those things which consist in the ablation of any thing, and are
first called Purgers, but although all Medicines in general which free any
parts of the body from excrements may be called, purging medicines, yet use
has brought it to pass that they are only called purging medicines in
particular which lead or drive out excrements through the paunch or by Vomit;
those which move by the belly and are wont to be known by the common name of
Evacuators, are twofold; some of them are such as only purge the belly and the
first passages, others there are which reach beyond the first Region of the
body and emit peccant humors from the more remote parts, which are more
properly called purging medicines.

The former sort the Greeks call, Lenitives.
Enteropticks and Hypacticks that is Lenitives, because they evacuate ordure
out of the guts, and whatsoever is detained in the stomach, guts, and Orifices
of the Meseraick veins, whether they do it by mollifying and humecting, or by
lubrifying and making the passages slippery, which they imbue, and melt the
feces with their abundant humidity, and provoake to expulsion, or whether they
have a power of cleanseing and moderatly stimulating, such are, Mallows, March
mallows, the herb Mercury, Beets, Cabbage, Blites, Orach, Sparagus, Raysins,
sweet Pruins, Sebestens, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Oil of sweet Almonds, new
fat Figs, sweet Apples, fat Broaths, especially of a Cock or Capon, whey,
especially of Goats milk, fresh new Butter.

But the purging medicines are most properly so called which send forth some
particular humor out of the body, Things purging.
from some particular part, but by what power they perform, that is much
controverted by Physicians, but it seems probable, that purging medicines,
whither taken in at the mouth, or by Clister, or externally applied to the
Navell or belly, or held in the hands or applied to the Buttocks are resolved
and deduced into action by the heat of our bodies, and that the most subtle
spirits, or vapors of them so resolved are dispersed through vessels into the
whole body, and by a hidden force and propriety, move the humors which have
affinity with them, and trouble, stir up, and as it were ferment them, and do
so bring it to pass, that those humors, which before were mixed with the
blood, and caused no disturbance of nature, being now stirred up and separated
from them, and being by themselves, stimulate nature and irritate it to
expulsion, which being irritated by the help of the expulsive faculty, expells
both the purging medicine, and the vicious humor so separated by the power
thereof, together from the body.

But some of them are more mild which mollify the belley, More mild.
yet besides this, by a propriety of substance, regard a peculiar humor, and
exercise their strength beyond the first ways, to the Liver and Spleen, yet
cannot evacuate from the whole, and the most remote parts, some are stronger,
which evacuate beyond the liver and spleen, also greater vessels, but the
strongest purges are those which evacuate humors out of the whole body,
Stronger.
and from the most remote parts, and from the smallest veins; there are diverse
purging medicines, yet the difference of them is drawn, from the number of
humors, which they attract by a specifique force.

Cholagogues, or the milder purgers of choler.
MAnna, Manna.
which in the broth of Beef, or of a Hen, or in a decoction of Pruins, or
Tamarinds being dissolved, and strained, is given, from an Ounce to three
Ounces.

Cassia Fistula, Cassia.
is a benign, and safe medicine at all times and all ages, unless that it be
too moist and windy, and therefore, not so convenient for a moist stomach and
guts, and those that are flatulent, and therefore is corrected with Cinnamon,
Mastick, Anni-seed, Fennell-seed, Carrot-seed, half a dram, or a whole
dram being added to it, it is exhibited conveniently in the form of a Bolus,
or Electuary not long before meat, it is given from half an Ounce, to two
Ounces.

Tamarinds are cold and dry in the second degree, Tamarinds.
and for that reason, repress the Acrimony, and heat of humors, the pulpe is
given from an Ounce to two Ounces, or three Ounces, and in decoction to four
Ounces.

The juice of Roses, syrups, Juice of Roses.
and Honey prepared of it gives strength to the Liver, and bowels, but it opens
the Orifices, and therefore is not to be given to such as are with child, the
juice is given to two Ounces, the Syrup and Honey to three or five Ounces.

The juice of Violets, Violets.
and Syrup and Honey prepared thereof, mitigates heat, the juice is given to
two Ounces, the syrup and Honey to four Ounces.

Flowers of the Peach-Tree cause not only purging, Peach Tree flowers.
but vomiting, and purge chollerick and serous humors, the Syrup prepare of
them is given to two Ounces, the conserve to an Ounce, a handful of them
infused in Wine does perform the same.

Myrobalans, of citron color, are cold and dry, Citron Mirobolanes.
and also bind, and strengthen the bowels, but are not so safe in obstructions
thereof. Their astriction is corrected, opening things being added, and sweet
smelling seeds, or if they are rouled in Oil of sweet Almonds, they are given
in powder to two drachms, in infusion to five drachms, or to an ounce and half.

Rupbarbe besides yellow choler, purges phlegm also, Rhubarb.
but not unless it stick in the nighest passages, it is principally good for the
liver, it has diverse parts, by the more subtle it purges and opens, by the
thicker it binds, whence it is profitable, in a Lientary, and in spitting of
blood, and in ruptures, it is given in the substance, in infusion, and
decoction, it ought to be very light, and the third part of Cinnamon is added,
or of Camells hay or Indian spike, when you are willing only to purge, or open,
it is best given, in infusion or decoction, but when you would bind and
corrobarate it is best in the substance; there is also an extract prepared
hereof, but such a one, which scarce purges stronger, then when it is taken in
the substance, it is given in the substance it is given in the substance, to two
drachms, in infusion to half an ounce.

Turpentine moves not only the belly, Turpentine.
but the bowels, and especially cleanses the reins, it is given with the
powder of Rhubarbe, or Licorish, and Sugar, made into a Bolus, or with the
yolke of an egg, and some convenient water therewith, wrought in a Mortar, and
reduced into a milky liquor, it is given from half an Ounce to six drachms.

Aloes is hot in the second degree, Aloes.
and dry in the third, exceeding bitter, it opens the mouths of the veins, and
therefore is hurtful to such as are apt to a Flux of blood, or such as are
with child, and Hecticks, and no way safe for those that are hot and dry,
extenuated; it is most conveniently taken prepared, and extracted, and Rosated,
as they call it, by reason of the bitterness of it; it is not easily given in
drink, but in pills, most properly it is given from half a dram, to three
drachms.

Fleabane, Fleawort.
or Flea-wort, the seed of it, is cold and dry, in the second degree, it is given
in infusion, rather then in the substance, from a dram to three drachms,

Stronger Purgers of Choler.
SCammony is hot and dry in the third degree, Scamony.
it primarily draws choler, next Phlegmaticks humors, and unless it be well
corrected, it frets the guts by its Acrimony, causes gripings, opens the
Orifices of the vessels, and causes a Flux of blood, it hurts the stomach,
Liver, and Heart, inflames the Spirits, and stirs up fevers, and therefore we
seldom use it alone; and least that it should offend, fat things are to be
added, Tragacanth, Bdellium, Oil of sweet Almonds, seed of Fleabane, Cinnamon,
Spike, Galangale, Fennel seed, Quinces, Mastick, the juice of Violets, and
Roses, it is commonly corrected, by boiling it in the substance of a Quince, and
so prepared it is called Diagrydium, there is also prepared of it an extract, or
Rosin, it is scarcely fit to be given to those that are weak although it be
corrected, the dose of Dyagridium is given from five to fifteen grains, some
give a scruple.

Asarabecca purges choler by the Paunch, Asarabecca.
yet it rather stirs up vomit, it attenuates, opens obstructions, and provokes
sweats, and therefore is profitable for Hydropick and Icterick persons, and
such as are troubled with the Spleen, and Quartan Agues, it is given in the
substance from half a Drachme, to two Scruples or a Drachme, in infusion from
two Drachmes to half an ounce.

The milder purgers of Phlegm.
MYrobolans, Mirobolanes Chebula. Emblica. Bellirick.
Chebulae which principally are good for the Brain and Liver, according to
some evacuate also black choler, emblick which are appointed for the heart,
Spleen, and Liver, as also Bellirick are cold, in the first, and dry in the
second degree, and bind, and therefore are not safely given in obstructions, nor
when Phleagme tenaciously cleaves to the guts, but in fluctuations and in a
looseness, and when there is need of astriction and corroborating, they are
prepared according as we have showed before, of the Citron Myrobalams there is
also the same Dose to be given.

Agarick purges only thin, and aqueous Phlegm, Agarick.
but not viscide, and principally evacuates the excrements of the Brain, and
Lungs, opens obstructions of the bowels, yet is not so commodious for the
stomach, and therefore the third part of Cloves, Nutmegs, Galingale, Sal
gemmae, Ginger, are to be added, it is given in the substance to two Drachmes, in
in infusion from two Drachmes to half an ounce.

Mechoacan also purges Phlegm, Mecoacan.
but principally serous and aqueous humors, and therefore is excellent in
Dropsies; it is corrected with the third part of Cinnamon, Anniseed, Mastick, it is
given from a drachme to two drachmes in the substance, in infusion to half an
ounce.

The stronger Purger of Phlegm.
TVrbith is hot in the third, Turbith.
and dry in the second degree, and draws out thick and viscide Phlegm, even
from the remotest parts, it is hurtful to the stomach, and causes loathing, and
Vomit, and is not to be given to children, old men, nor Women with child, and
when it is exhibited, it is to be corrected with Ginger, Mastick, Pepper,
Cinnamon, Fennel, Galingale, nor must you eat fish after you have used it, the
Dose is from 2. scruples, to 4. scruples, in the substance, in infusion or
decoction from 2. Drachmes to 3. Drachms to 6. Drachms.

The seed of wild Saffron, Seeed of Carthamus.
purges Fleagme, and Water, by Vomit and Stool, and is very good for the
breast, and such as have Asthmaes, but it is an enemy to the stomach, and
therefore it is used with the third part of Cinnamon, Galingale, Mastick, or
Anniseed, it is given in decoction from three Drachmes to six Drachmes.

Coloquintida, Coloquintida.
which is hot and dry in the third degree draws out Phlegm, from the most
profound and more remote parts; Turbith cannot evacuate but is a most vehement
medicine, and offends the stomach and Guts, when there is a Fever; and
moreover it uses to be sod, being bound up in a skin, it is seldom used alone,
but instead thereof Troches made thereof, which they call Alhandals, are wont
to be used, it is corrected with Cinnamon, Tragacanth Mastick, Bdellium, and other
Cordiacks, Hepaticks, and Stomaticks, it is given to 15. grains or a Scruple.

Hermodactiles purge thick Phlegm especially from the joints, Hermodactiles.
and therefore is good for the Gout; it is corrected with Cinnamon, Ginger, Mints;
it is given in the substance from 2. scruples to a Drachme and half, in
infusion, or decoction to 3. Drachmes.

Euphorbium is hot and drying the fourth degree, Euphorbium.
it draws away thick and tough Phlegm, but more powerfully aqueous humors,
it is a violent medicine, and it is reckoned by some, rather among poisons, then
purgers, it is corrected by cordials and stomaticks, Oil of sweet Almonds,
Saffron, Mastick, by the sowernesse of a Lynion or Cytron, the highest Dose of
it is 10. Grains.

Opopanax heates in the third, Opopanax.
and dries in the second, it draws away thick and viscide Phlegm from the
more remote parts and joints, it is corrected with the third part of Ginger,
Spike, Cinnamon, or Mastick, it is given from half a Drachme to a Drachme.

Sagapenum is hot in the third, Sagapenum.
and dry in the second degree, and purges clammy and thick humors from the
Bowels, Brain, and more remote parts especially of old men hurts the stomach
and Liver, it is corrected as opopanax, the Dose is from half a Drachme to a
Drachme.

The milder Purgers of Melancholy and black humors.
INdian myrobolans are of the same nature with the rest of them, only that
these purge melancholy. Indian. Mirobolanes.


Polipodie evacuates adust choler, as also Phlegm; it is profitable in diseases
of the splcene, and Hypocondries, Polipodie.
the Dose is from a Drachme to three Drachmes, in infusion to an Ounce and
above,

Epithymum purges a dust choler, Epithymum.
and Melancholy without trouble, and is profitable in Diseases proceeding from
hence; yet because it is hot and dry in the third degree, it is safer to be used in
Winter, then in Summer, it is given in the substance from two Drachmes, to three
Drachmes in infusion from half an ounce to an ounce.

Sena is as it were the middle betwixt the stronger and weaker, hot in the
second, dry in the first, Sena.
it is a very useful medicine, which not only evacuates adust humors, but also
choler and Phlegm; cleanses all the bowels, and is convenient for all ages,
when it is more dry it is not inconveniently corrected with the flowers of Violets
and Burrage, Ginger, or Cinnamon, or the fourth part of Galingale is added to
it, the powder is given from a Drachme to two Drachmes, in infusion from half
an ounce to an ounce.

The stronger purgers of Melancholy and adust humors.
LApis Armenius purges dull, thick, melancholy humors, Lapis Armenius
yet more gently then Hellebore, it is corrected by washing in Cordial waters,
it is given from half a Drachme to a Drachme, or sometimes to a Drachme and
half.

Lapis Lazuli has the same virtue but is something weaker, it is corrected with
Cordialls, the Dose is the same. Lapis Lasuli.


Black Hellebore is not usually to be given to children; Black Hellebore.
women that are great, nor to weak bodies, and indeed it is more safely given
in decoction, then in the substance, it is corrected with Cordialls, and
stomaticks; it is given in the substance from a scruple to two, nay to a Drachme,
in infusion or decoction from a Drachme to half an ounce.

Hydragogues and such as evacuate aqueous humors.
THe juice of the root of Flowerdeluce is hot and dry in the third, Root of
Orice.
opens draws, out thin Choler and water; but for women with Child it is not so
safe, because it provokes the months, it is corrected with a little Wine and
Cinnamon, and Manna, or honey of Roses is added; or decoction of reysins of the
Sun, it is given from half an Ounce to an Ounce and half, or two Ounces.

Gratiola or hedge Hyssop purges by stool and vomit, Hedge Hysop.
but troubles not a little the body, it is corrected with Cinnamon, Anniseed,
Liquorish, it is given in the substance to a Drachme, in decoction from half an
Ounce to an Ounce.

Elaterium or the juice of wild Cucumbers draws water and choler out of the
Bowels, Elaterium.
and happily draws forth the water of hydropick persons, but it provokes vomit
also, gripes the bowels, opens the mouths of the Veins, and unless it be
cautiously exhibited does mischief; it is corrected with Tragacanth, Fleawort,
Bdellium and Cinnamon; in the Dose you must not easily exceed six Grains.

The rine and juice of the root spurge, Spurge.
purges and gnaweth powerfully, and therefore is corrected with Bdellium,
Tragacanth, Mucilage of Fleawort, Cinnamon, Spike, the Dose of the Bark of the
Root is from six grains to fifteen grains, but of the milk (or juice) from
three grains to eight grains.

Mezereon whose force is fiery, Mezereum.
exceeding sharp, exulcerating, biting, kindling Fevers, dissolving the
strength of the heart, and noble parts, and purging choler violently; and
Bilous serosities, it is corrected with Sorrel, with the juice of Pomegranates or
of Quinces, of Purslan, Mucelage of the seed of Fleabane, the Dose in the
substance is from six grains to ten grains, in the decoction from half a
Drachme to a Drachme.

Dwarf elder, Elder. Dwarf.
or Dane wort and elder, the seed and middle bark, and juice of the root and
leaves, draw out water, they are corrected with Cinnamon, the Dose of the
berries is given to a Drachme, of the barks to two drachms, of the juice from
half an ounce to six drachmes.

Soldanella or sea Colewort are the best remedy to draw out water, but it is an
enemy to the stomach, Soldanella.
it is corrected with Cinnamon, and Ginger, the Dose is from a drachme to 2.
drachmes, of the juice to half an ounce.

Gummigote purges choler and water, Gummigote.
and oftentimes causes vomit, which is prohibited by the addition of the
spirit of salt or Mace, the Dose is from five grains to eight grains.

The root of Ialap powerfully and with violence purges serous and black
humors, it is given from a scruple to 2. scruples. Ialap.


Although each of these do purge single humors, yet some of them do purge other
humors also secondarily, Rhubarbe, Aloes, Cassia, Agarick, Scammony, evacuate
choler with Phleagme; Myrobolanes, Chebulae, Lapis Armenius, Lapis Lazuli,
Phlegm and black choler. Sena, Epithymum, Polipodie, black Hellebore, purge
choler, Phleame, and Melancholy, the latter Physicians have drawn other
medicines into use unknown to the Ancients, prepared of Venus Mercury and Mars.

CHAP. XII. Of Medicines that cause vomits.
SEcondly amongst evacuating medicines are such as cause vomitings, Things
causing vomits.
which indeed evacuate the stomach immediately, yet if they are too strong they
draw the neighboring Bowels and the greater veins, they perform that for the
most part by a peculiar propriety, by reason of which they have an inclination
upwards, yet some of them for a manifest cause, namely because they swim in the
stomach and oppress it, and loosen the Orifice of the superior ventricle, such
are all fat and oily substances. But some are gentle, others indifferent
strong, others very strong.

The gentle are simple water, or Barley water luke warm, The most gentle.
especially with a little honey, and salt, drank by little and little at one
draught, common oil luke warm, four ounces or six ounces, Hydromell largely
taken, Hydreles to ten ounces, Figgs newly eaten, and cold water dranked after.

The middle sort are the Flowers of Dill, The middle sort.
as also the Seed of Orach, and of Raddish, they are given from two drachmes to
half an ounce, the root of Asarabecca, and Orach are given in the substance to
four scruples; Bittony, the middle bark of a Walnut, to a drachme, in
infusion to half an ounce, the green pill that cover the walnut shell dried
in an Oven, from half a a dram to a dram, the juice of Raddish to two
ounces, the tops of green Elder, (or the berries.)

The strongest are the Roots, The strongest.
of Spurge, of Sow-bread, to a dram; in infusion, from a dram to two
drachms; the Roots of white Hellebore, in infusion from half a dram to a
dram, adding cardiacks, Flowers of Danewort, Barks, or Root; Flowers of
broom, seed of broom, from two drachms, to half an ounce, the seed of
spurge, the husks being taken of, ten in number, a water to provoke vomit made
of green Walnuts and Raddish Roots, Ana, parts 2. of Vinegar part 3 d, being
distilled, is given to two ounces or three ounces, white vitriol, Salt of
vitriol, glass of Mars, and Flowers, crocus Metallorum, and from thence a
water to cause vomiting prepared by Rulandus, Mercurius vitae etc. are in use
with the chemists.

CHAP XIII. Of Medicines causing Urine.
OF Diuretic medicines, or such as cause Urine, some are properly so called,
Diuretics.
namely such as easily penetrate into the veins, and pour humors into them,
they cut, and separate the thick from the thin; that they may so do, it is
necessary that they be hot in the third degree, and of a most thin substance,
of this kind are, the Roots of smallage, Fennel, Parsley, Butchers-broome,
Sparagus, Valerian, Burnet, Spikenard, Asarabecca, Wormwood, Agrimony,
Nettles, Ground Pine, Cheruil, Rue, Scordium, Anniseed, Fennell-seed,
Hart-wort, cheruil, Gromwell, Saxifrage, Juniper Berries, sweet Almonds,
Peach-stones, and water distilled out of them with Malmesey Wine, Cubebs,
Garden-cresses, the wood cassia, Medicines of spirit of Salt, and of Tartar,
others less properly so called, whereof some are hot but do not attain to
the third degree, as Turpentine, Parsnips, Dill, Venus hair, fresh gathered
Roots of Smallage, others are moist also which supple, or loosen the passages
of Urine, as Licorish, march Mallows, the seed of Mallows, others are cold,
which have an abstersive faculty moderate, attenuating, and refrigerating
force, such are Pippens, Gourds, Cucumbers, the substance and seed thereof,
Barley, Strawberries, whey, juice of citrons, and Lymons, others besides that
they are of thin parts, they afford much aqueous humidity, as thin white Wine,
the seed of Melons, Gourds, cucumbers, waters of baths.

CHAP XIV. Of Medicines provoking sweats.
I Droticks, Provoking sweat.
or Sudoriphicks are endued with a greater tenuity of parts, then Diuretics,
they are hot also and besides they penetrate into the farthest parts of the
body and cut humors, they attenuate, rarify, and turn into exhalation, and
what ever is in their way, they carry with them, and drive into the extremities
of the body, or if some amongst them are cold, or astringent also, by a hidden
quality, whereby they resist poison, they drive malignant humors to the
superficies of the body.

Such are Carduus Benedictus, Venus hair, Roots of Fennel, Smallage,
Parsley, Burdocke, Burnet, Angelica, Tormentill, Worm-seed, China, Flowers of
chamomill, the wood guaicum, Sassafras, Irish slat, Harts-horne, juice of
Elder, Bezoarticum, Minerald without; and with Gold, fixed steel, or
Diaphoretick, and copper, and steel fixed, Diaphoretick, Mercury precipitate,
also to provoke sweates, Laconick bathes, of sweet water are profitable, also
fomentations, as warm Bottles, and hot Tiles, Frications, Unctions and such
like.

CHAP. XV. Of Diaphoreticks and Medicines, discussing wind.
DIaphoreticks, with the Greeks are the same, Dissolving.
with discutient and dissolving medicines with the Latins, and they drive out
through the insensible passages, and secret pores, all such things are hot and
dry, and have power of converting humors into Vapors, and of opening, and
dilating the pores of the skin, such are camomill, Melilot, Dill, Fenugreek,
Rue, seed of Flax, Lupines, Galbanum, dried Pitch, Storax, Brimstone,
Sagapenum, and such like which are lately named.

Next to these are they which are called, Discussing of wind.
discussers of wind, which as well can discuss, and consume wind within the
body as when it is moving to the extremities, such are, besides those already
named, century the less, which wonderfully conduces to the discussion of
wind, upon the Hypocondries, Anniseed, Bay Leaves, Pennyroyall, Fennel-seed
caraway-seed, cummin, Ammi, carrot seed, Parsley, Agnus Castus, Dill,
Juniper Berries, Bay Berries, Galingale, cloves, Mace, the Pills of Oranges,
the genitalls of a Beaver.

CHAP. XVI. Of provoking courses, expelling the secundine, and a dead child.
SUch as bring down menstrous, Eringing down courses.
are either improperly so called, to wit, such as corroborate the expulsive
faculty, or further the generation of blood, or else attenuate its thickness,
and viscidity; or properly so called, which open obstructions of the womb, and
draw down blood to the womb, which opening and cleanseing things most
powerfully perform, and such as are not of a very thin substance, least
through their tenuity of substance, they should presently be scattered, and
therefore there is most conveniently provided for this purpose, things which
have some bitterness, mixed with Acrimony; such like are Sage, Penny-royall,
Dittany, or Garden-ginger, Marjerom, Rue, Calamint, Wild-Marjerom, Bittony,
Spike, Asarabecca, Mugwort, Germander, Worme-wood, Ground Pine, Roots of red
Madder, Birth-wort, Fennel, Parsley, Flowerdeluce, Eringo, Lovage, Burnet,
Saffron, Flowers of white Violets, Parsnips, Juniper Berries, of Bays, Flowers
of Camomill, Cinnamon, Mirrh, native Borax.

The stronger of these drive out the secundine, Expelling Secondines and a dead
child.
and expel a dead child, which therefore are called casters out, and drivers
out, or Ejaculators, because they drive out the young; such like are, Asa
faetida, castor, Myrrh, and those things which are variously applied
externally, as Opopanax, Galbanum, Amoniacum, Sulphur, the smell of the burnt
hoofes of an Ass, Coloquintida, Rue, wild Cucumbers, the gall of a Cow, or
Calfe.

CHAP. XVII. Of Medicines that break the stone.
SInce the common Doctrine of the generation of stones is suspected, as is said
before in the second Book, page 2. Breaking the stone.
C. 9. also the common opinion which strives to support it concerning the power
of dissolving stones is suspected, and therefore here we deservedly fly to the
propriety of the whole substance, which nevertheless is not inconveniently
drawn, from a Saline or salt force, the medicines breaking the stone are
Ground Ivy, Bitony, Pelitory, the Roots of Rest-harrow, the five Diuretics,
the Roots of Raddish, Saxafrage, Burs, bitter Almonds, cherry-stones, the
stones of Apricocks, the Kernells of Medlars, Grumwell, Parsnips, cinnamon,
Gourds, crabs stones, Goats blood, Lapis Judaicus, the Roots of Sparrage,
Snales, Lignum Nephriticum.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Errhines, Sternutatories, and Apophlegmatismes.
ERrhines draw out phlegm into the Nostrills, Errhines.
not from the ventricles of the brain but such as is about the membranes
covering the brain; they perform that by their heat and vitrosity wherewith
they are endued by their extergent and sharp faculty; such are made of
Marjerom, Rue, Pimpernell, cabbage, Beetes, Roots of Flowerdeluce, Fennel
flower, Penneroyall, Wild Marjerom, Hore-hound, Sow-bread, Wild Cucumbers,
celendine, Fell-wort, the juice of double or single Pasque flower.

Ptarnicks, or Sternutatories, or such as cause sneezing, Sternutarories.
are those which by their Acrimony irritate the expulsive faculty of the
brain, which being wearied desiring to expel the medicine, sends out together
with it the excrements, which remain about its membranes, and in it self,
such like are certain Errhines most curiously powdered, and likewise white
Pepper, Ginger, white Hellebore, bastard Pellitory, Caster, Cloves,
sneezing-wort, Euphorbium.

Lastly, Apophlegmatismes, Masticatories, Apophlegmatismes.
or Gargarismes are those which being put into the mouth and touching the
Palate, draw excrements from the brain into the Palate and mouth, and that by
their whole substance, or by their heat and Acrimony, which pour out and melt
excrements, and stimulate the expulsive faculty of the brain to expel, such
are made of Mastick, Raisins, Hyssop, wild Marjerom, sweet Marjerom,
Penneroyall, Caster, Cubebs, the barks of the Roots of Capers, Ginger,
Fennel flower, white and black Pepper, Mustard Seed, Turbith, Staves-acre.

CHAP. XIX Of things causing spittle.
THose things which help to evacuate humors in the breast and lunges when they
are therein contained, Expectorating things.
ought to be cutting and attenuating and somewhat sharp, that they may render
what is thick thin, and what adheres by reason of viscidity, may be cleansed,
least the thinner parts being resolved, the thick should be left behind and
become unfit for expulsion, nor should they be too sharp least they should
stir up the cough, such are made of Hyssop, Venus hair, Scabious, Raisins,
Horse-hoofes, the Root of Elecampane, Birth-wort, Angelico, Flowerdeluce,
Wake-robbin, Squills, Licorish, Raisins of the Sun, Injubes, Sebestens,
Almonds, Figs, Pistack-nuts, the feed of a silk worm, Garden Cresses,
Watercresses, Hartwort, Nettle-seed, Sperma ceti.

CHAP. XX. Of Medicines killing and expelling worms.
LAstly those things may conveniently be referred to this rank which kill
worms, Killing worms.
whither they do it by bitterness, or by a peculiar or occult force, such are
century the lesser, Wormwood, the Herb Lung-wort, Mints, the leaves of
Peach-Trees, Rue, Purslan, Sorrel, Lyons-Tooth, Cynae or Santonici an Herb
like Southernwood, the stalks of Leekes, Orach, Plantaine, Lupines, Roots of
Grapes, Fern, Gentian; Elecampane, bitter Almonds, Peach-stones, Aloes, Syrup
of Pomgranates, Citrons, Hearts-horne prepared, Bole armenick, Myrrh, whither
they are taken inwardly or externally applied to the Navill.

CHAP. XXI. Of drugs good against Poison.
IN the last rank of Medicines, Drugs good against Poison.
we will place those things which resist Poison which are called Alexiteria or
Alexipharmaca, all of these if we rightly weigh the matter, perform that which
they do either with their whole substance, as they say, or else by some occult
propriety: Medicines against Poison are twofold, some are general, and
common, which resist all manner of Poisons, and strengthen and comfort the
heart and vital Spirits, so that they cannot easily take infection, others are
particular which oppose some peculiar sort of Poison.

Common Antidotes against Poison are Angelica; Common Antidotes.
Carduus Benedictus, Valerian, Dittany, Scabius, Divells-bit, Swallow-wort,
Burnet, Tormentill, Rue, Germander, Sorrel, Worme-wood, Plantine, Marigolds,
Speed-well, or Fluelin, Vipers-grass, Zedoary, Gentian, Juniper Berries,
Citrons, Bezoar stone, Unicornes-horne, Harts-horne, Bole armenick, Irish-slat.

Of those Alexipharmicks which resist particular Poisons, Proper.
many are delivered by Dioscordies in his sixth book.

CHAP XXII. Of the manner of finding out the virtue of Medicines.
WE come to the knowledge of the faculties of these Medicines two ways, by
reason, and Experience; How the virtues of Medicines may be found out:
and indeed especially by experience; for the force of some Medicines, as
acting in their whole substan^, is found out only by experience and although
reason may seem to persuade some things, yet unless it be confirmed by
experience it is to be rejected; truly those indications are not plainly to be
rejected which are taken from external passions of things, from the place, and
Air, from colors, and smells, and remarkable signs, yet in many things they
fail, unless experience be joined: nay experience alone often suffices, for
those things which are clearly manifest to our senses, leave nothing of doubt,
yet if that which is found by experience, can be confirmed by reason, Manner of
experiments.
that is, by much the most certain knowledge, but when reason seems to be
adverse to experience, it is better to cleave to experience, yet experience ought
not to be taken rashly, nor to be taken from one example but many observations,
and those are choicely to be collected, which may be done if the medicine
acting, and the body or subject suffering, be diligently considered.

In medicines, especially such as are taken from Plants, the substance,
quantity, quality, age, time of gathering, native place, and such like, are to
be considered, and especially to be regarded, whether it have got any strange,
and acquired quality, but it ought to have its own virtue whole and entire.

The subject is man's body, and all medicines are said to be such, not
absolutely, nor in respect of other things, but in regard of man's body, whence
it comes to pass, that experience ought to be made, of the primary qualities
in a temperate man; in others for the most part, especially those that are
sick, and those that are affected with me simple discase, and not a compound,
least experience should be put out of its course, nor is it enough, that
experience be made once, or in one body, but observation ought to be made in
many that are alike in Temperament, age, sex, structure of body; it is also to
be considered whether any Medicine, performs any thing primarily, and by its
self, or by accident.

THE FIFTH BOOK, PART. I. SECT. II. OF CHYRVRGERY.
CHAP I. Of Chyrurgery in general.
AFter we have spoken of the faculties of the medicines, it remains that now we
speak of Chyrurgery, and that we propound all the operations, which are made
by the hand, and Chyrurgicall instruments, in man's body, for the recovering of
healths sake, we will propound the operations which often are the matter of
help. Chyrurgerys what.


But although the word Chyrurgery, which signifies manuell operation, may be
taken of all actions, which are done by the hand, yet according to
Preheminency, it is taken for that part of Physic, in particular, which by the
artificial use of the hand, cures diseases of man's body, which are contrary to
nature, and so Chyrurgery is employed only in the external parts of the body,
and exercised in those internal parts also to which the hand, and Chyrurgicall
instruments can reach.

Since hence three things are required to perform an action, the Agent, the
Subject patient, and those things by which the action is made, in Chyrurgery
also, these three are to be considered, Description of a Chyrurgeon.
the Agent, is the Chyurgeon, which Celsus in his seventh Book, and the
beginning of that Book thus describes, a Chyrurgeon ought to be a young man, or
a middle aged man, with a strong hand, stable and never shaking, and as ready
with his left hand as with his right, sharp, quick and clear sighted, not
daunted in courage, not pitiful, as he is willing to cure, whom he takes in
hand, one that may not by the clamor hasten his motion more then the matter
requires, nor loss then is necessary, let him cut, but let him perform all
things, as if no others pain could trouble him by their crying.

The subject is man's body, The subject.
the knowledge exactly where of, and the figure of every part, and their
situation, and concoction is required in a Chyrurgeon, which often defection
of bodies will bring forth.

Those things by which an action is performed, are instruments; and some other
things are necessary for performance of operations, as the place, light,
garments, Servants, standers by.

The Instruments are various, Instruments.
yet the chief are, an incission knife, a Penknife, a pair of Tongs, an
instrument to pluck hair from the body by the Roots, called vossella, a
Probe, a broad Probe, a Seaton needle, a Needle, Thread, a Hook, a little
hollow Instrument of Chyrurgeons, boared, a Phillet, Swathing-bands, Clouts,
and little rags, Lint, Sponge.

The place is to be chosen, Place.
which is most commodious for Chyrurgicall operations, and wherein the sick may
not be hurt, by wind, cold, heat, or any external accident.

The light whether it be that of the Sun, Light.
or some other, ought to be such, that the Chyrurgeon may accurately discern
that part, which he dresseth, least he should offend himself or the patient.

The Servants, Servants and standers by.
and standers by ought not to be displeasing and troublesome to the sick, but
ought to be attentive to the commands of the Chyrurgeon, silent, and which is
their duty, faithful to perform his dictates.

The garments of the Chyrurgeon ought to be so made, Garments.
that they may no way hinder him in his operation.

The Chyrurgeon himself ought to endeavor as much as in him lies, to
perform his operation presentsy, safely, and with delight, and as much as
possible without pain.

All the Chyrurgicall operations are five, Chyrurgicall operations how many.
a putting together or conjunction of separated parts, a correcting and setting
right of those things which are out of joint, or out of their place, a Solution
of continuity, an Extirpation, or cutting off of Superfluities, and a
Restitution of deficiencies, of which now in their order.

CHAP II. Of putting together, and binding in general.
POsition is that operation of Chyrurgery whereby the parts, are joined
together, Setting or putting together. Finding.
which were separated contrary to nature.

Deligation or binding is necessary to this as also for the most part to other
Chyrurgicall operations, to which belongs fasciation, or Swathing-bands, and
the putting in of Tents, fitting of Splints to bind about wounds, and the
action it self or putting in of a round string to cleanse the wound, aright or
true placing of the part bound.

Of Swaddling.
A Swath is a long and broad band (or list:) Swathing.
fasciation is a convenient circumduction and convolution of the swathing-band
about the member to be cured, the most convenient bands are linen, which are
clean, light, soft, which have neither seames, nor knots.

The differences of Swathing-bands are various, Differences of it.
which are taken from their figure, length, and breadth, they differ in respect
of figure, because some are rolled up thick, long and equally broad, and rolled
up into a round circle, others are rent, or broken, which consists only of one
linen cloth, but that cut or parted, either in the middle or outsides, others
are sowed together, which are Swathing-bands and Ligatures ending in diverse
heads, and representing several figures; Swadlings differ in longitude,
because some are longer, others shorter, and so it is of latitude.

There are two kinds of deligation, the one simple, Differences of deligation.
the other compound or manifold, the simple is either equal or unequal, the
simple that is equal, is only round, which incompasseth the affected member,
in a round circle, alike every way, without declination, unto either part, but
is simple equal, binding is divided into Asciam, and Simam, which only differ
in respect of more and less, because Asciadeclines a little from a round, but
Sima, much of several ways of swathing are many differences, taken from the
similitude of the parts which are bound, or from the similitude of certain
Animalls or other things, of which Galen in his Book of swathing.

As for what belongs to the manner, The manner.
sometimes the binding, is to be begun from the part affected, other times from
a sound part, nearest to the part affected, sometimes from the opposite part,
moreover sometimes swathing is to begin, at the end of the swathing-band,
sometimes at the middle, thirdly swathing-bands should neither press the part
too hard, nor suffer it to be loose, for when it is too loose, it does not
sufficiently contain the part, and when it is too hard it causes pain and
inflammation.

The use of swathing is twofold, one by its self, which is to draw together
the disjoined parts, to contract thedilated, to direct the distorted, to
contain the member framed and the adjunct parts, to resist a humor flowing;
or to repress a humor which is already flowne, or to force blood to
extenuated parts; but that which begins in a place affected represseth from the
part, that which begins from a sound or opposite, forces toward the part, the
other is by accident, which is to keep on medicines applied to any part.

Of Cerots or Bolsters.
SPlenia, Splents made up with Linen.
are Plasters so called, from the figure of the Spleen, the Ancients calls
them, Plumaccoli, but now they are called Pulvilli, Plagulae, they are linen
rags folded up together, which are put to the part, some according to longitude
right, others oblique, others transverse, and some doubled, foam threefold,
others fourefold, sometimes single, and sometimes more, according to the use
which they are put for to strengthen, the binding members, unequal in
thickness, or thin and hollow parts are to be equalled, and filled up; that
the whole dilagation may be equal, the parts also are to be defended from the
pain of the swathings and bands, and the Sanies, and thin matter, is to be
expressed and imbibed.

Of Splents.
SPlentors, or splents, Splents.
which are wont to be fitted to broken bones, and such as are out of joint,
after they are set, which were prepared by the Ancients, of wooden-slips of a
cane, but now they are prepared of the wood, of Fur, or splentors of some
other wood, or of the Barks of Trees, or Paistboard, and hard Leather, which
may answer to the parts greivously wounded, or broken, or put out of joint,
especially to the hands, sometimes to the chest of the body, so made up, of
light wood, that they may answer to the figure of the member, or of white thin
plates of Iron, or tough skin, or shell, Paper glued together, and fitted, so
that they may contain, the parts drawn and joined together, least that they
shake or totter, and slip out again, and slide out of their places.

Of Binders.
LAqueus, Swathingbands.
is a band or binder so knit together that being drawn in or pressed by weight,
is shut, or closed, the use thereof is to extend broken limbs, or such as are
out of joint, to continue such as are put right in their places, to bind the
parts and draw them in straight, also to bind the heads of vessels out of
which blood flows, the differences of them may be seen, in Oribasius de
Laqueis.

Of fit placing of a member that is bound.
THe convenient placing of a part that is bound consists in this, that it may
have that position, which may preserve its natural figure, and may be without
pain, and may be convenient for the cure of a disease. A member shall be so
placed if all its parts, bones, muscles, nerves, veins, and arteries, may
enjoy that position whereby they neither are distended, nor pressed; if the
member be set or placed softly, and equally; if the orifice in a hallow ulcer,
or wound, tend downward as much as may be, that the quitture may be purged
out; lastly if moderation be observed in ordering of the binding so that it be
neither too straight nor too loose.

But collocation is made either by putting in, or by suspending; a member is
fitly restored, when it is underpropt with certain stays, with feathers, wool,
or soft rags, that it may be quiet and leaning or resting on somewhat, it
should lie always even, and soft, least it either should be shaken by motion,
or extended by reason of flux, or least the sanies and thin matter should be
retained in it: the member is suspended, either when the sick keeps his bed,
or newly begins to walk, and especially the hand, and the arm are to be kept
in a Swath, which Celsus calls, Mitellam.

CHAP III. Of Coaptation of broken bones.
Synthesis, which joins together separated parts, is either of bones, Setting
how manyfold.
or of fleshy and soft parts, setting together bones is either a fitting those
that are broken, or a restoring those which were out of joint.

The putting together of broken bones, is performed by two operations, Of
broken bones.
whereof the one is called Catastasis, Antitasis, or extension; the other is
called Diorthosis conformation, or it is called reposition of the bones, into
their own places; extension is either equal, or unequal, equal is that
wherein the member is equally extended from either side of the broken bone, but
that is said to be unequal, when the member is more extended on one side; that
side ought to be more extended, wherein the broken bone is contained but no man
can rightly perform those operations, Extension.
unless he knows the nature, and differences of bones and fractures, for
when a muscle is drawn back to its head, and so carries with it that part of
the member which is joined to it, first there is need of extending, which the
Greeks call Antitasis, which ought to be done, as near as may be, with little
or no pain, and that is performed by one work, or more, and that either with
the hands only, or raynes as it were swathings, or instruments, according as
the bone is more or less broken.

Diorthosis, or conformation, Strengthening.
is a restitution of a broken bone into its place, and a right fitting of the
extremities of the broken bone, which is performed if after the member be so
much extended, that in putting it back the bones cannot touch one another, the
Chyrurgeon is to take hold of the member on both sides, with both his hands,
and that which is slid into the right part he should thrust into the left, and
the contrary, and what ever hangs out of the bones, he should put back into
their own cavities, until the extremities of the bone are rightly united, and
thrust back, into their places, and the member has recovered its natural
figure. The cure of a fracture with a wound.


But if the extremities of the broken bones, break through the skin, that they
hang out, some convenient instrument of Iron, like a bar, is to be used, to
force the broken bones into their place, but if any particle of a bone so hang
out, that it cannot easily be put into its place, it is to be cut off with a
sharp pair of cissars, or to be filed off with a file, that it may be shorter,
neither let it any more hinder the reposition: in such a fracture which is
joined with a wound, if any thing stick betwixt the broken bones, which may
impede their glutination, whither particles of a bone, or any thing whatsoever,
it is to be taken away without violence; when the bones are rightly placed, the
extension is to be remitted by degrees, and with convenient binding and placing
of the member, and so to be performed, that the bones united and rightly framed
may remain so.

Yet before swathing-bands are put about a broken member some medicines used to
be applied, to hinder the Flux of humors and inflammation, and to farther the
generation of brawny flesh, of which, read the Institutions.

The deligation is to be performed, Manner of swathing or deligation.
neither too straight nor too loose, with two swathing-bands, whereof the first
is to begin above the fracture, and to be bound about it, twice or thrice
upwards; the other, being longer by half, is to be rolled about the contrary
way, and is to be put on first upon the fracture, and beginning from thence to
be rolled about something downward and again is to be carried above the
fracture, and lastly toward the superior sound part, but in fractures of great
bones, that the deligation may be the more stable, and the bones firmly put
into their places, may remain so, Bolsters or cross folded clothes, and
splentors, and Plates, are also to be used, moreover the member is rightly to
be placed, gently, equally, and inclining upwards, so that the part may obtain
its natural position, to which purpose, both a hollow Pipe, and Cane, or
Plate, or such like, are sometimes to be applied, the deligation being well
performed, is to be loosned the third day, the fracture to be cleansed, and
bound up again, and this is to be continued until hard flesh be grown, and
the fracture healed, but if a fracture be joined with a wound, after the
extension is abated, and there is convenient conformation of the broken bones,
the lips of the wound are to be drawn together, and being drawn, to be kept
together, yet so that the swath-bands be not too straight bound, which ought to
be flacker, and to be extended on both sides, beyond the lips of the wound,
least pain should be stirred up, but in the following deligations, a hole, or
vent, may be cut above the wound, both through the Plasters, and swathing
bands, that it may be perfectly cured.

CHAP IV. Of restoring of bones that are out of joint.
Synthesis which puts bones slid out of their places into them again, call
this Arthrembla, this is performed three ways, either with the hands of the
Chyrurgeon which is convenient in tender bodies, and when the hurt is newly
done, or with certain common instruments, as by the help of raynes,
swathing-bands, Laqueorum, scalarum, sedilium, forium bifidarum, and it is
convenient for children, Women, and those whose muscles are grown stronger, and
luxations have been longer, or by instruments, certain Engines, peculiar for
that purpose, is performed, and are used for strong bodies, and old luxations,
and altogether on those, which cannot be restored by the two former ways, of
such Engines, you may see Hippocrates, of joints and fractures, and Oribasius
of Engines intititled, de machinis.

But after what manner soever, restitution of a boneout of joint is performed,
four operations are necessary to do, it first Extension, Reposition,
Deligation, and Confirmation, What things are required for the setting of bones.
and Collocation, of the members so replaced.

Extension, is made, either by the hands of the Chyrurgeon, or his Servants, or
by raynes, bindings and swathings, or Instruments, and Engines, as is said.

Extension being made, the bone which is slid out of its place is to be put
into it again, which work the Greeks call, Moclia, and Mocleuses, Reposition.
namely a compulsion of a bone that is out of joint and extended into its own
place, which being slid from or out of the end, in the same way which the joint
slid, it ought to be put back to that place out of which it slid, whereof there
are so many ways as there are joints.

The joint being restored, the intention is to be remitted and the member
afterward, so to be strengthened that the joint cannot again go out of its
place, Deligation.
which for the most part is performed in the same manner as in fractures.

Lastly the member is to be placed gently, and equally, and to be kept unmoved
till the fourth or seventh day. Collocation.


CHAP. V. Of the putting together of the soft and fleshy parts.
THe fleshy and soft parts, disjoined, Setting of soft parts.
preternaturally are joined together, either without any division of them, or
by solution of their continuity, that putting together, which is performed
without any division of parts is various, and of different parts, and first of
all sometimes certain parts being slid out of their places, come to be put
into their natural place again, such are the guts, and paunch, which
sometimes by the wounds of the paunch come out, sometimes the Rim of the belly
being loosned, or broken, falls into the groine, and cods, or break out at the
navell, hitherto belongs the womb, and gut Rectum, which sometimes also fall
out of their places, and therefore all these are to be put into their places
again, but how the restoring of each singular part ought to be performed, is
spoken in our Institutions, and 3 d. Book of praxis.

Moreover, Wounds, how set.
for what belongs to the manner of joining together, wounded parts, without
division, the lips of the wounds, since they are disjoined, are to be brought
and joined together, and when they are brought, being joined are to be kept
together, which may be done too ways without solution of continuity, either by
swathing, or gluing, or a suture with the Glue, and indeed as for swathing that
is convenient being made for Wounds according to the length of the member,
Swathing.
and not very deep, and when we hope by fasciation only, the lips may be
joined. A future is not rashly to be appointed, and indeed if the wound be
long, narrow, and straight, swathing is better, that is, deligation of three
fingers breadth is enough. The manner of fasciation may be seen in the
Institutions.

But when in transverse and long wounds, A suture by glue.
sasciation alone is not sufficient to draw and continue the lips of the wound
together, there is need of a suture; but when in wounds of the face prickings
cause deformities, and in other long and great wounds before the glutination of
the wound the sutures are broke; render bodies also cannot endure a seam which
is made with a needle, a certain lutination or suture is invented by glue, by
which without any division of the wounded part, or stitching with a needle, the
lips of the wound are drawn together. Provision to perform this may be seen in
the Institutions.

But that conjunction of wounded parts which is made by solution of continuity
is performed with a suture and pipes to the suture, A suture by a needle.
three Instruments are to be used, the Needle must be triangular and thread
strong, least it should be broken, not too hard, but softened with Wax, equal,
or even, the Pipe ought to be Gold mixed with Copper, or Silver, with a hole in
the end that the Needle may pass through the hole, and the Pipe holding it,
and being put to i^, it may stay the lips of the wound, least whilst the needle
is put to it it should be stirred, neither should it be lengthned to the
protraction of the thread and needle: the manner of the suture is twofold, the
one is that which is performed in the same manner as Skinners or Furriers use
to sow their skins, being fitted for wounded guts; the other is thus, in the
middle of the wound, with a Needle drawing a double thread, the lips of the
wound are tied, and a knot being made, the thread a little above the knot, is to
be cut off: Moreover in the middle space on both sides another hole is to be
pricked with a double thread, and a knot being made in the like manner, it is to
be cut off, and that is to be continued till the lips of the wound be rightly
sown together, and brought to mutual contract. Fibulae.


There is mention also amongst the ancients of a Pipe, but what it was for the
most part is unknown at this day, since it is incredible that those iron hooks
should be fixed to the skin, since that would have caused intolerable pain,
the opinion of Gabriel Fallopius is more probable, who teaches that pipe to be
that suture newly described, which is called Intercisa, and at this day is most
frequent, which is drawn with a needle drawing a double thread through both the
lips of the wound, and above the wound, with three involutions, both the ends
of the thread are tied together and knit into a knot. But the word Fibula
signifies every Instrument that joyneth things together. And thus much of the
Chyrurgicall operation which is of putting or joining together.

CHAP. VI. Of correcting of Bones that are represt or set awry.
THe other Chyrurgicall operation is Diorthosis, or the putting right, a
correcting of bones put awry, or writhen; The Skull if it be deprest, which
often happens in Children, is to be reduced into its natural condition and
place, either with Cupping-glasses, the hair being shaved with a great flame
put to them, and the mouth and nostrils being shut, the Patient by expiration,
together with a violent striving, by putting Cucurbita Cornea, out of which the
mouth and nostrills of the sick being shut, a strong man may suck up air, or
with some Plaster sticking very fast to the skin, which is to be applied, and
when it cleaves very fast then to twich it up, or with an elevating Augur, or
trepan, or by performation and elevation of the Skull.

The bones of the nose being broken or bruised, Of the nose
are to be drawn back by the finger, or a Specillum put into the nostrill, and
without are to be directed and put into frame by the hand, and afterward a
tent is to be put into the hollow of the nose or nostrill.

A member being contracted first it is to be softened, Directing of contracted
members.
afterward either gently to be bowed, or with an Instrument fit for that
purpose it is tenderly and by degrees to be drawn in, or stretched out.

The Legs or Arms in Infants being awry, Direction of crooked Legs or Arms.
the best way of directing them is, that they may be reduced by handling and
directing them gently with the hands and by degrees, and with swathings drawing
them the contrary way to that which they are in, and by rolling the swath-band
by little and little they may be reduced into their natural and due figure,
but if the swathing be not strong enough, and that the child desire to go,
little boots like bagging shoes in that manner as Paraeus has described them
in his twentyeth book of Chyrurgery, Chap. the eleventh, are to be fitted to
his Legs; and thus much of the second operation of Chyrurgery.

CHAP. VII. Of disjunction in general, and of dissection of soft parts.
THe third operation of Chyrurgery is disjunction, The kinds of division.
which devides those parts of the body which are joined and continued together,
of the first of these there are two kinds, Section, and Ustion; Section, some
is of soft some of hard parts; and of soft parts according as it is made by
cutting or pricking, in particular it is called, Tome, or cutting, or
Paracentesis, pricking; of the bones and hard parts there is perforation or
boaring with a wimble, shaving, filing, sawing; lastly Ustion is common both to
hard and soft parts, all which operations are now to be explayned in their
several kinds.

In cutting soft parts, Opening of a vein.
first comes the opening of a vein, which is appointed for emission of blood
out of the body, in diverse parts of the body, the provision and convenient
preparations for that purpose may be seen in the institutions.

Moreover since that sometimes the matter in tumors should be changed into
quitture, Opening of imposthumes.
nor does an imposthumation, always break of its own accord, and it is to
be doubted least the purulent matter retained should offend the neighboring
parts, and bring rottenness to the bones, sometimes also there is venomous
matter, and affects the way to the internal parts, or an imposthumation or
Ulcer near a principle part, or joints, may stop the fundament, oftentimes an
Ulcer or imposthume full of matteris to be opened with an Instrument, or by
which opening ought to be so performed as that the adjacent veins, arteries
and nerves may not be offended; the Sanies either is included in a bladder, or
else has no bladder; if the quitture be not included in a bladder, let that
part be wounded that the tumor may come to its height, and the skin is very
thin, yet as near as may be do it in a declining part; the Instruments fit
for cutting are, variety of Incision knifes, according to the variety of
figures, and necessity of their use, the bigness of the cut is to answer to
the quantity and the quality of the matter to be emitted, an incision being
made, and the matter in some part evacuated, least the wound before the whole
matter be let out should close up again, tents are to be put in, nay if need
be, the wound must be dilated, and the part so bound up and placed, that the
quitture may conveniently flow forth, but if the purulent matter be enclosed in
a bag, the tumor according to its longitude if it be less or cut athwart
like, the letter X; if it be greater and the whole bagg with the matter in it,
it is to be taken out and nothing of it to be left behind.

Thirdly Fistulaes also are often to be cut, The cutting of a fistula.
which is done with a fit Instrument, which therefore the Greeks call
Syringotomon that is a Pipe cutter, the manner of cutting may be seen in the
Institutions.

Fourthly parts also are sometimes to be separated which are joined together
from ones birth, after ones birth, Separation of parts that are joined together
preternaturally.
whereunto belongs the cutting of the tongue when it is tied, of ears when
they are shut, of the fundament when it is closed, the opening of the private
part of a female, the freeing of the prepucium when it is straightned, a
separation of it from the glans, the opening of the top of the yard, or glans
when it is closed, separation of fingers growing together, the opening of the eye
lids when they grow together, all which may be performed by cutting by a
skillful Chyrurgeon, and how it shall be performed, shall be explained in the
Institutions.

Fifthly hitherto belongs scarrification, Scarification.
which is performed with an incision knife, or lance, and so that the skin may
be opened only with gentle cuttings, or to wound it deeper, and that the more
ready evacuation of blood may follow, cupping glasses for the most part with a
burning flame are to be applied, which may attract the humors more potently,
yet sometimes scarrification is appointed without cupping glasses, such as that
of Mallets which was in use amongst the Ancients, and the scarrification, in
use with the Egyptians this day.

Sixthly, Cutting of vessels.
Angeiologia so called in particular, which is a cutting of the vessels in the
forehead, in the Megrim, and an inveterate Opthalmy, and when there is a
perpetual weeping of the eyes, whereby a vessel, freed from the neighboring
parts, is tied with a thread on both sides, and afterward in the middle
betwixt the two threeds it is to be cut transverse according as the manner of
operations is delivered in the Institutions.

To the cutting of vessels belong the cutting of the varices, Cutting of the
varices.
which was done by the Ancients, almost in the same manner as the cutting of
the other vessels lastly propounded, as you may see out of Celsus the 18. Book
Chap. the 13. Paulus Aegineta the 6. Book the 82. Chap. Hier. Fabricius has
another manner of Chyrurgicall operation, Tit. of Chyrurgery of the vessels
called varices, namely such a one, the Instrument Volcella (which is to pluck
up hair by the Root) bowed or lifted up first with a hook, he prick; the
varices in many places, afterward he puts to it a binding medicine
representing the figure of a candle, according to length of it, and upon this
he puts the bark of a hollow reed or Cane,

To Angeiologie also may be referred that cutting of an Aneurisme, Cutting of
an Ancurisme.
out of Paulus Aegineta, 6. Book, 37. Chap. and 64. Chap. which may there be
seen, which nevertheless is scarce to be attempted unless the Aneurisme be
very small, and in an ignoble part, not having any great vessels, since
without great danger it cannot be performed.

Seaventhly, Paracentesis.
to Separation or Section, belongs Paracentesis by which word every pricking in
general was denoted by the Ancients, and it is performed in diverse parts, and
that either with a needle or with the point of a knife, this operation is
famous and Ancient, in the paunch, to evacuate water of those that have
dropsies, which retains the name of the general name, the manner and reason
of performing whereof in the Institutions and in the 3. Book of Practice part
the 6 th. sec. the 2 d. Chap. 3. is delivered; in water of the head the same
pricking is sometimes used in the skin of the head, and in the cods filled with
water.

Hereunto belongs the cure of a Cataract by pricking which is so to be
performed as Celsus also describes in his 7. Couching of a Cataract.
Book and 7. Chap.

As also the cutting of the windpipe, Laryngotome.
which is called Laryngotome, which when it is necessary is to be performed
with a lance, (the other parts being removed, under the Larynx betwixt the
third and fourth ring of the Windpipe, the manner of operation is propounded
in the Institutions.

As also the cutting of the breast, in an Empyema, An incision of the breast.
or an Ulcer or imposthume, in the cavity of the breast, which is performed on
one side of the breast, betwixt the fifth, and sixth rib, and how it also is to be
performed is explained in the Institutions.

Moreover a Seton, Applying of a Seton.
or using of a Seton Needle by which operation the neck is pricked, and the
wound kept open, that peccant humors may be evacuated by it, of which
operation you may also read in the Institutions.

To prickings, we have annexed leaches, Leaches.
or the application of leaches, which being chosen, prepared, and cleansed, are
applied with a rag, or a reed; by their biting they open the veins and draw
out blood, and indeed from the subcutaneous parts only, and capillary veins,
if they are applied only to the skin, but if they are applied to any great
vessel, they draw blood from the innermost parts of the whole body, and
therefore they are applied according as there is need of this or that
evacuation, and are applied to children when we dare not use the lance to open
veins. To the veins of their arms when they are affected with any grievous
disease that requires evacuacion of blood.

CHAP VIII. Of Section of Bones.
BUt that cutting which is performed in hard parts or bones is fourefold,
according to the various manner of separation, and variety of instruments,
namely shaving, filing perforation, and sawing.

First shaving is a plaining and a making smooth of the inequality of bones
with an incision knife shaving them, Shaving.
or a detraction and taking away of the filth clinging fast to the bones, and
it is performed with files, in magnitude and figure, according to the several
natures of diseases and of bones; either straight, such as are hammers which
they use in driving, or bent in the end such as they use in drawing, sometimes
they use both a file, and a Hammer wrapped in a clout.

Secondly filing, Filing.
or wearing away of bones with a file, it useful in the teeth when they hang
out contrary to nature.

The third is perforation whereby we cut the part out of the middle of a bone,
Perforating.
either with a Trepan or with a file, or together with a Trepan and a file; the
perforation which is made by a Trepan, the Greeks call, Trupesis, a wimble
they call Trupanon, Kinds of Trepans or Wimbles.
and Trupane; but a Trepan is either straight and sharp, and in a hollowed
circle, which is called a wimble in particular, or it is hollow which is
called, Modiclus; Trepan is like to common wimbles which Carpenters use, and
it is twofold, the one is that which answers plainly to the wimbles of
Carpenters; the other, which near the point at such a distance as the
thickness of the skull is of, has a knot without, or a circle fitted, which
whilst the Trepan is within the skull, hinders it that it cannot go deeper
then is fit, which kind of Trepan, because it cannot go deeper, the Greeks
call Trupanon, or Abaptiston; Modiolus the Greeks call, Cointhion, and
Coinichis, and Prion Caractos, it is a hollow Instrument of Iron, round and long
like a Pillar, at the bottom of the mouth like a saw, or full of teeth, and
straight Trepans, which are called Periteria, are opposed to it, which are
turned about with a handle, which if it have a nail (or pin) in the middle it is
called male, and if it have not is called female, but the perforation or
boaring is performed principally when the skull is broke, or when some matter,
or blood is contained within the skull, the manner of which operation may be
seen in the Institutions, sometimes also in rotten bones when the rottenness
goes deep.

Lastly by sawing, Sawing,
or cutting with a saw, bones are divided, when any dead part, the flesh being
first cut away with a knife to the bone, and the bone is laid open, or when
some broken bone hangs our, and cannot be put back into it place, or when any
chinke is to be filled up, or when the table of the skull is to be taken away.

CHAP. IX. Of Burning.
THe last kind of separation remains, Burning.
which is burning, which is to be used when diseases cannot be taken away by
medicines, nor cutting; burning is performed two ways, Burning twofold.
either by those things which actually have in them fire, and a fiery quality
as Iron, or other fiery Instruments made of Gold, Silver, Brass, which are
called actual Cauteries, or with burning medicines, which are called
potentiall Cauteries.

There are some differences of actual Cauteries, especially, An actual
Cautery.
in respect of matter and figure, and differing also some other ways; as for
matter, Metallic Instruments prepared of Iron, Brass, Silver, Gold, are in
use this day, Iron burns potently, Brass and Gold not so violently, the
figures of Cauteries are various, which are described every where, sometimes
they are fiered more, sometimes less, sometimes impressed deeper, sometimes
superficially only, the manner of burning is to be seen in the Institutions,

Another manner of burning is that which is performed by potentiall Cauteries,
Potentiall.
what Caustic medicines are, and Escaroticks, is spoken above, part the 1.
sect the 1. Chap the 10 th. and in what manner Cauteries are to be prepared
shall be shown in the end of this Book.

Fontanells, Issues.
and Issues are made by actual and potentiall Cauteries, namely little Ulcers,
prepared to evacuate, draw back, and drive humors through them, but in what
parts, and how these Fontanells are to be made shall be shown in the
Institutions.

To this third operation may be referred that, Cupping glasses.
whereby something is drawn in the body, or out of the body, by cupping
glasses, but a cupping glass is a vessel with a belly which is fastened to the
body to draw, all whose strength of acting comes by reason of vacuity, but what
the differences of them are, the manner of applying of them, and their use,
shall be shown in the Institutions: and thus much of the third Chyrurgicall
operation.

CHAP. X. Of drawing of things out of the body which were sent into the body
from without
THe fourth Chyrurgicall operation is, How many ways things may be drawn out
of the body. Drawing out of things thrust into the body. A Dart how many ways
it may be drawn out.
Exairesis, or extraction of hurtful and unprofitable things out of the body;
but things which are to be taken away, are either sent from without into the
body, or begotten in the body.

First for what belongs to the extraction of things sent from without into the
body, they are twofold; first all those things which are sent to wound the
body, as darts of all sorts, and Bullets shot out of Guns; Moreover certain
external things which come into the Chops and Throat, Ears, Nostrills, and
Eyes, and stick in them,

But Darts are taken out two ways, either by extraction, or impulsion, that
is, either that way which they came in, or that way which it aimed to go out
at; it is drawn out by the part which it came in at, either without any
launcing, or with launcing; for if the dart pierced not deep, if it has not
passed through great vessels, or nervous parts, and and meets with a bone,
veins, arteries, or nerves, out of the region whither it tended, and if there
be no fear of any great tearing, it may be drawn back that way, which it
entered into the body, and that without cutting; but if there be danger, and
that it be to be feared least that the body should be lacerated, if the dart
should be drawn out the same way that it went in at, the wound is to be dilated
either by cutting, or without launcing, namely with that Instrument, which
Ce^sus in his 7. Book and 15. Chap. calls Hypsiloeides, or Swans, or ^torkes
beak, or other dilating Instruments whereby the Dart may the casier be drawn
back. It Is drawn out by the hand, if it may be, when it is apparent, and is
fastened only in flesh, or with a Volcella, when it sticks so deep that it
cannot be taken hold of by the hands, or other Instruments which the Greeks,
Boloulca, that is certain Instruments to pull out Darts, of which kind are
long Tongs, Tongs with teeth, straight, a little bent inward, but the outmost
part broad and round, to which the latter Chyrurgeons have given several names
from their figure, and call them Crows, Storkes, Ducks, Geese bill, the
figures whereof are extant, in Amb. Parey in the 10 th. Book 18 th. Chap. but
if the point of the Dart, has pierced into the member more then half through,
and the place by which the dart is to be drawn through, be more, then it has
hitherto passed, and neither bone, Nerve, Veins, nor Arteries hinder it, it is
more convenient, to drive the Dart thither whither it tended; dissection being
made in that part, and to draw it out by making of a new wound; but yet if the
Dart be too broad it is not expedient to draw it out through another part; least
that we add to that great wound, another great one.

The reason of drawing out Musket bullets in many things is agreeable to the
extraction of Darts, The way of taking out of Musket bullets.
for three things are required to extraction, the first that the way may be
dilated with an Instrument; secondly that the bullet be taken hold of; the
Instrument takes the bullet, either as a pair of Tongs, or the point of the
Instrument enters into the bullet, incompasseth it with its cavity, or it takes
hold with the end that is toothed like a faw; thirdly a bullet being taken hold
of with an Instrument, is drawn out by the hand of a Chyrurgeon with the
Instrument, of which more in the Institutions.

Moreover sometimes thing shappen externally to the Chops, Things that stick in
the Chops.
Throat, Ears, and happen into the Nostrills, and Eyes, and use to stick in
them, each of which require several ways of drawing forth; if a little fish
bone, or the back bone of a fish stick in the Throat, and that it be in sight
when the mouth is opened, it is to be taken out with a Volcella, and that either
straight, or a little bowed toward the end, and convenient to take out the
bones from the Threate, but if it should descend deeper into the Throat, or
having used a Speculum of the mouth to open it wide, if it does not appear, a
vomit is to be stirred up with oil of sweet Almonds, or of Olives, or with a
quill, or putting down ones finger.

A Worm sticking in the Ears, A worm in the ears how to be taken out.
first of all it is to be drawn out a live, and that it may be the better
performed, and the worm may the easier be taken, it is to be enticed outward,
by injecting sweet things into the Ears, and applying of them outwardly, but
if it cannot be enticed, or drawn out alive, it is to be killed with those
things that are bitter, and by a peculiar propriety and force, are destructive
to worms, but being killed, it is drawn out by pouring in water or wine and Oil
luke warm, and putting in of tents made of Cotton, wet with Honey, Turpentine,
or some glutinous gum, wherewith twisting it up and down in the Ear, the worm
is drawn forth, the sick leaning on that side the Ear is affected

Other things which may be put, or slid into the ear are either hard, or
liquid; if the things are hard, warm Oil is to be powered in that they may be
dissolved, if it be possible, or certainly the passages of the Ear may become
slippery; but if the thing which falls in be of that nature, that it will swell
with moistning, as Pease, Beans, etc. all moist things are to be avoided,
afterward sneezing is to be provoaked, the Nostrills, and the mouth being
shut, that the spirits may be forced to go out through the Ears, and so that
together to be thrust out which was slid into the Ears, but if the thing
cannot be extruded in this manner, it is to be drawn out with a convenient
Instrument, yet very warily, least either that which is to be taken forth
should be thrust deeper, or the membrane called the drum of the Ear should
be broken.

If that which is to be taken out be liquid, the affected should hop upon his
foot on the contrary side, bending his head downward on the afflicted side,
that the moisture may come forth, which if it does not come to pass, sneezing
is to be occasioned, or a little dry sponge is to be put into the Ear, so that
the extremity of the Channel which goes into the Ear be first stopped and
fortifyed with Cotton, that whilst the spirit is drawn, there be no room
granted for the letting in of Air in any ways.

If any thing come into the Nostrills sticks in them, there is another way of
drawing of it out, then that of drawing out those things that stick in the
Ears.

If sand or dust stick in the Eyes, the stone found in the maw of a Swallow,
Crabs Eyes, Pearls, if they are cast into the Eyes, cleanse them, but if any
greater thing be fixed in the Eye, it is to be drawn out with a fine linen
cloth, wet in pure fountain water, or with a sponge tied to a soft quill, but
if it be greater, it is to be taken out with a little Volcella, or unless
extraction in this manner does succeed, Anodunes, or medicines taking away
pain, being applied and other convenient medicines, the business is to be
committed to nature.

CHAP. XI. Of drawing out of things generated in the body according to nature,
but retained in the body beyond the limits of nature.
AFter these, amongst those things which are to be drawn out of the body,
somethings are found which indeed are generated in the body according to
nature, yet are detayned there contrary to nature, and hitherto belongs first
of all, extraction, or excision of a living or dead child out of the body,
moreover the drawing out of Urine detained preternaturally.

First of all, Of taking out a lived child.
if the young can neither be brought out by the help of the mother, nor by any
other, there is no other help remains then cutting, whereby the living child
is taken out, and those which are brought forth on this manner, are called
Caesares, the young is cut out when the mother is living or dead, Of a dead.
but of this Cesarean bringing forth, you may see a peculiar Book of Francis
Rousset, but as for the extraction of a dead child by what means that may be
rightly performed Celsus teaches in his 7. Book. 29. Chap. 23. Aetius Tetrach
Book 4. Ser. 4. Chap. and Hieron Fabricius ab Aqua P. of Chyrurgicall
operations, Amb. Parey describes fit Instruments for this operation in his 23
d. Book Chap. 26. Job. Andr. a Cruce.

Next to these is the drawing out of a Mole and the same reason for the most
part is in drawing out them as in the extraction of a dead child. Extraction of
a Mola


Lastly hitherto belongs the drawing out of Urine by Chyrurgicall operation,
Drawing out urine with a Cathera.
but that operation is performed by Silver, or brazen Pipes, which they call
Catheters, which that they may be fitted for every body greater or less, three
of them are to be prepared for men, and too for women in a readiness, the
manner of operation is in the Institutions.

CHAP. XII. Of taking away the corrupt parts of the body.
SOmetimes the parts of the body are so corrupted that there is no hope of
curing of them, Cutting of dead flesh.
which as being unprofitable and hurtful, and such as may infect the parts
next to them, and pollute them, are to be taken away; whatever therefore is
corrupted, is to be cut off, but the manner of cutting offis various according
to the variety of the parts that are hurt, and the place where they are, and
nature of the disease it self, and therefore the rightest manner of taking
away such from the body is known by particular operations, yet oftentimes in
fistula's and other malignant Ulcers, cutting alone is not sufficient as being
that which cannot take away the smallest fibrillaes and particles, but after
cutting there is need of an actual or potentiall Cauterie that the remainders
may be taken away, nay sometimes without cutting, by Cauteries only things so
corrupted are taken away.

Hereunto belongs the Amputation of parts corrupted with a Cancer, Amputation
of a cancer. Of a Uvula, yard, womb. Of bones.
also a cutting off of the Uvula, corrupted either by inflammation or by Morbus
Gallicus, the cutting off also of the putred, or corrupted yard, as also of the
corrupted womb.

Corrupted bones are taken away by filing, shaving with an incision knife, or
with a wimble, of which it is spoken before, as also with diverse kinds of
Tongs, whereby the corrupted bones of the fingers, and broken bones hanging out
may be taken away.

Hitherto belongs the plucking out of teeth, Teeth.
which is performed, the Teeth being first loosned from the gums, and is done
with several Instruments, whose names are taken from the figure, and
similitude for the most part, which they have with the beakes of living
Creatures, which Hieron Fabricius, reckons up, the figures of them are extant
in Amb. Parey. the 16 th. Book Chap. the 17 th. and Joh. Andr. a Cruce.

Lastly it sometimes happens that in man's body certain parts are corrupted
with mortification and they so die that there is no hope of recovery of life,
Amputation of Limbs.
when there is one indication that which is corrupted is to be cut off, least
the sound also should be affected, which operation the Greeks call
Acroteriasmos, or a tearing off the dead ^lesh, but in what place and when that
Amputation is to be made cannot be delivered in a compendium, see the
Institutions.

CHAP. XIII. Of freeing and taking away things generated in the body contrary
to nature.
THe last kind remains of taking away things out of the body, Things
preternaturall begotten in the body how many-fold.
namely those which are generated in the body contrary to nature, but there is
no little difference amongst those things, for some of them are borne together
with the parts of our body and are adhere tenaciously, as Warts, Warts great
above and small below, swellings and inflammations in the fundament, the top of
the yard, the way to the womb, callous flesh, Corns, Knots, the Kings Evil,
excrescencies of flesh in the Nostrills, and Polypus, swelling in the Chops,
small tumors in the Urinary passage, Excrescencies on the eye lids, fleshy
ruptures, or else they are contained in some part of the body, as water in an
aqueous rupture in the paunch, stones or gravel in the reins, bladder or yard.

The cutting of warts is performed either by binding, Warts.
cuttings, or burning; Warts hanging down are taken away either with a silken
thread, or Horse hair, or they are to be tied with some other strong thread
every day harder and harder until they come off; cutting is performed with an
incision knife, like a Myrtle leave, or with a lance; burning is performed
with an hot Iron, or with green wood that is burnt; but how severally the
tumor called Thymus in the fundament, glans or prepuce, are to be taken away
is shown in the Institutions, and in the 3 d. Book of practice.

Sometimes a little tumor arises in the Urinary passage from an Ulcer,
Caruncles extirpated out the Vrinary passages.
and is so increased sometimes that it stops the urine, this is to be taken
away by the help of a Chyrurgeon, and fit medicines, but least that other
parts should be eroded, medicines are to be ejected through a silver Pipe, to
the tumor, or else it is to be incorporated and mixed with the top and head of
a wax Candle, and thrust into the place affected, or a little Cane with Lint
and white wax put into it, and bedaubed with a fit medicine, being hollow that
the urine may pass through it. This is to be put into the urinary passages.

Polypus if it admits of cure, Taking away a Polypus.
it is to be cut off with a sharp Iron Instrument made after the manner of a
Spatula, being put into the Nostrills, of which operation see the Institutions,
and the first Book of Practice.

Fleshy excrescencies in the Chops called, Epuli a nail in the eye.
Epuli, as also Encanthis, or excrescencies in the greater corner of the Eye,
and the nail of the Eye, unless they can be taken away with medicines, are to
be cut off, as also pieces of flesh here and there growing in the skin of the
body, Excrescencies of flesh. Fungi. Nodi etc.
and excrescencies which represent a kind of soft flesh, which are like the
roots of Mushroms, and grow like them, and therefore are called Musheroms,
knots also, Kings evil, Kernells, swellings in the Throat, and swellings in
the flesh, or fleshy ruptures if they cannot be eradicated by Medicines, must
be taken away by cutting.

A watery rupture, A watery rupture.
or water collected into the cods cannot always be taken away by discussing
medicines, the cods are to be opened, and the water to be let out through the
wound.

Lastly the stone of the bladder, Stone of the bladder.
since it is seldom diminished by medicines, the bladder being cut, it is to be
taken out, and sometimes a stone sticking in the urinary passage is to be drawn
out, but in what manner those cuttings, and operations all of them ought to be
persormed, is spoken in the Institutions, and may there be seen, nor can the
ways of those operations be reduced into a compendium, but all things which
are there spoken in the operations are diligently to be observed, and thus much
of the fourth Chyrurgicall operation.

CHAP XIIII. Of the restitution of parts that are lost, or of the Chyrurgery of
imperfect parts.
THere remains the last Chyrurgicall operation, Chyrurgery of such as are
maimed.
which is required in the cure of such as are imperfect and maimed, namely when
the extremities of the Nose or Ears or Lips are shortened, and these parts
maimed, but although parts that are lost are counterfeited by Instruments
fained made and painted, out of several matter representing the similitude of
the part lost, yet this is only a counterfeite and palliating cure, but when it
cannot be restored by a new generation of the deficient part, it is to be
restored by the flesh of another member being brought and united to it, yet
that operation is not to be tried on every body, but first it is to be observed
what kind of body it is which is to be cured, for in old men or in a body which
has an ill habit, wherein wounds are difficult to be cured, this way of cure
is not to be easily attempted. Casper Taliacotius in his Book of maimed
Chyrurgery, by inserting, accuratly and largely describes the manner of this
operation, the sum of this operation is this; he makes his transferring, or
bringing into the Nose, and Lips, from the Shoulder; but to cure unperfect
Ears he takes away from the Region behind the Ears, namely he appoints a
convenient cutting in those parts, and the maimed parts being first cleansed,
he commits and joins the skin of that part which is cut off with the maimed
part, and that they may be kept joined together until they grow together, he
binds them with swathing bands. And indeed he puts that part of the Nose or
Lips which is maimed, into the wound made in the Shoulder, with the head tied
to the Arm, as it were to a prop, that it is, immovable, and fixed so that it
can be moved no way. And in this manner when it has stuck so long, until the
flesh of both parts be united and grows together, he cutteth off again from
the Nose or Lip, the traduct, or that which was brought from another place and
is here g^own, then he makes conveniently, and frames that flesh so cut off
from the Arm into a form of a Nose or Lip.

THE FIFTH BOOK, PART. II. Of the Method of healing.
SECT. I. Of showing how to preserve health.
CHAP I. Of the Method of healing and of indications in general.
BUt it is not sufficient to know the Instruments for the recovery of health,
and those things which are profitable for the curing of a disease, but it is
necessary to understand how and in what manner every thing is to be used, or to
know the Method of healing, and restoring of lost health, the next thing
therefore is that we may show the Method of healing.

Capivaccius defines the Method of healing to be an art wherein by indications
remedies are found out that the lost health of man may be restored, The Method
of healing.
for the Method of healing (as also all Physic) is a certain principal
effective had bit using indications as Instruments to find out remedies for the
cure of diseases.

For the end of the Method of healing is twofold. The internal, or proximate,
namely invention of fit helps and remedies in every disease, or rather an
invention of indications, that show what will cure. The external is a
restitution of the lost health, or which is the same, an extirpation of a
disease.

But an indication which the Greeks call Endixis is sometimes taken in general
for every showing or demonstration, Indication what.
yet properly and in particular, and as it pertaines to the Method of healing,
it signifyes the showing of remedies, and it is a perception of what is
healthful in the Indicant, known by causes, or which is the same, it is a
perception, and comprehension of that which is helping, or indicated, with an
apprehension of what indicates without experience or any forceable argument
from the cause to effect.

But although Indication be the first Instrument of Dogmatick Physic whereby
it is discernd from other Sects, yet that does not plainly reject experience,
and any forceable arguments, but when diseases and the morbisique causes of
nature are not sufficiently known, it flies to experience and example as to a
forceable Argument.

Experience is the remembrance and observation which oftentimes is seen to come
to pass in the same manner. Experience what.


An Analogisme, Analogisme.
or forceable Argument to perswad is an apprehension of what is helpefull from
the like, but that similitude is either amongst the affects or remedies, or
amongst the members.

As for the Indication, that is really a certain Enthymema, by the force
whereof that is found out which is done, for the consequence is so manifest
that no man can deny it, and indeed by the force of those propositions which
are the foundations of Method, and like Axioms, and principalls in the Method
of healing, and they are these.

Every thing which jndicates shows the conservation of its self, or the taking
of it away.

That which is according to nature is to be preserved, and that which is
contrary to nature is to be taken away.

Contraries are cured by their contraryes, likes are preserved by their likes.

But there are various differences of Indications, Differences of Indications.
the first and most general is taken from things about which they are
conversant, which are according to nature, and preternaturall, and it is
because an Indication is a perception, and insinuation of the preservation of
that which is according to the nature, of the indicant to be performed by its
likes, the other is an apprehension of the taking away of that which is
preternaturall, to be performed by the contrary of the indicant.

Moreover one Indication is genericall, Genericall
another subalternate, another specificall and determinate; genericall which
the common and genericall nature of the indicant supplies, and which simply
teaches how to take away the disease, and the cause of a disease, and to
preserve strength, but in what manner that may be performed, it does not show;
subalternate, Subalternate. Specificall.
which the subalternate essence of the Indicant shows, and which indeed
determinates the matter more, yet not perfectly; specificiall which is taken
from the specifique nature of the Indicant, and describes the whole Indicant
exactly and its remedy, and is also called the determinate. Profitable.


Thirdly one Indication is profitable, another unprofitable; profitable is
that, to which some matter answers, or which indicates such remedy, the matter
whereof may be found out, and primarily, Unprofitable.
and by its self can take away the disease; but unprofitable is that, which
shows such help, the matter whereof which can take away the disease of the
first is not to be found.

Fourthly of Indications some are artificial, Inartificiall.
others inartificiall; inartificiall is that which may be known by others and
to the vulgar, as well as to the artist, who equally knows the disease is to
be taken away, and the strength to be preserved, but knows not a reason how
that may be done, Artificial.
such as is genericall, and sometimes subalternate; but artificial Indications
are those which are not known to all, but only to Artists, and require a great
deal of skill that they may be known, and the Indicant, and helping things are
exactly described such as are specificall and determinate. Curatory,
preservatory, vital.


Lastly some Indications are to restore, others to preserve, some are vital,
according as they are taken from the restoring Indicant, the preserving, or
vital.

CHAP II. Of Indicants.
BUt an Indicant as it belongs to the Method of healing is some Agent permanent
in man's body, An Indicant. What.
which by its proper nature and estence shows some help, and shows the
Indicate which it requiers to be directed to its self that the lost health of
man may be restored.

Whence it appears what are the true notions of a true indicant, for first it
is required that it do act, What is required in a true Indicant.
or that it be some Agent, Secondly that it be something permanent and present,
or adhering to it, Thirdly the Indicant ought to be known to the intellect,
Lastly one Indicant, as it is one, indicates also one.

As for the numbers and difference of Indicants, The differences of Iudicants.
it is taken from the end of the Method of healing; which is an invention of
remedies, for whereas things preternaturall are to be removed and things
according to nature to be kept, the Indicant should be twofold; called removing
or curing in general, or vital, and since that things contrary to nature are
three, a disease, the cause, and the Symptoms, there are properly four
Indicants so called.

The Indicant which is taken from a disease is called Cutratory, An indicant
curatory. Preservatory. An urgent Symptom.
the common name being retained of the method of healing, but that which is
taken from the cause besides the containing cause, is called Preservatory; that
which is taken from the Symptom, is called an urgent Symptom, nor are
Symptoms to be excluded from the number of Indicants, since that also is
preternaturall, and has peculiar indicates which of its proper nature it
affords, and that different from the indicates which the diseases and causes
afford, and remedies may be brought for Symptoms which regard neither the
disease, nor the cause of a disease, which is manifest in pain which Anodynes
show.

The Indicant which is taken from things according to nature is called vital,
A vital Indicant.
but since things according to nature, are health, the causes of health, and
the accidents of health, a vital indicant may also be sub-divided.

But although some reckon more Indicants, Indicants less properly so called.
yet they are not new and peculiar Indicants, but belong either to the causes,
from whence Preservatory indication is taken, or they are not true indicants,
but rather manifest true indicants and by accident, and the intervening of
another help to discover remedies, such like are temperament, habit of body,
age, sex, kind of life, strength, custom, the peculiar nature of every one,
the condition of the part beset with the disease, air, condition of Heaven,
the time of the year, the Country, the place of habitation, the times of
diseases, and the force of the remedies.

Namely the temperament indicates the preservation of its self, of which, a
rule; That disease which differs most, from the natural state, is to be cured
with more vehement medicines, that which differs less, is to be cured with
milder. Age circumscribes the vitallindicant, of this there is a rule also; By
how much the more a disease recedes from the nature of the age of the sick, by
so much the more violent remedies it is to be cured with; by how much the less,
by so much the more gentle remedies. There is the same reason of Sex, as there
is of age; as for custom, those things that are accustomed along time,
although they are worse, do less hurt, then those which are un-accustomed,
whence a disease which differs much from custom, is to be opposed with
stronger, that which recedes less, with weaker medicines. The course of life
for the most part requires the same as custom.

Idiosuncrasia shows that choice is to be had in Medicines. It is to be
considered about the part affected, first its excellency, whence, a rule; Noble
parts are not to be tampered with strong medicines, but ignoble parts will
endure them more safely; moreover, its conformation and figure which
determinates the Indicant and the Indicate; so a thinner part being moistened
over much requires not great dryers, but a thick and compact part requires
great dryers, Thirdly situation, of which you must know, that parts which are
deep in the body, are to be cured with stronger medicines, but those that are
in the Superficies with weaker: Fourthly, the place, of which is to be noted,
that if many ways lie open for the giving of medicines, the next are to be
chosen. Air according to a several respect, sometimes signifies a Curatory
Indicant, sometimes a vital. Of the season of a disease Hippocrates his Axiom
is, In diseases beginning, if any thing seem proper to be removed, move it;
but in diseases that are quiet, it is better to be quiet.

Lastly, medicines sometimes show a greater, sometimes a lesser regresse from
the natural state.

CHAP III. Of the concord, and discord of Indicants.
BUt those Indicants, according as they sometimes agree amongst themselves, and
sometimes disagree, they are allotted new names, and are called Indicaats,
Consentients, contrary Indicants, Prohibents, Permittents, Repugnants,
Correpugnants.

Co-indicants or consentients are those, Co-indicants.
which conduce to the finding out the same remedy, and more of them indicate
the same thing, yet others would not have Co-indicants to be Indicants, which
require the same help, but to be that only which in the foregoing chapter we
have said to be called not so properly Indicants, namely such as indicate
mediately, and by the intervening of another, but the rest which are properly
called Indicants, and require the same help, which is required by another
Indicate, are called by a peculiar name Consentients.

Prohibents which you may call contrary Indicants, Repugnants.
and Repugnants, they are those which differ from other Indicants and require,
and indicate another thing which is adverse to that, which was indicated from
another primary Indicant and indeed so that the indication thereof be to be
preferred before the other, and that which was indicated from the other is to
be omitted.

Those are called Correpugnants, Correpugnants. Permittents.
which resist together with others, and prohibit something.

Lastly, Permittents are those which although they indicate contrary to that
which was indicated by another, yet, they are overcome by another, as being
more powerful, so that they are compelled to suffer that which the other
persuades.

From whence it is manifest that a Physician ought to consider not only what
one Indicant persuades, but also what another requires, for if all the
Indicants agree, and conspire as it were in one, that is boldly to be performed
which is commanded by them, but if there be some disagreement amongst them, it is
diligently to be weighed which of them persuades most powerfully, and those
things which dissent amongst themselves are to be valued by their strength,
dignity, and number. If they are equal according to power and dignity, and are
uneven according to number, those which exceed in number are to be preferred,
and that is to be preferred which is indicated by most, but if the Indicants
are uneven in strength and dignity, that is rather to be preferred which is
commanded by the more noble, or even by one more noble, but if those Indicants
are equal both in strength and number, in all things they are to be regarded
according to each several respect.

From whence it is manifest that if the magnitude of Indicants be even, the
vital indications are always to be preferred before the rest, and the
greatest respect is always to be had to the strength, but if there be not a
parity amongst the Indicants, that is rather to be performed which is indicated
from that which most persuades, yet the rest if it may be are not plainly to
be neglected.

CHAP. IV. Of Indicates.
AN indicate is that which helps, An Indicate.
and is shown that it is to be used by the Indicant, it is also named
Sumpheron, that is, profitable, Prospheromenon, that is aid, that which is
required, the scope, and it is called the second scope, to distinguish from the
first (for so the Indicant is sometimes called) also a remedy in the Curatory
or restoring part.

An indicate is divided into something to do as they speak, Division of an
Indicate.
or into the very essence of the remedy and nature of it, and into the use, or
right Administration of that matter fit for remedy.

What is to be done is known by its self from the nature of the true Indicant,
What is to be done.
whereby is known that the body is well or ill affected and confists in two
things, and the Physician propounds to himself two things principally to be
performed, namely that he may preserve the strength, and drive away those
things which are contrary to nature, as a disease, the cause of a disease and
Symptoms, from whence and, what is to be done, as the indicants above show, is
divided into Curatory, which is a remedy taking away the discase;
Preservatory, which is a remedy taking away the cause, and vital, which is
helpful for the prefervation of life, to which as is said may be added,
mitigation of urgent Symptoms

In these oftentimes contrary indications do meet, and that which is
persuaded by one, is dissuaded by another, for the strength requiers giving of
nourishment, contrary to which a disease and the cause do indicate, for they
are increased by the exhibition of aliment, but then that is to be helped,
which has most need.

But in giving contrary things, this principle is to be observed, that the
remedy may be given contrary to the indicant, very exactly, but since that
which is equally contrary may be given two ways, either by applying such a
thing once which is equivalent to the regression from the natural state, or
oftener by exhibiting contraries, not so directly contrary at several times,
the first kind of remedy is to be used in two sorts of diseases, namely in
those which are weak, and in those diseases, which are extreme, dangerous,
but the latter way of remedy is to be used in those diseases, which
aremoderate as it were the middle betwixt the extreme dangerous, and the weak
disease.

Moreover that which is to be done, as of indications, so of indicants, one is
genericall, another subalternate, another specificall, another appropriated,
one is profitable, another unprofitable, one is artificial, another
inartificiall.

But the use and right Administrations of help are comprehended under
quantity, Use and right administration.
place and time which aims Practicioners commonly name how much, when and
where to act or do, yet it is here to be observed that those circumstances and
manners of Administrations have place both in the help it self, and in the
matter fit for cure.

As for what belongs to quantity, Quantity whence Indicated.
since that it may be taken both for a de finite degree of Administering of a
remedy, in which respect quantity, and what is to be performed by a specifique
agent are the same, and for the dose, plenty, and bigness of the matter of
cure it self: quanttity or magnitude of the essence indicating denotes
quantity taken in the former sense, for example sake, great heat shows that it
must be much cooled. Yet hear is to be considered whether the part be
situated deep in the body, for then a stronger Medicine is to be chosen that
it may come to the part affected, with its full force.

When, or the time is shown from the time or presence, of the Indicant, Time.
for then help is to be Administered when that which requires it is present.

Order also belongs to time, for that which in simple, Order of doing.
is Time, incomplicate is order, and the presence of a vehement Indicant shows
the order of performing, but that is first to be done which is shown by the
Indicant, which over rules the rest in indicating, and that overcomes the rest
in indicating, by which the greatest danger is threatened, and without the
removing of which the rest cannot be taken away, and therefore three things
being observed, we may proceed in a right order of cure; if first we weigh what
urges most, and from whence there is fear of greatest danger, for that is
first to be opposed, which strives most, or from whence the greatest danger of
life is threatened. Secondly, if we consider what regard it has of the cause,
and what of the effect, for the cause is to be taken away before the disease.
Thirdly, if we confider what may be in the stead of an impediment, and what
before what, and what with what, and what after what may be cured, for
whatsoever may be a hindrance in the taking away of a discase, or the cause of
a disease are first to be removed, and therefore it is to be considered whether
a disease be joined with a disease, or with the cause of a disease; if a
disease be joined with a disease, it is to be considered whether those diseases
agree or not, if they no way agree but are resident in diverse parts, you may
cure them severally, or together, each by their proper remedy, and it is no
matter to which you apply the first remedy, yet regard is to be had of the
parts wherein those diseases reside, for those which are in noble parts, or
those parts which serve the noble parts, or have consent with them, or which
perform any public duty, they are first to be taken away, but if the diseases
have some agreement, and are some way united, it is to be considered whether
the cure of the one is beneficial to the cure of the other, or at least no way
hinder the cure of the other, or whether the cure of the one may bring any
impediment or hindrance to the cure of the other, or whether they partly
consent, and partly dissent; if the cure of the one bring no impediment, or
bindrance to the cure of the other, or also if it promotes it, as if a
distemper of the liver, and an obstruction thereof concur, you may cure them
severally, or together, and begin with which of them you please; also when a
reason thereof may be had from that which urges most, if they are not of
equal force, but if they are so joined together that the one is more
dangegerous then the other, you must begin with that which is the other,
neither of them is to be cured by its self, but the remedies shall so be
tempered that they may both be cured, most dangerous, qut if the one be no more
dangerous then both be cured, Lastly, if they partly agree, and partly
disagree, you are to begin with that, the cure whereof hinders not the cure of
the other, and without removal whereof the other cannot be taken away; if a
disease be joined to a cause, the cause is first to be removed, but in the
removing of causes it is to be observed, that they are to be taken away in that
order wherein they follow one another, so that you are to be begin first with
that which was first in generation and last in dissolution, from thence you are
to go on to the next, and so to go on forward in order until we come to our
desired end, and that we may briefly comprehend all the matter, the presence of
the Indicant which overcomes the other Indicants, and the absence of the
prohibiting Indicant, shows when to act, and the order of performing; and
moreover it teaches whether the same remedy be to be repeated often, for so
long and so often, it is to be repeated, as the Indicant remains present, and
no hindering Indicant happens.

The place, or substance of the Indicant shows where, and the place of
applying remedies, and the place is to be found out in which, by which, and to
which as they commonly use to distinguish.

In all alterations the place in which is principally to be taken notice of, in
evacuations the place from which, Manner.
and by which, if the matter be carried out of one place into another, the
place to which

As for what belongs to the place of applycation of matter fit for remedy,
since a contact or touch of the matter and Indicant cannot always be
immediate, that is to be chosen by or through which the matter of cure may come
to it, that there may be a touch, and action and passion thereof and of the
Indicant.

As for Mode, if it regard the remedy it self without consideration of
matter, How the matter medicinal answering to the Indicate may be found out.
it seems not to differ from quantity, time, and place, but rather to be a
Summetry in measure, and equity to be observed in these; but if it be taken for
the form of a medicine, that is delivered in the doctrine of the composition
of medicines.

The help or Indicate being found out, that the Physician may be careful of
the matter of cure it is very requisite; which is taken from three heads,
Chyrurgery, Ingredients, and Diet, the same Indicate shows matter,
circumscribed and determinate with its conditions, quantity, time and place,
for that matter is proper and fit, which can perform that, which the
determinate Indicate requires by its rules, and which may have force, but if
there be more Indicates, or matter to be sought which have more faculties, or
if these be wanting more shall becompounded together.

But because always as is said, regard is to be had of the strength also, and
it is to be weighed, whether by the application of this matter, there may come
more good or not, the nature of the whole body, and of the part to which the
medicine ought to be applied is to be considered, in which business not only
manifest, but also occult qualities ought to be weighed, and it is to be enquired
by the Physician whether the sick have any peculiar hatred to any particular
thing, which therefore is in no wise to be given in the cure, but in parts
affected in their kind, the excellency of a part is to be weighed, the sense,
situation, conformation, for if a part be a principal one or performs a
public Office, no Medicine is to be given which can much hurt it, and disturb
its Office and Duty, for then loss would redound to the whole body, so to the
mouth and chops poisons and things ungrateful to the taste and sordid are not
to be exhibited, nor stinking things to the Nostrills, nor gnawing and biting
things to the eyes, nor those things to be applied to nervous parts affected,
that cause pain.

The same rules which we have now even propounded in the right use of remedies,
Quantity of matter.
ate to be observed also in choice of matter, the quantity of matter regards
the measure, and wa^ght thereof, which was indicated by the Indicant, and is
propper for the performing of the Indication; the quantity of the matter is
found two ways, first in what quantity any medicine whatsoever is to be given,
and what are those bounds betwixt which if it be given it performs that which
it ought, and no way hurts, is manifest by experience only, but in what dose,
whether in the highest, lowest, or middle, the medicine be to be given, to this
or that sick person, what the quantity is of the matter to be administered, that
is known from the magnitude, or extent of the Indicant, and if the quantity of
the Indicant be great, the quantity of the medicine ought to be great likewise,
in which matter the condition is to be weighed and the strength of the whole
and of every part, for if a part to be altered is more remote in place, a
greater quantity of the remedy altering is required, namely that it may come
with its full force to the part affected.

But the time of Administering of matter is taken not simply from the presence
of the Indicant, Time.
but is that when it can help, but this time is known, and the knowledge of
the matter to be administered, and the nature of the part to which it ought to
be Administered, for some things work presently, others after some space
between; the action of of some things continues long, of others it cease
presently. The part as it is open, or placed deep, so it regards the action of
the Agent presently; the Administration of the matter is to be prohibited when
it does more hurt then good, but it may do hurt, when it may preserve any
thing contrary to nature which ought to be taken away, or when it may take away
that which ought to be preserved.

The place of Administration of matter, is that place where the matter is to be
given, may help and perform that which it is required to do, for since every
action is performed by contact, the Physician ought always to endeavor that
the matter which he ^seth might penetrate to the place where the Indicant is,
and may touch the Indicant, but some parts are External, others Internal, in
External the matter is plain, for there the matter of the medicine is to be
applied where it is to work, or where the Indicant is, since the External
parts may be immediately touched with the medicines, but medicines cannot be so
immediately applied to the Internal parts, and therefore when we are willing to
evacuate, common ways are to be chosen, and the next through which the matter
may be evacuated; if we are to alter in the interior parts, either manifest
ways are to be found ^ut or occult passages, through which the matter that is
given may penetrate, and indeed as for manifest passages, the widest and
nearest are always to be chosen.

But concerning the measure, Manner.
or manner shall be shown hereafter, part the 3 d. Sect. 3 d. where various
forms of medicines, both simple and compound shall be proposed.

CHAP. V. What Morbifique causes indicate, and peculiarly of purging of a juice
in the body which causes ill digestion.
FOrasmuch as hitherto we have explained the universal Method of healing, now
peculiarly we will propound the Method of taking away of Morbifique causes,
removing diseases, and preserving strength, and will begin from the causes.

What the differences of causes are, is spoken before in the 2 d. Book, part
the 1. Chap. the 3 d. for of what kind soever they are, whether begotten in the
body, or externally, or admitted into the body, and become as it were internal
or stirring up, cherishing, and increasing a disease without, they all require
removal.

But whereas causes offend either in the whole substance, or quantity, Causes
what they show.
or quality, or motion, or place, first, all things which put on the nature, of
a cause, as in their whole kind they are contrary to nature, they indicate, an
absolute ablation of them out of the body, or as latter Physicians say, an
Eradication.

But that here we may treat only of humors, What things show in their whole
nature preternatural.
several ways there are of rooting out and evacuating corrupt humors out of
the body, for sometimes they are purged through the paunch, sometimes they are
ejected by vomit, sometimes discussed by sweates, sometimes cast out by urine,
of which we will now speak in their order, and first of purgation.

Purgation taken in the largest sense is indicated from a Cacochymie; What
shows when to purge.
or juice which causes ill digestion and bad nourishment, and a purging
medicine taken in the largest signification is the matter of remedy, indicated
for a Cachochymie; but that this doctrine of purgation may be more evident, in
the first place it is to be observed, that Physicians in respect of purging
medicines, divide the body into three common Regions, into the first, which is
without the liver, and is extended from the stomach, through the middle part,
home to the liver; the second which is dilated from the middle of the liver,
through the greater veins, to the outside of the body; the third, which
comprehends the habit of the body with the lesser veins: private parts also
have their excrements and peculiat ways to void them, and hence one evacuation
is called universal, Universal evacuation.
another particular, universal is that which evacuates humors from the common
Regions of the body, such is evacuation of blood after what manner soever,
purging by the paunch, vomitting, voiding of u^ine, sweat, Particular.
insensible transpiration; particular is that which evacuates some private
part, as the brains, lungs, womb.

As for universal purgation which evacuates the common Regions of the body,
Cacochymie consists of what Indicates it, either on this side, or beyond the
liver; Cacochymie which consists in the first Region of the body, by its self,
and properly indicates those medicines which have power without any manifest
agitation of evacuating superfluous humors through the paunch, which stick in
the first Region of the body, although sometimes if the matter have an
inclination upwards, and the sick can easily endure a vomit, by vomit also
humors may be purged out of the first Region of the body, so that those things
which cause vomitting are not purging, and vehement, but gentle, such like are
as ^bovesaid part the first, Sect the first Chap the second: Lenitives.
others are called Encoproticks, only such as loosen, and mollify the belly;
which evacuate only by softning, and washing away, and drawing away, others by
a singular propriety, purge peculiar humors, whose force notwithstanding since
it cannot be extended beyond the liver, by some are called Lenitives, by
others, gentle purges; both of them and first the former, since they evacuate
without much troubling the body, the strength easily endures them, and
therefore they may be secrely given in what age soever, sex, or time of the
year, so that the use thereof be lawful, namely that they are given in their
due quantity, and before meat a little, and in fevers not near the fit.

But excrementicious humors, Purges properly so called.
which consist beyond the liver are to be evacuated by Cathartick medicines, so
called peculiarly, or purgers, stronger, and strongest, and Catharsis or
purgation in particular so called is an evacuation of excrementitious humors
abiding beyond the liver by Cathartick medicines through the paunch, and by
vomit, and is indicated from excrementicious humors, and such as are
unprofitable for the nourishment of the body, and some of those are natural,
others contrary to nature, the natural are those which are generated by the
purpose of nature, as sweet phlegm, Melancholy, choler, for these if they
abound, and are generated in the body in greater plenty then they ought,
constitute a Cacochimy, but preternaturall are those which are generated
contrary to nature, and unto which natural humors degenerate, both of them,
if they so offend that they can neither be taken away by diet, nor any other
milder kind of evacuation, as by sweates or insensible transpiration Indicate
purgation.

But as Cacochimy subsisting beyond the first passages, and that being greater,
Indicates purgation, so such require such kinds, as purge a definite humor;
namely phlegm requires Phlegmagogues; Choler, Chologogues; Melancholy,
Melanagogues; watery humors, Hydragogues; mixed humors require mixed.

Yet it is to be weighed what the strength permits, Permission of purgation.
and prohibits in purgation appointed, by a Noble medicine, and whether the
strength can endure purging, and the sick be apt, or unapt to purge, and
whether more profit or hurt will ensue by purging.

All the rest of the signs which are said to forerun purgation, belong to the
strength, whether they are strong or weak, of which kind are Temperament, habit
of body, age, sex, of which Hippo. 4. Apho. 1. speaking of purging women with
child says: Those that are pregnant are to be purged if the humor be
un^bridled after four months, and until the seventh month, although these
less, for those that have lesser or greater young are more warily and
religiously to be meddled with, the kind of life, custom, property of nature,
constitution of Air and such like. As for the Temperament, hotter and dryer
bodies endure with more difficulty cold and moist indifferently, hot and moist
easil^: strength of body admits of purgation, imbecility very little, a lean
habit of body warily, a full body easily, a fat body hardly, of age it is
principally to be noted that sucking children are most conveniently purged by
medicines given to the Nurse: as to custom, those that are wont to be purged,
more boldly; those which are not accustomed are more ringly to be purged: of
Air you must know that neither the hotter, nor the colder; but purging is
principally in the spring time to be appointed: concerning the nature of a
disease it is first to be noted that in hot dileases, if the disease will bear
it, cooling things are to be administered before purging, moreover because in
them the store of ill humors is rather to be taken away by loosning things
then by true purgation. Thirdly because those which are apt to a Diarrhaea,
Crampe, etc. are not casy to be purged. But principally you must observe
whether the sick be prepared and fitted for purging, namely whether the ways
through which the matter ought to be conveyed, are open, and the humors
themselves fit to be evacuated, of which it shall be spoken.

CHAP. VI. Of the time fit for purging of a disease.
BUt although peccant, Time of purging.
corrupt and putred humors always Indicate their own taking away, and
evacuation out of the body, yet because they are not always apt for
purgation, you may not evacuate them at any time, but are to enquire of the
time and occasion of giving purges The convenient time of purging is, when the
humor Indicating purgation is present, and other Indicants permit it, and
nothing hinders it.

But in the beginning you are to be admonished here, that those things which
are to be purged either may stir up a fever, or other diseases without a
fever; if the fever be absent, the ways open and the humors themselfes
prepared for motion, you may purge them at any time, so in the Scab, Cachexie,
pain of the head, Palsy, Trembling, pain of the Teeth, you may purge during
any time of the disease, when nothing prohibits, it and that a concoction is
not expected, when those humouts are not properly crud, the are ill drawn
hither by some A^ho. Hippo. 22. Sect. 1. things concocted, are to be purged not
crude, but the whole disputation of the fit time for purging of a disease is of
Fevers, and that acute, especially wherein the humors are properly crude,
although the time of a disease show not, yet there is a sign which shows
either the prohibiting, or permitting virtue; for since that in the
augmentation of a disease, nature begins a combat therewith, in the state
there is a great conflict between them, let him endeavor this one thing with
all his industry that he may overcome the morbifique cause, and having overcome
it may drive it out of the body, and all the Symptoms if they are greater,
nature is neither to be opposed any more with purging medicines then, nor to be
called away from its good purpose, nor being debilitated enough by the
Morbifique matter, and most grievous Symptoms, is it to be hindered; there
remains therefore two times, namely the beginning of a disease, and that after
the state, neither notwithstanding is it equally profitable to purge in which
you please of these in all diseases, but always to consider whether more
profit, or more inconveniency will ensue by purging, but what it is to be done
here. Hippo, teaches in the 22. Apho. Sect 1. which Galen, in 4, of preferving
health Chap 5. calls an Oracle, he says, concocted, and ripened humors are to
be purged and moved, not crude.

Out of which it is manifest that the most convenient time of purgation is
after the state, Purging is the best in the declination of a disease.
and when the humors are concocted, for if we purge concocted humors, that is
such as are overcome and tamed by nature, and separted from the profitable
blood, we have nature our helper, and the humor more aptly follows the
leading of the purging medicine, but if we endeavor by purges to evacutate
crude, humors, that is such as are not as yet Elaborated, and become benign,
nor as yet separated from the profitable, the sick will receive more damage
then benefit from thence: neither have we nature to a fist us, nor are the
humors apt for purgation, wherefore either the purge performs not its purpose
and brings out nothing, or very little, or if the medicine be very strong, it
draws out not only the unprofitable, but profitable humors, (since they are
hitherto mixed,) it melts, and consumes the body, disturbes the humors more,
and confounds them, brings forth obstructions in the first passages, the matter
being stird and not sufficiently evacuated, whence grievous Symptoms do
arise, but if any voluntary purge shall happen, and that sufficient, or that
any future looseness be expected, there will be no need of any purging;
according to Hippo. 1. Apho. 20. those things which are perfectly judged, and
exquisitely confirmed are in no ways to be removed, Sometimes you may purge in
the beginning.
neither moved, neither with purging, medicines, nor other endeavors, but are
to be let alone.

But although the best time for purging is after concoction, yet sometimes you
may purge in the beginning, by the command of Hippo. 2. Apho. 29. where he
says, in the beginning of a disease, if any thing seem fit to be moved, move
it, but when you may, purge it in the beginning of a disease: It is variously
disputed amongst Authors; Galen shows it clearly, whilst 1. Apho. 24: he
says, that then only purging is to be used, when greater profit may follow by
the evacuation of offending humors, then the detriment is, which the body
receives from purging medicines; or when any present danger does more urge,
then crudity of humors; but Hippo. shows the cause, and that danger, 1. Apho.
22. whilst he writes. That purging is not to be used in the beginning of a
disease, unless the matter raise Tumors, or be angry: for if hot humors,
acrid and biting wander up and down in the body, and it be doubted least the
strength should be debilitated by the agitation of the matter, or least the
matter being stird up should rush into some principal part with violence, or
into some part, which may draw a principal part with violence, or into some
part, which may draw a principal part into consent, or least the native heat
should be extinguished, you may purge them presently in the beginning of a
disease, especially when they also of their own accord are moveable, and easy
to be evacuated, and nature wearied out by them, affords its assistance toward
their expulsion, and indeed that should be done in the very beginning, Apho.
10. Sect. 4. of Hippo. To purge in very acute diseases if the humor swell, the
very first day, for delay in diseases of this kind is dangerous.

CHAP VII. Of preparation and concoction of humors.
AT another time, Concoction and preparation of humors differ. Concoction of
humors the work of nature.
concoction of humors is to be expected before purging be appointed, and the
Physician shall studdy to prepare those things which further concoction, and
cause more commodious evacuation, for we must distinguish betwixt concoction
and preparation, and concoction is attributed to nature, preparation to Art,
namely nature only concocts humors, and Elaborates them, and draws them to
that perfection, and better state by putrefying which they can receive, that
they may the more conveniently and without prejudice or detriment to the sick
be evacuated, but it is not in the power of Art to concoct humors, yet it may
be helpful to the native heat, concocting both by cherishing and strengthening
it.

Besides this true concoction which is the work of nature only, Preparation of
humourst wofold. Digestion.
there are yet other preparations of humors, which are appointed for the more
happy concoction, and more profitable evacuation sake, which the vulgar call
concoctions also, and medicines effecting them, they call Concoquents, or as
they commonly speak Digestives.

These preparations are of two kinds the one is that which preceds the
concoction which is performed by nature, The first prepation of humors.
the other is that which follows it, the former is that which takes away all
things which are impediments to nature whereby it may the less begin, or
happily perfect concoction, and commonly uses to be called concoction; the
quality of humors besides their quantity, hinder concoction; therefore what
qualities soever hinder concoction are to be taken away by their contraries,
and hot humors are to be cooled, cold to be heated, dry to be moistened, moist
to be dried, in like manner humors that are too thick are to be attenuated,
those that are to thin and sharp are too be thickened and allayed, and those
that are tough to be wiped away or purged.

Namely phlegm which is cold, Phlegm how to be prepared. Choler.
moist, thick, and dull, requires heating, drying, attenuating, cutting, and
detergent medicines.

Yellow choler since it is hot and dry, it is to be corrected with cooling and
moistning things, but as it ^s thin, and by its too much tenuity may molest the
body, it is to be thickened, the other kinds of choler which are produced by too
much adustion, sichence they are now thicker, require extenuation.

Moreover the melancholy humor since it is cold, Melancholy.
dry and thick, is prepared with things modernately heating and attenuating and
moistning, but black choler, since it is a hot humor very dry and thick,
requires cold things, much attenuating and moistning.

The other preparation is that which is appointed when putred humors already
concocted, Another preparation of humors.
or others also not putred, by reason of some impediment are not evacuated
without difficulty, unless that be taken away.

But sithence humors which ought to be evacuated, ought to be moveable, and
the ways through which they ought to be moved open, hence it easily appears
that there are two hindrances, which impead the happy purgation of humors,
namely thickness of humors and obstruction of passages. And therefore the
Physician which would purge as Hippe. commands 2. Apbo. 9. must well prepare,
as Galen explaines it, it is to extenuate the thick and dull humors, and open
the passagesthrough which they ought to be traduced, and drawn by the force of
purging medicines.

CHAP VIII. Of the quantity of purgation.
THat we may purge as much as is convenient, How much to purge.
and no less, we are to use diligence, first to know the quantity of the
peccant humor, that from thence the quantity of the purging medicine may be
determined, for the quantity of the purging medicine ought to be such that it
may evacuate all the peccant humors, least any part thereof remain in the
body, and corrupt the other humors, and afterward cause a ralapse.

But whether the peccant humors ought to be evacuated together, and at once,
Whether the peccant humors are to be evacuated at once or several times.
or at several times is to be known from the store of humors, and strength or
weakness of the Patient; for if the matter be much, and if the strength be
great, yet it is better to divide the purgings, nor by too large evacuation
rashly to debilitate the strength, but if the matter be too little, and the
strength great, you may purge all the humor at once; if the strength be weak,
and many, or few humors are to be evacuated, it is more commodious to evacuate
at several times, then to debilitate the strength by one strong purge.
Permittents and Probibents.


Moreover you must attentively consider how the strength will endure purging,
and all those things which may discover present strength as well as that is to
come, and all those things are to be weighed which are numbered amongst
permitting things, and such as prohibit purgation: amongst which the first is
the natural propriety of body, for some having taken stronger, and greater
doses are scarce moved by purgers, others are purged very easily having taken
any purging medicine, therefore if the propriety of natures be not sufficiently
discerned, it is better to try with gentle things, then rashly to meddle with the
strongest; custom also and habit of body is to be known, and it is to be
considered whether the sick can bear strong medicines or not.

The perfect fignes of purging Hippo. Signs of perfect purgation.
delivers 1. Apho. 23. he says Excretions are not to be valued by their
quantity, but if they are such as they ought, and so go out that the sick can
easily endure it; whereof the first is if such as ought are evacuated. Secondly
if the sick can well bear it. Thirdly thirst happens through evacuation,
according to Apho. 19. Sect. 4. whosoever are purged having taken a purge, and
do not thirst, the purge has not reached home to the mark before they do
thirst.

But if due evacuation be not made it shall be promoted sparingly by moderate
exercise of the body, More s^aring purgation how to be provoked. Overmuch how
to be hindered.
as it is in Hippo. 4. Apho. 14.15. but if it be too much, you must use sleep
and rest.

Too great evacuations are hindered by Ligatures, and rubbing of the extreme
parts, by sweates, Cupping-glasses applying to the navell, astringent Topicall
Medicines put to the Region of the stomach, taking of new Treakle, or old, with
a grain of Opium, as also with meat, drink, and Medicines given, that have
astringent qualities.

CHAP. IX Of the place by which purgation ought to (...) made.
LAstly the place, What show the part to be purged.
by which purgation ought to be made the residence, or as I may say the
in^lination of the humors show, for a humor is to be evacuated through that
place, through which, both in respect of the place wherein it resides, and of
its own nature, it is fit to be evacuated so that the strength will permit it,
which Hippo. also admonishes 1. Apho 21. we ought to lead out humors that way
which they are most inclined to go, thither they are to be led through
convenient places.

But the convenient places are those through which nature at other times
rightly acting, evacuates what is offensive, and indeed there are two ways by
which purgation is to be appointed, the one is that by which we vomit, the
other through the paunch, By vomit.
but by vomit those humors are conveniently evacuated which are apt both in
regard of the place where they reside, and in respect of their own nature to be
carried to the stomach, or such as tend upward, namely such as are generated,
and reside in the stomach, as those also which are contained in the Spleen,
Cavities of the Liver, and Pancreas, as also thin humors, hot and choleric;
but by the paunch those which remain in the inferior parts and tend downwards,
as also thick and cold humors, By the paunch.
hence Hippo. writes 4. Apho. 6. those that are lean, and easy to vomit are
to be evacuated upwards, being careful of the Winter. As for example, those
which abound with choler which tends upwards; but on the contrary those which
are hard to vomit, and are somewhat thicker, and of an indifferent habit of
body are to be purged downward being cautious in the Summer, because they more
abound with phlegm.

Moreover the time of the year shows the humor, Time of the year.
and from thence also the place of purgation, hence Hippo. 4. Apho. 4. in the
Summer the superior ventricles, in the Winter the inferior are to be purged,
for in the Summer yellow choler and hot humors abound, and by reason of the
heat all things in our bodies seem to tend upwards, in Winter, phlegm rather
abounds which is heavy, and by nature tends downwards.

Symptoms also show the nature of humors, Symptoms.
and whither they incline, as Hippo. teaches 4. Apho. 17. the loathing of meat
by one that is not in a fever, the griping of the mouth of the stomach, a
Vertigo with Apparitions of shadows, and bitterness of the mouth show that
there is need of purging upwards, all which Symptoms signify that choler is
willing to ascend to the mouth of the stomach, and the same Apho. 18. pains
above the Middriffe, whoever wants purging, they signify they are to be purged
upwards, but those which are beneath, downward, and the same Hippo. Apho. 20.
if there be gripings, and frettings in the guts in fevers, and heaviness of
the knees, and pain of the Loins, they show that you are to purge downward.

Yet in provoking vomit we must consider whether the sick be easy to vomit, or
not, and whether the stomach or any of those parts, which may be moved by vomit
and to which the humors, or at least the vapors stird by vomit may flow, be
weak, and affected, for then you must abstain from giving a vomit.

CHAP. X. Of the due Administration of Purgers.
AS for the hour of giving a purge, Particular time.
purging medicines are to be given at the fourth, fifth or fixth hour in the
morning, but if there be any thing which impeades purgation at that time, or
requires a purge to be given sooner, it may also be taken at another hour, for
fits hinder, which if they come in the morning, the medicine is to be exhibited
in the Evening, but a violent disease forces us to purge, since it threatens
present danger, in which case purging is not to be deferred, but to be given,
although in the Evening, the purge being taken, you must abstain from meare
four, five or six hours, after the medicine is taken, those which are given to
drink should be given, hot, not cold, nor lukewarm.

Some are wont to mingle purges amongst their meats, Whether purgers may be
mixed with meat.
but they did not well, for the force of the medicine is hindered by the meat;
and the meat is defiled and corrupted by the medicine, and the humors which
are drawn; its concoction is hindered, and being uncocted, the medicine
stimulating, it is expeld; and it is to be feared, least some excrements, mixed
with the meat, should be distributed into the Liver and veins, or that the
meat it selse, being not enough concocted, or rather corrupted, should breed
some inconveniency in them.

CHAP. XI. Whether it be lawful to sleep having taken a purge.
WHether we may sleep having taken a purge Physicians disagree, but there is
need of a distinction; for if the purging medicine be gentle and benign,
having taken it we ought not to sleep, least the medicine should be carried
away and overcome by nature, and its action hindered, but if the purging
medicine be stronger, and requires greater heat that it may be brought into
action, sleep may be granted to the sick, yet moderate, which may only further
the activity of the medicine, but not impead evacuation, but afterward to
abstaire from sleep until perfect and sufficient purgation be made; moreover
for the same reason, after taking strong purges it is lawful to sleep a little
while, that the malignity of the medicine may be resisted by the more
plentiful heat, occasioned by sleep, and those troubles which the medicine
occasioneth may less be discerned in sleep, and so the medicine retained
without trouble or molestation, may rightly be reduced into action.

CHAP. XII. Whether it is best after purging, to use cleansing, and abstergent
medicines.
It Is the custom at this day, some hours after taking purging medicines, to
exhibit cleansing broathes, and such as wipe away, and that is righly done, for
it is profitable before food be taken, that the remainders of the medicine, and
the residue of its qualities, and if any vicious humors are drawn by the
medicine, and remain in the stomach, they are to be washed away, and drove
downward, and the loathing, and disdaining of meat, which is wont to be
occasioned by purging, may be freed and taken away.

CHAP XIII. Of Evacuation by Urine
ALthough the watery humor is principally evacuated by Urine, which remains of
the drink, Evacuation by Urine.
and is mingled with the blood, and the gibbous part of the Liver, Reins,
Bladder, and Vessels sub-servient to these, are principally purged by it, yet
the other humors attenuated, and principally the serous, thinner phlegm, the
choleric humor, and all the nerves and veins, may be purged by the same. But
seeing those things that cause Urine cleanse the body by degrees, it is most
profitable in those diseases, wherein it is convenient to evacuate matter by
degrees, and sparingly; but in those where there is need of sudden excretion,
and of evacuation to be made on a sudden, in such evacuation of Urine is not so
helpful.

But what the difference is of medicines provoking Urine is spoken before,
Diuretics properly so called are useful only as often as thick humors
residing in the Reins, bladder and parts sub-servient to them are to be
evacuated, or if thick humors stay, or stick in the veins but those which
move Urine only by affording aqueous matter, are convenient in those diseases
which are bred of thick and adust humors, for by the mixture of aqueous
substances, these are rendered more fluid. Permittenes and Prohibients.


Those things which permit, and prohibit also, are here to be considered, the
strength easily endures this evacuation so that it be so administered that more
profit then damage may redound to the sick, for if either in the whole body or
about the liver, many ill humors stick, there is danger, least by their plenty
and thickness whilst they get to the straight passages, they should obstruct
them; and therefore first a purge for the belly is to be appointed: Diuretics
also are not so convenient for hot and dry diseases, as fevers arising from
hot humors, nor for such as are lean and withered, as also if the Reins,
bladder, and passages and vessels appointed for this evacuation, are
ulcerated, or inflamed or affected with some such like disease, Time.


The time of drinking medicines causing Urine is not not convenient in the
beginning of a disease, since the matter is as yet more plentiful, and
thicker, but in the declination when the matter is somewhat abated and thinner,
but they are most profitably given before meat, and on an empty stomach.

CHAP. XIV. Of evacuation by sweat.
LAstly vicious humors also may be expelled by sweat, Sweat whence it
evacuates.
for although sweat evacuate in the first place from the circumference, and
habit of the body, yet it may evacuate humors also from the rest of the body,
and indeed first out of the greater veins and Arteries, and afterward out of
all other parts, namely from whence humors may be driven to the veins, and
from thence to the superficies of the body, for they are not conveniently
thrust out from the cavities of the stomach, guts, womb, and such like, to the
extremities of the body, and there are other ways by which they are far more
easily evacuated, What humors are evacuated by sweat.
but the watery humor is evacuated by sweat, which also may be evacuated by
Urine, and so may every thin humor and choleric, as others also if they are
attenuated, but principally sweates are profitably provoked by art in
inveterate and cold discases, and diurnall distillations, in the Palsy, the
Sciatica, and other pains of the joints.

Yet you must be careful here what the strength can permit, for this is a
powerful remedy, Things permitting.
and requires great strength, but principally hot and choleric persons endure
sweat less, and not long, nor do very hot things agree with them; much
matter prohibits provocation to sweat, for it is to be feared, least being
dilated to the skin, it should shut its small breathing holes, or pores, and so
either generate, or increase putrefaction.

As for how much, How much.
we must be careful that we do not over much provoke sweat, for sweat, if
it be too much, weakens the strength exceedingly, resolves the body, and makes
it lean, wherefore it is more commodious to cause moderate sweates often, then
to debilitate the strength with one that exceeds measure.

But the fit time for provoking sweates is the beginning of a disease, but
after universal purging of the body, When.
and in the declination of a disease, but the particular time, when the meat
is concocted, and in the declination of diseases, in those which have
paroxismes.

But medicines provoking sweat are especially to be exhibited with profit in
pestilentiall diseases and in all malignant matter, by which the malignant
matter, In what diseases.
the pestilent and venomous matter to the great benefit to the sick is driven
from the internal parts, and those that are next the heart to the extremities
of the body, and is evacuated by sweat. But Sudorisiques, which are given in
such diseases, ought to be of the number of those that resist poison, that they
may together infringe and debilitate the venom. In Administering of which,
there is no need of all those rules or observations, which are necessary to be
observed in provoking sweates in other diseases, but presently in the beginning
of a disease those Sudorifique resisters of poison are to be given, neither is
too much debilitating of strength to be feared.

CHAP. XV. Of particular Evacuations.
AS for particular Evacuations, Particular evacuation of the brain. Errhines.
if any vicious humors are collected in the brain, it may be evacuated two
ways, by the Nose, and the Palate.

By the Nose, first Errhines call out phlegm, which is spread about the
brain, and filmes that cover it, and stirs up its faculty that it may strive
to cast out super fluous humors.

Moreover sternutatories, Sneezing.
which are stronger, and irritate the brain, and by the force thereof humors
which lie deeper may be cast forth, of both of these this in general is to be
noted, that such remedies are not to be used, unless universalls have
preceded, and that the whole body be purged, but or the matter and form of
Errhines, and those things that cause sneezing, see before part the 1. Sect. 1.
Chap. 18. and hereafter part the 3 d. Sect. 3. Chap 30.

But those things which evacuate by the Palate, Apophlegmatismes.
are called Apophlegmatismes, and purge the more inward cavities and ventricles
of the brain, they are not conveniently given to those, the inward part of
whose mouth, throat, gullet or Larynx is exulcerated, and such as are
obnoxious at other times to distillations to the Chops and breast.

Those which purge the Lungs are called expectorating things, Purging the
breast.
and because humors cannot cast out from the lungs through the Wind pipe,
without a cough they are called Becchica of which kind for the most part are
Arteriacks i.e. medicines for Rhemes all of them, especially those which
cleanse, cut, or any way prepare the matter for expulsion, but that humors may
the more easily be evacuated by cough, their consistence ought to be
indifferent, neither too thin, nor too thick, but only so thick that they may
be carried upward by Air; not so viscide, as to stick in the mouth of the
Lungs, and therefore if the humors are viscide they are to be moistened and
cleansed with sour things but if too thin, to be somewhat thickened.

The stomach is evacuated by vomit or by the paunch, Things purging stymach,
Liver, Reins, Womb.
the guts with glisters, and medicines purging the belly; the cavities of the
liver, through the belly; the gibbous parts, by urine; the reins, and urinary
passages, by urine, the womb by the cources. Of which it is now spoken in
universal evacuation.

CHAP. XVI. Of the abating abundance of blood with Leaches, Cupping-glasses,
Scarrifications etc.
THe other fault amongst morbifique causes is quantity and the common
Indication which is taken from hence that that which abounds may be
deminuished, What shows the fault concerning quantity. What offends in quantity.
and that which is diminuished, may be increased, but since nothing can be said
to abound, unless that at other times it be naturally present; but in the body
blood only and such excrements are contained which proceed from nature; blood
and natural excrements in this second manner may be the causes of diseases, as
also milk and seed, and moreover the spirits and solid parts of the body, all
which if they are deficient in quantity, ought to be increased, but if they
exceed are to be deminuished; natural excrements are seldom desicient in
quantity, but they often exceed; but since the same reason is of evacuating
natural excrements, which there is of the humors, in their kind
preternaturall, here only we will speak of taking away of blood when it abounds.

Therefore if Plethory, be present and the blood abound, Plethory what it shows.
the blood is to be diminuished, and that which abounds to be taken away, and
too great plenty of blood indicates diminution of the same.

But concerning the manner how we abate the blood, The manner of abating blood.
some perform it more strongly, others more weakly; frications, Sweates,
Bathes, Exercise, Fastings perform it more weakly; Leaches, opening of the
Hemethodes, provocation of courses, Cupping-glasles, and Scarrifications
perform it more strongly; but the most generous, and powerful remedy here,
is opening of a vein.

Frications, sweates, Bathes, and Exercises, they diminuish the blood one way,
because they stir up the heat in the body, which dissolves and dissipates the
substance of our bodies.

But fasting does not evacuate by its self, Fasting.
but by reason that it takes away humors, and diminuisheth the body, because
it puts nothing in the stead of that which is consumed by heat, and denies
necessary aliment to the body; but because fasting evacuates the whole body
equally, it is then requisite when the humor abounding does abound not in one
part but in the whole body; yet shorter fasting first evacuates humors out of
the stomach and about the stomach; but because fasting evacuates by degrees it
is not profitable, nor sufficient for an indication, when plenitude is suddenly
to be abated. But it is endured when the strength is powerful, to which all
other things, which prohibit fasting are to be referred, as temperature of
body, hot and dry, hot and moist, a thin habit of body, griping or biting in
the Orifice of the stomach, vomiting, flux of the belly.

Leaches by opening the mouths of veins, Leaches.
and sucking blood, evacuate blood by themselves, and sensibly, yet by little,
and little, in which respect they may diminuish the plenitude of the whole body
and help diseases of many parts to which they are applied, and evacuate,
sometimes a greater, sometimes a lesser quantity of blood, as they are applied
to a greater, or lesser vein, in the application therefore of them, you are to
observe, whether they are placed for the evacuation of the whole body, or for a
disease of some private part, for if they are applied for the evacuation of the
whole, they are to be put to the great and prominent veins, in the Legs and
Arms or Hemerhodes, yet in women that are with child, they must be applied
only to the Arms; but in regard of peculiar diseases they are to be applied to
diverse parts, as this or that part is affected.

The Hemerhodes if they use to flow at other times, Hemerhodes.
the opening of them may be instead of breathing a vein, but otherwise the
Physician in opening of them shall labor with little profit, unless happily
they are opened by leaches putting to them; but since the Hemerhodes are
twofold, external and internal, the external are opened to abate a Plethory,
as also for diseases of the Reins, Womb, Back, Hips, and other diseases
arising from the hollow vein with profit; as in diseases which proceed from
the Hypocondries, the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, the internal may be
conveniently opened; but the external are opened with frications, the leaves
of a Fig, course rags, Leaches applied, the juice of an Onion, the juice of
Century, or Sow-bread, the Gall of a Hog, or Bullock, or with rags wet in
these, but the internal with suppositers and sharp Glisters.

The courses whilst they flow exacuate also and diminish perfluour blood;
Courses.
but nature appointed that flux, which if it be suppressed is to be opened; in
which business this is to be observed, that in provoking them, the Physician
should make use of that time, when at other times they use to flow, for if he
should endeavor it at another time, he looses his labor.

Cuppings, which Scarrification also, Cupping with scarrisying.
but by die, evacuating blood by themselves, and sensibly, but by degrees; for
which reason they are something applied for good reasons, sometimes instead of
opening a vein; if they are applied with good reason, they are indicated from
no great fault of the blood. But when they are used instead of Phlebotomie they
are applied for some great fault in the blood, which indeed requires the
breathing of a vein, which notwithstanding weak strength will not endure; but
Cupping-glasses properly evacuate cutaneous blood, yet because some of the
blood which comes out of the skin is powered into the capillary veins from the
great veins, in this respect also they are said to evacuate the whole body:
but if that evacuation be more sparing it does not reach the whole. And when
Cupping-glasses evacuate by drawing, the use of them is most profitable if any
revulsion be required at the same time: as for the place of applycation, if
they are applied in respect of the whole, they should be put to the inferior
parts; if in respect of any part, then to that part which requires this
remedy; yet in those that are pregnant, they are not to be exhibited to the
inferior parts but rather to the Arms.

Lastly simple scarification also without cupping, Scarrification.
may evacuate blood; which truly is used sometimes instead of opening a vein;
and it is appointed in the Legs especially, by which means it may not only
evacuate but also re-vell from the head, and superior parts, yet sometimes in
the Arm and back also, but in its proper use it is exhibited, when there is a
purpose to evacuate only out of some one part, but especially when we would
evacuate some acrid, malignant, and venomous matter, least being retained, it
should cast the sick into danger, which is used also in a Gangrene, and by the
ancients in a callous Ulcer.

CHAP XVII. Of opening a vein.
BUt the most efficacious remedy for evacuation of blood is the breathing of a
vein, which nevertheless has other uses, What indicates a breathing of a
vein.
whereof we will here speak together, for it is a question of great moment when
the breathing of a vein, or evacuation of blood by opening of a vein is to be
appointed, where first this is to be noted, that the opening o^ a vein is not
some one Indicate, but the matter of remedy which is profitable in many
Indicates.

There are two general benefits in the opening of a vein, The use of opening
a vein.
to evacuate, blood, and by accident, whilst it draws away the blood, the
vehicle of heat, to cool; again in evacuating it performs two things, for
it both takes blood out of the body, and always the cource, and violence of
humors in the veins; first the way it both takes away the ill blood, and only
diminuisheth it offending in quantity, but the latter way it can revell, and
draw back and derive the blood flowne into a part, and the blood which is
flowne in whilst it is yet moveable, can draw it to the parts near thereunto;
so that the opening of a vein may wholly perform five things, namely to
evacuate corrupt blood, to diminuish blood, to revell, derive, and refrigerate.

For first the vicious and putrefying blood may be evacuated by opening of a
vein, Putred blood evacuated by the opening of a vein.
as that which is contained in veins, and they being opened it flows out, and
indeed it is most profitably appointed in beginning of diseases, since nature for
the most part in fevers use to drive no small portion of the peccant matter to
the extremes, and those greater veins under the skin.

Secondly, breathing a vein is an excellent remedy to diminish the blood. The
cutting of a vtine devinuisheth blood and revels.


Thirdly, the opening of a vein is used for revulsion, for a vein being
opened, the violence of the blood is turned and drawn back to the contrary
part, and therefore it is a very efficacious remedy to stop flowings of humors,
contained in the veins.

Fourthly, the opening of a vein may derive the blood, which newly flowed into
the part, It derives.
and is not yet settled there, but as yet fluid; a vein being opened nigh at
hand it may, I say drive the blood to a neighboring part.

Fifthly, Cooles.
opening of a vein cooles by accident, but if distemper only be present, which
may be corrected by other remedies, and no other fault of the blood be joined
with it which requires breathing of a vein also, cooling medicines are ordered
to be used; but if the blood be so exceeding hot that it requires sudden
refrigeration, which other medicines perchance cannot perform, or some other
fault of the blood be joined, which by the same means, opening of a vein may
help, for this cause also you may open a vein.

From whence it is manifest, For which Indicants cutting of a vein serves.
that the breathing fo a vein may be profitable, whilst the blood either
putrifyes, and is corrupted, or offends in quantity, or flows to any part,
with violence, or oppresses a part, or burns vehemently.

Yet it is not always necessary to open a vein when these ^inconveniences
are present, since we can take them away by other means, but then only
breathing a vein is conveni^ent, when there is a great corruption of the
blood, and it requires sudden releasing, as being that which is the best and
most efficacious remedy amongst the evacuations of blood, then presently blood
may be evacuated.

In short, The adequate Indicant of cutting a vein.
the Indicant to which by mediation of the Indicate, as being the matter of
help, opening of a vein agrees, it is a vehement fault of the flowing blood,
which is corrupted either in its substance, or it offends in quantity, or
rusheth into some part, or oppresses some part, or grows exceeding hot; yet
besides these principle faults, the blood also sometimes, as a cause without
which it cannot, and as adjuvant, it may offend; and then also it requires
opening of a vein.

Yet we may not always open a vein when these Indicants are present, Things
permitting opening a vein.
for since the opening of a vein evacuates blood together, and also exhausteth
somewhat of the spirits, and so debilitates the strength, if the strength be
great, it permits opening of a vein, if it be weak it prohibits it, and
regard is to be had here not only of the present, but of the future strength,
for when the strength is weak, either oppressed with store of humors, or
loosed, in the latter imbecility only breathing of a vein is prohibited, but
in the former it is profitable.

All other things which are said to permit, or prohibit the breathing of a
vein, besides strength, they do it only in this respect, namely as they are
the tokens or signs of strength, or debility of nature, as Age, which
flourishing admits of opening a vein, Childhood and old Age prohibit the
same, Se^.
the Sex, as to women with child, especially in the last months, the opening
of a vein is prohibited; unless some disease enforce it and there be store of
blood, property of nature, custom, habit of body, course of life, constitution
of Air, some Symptoms, as large evacuations, watchings and such like, which
dissipate the spirits, and substance of our bodies, and loosen our strength,
unless they are taken away by opening of a vein. How much blood to be
evacuated.


The quantity of letting blood is indicated from the greatness of the fault
depending on the blood, and according as that has greater or less force, so
blood is to be evacuated more largely, or sparingly, yet the strength, as also
things permitting are here to be weighed, an^ all those things, which are the
signs of strength, and weakness; and it is to be considered whether the
strength will bear that evacuation, which the magnitude of the disease
requires.

But whether the quantity of blood which is indicated be to be taken away at
once, or several times, the greatness of the disease, and the strength do
show; in a most violent evil^, it is convenient to evacuate the blood at once, in
milder at several times; also strong bodies will bear one large evacuation of
blood, but if they are weak, it is better to do it at several times.

The presence of those Indicants which serve for the letting blood, Time.
shows the time of letting blood, and the absence of the prohibiting; therefore
the most convenient time of letting blood for the most part is the beginning of
a disease, yet it is not to be appointed whilst crude juice, and unconcocted
meats are in the first passages, and in diseases wherein there are certain
intermissions, and wherein the fits return at certain times, the time when
the fit is, is not convenient for letting blood, but the time of intermission
is more commodious, or if that be too short, the declination of the fit, or the
abating of a disease.

As for the hour, Hour.
if a disease that is violent, provokes or urges, in what hour of the day
soever, or even at midnight, no preparation being made before, and no delay
being made, you may open a vein, at other times, one hour or two after sleep
is most convenient.

But where, What veins to be opened.
or the place, and vein to be opened, although what veins soever be opened it
may evacuate the whole body, yet the larger perform this best, and regard is
to be had, to the fountain of blood, and the rise of the evil, which are
principally the liver and spleen, the veins therefore in the right or left
cubit are to be opened, according as the disease requires, the internal,
external, or middle, and especially the internal, but what veins are to be
opened for Revulsion and Derivation sake shall be shown in there proper place.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Revulsion.
AS for the third fault of humors, Default of humors according to qualities.
namely when humors recede from their natural state in respect of qualities,
how that is to be amended, from those things which were spoken before of the
preparation of humors, and which shall be spoken hereafter of curing of
diseases of intemperature, is manifest enough.

But the error in motion is various, In motion.
and humors decline from their natural state, if either they are not rightly
moved, that is, when they are moved thither whither they ought not, that is,
when they ought to be quiet according to the Law of nature, they are moved at
that time; or else are not moved, when they should be moved; or are moved in
parts or thither where they ought not to be moved; the first error is called
the restraining motion, the second the inciting, the third the helping, the
fourth the correcting, and averting to another place.

First therefore humors as they offend in motion afford one indication only,
of stopping of motion, Humors offending in motion what they indicate.
of staying the violence of a humor, or an averting of a humor from a place,
to which it flows contrary to nature, unless happily nature unburthens it
self conveniently by that means, or the body puts away humors that trouble
it to some ignoble part of it, but we may satisfy this indication several
ways, namely if either we take away those things from the humor, which are
necessary for motion, or whether we draw back the same by force, namely, if out
of what is thin and fluid we make it thick, if we stop the passages to it, and
straighten, and make narrow the ways, through which it ought to flow, lastly
if we prohibit its coming, and bind the passages which are in the part that it
may not be conveniently received, but when we cannot hinder these often, or it
is sufficient to stay a flux, we call back and retract those humors by force:
Humors are drawn back either by reason of vacuity, or heat, or pain: By
reason of vacuity, or rather evacuation humors are drawn back, which power out
and evacuate them out the body through other parts, as the opening of a vein,
scarrifications, leaches, flowing of courses, Hemmerodes, purging by the
Paunch, vomitings, urines, sweats,: By heat and pain they are drawn back, by
those things which have power of inciting heat and pain, or have power of
performing them both, as are frications, ligatures, lotions, fomentations,
vesicatories, causticks, and such like.

An so, How many ways the motion of humors may be hindered
although there is one Indicant, namely a fault of the humors in motion, so
there is one Indicate, namely, remedy hindering motion, and averting the humor
from the part to which it flows, yet the manners of performing these are
various, namely four, Revulsion, Derivation, Interception, and repulsion.

Revulsion, Revulsion, what.
which the Greeks call Antispasis, is an averting of a humor flowing into some
part, into the contrary; But humors are Revelled, not those which are in the
affected part (for these are properly evacuated out of the part affected,
Revulsion ought not to be to the next.
or nigh thereunto) but they are such as do flow to some part, or are about to
flow. But since this is common to every Revulsion, that a contrary motion may
be occasioned for the flowing humor, and may move it to a part, not to that
whither it tends, but to a contrary; hence it follows, that Revulsion ought
not to be to the next, but to the remote and opposite parts, and principally
according to length, and breadth. As for the other oppositions some observe
them also, whilst they make a twofold Revulsion, the one which is simple and
absolutely such, or a universal Revulsion as it is called, Universal.
which observes contrariety in respect of the whole body, and in it regards
contrary terms, from whencesoever the humors flow, as when we revell from the
head to the legs and feet. Particular.
But there is another particular Revulsion, or local, which in one member
only regards contrary terms and opposition of the parts of the same member,
and in the same member revels from the anterior parts to the posterior, or from
the hinder to the former parts: Which nevertheless scarce deserve, the name of
a Revulsion: And this former in the beginning of diseases, when the body is as
yet very full, is most proper: But the latter is not convenient in the
beginning of diseases; also whereas in revulsion the flowing humor ought to be
drawn to the contrary part is manifest, flowings are to be drawn back together
to the beginning; hence when humors flow from the whole body, or the
beginnings of fluxes lie hid, the revulsion is fitly made to the remote parts,
but when the beginning of the flux is certain, to that the flux is to be
re-called, although it be not the remotest part.

In particular, as for the revulsion by opening of a vein, Revulsion by
opening a vein.
although that also is to be appointed in a distant, and remote place, yet not
simply the most remote part is to be chosen for the opening of a vein, but
that part which is exactly on the contrary, or which also has communion of
veins joined to it, or Euthyory which is a certain direction of vessels, by
which the reduction of humors may conveniently be made, and may easily flow
from one part into another, and therefore veins, which are open for revulsion
sake, rather communicate with the part sending, then receiving, as it is
necessary; so we recall blood flowing to the place from whence it begins, and
we cause a contrary motion for it; namely we ought here to choose veins which
are remote to the part affected, and have communion with the part sending,
which are directly opposite to the part affected, either according to
longitude, or latitude, hence an inferior part being affected, a vein in the
Arm of the same side, a superior part being affected a vein in the Arm of
the contrary side, the liver affected the interior vein of the right cubit is
to be opened.

As for the Administration of a Revulsion, The right Administration of
revulsion.
the quantity of revulsion answers to the quantity of the flux, and strength
tollerating, but that is greater which is made with the letting out of a
humor, then that which is without it, and there are certain degrees and
differences of magnitude in every kind, every one whereof answers to the
certain error in the motion of the peccant humor.

As for the time of flowing since revulsion ought to be of humors flowing, it is
principally to be administered, The time.
when the flux begins, but if the flux be more lasting, it ought to be
exhibited after the beginning also; but if the flux be less so that it may be
stopped by derivation, or repulsion, there is no need of revulsion.

The places, to which revulsorie remedies are applied, Place.
are various, according to the variety of the parts affected.

CHAP. XIX Of Derivation.
DErivation regards that matter which newly flows into the part affected,
Derivation what.
but as yet is not spread abroad into the space of the part without theveines;
but as yet it flows in its veins, and it is an averting or drawing away of
the humor offending the part, to the adjacent parts, and an evacuaion of it
through the same, and in this evacuation, namely that which is made by opening
of a vein, the communion of the veins with the part affected is observed,
whereof mention is so often made by Authors; also if the matter in the body be
plentiful, derivation is not to be appointed unless that plenitude be first
abated.

The quantity of Derivation of a humor which flows into the part, Quantity.
answers to the quantity which so flows, and to the strength of the sick, but
in letting of blood the measure, and limits of Derivation in inflammations
Hippo, commands us to learn by the changing of the color: the second of the
reason of diet in ac. T. 10. so that the strength will bear it.

The convenient time of Derivation is when the matter flows into the part,
Time.
and the store of matter is taken away, and the flux is abated, yet it ought to
be performed before the matter besme are the part.

The situation of the part shows the place; Place.
which in general ought to be near the part affected, and to communicate with
the passages.

CHAP. XX. Of Repulsion.
REpelling things drive away the humor flowing, Repelling:
to another place, and hinders its coming to the part affected, and that which
newly has flowne, they free the part from by pressing of it out

But you may not exhibit Repelling things in all fluxes, Repellents not
convenient ser fluxes.
for first they are not to be given in ignoble parts; Secondly, when the flux
is nigh to a principal part, least the matter repulsed be carried to the
principal parts. Thirdly, to parts placed too deep. Fourthly, if the matter be
malignant, and venomous. Fifthly, when a wound is inflicted by the stroke, or
biting of a venomous Creature. Sixthly, if nature rightly acting, drives any
matter into a part critically. Seventhly, if the humor be much, and the body
as yet full. Eighthly, if the humor be fixed in the part. Ninthly, if there be
vehement pain.

The most convenient time for Administration of repelling things, is the
beginning of the flux; Time.
but when the beginning proceeds toward the augmentation, Digerents are to be
mixed.

But since as is said before, some repelling medicines are cold and moist,
others cold and dry, and astringent, those do best agree when the humor shall
be thin, and little, and is in the extremities of the body, or when
fluctuations happen by reason of two great heat of the parts, or when they
have great heat adjoined, or if the pain be vehement, but these when pain
does not so provoke, and fluctuations are made through the debility of the
parts.

The place to which repellents are to be exhibited is the same from whence we
ought to repel. Place.


CHAP. XXI. Of Interceptings.
SUch things as do intercept, Intercipients.
for the most part agree with those things that do repel, and they differ
only in respect of place from them; for repellents are exhibited to the part
affected; but intercipients to the ways through which the humor flows; such
like are Defensitives, commonly so called, which being endued with a cold
faculty, dry, earthly and astringent, stop the coming of the humors in their
passages, and hinder them that they cannot come to the part affected, and since
some are more powerful, others more mild, the strongest are to be used in a
grosser habit of body, when the vessels are wider, and the condition of the
Air hotter, which loosens, and dilates the passages, and that there is greater
violence of the humor flowing; if the matter be otherwise, the milder are to
be applied.

But they are most fitly applied to places void of flesh wherein the vessels
are more evident, and open. Place.


It Is contrary to the error of humors in motion, Motion of humors taken away.
when those things which ought to be moved, are not moved at all, as when the
months, Hemerhodes, or other accustomed Evacuations are suppressed, for then the
humors which lie still are to be attenuated, and heated, and the passages to
be relaxed, and the straightness to be taken away, of which in their place,
which if they help not, we must come to those things, which can stir up
humors by violence, which we have accounted before, namely which draw humors
into some part, by reason of heat, pain, and vacuity.

CHAP. XXII. Of discussing.
THe last fault of the humors, Humors offending in any part.
is according to the place where, namely when some humors abide in some part
where they ought not, the humors therefore which cleave to that part are to be
taken away, which is done either insensibly, by the secret pores, or by
Evaporating, whilst the humor being dissolved into vapors is discussed, or
the humor is plainly evacuated and under the form of a humor is drawn our.

Those which take away the humor by insensible transpiration, Discutients in
what diseases convenient.
are called Discutients, Resolvents, and Digerents; but they are most
profitably administered, when the humor is thin, sticking under a soft skin, to
which the force of the discussing medicines may penetrate; for you may not use
Diaphoreticks if there be plenitude in the body, but rather must evacuate the
body first,

The most convenient time for exhibiting Discutients is the state, Time.
and the declination at hand, yet in the augmentation they may be used, but not
alone, but mixed with such as repel.

But since some Diaphoretick medicines are stronger, and hotter, some not such,
we use the gentlest when the matter is in the superficies of the body, the part
affected soft and loose, the stronger are given when the matter is situated in
a deeper place, under a thick and gross skin, and it self is colder and
thicker.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Softning and Ripening of matter.
EMollients are necessary as often as the matter is thick, Emollients.
and hard; for as often as the matter is thick and hardened, in vain we exhibit
Diaphoreticks, since that such matter cannot be discussed by them, but they are
forced to be softened; of Emollient medicines it is spoken before.

Yet if the matter cannot be dissolved, and discussed, Suppuratives.
it is to be turned into quitture, whereof if the Physician see that the humor
cannot be discussed by Evaporation through pores, in this part he ought to
help nature, and to exhibit ripening medicines, but if there be hope that the
humors may be discussed, he must abstain from suppuration, it is to be noted
also that all humors cannot equally and aright be turned into purulent matter;
blood indeed is easily turned into quitture, but in diseases arising from
choler, and Melancholy suppuratives, or ripening medicines are scarce to be
exhibited without danger, since by the use of these, those humors often times
do so degenerate, and are corrupted, that they may excite a cancer, and other
malignant ulcers.

Neither are they safely administered to every place; In the internal parts
suppuration is not rashly to be procured; amongst the external parts,
suppuratives are not safely used about the joints.

THE FIFTH BOOK, PART II. SECT. II. Of showing how to cure.
CHAP. I. Of diseases of Intemperature.
AFter we have finished the Indication Preservatory, now we come to the
Curatory, and are to show the way of curing diseases, and first diseases of the
simular parts, and indeed what belongs to diseases of Intemperature. Distemper
what it shows.
Of Intemperature there ought to be an alteration by contraries, namely a hot
distemper, indicates medicines cooling, a cold heating, a moist drying, a dry,
moistning, hot and moist requires a medicine cold and dry, hot and dry a
medicine cold and moist; cold and moist require hot and dry, cold and dry
Indicate hot and moist.

But not only in alteration is contrariety to be observed in general, How a
degree of contrariety is to be observed.
but also certain degrees of contrariety, as much as may be; and therefore a
disease which receds very much from the natural state, wants more vehement
remedies, and on the contrary a disease which differs not much from the
natural state, requires gentler remedies; hence a hot disease in a body by
nature colder, then those that are well, is to be resisted with cold things.
And a cold disease in a body hot by nature, requires hotter remedies: A moist
disease in a dry body, and hard by nature, requires exceeding drying Medicines:
A dry disease in a moist body, and soft, requires things that moisten
exceedingly. On the contrary, a hot disease in a body, hot by nature, requires
milder cooling remedies: A cold disease in a colder body, requires weaker
heating remedies. A moist disease, in a body moist by nature and soft, wants
dryers not so powerful: A dry disease in a body, dry and hard by nature, has
need of remedies moistning less.

Moreover in alterations, Contraries appropriated.
not only a Medicine exactly answering to the present distemper, as near as
may be should be opposed; but it ought to be appropriated, and have a peculiar
agreement to the nature of the part affected. Also we must beware least the
Medicine have some other quality joined with the quality which is necessary to
correct the distemper which may hurt the part.

Also since hence in the cure of simple distempers, Simple contrary Medicines do
best agree, if they are not always in a readiness, that quality which does not
agree, or which is hurtful may be taken away by the mixture of others; As on
the contrary compound distempers, if we cannot have a Medicine which is
convenient for the compound contrary qualities, that which is wanting must be
supplied by the mixture of others.

From all these it is manifest, Distemper of the brain.
that in curing diseases of the head, it is not easily to be altered beyond
mediocrity, least the native heat should be weakened and dissipated; yet it is
more safe to heat then cool.

In diseases of the Breast and Lungs, The Breast.
you must always beware that you dry not too much, least the matter should be
thickened and unfit to draw out. But when there is need of cooling, first beware
that cold astringents are not given, but moistning, for cold things are very
hurtful to the Breast, 5. Apho. 24. not only applied outwardly, but taken
inwardly.

In the cure of the heart Medicines are always to be mixed which have a
corroborating power, Heart.
and therefore moderate astringents, and odoriferous, and Bezoa ticks as they
are called, should always be mixed with the Medicines which are given to the
heart: But always beware of vehement coolers and heaters,

The stomach is easily hurt as well by too much heat, Stomach.
as by too much cold, and in a hot distemper it is to be warily cooled, by
degrees, and by little and little, but in a cold you must take heed least the
innate heat, be too much dissipated by hot things; and therefore somewhat
astringent and strengthening is all ways to be added, which may hinder the
dissipation of the innate heat and Spirits.

In curing the Liver, Liver.
these medicines are to be chosen, that have some binding and strengthening
faculty with tenuity of parts; such like are those that are astringent and are
bitter; but you must abstain from sweet things, by which the Liver, as also
the spleen do easily swell.

The Spleeen requires, and endures the strongest medicines, Spleen.
and therefore they may safely be applied outward, yet so that the humors
contained in it may not increase by sudden cooling, or be hardened by drying;
but they are scarce safely given inwardly, least the other bowels be offended
by them, and therefore what is wanting in vehemence, is to be be made good by
daily use of them.

In a disease of the womb, Womb.
you must abstain from vinegar, for pleasant things are more grateful to the
womb, yet such as are great must abstain from them.

The Eye since it is very sensibly it does not endure sharp medicines, The eye.
or such as may bind, and exasperate it.

But in the cure of distempers, not only contraries convenient are exhibited,
but the use of likes are altogether to be avoided.

Yet if the distemper be with matter, Distemper with matter.
alteration alone does not suffice, but the cause from whence it is cherished
is first to be taken away; and therefore Indication in distempers of this
nature, is evacuation and alteration, where notwithstanding by the name of a
cause are not only understood causes simply so called, but also diseases and
affects, some of which excite, and cherish other diseases, for these in like
manner are to be taken away in the first place.

CHAP. II. Of curing diseases of the whole substance.
IN curing diseases of the whole substance, the occult malignant quality is to
be driven out by its contrary, and a remedy against poison; and the venomous
cause to be taken away, and rooted out of the body; and therefore poison which
is drunk or taken in at the mouth, is to be cast out by vomit, or presently to
be drawn out through the p^unch; but if it be drawn in with Air, or has
passed beyond the liver, it is to be expelled by sweates; but those which are
communicated by the biting, or striking of venomous animals, are brought by
drawing after what manner soever to the body, first of all we must labor to
draw back, and extract, and to hinder it all manner of ways, least it
penetrate and creep within the body; but principally, every sort of poison is
to be expelled by those remedies, which experience teaches to be most
repugnant to them, and with those the heart is to be strengthened; yet to
observe the manifest qualities also in poisons, is a great part of the cure.

CHAP III. Of the cure of diseases of Conformation.
AS for the Errors of Conformation, Cure of figure in diseases. What they show.
if the bones are set awry, and ill shaped, in those which are growing, the
cure is possible; but in those that are come to ripeness of years, and which
grow no more, they are incurable.

But it is a general Indication which supplies the fault of the figure, a
changing of the part of the viticus figure to the contrary, until it acquires
the figure which naturally it ought to have, but this is performed two ways,
by fashioning, and alligation or binding; How corrected.
by fashioning that mending of the figure is to be taken, which by drawing and
prossing with the hands, by little and little and often, is perfected; by
binding, that correction is understood which is performed by swathings, and
Ferrules, or Canes, namely by which part of the vicious figure by swathings is
drawn contrarywife, and retained by splintors, least it should bend back
again toward its erroneous figure.

The second sort of diseases of Conformation are in the hollow places, which
two general indications do help, The cure of diseases in the channel or
passages.
namely to open that which contrary to nature is shut, and to shut that, which
contrary to nature is opened.

But amongst diseases in defect the most common is obstruction of passages, Of
obstruction.
whose common Indication is, apertion of obstruction But since thence the causes
of obstruction may be various, particular indications are taken from them, and
those being taken away, the obstructions are also opened: Therefore that
obstruction which is made by thick and viscid humors, requires attenuating,
cleansing, and cutting medicines; amongst which, sometimes the weaker,
sometimes the stronger are used, according to the nature of the humor it self,
and the condition of the place wherein it resides: But if obstruction be made
by many humors, and they contrary to nature in their whole kind, the cure
thereof consists altogether in evacuation. But if the humor be not contrary to
nature in its whole kind, but only offends in quantity, the Indication is
Apokenosis, i. e. That which abounds is to be abated, according to its
abundancy: But although all the obstructing causes should be evacuated, yet
they differ as well in other things, as also especially in this, that each of
them require their peculiar and convenient places: Those which obstruct the
Breast and Lungs, are to be ejected by cough, nor can they easily be evacuated
any other way: But those which are contained in the Liver, or in Veins, or in
Arteries, or in the Reins, are cast out by Urine, the belly, or vomit.

The other kinds of straightness, Coalescense
when the causes are taken away, they are likewise taken away, things growing
together, or Coalescents, since it comes to pass by the growing together of
parts and sides of a passage Indicate a Medicine breaking and taking away that
Siccatrizing again.

Constipation Indicates the cause to be taken away, Pressing and closing.
Compression.
which make that straightness.

Compression since it proceeds from external causes, resting upon the
passages, the Indication is common, namely, to take away that cause of pressing
together, and shutting the passage, but the special Indications are various,
according to the variety of causes, and the whole cure consists in the ablation
of those causes which shall be shown in their own place.

Lastly, Subsidence, if it be caused by too much humidity, the part is to be
dried: If the part be wrung hard, and as it were contracted, with drying
things, and too many Astringents, and cold, the contraries, namely, Relaxing
and moistning things are to be exhibited.

On the other side, if the passages, Cure of the opening of Vessels.
and vessels which ought to be shut are opened, and humors flow out from
thence, the common Indication is, that the opened vessel is to be shut, which
may be performed in the external parts, with convenient Medicines applied, and
bound: But if the opening be in the inward parts, the manner of performing that
is various, according to the variety of causes: If it be an Anastomesis, or
opening of the mouth of a vessel, the orifice of the opened vessel is to be
hardened and bound. If by a Diapedesis, thickning and incrassating Medicines are
required: If by a Rupture, the broken vessel is to be united, and shut: If
from Erosion, Sarcotticks first, afterward consolidating medicines are
required.

Thirdly, If the part which naturally ought to be smooth, Cure of diseases of
the superficies.
should become rough, it is to be made smooth again, which is performed in the
Windpipe and Tongue: If that which is evacuated be filled up, or that which is
extant be taken away; That is performed in soft parts by Medicines which
moisten, and have a clammy nature: But this with abstergent Medicines; But in
bones whether they are eroded, Of roughness.
or have any superfluity annexed to them, the roughness is conveniently taken
away by shaving.

Smoothness contrary to nature, Of smoothness.
requires a contrary way of cure, and the natural roughness is to be brought
again, by abstergent Medicines, and indeed such as thoroughly cleanse, namely,
such as can free the glutinous humors, tenaciously cleaving to the outsides
of the parts, and restore the natural roughness to the part.

CHAP. IV. Of the cure of Diseases of number.
DIseases in Number, since they are twofold, in excess, and in defect, either
of them require their Indication, Diseases of number what they indicate.
and that which is wanting, and naturally ought to be present is to be
restored: But that which abounds is to be taken away and removed; but since
that which is wanting only can be a natural thing, it is the part of Nature
only to make up and regenerate that which is wanting, but the Physician is
only the servant of nature in these things whilst he defends the strength of
nature, Administers fit matter, and removes impediments, but this general
indication is varied according to the variety of parts, and cannot always be
reduced into action: for it proceeds in one manner in the generation of flesh,
in another of a bone, in another of a nerve, and other parts, of which in the
solution of unity.

Moreover since some parts are simple, others compound, if compound are lost,
neither the same in particular, nor any thing like unto them, can easily come
in their stead; in which the third scope is to find out a certain comeliness,
or to make something, which may some ways do the office of a lost part, yet
later Physicians have invented a way of curing imperfect parts, whereof above,
part 2 d. Sect. 1. Chap. 16.

On the contrary excess requires its removal, but since those things are
various which ought to be taken away, each of them deserves its peculiar cure,
according to the substance, dignity, situation of the parts, and differing also
in other respects, for we always beware of this, that other parts may not be
hurt, or at least to do our endeavor that they may receive very little hurt,
and that there may come no greater loss to the body by the taking away, then
that was which came by the thing abounding.

But the Instruments wherewith a Physician may appoint the ablation of things
which abound contrary to nature, are three, Iron, Fire, and medicines; by Iron
all acute Instruments of every kind which are fit for the cutting of^
superfluities, are understood: by fire, actual eauteries are understood,
whilst that which abounds is burnt with Iron, Silver, or fired Gold. Medicines
for this purpose most convenient, are those which are called potentiall
cauteries, Cathareticks, namely, Septicks and Escaroticks, all which are
mentioned before.

CHAP. V. Of curing diseases of magnitude.
WHen either the whole body, Magnitude increased what it shows.
or any member thereof is increased contrary to nature, so that the natural
actions are thereby hindered, the Indication is that the magnitude increased may
be diminished: and indeed since the substance of the part is not sound, when
it is increased in magnitude, as in wounds, and ulcers, the same medicines are to
be exhibited as to those abounding in number; but if either the whole body or
any part be equally increased, and it too much increases through the whole,
you may not use Iron, or Fire, nor corrasive medicines, but there are two
special aims, namely, to draw away the too great plenty of aliment from the
parts, and to consume it, or take it away by Digerents, and discutients,
wherefore fasting and spare diet, are then convenient; and such use of the
non-naturalls as may attenuate and discuss, and medicines of the same nature.

Tumors also have their peculiar aims which that general Indication
satisfies, Cure of Tumors.
which commands us to diminish that which is increased contrary to nature; of
which in its own place.

The magnitude diminished on the other side indicates its increase, but this is
performed by new nourishing, Bigness diminished what it shows:
or restoring, and by generation, by renutrition; that which is wanting is
restored by good and plentiful aliment, and the part acquires a greater, and
natural bigness, but generation is then necessary when any thing is lost of
the substance of the part: for there that is restored by the re-generation of
flesh which was lost, and the cavity of the ulcer filled up.

CHAP VI. Of curing diseases in situation and connection.
MOreover Organick diseases, Diseases in position and connection without they
show.
since there are diseases in position, and connection, that which has lost its
natural place, Indicates its reposition into its natural place, but that,
which is not joined to those which it ought, Indicates its conjunction with
them; the first indication performed, and bones out of joint are cured by
bending and forceing them from the opposite part to that from whence they were
removed; which by what means it may be performed is shown before part 1.
Sect. 2. Chap. 4. so other parts are to be reduced into their own places.

But if the parts which according to nature ought to be separated, are joined
together, and grow together contrary to nature, they are to be freed and
separated: But that separation is made either by Surgery, and the help of an
Incision Knife, and Iron, or with a silken string, or with a Horse hair, or
with caustic Medicines and Septicks.

But the other kind, Diseases in connection.
when the part is not joined with those with which it ought, Indicates that,
that which contains should be rendered more firm and solid: And therefore
those parts ought to be strengthened and contained.

CHAP. VII. Of the cure of Solution of Continuity.
THe first, Unity dissolved, what it shows. What to be done by the Physician.
and most usual Indication of Solution of Unity, is uniting, or unity
dissolved Indicates that the parts that are separated should be united; which
thing although it be the work of nature, yet the Physician is the Servant of
nature in this matter: For these are the principal duties of the Physician
here. First, he is to be careful that nothing fall into the part affected,
which may impede conglutination.

Secondly, That the extremes, or lips in the dissolved unity are rightly joined
again, and are mutually applied to each other.

Thirdly, That the extremes so joined may be kept together.

Fourthly, That the Temperament of the part it self may be preserved, and the
help of nature is necessarily required in agglutination.

Fifthy, That the Symptoms which may ensue be prevented and corrected.

But these aims are not always performed in all parts alike: The cure of
wounds.
For in wounds, every extraneous thing is to be taken away out of the Wound,
then the lips of the Wound are to be joined together, and it is to be
endeavored that they may be kept united: As before part 1. Sect. 2. cap. 5. is
spoken, the parts being joined, the rest of the work is to be committed to
nature, it is the parr of the Physician only to endeavor that the blood which
comes out offends neither in quantity, nor quality, and to use Medicines that
generate flesh, of which Galen 3. of his Method of healing, cap. 3. And lastly,
to citatrize the wound: yet if certain Symptoms which may hinder the cure, do
follow, as Hemerodes, pain, convulsions, they are to be resisted, and
principally care is to be taken that no inflammation ensue.

In the cure of Fractures, Of Fraciures.
the Physician propounds to himself two aims. First, that the broken bones may
be rightly joined together again, and that the natural Position and Figure
may be restored to them: The other that being joined they may be kept together
and retained, and grow in their natural figure: But in what manner that may be
performed, is spoken before, p. 1. S. 2. c. 3.

But the generation of hard flesh and skin, Generation of hard flesh.
whereby the bones and skin may be conglutinated and grow together is the work
of nature: But the Physician ought to help nature, which he does if he beware
least any inflammation or such like accident which may hurt the substance and
temperature of the member, should follow, and the aliment is to be so disposed
through drying Medicines, that it may the sooner be changed into callous, or
hard flesh, of which it is spoken before.

CHAP. VIII. Of the cure of oppressing and urging Symptoms.
THe third sort of preternaturall things remains, Symptoms urging, and how
many.
namely, Symptoms. Symptoms as they are preternatural Indicate in general
the ablation of themselves: But that Indication for the most part is
unprofitable: For since they depend on diseases, and their causes, those being
taken away, these also are taken away: But because it cannot always be
expected, or waited, until the cause, or the disease be taken away, somethings
necessary Indicate, which require a peculiar cure different both from the cure
of a disease and of the cause, and that they require to be done speedily: Such
Symptoms are those which are said to urge or ensorce: All those things provoke
which threaten such danger and mischief, that the ablation of the disease, or
of the cause on which it depends cannot be expected, but if it should be
expected, it would threaten the hazard of life, or some great hurt; But then
the ablation of the disease is not to be expected when either it is uncurable,
and the Symptoms belongs to an action hurt, that is neceslary, not absolutely
for life, but for amendment, or if it be cureable, the cure whereof is so
tedious, that before it can be perfected, danger and hazard of life will be
like to happen, by reason of the Symptom; those Symptoms are commonly
accounted but few, principally pain, watchings, and immoderate Evacuations,
yet there are some others.

Pain indicates a medicine taking away or mittigating pain, Cure of pain.
but since pain is either a sad sensation, or else is not made without a sad
perception by sense, and two things are necessary to sensation, perception of a
thing Tangeable, or sense in the part which it meets with, and advertency of
the mind, if one of these be wanting neither sense nor pain is, and therefore
those things which take away, and hinder one of these, are contrary to the
pain: and as for what belongs to the sense in the part, we may resist pain
two ways, either by opposing a contrary object to the sad sensation, or by
taking away the sense; sithhence therefore a sweet and pleasant sensation is
contrary to a sad, that the sad sensation may be taken away, that is to be
offered to it, which is endued with a mild and gentle heat, and brings forth a
pleasant, Anodines.
and sweet sensation when touched, which are Anodines (or medicines
mittigating pain) properly so called, as a bath of fresh water, common Oil,
the far of Animalls, Muscillages, and other things endued with a temperate and
pleasing heat, of which above P. 1. S. 1. Chap. 7.

Moreover Narcotticks mittigate pain, Stupefactives.
or Stupifactives, which stupifie the Spirits, and together provoke sleep, and
so do it, that the Dolorifique subject is not perceived.

Secondly, Intentiveness of mind is hindered if it be averted to other objects.

Over much watching indicates a medicine causing sleep, Cure of over much
watching.
sleep may be occasioned four ways; first if all things may be removed which
may excite any sense to operate. Secondly, if the mind be drawn away from the
agitation of the external senses, and the animal spirits are pleasantly
invited, from motion to rest. Thirdly, if those things are exhibited, which
allay hot, dry, and sharp vapors, and send pleasant fancies into the brain,
whereby it is moistened, and as it were stupifyed. Fourthly, if those things are
exhibited which by a peculiar faculty make the animal Spirits drowzie, and
unapt, or dull, which specially are called, Hypnoticks, and Narcoticks.

Thirst since it is the desire of cold and moist, Cure of Thirst.
and is made through the defect of cold and moist, it Indicates cold and moist,
as its contrary.

Too great a flux of the belly, as it is such, Of the flux of the belly. Flux
of blood.
is stopped by astringent things.

Blood slowing Indicates a remedy that stenches blood; but it is stopped two
ways, either by prohibiting, that the blood cannot return to the place, out
of which it came, or if the vessels suffer it not to flow, which will be done,
if they are shut, or closed, and sometimes, one of them only suffices, and
sometimes, when there is a great flux of blood both are necessary. That the
blood may not flow back to the place out of which it came, is to be brought to
pass if it be not drawn back by it, if it be repelled, if it be drawn to
another place, t^s not drawn back if the causes, by reason of which it is drawn
back be taken away, as heat, pain, troublesome thirst: it is repelled by the use
of the Refrigeratives, and astringents, it is drawn into another part by
Revelling, or Deriving, but that the blood may not flow back, is prohibited
when the end is shut, which is done, when the way is obstructed, and stopped;
through which it flowed.

We cure a swooning by refreshing the Spirits, Fainting or swooning.
although it cannot be done presently by removing the cause, for this purpose
the most f^^ things, are pure Air, excellent and O doriferous Wine, and
spirits distilled of it.

But not only actions hurt, but other Symptoms also sometimes trouble, if the
Arm pits stink and smell rank, that inconveniency is remided by the use of
sweet things, if the breath stinks, that imperfection is hid by the chewing of
sweet smelling things.

THE FIFTH BOOK, PART II. SECT. III. Of the vital Indication.
CHAP. I. What does Indicate Diet in those that are sick.
Since hence, it is spoken by what means things preternaturall are to be taken
away, now it remains that we speak, how that which remains in a sick man,
according to nature may be kept, or preserved: but those things which are
according to nature commonly come under the name of strength, or force, and
Indication which is taken from thence, is called vital, and Conservatory,
because it preserves those things which are hitherto in the sick, according to
nature, and those things which can preserve the strength of our body by
themselves, and are according to nature, are called vital and Preservatory
Indicates.

But since as above in the 4. Book, part 2. Chap. 1. it is said there are
three vital, or Preservatory Indicants, health, the cause of health, and sound
actions, as we are to endeavor, that in a sound condition all these may be
preserved, so it is to be aimed that as much as it is possible they may be kept
in such as are sick, and this is to preserve strength; namely to preserve the
native heat, in the whole, and in all the parts, and the right use and
observation of things called non-naturalls.

Namely the strength shows the Aliment, The strength what it shows.
in this respect because it is placed in spirituous, solid, and fleshy parts,
having a just quantity, and does use them as an Instrument; and the vital
Indication is busied only about keeping the substance of the spirituous, solld
and fleshy parts.

But although the strength only Indicate Aliment, Things prohibiting.
yet it may be prohibited from others, for oftentimes the giving of meat
increases the morbifique constitution, and also to regard this, that it is not
to Indicate Aliment, but to prohibit it, for when meat is given nature is
called away from concoction, and evacuation of morbifique matter, and therefore
when the powers Indicate their preservation, which is performed by exhibiting
nourishment in that quantity which the substance to be preserved wants, but
the morbifique cause indicates its Evacuation, and therefore commands nature to
be at leisure for it self alone, and so prohibits Aliment, whereby nature
would be called away, and hindered from its work, you must be careful, what
urges more.

In breife: strength only Indicates Aliment; the morbifique cause permits, or
probibits; the rest, as age, custom, Time of the year, the state of Heaven,
and such like are the signs of firm strength, or of weakness, or such as may
show the force, and greatness of the morbifique cause.

CHAP. II. What things belongs to Diet.
ALthough Diet consists principally of meat and drink, Things prohibiting to
Diet.
yet other things also called non-naturalls, as Air, sleep and watchings,
exercise and rest, and accidents of the mind, belong thereunto: but amongst
these there are some things out of which primarily, and by themselves Aliment
is generated; such is Air, meat and drink, but others, are accounted amongst
the matter of food, in this respect, not because really out of those as the
matter, Aliment of the body is generated, but as they are the causes of Aliment
by accident, and help that those things which are the true materials of
Aliments, may be more commodiously turned into Aliment: such are sleep, and
watchings, exercises, and rest, Repletion and Inanition, and passions of the
mind, of which is spoken above in the 4. Book.

CHAP III. How many sorts there are of Diet, and which agrees to which diseases.
BUt Diet is threefold, Diet threefold, Thick. Indifferent. Thin
thick, thin, indifferent, or betwixt both, thick or full Diet is that which
can preserve not only the strength which is present, but also can increase it,
indifferent is that which preserves the strength as it finds it, the thin is
that which preserves the strength yet somewhat abated. Of thick and full Diet
again some is simple, which agrees to those that are sick, and is made by a
ptisan, with the Barley whole; another is fuller and thicker, which is made
with fish and Eggs; another which is the fullest of all, which gives way to
flesh of creatures that are gelded. Simply thin is threefold, simply such and
is made by the juice of ptisan, the thick juice or cream of ptisan, or ptisan
strained; the thinner is that wherein water and Honey is mixed; the thinnest
Diet was that of Hippo. wherein nothing was put; the middle sort was made with
bread dipped in broth, or also with the flesh of fowls.

But regard is to be had of custom, places and Countries, since in some
Countries, full Diet is more in use, in others more sparing, and according to
that, the matter of thin Diet is to be moderated.

But what kind of Diet agrees to what diseases, the comparing of the strength
which Indicates food and the morbifique causes, What food is fit for what
diseases.
which hinder the same, do show; for by how much the more nature is busied, in
opposing the morbifique cause, by so much the more sparing Diet is convenient;
but by how much the less it is busied, by so much the more plentiful Diet may
be given; but by so much the less it is oppressed, by so much the state of a
disease is nigher, and therefore also, by how much the disease is more acute,
by so much the Diet is to be more sparing, so that the strength can endure with
it, until the state, but it is known when the strength can endure and subsist
until the height, but when it cannot, the nature of the sick is to be
considered: for if the body is made bitter with choler, hot and dry, abounding
with choler, especially about the stomach, he cannot endure thin Diet, or
fasting; for such bodies motion is easily hinderd, regard also is to be had of
age, for as it is in Hippo. 1. Apho. 13. old men easily endure fasting as also
those of middle age, young men less, boys least of all, and amongst them,
especially those which have sharper, and quicker wits.

But as for the nature of a difease, Diet in long diseases.
in long diseases there is need of an indifferent or full Diet, and so much the
more plentiful, by how much the diseases are slower, but in acute dises,
thinner is requisite, least if we should give too much meat, we should cherish
the discase; but since there are degrees of acute diseales, so much the thinner
is to be given, by how much the discase is the more acute.

Yet it is always safer, to give thicker Diet then is fit, Whether more error
is committed in full or spare Diet.
rather then thinner; as for the quantity you ought rather to studdy
substraction according to Hippo. 1. Apho. 5. In thin food the sick do faint;
whence it comes to pass that they are hurt the more, for as much as every
fault here, is greater then it uses to be in a little more plentiful Dy^^.

CHAP. IV. Of the right Administration of the Diet of sick persons.
IN the same manner as in medicines, so in vitalls, Quantity of meat.
a threefold these may be observed; namely the highest, middle, and lowest,
which may be administered in all Dy^t, whether thick, indifferent, or thin. But
which dose is to be given, and when, is collected, by comparing of the
strength, and morbifique cause one with another; for since the morbifique
matter sometimes urges more, sometimes less, and sometimes the help of
nature is more required in resisting the cause of a disease, the same form of
Diet may be observed, sometimes a greater, sometimes a lesser is to be given,
according as nature is sometimes busied more, sometimes less in the combat
with a disease.

Namely in the beginning of a disease, nature contends not much as yet with the
morbifique cause, neither whilst it is yet employed in concoction, and
Evacuation; wherefore you may exhibit victuals, which are convenient for the
disease, then the highest dose.

But in the Augmentation because nature begins to contend with the disease, In
the Augmentation.
and is more busied about the morbifique matter then in the beginning, then
some of the quantity is to be abated, and Diet is to be given in a middle dose.

But in the state when the combat of nature, In the state.
and the disease is most violent, and nature is most busied in concoction and
evacuation of matter, the victuals are to be administered in the smalest
quantity, and nature not to be called away from its purpose.

The time, The time of giving food to the sick.
and when meat is to be given, as for that in continued diseases, and such as
have no differences of fits, Diet is to be administered according to custom,
principally at that time when the sick use to eat before; But in diseases which
have fits, when meat is to be given Hippo. shows 1. Apho. 11. It behooves to
take away meat in the sits themselves, for to give it is hurtful, and when by
circuit diseases return, in the Paroxismes themselves you must abstain, which
nevertheless is not simply to be taken, but if a fever be from a sharp and
biting humor kindled by the Sun, anger, fasting, labors, and the sick be
thin, and lean in body and in Temperament, and especially in Summer time if he
be hot and dry, either a little before the fit, or in the fit it self meat is
to be taken, otherwise he easily falls into a burning fever or Hectic,
swooning, or convulsion, or such like, and indangers the loss of his strength.

THE FIFTH BOOK, PART III. Of the Compositions of Medicines.
SECT. 1. Of preparing and compounding of Drugs in general.
CHAP. I. Of the necessity and profit of preparing and Compounding simple
Medicines.
THere remains now the Pharmaceuticall part of Physic, which prepares and
compounds simple medicines, for the word Pharmacopia comprehends them both,
namely the alteration of simple medicines by the help of Art without mixture
of others, and the mixture of simple medicines.

But this part of Physic is necessary, Why it is necessary to compound
medic^nes.
for many and great causes, for first the cause may be in the medicine it self
namely if the substance of medicines be not so proper, and troablesome to the
sick, by preparation and composition that which is wanting may be supplied and
that which is unprofitable, troublesome, and hurtful may be taken a way;
sometimes a medicine has a super fluous quality which we do not then want,
therefore we ought to allay that by mixture of the contrary; some simple
qualities are easily corrupted, wherefore there needs digestion, distillation,
concoction, to be used, or to preserve, or pickle those things with Honey,
Sugar, Vinegar, Salt. The strength of some medicines is easily taken away,
whence we are to effect by the mixture of more viscid things, that so it may
not be easily dissipated, moreover the causes in effect it self contrary to
nature, for if simples are not to be found which have all those faculties,
which are requisite, in one sick person oftentimes, and in the mixture of
diseases contrary to nature, then one medicine is to be compounded of several
simples, which may perform all the Indications; which kind of medicines the
Greeks call, Polychreston. Thirdly since that simples are not allways supplied
by nature which may agree to the Temperament, Sex, kind of life, and various
constitution of the parts of every one, there is need of preparation and
composition. Lastly, for the several forms also whereof this is more pleasing
to this, that to that person, nay in regard of the disease also it is necessary
to prepare and compound medicines.

O^ that we may briefly contract these things, there is need of compounding
medicines, for two reasons, either for the strength of the medicines sake, or
for its use and applycation sake; for if the virtue of the medicine be weak
it is to be strengthened by mixture with more vehement, if any faculty be
deficient, it is to be mixed, if a medicine be stronger then it is required,
something is to be added by which i^ is to be abated, or corrected If a simple
have any superfluous quality or hurtful, that is to be mixed, by which that
hurtful quality may be taken away.

But that the medicine may rightly be applied and drawn into action, it is
necessary that the medicine maybe preserved, least before administration it
loses its strength, by mixture of some preservative, for example, with Suga,
or some other. Moreover that it may come to the place, a vehicle is to be mixed,
which leading it, it comes the easier thither, and least it should be weakened
by the way, it is to be mixed with the stronger, that it may come to the part in
that degree which it ought. Lastly, it is necessary, that the medicine applied to
the part affected, may continue, whence are requi^ed medicines which may
retain those things which go away, or do not adhere to the part, in the part.

CHAP. II. What things are necessary for the artificial preparation and
Composition of Medicines.
ALL those things which are requisite for the composition of Medicines may be
reduced to sour heads; What things are required for the compounding of
medicines. The basis of medicines twofold. Simple.
first a medicine which may supply the Indication whereby a disease or the
causes of a disease, or the Symptom it self which offends, may be opposed:
and such a medicine, in composition is called the basis because on that as on
the foundation, the edifice is builded, the whole composition depends on it and
all the rest are referred to this, and are mixed together, for its sake, and
that its strength be great in the compound it is necessary; But the basis is
sometimes simple, sometimes compound, and indeed not in one manner, for that is
called a simple basis, which satisfies one Indication, and brings forth one
effect, although it does not always consist of one, and a simple medicine,
but oftentimes is compounded of more, but that is called a compound basis,
Compound.
which can perform more uses, but at other times that is called a simple basis
which consists of one medicine, a compound which consists of many, but a
compound medicine takes its denomination, sometimes from the basis, sometimes
from the medicine, set down in the first place in the prescription.

But that the basis, or medicine, Correctors and Helpers.
which is opposed to the disease contrary to nature, should be accommodated in
all respects, besides preparation, oftentimes correcting and helping things are
required; for since that sometimes the basis is weaker, thicker, or flower, or
stronger, and more powerful then it ought, or has any malignant, and
hurtful, quality or is ungrateful to the smell or taste, or any other way
troublesome, and have any strange and unprofitable quality; the dull and idle
are corrected by the mixture of whetting things, and such as increase strength:
thick qualities, are to be amended by mixture of thin; sharp, vehement, too hot
or too cold, or malignant are to be corrected by the addition of their
contraties: in unpleasant savor, or taste, by things having pleasant savor;
those things which are endued with an ungrateful and unpleasant smell, by
those things which have a fragrant and pleasant smell, and by all other
pleasant things are to be corrected, and all hurtful qualities or
unprofitable, are to be amended and taken away, by the mixture of their
contraries.

Thirdly, Directers.
If medicines of their own accord cannot conveniently come to the part
affected, there is need of Directers, as they call them, namely such as either
are familiar to the part affected, or open a way for the medicine.

Lastly, Preservers.
To the composition of a Medicine those things are required which preserve from
injury and corruption, and give it a certain form and consistence: H^^^e ^ome
are preserved with Honey, others with Sugar, others with Oil, and receive from
them the form either of an Electuary or of a Sirrup, or a Conserve: But some
are rendered fitter to endure, or keep, by preparation only.

CHAP. III. Of the weights of Medicines.
BUt before we come to the preparation and composition of medicines, by which
two Pharmacopeia is finished, something is to be premised of the weights and
measures of Physic, and of the dose of medicines, for things out of which the
forms of medicines are prepared, are esteemed either by number, or a heap, or
weight, or measure.

Fruits and Pulse, What things are accounted by number. By heap. By pugill.
Little handful. Bundle.
and the greater seeds, are numbered, and when the number ^is equal, they are
divided into paires, or couples, and it is written, Par. 2.3.

But the quantity of medicines is described by heap, by little handfulls, by
great handfulls, and little bundles: and Physicians use these principally in
leaves, herbs, flowers, barley, and certain seeds, salt, and other things: A
Pugill is as much as can be comprehended by the extremities of the fingers
joined together, and drawn together, and it is called by some a little handful:
A handful is as much as can be held or comprehended in the hand: A little
bundle is as much as we can take between our arms.

By weights, as by the balance and scales, By weight.
they weigh dry things for the most part, but liquid things they measure,
although they also may be described by weights. And the measures are no other
then such as are described by pounds and ounces.

But although there be great variety of weights, By measure.
we will propound only those which Physicians use at this day every where up
and down, and are most necessary for the reading of Authors.

The least of all weights is a Grain, A Grain.
which moreover is constant, and ought to be one and the same amongst all
Nations; for although without doubt, it took its name from a grain of Barley,
or Wheat, yet since there is not the same weight of these in all places, not
these but the smallest Money, which in all Nations is the same, and is kept
unchanged, and is to be accounted for the foundation and beginning of all
weights: But it is noted by Physicians in this manner, Gr. g.

A Chalcus with the Greeks, consists of two grains, Chalcus.
which kind of weight the Arabians named Kestuf, commonly called Aercolum, or
two grains.

Dicalcon makes four grains, Siliqua.
with which agrees Cheration: Siliqua or four grains, which the Arabians call
Chirat.

Hemiobolon, or Hemiobolion, Semiobolus.
a Semiobilon is six grains.

Obolon, Obolus.
or Obulum consists of twelve grains, the sixth part of a drachme.

Four and twenty grains make a scruple, A Scruple.
for a scruple consists of two Obolaes. Whence with the Greeks a Diobolon, is
the same with the scruple, whence it is also called by the Greeks Gramma, that
is, a Letter, to wit because an ounce contains so many in it, as the Greeks
have Letters: and it is the four and twentieth part of an ounce. But amongst
later Writers, for the most part, those which followed Nicholaus, and Venetous,
a scruple contains only twenty grains, and it is thus noted,

Thirty six grains make Hemidrachmon, or Triobolon, Semidrachma.
that is half a drachme, which they call an Egyptian bean, or an Alexandrian
bean, ss.

Seventy two grains make an Attique drachme, A Dram.
which is used by Physicians; but the dram of Nicholaus and Venetus, which at
this day, for the most part, is used every where, contains only sixty
grains, Drachimi, and Darchimie, or Darchimet, with the Arabians, the word
being corrupted, is called Drachmes, in English a Dram. By Serapio, and the
same Arabicks it is also called Aureus, and by the same these names, Drachme,
and Aurei, are often confounded: But at other times, Nummus Aureus, or Denarius
contains four scruples, namely a whole Dram, and the third part of a
Dram; eight Drachms make an ounce, and it is thus marked, i.

Twelve ounces make a pound, lb.
Deunx makes eleven ounces, XI.
Dextans has ten ounces, X
Dodrans has nine ounces, IX.
Bes has eight ounces, VIII.
Septunx has seven ounces, VII.
Semios or Selibra has six ounces, VI.
Quincunx has five ounces, V.
Quadrans has four ounces, IV.
Triens has three ounces, III.
Hereunto belongs the Table *
CHAP. IV. Of Physical measures.
AS dry things for the most part are weighed, A Description of measures.
so liquid things are measured, although the manner of measures be appointed by
Physicians, according to the manner of weights: But measures may be explained
two ways, either greater by less, or on the contrary, less by greater; or by
weights: For if it be asked, what a Pint or a Pound is, it is answered, to be the
half of a Sextarie, or to contain fix Cyathos, or Cupps, or its answered, it
contains nine ounces of Oil: For the former way of describing measures, is
certain and stable, but the latter way of explaining them is not always the
same; for although the capacity of measures be not changed, yet the weight of
the things that are measured by the same measure are not the same; whence
Physicians at this day, since in liquid things they rather regard the weight
then measure, and they use measures only for to save the labor of weighing.
Three kinds of measures of liquid things are used; namely, some for measuring
of Wine and distilled Waters, others are appointed for Honey, others for
measuring of Oil; all which measures, although they are distinguished by the
names of Ounces, yet the weight of liquid things vary in the distinction of
ounces: for since Oil is light, more of it goes to an ounce, Wine since it is
heavier then Oil, less of it goes to an ounce; Honey since it is heavier,
then both, a small quantity, in comparison of the other, makes an ounce.

The first and least of measures which are tried, not by weight, but only by
quantity, is a spoonful, and the division of measures does not go beneath it:
But a Cochlear, or a spoonful, is fourfold; The least, that a little bigger,
a great, the greatest; the least contains half a dram in weight, of a thing
that is of a middle weight; that a little bigger, a whole dram; a great, a
dram and half, or two drachms; the greatest contains half an ounce in
weight.

A common little Spoon is half a cup, Mustrum.
and contains in weight of Oil, six drachms, of Wine or Water twenty
scruples, of Honey nine drachms.

A Cyathus or a Cup, is the sixth part of a pint, Cyathus.
by common observation, it holds in weight of Oil twelve drachms, of Wine or
Water thirteen drachms and a scruple, of Honey eighteen drachms.

Acetabulum, which by the Greeks is called Oxybaphum, Acetabulum.
is a Cup and half, the common observation it holds in weight, is eighteen
drachms of Oil, twenty drachms of Wine and Water, twenty seven drachms of
Honey.

Quartarius, or the fourth part of a Sextarie, Q^a tarius.
contains three cups.

Hemina or Cotyla, is the twelfth part of a Congie, Hemina or Cotyla.
half a Sextarie, it contains six cups, but in weight nine ounces of Oil, ten
ounces of wine and water, thirteen ounces and half of Honey, (this measure
contains three quarters of a pint.)

The Italian Sextarie is the sixth part of a Congie, A Sextary.
it contains two Heminaes (or a pint and half) twelve cups; but in weight it
contains eighteen ounces of Oil, twenty ounces of wine and water, 27 ouncse of
Honey.

A congie is the eight part of Amphore, A Congie.
(which is a Tankerd, or Rundlet,) containing eight gallons:) it contains six
Sextaries, twelve Heminaes, but in weight, nine pound of Oil, ten pound of
Wine and Water, thirteen pound and half of Honey.

Urna, Urna. Amphora.
is half the Italian Amphora, but the third part of the Attick, for a Greek
Amphora which is called, Cadus, and Merreta, is greater then an Italian, it
contains 48. Sextaries, but in weight it holds seventy two pound of Oil,
ninty pound of Wine and Water, one hundred and eight pound of Honey (this Urne
of our measure contains four gallons and half.)

Culeus is a measure containing twenty Italian Amphoraes, Culeus.
it is the greatest of measures, but of these things it is spoken more at large by
others.

CHAP. V. Of Doses of Medicines.
ALthough in this darkness of man's understanding, it is not so easy to define,
by what Rule and proportion, Elements agree in mixture, yet by the most, the
opinion of Alchindus is retained, and a Geometrical proportion is appointed in
degrees, not an Arithmeticall, and that for this reason, because betwixt the
nearest degrees, there is a far greater difference, and inequality, then there
is between two numbers, immediately following one another.

Hence from two scruples to two ounces is accounted a temperate dose: the dose
of a medicine, in the first degree from a scruple to an ounce; in the second
from half a scruple to half an ounce; in the third from five grains to two
drachms: in the fourth from two grains, and a half to a dram: yet it is
here to be observed that in every degree as appears by the dose, there is a
certain latitude in the highest degrees, you may not always ascend to the
highest dose, nor may all those things, which are in the fourth degree be given
to a dram, but according as some are in the beginning, others in the middle,
and others in the end of the fourth, so the dose is to be moderated.

Moreover it is here to be noted that regard ought to be had of occult qualities
also, and therefore experience is especially to be consulted with

The Doses of Purgers.
AS for the doses of purging Medicines, The Dose of purge^s.
they may be limited according to degrees, but since that in every degree there
are three mansions, it is not lawful to give what medicine you please of what
degree soever from the lowest to the highest dose of that mansion. But every
mansion has its highest and lowest dose.

The dose in the first mansion of the first degree is from two ounces, or three
to six or seven ounces; such like are Syrup of Roses selutive, and Honey of
Violets solutive.

Those which are in the third mansion of the second degree are given from 2. to
3. or 4. to these belong juice of Roses and Violets, Manna, Cassia, Syrrup of
the flowers of Peaches, juice of Flowred^luce.

Medicines in the first mansion of the second degree are exhibited, from half
an ounce, or five drachms, Of the second degree.
to an ounce and half, or two ounces; hitherto are referred Tamarinds, and
Cassia; in the second mansion of the second degree they are given from half an
ounce, to an ounce and half, as Turpentine.

In the third mansion of the second degree they are administered from 3.
Drachmes to 7. Drachmes, of this kind is Epythimum.

In the first mansion of the third degree the dose is from a Dram to half an
ounce, Of the third degree.
hereunto are referred Myrobalans, Rhubarbe, Agrick.

In the second mansion of the third degree, purging medicines are exhibited
from a scruple to two drachms, in this rank are Aloes, the seed of Fleabane,
Polypodie, the leaves and powder of Sena, Mechoacan.

In the third mansion, the dose is from half a dram to a dram, hitherto
belongs Asarabacca, Carthamums, or bastard-safron, Soldinella, Hermodactiles,
Turbith, Lapis Armenus, Lapis Lazuli, Opopanax, Sagapenum, black Hellebore, the
roots of Jalap.

In the first of the fourth degree, Of the fourth degree.
Purgers are given from ten grains to half a dram, hitherto belongs
Mezereum, the seed of Thymelea, or Oneorum, or Granum Gnidium, i. e. Mountain
Widdow-waile, Coloquintida, Elaterium, Hysop.

The dose in the second mansion of the fourth degree is from five grains to
fifteen grains, in the end of this mansion, is Scammony.

In the third mansion of the fourth degree, they are given from three grains
to ten grains, of this kind is Euphorbium, Spurge, Antimony.

But of the dose of these simple purgers, is spoken particularly, above, part.
1. Sect. 1. Chap. 11.

But as for the doses of compound medicines they are first found out by the
qualities of the simples which are mixed together; Secondly, from the degrees of
their strength; Thirdly, from their quantity, of which in the Institutions.

In the finding out of the dose therefore of compositions, The Doses of
compound medicines how they are to be found out.
first it is to be considered, how many doses of purgers are in any composition,
afterward the weight is to be determined, of the whole composition, and hence
by the rule of proportion you must enquire how great a part of the whole
compound may be given for one dose; as for example, if we examine, Pillulae
Cochiae, there are in that composition of Hierapicrae ten drachms; which in its
self contains ten high doses of Aloes, of Coloquintida three drachms, and a
scruple, which contains seven doses, of Scammony two drachms and half, which
has ten doses, Turbith five drachms, which for the most part make four doses,
Siechados five drachms, Syrup of Stechados, for the most part ten or twelve
drachms.

And so since the whole composition which contains twenty four of the highest
doses, has for the most part thirty six drachms, a dram and half answers to
one dose, and the highest dose of Cochiae pills shall be a dram and half.

The doses are 24.

The composition 36. drachms.

Therefore the dose is 1. dram and half.

THE FIFTH BOOK, PART III. SECT. II. Of Operations necessary for the
preparation, and composition of Medicines.
CHAP. I. Of the parts of Pharmacopoeia.
THE whole art of an Apothecary may be divided into two parts, The art of an
Apothecary.
whereof the first handles the operations by which the Apothecary obtaines his
desired end, and whereof oftentimes in the preparation of one Medicine they are
more, and the same are required in diverse preparations; The other teaches, to
prepare certain remedies by those operations, and to reduce them into a certain
form, and when it is needful, to join and compound many of them. To the former
part belongs Chemistry in some measure. But since, that is largely spoken of in
the tract of consent and dissent of Chymicks, and Aristotelians, as also in the
Institutions, I am unwilling to repeat those things here in this compendium.

CHAP. II. Of the kinds of heat.
AS for what belongs to operations, The degrees of heat.
and performances, since all Apothecaries whatsoever have need of heat and
fire, as being the most common and useful Instrument, first let us treat of
hear.

But in heat in the first place, the degrees thereof are to be considered and
the manners, of adding of fire; the degrees of heat in general and absolutely
are accounted four; The First is that which appears pleasing and mild or
gentle; the Second is that which is quicker and almost not to be endured by
the hand; the Third destroys, the Fourth is the highest: but every of these
degrees have a great latitude, and therefore not undeservedly every degree may
be divided again into its degrees, in rightly showing whereof much discretion
is required, but for the most part it is better to err in defect, then in
excess, for if any thing be once corrupted by the violence of the fire, it
cannot be restored to its self again, and oftentimes glasses are corrupted,
and other dangers are accumulated, but if there be any error in defect, by
continnance and increafing the degree of heat, it may be recompensed, although
the time of operation be prolonged.

But the degrees of heat may be made up diverse ways, How they may be varied.
and depend on diverse causes, the chief whereof we will propound. For first
fire may be used diverse ways and manners, for sometimes the matter with a fit
vessel, or without a vessel, naked and open, is put to the fire, which again
is done several ways, for either it is circular, which in plain incompasseth
the vessels and is removed from a distant place by degrees nearer to the
vessel, until at length, it is heaped up over the vessel, or else the
vessels are put in a fit furnace or the fire is made above the vessel
Reverberatory, or striking back when the flame is repercussed by the cover, or
door of the furnace, it strikes as it were the matter, and so it flies round
every way.

At other times the matter with its vessel is not exposed to the open fire, A
dry Bath.
but is setagainst another body intervening, and that diverse ways; for first,
if a pot to put sand or such like matter into, put on a vessel standing on a
Trivet containing the matter to be prepared, be empty, it is most conveniently
called a dry Balneum or a dry Stupha, but if the vessel be not empty, a
various heat according to the variety of matter which is put in it, may be
afforded, and may be called by several names; if it be filled with water and
the vessel together with the matter to be distilled, be set into the water; it
is simply called Balneum Maris or Mariae; Balneum Maris.
a Bath also may be prepared not only of water but of the saw-dust of sawed
wood or Hay filling the vessel and then moistning it, and so cover it with a
glass, but if the vessel with the matter to be elaborated be not set in
water, but be so placed, that it may receive only the vapor of the heated
water, it is called Balneum Vaporosum, afterward let the pot be filled with
the dust of Bricks, with Sand, Sawdust, the filings of Iron and such like.

Secondly, the moderation or governing of the heat, depends on the store of
fuel, the quantity whereof in the kindled coals, the Artist can at pleasure
abate or increase, or make it how he please, and that either by the plenty or
want of coals, or by the more free eventilation of Air, and the shutting out
interception of the same; for a greater quantity of coals make a greater and
stronger heat, if they can by the fuming of the Air, and by opening of
breathing holes, be kindled, all which may be better shown then described.

Thirdly, for the variation of the fire, the dishes commonly called Cappellae
do make it according to their various distance from the fire; for if they are
moved nearer to the fire it is increased, but if further off, the heat is
remitted.

CHAP. III. Of the first rank or form of operations of Breaking, Sleeking, or
making plain, In the institutions Chap. 3^ 4.5.6.7. The kinds of operations
Pharmaceuticall.
Shaving and Fileing.
NOw for what belongs to Workmanship and operations, although all these may
seem to be referd to conjunction and separation, yet it pleases us in this
place according to our purpose to reduce them into three forms, and to
comprehend them in the three following Chapters, In the first we may contain
those operations which pertain to the dissolution and corruption of a thing; In
the second we will put in those things which are separated, and the detraction
of any thing, In the third, we will explain those which are appointed for the
alteration, immutation, perfection, and preserving of a thing.

In the the first rank are breaking, or grinding, shaving, sleeking, filing,
melting, or dissolving, drayning, burning, turning into ashes, or incineration,
calcination, praecipitations, fumigation, putrefaction and fermentation.

As for breaking or grinding, Tritura.
the chief end thereof is, that things may reduced into their smallest parts;
that afterward they may the easier, and more exactly be mixed with others, and
their virtue may be drawn out.

Sleeking, Laevigatio.
or levigation, is nothing else then a most exact breaking or grinding, whereby
some Medicine, red marble, or some other polite stone, a convenient liquor
being powered in, or else without liquor, it is so long wrought with a little kind
of Mil stone, by the turning of the hand, that it is reduced into the form of
fine flower, and wonderful small dust, in that manner painters use to prepare
their colors.

Next to these are Section, Shaving, and Filing: Leaves, Staulks and roots of
plants, Cutting Shaving Filing
are cut with Scizzers, or Knives, and by this means they are prepared, for
boiling, infusion, or grinding, other things are shaved, or lessened by a turn,
as woods, horns, hoofs, or nails, teeth of living creatures, for the same
purposes. But those things which can neither be lessened by cutting or
breaking, should be filed with an iron File, and reduced into the smallest
parts, such like are most metals, as iron, and others, and also woods, horns,
and bones of Animales.

Melting is a reduction of harder things, Meltings Dissolving.
into a more liquid substance. Dissolving differs not from this, unless
because that is done always by the benefit of heat, and for the most part
without adding of moisture; but this is always done with moisture, and
oftentimes without heat, so they melt fat, butter, marrow, wax, Pirch^osin,
certain kinds of gummes, as also metals by a greater strength of fire, but for
the most part with powder added that they may the better run; all kinds of
salt, are dissolved tears, juices, many kinds of gummes, Rosins.

Drayning or dissolving is a peculiar sort of solution when a body is made
fluid, by moist aier, Deliquium.
which insinuates it self into it, so salts, allome, nitre, and such like melt,
all which turn into liquor, also lyme, or chaulke, of which the greatest part
are dissolved into liquor, or some thing of them only melt, according as they
contain more or less salt. To these belong burning, and torrifying, Burning.
Toasting:
yet they differ in this, that these are performed with the less, they with
the greater fire, whence, in tosting things are rather dried, then burnt, and
if any thing be burnt, it is the outside, but in burning as well the internal
parts, as those on the outside are burnt together. This drying is performed in
a Platter, or Frying pan, especially of iron, wherein medicines put to the fire
may often be stirred about, that either the superfluous humiditie may be
consumed, or the quality that abounds in the medicine may be taken away, but
burning, when any medicine, as hearts horn, man's skull, ivory, oils enclosed in
a potters furnace, are burnt, and being burnt, and as yet hot are extinguished
in a convenient liquor, and afterward rubbed, or crumbled to dust.

Cinefaction, or a reduction into ashes, Burning to asks.
is so called when the moisture, which was in the combustible matter, by which
the parts hung together, is consumed by the fire, which is performed, two
ways; First, the fire being opened the thing it self is cast in naked, and is
reduced into ashes, moreover in a Vessel that is closed, matter is burnt and
turned into ashes, which combustion differs from the former in this, for in the
former, whatsoever is volitile flies into the air, but in this some volitiles
are retained, and fastened with the fixed.

Calcination is a pulverisation of a thing by fire caused by the privation of
the moisture of the part joined with it. Calcining.
This principally takes place in minerals, and metals, and other things which
of themselves do not burn, and are more firmly united, and it is appointed
either that a thing may be made the fitter for solution, or to lose the
acrimony, which it has, although on the contrary some things become the
sharper for burning whilst the aqueous humiditie, whereby the acrimony is
occasioned is consumed by fire. But this is performed two ways, either by
actual fire, when things are fired, and the bond of continuitie is broken by
actual fire; or by potential fire, when things to be calcined, are corroded, by
strong and corrasive waters, and other causticks.

That calcination, which is made by actual fire is again various, for some
things are calcined by themselves, and without any addition, but other things,
with additamentents, which either prohibit the fusion, or else burn and
corrode.

But that calcination in particular, which is made and corrasive powders mixed
therewith, Cementing.
is called Cementing, and it is performed when a crucible is filled with thin
plates of metal, and corrasive powders, one rank above another, First
Plates, then Powders, then Plates, then powders, etc. As the manner is in
doing, after the crucible is exposed to a circular fire or Reverberation by
degrees, yet some things are extinguished first by certain waters, before they
are calcined, some are corroded first by their own waters and afterward are
Reverberared; on the contrary some things are Reverberated first, afterward
corroded.

Calcination which is done by potentiall fire is finished by corroding,
Corroding.
precipitating, or Fumigation. Corrosion is a solution of mettalls, or such
like by waters and sharp spirits Precipitation is when a metal descends to
the bottom, Precipitation. Fumigation.
in the likeness of Chaulke, and is separated from the water that dissolves
it; but Fumigation is when some body is corroded and brought into a body like
chaulke, by the exhalation, or vapor of a corroding thing.

Hitherto pertaines Amalgamation, Corroding of mettalls by Quick-filuer.
Putrefaction.
which with the Chemists is an operation which is nothing else then a corroding
of mettalls by Quicksilver and Mercury.

Lastly putrefaction, which others call Fermentation, and digestion, is that
operation whereby a mixed body is someway dissolved by a moist heat, and losing
its natural juncture, or Union, is rendered the more fit for artificial
separation.

CHAP. IV. In the Institutions Chap. the 8.9.10.11.12.13.14. the second form
of operations.
Of the second rank or form of operations.
TO the second form of operations we refer those things, which are employed in
separation and detraction of any thing; and in separation of Homogenialls from
Heterogenialls, of pure from impure, of Profitable, from unprofitable, such are
fifting, washing, infusing, boyleing, straining, fumeing, Clarifying, Filtring,
Digestion, Expression, Distillation, Sublimation, Exsiccation, Evaporation,
Exhalation and Coagulation.

Sifting is not only a separation of things beaten, Sifting.
and brought into powder, of the finer part from the thicker, by means of the
seive, but also for the most part, a casting of moist and boiled things through
a hair seive.

Washing is not appointed for that end only, Washing.
that medicines defiled may be cleansed, but that some superfluous quality may
be taken away from the medicine, or a new, may be introduced.

Infusion is nothing else but a steeping of a medicine in some liquor, Infusion.
whereby the medicine may be moistened within and without, that its force or
strength may be drawn out, or increased, or its malignity corrected, or that
which is hard may be softened.

Next to infusion, is boiling, or seething, Seething.
which differ only in this, that medicines in infusion are moistened with longer
time and less heat, but by boiling it is performed sooner and with greater
heat.

Straining is that whereby moist things, Straining.
either first heated, as the thicker and more viscid things, or lukewarm or
eold, as those that are thinner, are cast through a thick, or thin strayner,
the thicker parts and dregs being left behind in the strainer, they become the
purer.

Scumming is when during the time of seething the froath swimming on the top,
is often taken away with a spoon, Scumming.
for the most part perforated.

Clarifying, Clarifying.
although it may be taken in general for any sort of separation of filthy, and
thick things, which may be performed many ways, either by standing still
whilst the seculent matter, descends of its self to the bottom, and settles
or by straining, or by froathing, yet principal with the Apothecaries,
Clarification is that purification of things boiled by despumation, having
added the white of an egg, namely whilst the white of an egg is beat with a
Spatula, or spoone, until it come into froath, and afterward is mingled with
the Syrup or decoction hot to clarify it, and when it has contracted any
blackness it is taken away, and a new is put in so often till the liquor become
clear.

By Filtration, Filtring.
or straining through a brown paper, that which is thick and faeculent, mixed
or confused in any liquour is separated, namely whilst the pure liquour
descends through the strainer, whether it be a linen ragge or brown paper,
into the Vessel that is under it, but the impuritie is left in the strainer.

Digestion, although sometimes it signify putrefaction, sometimes a certain
exaltation, Digestion.
and circulation, since that in general, to distribute or dispose in order, is
to concoct, and digestion is concoction, yet in this place, by digestion, we
understand such a conction only whereby that may be separated, which is as yet
foul in things, whilst the substance of the liquour is attenuated, and
separated from its earthy impuritie.

Hereunto belongs Expression, Pressing.
by the benefit whereof by a strong endeavor, either with the hand alone or
with a press, we separate the liquid and moist from that which is dry and
earthy.

Distillation is nothing else, Distillation.
but a collection of exhalations elevated by heat, out of something exhalable,
by the help of a Vessel, and receptacle, thick, and cold into a liquour.

This is commonly accounted threefold, the one is that which is by ascent, the
other is that which is made by the sides, the third is that which is made by
descent.

By ascent Distillation is said to be, Distillation by ascent.
when the exhalations and vapors ascend upward, from the Alembick, or the head
of the Furnace. And the Vessels which contain the matter to be distilled, the
head being put on in it, it is condensed into a liquour, which distills drop by
drop through the beak or nose into the receiver, and it is gathered together.
This is performed, either by the Sun beams or by fire, sometimes lying open,
sometimes not manifest, namely some other body intervening, as sand, ashes,
water, etc.

Hitherto also may be referred conveniently Distillation by a Glass like a
ball so called, Distillation by a glass.
whereby oil of sulphur is prepared, namely when the brimstone is kindled,
glass, hammers receives the vapors, and condense them into oil.

Distillation to the sides, Distillation to the sides.
or else it is called by inclination, when the exhalation, and spirits do not
ascend straight upwards in the Alembick, but tend toward the receiver by the
sides and obliquely, This is performed either when the fire is opened to it, or
when some other body comes between, as sand, ashes, etc. By a Vessel which they
call a Retort, or a Straight gourd, yet placed oblique in the furnace, that the
Alembick may incline downwards.

Distillation by descent is when a liquour, Distillation by descent.
is not carried upwards, from the dissolved exhalations, nor to the sides; but
tends downwards, and drops into the supposed Vessel. This again is performed,
the Vessel lying immediately on the fire, or sand, ashes, etc. intervening.

To distillations belongs Rectification, or Cohobation, Rectification.
whereof that is no other then a repeated distillation of a thing, to purify
and exalt it the more, the dreggs being left in the bottom, or to separate the
phlegm from oil, or the spirit from phlegm, but this is said, when the humor
which was distilled, is powered off, and again, and again, is drawn, and
distilled in the same Vessel, where the matter was left.

Sublimation, Sublimation.
which is performed sometimes by fire that is open, sometimes by some
intervening body, as Sand, Ashes, etc. It Is the nearest to distillation by
ascent and differs from it only in this, that as in distillation vapors, which
are exalted, come together into a liquour, so in sublimation exhalations ascend
dry, and being carried up on high, stick to the sides of the Alembick like
attomes.

Praecipitation seems to be contrary to this, Praecipitation.
which is done when bodies dissolved by waters and corroding liquours, are
again separated from the liquour, that the form of chaulk or dust may remain,
which comes to pass, when any thing is cast or powered into the solution, by
whose force the dissolving liquour, or that which was the cause of solution in
the liquor, is separated from the dissolved body. Drying.


By Exsiccation the superfluous moisture is taken away, whether in the shade,
or in the Sun, or whether it be done in an Oven, or in a Drying Pan over
Coals, both for that the Medicines may the better be preserved, and may not
contract thirst by their superfluous humidity, and putrify, and be corrupted,
and also, that they may the easier be contained, and made into powder.

By Evaporation the aqueous humidity expires, Evaporation. Exhalation.
as by exhalation, dry exhalations are elevated by heat, as that which is
superfluous in the thing being dissolved into vapors and exhalations may go
out, and the more useful part only may be left.

To these operations is added Coagulation, Coagulation.
which is nothing else but a reduction of a liquid thing to a sollid substance
by the privation of moisture.

CHAP. V. Of the third manner of Operations.
THe third form comprehends those operations which are appointed them, The
third form of operations.
for alteration, immutation, and perfection of a thing, and aim at this, that
a thing may be reduced to a better state and more noble degree. But although
some do reckon more such operations, and perhaps there are more, yet in this
place all of them are properly called by the name of Digestion, Digestion.
and as it is distinguished from the two higher kinds of digestion, whereby a
new quality of a thing newly elaborated, is introduced, so that if the thing
contains any thing that is hurtful, it puts away that, or if any thing is
wanting to it, it begets that; and if there are any others to be here repeated,
they ought to be accounted for certain ways of Digestion; Institution Chap.
15. and 16. Circnlation.
For all of them for the most part, in the same manner by a gentle external
heat, exciting the internal force of a thing are performed, which here is the
primary agent.

But amongst the manners or kinds of digestion, the chief is Circulation, it is
called by some Pelicanation, from the vessel wherein it is performed, where by
a gentle external heat being exhibited, the matter which is circulated, is
exalted continually in the form of vapors, and is again condensed, and so by
that continual concoction and this circular motion of refolution and
condensation, it attaines to the highest degree of perfection in its kind.

Hitherto belongs conditing, Conditing.
preserving, and confecting; fruits, flowers, roots, are condited or pickled
with Honey, Sugar, Vinegar, Salt, not only that they may be preserved the
longer, but that they may be the more pleasant to the taste.

In confecting, Confecting.
fruits, roots, seeds, sweet smelling spices, are preserved and candied with
Sugar, more for the taste sake then preservation, or augmentation of the
strength.

Nutrition of medicines is a certain humectation, but such whereby the thing
is presently wet, Nutrition.
or moystned, and immediately dried again by the Sun or fire, and is to be wet
and moistened again; which labor is to be repeated thrice, sour times, or so
often until the medicine has sufficiently imbibed that humor which we desire.

THE FIFTH BOOK, PART III. SECT. III. Of the Forms of Medicines.
CHAP. I. The Division of Medicines.
AFter we have finished the operations necessary for an Apothecary: The
Division of Medicines.
It remaynes that we now come to the preperations themselves of Medicines,
which are perfected by those operations. The differences of Medicines, are
taken either from the substance or from the parts to which they are applied.
Medicines being considered the former of these ways are, some full of Vapors,
others Corpulent; Corpulent are either fluid, or having a consistance, Fluid
are various, as distilled waters, Spirits, Liquid tinctures, Vinegar, Medicinal
wine, Hydromel or Honey and Water, clarifies Juyces, Oils, Emulsions,
Decoctions, Infusions, Julebs, Syrrups, Baths, Clystets, etc. Again those that
have a consistance, some of them are actually moist, others dry; Of the former
sort are Conserves, Electuaries, Eclegmas, Juices, Extracts, Boles,
Muscillages, Fat Lineaments, Balsomes, Unguents, Cataplasmes: Those that are
actually dry, are either continuous, and the parts cohaere together, or else
they are discontinued. Of the former kind are, Pills, Troches, Rotule^,
Morsels, Plasters, Cerates, Suppositers, Glasses, Regulus, and certain things
sublimed: Of the latter sort are, several Species and Powders, Meal or brann,
Flowers, and things praecipitated.

But in respect of the parts to which they are applied, some are called
internal, Internal.
others external. The internal are those which are taken into the body that
common and usual way as we take in meat and drink, all the rest whether they
are applied to the body, or spread over the body, or any other way applied to
the bodie^, or if they are cast into the body any other way, External.
as, at the fundament, ears, nostrils, womb, we call them externals.

The forms of Internal Medicines are various; The difference of internal
Medicines.
for some are fluid, others not fluid, and these are either soft and liquid, or
altogether dry, The fluid are, Decoctions, Infusions, Medicinal VVines, Honey
and Water mixed and boiled together, wine mingled with honey, vinegar, and
honey, and barleywater, Juices, distilled waters, Spirits, tinctures, and
Liquid extracts, Oils, Sirups, Julips, Emulsions; Soft and not fluid are,
Extracts, Conserves, Preserves, Medicinal Juices thickened, Electuaries,
Eclegmaes, or Medicines to be licked or supt, Boles, Not fluid, and plainly dry
are, powders, Sweet meats, Salts; Saffron-flowers, Precipitates, Comfits,
little round Cakes, Morsels, or little snips, march-paines, And those which
belong to these, as Troches, and Pills.

But externals are either sent into certain parts of the body, Of Exterternal.
or they are only applied, or exhibited to the superficies of the body, or
they are only hung about, as Ammulets, and Periapticke medicines, or medicines
to hang about ones body; Suppositers and Clysters are injected, and cast into
the body; Clysters, and pessaries, are also injected into the womb, also
certain Liquours are injected into the yard and bladder; into the mouth are put
gargarismes, to wash the mouth, or throat with, Apophlegmatismes to draw away
Phlegm, Dentifrices to rub and cleanse the Teeth, To the nose Erhines,
Sneezing-wort; Odours, Suffumigations, peculiar injections into the Ears,
Collyries, or medicines, applied to the eyes. To the outside of the body only
are exhibited, and applied, oiles, balsomes, ointments, linements, cerots,
plasters, Cataplasmes, Dropases, or ointments to take away hair, Sinapismes,
Phaenigmaes, or medicines causing the body to break out in blisters, or
Pustules, Epithems, or medicines some what softer then plasters to be applied
to the body, fomentations, or any thing applied plaister-waies to aswage pain,
little baggs, powders, embrocations, washings of the extreme parts, baths,
washbals, searing irons or cauteties.

Some others do best agree with certain other parts; What Medicines are are
applied to the Head.
all external things for the most part, communicate their strength to the head,
as distilled waters and spirits, oils, extracts, decoctions, infusions, syrups,
conserves, preserves, comfits, electuaries, little round cakes, morsels, pills,
powders. But external medicines applied to the head, in the form of powders,
little baggs, round balls, oiles, balsoms, ointments, unguents, plasters,
cerots, cataplasmes, oxyrhods, that is medicines with vinegar and roses,
epithemes, or the softest plasters, embrocations, suffumigations, perfumes of
diverse sorts, as also washings of the Feet are profitable for the Head. To the
eyes. To the Ears.


Externally waters, and Collyries, ointments, fomentations, unguents,
cataplasmes, are convenient for the eyes.

Into the ears distilled waters, Juices, decoctions, oiles, and other liquours
are infused and dropped, and other Medicines in the form of evaporation, and
fumes are sent into the ears, also liniments, ointments, fomentations,
epithemes, Cataplasmes are applied.

For the teeth are convenient, lotions for the mouth, To the Teeth.
liniments, small pills to be put into hollow Teeth, unctions for the Jaws,
powders for rubbing the Teeth, and also troches, and pensills made in the form
of suppositers are convenient for the Teeth, and being dried, and hardened, the
Teeth are rubbed therewith.

Medicines applied to the mouth, and Chopps are lotions, For the mouth and
Chopps. For the Breast.
and gargarisines, ointments made of honey, of syrups and juices, lohocks.

Most internal things are good for the Breast, but especially, lohocks,
troches, and little rolls, such as they use to hold under their tongues, the
thicker sort of syrups, vapors, and fumes drawn in with aier, externally, the
samemedicines may be applied in the form of oiles, ointments, unguents,
cataplasmes, plasters and cerots, little baggs, fomentations, and epithemes.

Medicines are applied to the Heart, To the Heart.
for the most part after the same manner, and moreover fumes, or steames, which
are profitable for the recreating and refreshing of the spirits.

Internal Medicines may be conveyed to the Stomach in all forms, To the
Stomach.
but principally those which are taken in at the mouth, but externally, in the
form of oils, unctions, fomentations, liniments, unguents, cataplasmes,
plasters, epithemes, baggs.

Moreover, To the Liver.
all internal things may penetrate to the Liver. But external in the form of
Ointments, Fomentations, Linements, Cataplasmes, Unguents, Plasters, little
bags, Epithems, are applied.

In the same manner Unctions are exhibited to the Spleen, To the Spleen Reiues
and Bladder.
and Bladder; Bathes also, and Tubs of waters to fit in, are useful for the
Reins, Bladder and spermatick Vessels; and Clysters injected are good for
diseases of the Reins.

All the same things are convenient for the womb, and moreover injections into
the womb, Pessaries, Errhines or medicines to put into the nose, fumes, and
Evaporations, Lotions of the feet.

And all these sorts of medicines shall now be explained in their order, as far
forth as this compendium will admit of.

CHAP. II. Of Decoctions.
DEcoctions which the Greeks call Apozemes, are potulent medicines prepared by
the boiling of plants and of their parts, Decoctions what. How many fold.
are potulent medicines prepared by the boiling of plants and of their parts,
seldom of Animalls; all Decoctions may conveniently be reduced into two
forms; namely into Decoctions altering, and purging; under Decoctions
altering, we will comprehend all those that have any other verrue besides
purging, and do alter the body, whether they are given in regard of themselves
only, or for some following purge; which Decoctions are then called
Preparatives, Digestives, or Apperatives, that is opening things.

But the matter to be decocted is taken out of the rank of Vegetables, The
matter of them.
wherein are variety of parts of plants or herbs, seldom of living Creatures.

But as for the quantity of the materials to be decocted, Quantity.
if a weight be to be assigned generally to what ever is to be boiled, it
begins from an ounce or two ounces for the most part, and ascends sometimes to
half a pound, nay sometimes to a pound, a pound and half, and two pound, but
as for the dose of the several kinds Decoctions are prepared.

Of the Roots and Barks 2. 3. and 4.

Of Leaves, 3.4.5. or 6. handfulls.

Of seeds 3.4.5.6. drachms

Of Fruires, in number 1.2.3. couples or paires 5.6.

Of flowers, pugills 4. or 5.

Half an ounce, five drachms or six drachms answers to a little handful, two
drachms or three to a pugill, but it is not necessary to mix all those
together in every decoction, and to heap up a mixture of them all, but when a
few will perform the intentions, it is in vain to put in many, yet if the
decoction be provided to be given at many several times, such a quantity of
materials ought to be taken, as that the decoction made of them may be
powerful to perform the aim of the Physician.

But in the seething, Preparation of the matter. Or of boiling.
the preparation of the things to be boiled, and the manner of seething, is to
be observed, for first if the materials are too thick or hard, they are first
to be cut or gently bruised, or fyled or beaten in a mortar.

In the manner of seething, order is to be observed in putting in the things to
be decocted the fire and instruments and Liquor which is decocted; and time
also is to be observed.

Order of boiling is to be observed, that all the things may not be put in
together, but the Roots, Barks, Woods, which are the more sollid things, and
without smell, should be put in first, then the Leaves, and seeds, last of all
flowers, and Aromatic things, and all those things which smell strongly, and
those things which may disperse their strength by much boiling; but this cannot
be observed except the vessel be opened, but if the decoction be made in a
thing that is covered, it matters not much to put in all the things altogether,
and if any of them are more difficult to be seethed, those should first of all
be bruised by themselves.

The fire should be clear and equal, but very gentle, since the virtue is
easily called forth, but stronger when there is need of much boyleing.

But decoctions are made by the Apothecaries commonly when the vessel is open
and the fire also, but it is more convenient, least the strength of the medicines
should vanish in boiling, to make a decoction in a Biploma, as they call it or
a double vessel, the vessel being shut, or if a decoction be made the fire
being open, it is convenient to set on it a close Alembick, or if it has a
beak, o^ snout, to fit it with a receiver to take the liquor, and to mix it
with the strained decoction.

The Liquor in which the things are boiled ought to be such as may perform the
intentions of the Physiti^^, Liquor for the De coction.
as water of the Fountain, distilled water, Barly-water, Chaly-beate, Water,
Whey, water mixed with Honey called Hydromell, sometimes Wine is taken, seldom
strong Beer is used, sometimes some Vinegar is put in, that the viscid and
tough humors may more powerfully be cut thereby, and the medicine may
penetrate the more; sometimes Roots alone, before the decoction is made, are
brayed in Vinegar. Distilled waters also are often used for decoctions with no
great profit but with great charge, unless the decoction be made in a close
vessel, since so long boiling takes away all their strength.

The quantity of the Liquor ought to be such as may satisfy for the decoction,
The quantity of Liquor.
and ought to cover the medicines three or four fingers breadth; which for the
most part is left to the discretion of the Apothecarie. But if the proportion
be appointed by the Physician, the Liquor is for the most part fourfold,
six-fold, eight-fold, in proportion to the medicines, according as the Herbs
are dry, or full of juice, thick, or thin, and may imbibe more or less of the
Liquor, and they ought to sees a little, or long.

Sometimes before boiling, the medicines are somewhat cut, or bruised, and
sometimes they stand a while (after decoction) before they are strained.

But they are boiled to the consumption of half or of a third part, or of a
fourth part only of Liquor, or till but a third part remains, according as the
medicines and the scope of the Physician requires: for those whose virtue
easily vanish and are in a thin, and seperable substance are to be boiled the
less time: but those whose substances are thicker, the strength cannot be
drawn forth without longer boiling, the decoction is strained with, or without
squeazing, according as there is need of the thinner parts only, or thicker,
and such as lie deeper.

A decoction is prepared either for one dose or more; for one, three, four, or
five ounces may suffice, if for more, the decoction should be made that the
remainder may be a Pint, or a Pint and an half, and afterward of things making
it pleasant, for one Dose an Ounce, or an Ounce and an half may be added, yet
more than a Pint, or a Pint and an half of a decoction, at one time, is seldom
made, (except the decoction of Guiacum and such like) since that if more should
be prepared, it would easily be spoiled before it would be taken by the sick;
Unto three four or five ounces of the decoction strained are added, of Sugar,
which often is ^used or Honey, six drachms, or an ounce, or of some convenient
Syrup in every dose an ounce, or an ounce and half: Sometimes the juices that
are most convenient of Herbs, or Fruits, and often other Liquors, as Aqua
vitae, Spirit of Vitrioyle, Copper, Saltpeter, some drops thereof are added,
and indeed only one of these is added sometimes to an Apozeme, but of lenitives
more, as more Syrups, or juices and Syrups, or of juice and Sugar, when juices
are adminiistred, for the most part; Sugar or Syrup is mixed with them, and
sometimes pleasant things; that they may be the better mingled, a gentle
ebullition is appointed at a weak fire; if it be convenient, the white of an
egg may be added, that the Sugar and Honey, and decoction also may be
clarifyed; or if that clarification does not suffice, the decoction is to be
put into the Balneum Mariae, till the thick dregs settle in the bottom, and
they by settling in the bottom, and pouring off of the clear Liquor are
separated, and that is to be repeated sometimes if it be needful; sometimes
the decoction is to be made pleasant either for the acquiring of a good taste,
or smell, or some other virtue, namely the Aromaticks a little before the end
of boiling being reduced into into powder, or Aromatic species fitted for the
disease, half a dram, or a dram thereof in each pint, is to be hung in a
thin skin, or bladder in the decoction, and are often pressed out, or else a
little after, the decoction is removed from the fire, the decoction being as
yet hot, they may be cut, or bruised more grossly, and so injected, and after
they have stood together some time in a vessel well covered, it is strained
again. Musk also, and Ambergreaze, if it be convenient, may be also given to
the dose of a grain of each; or a dram or two of Cinnamon water may be added.
If Wine or Vinegar be necessary, it is more convenient to add them after the
boiling, or a little before they have done boiling.

They are given for the most part in the Morning, The time of giving.
or Evening, or two or three hours before dinner, or supper, the stomach being
empty and the decoction being first warmed, three four or five ounces thereof
is given at a time, and that is often performed two, three, foute or five days
following, and either once only, or twice a day; if the decoction; are prepared
for many doses, they are to be kept in cold places under ground, for they will
scarce continue above a week although it be in the Winter: but in the Spring
and Summer, for the most part they are renewed every way.

Hereunto belong restorative Broathes as they call them, Restorative broaths.
which are made of Hens, or Capons, to which Veale, or Goats flesh may be
added, and there are of three sorts; the first they call a complete, Jus Consum
matum.
or a perfect bro^th, because it is most absolute, and fittest to nourish: it is
prepared as ordinary broathes are, only that they boil longer, and indeed so
long until the sixth, eighth, or sometimes the tenth part only remains;
Gelatina.
the second is called Gelatina, which is made if these meats are boiled in a
double vessel without pouring off the water, and the juice is pressed out from
thence, from which after it is cooled, the fat swimming on the top is to be
scummed off: Contusum.
the third is called Contusum which is prepared when the meats first sodden or
roasted, afterward are beaten in a mortar, so long until they may melt when
broth is put to them, and afterward are strained.

Purging Decoctions.
PUrging decoctions differ not from other decoctions, The manner of prepuring
purging of decoctions.
unless in respect of materials; namely that simple purging medicines are
mingled in purging decoctions, the manner of preparing is the same: for purging
medicines convenient for the evacuation of the humors are taken, and that for
one and more doses, yet because in seething their strength will decay, or waste
they ought to be taken in a greater dose, then in the substance, the strongest
for the most part double, but of the milder purgers, fourfold. Of which before
in the doses of medicines.

Other things are added to these, which may either resist and correct the
malignant, and noxious qualities of the purge, or may prevent the mischeives
which may befall nature by theuse of strong purgers or which may increase and
stir up the dull faculty of a medicine, or extimulate them to work more
speedily, or may bridle them if they work too strong and quick, or such as
have regard to some private part, and may lead and direct the purging medicine
thither; Aromatic powders or species are added to the decoction strained, for
to please the palate, halse an ounce or an ounce of Syrup is appointed and
prepared.

2. Oftentimes something that purges is added to the decoction as Syrup and
Honey of Roses and Violets solutive, also Cassia, Manna, which are dissolved in
the decoction, which is again strained.

3. Sometimes purging electuaries are mixed and dissolved in the concoction, in
such quantity that they make one dose when they are mingled with many things
that are boiled together.

4. But because decoction, by the mixture of electuaries become thicker; it is
not inconvenient if they are strained again, and also clarifyed, but then the
Electuaries may be used in a larger quantity.

5. Sometimes, some of the purging powders are added to the Liquor or decoction.

6. Or some quantity of a purging extract is dissolved in it:

7. Lastly, decoctions are oftentimes made of purging and altering medicines
together.

Hereunto belongs decoctions to cause vomits, Vomiting things etc.
sweates Urine, examples whereof are extant every where.

CHAP III. Of Infusions and other purging Potions.
INfusions are next unto decoctions, Infusions.
and differ only from decoctions simply so called, in that they are wont to be
prepared only by boiling without macerating them before hand: but these are
when the medicines are broken, or beaten before, and put into a convenient
Liquor for some certain time that they may leave their virtue in it The m^nner
of preparing.


They are prepared of medicines of all sorts, but most commonly of Purgers,
which should be given in somewhat a greater weight, then in the substance,
namely half so much in the substance, and double in the Infusion, with their
correcters and directers being cast in also in a due quantity, (sometimes in a
nodule or little bagg of fine linen, shut) in a Liquor convenient for the
purpose of the Physician: the Chemists at this day, that the extract may be
made the easier, put to the menstruum or prepared matter some drops or spirit
of Salt of Vitrioll, or Oil of Vitrioll is added, which is made by draining,
which they call per deliquium.

The quantity of the Liquor ought to be such as may cover those things that are
macerated, and may be something higer then they, being infused in this manner,
fix, twelve, or twenty four hours in a warm vessel stopped or shut, they being
beaten or cut in pieces should so long lie in it until the Liquor has
extracted all their strength, which may be known by the taste and smell. But
if, which often happens, there be urgent occasion, the medicines cannot be
macerated for want of time, that defect may be supplied by gentle boiling of
them, afterward that which is strained with or without squeazing is appointed
for use, and indeed without squeazing or pressing that which is strained is
more cleansing and pleasing to the taste, but weaker: but with expression it is
more troubled and thicker, but more efficacious.

You may add to the infusion things that sweeten it or other purging things as
it is said before of decoctions.

Sometimes Decoctions, and Infusions are given together; namely a Decoction is
prepared in the same manner as is said before. In a sufficient quantity of that
decection are infused purgers with their correcters, and the rest of the things
are afterward mixed as in other infusions.

Another way also a Potion is made of insusion and decoction mixed, or an
infusion with a decoction, namely the decoction is prepared by its self, and
the insusion by it self, both of them according to the method formerly
described, and these two Liquors are afterward mingled together.

To these purging decoctions, A purging Potion. The menner.
and infusions, by reason of their fimilitude we add a purging Potion
peculiarly so called by some, which is prepared in this manner, first a
sufficient quantity is taken of any sort of Liquor, decoction, distilled water,
Whey, water and Honey mixed, Broth, Wine, Juleps of Violets, sufficient for a
draught, namely two 3. or 4. ounces, in the Liquor a sufficient quantity of
Cassia, Manna, or a sufficient quantity of any one purging electuary, or more,
is to be dissolved for one dose; sometimes of some Syrup half an ounce, or 6.
drachms, or some of the Aromatic powders are added, and these potions are
taken as the rest, which we have spoken of heretofore, hot in the morning
fasting.

2. Secondly, as it is spoken of pu^ging things, so here also straining, and
Clarifying may be appointed, but then the electuaries are to be taken in a
greater quantity, then if they are given without straining.

3. Thirdly, purging Potions may be prepared of purging extracts, but seeing
that extracts are wont to be given in a smaller dose, they require less
quantity of Liquor, and th^rfore are more grateful to the affected: sometimes
two or three ounces of other Liquors are taken instead of Muskadine, and the
extract is dissolved in them, and if there be danger of being too hot, some
Sorrel, or Lemons, or some other convenient things may be added.

4. Lastly, purging Potions are prepared of powders as well simples, as of
compound purging medicines, as also with purging Roles, but the dose of such
powders, ought not to be much more then a dram, otherwise the Potion will be
too thick, and ungrateful: and sometimes some powder is mingled with dissolved
electuaries.

In the same manner also, Potions and infusions for vomits.
Infusions and Potions for vomits, sweates, and medicines provoking of Urine
may be prepared.

CHAP. IV. Of Medicinal Wines, drinks of honey and Water sodden together, of
Wine mingled with Honey, of Oxymel, of Medicinal Vinegar, Decoction or
Barley-water, also of Clarified Juices.
OUT of those things which have bin hitherto spoken of Infusions and
Decoctions, Medicinal wines.
it will easily appear how medicinal wines are prepared, and they are either
altering, ^r purging and altering together.

They are prepared, either of Must; or of Wine that is re^ined, those that are
prepared of Must, have a more plea^ant taste, and they are thus done; The dry
Medicines are ^ut into little wooden Caskes; when the Must is some^hat abated,
and the Wine cleansed, and made clear, it should ^^e drawn out into another
Vessel, and kept for your use.

In the same manner Physical drink may be prepared, Ph^sica^l ^^^nkes.
of Wormwood, Hearts tongue, Bittony, Sage, Rosemary, and other herbs, and also
of purging things: but for the most part, the herbs are first bruised in the
drink, after it is brewed, being as yet warm, and afterward in due season things
to make it work, being put in, they are suffered to cool.

Of Wines so cleansed, Medicinal Wines are prepared; Dry medicines are
cleansed, cut, and broken, and are put into a glass, or earthen Vessel,
sometimes into a Nodule, or little Bag of fine linen, or thin linen sewed
up; a sufficient quantity of good white Wine is powered in, so they stand in
infusion, in a Vessel that is shut, afterward strained, unless they are
enclosed in a little Bag.

But this proportion for the most part is observed, that to a pound of
medicines, there is taken of Must, or Wine eight Pints, twelve, nay, to twenty
five, nay thirty, or thirty six, so that an ounce may answer to the proportion
of two or three Pints.

Medicinal Wines also that alter, are prepared if distilled Oils are added to
them being first mixed with Sugar, or Spirits, or tinctures, spirit of Wine
drawn out of simple medicines, or moist extracts.

Sometimes medicinal Wines are sweetened with Sugar or Honey, Claretum.
and are called Clare^s, and Hippocratick Wine, they are profitable in cold
durable diseases, they a^e made in this manner: Aromatic things or roots also
and seeds grateful to the smell and taste, principally are grosely beaten, or
cut, and such as have great efficacy, are infused in sweet Wine, so they are to
stand sometime in the Infusion, in a warm place for some hours, or let them
simper in Balmum Mariae, for half an hour, especially if you may accelerate
the work, or to prepare Wine mingled with Honey; afterward there is added a
sufficient quantity of Sugar to make it pleasant to the taste, so that to two,
three or sour parts of Wine, one part of Sugar may be taken, and oftentimes
Wine is drained through Hippocrates sleeve, that it may become clear, some of
the distilled waters that are convenient, may be mixed with the Wine.

Some infuse the Aromaticks in spirit of wine, about eight or ten parts whereof
is used to one part of the Aromaticks, and when the spirit of wine has drawn
out the tincture, they separate it by declination, and straining or filtring,
and keep it for their use, but when it is convenient to make Hippocraticall
wine, they power some drachms, and withal^ an ounce or two ounces, to one
measure of Wine, a sufficient quantity of Sugar to sweeten it.

But such Wines and Clarets, may be prepared not only to alter, but also to
purge, with the same dose for the more choice sort of persons, namely with
purgers, principally the Leaves of Sena, Mecoacam, Agrick, Turbith, with their
(...) recters are put into a sufficient quantity of Rhenish Wine, and being
heated in water lukewarm in a glass afterward must stand in a warm place,
six hours in Infusion, afterward add of Julep of Violets, or Roses halse an
ounce, or let them be sweetened with half an ounce of white Sugar and be
strained, and filtred through a brown paper, let three ounces of that which is
strained be perfumed with two drops of Oil of Cinnamon; Manna also may be taken
instead of Sugar.

If the Wine be sweerned with Honey instead of Sugar, Wine mingled with Honey.
it is called Oinomell. Mulsum, or wine mingled with Honey, is prepared of one
part of Honey, and two or three parts of Wine mixed and boiled together: and
Aromaticks of every sort may be added, and it may be prepared at the time of
gathering of Grapes, namely if one part of Honey be taken and two of Must: of
water if it be convenient three parts or five parts in quantity, and let them
heat together.

Hydromell, and Mulsum, and Melicratum, Hydromell. Mulsum. Melieratum.
are names of medicinal Potions of the same nature, namely made of water, and
Honey, and sometimes of other things boiled therewith, or if there be any
difference amongst those, it is only in comeliness, for Melicratum is made
suddenly for present use of a mixture of Honey and water; but Hydromell is
prepared to keep longer, and is neater made; of Mulsum some is more cleanseing,
others purer, so that there is a several proportion of Honey to the water,
according to the various scope of the Physician, and temperature of him that
takes it. To prepare it eight, ten or twelve times the quantity of Fountain
water is to be taken: but this is made of one part of Honey and five or six of
water, boiled till the fourth or fifth part be consumed.

Amongst the kinds of Mulsum, which can keep, Meade.
the most noted at this day, is that drink which is called Meade, and the best
indeed is prepared in Li^uania.

But Hydromell is prepared not only of water and Honey but also of several
Aromaticks, Herbs and Roots, as Clary, Hysop, Bettony, and others, both kinds
are made, that which is for present use, and that which is more durable, and
will keep longer, it is prepared for present use, if in a pint of the water of
Plates, a dram, or at most two drachms are boiled, the 10th. or 12th. part of
the best ^^ney be added, to every pint of the decoction. Hydromell is made
after the usual manner: But sometimes Hydromell is compounded, when the simple
Hydromell is sented with these only, although no other thing be boiled in it.

Besides the compound Hydromell which does alter, a purging Hydromell is also
prepared, which is nothing else but a purging decoction made with simple
Hydromell.

The next to Mulsum, Oxymell.
is Oxymell, which differs from it, only by the mixture of Vinegar, a drink
very usual amongst the Ancients; but the old Physicians did not make Oxymell
alike, but severally and added Vinegar according to the nature of a disease and
of the diseased and other circumstances, and they gave it not only mingled with
other medicines, but alone to quench thirst, and other purposes to drink, but
that which is most cleansing, and may also be used in fevers was made of
twelve parts of water two of Honey and one of Vinegar; they were gently boiled
and scummed, and the fire not being fierce, and by the addition of the white of
an egg were clarified, and afterward strained through a woollen cloth, till
it become clear and pure.

There are prepared by the Physicians other kinds of Oxymells compounded of
more medicines; such is the Oxymell Helleborated of Gesner or rather of Julian.

To this head we referr the water, Barley water.
or decoction of Barley which is made of whole Barley boiled in the water till
it comes to a Ptisan, and some is simple when nothing is boiled besides Barley;
another is compound when certain other things also are added to the Barley,
namely Raisons, Licorish, Anni-seed, Fennell-seed, Cinnamon, Sugar: of Licoris^
is added, from two drachms to half an ounce or six drachms, Raisons from an
ounce to two ounces of such as are stoned, half or a whole dram, Cinnamon to
one dram, or 2. drachms, for a pint and half or z, pints of Liquor.

Sometimes a sour medicine is prepared, Medicinal Vinegar.
as with Squills, Roses, the rindes of Scordium, the Flowers of Elder and many
others, and not only of one, but more simples by infusion and materation of
them in the same manner, as in medicinal wines.

Moreover to this Head we may refer clarified juices, Clarified juices.
which being pressed out of new gathered Plants are purified, either by the
white of an Egg, or by straining, often repeated, principally by filtring, or
by separation.

CHAP. V. Of distilled Waters and Spirits.
THose things which are prepared by distillation are called distilled things,
which are of diverse kinds, Things distilled.
yet all of them may be reduced to two forms, for either the things distilled
are in the form of waters, or Oils; Water.
those that are of the same consistence with water are again twofold, for
either they come near the nature of water, and are plainly called waters, or
else they are spirituous, Spirits.
and are called Spirits, yet these names are often confounded, for oftentimes
that which is spirituous is called a water.

1. First distilled waters are prepared of diverse things: Manner of distilled
waters.
of herbs and Flowers, all for the most part are distilled by ascent; and
principally of fragrant flowers, and other thinner and colder things, whose
force easily vanishes, for the most part, waters good enough are distilled in
a crooked glass, by the Balneum Mariae.

2. Others bruise the flowers, and herbs that are to be distilled, and press
the juice out of them, and out of that juice by distillation through an
Alembick they draw out water into the Balneum Mariae.

Some cut in small pieces the Plants to be distilled, or bruise them, and being
bruised they they fill the Gourd having a narrow mouth all most full, and the
patelli the glasses being put on with the powder of the glass of Copper and
borax Hermeticall, they shut and afterward they put the glass full of water
into a Cauldron, and boil it six or seven hours, afterward they put the
glass when it is taken out of the water, into a warm place to cleanse it,
until the drops cease to stick to the sides of the gl^sse, and the digestion
be absolute: they distill the matter digested in Balneo Roris, they separate
the Oil from the water they power out the water with the relics again and
repeat the distillation.

4. But the hotter, and Aromatic Herbs, and those whose strength do not so
easily vanish and lies deeper, are not so conveniently distilled by Balneum
Mariae, but in vesica, but in this distillation by a vessel of water, some
diversity also is observed, for some bruise the herbs, or cut them into small
pieces, and fill the fourth part of the Vesica besides for them, then they
pour of the pure water that three parts of the Vesica may be filled therewith,
and one quarter for the most part remains empty, and a Refrigeratory vessel,
being applied and the worm also (if you desire merely a spirituous water) or
with an Alembick with a Refrigitory, and their conjunctions or joints shut, and
a convenient fire being kindled and placed under the Vesica they distill water
gently and by drops.

5. Others having powered in hot water into a vessel close shut, first they
bruise the herbs, twenty four hours for the most part, they think it most
profitable if the herbs are not only macerated in warm water a day and night
space, but being bruised, or beaten, they should stand in digestion, and
putrefaction in Horse dung, or Balneo Roris, or Mariae, for ten or fourteen
days, afterward they should be distilled. That water which first drops out is
the best: but that which comes out last is like water it self; distilled
water, if it be convenient, may be poured off, with new herbs to be digested,
and distilled again.

6. But since that water and spirit ascend together, they must be separated,
which is most conveniently done by the Balneum, namely all the water is to be
powered into a crooked glass or Violl, and by a gentle heat only the spirituous
part is to be distilled, by which distillation if the heat be rightly governed,
the separation happily may be made at once, yet if it shall not so happen the
first time, the distillation is to be repeated, and that rectification which
was first made by a Gourd, afterward rectification is appointed by a Phyoll.
Examples may be seen in the Institutions.

CHAP. VI. Of Oils.
FOr the most part it comes to pass that with the water in distillation of hot
herbs, Oils.
and Aromatic seeds, Oil comes forth together, which is to be separated from
the water; but this is performed first by a kind of tunnell which they call a
Separater or Tritorium, afterward through a filter or a course woollen cloth,
thirdly through brown paper: the Precepts of which operations are to be sought
out of the Institutions.

Yet certain Oils are distilled also without waters; so Oils are drawn by
distillation from Amber, Mastick, Frankinsense; Of which in the Institutions.

CHAP VII Of Syrups and Juleps.
SYrups, and Seraps, The name of Syrups.
derive their names from the Arabicks, and therefore are not to be written with
a^y, which the Arabicks want, and it is drawn from the root Schareba, which
signifies to sup, and therefore it signifies a Liquor to be Supt; Syrups
therefore are fluid medicines prepared of a convenient Liquor, whether it be
boiled, or infused, or a juice made up with Sugar or Honey, and boiled for the
most part to the consistence of Honey: Syrups are invented both for delight to
the taste, and for durability, that convenient medicines may be in a readiness
at any time of the year.

Some of them are simple, Differences.
which are made of one simple medicine only, and with Sugar, or Honey; compound
which are prepared of more; both kinds are appointed for several uses, of
them are some altering and strengthening, others purging, and the liquour is
taken from decoctions, infusions, clarified juices and Vinegar.

This is the manner of preparing, Manner of preparing Syrups.
First the decoctions art taken; to the Decoctions are added Sugar or Honey,
according as the use and scope of the Medicine requires; namely, two pounds of
Sugar or Honey to a pound, or a pound and half of the decoction, as it is
desired to be thicker or thinner, and ought to be kept more or less time: Then
afterward it is to be clarified by adding of the white of an Egg, that the
decoction by a gentle Fire may sees to the consistence of a Syrup: If Honey be
added, it ought to be boiled less, because being cooled it easily becomes
thick. Syrups also, like an concoctions, may be made with Aromaticks, or
Aromaticke Powders.

2. Seconldy, they are prepared of clarifyed Juices, to which is added half the
quantity of Sugar, and boiled to the consistence of a Syrup.

3. These Syrups are better if fresh flowers are infused 24. hours in the
expressed juice in Bal. Mariae, and are again expressed, and that repeated as
often as it is fit. Then the juice is to be clarified by digestion, and half
the quantity of Sugar to be mixed with it.

4. Others boil the juice till half be consumed, then they strain it, and
suffer the decoction to stand and settle, that the juice may be the purer, the
which when Sugar is added, they settle to the consistence of the Syrup.

5. Sometimes the juice pressed out is poured into hot clarifyed Sugar, and
exposed to the heat of the Sun, to consume its aqueous humidity. But, if the
heat of the Sun be not sufficient, it may be performed by gentle boiling.

6. Syrups are also made of Infusions, Sugar being added in the same manner as
of Decoctions.

7. And sometimes other things are infused in juices, and afterward when it is
strained, Sugar is put to it, and the Syrup is made according to art.

8. Syrups may be made of extracts also, if a little Sugar be added to the
extract being thickened by abstraction of the Menstruum.

9. Syrups may also be made of soft Electuaries, if the Electuary be dissolved
in six times or eight times the quantiny of warm liquour, and strained, and
half so much Sugar added thereto, by a gentle heat without boiling, the liquour
should evaporate to the consumption of the third part.

10. Also Syrup is prepared of Sugar and Vinegar only, namely four pound of
Sugar, and two of Vinegar, and according to some five Pints of water, and it is
called Syrup of Vinegar simple.

11. Moreover, Syrrups are made much more artificially, especially of hot and
dry Plants, if only so much water is poured off as that so much of the liquour
may be left after straining without concoction, as otherwise uses to be left
after concoction is made, and the matter infused on this manner in a Glass or
other convenient vessel, such as Fire-vessels, or earthen vessels, whose
orifices may be fitted with a cover made for it, that is round and channelled,
which should be put into the Balneum, three or four days to digest, and
afterward should be strained, and that which is strained should again be put
alone in Balneo, or because of straightness of time, it should be clarifyed
with the white of an Egg, what ever is feculent in it. Afterward Sugar should
be taken and clarifyed, and boiled to such a consistence, as is observed in the
Confection of Penides, and it should be mingled with the clarifyed infusion.

The nearest to this is Oxymel, Oxymel.
which is to be had in the Shops, which is prepared of one part of Water, one
of Vinegar, and two parts of Honey, whereof diverse compositions may be made
also.

Syrups are seldom given alone in Diseases of the Breast and Stomach; The
manner of administration.
but oftentimes are mixed with double the quantity of distilled waters, or
decoctions; and an Ounce or an Ounce and an half of Syrups may be drank with
two or three Ounces of Water or Decoction at one time.

To Syrups and Juleps belong Rosated water, A Potion of Roses and water.
which is a Potion compounded of Roses, and Water, and Honey or Sugar:
Oribacius put into sixty Pints of warm water, ten pound of Rose-leafs, he shut
the Vessel till they were perfectly boiled, afterward the Roses being taken
out, he infused of boiled and clarifyed Honey thirty pound, and put it into a
Cellar. Actuarius took ten Pints of water, and five pound of Sugar and boiled
them together to a convenient thickness, afterward he infused a pound of the
juice of Roses.

The likest to Syrups are Juleps and Zulaps, Juleps.
as they are called, from the Arabic word Sialaba, which is to heal or make
sound, without doubt it is derived from thence, so that indeed Physicians often
times take them for the same Medicine, and Potions that are mixed of Water and
Syrups called Juleps, but the name of Juleb is often extended farther now than
with the Arabians, who invented this Medicine to be made; for the name of Juleb
was absolutely given by them, when Sugar only is dissolved in Rose Water, and
boiled, as Julep of Roses is, otherwise called Alexander's Julep.

But a Julep, if there be any difference betwixt it and a Syrup, is a Medicine
clearer than a Syrup, and therefore more delicate and grateful, and it is made
of distilled waters, clarified Juices and Sugar.

They are made with, The manner of preparing of Juleps.
and without boiling; without boiling on this manner, Common or distilled water
is taken, or a decoction of Barley, to the which some Juice also of Citrons,
Limmons, Pomegranates, Quinces, or Vinegar may be added, and white and
clarified Sugar is poured in, or instead thereof common Juleps of Roses and
Violets, which being boiled to the cosistence of a Syrup, are kept for use, and
are diligently mixed together, and if there be need, are drained through
Hippocrates's sleeve. But the proportion of Sugar, or usual Juleps, which is
observed to the waters and juices is various, as the present occasion requires
it. For the most part the Palate of the sick is their guide, and sometimes the
proportion of water and Juices to Syrups and Sugar is threefold, sometimes
fourfold, sixfold, eightfold, or twelvefold. Sometimes Juleps are made with
Aromatic Powders, or convenient little Tabulets are dissolved in them. It Is
most convenient also in some Diseases to add Spirit of Vitriol.

2. Moreover, Juleps are prepared of Conserves and medicinal Juices, if
distilled waters that are proper, or a Decoction of Barley be poured into them
in a sufficient quantity, and are stirred with a Pestle in a Mortar, or are
mingled together over a gentle fire, and strained.

3. But those Juleps which are said to be prepared with decoction, are nothing
else but the pure and finer decoctions of Syrups, and the same manner of
preparing of them which is of decoctions and Syrups, only that they are
removed from the fire before they receive a thicker consistence.

CHAP. VIII. Of Emulsions and other Mixtures, bringing or causing milk, and of
strengthening things.
AN Emulsion is so called, Emulsion.
because it is like Milk, and is prepared as it were by milking; for it is a
potulent Medicine prepared of the pith and strength of seeds and certain
fruits, especially of sweet Almonds (Which Emulsion in particular by some is
called Amgydalatum) by the affusion of convenient waters, or of some other
liquour, and by pounding and pressing of them, to which the Pulpe of a Capon or
Pullet may also be added, if you have a desire to nourish.

They are prepared for several purposes or uses, The use.
according to the variety of the matter, namely, to quench thirst, to cause
sleep, to provoke sweats, and other things; and sometimes externally in stead
of Epythems, and may be exhibited for the heat of the brain, and to mitigate
pain, and cause sleep.

They are prepared in this manner, Manner of preparing.
Sweet Almonds are blanched, so are the four great cold Seeds, and other
things, the Kernels also are beaten in a stone or marble Mortar, pouring in by
degrees some fountain water, or of Roses and other convenient distilled
waters, or clarifyed with a convenient decoction that is pleasant to the taste:
The proportion of the liquour is uncertain, sometimes more, sometimes less,
according to the strength of the seeds and fruits, and according as the
Emulsion is required to be thicker or thinner: But at the least a threefold,
oftentimes a six-fold, eight-fold, ten-fold, etc. quantity of the liquour is
required; being beaten they are strained, and if convenient, Syrups or Julips
that are proper, as of Violets or Roses are added: The Emulsion being made
sometimes it is to be sweetened with Sugar, or Rowles of Diamarg. frig. manus
Christi perlati, or the Juleps lately mentioned: Sometimes there may be added
some Cinnamon water, if the disease will suffer it; and sometimes conserves,
Comfits, and liquid Electuaries may be added, from half a dram to a dram,
two drachms or more.

Pearls also, Coral, Hearts horn burnt, and other powders and Spices, may be
added to Emulsions.

Sometimes potulent Medicines may be made of Pearls only, Coral, Hearts
horn, and such like, with convenient waters, which also by reason of the
color of Milk, which they have, are called Emulsions, and are very frequent,
with modern Physicians.

Oftentimes Juices also that are drawn out by expression, as of Pomegranates,
Lemmons, or other liquours also are mixed with those waters (yet so that the
distilled waters for the most part exceed the rest in quantity) sometimes, but
seldom, some convenient Syrup. But because Physicians for the most part desire
a white color in this water, for the most part they omit all those things that
may discolor it.

CHAP. IX. Of Tinctures, and Extracts, and liquid dissolutions.
AN Extract is nothing else but the pure essence of a thing separated from its
grosser body by a fit menstruum (whence they are also called Essences by many)
which whilst it is as yet in a more liquid substance, An Extract.
and joined with the menstruum, it has also the color of the thing, and
therefore is called a Tincture; alth ough sometimes they are called Tinctures
also, when the essence of a thing is now separated from its menstruum which
extracted it.

Essences or Tinctures that are liquid, Essences.
are prepared either of green Plants, or of Juices: when they are prepared of
green things, the Herbs are bruised, and a little spirit of Wine is put in for
the preservation of them, and the juice is pressed out, which being cleansed is
called an Essence.

Those that are properly called Extracts are prepared of dried Plants, from
whence if the whole menstruum be not separated it is called a Tincture, or
liquid extract: But menstruums, that is, Liquours exhibited for the drawing out
of the essence of a thing are various, according to the diversity of the
matter, and use; they of spirit of Wine, distilled Waters, Whey, Vinegar, and
such like, are exhibited.

In choosing a menstruam, first you are to consider whether you desire a liquid
tincture, or an extract, or a thicker or grosser body: For if a liquid tincture
be desired, a menstruum is to be taken, which is of the same kind and faculty:
But if the menstruum ought to be separated, it is no matter, although it be of
another kind then the Tincture is of.

But since it is required in a menstruum that by the subtility of its substance
it may penetrate the matter, and by its familiarity entice out the purer parts,
and without spoiling and corrupting of the Extract it self, may again be
separated from it: Spirit of Wine may easily be esteemed the best amongst them,
and take the first place; but May-dew, distilled Vinegar, Spirit of Salt, of
Turpentine, etc. are used also according as some present occasion may require.

If compound Extracts are prepared, The manner of preparing Extracts.
and the simples be of diverse natures, each of them severally, or those which
are nearest one to the other, are drawn off by their Menstruum, and afterward
the Extracts are mingled.

The way of preparing Extracts is plain of it self, namely, the Menstruum is
poured into the matter, that is beaten and poudred, which sometimes by the help
of an external heat, when the essence of a thing is drawn out, and the
Menstruum colored enough, it is poured out, and another is put in, and that so
often repeated, till all the strength and virtue is extracted; afterward the
Menstruum is separated by heat, which if it be not separated whole, it is called
a Tincture or liquid Extract; but if almost whole, and of the consistence of
Honey, it is called a simple extract; examples may be seen in the Institutions.

Nor are such Extracts as well liquid as thicker prepared simply alone, but
also compounded: to these belong E^ixir, of propriety, purging Extracts, and
universal purgers, Laudanum opiated.

To Extracts belong those Rosins also which are prepared of Scammony,
Mechoacam, Jalep, and such like, containing in them a kind of gummy substance.

Of Tinctures, of Gemms, Coralls, Metalls, as of Balsum of Venus, may be seen
in the Institutions.

CHAP. X. Of Conserves, Preserves, and medicinal Juices.
THe name of Conserve is given principally to Flowers, The manner of making
Conserves.
and sometimes to Herbs, and certain soft and tender Roots, which being made up
with Sugar are kept many years: they are prepared in this manner, the Flowers
or Herbs newly picked or cleansed, and (if they abound with too much humidity)
first a little dried in the shade, the mixture is to be put up in a Glass or
glased vessel. If the Plants are moister, it is profitable to heat the Conserves
when they are made, by a gentle Fire.

2. Others take a Glass, and cover the bottom of it with Sugar, then they put
in the Flowers to be condited, the depth of three Fingers breadth, and then
they put in Sugar again, and in this manner heap upon a heap, and the Glass
close shut they expose it to the Sun some certain weeks.

3. Sometimes the Roots are boiled until they can be pounded, or without
boiling, are washed and cleansed, and are beaten very small, to them so
pounded, or to the Decoction strained through a Hair-sieve, the Sugar is added
as it use to be for Syrups.

The name of Condite although it may be taken for a compound medicine also,
Things condited.
as well as for a simple Plant mixed only with Honey or Sugar, so that
Conserves also may be comprehended under the notion of Condites, yet in
particular the name of Condite here, is given only to medicines which are not
pounded, but whole for the most part, Preserved with Sugar or Honey, both that
they may be kept longer, and rendered more grateful to the taste.

Fruits in the first place are preserved, Manner of Prese ving
Roots, Barks, Stalks, and some Flowers, as of Citrons or Lemmons, and Oranges:
this is the Preparation, the softer Fruits, as Cherries, Black-berries,
Barberies, Apritocks, Peaches, Pears, Moshcattellina, and the like, which are
soft, being put into Sugar or Honey, that is hot, they are boiled, until the
humidity of the Fruits (...) consumed and the Sugar or Honey receive their
former consistence; or if there be danger lest being boiled they should decay
and lose their color, the Sugar only being hot, they are poured out, and when
the Sugar has drawn their aqueous humidity, the Sugar alone is again to be
boiled, till that aqueous moisture is consumed, and afterward to be poured out
again to the Fruits, to be preserved: but those which are more solid should
first be bruised in Water, or boiled, until the bitterness and ungrateful
taste be drawn out, and they become softer; yet you must observe that whilst
we do strive to please the Pala^e, we must not lose the strength of the
Preserve by too much maccration or boiling; afterward we dissolve and clarify
the Sugar, either in fair water, or in the water where the Medicine is
macerated, unless it has an ill taste, we pour out the clarified Sugar upon
the Fruits or Roots, and then we seethe them again, until the aqueous humidity
which remains be consumed.

Lastly, being so prepared, they are kept in a Glass or carthen Vessel covered
with a round wooden Cover, and clean stones being put upon the Lid, the Lid is
deprest so as that it covers the Liquour.

Next to these are thickened juices, Thickened juiees.
and such as are fit for medicinal uses, which the Arabicks call Rob: They are
prepared for the most part of the juices of Fruits, sometimes of Flowers also,
that they may be useful in the Winter, when we want fresh Herbs and Fruits;
and in this manner they are prepared, the juice being drawn out is boiled over
a gentle Fire to the consumption of half, or the third part, then whilst as it
is yet hot, the thickest is strained: that which is strained is permitted to be
clarified by settling in the bottom, or it is clarified with the white of an
Egg; that which is clear is boiled again, until it acquire its due
consistence. But because the juices of themselves will not easily keep, unless
they are boiled to a thicker consistence and all the watriness be taken away,
for the most part less than half so much of Sugar or Honey, or a little
quantity of one of them is added.

Those purest, clearest, finest juices, Gelatinae.
like icicles in frosty weather, as they call them, being poured out use to be
kept, which commonly are called Gelatinae, or frozen juices, and they are
prepared principally of juices that are made without expression, the purer and
more delicate juice of Quinces, Apples, Pears, Goosberries, (or Currants.)

That composition called Diacydonium, Diacydonium.
which use to be prepared for the most part in the form of a solid Paste,
unless you would rather refer it to the Electuaries.

And Purgers may be mingled with those Juices, and of them pleasant Medicines
are made for infants and more delicate Persons.

CHAP. XI. Of Electuaries.
THe name of an Electuary, although it be severally used by several, An
Electuary what.
yet we think that it is to be attributed to Medicines, which are reduced with
Honey, or Syrup, or plain sugar, or some other convenient thing, being used to
a thicker consistence then a syrrup, and not ^o fluid, yet somewhat moist, this
word is derived, or rather corrupted from the word in Greek Elleickton, or
Elleickton, by which name they call a Medicine which may be taken as it were by
licking, by some they are improperly called Opiats, Whence so called Opiats.
not because they have Opium in them, but because they are of the like
consistence, with those Medecines of the Ancients which had Opium in them, such
as Treakle, and from hence they are called Opiats.

Electuaries may be for several uses, according to the nature of the simples
whereof they are compounded, for some are to alter, and strengthen, others
against poisons, which because for the most part they have opium in them, they
are called Opiats, as Treakle, Mithridate, Aurea Alexandrina, others are fit to
purge, which are called Catharticks. Difference of Electuaries.


Electuaries are twofold, the preparation of the former is thus,

Aromaticks, and other simples being beaten into a fine powder. In the first
place clarified honey is put into it, or sugar, or some convenient waters, or
syrups, or proper decoctions of proper simples in fair water, or a sufficient
quantity of another liquor, or infusions, or juyces pressed out of other
Medecines strained and boiled with clarifyed sugar, or honey, to the
consistence of a syrup, or of many of these together, whilst they are as yet
warm by the fire. A third part is sprinkled in by little and little, which may
conveniently be done through a Sieve, and is to be stirred about with a wooden
Pestle in a Mortar, and should be exactly mingled and kept in a convenient
Vessel.

The other manner is thus, Conserves they are convenient for your present
purpose, to which are added powders, and Aromatic Species, Troches, Conserves
also, and medicionall juyces, or Robs must be exactly mixed together in a
Mortar, with a sufficient quantity of dissolved sugar, or a convenient syrup,
or honey: But the proportion betwixt the Conserves and Powders, and Species are
not so exact, as some do determine, but several times they may be three fold,
four fold, six fold, eight fold, twelve fold: For a sufficient quantity of a
convenient syrup being poured in, whatsoever the proportion be betwixt it and
the Powders, they may be all reduced easily into the consistence of an
Electuary, which is also to be held of Conserves. Sometimes also spirit of
Roses, of Salt, of Vitrioll, distilled waters compounded, or of distilled
Oils, some drops are to be put in. And these kinds of Electuaries were called
by some Condites, as is said before, it is so called by some from the mixture.
Mixture.
Purging Electuaries for the most part are so made.

There is another manner like to this: Fruits, seeds, or roots are put in, or
are boiled in wine or water, to the f^rm of a Poultice. Afterward they are
strained through a hair Sieve, sugar, or clarified honey is added, or Syrups,
or Manna, and if it be needful are boiled to the consistence of honey,
sometimes the Species, and Powders also. Spirits also of Vitrioll, and Salt,
and distilled Oils.

Of Raysins and Pruants that are laxative, you may see the Institutions.

CHAP. XII. Of Eclegmaes, and Lohochs.
EClegmaes, or Eclectaes, from the Greek word Eclei^o, Eclegma.
that is to take up with ones tongue, or lick of, the Arabicks called Lohoch,
or Linctns, Lohoch.
and things that are to be licked, as they are commonly called, are like unto
Electuaries, nor do they differ from Electuaries, only in that they are of a
moister consistence, and as it were the middle betwixt Syrups and Electuaries,
and are appointed peculiarly for diverse diseases of the Breast and Lungs.

Species and Powders, Conserves, thickened juices, Honey, Manner of preparing.
Sugar, Extracts, Muscellages, Syrups, Juleps, Oxymell, distilled Oils, the
manner of preparing is the same also with that of Electuaries. The Powders are
taken, which are most convenient, Gums of Arabic, Tragacanth, Juice of
Liquorish, Rice, and all things are incorporated in a sufficient quantity of
honey, or Syrups, or Juleps, or Muscellages, or Juices, or Insusions, or of
some decoction for this purpose, prepared of roots, herbs, seeds, fruits, But
principally of Muscellages, and visoid things being strained and expressed and
boiled with honey, or sugar, to the consistence of a syrup, or any one, or more
of these, and all of them are to be wrought so long in a Mortar with a wooden
Pestle, until they are exactly mingled, and come to be of the consistence of
honey, or rather the middle betwixt Honey and Electuaries.

Eclegmaes may be prepared without the addition of Powders, and Species, if a
juice, or Muscellage be boiled with honey, or sugar, to the consistence of an
Eclegma.

3. Eclegmaes also may be made according to that manner which is explained last
of all amongst the Electuaries, so that if it ought to be licked, the
consistence ought to be the moister.

4. And such things are often administered alone to be supt up by the sick, or
else they are prepared of them other things being mixed, a new Eclegma is made
for the present occasion; for you may take as much as you please of the usual
Eclegma; Conserves also are added, and convenient Powders, Sugar, and an
Eclegma may be reduced into the form of a Syrup, with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup, or Juleps or clarified Honey, or Sugar dissolved; To which sometimes
some drops of distilled Oils are added.

5. Sometimes an Eclegma is prepared of Syrups alone, Sugar-canded, or Penedies
being added.

Hereunto belong medicines which by some are called Saponea, Saponea.
from the similitude of white Soape not yet made hard, by others it is called
Linctus, from a Liniment made of Almonds. Sweet Almonds are taken being
blanched, and are pounded; to those that are pounded, clarified Sugar, or
Penedies, or Sugar Candy is added; being first dissolved in a convenient
Liquor, they are boiled to the consistence of Honey; a little before they have
done boiling a pound of Rice is added, to wit, unto two ounces of Sugar, an
ounce of Rice, and another of Almonds, and a sufficient quantity of Rose water,
and a little before it be ended some Ginger also, or Aromatic may be added.
Others draw a milk out of Almonds with Rose water, or some other convenient
Liquor, with some portion of milk; Sugar is dissolved, the Rice is rast in
afterward, and the other part also of the mulsion being poured in they are
stirred with a gentle fire.

The composition which is called Leucophagum, Leucophagum.
is so named from its color, and therefore may be referred to this, or the
precedent head; it is prepared of swee^ Almonds macerated in Rose water, and the
flesh of a Capon, or Patridge boiled with it, being very much wrought in a
Marble Mortar, and strained through a hair seive, with a little of the beaten
blanched Almonds, and Sugar, boiled to a due consistence, to which according to
the several aims of the Physicians, Aromaticks, Corralls, and other things
may be added.

CHAP XIII. Of Boles.
A Bolus has that name because it is a gobbet of Physic in a round figure, A
Bole.
almost as much as ones mouth will hold, whence it is calied Buccilla; but the
name of Bolus agrees not only to purging, but altering Physic.

Purging Boles are thus prepared: The way to prepare purging Boles.
purging Electuaries are taken, and a convenient quantity of Sugar being added,
they are made up in the form of a Pyramid, not much unlike an Olive, lest they
should be loathsome, they ought not to be made of Electuaries that are
ungrateful, and for that reason Hiera is scarce ever given in Boles; the
quantity ought not to exceed an ounce.

2. Sometimes some of the Powders or speties are added.

3. You may add conserves.

4 Or instead of Sugar Conserves either alone, or with a little Sugar may be
used.

5. Instead of Sugar, or sometimes with Sugar, especially in diseases of the
reins, Licorish-Powder; or some other may be added, so may Turpentine also.

6 Moreover in the stead of purging Electuaries, Powders of simples that purge
use to be taken, wherein something also which alters, or corrects the violence
of purgers, or that give a pleasant ^mell or taste to them; or else they may be
added for some other cause, or species of purging Confections, or Extracts
purging, both simple and compound, which are taken and incorporated with the
pulpe of Cassia, the pulpe of Tramarines, or Pruants, or some Conserve or Rob,
or some convenient Syrup, and with a sufficient quantity of Sugar are made into
the form of a Bolus.

7. Sometimes distilled Oils are ming lediwith a Bolus to corroborate, namely
of Anniseed, Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, some few drops, and sometimes the Bolus is
covered with Gould.

Boles to cause vomiting, Vomiting boles.
and they are prepared after the same manner, and are made of some Emettick
powder, sim ple, or compound, to which sometimes is added some of the things
that alter or correct, some certain grains, or some Emittick extract, with a
conserve or some confection of the like consistence, and with syrups.

Boles also may be exhibited for other uses, Altering.
to alter, st^engthen, and provoke sleep; but the composition differs not from
the former.

CHAP. XIV. Of Powders, and Trageis, or Comfits.
BUt as for the forms of dry Medecines, Powders, and Trageis.
Powders, are the plainest way of compounding amongst them, commonly called
Trageas, without doubt corruptly derived from the word Tragema, which consists
of one, or more Medecines compounded, if the taste be ungrateful, an equal
part of sugar, or half so much sugar is to be added.

But Powders are either thin, and subtle, which if they confist of pure
Aromaticks, and Sugar, they are wont to be called generally Tragemats, or
Trageae, or else more thick, and not so subtle; nay sometimes Aromaticks are
not pulverised, but only cut asunder, and seeds hardened with sugar, or
candied, called Comfits, are added to them, and Species that are cut, are also
called gross Trageaes.

They are used for several purposes, according to the various nature of the
simples whereof they are composed, some of them resist poison, others purge the
belly, others by vomit.

To those that purge, simples which have in them a faculty of purging are
taken, and correcters are added, sometimes also a grain of distilled Oils is
mixed with a dram of Powder,

CHAP. XV. Of Salts.
ALl things almost contain two kinds of Salts, Salt twosold.
the one volatile, which endures not the fire and heat, but flies away and is
dispersed, and vanishes by burning, the other is fixed, which endures the
fire, and is left in the ashes.

Volatile Salt is collected in distillations, so of stale Urine, Volatile Salt.
Salt distilled by an Alimbeck in the first place, and by a Phiola or the
bottom of a Glasse-Still; in the second place Volatile salt of Urine is
collected, the same may be drawn out of other things. In the juices of Plants
also, salt sometimes coagulates to the thickness of boiled honey, Fixed.
in a cold place. But fixed salt is prepared of the ashes of plants and woods,
whilst a Lie is prepared out of them, and that is boiled till all the water
exhals, for then the salt is left behind, which is purifyed first by often
dissolving, and coagulating. Secondly, If it be dissolved into a liquor by
drayning in a moist place, it is filtered, and afterward coagulated. Cream, etc.
Of Tartar.


Hereunto belongs the cream, or thick juice, and Crystal of Vitrioll, and of
Tartar, which are nothing else but salt of Tartar separated from the dregs that
were mixed. Magisters.
Also Tartar vitriolated, salt of Tartar. To these belong Magisters, or
dissolvings of Pearl, Coral, Crabs claws, precious stones, Saccharum
Saturni, which takes place so far, if salt that is volantile, of the menstruum
that dissolves does as yet stick in them: For then according to the manner of
salts they are dissolved in waters and other liquors; but if they are
precipitated by oil of Tartar, or Vitrioll, and the salt that dissolves be
separated from them, they rather belong to powders.

CHAP. XVI. Of Croces.
TO powders and salts we may well join those things which the Chemists call
Crocos, stours, sublimates, Croci what.
precipitates: The name of Crocos is given to some Medecines from the color of
Saffron, for Croci are nothing else but fine powders, or tinctures reduced into
the form of a powder of Saffron-colour: But principally they are called Crocos
of Metals, and Crocos of Mars.

Crocus mettalorum is nothing else but Antimony burnt with nitre, Crocus
mettalorum.
and reduced into powder of Saffron color, next to this is that of Venus of
Antimony Gouden as it is called. Of which the Institutions may be seen.

Crocus of Mars is prepared several ways, which may also be seen in the
Institutions.

To these we may well referr that which is called earth of vitrioll, whose
preparation is taught in the Institutions.

CHAP. XVII. Flowers.
Of flours and Sublimates.
THose are called Flours by the Chemists, for the most part, which are the
thinner, and more subtle parts of a body, separated from the thicker by
sublimation, the most common flours are of Copper and of Antimony, as also
Benzoes; the reason of preparing whereof is to be had in the Institutions.

Hereunto belong the other Sublimates, amongst which the chief is Mercury
Sublimate simple, and Mercury Sublimate sweet.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Precipitates. Of precipitates.

ALthough those things in general are rightly said to be precipitated, which
are dissolved in some Liquor by a peculiar Art, and separated from the Liquor,
deseend to the bottom in the form of a Powder or like Chaulk, yet the name of
precipitating principally belongs to Mercury, which after it is dissolved in
Aqua Forci, and is separated from the water that dissolves it, and lettles in
the bottom, it is called Mercury precipitated. Turbith.


The name also of Tu^bith, or Turpeth, is in use amongst most Chemists, Mercury
precipitate Gold of life. Bezoarticum Minerale Mercurius Vitae.
which from whence soever it had its original, it signifies nothing but
Mercury precipitated.

The way of precipitating Mercury is shown in the Instistitutions: to which if
any Gold be added, it is called Gold of life; of which in the Institutions.

To these belong also Bezoarticum Minerale, as it is called: it is there also
described, a^ also Mercury of life and some others.

CHAP. XIX. Of Glasses, Regalls and certain Chymicall Powders.
THose chymicall Medecines which remain, Glasses, Regulus-chaulks, and certain
Powders, we will annex in this Chapter.

First, Glass is prepared from the chaulks of things; Glass.
and vitrification, for the most part, is the last resolution of things: for
Ashes, or Chaulk is to be poured into a very strong fire, and sometimes Borax
is added to ripen the fusion, or other fusill Powders, but fufill matter is
poured into a Basin made hot, or upon some table.

Glass of Antimony is predared in this manner; Of Antimony and Mercury.
also Amber of Antimony, or as others would have it, of Mercury. Purging cups
may be made of these Glasses, also Rings, Money: If glass of Jupiter, or
glasses, or Amber of Antimony, Rings purging, Regulus of Antimony. Antimony,
Diaphoretick. Lac Veneris.
if they are set into the bottom of a cup, or into a Ring, or any Coin: Of
Glass of Antimony golden; see the institutions, as also of Regulus of Antimony.

Moreover, the next to these are chymicall Powders and Chaulks; as for them,
the first that is referred to them, is called Antimony fixed, or Diaphoretick,
which is made if Antimony be burnt so often with Nitre, till it become white
and fixed. Milk of Venus, how it is prepared, the Institutions show.

To these belong Dreggs, or Faeculae, Faeculae.
as they are called by later Chemists, which are certain Farinaceus Powders
prepared of the juice of certain roots beaten, or expressed or extracted by
some liquor, namely, if a juice, or liquor be put into a cold place, the Faeces
of their own accord settle in the bottom, which when the moisture is poured
off, are dried and kept; the chiefest that are in use are the F^ces of Briony,
Wake Robin, Piony, and Orrice, as also of Dragon.

CHAP. XX. Of Comfits, little round Cakes, and Morsells, and such like.
THat the palate and taste may first be pleased, certain Medecines are found
out by Physicians, preserved with sugar, and are made up into a dry body:
Amongst which the first are those which are called Comfits, as we may speak in
the manner of an Apothecary, with whom, Comfits are nothing else but Conserves
dried, Seeds, Kernells, skind or blanched Roots, and Pills or Rindes.

Purging confections also are prepared, Of purging Comsits.
and that two ways, first if the Sugar be poured in before it be cooled, the
purging things are mingled, and stird about together that they may stick to the
Sugar; Secondly, which is more convenient, if the seeds, or Rindes, are
macerated in a purging infusion, until they swell, and then being gently dried
are hardened with Sugar.

Morcover, The manner of preparing little Cakes.
there are little Cakes which are prepared in this manner, take of the powders
or species of medicines, of Sugar, either plain white, or of Roses or Violets,
six times so much, sometimes eight-fold, to which simple or compound Manus
Christi pearled, may be mingled, or aded; in purging Rolls, also double,
treble, or a fourfold, quantity is dissolved, according to the taste of the
purgers, which is dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Fountain water, or of
some convenient distilled water, or juice, seldom of a decoction, or infusion;
to this Sugar, Powders, and Species, are thrown in by degrees, and stirring
are exactly mingled together: and are powered out by drops upon marble stone, or
on a Cypress or other table of wood, that being cooled they may concreate in
round Cakes and Rolls.

Sometimes instead of Powders, Oils or extracts are taken, and of altering
extracts, five, six, seven, eight, nine, or ten grains are taken, for an ounce
of Sugar, so of distilled Oils three, four, five, or six dreps, for an ounce
of Sugar, sometimes Powders, Extracts, and Oils are taken together.

Manus Christi purging are made two ways, Purging Manus Christi.
for either to every pound of Sugar, an ounce of Rosin of Scammony prepared is
taken, and so 'its made up in the form of a Tabulet, or the faeces of
Mechoacam instead of Rosin may be mingled in a three or fourfold quantity of
Sugar.

There is the same way for the most part of preparing morsells, Morsells.
only that medicines for the most part, in morsells are nor beaten so fine, but
in a grosser manner: to which others may be added which are not made easily
into Rowles, or at least in a less quantity, as Fruits, and seeds, namely
Almonds, Pine-nots, Pistack-nuts, seeds of Melons, Citrons, (or Pompions)
Conserves, Preserves; the proportion is to be observed betwixt them which is
most agreeable to the intention of the Physician: and all of them as it is said
of Rowles in a sufficient quantity, that is for the most part six or
eight-fold, sometimes also ten or twelve-fold; but in purgers a three or
fourfold quantity of Sugar dissolved in a convenient Liquor is taken.

2. Sometimes Fruits themselves are not taken in their substance, but an
Emulsion is made of them with convenie^t waters wherein the Sugar is dissolved.

3. Befides these Extracts, and distilled Oils may be mingied in the same
manner as Rowles.

4. Sometimes instead of Sugar, Manne may be used in purging things.

When all things have been exactly mingled over the fire before they are
cooled, the whole mass is laid on a marble stone, or Cypress Table, and is
dilated, and folded, or is powered into a wooden Box made for this purpose, and
are cut into Tables that are foure-square, or into what shape you please.

5. When the Tables or Morsells are prepared they may be moistened with
distilled Oils, or with musk and Amber distolved in Rose Water, namely when
we fear least the strength of them in boiling should fly into the air.

6. Purging morsells may be made after another manner a due quantity of the
purging extracts are taken, or some of the purging Powders are joined with
them, to these are added Aromatic powders, or Aromatic Extracts, and with
Manna or Sugar little Cakes are made, the proportion of Sugar is double, or
treble to that of the Extract, and the proportion of Manna is the same, but
these Cakes are not made of Fruits and seeds alone, but sometimes, the flesh of
Capons or Partridges, or Cockes-stones are joined with them, namely when we
intend to nourish, and especially in those which can eat no meat, whence such
morsells, are called nourishers, or nutritives. Nourishing Morsells. Pandalaeum.


To these may be added the medicine, which junior Physicians call Pandalaeum,
which in matter and in the end (for which is used) agrees with an Eclegm^, and
is appointed for diseases of the breasts and lungs, but in form it differs not
from Rowles, Tables or morsells only in that Rowles and Tables are framed into
a certain figure either round, or square, but Pandalaeum, remains without
being formed, and Pouders are permitted to condense with Sugar in a Box in that
which is called Pandalaeon, and when it is used a Lump of it is cut with a
Knife, or taken up with a Spoon, and held in the mouth till it be confumed.

Moreover, Diamygda^atum.
to this rank pertain several Comfits which are principally prepared to restore
health, and from the Basis they are commonly named, such are Diamygdulatum or
Marchpane, Diatestudinatum, a composition whereof Snails is the Basis, Pineatum
where Kernels of Pine-nuts are the Basis, and Sugar-bread.

Marchpane is compounded of sweet Almonds wrought with Sugar and Rose Water
well mingled and boiled according to art; but for Physical use, Fruits, Seeds,
and Aromatic Conserves are added.

Testudinatum is made almost in the same manner, Snails being only added.

As Pineatum also of Kernels of Pine-nuts mixed with Sugar in the same manner.

Sugar-bread is made of the whitest Flour, Sugar and Eggs being added, and
sometimes mixed with other Medicines, and boiled in a Pot, or Furnace; of which
see the Institutions.

CHAP. XXI. Of Trochees.
TRochees, that is, Rolls and Cycliscoi and Artiscoi in Greek, that is,
Trochees.
Pills or little round Balls are solid Medicines, cohering and consisting of
convenient things, taken in a Liquour made commonly in the form of
Lupine-seeds, their circumference sometimes round, sometimes with a corner,
both of them smooth without-side, invented principally for that end, that
Medicines reduced into Powder may be kept the safer in this solid figure from
the injuries of the air.

There are a sort of Trochees amongst the universal Medicines, The way of
preparing them.
and such as are for all uses almost, and may be exhibited according to the
nature of the Medicines whereof they are compounded, and afford convenient
matter for many other compositions, for some purge, some open obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen, others provoke Courses, others open the obstructions of
the Reins, some mitigate heat, some are appointed for the Breast and Lungs,
some strengthen the Brain, some stop Fluxes, and stench Blood, some are
exhibited externally, or that may repress humors that are flowing, or take
away proud flesh, such like are Pills or Lozenges, of Polyidae and Andronis; or
to cause sumes and suffumigations.

The materials whereof they are made, are Medicines of every sort, which being
macerated in a convenient Liquour, or made into some mussellage are reduced
into one mass, which are divided into many Lozenges and Pills, wherein for the
most part some impression is made; they are made either by a gentle fire, or
rather are dried in the shade, and kept for use; not only Pouders and Species,
but thickened Juices also, Conserves, Extracts, Fresh-flowers, Eclegmaes, and
distilled Oils, are made into Trochees.

CHAP. XXII. Of Pills.
PIlls are so called from their similitude to little Balls by the Latins, and
from the solid form, Pills.
the Greeks call them Cataposia from Catapineine, that is, Drinking or
swallowing down: Pills are Medicines made into the form of a Globe or Ball,
principally for this end, that they may be swallowed whole, and the
unsavoriness of the Medicine may the less be perceived by the taste.

They are made of Pouders, the matter whereof they are made are Electuaries,
Trochees, Flours, Salts, and whatsoever things are dry do afford: but Pills,
since they ought to have great efficacy in a small quantity, the Medicines out
of which they are compounded ought to be powerful, and therefore those things
which have but small strength in a great mass are not to be put into them, such
as are Flours for the most part. They are reduced into a mass with Syrups,
thickened Juices, Extracts, and such like Liquours.

But although all Pills for the most part do purge, and by Pills a Purging
Medicine is understood, yet other Medicines may be reduced into this form.

Pills are prepared in this manner, The manner of preparing them.
convenient Medicines are to be taken, and reduced into a Powder, and mixed in a
Mortar with some Liquour somewhat viscid, as with a convenient Syrup or Juleb,
seldom with Honey alone, by the benefit whereof both the mass may stick
together; and if they are to be kept long they may be preserved, so that the
faculty of Medicines cannot easily expire and vanish; but the Aloes which
commonly is given in Pills serves to incoporate.

1. If they are prepared for many Doses and daily use, the mass is to be kept
in the form of a Pyramid, (which they commonly call Magdalias and Magdaleons)
and in the beginning they should be softer, that they may ferment, and the
virtue of the Medicines may be the more exactly mingled; then after two or
three days it is wiped over with Oil of sweet Almonds, and covered with a Bladder
or a Skin, and kept in a Box.

2. Of the usual Pills, and those which are kept in a readiness for daily use,
the manner of the Preparation is thus, Take of the mass of usual Pills more or
less, as much as is need, to which instead of a Goad are added some Diagrydium
or Trochees of Alhandale, or else some other Purgers, that all together may
make one Dose, and let them be mingled with some distilled Water, or with white
Wine, or some other convenient Liquour, and brought into one mass, and let it
be reduced into 10, 15, 20, 25, 30. Pills more or less.

3. Pills when they are made sometimes use to be covered with Gold, or Powder
of Cynamon, Nutmeg, Fennel, Licoris, as is convenient.

4. You may mingle Extracts with the other usual Pills or Pouders.

5. Nay, Pills may be made of Extracts alone, if they are a little thickened,
or, which is more convenient, if some of the Purging Pouders be added.

6. You may also prepare Extracts out of the mass, particulars of usual Pills,
and make Pills of them.

7. There may be added also for to correct, a drop or two of distilled Oils, as
also of Spirit of Copper, Common Salt, Vitriol.

8. There is another manner also of making Pills, The Simples whether Altering
or Purging are macerated for two days in Wine or some other Liquour, or else
they are boiled, in it, or a certain juice is taken out of convenient things
and one of these things are taken, or two or more of these Liquours severally
prepared are intermingled, or being newdone they are poured again into some of
these, or they are boiled, and afterward strained: to the Wine or Liquour
strained, or expressed, purging, or altering Species, and Pouders, or
Compositions of the Shops which may be poudred, as Trochees and Tabulets,
somewhat less than the eighth part in quantity to the Liquour, or there abouts,
or cathartick or not cathartick Extracts; to which distilled Oils also, some
drops, or half a scruple, according as the bigness of the mass for Pills, is
more or less, may be powered. Afterward all of them by often stirring may be
dried over warm Embers, or in a Stove, till they ^re brought into a mass, if it
be convenient, the mass being dried, it may again be imbibed and wrought in the
same Expression or Liquour, and dried; and you may repeat that the third time:
but that they may continue the longer, some Aloes is to be added to them.

But lest that Pills should cause loathing in swallowing, Manner of using Pills.
the whole Dose ought not to exceed a Drachme, or four Scruples; and that the
same loathing may be prevented in taking them, we have said, they are to be
rolled in Aromatic Pouders, or Licoris Powder; there are some who can easily
swallow them alone; but others to take away the taste, and avoid the
unpleasantness, and facilitate the swallowing, use diverse means, Wines, Syrups,
Pulp of roasted Apples, and other things please others, they are conveniently
taken in a little Pulp of Bread in Beer. After the altering Pills, and those
whose force can penetrate from the Stomach to the remote parts are taken, some
liquid thing ought to be taken after them, to carry them to the Veins.

There is another kind of Pills which are called Hypoglottides, Hypoglottides.
because they are retained under the Tongue, till they melt by degrees,
principally for the Cough, and Diseases of the Breast, simple Medicines are
taken: to an Ounce, and half, more or less, and are beaten, and with a
convenient Liquour, as with a Muscellage of Tragacanth, Quince-seed, Fleawort,
Wine boiled to the third part with Honey or any pectoral Syrup they are taken
and made into Pills; sometimes they are prepared of a Decoction, namely, to
that which is strained, somewhat less than the eighth part of Tragacanth is
added, the weight of Sugar, and Penides equal to that of the Decoction.

Sometimes these Hypoglottides are prepared for preservation from pestilent
air, and to corroborate the Brain, and cherish the animal spirits, as also for
delight and pleasantness of smell, to correct the stink of the external air, or
of the mouth within, the filth offending the nostrils, let them be made of
sweet-sented things, with Muscellage of Tragacanth.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Suppositers.
EXternal Medicines are twofold, External Medicines.
some are injected and put into certain parts, others are applied only to the
Superficies of the body; of the former kind are Suppositers, and Clysters,
both those which are injected into the Paunch, as those which are injected into
the Womb; and Pessaries, Injections, which are made into the Yard and Bladder,
Gargarisms which are in Mouth and Chops, Aphophlegmatisms, Dentifrices,
Errhines, Sternutatories, Odoraments, and Fumes; Injections into the Ears,
Collyries, which we shall speak of in the first place.

In the strst place, Glandes or Suppositers
Glandes, with the Greeks, Ballanoi, commonly Suppositers, are solid Medicines,
which are put into the Fundament, in figure somewhat long and round, like to an
Akorn or Wax-candle, four or five fingers breadth in length.

But Suppositers are not always prepared for the same-use, Use.
for they are often exhibited, that they may loosen the Belly, and stimulate
the expulsive faculty; sometimes for other affects also, namely, when an Ulcer
is in the Gut rectum, that it may cleanse, consolidate and dry; when pain is
present, it may allay it, and draw it away; when the humors flow toward the
upper par, that it may draw them back, and cause revulsion; when there are
little Worms called Ascarides, to kill them.

Suppositers irritating the expulsive faculty are exhibited, first, when the
sick is so weak that he cannot take Clysters; moreover when the Seige clings in
the Paunch, there is need of a Suppositer to be used before a Clyster, that it
may make way for the Clyster. Thirdly, if Clysters injected do not work, or
operate slowly, it is needful to stimulate nature to expulsion. Fourthly, when
by reason of straightness of time we cannot prepare a Clyster.

There are three sorts of these Suppositers, The kinds of Suppositers causing
stool.
Gentle ones which are sufficient for infants, and are made of Lard, a Fig the
inside being turned outward, Bullocks fat, the stalks and roots of Beets,
Cabbage, Spinach, the Herb Mercury, indifferent strong, are prepared of Honey,
boiled till it be thick, a Mouses turd being sometimes added, the White of an
Egg, Salt, and a little Saffron and Honey, with white Soap; the stronger are
composed of Honey, Salt, and the Powder of purging Species, as with a
sufficient quantity of Hiera, with Agrick, Hiera, Logadii, Aloes; the strongest
of all are prepared with Species, convenient for Suppositers, the Powder of
white Hellebore, Euphorbium, Scammony, Turbith, Colloquintida, Indian Salt,
Amoniack, Saltpeter, a Bulls Gall, which we use only when the faculty is
stupefied, and we endeavor to draw back from remote parts.

They are prepared in this manner, Manner of preparing them.
Honey is boiled to spissitude, that is, so long till you can take it up with
your fingers; into which other things are sprinkled which are needful, namely,
half a Dram or a Dram of common Salt, Salt- Gemmae a Scruple, of the
gentler purging Species a Dram, of the stronger half a Scruple, of Juices
half a Scruple, (or a Dram,) of sharp Salts six Grains, or half a Scruple to
an Ounce of Honey. Hence they are made out of the mass in form of a Pyramid, as
big as ones little finger, and dipped in or anointed with fresh Butter or Oil;
sometimes a Thread is tied to it, that it may be drawn out at pleasure.

These Suppositers are properly applied to those who have Ulcers, Clefts,
Inflammations, and other Tumors in the Fundament. But when they are troubled
with pain of the Hemerhoids they are not convenient to be used, for they
exasperate pain.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Clysters.
CLysters which the Greeks call Clyster, Clyster.
Clysmos, Clysma, and Enclysma, is so called from purging or cleansing,
although it signifies every sort of Medicine in general, which pours in that
which is liquid into any part, yet in particular, as also Enema from injecting,
for the most part is taken only for a Medicine which is injected by the
Fundament into the Guts.

A Clyster is injected for several ends, Differences of Clysters.
whence there arises various differences of Clysters; for some loosen the
belly, and of these some do it by Emolliating, which are made of Emollients,
proposed before, p. 1. S. 1. c. 6.

Others purge, to which purging Medicines are added. Some cleanse, namely,
those which are compounded of Barley, the herb Mercury, Pellitory, Wormwood,
Agrimony, Century the less, Pease, Parsnibs, Lupines, Flour, Honey with Roses,
Hiera. Some are composed for the discussing and breaking of wind, and are made
of those Medicines that expel wind, above mentioned, page 1. sect. 1. cap. 15.

Some bind and are prepared of Astringents, proposed in the same, cap. 6. Some
glutinate, and are prepared of glutinating things, spoken of in the same part
and sect. cap 9. Sometimes Clysters are made of Anodyns, or Medicines that
mitigate pain, for pains of the Guts and Reins.

But Clysters are compounded in this manner, there are taken of Roots and
Rindes an ounce or two, of Leafs three, four or five handfuls, of Seeds three,
four or five Drachms: of Flowers some Pugils, of Fruits, Pears ten, that is,
twenty; to which if a purging Clyster ought to be made, Purgers are added,
Agrick, Colloquintida, Seeds of Carthamons, (all which least they should
stickto the Guts, and offend them, are tied in a Linnen-cloath) the Leafs of
Senna; but there is no need of such variety always, but oftentimes a few
simples suffice. All the simple Medicines are boiled in a sufficient quantity
of water; of the Decoction take three, four to fifteen Ounces, according to the
age, for infants three Ounces, hence those that are a little riper four, five
or six may suffice; for one that is come to ripeness of years, for the most
part they take a Pint, sometimes also fifteen Ounces; yet sometimes, namely,
when we would retain the Clyster long, and lest the too great quantity should
oppress the other parts, only eight or ten Ounces is taken in the Stone. In
the Decoction strained those things which agree to our present purpose, we
dissolve, as Oils from an Ounce to two or three. When we only are to
emolliate, we put in Oils only or Butter, but indeed in greater quantity:
those which have a purging faculty are then wholly to be omitted, lest by
reason of the hard ordure sticking in the Guts, nature should be stimulated in
vain, and humors being drawn greater evils do ensue. On the contrary, when you
are to purge, to repel, and a sharp Clyster is required, the Oils whereby the
force of sharp and purging things is resisted, are to be omitted, and purging
Electuaries are to be added for the most part double the weight, which at other
times they use to be taken in at the mouth, or Pills are to be dissolved, Salt
also is to be added from a Scruple to a Dram; also Abstergents, as Honey of
Roses, or Sugar, in weight an Ounce or an Ounce and half; all of them being
mixed, and moderately heated by a convenient and known instrument, they are to
be injected into the Paunch an hour or two before meat.

Those who are unwilling to have it done by others may give a Clyster, as they
call it, to themselves by instruments described in many places, the most
convenient whereof Guil. Fabricius propounds in his Chyrurgical Operations,
Cent. 1. Obs. 78.

CHAP. XXV. Of Injections into the Womb, and of Pessaries
TO Clysters which are injeanded into the Guts, Injections into the Womb.
we may well join those which are cast into the Womb, and are therefore called
Uterine Clysters; The Instrument, or Squirt, by which the liquor is cast into
the Womb, is called by the Greeks, Metrencytes, but the Medecines which are
injected they call Metrencyta.

A due quantity is taken of simples agreeable to every ones disease, Way of
preparing.
it is boiled, and three or four ounces of the decoction, or instead thereof
distilled water is taken, and two or three ounces of Oil are added, and
powders, to the quantity of three drachms; and of those mixed together, three
ounces are injected into the Womb.

For the same causes, P^ssaries.
for the most part, for which Clysters as they call them, are injected into the
Womb, Pesses, and Pessaries, barbarously called Nascalia, are put in.

1. The manner of preparing.
There are many ways of preparing Pessaries, the first is cotton, or wool
that is shore and well carded, and are mixed with a juice, or some liquor,
either alone, or with some convenient powders mixed, twisted, or wreathed, about
the bignisse and length of a finger, it is wet in it, and applied to the
generative parts of women, the quantity of Medecines that are pounded for the
most part is an ounce.

2. Moreover Medecines that are pounded are taken in convenient liquors, as
with oil, fat, wax, Galbanum, Storax, honey, and are made up and mingled into a
mass, and fashioned in the figure of a Pessary, to which a thread is tied,
which also may be covered with fine linen, or a thin piece of silk.

3. Sometimes green herbs, and such as are full of juice, are a little bruised,
and tied about with a thread, and bound in the form of a Pessary.

4. There is a time also when Powders only being taken in fine wool, or
cotton, being made round, are put into a thin bagg made of a fine ragg.

Nascalies, Nascasia.
as they are barbarously called, are compounded of the same Medecines, which
are taken with cotton, or soft wool, and applied to the external orifice of
the womb, especially in Virgins, to whom you may not give Pessaries.

CHAP. XVI. Of those things which are injected into the Yard, and Bladder.
INjections into the Bladder, Injection into the Bladder.
are liquid Medecines which are injected into it through the urinary passage;
in the use whereof, the whole art consists in injecting, for sometimes it is
sufficient to cast in this Clyster by a Squirt, sometimes a Catheter which
opens the way, as it were, and it is necessary to precede.

It happens also sometimes that there is need of injection into the Yard,
namely, when it is either hurt by the stone, Into the Yard.
or troubled with pain, or the passage within is ulcerated; it is prepared of
those things which are agreeable to the scope of the Physician.

But not only fluid Medecines are injected, but Unguents are cast in in this
manner: Take a wax Candle, to which some Turpentine may be added, of that
thickness and length which may answer to this passage and channel, this Candle
is bedaubed with an Ointment, and is thrust in, but you must be careful that
the candle may be so prepared, and stick so long, that it may not melt with the
heat of the yard; you may boil also some convenient Plaster, and put the wax
candle, or a little Instrument made of lead, into it.

CHAP. XXVII. Of washings of the mouth, and Gargarismes
COllutions of the mouth with the Greeks, Diaclysmata, Mouth-waters.
they are fluid Medecines, which are contained in the mouth, and without
swallowing, by the help of the tongue are agitated up and down, being
principally appointed for pains of the teeth, and diseases of the Gumms.

Next unto these are Gargarismes, to wit liquid Medicines, Gargarismes.
by which the Chaps are washed without swallowing, namely, whilst the humor
contained in the mouth, flows toward the top of the Windpipe by its gravity,
the head leaning backward, the breath breakking out is repelled, and is
agitated by a reciprocal motion.

Gargarismes are administered for diverse purposes, Use of gargarismes.
some to repel, others to resolve, and discuss, others to ripen, others to
absterge, or wipe often, others to consolidate: But of all medicines for what
purpose soever they are intended, those are to be chosen which are not
ungrateful to the smell or taste, nor have any venomous and malignant
quality, since it may easily come to pass, that any thing may be swallowed
contrary to the will.

Some are prepared with distilled waters, Manner of preparing.
others with decoctions, wherein Juices, or Syrups are dissolved, under a
threefold, fourfold, or six-fold quantity, so that to a pint of distilled
waters, or of a decoction, two, three, or four ounces are taken, to which
sometimes some of the Aromaclck Species are added, and being mixed all are
exhibited together lukewarm.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Medicines that draw away Phlegm.
APophlegmatismes, Apophlegmatismes.
are Medicines also, which are held in the mouth, and draw out Phlegm from the
head, and neighbouring-parts, from whence they have their name, for the most
part they are called Diamassemataes or Masticatories.

But they are not all made alike, Manner of preparing.
for first Apophlegmatisms are used in the form of Gargarisms, which how they
are made is newly shown.

Moreover, Medicines may be made by bearing, and with a convenient liquor,
reduced into the form of an Electuarie, wherewith the Palate should be
anointed. Masticatories.


The third are called Masticatories, which are retained and masticated longer
in the mouth, partly by their heat, they dissolve Phlegm, draw it out, and
entice it forth, partly by the strength wherewith they are endued, of
stimulating the expulsive faculty of the brain, they irritate it, to eject
what ever troubles it, which again may be done three ways.

For first simple Medicines, either whole, The way of making.
or a little cut only are detained and chewed in the mouth.

Secondly, The same medicines pounded, and with a sufficient quantity of
Honey, or Wax, which is taken, are made into Troches, like Lupine seeds, or
Hazel-nuts, being in weight a scruple.

Thirdly, The same medcines stamped, being put in a linen cloth, which may be
bruised and chewed with the Teeth.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Medicines to rub, and cleanse the Teeth.
DEntifrices, which the Greeks call Odontrimmata, Dentifrices
and Smegmata Odonton, are principally prepared to whiten, cleanse, and
strengthen the teeth, The way of making.
and fasten the Gumms when they are loose; But there is not one sort of them
only, for first they may be washed with convenient liquors, or rubbed with
cotton, or a linen ragg, wet in a convenient liquor.

2. Moreover the form of an Ointment may be used, if the powders are taken in
honey, simple Oxymell, with Squills, honey of Roses, or syrup of Roses.

3. The Teeth may be rubbed with powders.

4. Troches, or Penfills may be made in the form of suppositers, which being
dried and hardened, the Teeth may be rubbed.

5. After Dentifrices, it is convenient that the mouth he washed, principally
with Wine wherein Orice roots, or some other convenient thing is first
macerated.

CHAP. XXX. Of Medicines put into the Nose, and to provoke sneezing.
ERrhines, Errhines.
as the name shows, are medicines which are put into the nostrills, which is
done for several ends; either for calling out Excrements from the brain, and
to provoke sneezing, those that perform which in particular, are called
Ptarmica, Ptarmica.
or such as cause sneezing; or to open the obstructions of the passages, or to
heal an Ulcer, or stench blood; whence the matter of Errhines, is not always
the same but various according to the various intentions, which is shown
before in the faculties of medicines.

They are prepared also in several forms; Way to make them.
for some are moist, and Liquid, others hard and dry; again, the Liquid are
twofold, either they are powered into the nostrills, or the nostrills are
anointed with them only expressed juices are powered into the nostrills, and are
drawn in by and clarified them.

2. Or distilled waters are added to the clarified juices, Wine, Oil, Honey,
somewhat less then double, or somewhat less then four times the weight,
according as thicker, or more fluid Errhines are required, or convenient
powders may be added, about a dram in weight.

3. Or decoctions are prepared which are mixed with somewhat less then double,
or somewhat less then four times so much Honey, and are put into the
nostrills.

But those things wherewith the nostrills are anointed, are most conveniently
made of Oils and Powders, to which belongs Balsoms, which the Nostrills are
anointed with.

Besides these, to the moist there seems to belong, those things which are put
into the Nostrills in the form of a tent.

But dry Errhines are made first of convenient Roots, Dry Errhiaes.
or Staulkes, as of Beetes, Flowre-deluce, Sow-bread, which are fashioned in
the form of a Pyramid, and afterward macerated in the water of sweet
Marjerom, or some other a fit water, or Oil, a thread being first tied about
them, they ^re put in.

2. Moreover dry Errhines are made when simple medicines are reduced into a
thin powder, and a grain or two or two of them is blown into the Nostrils,
and so they use to call Errhines in particular Ptarmaca, or Sternutatories.

3. Thirdly, Errhines and Sneezings may be made of the same powders, if with a
linen or woollen cloth, or a Linen bagg, that is round, they are wrapped up in
it, and either with juice, or convenient distilled waters; for example of
Marjerom, the Sternutatorie powder be dipped in it or sprinkled with it, and put
into the Nostrills.

4. Fourthly, medicines for the nose being reduced into a powder, are taken in
a Muscellage, or Gumm, or Turpentine, or Oil and wax, and diligently mixed, are
made up into Pessaries, in the form of a Pyramid, as it were in that bigness
that they may be put into the Nose, to the end whereof a thread is tied, that it
may be drawn out at pleasure.

CHAP. XXXI. Of sweet Smells, Perfumes, and Odoriferous, Balsomes.
SWeet Smells also are taken in at the Nostrills, Things causing sweet Odours.
Simples Odoriserous.
but principally they are exhibited for altering of the brain, and recreation
of the Spirits and are exhibited for the resisting of filthy and Pestilentiall
smells.

The materials of these things are all such as breath a sweet Odor out of
themselves, as Musk, Amber, Civit, Benzoin, liquid Storax and Ladanum, wood of
Aloes, Rose-mary, Lavender, Marjerom, Spike, wild Basil, Stechados of Arabia,
Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, Frankinsense, Myrrb, grains of Juniper, Gallia
Moschata, Camphir, and those things which are given cold, as Roses, Violets,
Flowers, Kinds of Odor ferous things.
of Nimphea, santalls.

But they are exhibited several ways, and several kind of sweet smells, are
made of those simples, for first they use to be reduced into powders, and are
kept either in a Box, or wooden vessel, and as often as necessary, are put to
the Nostrills, or else are included in a little bagg, or nodule of silk.

2. Secondly, the same reduced into powder are taken with Ladanum, Wax, Liquid
Storax, to which some Turpentine may be added also, and made into one mass in
a hot Mortar, by pouring in of Rose-watar, of which little balls are made
commonly called Pomander:

3. Thirdly Unguents and Linements, use to be made of sweet things, Balsomes.
which they call Balsomes at this day, they are prepared of distilled Oils, to
which is added Amber, Musk, Civit, Indian Balsom, whereof the whole force of
them depends, which are mixed with a certain body which affords a convenient
consistence, instead whereof although some take other things, yet extract of
Plantine is conveniently taken, or Oil drawn out of Nutmegs, by which all the
smell for the most part, color, and taste is extracted by the Spirit of Wine,
or which is most convenient, an extract and Oil of Nutmegs, together to this
mixture a color agreeable to the Balsom, shall be made of a juice or tincture
of the medicines.

4. Fourthly, perfumed waters use to be prepared, wherewith the Garments use to
be sprinkled, or the nose, hands, and other perts of the body use to be wet,
the same waters being put in a convenient vessel upon the coals, are
dissolved into an Odoriferous Vapor.

5. Fifthly, wash-balls are also prepared, or sweet balls to wash the hands,
and feet, of which hereafter Chap. 42.

6. Fumes.
Moreover, sweet Vapors, or fumes, belong to Odoriferous smells the Greeks
Thymiamata, which although they are taken for the sweetness and pleasantness
of smell, or for strengthening the brain, yet they may be appointed for other
ends also, namely to stop distillations, for drying ulcers of the lungs, when
they are stuffed with thick matter, peculiar suffumigations, also are prepared
for the womb, and to provoke and stop courses, the falling down, and
suffocation of the mother, and the coming out of the Fundament.

1. How prepared.
But suffumigations are prepared, first of sweet medicines, that are cut, or
powered, being thrown upon live coals, or hot ashes.

2. Moreover, the same powders are made into Cakes or Trochees, with a
convenient Liquor, and with a Gum or Rosin.

3 Thirdly, the coals of Lime or Teile-tree or of Willow being mixed, Pyramids
and Candles as it were are made of the same matter, which is kindled, when
there is use for, them.

CHAP. XXXII. Of those things which are put into the Ears.
THose things which are put into the Ears to assuage their pains, for
inflammations, Ulcers, Singings, Things to be injected into the Ears.
Hummings, and other infirmities, are exhibited, either in a Liquid form, and
first dropped into the Ears.

1. Secondly, a hot Vapor of Decoctions, or convenient Liquors are injected
into the Ears, (which they commonly call Embotum) or simples that are
convenient are included in a bagg, and boiled, and put into the Ears.

3. Thirdly, they are exhibited in the form of a Linement.

4. Fourthly, simple medicines may be reduced into powder, and blown into the
Ears, or sent in, in the manner of a fume, or Vapor.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Liquid medicines for the eyes.
COllytion, and Collurion, as much as to say Collurion, Collyrium.
that is Colobon ten Ouran, or Colobee Oara, it is so called because it is like
mutisarae caudae, in which form although various medicines appointed for
various uses, were heretofore prepared: yet at this day by the name Collyries,
are understood only external medicines proper for the Eyes.

But medicines which are exhibited to the Eyes, and in general have borrowed
their name from those dry ones, Way of preparing.
are named Collyries, and are commonly divided into dry and moist, dry ones are
made when medicines pounded very small, are made fine in a Mortar, and with a
sufficient quantity of Whites of Eggs, or of some Muscellage, are made into the
form of a Pyramid, or Trochees, and are dried in the shade when there is need
of them, they are beaten again, in a marble, or Stone Mortar, some convenient
Liquor being powered in, and the Liquor, afterward, which is then prepared, is
dropped into the eyes.

2. Moist Collyries are twofold, for either they are dropped into the Eyes, in
the form of a Liquor, which is made of juices, distilled waters, Decoctions,
or many of these mixed, powders being added, and espcially of those medicines
which will dissolve in a moist body.

3. Or they are made in the form of an unguent.

4. Lastly, convenient medicines also, are boiled in water, and the warm
Vapor exhaling out of the pot, which is covered with a linen cloth, is
received into the eyes.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Oils and Balsomes.
BUt as for what belongs to Medicines which are exhibited to the superficies of
the body, Oils.
the first amongst them are Oils; whereof some are natural, as Petroleum and
common Oil, which is made of ripe Olives, and Omphacine, which is drawn of
unripe Olives; others are artificial, which are made three manner of ways.

1. How to prepare them.
For first; Unctuous juice is expressed, after which manner Oil of sweet
Almonds, Pistack-nuts, Nuts, seed of Flax, Gourds, Cucumbers, Henbane, Hemp,
and Oil of Poppy is prepared; by expression also, Oil of Yolks of Eggs is
made,

2. Secondly, Oils are prepared by Infusion many ways, for sometimes simple
medicines are boiled with Fountain or distilled water, and Wine, or other
convenient Liquor, in common Oil, to the consumption of the moisture, or
juice; sometimes the same simples by a gentle heat are macerated in the Sun,
yet it seems more convenient if dried Plants are steeped in Oil, in Balneo
Mariae, twenty four hours, afterward the Oil is expressed, and clarified by
residence.

Thirdly, Oils are prepared by distillation also, as is said before, amongst
which some at this day are called Balsomes; examples whereof are to be had in
the Institutions.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Linements and Ointments.
A Linement, or Litus, with the Greeks Crisma, A Linement.
and Syncrysma, and that which takes away wearisomnesse, is called Acopon, that
is, freed from labor, it is a liquid Medecin, externally applied, thicker in
consistence then oil, but more liquid then an unguent, or of a middle
consistence betwixt an oil, and an unguent.

It consists of oils, butter, wax, fat, tallow, marrow, gums, juices,
muscellages; for the most part they have no wax, or if any be used, they take
only a dram of wax to an ounce of oil, to these sometimes, flowers,
powders, and rosins are mixed.

They are prepared in this manner, The oils, fats, How prepared.
or other things here named, are taken: to these powders are added, Juices, and
such like, of that proportion for the most part, that to an ounce of oil, three
drachms of fat, or two drachms, and one dram of powders is taken, or that
proportion is observed, as may make the consistence only a little thicker then
oil; and all are mingled either without fire and boiling, or are dissolved at
the fire as Gums, and Fats, or also by some ebullition, namely, to the
consumption of the Juices, or Vinegar, if any such thing be mingled with it.

Unguents which the Greeks call Myra, and Alleimata, Unguents.
from whence Miropolae and Alyptae were the names that the Ancients first
called them by, which for pleasantness were made of odoriferous things, and
were distinguished from oils not in thickness, but in pleasantness of smell.
But those things which are at this day called Unguents, are Emmota, so called
by the Greeks, and are made of the same things whereof Linements are; But are
somewhat thicker then Linements, and those things which thicken, are taken in a
greater quntity in an Unguent, then in a Linement, but as for the liquid and
oily things a less quantity is observed in compounding them, this is the
proportion for the most part; that to an ounce of oils a dram of powder, two
drachms of wax may be taken, or a sufficient quantity, namely in those things
where Unguents are made of oils, powders, or metals, or plants, and wax.

But they are prepared either with fire, How prepared.
or without fire, without fire they are prepared in this manner;

1. The powders being beaten, and sifted, are taken, which are sprinkled in the
oil, and a sufficient quantity of wax being added, are reduced into the form
of an Unguent.

2. Or usual Unguents are taken, and for the most part four fold, or eight
fold, the quantity of powders, and species are mixed with some convenient oil.

3. Or fat, or marrow are taken alone, or with oil in equal weight, double,
or half so much again, a few powders being added with a sufficient quantity of
wax, an Unguent is made,

4. With fire also, they are made many ways, for either the grease, oils, or
gumms are melted, that the powders may the easier be mingled.

5. Or herbs, roots, seeds, are macerated, sometime in water, wine, juices,
oil, afterward they are boiled almost to the consumption of the liquor: to
the decoction when it is strained, the other things are added, and with some
grease and a sufficient quantity of wax, or a gumm, an Unguent is made.

6. Or they are prepared without oil, with grease, namely, herbs, flowers, or
fresh roots, are bruised with grease, and wrought in a Mortar, until the
herbs have imbibed the grease, and then they are melted by the fire, and
pressed out.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Cerots, and Emplaisters.
THe name of a Cerat, or Cerot, the Ancients used for a soft medicine, namely
for that which consisting of oil and wax is anointed.

But at this day it is taken for a medicine, like unto a plaster, yet is not so
hard as a plaster in consistence, and it is so called from Cera, that is wax,
because the greater part of it is wax: And it is compounded at this day of
powders, oils, Gums, Pitch, Turpentine and Wax, and sometimes Lard, Marrow,
and Muscellages are added.

But the proportion of the things that are mixed is various, neither can it
easily be defined and comprehended by Rules, and the quantity of Wax to be
mixed is left for the most part to the discretion of the Apothecary, who
ascends by degrees, according to progress from a lesser quantity to a greater;
yet for the most part the analogy of mixture uses to be desired, so that when
they consist of Oil, Wax, and Rosin, one part of Oil is taken, half so much of
Rosin, of Wax the third part: But when Pouders are added, the proportion of
Oils to Pouders is eight-fold, to Wax, two three, four or six-fold; and to
Rosin, that it may stick the faster, they use to add twelvefold; a Cerot
becomes the harder three ways, namely, by defect of Oil and Grease, by boiling,
and store of Pitch, Wax, or Pouders.

1. They are made in this manner, How made.
If the Cerot ought to be made of Pouders only, Oil and Wax; the Oil and Wax
should be dissolved together at the fire, and the Pouders put in by degrees,
and exactly mingled.

2. If Lard, Gums, or other things to be melted by the fire are taken, they
should be melted with the wax.

3. If Gums are to be dissolved in Vinegar or Wine; first they must be
dissolved in Oil, and mingled with Wax, that the Vinegar or Wine may be
consumed with boiling, afterward the Pouders may sprinkled in.

4. If you are to add Roots, Fruits, or Seeds, these are first to be boiled,
and the Decoction to be boiled again with Oil to the consumption of the
moisture.

Lastly, the things melted and pounded are to be added, and all to be mixed
together, and to be kept for use.

But when you may prescribe fresh things for present use, three Ounces and an a
half may suffice for a great Cerot, for an indifferent one two Ounces, for a
little one, one Ounce, and three or four Drachms of Pouders are sufficient for
an indifferent Plaster: and such Cerots use to be put with an Aromatic Powder
sprinkled on them into a piece of Leather, or to be covered with fine Linen;
the quantity and figure, if it may be, should answer and be conformable to the
parts to which they ought to be applied.

Plasters, Plasters.
from Emplattein, that is, from fashioning, and soft anointing is derived,
because they may be extended, and spread on a Linen cloth, or piece of
Leather; they are medicines somewhat harder and more sollid then Cerots, and
are compounded of the same things whereof Cerots are, only that metalls, and
mineralls, and for the most part, Litharge are added, which makes them of a
more sollid consistence.

For the most part this is the manner of compounding them; How compounded.
the wax for the most part is melted in Oil, if the Litharge be in readiness,
that also should be boiled in Oil. If Juices of herbs, or decoctions,
Musceilages, Vinegar, Wine or any other Liquor be to be mixed, then that also is
to be mixed with the rest, and being mixed, are to be boiled so long, until the
aqueous humidity be consumed; afterward the Rosins, fat, thickened and
concreate juices, and Gumms, are to be put in sometimes, dissolved first, and
strained, with Wine, Vinegar, and Oil; lastly Turpentine is to be mixed, and
all to be boiled to a due consistence, which when it is done, and taken from the
fire, the powders must be put in by little and little, and continually stird
about, that they may be brought into one mass, with the rest, of which being
cooled, but before it grows hard, are to be fashioned, in the similitude of a
Pyramid, or a long Roll, or Rollers, and be kept for use, of the which when
it is necessary, a part may be cut off, and if need be softened somewhat with
convenient Oil, spread on Linen, and applied to the skin.

The proportion of mixture, can scarce be defined exactly, and strictly, and if
any error be committed, it may easily be corrected by boiling or mingling of
more dry, or liquid things; but this proportion for the most part is observed,
that to an ounce of dry things, there is taken of Oil, Fat, or Honey, three
Ounces, of Wax a pound, of Rosin eight Ounces: But if boiled, and pounded Herbs
are added, a little handful, requires an Ounce, or an Ounce and half of Oil,
or Grease, so that the proportion of Wax to Rosin is six-sold, to Oil
fourfold, to Powders double: but if the quantity of Rosin be greater, there
needs the less Wax.

Sometimes before the Emplaistick mass be cooled a Linen Emplastick Web.
cloth that is worn out by age is dipped in, and when it is bedaubed with the
substance of the Plaster, it is taken out, extended, cooled, and kept for use;
which kind of Plasters, they called Emplastick Webbs of cloth, and
Sparadrapum, and applied them for cleansing of Ulcers, Glutinating,
Cicatrizing, and other uses.

And these are properly called Plasters, yet some things are referred to
Plasters also, which are prepared without Wax, Pitch, and those Glutinous
things, and without fire, and are compounded with Honey, Muscellages, and a
certain thick juice, or Barme, or only with a little Wax, melted with Oil; of
which kind is the Plaster of Bay Berries and de Grusta panis, and such like,
which are as it were in the middle, betwixt Plasters, and Cataplasmes.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Cataplasmes.
CAtaplasmes, which the Ancients called Pultases, A Cataplasme.
are Topicall medicines soft, and having the consistence of Pultases, and are
prepared to assuage pain, repel, mollify, discuss, to ripen, and other ends.

1. They are either prepared without fire and boiling, How made.
or with fire and boiling, from whence the one is called crude, the other
boiled.

Without fire, green Plants are pounded, and reduced into a Poultice, or dry,
reduced into Powder, are mingled with a sufficient quantity, namely double, or
trebble, of Oil, or a convenient Liquor.

2. They are made with fire, and boiling, if the plants being beaten, and
pounded, are boiled in a sufficient quantity of water, till they are soft;
afterward strained through a seive, which nevertheless, if they are well
boiled, and bruised is not always necessary, to these are added Muscellages,
Flower, and a sufficient quantity of Fat, and Oil, and are all boiled again
to the consistence of a Poultice, sometimes plants also are immediately boiled
in Oil.

The Cataplasmes being prepared, and put on a piece of linen are applied hot
to the part.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Medicines to take away Hair, Salves made of Mustard,
Medicines causing Wheales, or Pusties in the body, and Vesicatories, or
Medicines that cause Blisters.
A Dropax, or any thing to take away hair, a Synapisme, or a Salve made of
Mustard, a Phaenigne, a Medicine to cause Wheales, or Pustles, differ not from
the form of a Cataplasme, yet for some certain peculiar effects which they
produce, Authors have been pleased to separate them from other Cerots,
Plasters, and Cataplasmes.

Dropax in Greek, A Dropax.
with the Latins Picatio, is a Medicine composed in the form of a Plaster,
or Cataplasme, powerfully sticking to the skin, which heretofore was exhibited
to extenuate and relax the Member, to heat and draw more store of blood, as is
spoken before, part 2. Sect. 2. Cap. 5. or to dry moister bodies; It is
twofold, the one simple, Its differences.
which consists of Pitch and Oil melted together, the other compound, which
besides Pitch and Oil, has in it, Pepper, Castor, Pellitory, Bittony,
Galbanum, Brimstone, Nitre, or the ashes of Vine-twiggs, and other things which
are needful; out of all which a Plaster is made with Oil and Pitch, which is
put in a piece of Leather, or linen cloth, and applied to the member, being
hot, the hair shaved before hand, and the part well rubbed, and before it is
quite cold, is twitched off again, and put to the fire again, and applied to
the part again, and that is so often repeated, until the part grows red, and
is somewhat swelled.

Synapismes are Cataplasmes, A Synapisme.
or Plasters, principally consisting of Mustard Seed, from whence they have
their names, or other things are compounded, which are of the same nature with
mustard seed, and they are twofold, the one more mild and gentle, which the
Greeks call Phoinigmon, because it makes the skin look red, and is to draw out
the matter which lies so deep hid in the body, to its superficies. A Vesicatory.
The other is stronger which also raises blisters in the part to which it is
applied, which they properly call Vesi catories.

The Ancients made Synapismes of Mustard seed, How to prepare Synapismes.
or sheere-grasse, dry Figgs were macerated in warm water, the next day after
Mustard Seed pounded was mixed with that pulpe, and if a stronger Synapisme were
required, they would mingle two parts of Mustard with one of Figgs, but if
weaker, one part of Mustard Seed, and two parts of Figgs,: If indifferent
equal parts, being mixed they were applied to the part affected,, and left
there so long, till the skin run down with moisture, and looked red.

Other Medicines also, both making red, How to make Vesicatories.
and causing Blisters, are mentioned before, part the first, Sect. the first,
Cap. 10. and are mingled with honey, Oxymell with Squills, Vinegar with
Squills, Melle Anarcardino, Spirit of Wine, Turpentine, Soap, the crum of
bread, and G^mme, with sharp things and Plasters, and Cataplasmes are made of
them, whether to cause the part to look red, and burn only, or to raise
blisters. The principal thing to raise blisters is a medicine compounded of
Cantharides, and Leaven. When a blister is raised by a medicine, and is broken,
it is not forthwith to be dried, but to be permitted to run, that the humor
which we desire to evacuate, revell, or derive, may flow out, and therefore
some fat unguent, or a Figg, or the leaves of Coleworts, are to ^e put to it.

CHAP XXXIX. Of Epithems (which are somewhat moister then Plasters) Medicines
made of Vinegar and Roses, and of Medicines applied to the Temples, to stop
fluxes of Rehume from falling to the eyes.
ALlthough all medicines which are externally adplied to the body may be called
Epithems, Epithems
yet by custom those only are called so at this day which consist of
distilled waters, decoctions, or juices mingled with species and powders, and
are externally applied, principally to the region of the Liver, Spleen, Heart,
Stomach, forehead, and joints.

As for the matter whereof they are made, it is various according to their
several intentions: of distilled waters, Juices, Decoctions, Oils, either
alone, or mixed, Epithemes are applied for the mittigation of heat, resisting
of humors, that flow, strengthening the parts, and Liquors, or Powders that are
appropriated to any part whatsoever, are to be applied.

Epithemes are prepared two ways, How prepared.
first of liquid things only, distilled waters or juices are taken convenient
for the disease and proper for the part, to which sometimes, some Vinegar, or
Wine for penetration sake is added: afterward Species or Powders, beaten very
fine a dram and a half or two drachms, to a Pint, and sometimes more Powder
is taken: the matter of the Epitheme is prescribed according to the magnitude
of the part, from three Ounces to a pint, the mixture in the first place has a
linen or woollen cloth Cotton, or Sponge dipped in it, and stird about, when it is
to be used least the Powder should settle in the bottom, and for the most part
it is applied warm, and as often as it is taken off, it is dipped into it again, and
applied.

Sometimes certain Powders are put in, but they are first macerated in
fountain water.

To Epithemes belong Oxyrhodes, Epithemes for the forehead.
as they are called, which are Epithemes peculiar to the forehead, prepared of
Oil of Roses, and Vinegar, to cool, and repel; The Ancients, took of Oil
of Roses three parts, and of Vinegar one part, and stird them well together,
wherein they dipped a piece of leather, or skin and applied it to the forehead;
At this day also other Oils, as of Violets, Myrtles, Nimphaea, or water
Lillies, and sometimes distilled waters, and Powders are added Santalls, and
other things.

To these are referred anacollemata, Anacollemata.
which are wont to be applied for diseases of the Eyes, and Hemorhodes of the
nose, principally to the forehead, so called for this reason, whether they
consist of medicines that fill up, glutinate, and have an astringent quality,
because they stop the violence of humors that flow into them, or because by
their clamminesse, they adhere, and as it were stick like glue to the part to
which they are applied.

And they are prepared of Volatile or fine Flower, How prepared.
Bolearmoniack, Dragons-blood, Acacia, mastick, Manna, Frankincense, and such
like, mixed with the white of an Egg.

2. Yet they are often prepared without the white of an Egg, to mittigate the
pain of the head, or cause sleep which are applied, either with a Leather, or
a skin dipped therein, or enclosed in a little bagg, and they are more properly
called Epithemes, or Frontells.

CHAP. XL. Of Medicines applied Plaister-wayes to mittigate pain, and of
little Bags.
LIke unto Epithemes, are Fomentaes, so called, Fomentations.
because they do by their heat, as it were cherish the parts of the body to
which they are applied, and they are exhibited either to heat the parts, or to
cleanse, and discuss, or to mittigate pain, or soften that which is hard.
Differences of Fomentations. Moist.


1. And they are two-sold, moist, and dry; the moist are made either of hot
water, Oil, Milk, or wine, or decoctions of Plants, made with warer, wine,
Vinegar, Milk, whither a sponge, or linen cloth, answerable, to the
magnitude of the part affected, is dipped whilst it is hot, and applied to the
part, and when they begin to be lukewarm, or to cool, they are changed for
hot, or the same are heat again in the Liquor.

2. Sometimes, simples, included in Linen baggs, are boiled in water, wine, or
Milk, and are applied hot to the part affected, for which purpose, it is
convenient to prepare two Baggs, that when the one is cooled, the other may be
applied.

3. Sometimes, a Hoggs Bladder, or an Ox his Bladder, is half filled with the
Liquor of the decoction and applied hot to the part affected.

4. Fomentations, are made also, of living Creatures dissected, and as yet
warm, especially Pigeons, as also of the parts of living Creatures newly
slain, whilst they are hot, as the Lungs, Paunch, o^ Oils made of the same.

5. Sometimes the steam only of Waters, of Wine or Vinegar boiled, is stirred
up by the fire only, or by casting in of stones or Irons burning into the
Liquour, or some of the Liquour poured on them is applied to the part; the
vapor is taken by a Pipe or Tunnel with a wide orifice, or it is put about the
part with some covering, whereby the steam being detained and included, it may
act the stronger on the part affected.

But dry Fomentations are made with Bags, Dry.
the Bags are compounded of Herbs, Flowers, Barks, Roots, Seeds, Aromaticks,
Gums, which are agreeable to the present intention, being cut and pounded
proportionable to the figure and magnitude of the part affected, are put into a
Bag, and applied to the part, for a cordial Bag an Ounce, or an Ounce and half
may suffice, for the stomach a greater quantity is required.

The Bag is prepared either of Linen or Silk, and being pricked through with a
Needle is applied dry to the part, and sometimes it is wet in Wine or Vinegar,
and put on a hot stone or brick heated by the fire, it is applied to the part
affected and makes it warm.

CHAP. XLI. Of Embrocations, Lotions, and Bathes.
THe likest to Fomentations are Embrocations, or Waterings, Lotions, and
Bathes, all which signify rather a certain manner of using, than any
Composition and Form of Medicine, and they contain for the most part the same
matter with moist Fomentations.

Embrochee, Embrocations.
is a certain distillation or dropping down of a moist humor from above like
Rain: the dropping which is made on any part is performed, either by pouring
water out of a vessel, with a long snout, or by dropping out of a Laver.

It Is applied principally to three parts; First, upon the Coronall Suture, in
distempers of the brain, and the moisture runs no further, then the Sagittall
suture. Secondly, from the beginning of the spinall marrow, in diseases of the
Nerves and the moisture is terminated at the end of the spine. Thirdly, to heat
or dry the stomach, and the matter is suffered to run over all the belly: if
the guts also are weak, a Cerat with Santals is to be applied to the liver, if
there be fear of inflaming it, the matter to be so distilled is common water,
water of Bathes, decoctions, milk, oil, according as the part affected
requires it.

Some Lotions are exhibited to certain parts which are called particular
Lotions, Lotions.
others to the inferior parts of the body only, which are commonly calted
Incessus, and Semicuoium, i. e. a Vessel that you may sit upright in, others
are fit for the whole body, which are called Bathes.

Peculiar Lotions principally use to be administered to the head, hands, and
feet, and are prepared as Fomentations of herbs, or fair water, or boiled in
a lee, Wine, or Oil.

Incessus, which the Greeks call Encathisma, Incessus.
is a bath for the belly, and inferior parts wherein the diseased must sit up
to the Navell, and such bathing Vessels serve for several uses, sometimes to
mittigate pain, sometimes to soften and discuss wind, sometimes they are used
to provoke courses.

A Bath is a washing of the whole body, A Bath.
and is administered either for cleansing and taking away the faults of the
skin, or to relax the parts; or for some distemper of the whole.

Some bathes are natural, others are made by Art. The Differences.
Amongst the natural bathes the plainest is that of Fountainewater, which has
a power of heating and moistning, and therefore is convenient for such as are
Hectic. Nature also affords bathes, for the imitation of bathes artificial,
and of natural Bathes, the Physician may prepare many things to supply the
want of them.

CHAP. XLII. Of Soapes.
SOap also, Sapones.
or Wash-balls are used to certain parts of the body, which are prepared in
this manner;

There is taken of Venice Soap made smooth, How mad^
or of some other good and white Soap as much as is sufficient, to which is
added six or eight times so much Powder, and all of them are mingled in a
sufficient quantity of a water that is proper, and reduced into one mass, from
whence round Balls are made in the form of an Apple.

They are exhibited principally to cleanse the body, or some parts thereof, and
to give a pleasant sent to it.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Cauteries.
LAstly, Cauteries.
That we may speak something also of Potentiall Cauteries, their preparation is
manifold, and there is no man, but here will somewhat boast: But the most
profitable which will make an Escarre soonest without pain, and other
Symptoms, is that which is thus prepared;

Take the Lee, whereof black Soap is made and put it into a Drying Pan, till it
become almost as hard as a stone, and when it grows cold cut it into the form
of great Dice, and let it be kept in a glass close shut, least it should melt,
and it is commonly called the Corrasive stone; the use whereof is very frequent
at this day; to quicken Ulcers, by the which humors may be diverted from the
more noble parts, to the ignoble, and therefore they are called Issues, or
Fontanells.

HONOR, GLORY, and THANKSGIVING be to GOD alone.

FINIS.
Books Printed for LODO LLOYD, and sold at his Shop next the Castle-Tavern in
CORNHILL.
BVrtons Anatomy of Melancholy, Folio. A Historical description of the
Fast-Indies, by Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, Folio. Mr. John Goodwins, Redemption
redeemed, Fol. Divine authority of the Scriptures, 4o. Antapoligies in answer
to Edwards, 4o. Theomatica, or the danger of fighting against God, 4o.
Anticavilearisme, 4o. Hagiomastix, or a Scourge for the Saints, 4o. Vindication
of the Sentence past upon the late King, 4o. Reply to A.S. in vindication of
the Congregationall way. 4o. Answers. 4o. Fresh discovery of a high
Presbyterian spirit, 4o. Quaeries concerning the Government, 4o. Vindication of
the change of Government, entitled Peace protected, 4o. Apologist condemned,
4o. Three several Disputations concerning the extent and death of Christ, with
Mr. Powell and Mr. Simpson. 4o. Exposition of the ninth to the Romans. 4o.
Catabaptisme, in vindication of Infants Baptism, proving not only its
lawfulness, but divine Institution, 4o. Pagans Debt, and Dowry, 4o, Agreement
and distance of Brethren, being a brief survey of the Judgment of Mr. J.G. on
Justification, 4o. Defense of the true meaning of Romans 4.3.5.9. in answer to
Mr. Walker, 4o. Water-dipping, no firm footing for Church Communion, 4o. Return
of mercies, 12o. Saints interest, 12o. Behm's Mysterium magnum, or an
Exposition of Genesis, fol. The principles of the Divine Essence, 4o.
Threefold life, 4o. Four questions of the Souls original and nature, 4o. On
the two Testaments, Baptism and the Supper, 4o. Mercurius Teutonicus, 4o. Way
to Christ discovered, to which is added a Treatise of the Complexions, 12o.
Tree of Christian faith. 4o. A true relation of the Authors life and death,
fol. Considerations of Infants Baptism, by Mr. Horn, 4o. Antipoedobaptisme,
or a Treatise against Infants Baptism, by John Tombs, 4o. Exposition of the
eleven first Chapters of Job, by Mr. Joseph Carill, 4o. Some baptismall abuses
discovered, 4o. A doubt resolved, or satisfaction for the Seekers, wherein the
case touching an Administrator of Gospel Ordinances in these times, is handled
by Mr. Will. Allen, 4o. Doctrine of Justification asserted and vindicated in
answer to Mr. Will. Air, of Sarum, and Mr. Rich. Baxter of Kederminster, by Mr.
John Eedes Minister of the Gospel, 4o. Monarchy or no Monarchy in England by
Mr. Will. Lilly, 4o. Divine Optics, or a Treatise of the eye, by Mr. Rebert
Dingly, M. A and Minister of Brixton in the Isle of Wight, 8o. Astrea, or true
loves Mirror, by Leonard Willan, Gent, 8o. The exceeding riches of Grace,
advanced in Mrs. Sarah Wight, by H. Jessey, 8o. Gospel-liberty, by Mr. Cradock,
4o. The Prophecy of Daniell explained by Ephr. Huit, Pastor to the Church at
Windsor in New England, 4o. The Anatomy of Conscience, by Mr. Ephraim Huit, 4o.
Supplication of Saints, by Thomas Sorocould, 12o. Saints daily exercise by John
Preston, D D. 4o. The Christians daily walk in holy security and peace by H.
Scudder, 12o. The pouring out of the seven Vials, by Mr. John Cotton, of Boston
in New England. 4o. The power of the Keys, by Mr. Cotton, 4o. Silex
Scintillans, the second Edition enlarged, with a second part added thereunto,
by Henry Vaughan Satyrist 8o. A Tteatise of faith, by Fzekiel Culverwell, 12o.
The Doctrine of faith, by John Rogers, 12o. Graces and Prayers for Children,
8o. Fire of the Sanctuary, by Mr. Bruges, 12o. Martyrs Flowers, by Clement
Cotton, 12o. Balm from Gilead, by Mr. Robrough, 8o. Signs of a godly man, by
Mr. Byfeild, 12o. The right use of Promises, by Jer. Lewis, 12o. A definition
of faith, by Timothy Bat, 12o. Three questions of free justification, Christian
liberty, and the use of the Law, by Samuel Torshell of Banbury. 12o. The Saints
humiliation by Sam: Torshell, 4o. Tree of life, or the blood of the Grape, by
Tobias Whitaker, Dr. of Physic, 8o. Job Paraphrased, by George Abbot, 4o. The
Works of Dr. Stoughton, 4o. Questions and answers on the Common Catechism, by
John Ball Minister of Langton, 8o. Right receiving of Christ, by Daniel Dyke,
being a Treatise of the Lords Supper, 12o. A Treatise of the morality of the
Sabbath, by George Abbot, 4o. Reformation sure and steadfast, by Sam.
Farecloth, 4o. Marrow of Sacred Divinity, by Dr. Ames. Saints Nosegay, by Sam.
Clark. An Exposition of the Canticles, by Thomas Brightman, 4o. A Treatise
called the two Covenants from Sinai, and Sion, drawn up Catechistically, by
Sam. Slater, 8o. Godly man's choice, by Mr. Scudder, 12o. The Anchor of hope for
Gods tossed ones, by John Wells, 12o. The Spirit convincing of sin, by Peter
Sterry, 4o. Christ alone exalted in the perfection and encouragements of his
Saints (notwithstanding sins and trials) by Dr. Crispe. 8o. A small Catechism,
called Milk for Babes, by John Cotton of New England, 8o. Golden Sands, with a
few short hints about the riches of grace, by John Bachilcr, 12o. Spaniards
cruelty and treachery in peace and war, 4o. Quakers quaking principles, by
Ellis Bradshaw, 4o. Quakers Idol, by Josuah Millar, 4o. Magia Mdamica, or the
antiquity of Magic, and the descent thereof from Adam. Lumen de lumine, or new
magical light discovered and communicated to the world. Anthroposophia
Theomagica, or a discourse of the nature of man, and his estate after death.
(All three) by Engenius Philalethes, 8o. Expositions with observations on
several Scriptures, by Isaac Pennington; Junior, Esquire 4o. Postilion, or
Prophetical Prognostics of the wars of Christendom, written in high Dutch, by
Paulus Felgenhowre, translated in the year 1655 4o. Garden enclosed, Christ's
Church, Christ's Garden, by Paul Hobson, 8o. The Protestants practice, or the
Complete Christian, containing the sum of Christian Divinity, by a Reverend
Father of the Church of England, 12o. The whole grounds of Physic and
Chyrurgery, by that great and famous Physician Dan. Synertus, Dr. and Professor
of Physic, made English for the benefit of the unlearned, by I. O. late of
Trinity College in Cambridge. 8o. Several Sermons and Discourses of Mr. Will.
Dell, Mr. of Gonvill and Cajus College in Cambr, 4o. The Orthodox Evangelist,
by Mr. John Norton of Boston in New England, 4o. The Chemists Key to shut or to
open, or the true Doctrine of Corruption and Generation, by that juditious and
industrious Artist Henry Nollins, published by 'Eugenius Philalethes. Short
Arithmetic, or the old and tedious way of numbering reduced to a new and brief
method, by Edward Howes, Rector of Gouldenham in Essex, 12o.
DOCTOR D. SENNERTVS OF AGUES AND FEVERS. Their Differences, Signs, and Cures.

Divided into four Books:

Made English by N. D. B. M. late of Trinity College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Lodowick Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhil, 1658.

To the Reader, HEALTH and SAFETY.
WOnder not Reader, that you see these Rarities in the English Tongue, written
by the learned Professor of Physic, D. Sennertus; neither be angry that the
Mysteries of this Noble Art are laid open for the unlearned to peruse, for such
I design them. The ancient Greeks as Hippocrates, Galen, etc. and the Arabians,
as Avicen, Averoes, Mesue, Serapio, etc. wrote all in their own genuine
language, as Celsus, Serenus, and other Latins also in their vernacular and
mother Tongue.

The Author teaches the knowledge of those diseases that reign amongst us,
and the cure of all sorts of Fevers, continued and intermittent (which are
called Agues) he shows the way to cure the Small Pox, nay the Pestilence or
Plague it self, when it is never so contagious.

Kind Reader, I wish thee no greater happiness in time of sickness, then this
Book to advise thee, where an able Physician is wanting; I hope it will find
acceptance by thee, and be both welcome and profitable to thee. For my part, as
I expect no thanks, nor desire no commendation, so I fear no ignominy or
calumniation. May it prove as beneficial to all that read it in this Tongue, as
he desires it may that writes it; for seriously, he assures the world, that all
true Christians Lives are as dear to him as his own; and their health desired
most heartily by him, that esteems and valueth nothing so much as the
public good of his Brethren.

Not long since, this Authors five Books of Institutions of Physic and
Chyrurgerie, were published in the English Tongue; which incomparable Piece I
recommend to thy serious perusal, as the best foundation for Practice) that any
man hitherto has laid; Without any further troubling of thee with these
Epistolary lines, I refer thee to the Book it self; and so Farewell.

The Table.
BOOK I. Of Fevers in general, and of an Ephemera, and of a Synocha with
putrefaction.
OF the Nature of a F^ver, Chap. 1. p. 1. Of the causes of Fevers in general,
chapter 2. p. 3. Of the Symptoms of a Fever in general, chapter 3. p. 4. Of the
differences of Fevers in general, chapter 4. p. 5. Of the Cure of Fevers in general
chapter 5. p. 6. Of the Fever Ephemera, chapter 6 p. 6. Of an Ephera of more days, and
of a Synocha without putrefaction, chapter 7. p. 10.
BOOK II. Of Putred Fevers.
OF putred Fevers in general, chapter p. 12. Of the differences of putred Fevers,
chapter 2. p. 15 Of the sign^ of putred Fevers in general, chapter 3. p. 16 Of the Cure
of putred Fevers in general, chapter 4 p. 17. Of breathing of a Vein, chapter 5. p 18
Of Purging, chapter 6. p. 19 Of co-coction and separation of Humors, chapter 7. p 22 Of
Sudo^ificks and Diuretics, chapter 8. p. 23 Of Diet in putred Fevers, ch 9. p. 24
Of the differences of putred Fevers, chapter 10. p. 27 Of a continued putred
primary Fever, and first of a Synocha in particular, chapter 11. p. 28 Of a Causus
or Burning Fever, chapter 12. p. 31 Of continued periodick Fevers in general, and
of a continued Tertian, chapter 13. p. 33 Of a continued Quotidian, chapter 14. p. 36
Of the Fever Epiala, p. 38 Of the ^yncopal Fever p. 39 Of a continued Quartan,
chapter 15. p 40 Of Symptomatical Fevers, chapter 16. p. 41 Of Intermitting Fevers in
general, chapter 17. p. 46 Of Intermitting Fevers in particular, and first of an
Intermitting Tertian, chapter 18. p. 55 Of a Quotidian Intermittent, ch 19 p. 61 Of
an intermitting Quartan, chapter 20. p. 62. Of compound Fevers, and Semi-tertians,
chapter 21. p. 67
BOOK III. Of a Hectic Fever.
OF the nature of a Hectic Fever, chapter 1. p. 71 Of the signs of a Hectic
Fever, chapter 2. p. 72 Of the Cure of a Hectic Fever chapter 3. p. 73
BOOK IV. Of the Plague, and of Pestilential and malignant Fevers.
OF the Nature of the Pestilence, chapter 1. p. 75 Of the causes of the Pestilence;
chapter 2. p. 77 Of Contagion chapter 3. p. 79 Of the signs of the Plague, chapter 4. p. 81
Of preservation from the Pestilence. chapter 5. p. 82 Of the Cure of the
Pestilence, ch 6. p. 85 Of the nature of a pestilent and malignant Fever, and
the difference of them from the Plague, chapter 7. p 89 To what kind of Fevers
pestilent and malignant ones p^rtain, chapter 8. p 90. Causes of a pestilent and
malignant Fever, chapter 9. p 91 Signs of malignant and pestilent Fevers, chapter 10 p.
92 Of the cure of malignant and pestilential Fevers in general, chapter 11. p 93 Of
a malignant Fever, with the Measles and Small Pox, chapter 12. p. 97. Of the
Spotted Fever, chapter 13. p. 105 Of the English Sweat, chapter 14. p. 108 Of the
Vngarick Disease chapter 15. p. 110 Of a malignant Fever with the Cramp, chapter 16. p.
114 Of a malignant Fever with a Catarrh, and a Cough and the Squincy, chapter 17.
p. 116 Of the Cure of Symptomatical Fevers, chapter 18. p 118
Book I. Of Fevers in General, and of an Ephemera, and of a Synocha with
Putrefaction.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of a Fever.
THat which is called by the Latins a Fever, The name. of a Fever
by the Greeks (from fire) is called the fiery distemper; Hippocrates plainly
calls it fire, if it be very vehement, as being by the consent of all men a hot
distemper; For although some Germans call it Daskalte, yet that appellation
belongs not to every Fever, neither does it express the nature of a Fever, but
only signifies Cold, An intermitting Fever may be so called.

A Fever is a hot distemper of the whole body, atising from heat, kindled
contrary to nature in the heart, Its definition and nature.
and by the mediation of the Blood and Spirits, conveyed through the veins and
arteries to all the parts, and hindering natural actions, unless it be prevented.

For a Fever is generated, when (as Galen 1. Aphor. 14. has it) The native
heat is become fiery; Generation of it.
For seeing that all the parts of the body have a certain temperature, and all
of them are actually hot, every one according to its own degree, and thereby
are rendered fit to perform natural actions; If in the heart, from whence the
vital heat is diffused over all the parts of the body, each part receiving its
due temper from thence, a certain preter-natural heat be kindled and spread
over the whole body, so that to the natural temperature of the parts some
degrees of preter-natural heat are added, and that actual heat shall be
increased; a certain excess of heat and a hot distemper is kindled in the whole
body, which is called a Fever. Which distemper indeed formaliter, as some say,
is contrary to nature, and is called a Fever; but materialiter it is not
altogether contrary to nature, for unless there had been before some degrees of
natural heat extant, the supervenient heat could not constitute this degree of
heat.

And indeed a hot distemper only constitutes a Fever; Dryness is no part of the
Essence of a Fever.
for although all fevourish heat tend to dryness, yet that dryness is not
sickness in all Fevers, neither is the body by fevourish heat rendered unfit to
perform its natural actions, it is so by dryness in every Fever that the
natural actions are hindered; but although the fevourish heat always tend to
dryness, yet oftentimes the disposition of the body wherein that heat acts,
and moisture therewithal, hinders the production of a disease by dryness.

The adequate Subject of a Fever is the whole body, The Subject.
or certainly most of its parts, but the principal is the heart, as being that
wherein that heat is first kindled, and from thence communicated to all the
other parts of the body, unless it be hindered; nor can a Fever be generated,
unless the heart first become hot. Indeed the whole body is the Subject of a
Fever in regard of the similiar parts, and as it is endued with actual heat,
which is as it were kindled by the innate and influent heat; For this heat when
it is changed and converted into a fiery heat from a temperate and moderate, a
Fever is stirred up.

The immediate cause of a Fever is heat kindled in the heart contrary to
nature, The proximate cause.
and diffused over all the body; For as the heart whilst it is well and
according to nature, is the fountain of natural heat, and disperseth the same
over all the body, so if it grow hot contrary to nature, it distributes that
unnatural heat over all the parts. For although a Fever may be kindled by the
inflammation of other parts likewise, yet that happens not unless that heat be
first sent to the heart, and afterward from thence to all the parts of the
body, whence it comes to pass that in every Fever the Pulse is changed.
Nevertheless every kind of heat in the heart is not sufficient to cause a
Fever, but such a kind of heat it ought to be, as can cause such a hot disease
as can hinder the performance of natural actions.

Whence it is manifest that a Fever is one thing, A Fever and feverish heat
differ.
and a feavourish heat another thing. A Fever properly is that hot distemper
which happens in the living parts of a body, and renders them unable to act;
but the fevourish heat is also in the humors and spirits, and stirrs up that
hot distemper of the body, which constitutes the essence of a Fever.

CHAP: II. Of the causes of Fevers in general.
ALthough there is but one only cause of a hot distemper of the whole body,
which constitutes the essence of a Fever, namely, preter-natural heat kindled
in the heart, and thence distributed over all the body, yet the causes from
whence that heat in the heart arises, are several, as Galen of the causes of
diseases, cap. 2. and in the first book of differences of diseases, cap. 3.
recites five, Motion, Putrefaction, Contact of some hot thing, Cloasure of the
pores of the skin, or a Retention of a hot stream; and lastly Mixture with some
hot thing: And of these causes, some by themselves, and some by accident stir
up heat.

First from Motion, Motion.
sithence the Spirits and humors of our bodies are hot, from the confluence of
them into any part, according to the various motion of the body and mind, heat
is increased, which if it be greater, and be either kindled in the heart, or
communicated to the heart, a Fever ensues.

Secondly, Putrefaction excites heat. Putrefaction.
For since all things that do putrify become hotter, and out of putred bodies
are exalted many hot vapors, thence heat is conveyed to the heart by the veins
and arteries, and from thence a Fever raised.

Thirdly, contact of a hot thing exciteth a Fever: Contact of a hot thing.
As if the body wax hot by the Sun, Fire, Bath, or Medicine, and that heat be
sent to the heart a Fever follows.

Fourthly, if the pores of the skin are closed, and a hot stream and hallituous
excrements, Retention of a hot steam.
which in concoction are generated in the body, and use to be sent out through
the pores of the skin, be penned in, heat is thereby kindled, and a Fever bred.

Lastly, when hot things are mingled with humors and spirits, as meat, drink,
hot Medicines, all those communicate that heat which they contained in
themselves to the Spirits and humors, which if they penetrate the heart, and
from thence be distributed to the other parts of the body, a Fever is thereby
kindled.

And indeed the fourth of these causes, or the retention of the hot effluvium,
is sufficient alone without the rest to cause a Fever: But the other causes
without this can hardly do it. For although from Motion, Putrefaction, Contact,
and Mixture with a hot thing, hot vapors are stirred up in the body; yet if
the body freely ventilate, and that so much be daily evaporated and emitted of
those vapors as are generated, a Fever is not easily occasioned, but when
those vapors are detained, a Fever is soon kindled.

But although these causes if they be powerful, Disposition of a body to a
Fever.
may raise a Fever in any body whatsoever, yet in bodies inclinable an ordinary
power in the causes may suffice to beget a Fever. Now they are most inclinable
to Fevers which abound with much heat, salt and sharp humors: For which reason
Youths are more apt to Fevers, of which you may read, Galen 8 Of the Method of
healing, cap. 8. where the whole order of Inclinations to Fevers are set down.
1. Hot and dry. 2 hot and moist. 3. hot only. 4. dry only. 5. temperate. 6.
cold and dry. 7. cold only. 8. moist only. 9. cold and moist. Yet to another
kind of Fevers other bodies are more inclinable.

CHAP. III. Of the Symptoms of a Fever in general.
WHereas in a Fever the temper of a body is changed, Symptoms of Fevers.
and rendered hotter, hence certain Symptoms of Fevers must necessarily ensue:
And first of all it is hence manifest, that those actions are especially
hindered, which should be performed by the similar parts as they are such, and
by the benefit of the temper of each such part, no organick part concurring.
Such action since it is Nutrition, and those that are subservient thereunto,
they are especially hurt in Fevers. Yet because the Instruments by which other
actions are performed, consists of similar parts, that imperfection is derived
to the hinderance of them, as of vital and animal actions. Indeed the vital
actions are principally hurt in a Fever, because the fevourish heat is first
kindled in the heart. Whence in all Fevers the Pulse becomes more frequent and
swifter; for since the motion of Pulses in all Fevers may be increased, first,
a thick Pulse, as being most facile of all; but if that frequency satisfies not
the necessity, celerity happens, which if that be not sufficient, then
magnitude follows: So that the strength be not debilitated: The animal actions
also are often hurt. As for other Symptoms, preter-natural heat is observed to
offend internally or externally. Also the excrements and qualities of a body
are variously changed by reason of the hindrances of concoctions.

CHAP. IV. Of the differences of Fevers in general.
THe differences of Fevers are taken from their essence, Differences.
or from their accidents. Hippocrat 6. Epid. comment. text. 29. propounds the
differences taken from the heat it self of the Fever, that some Fevers are
biring, namely, such as strike the hand of them that touch them, and by reason
of that sharp vapor, which is stirred up by putted matter, it does as it were
prick the hand; but a mild one is such as has troublesome heat, but not so
violent. Moreover the heat o^ some Fevers at the first touch is not sharp, and
nipping, but if the hand be continued longer, afterward it betrays itself. On
the contrary others are quick at first to the touch, but if the hand continue
longer, it is overcome by the hand, and a little abated.

But those are the most proper differences which are taken from inherence in
the Subject, and the cause of inhering, which Fevers are divided into
Ephemeraes, putred and hectic, the truest foundation of which division is,
that one Fever is in habitude, the other in habit, for although the fevourish
heat in every Fever possess the similar parts of the body; yet some are so
inherent in the body, that they require no cause to cherish them, and although
they are not fed by the kindling of humors and Spirits, nevertheless they will
continue, which sort are called Hecticks. Another hot distemper is so inherent
in the similar parts of the body, that unless it be cherished by the kindling
of humors and Spirits it can no more subsist, which Fever is called a Fever in
habitude, which in respect of the cause is twofold, an Ephemera, to which also
a Synocha without putrefaction is referred; and a putrid.

There is another thing worth the noting, that one Fever is Primary, another
Symptomatical, Primary is that which follows no former disease, but depends on
its proper cause: Secondary or Symptomatical is that which arises from the
inflammation of any member. See Galen. 4. Aphor. 7.

But of Symptomatical this is to be noted, that those which by the ancients
were accounted Symptomatical, were indeed primary many of them, and
inflammations of the parts, of the Membrane that covers the ribbs, of the lungs
or chopps, rather happened to those parts, then the Fever to take it is rise
from them: Fevers accompanied.
Which Fevers may be called Comitatae, or such as accompany the Fever.

CHAP. V. Of the cure of Fevers in general.
NOw to the cure. Cure.
A Fever as it is a Fever being a hot distemper, indicates cooling things are
to be used. Galen. 8. Meth. Med. Cap. 1.

But because there is no small difference amongst Fevers, and that a Fever is
often joined with it is cause, regard is to be had of the cause of the same. Nay
indeed because the cause often offends more then the Fever it self, the Fever
is so to be cooled, as that the cause may not be cherished, and those things be
detained in the body which ought to be evacuated.

And oftentimes error is committed in this; whilst regard is had only of the
heat, cold things are administered, by which the cause of the Fever being
detained, the Fever is prolonged: Whereas on the other side, heating things, as
likewise either opening or sudocifick things, without cooling medicines, often
with happy success cure the Fever; For the cause being taken away, the Fever it
self cease of it is own accord; Whereof more particularly hereafter.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fever Ephemera.
THere are two sorts of Fevers whose heat are inherent in our bodies in
habitude. Fevers in habitude.
For that the hot distemper of the parts is cherished either by the heat of the
Spirits or humors; and the humors are inflamed either with or without
putrefaction.

Those Fevers which are sustained by the heat of the Spirits and humors
without putrefaction, The name Ephemeros.
are called Ephemerae and Humorales without putrefaction: Those which are
kindled by putrefying humors are called putred Fevers.

That Fever which is cherished by the kindling of Spirits, is called by the
Greeks, Puretos Ephemeros, by the Lattines, Diaria and Ephemera, by a name not
taken from the nature of the disease, but from it is duration. In respect of the
Essence thereof, it may be defined thus: Definition
It is a Fever arising from and depending on the heating and inflaming of the
vital Spirits.

The proximate cause of this Fever is the heat of the vital Spirits kindled
contrary to nature, The next cause.
which being spread over the whole body through the arteries, heats the whole
against nature.

That heat is stirred up from all those causes before mentioned in the second
Chapter, only except from putrefaction; Remote cause.
which sometimes immediately, sometimes remotely, by means of the natural and
animal Spirits heat the vital; to wit, perturbations of the mind, sadness,
fear, sollitude, anger, over much watching, too much intentiveness of the mind;
too much exercise of body, grief, hunger, thirst, hot meats and drinks,
drunkenness, crudities in bodies choleric, heat of air, fire, hot Baths,
retention of the hot Effluvium, inflammations of Kernels and Buboes, from the
which heat alone without putred vapors is conveyed to the heart according to
the vulgar opinion. Yet it seems not impossible but that those putred vapors
by the veins and arteries next to the part affected, may be communicated to the
heart. And so these Fevers should rather be Symptomatical then absolute, putred
then Ephemeral.

Those that are hot and dry easily fall into this Fever, Disposition of body.
in whom many hot dry vapors are coliected, which are easily inflamed by
causes heating them more.

Amongst the Signs by which this Fever is known and discerned from others, in
the first place, Galen. 1 de differ. Diagnostick signs.
Febrium c. 7. says, it begins from some procatartick or evident cause;
which indeed is an inseparable sign, but not a proper sign; for although a
Fever that does not arise from a manifest cause is not an Ephemera, yet every
Fever which arises from a manifest cause is not therefore an Ephemera. 2.
Moreover the Urine in substance, color, and contents, is most like unto the
Urine of healthy men, or at least recedes not much from them, which in an
Ephemera, which proceeds from crudity, it uses to do, in which the Urine uses
to appear more crude and whiter. 3. The Pulse is nearer to a natural one, then
in any other Fever; only that it uses to be extended in magnitude, celerity,
and frequency. Yet in regard of the cause which occasioned the Fever, some
change may be made in the Pulse. 4. The heat of this Fever is gentle and weak
in respect of other Fevers. 5. Nay in the very state and height thereof it is
somewhat more gentle and moderate. 6. This Fever invades without shakings, or
tremblings; it is increase and augmentation in heat and pulse is free and equal.
7. The declination is performed by moisture, or moist evaporation, by sweat
like theirs who are sound in health, which by a little exercise more then
ordinary comes forth, and a perfect apurexsie follows that moisture, so that
after the declination no footing is left for the Fever, either discernable by
Pulse or any other circumstances: And in case any footing be left, it is a sign
that it will turn into another sort of Fever.

The causes are most perfectly to be known by the relation of the sick, which
may instruct the Physician whether from passion of the mind, exercise of the
body, or any other evident cause this disease has been occasioned. These
causes also affords some signs of themselves, which the Physician cannot be
ignorant of.

These Fevers are the shortest of all others, Prognostics.
and continue not above twenty four hours: There is no danger in them, unless
some error be committed, and for the most part they are conquered by nature,
wherefore Physicians are seldom called to their cures. Yet according to the
diversity of their causes some are cured more easily, others with more
difficulty. For those causes which are hardly taken away, and the humors are
ap^ to corrupt, a Fever introduced from such, easily degenerates into a putred;
which happens when it is extended above four and twenty hours, or no sweat
appears, and pain in the head be present and persevere: And it degenerates
either into a Synocha without putrefaction, if the body be youthful and
plethorick; or into a putred, if the body be cacochymick, or into a Hectic, if
the body be hot, dry, and lean. And the proper signs of those Fevers show into
what sort of them the transmutation will be made.

Moreover sithence this Fever is a hot distemper of the whole depending on the
heat of the Spirits inflamed: Indication^.
And seeing the heat of the Spirits, and the distemper thence introduced
indicate cooling, yet if the cause exciting the same be still present, that
also ought to be taken away.

These Fevers are cured by good diet, The Cure.
so that there is seldom any need of strong medicines; the food therefore
ought to be cooling and moistning, the meat of good juice, and easy of
concoction, principally cream of Ba^ey, the rest may be mixed with lettice,
sorrel, juice of Citron or Lemmon, Vinegar. The drink should be barley-water,
small beer or small whitewine: Yet if pain in the head be present, or that the
Fever be occasioned by anger, or from a bubo, then wine is to be refrained. The
Ancients most frequently used Baths of warm water, but at present, neither the
same industry is used in preparation of them, neither are men in our age so
accustomed and disposed to bathe.

In the first place diligent care is to be had of that Fever Ephemeral, which
ariset hfrom the clovure of the skin, Cure of an Ephemer a from closure of the
skin.
or it is thickness, or crudity of the stomach, since they easily turn into
putred Fevers. And an Ephemera which is caused by stoppage of the pores of the
skin, since it comes to pass rather from plenty of blood, then ill habit of
body, in that a vein is forthwith to be opened, that the blood may be
diminished and cooled; but the thickness of the skin if occasioned by cold or
astringent things is cured by those things that rarifie and open the same, by a
bath of fair water lukewarm, soft rubbings, temperate and lukewarm oils,
wherewith the body should be anointed. But if the thickness of the skin be
occasioned by drying things, use moistening diet, and the body should be
anointed with temperate and moistening oils.

Lastly, if the Ephemera proceed from crudity, From crudity of the stomach.
since that is twofold, the one called Acid, which proceeds from diminution of
heat, the other Nitrous, which is caused by preter-natural heat: If from Acid
crudity, which seldom happens, the Ephemera proceed, and that crudity be less,
so that meat may be reduced into a better state, rest and sleep are to be
occasioned, and before sleep meat of easy concoction in a small quantity is to
be taken, and the stomach to be comforted with hot oils; But if the crudity be
great, then the meat is to be ejected by vomit, or if the sick be not apt to
vomit, with a lenitive, he should provoke a stool; before it be distributed
into the veins he must then abstain from meat, and the stomach both with
internal and external medicines is to be comforted. But if the crudity be
unsavory or nitrous, it is to be conected with cold things, wherewith if the
concoction be not helped, the corrupt meat is either to be emitted by vomit, or
to be purged by gentle medicines opening the first passages only, such as are
good against cholar, and as corroborate the stomach.

CHAP. VII. Of an Ephemera of more days, and of a Synocha without putrefaction.
THere remains another kind of Fever, An Ephemera of many days.
called Ephemera, to which that appellation does not belong, because it is
extended more days: Yet it can be referred to no other sort of Fever then this
more conveniently; therefore although Ephemera should signify the essence of
the Fever, Ephemera is so called though with the addition of more days.

Such Fevers are those which no ways differ from Ephemeral Fevers newly
described, unless in durability, the cause of which is obstruction of cutanious
vessels, which when they do continue stopped, Synocha without putrefaction.
an inflammation of the Spirits so long endures until that cause cease.
Moreover to these belong a Synocha without putrefaction, commonly called a
Fever inflative, which is generated from the fervency of Spirits, and thinner
blood without putrefaction.

The cause of this Fever is the prohibition of the hot Effluvium, Cause.
arising from obstructions or striction of the pores of the skin in a
plethorick body.

This continues several days, namely, to the third or fourth day, neither can
the plenty of vapors kindled, and exhaleing, which proceed from the blood, be
discussed in one day, nor can the obstruction or astriction of the pores of the
skin be opened in one day.

The Signs of a Synocha without putrefaction are the same with those of other
Ephemeraes, Diagnostick signs.
only more evident: For the heat is somewhat greater then in the others; the
skin is not dry but moist as it were, the Urine somewhat thicker and redder,
the Pulse vehement, swift, frequent, full, great and equal; the face and whole
body red and fresh, and as it were blown up; the veins swell and strut with
blood, the head is heavy and respiration more difficult.

This Fever as the other Ephemerals is void of danger, Prognostics.
and is dissolved by sweat or Hemeroids of the nose, within the fourth day, or
if it be protracted longer, within the seventh day, so it be rightly handled.
For unless it be rightly ordered 'twill degenerate into a Synocha with
putrefaction, or into a Frenzy, Squincy, Plurisie, or some other perilous
inflammation.

But when this Fever arises by the inflaming of the thinner blood and Spirits
in a plethorick body, occasioned by the prohibition of transpiration, Cure.
the blood offending in quantity is to be abated, the heat to be cooled, and
the closed pores to be opened.

Therefore presently a Clyster being first given, or a lenitive medicine, a
vein is to be opened, that the blood may be abated, fanned, and cooled, and
better governed by nature: And in that more plentifully then in any other Fever
you may bleed, yet so, as that the strength may bear it.

As for things altering, Galen to cool the blood drinks cold water, and
commands the sick to drink as much of it as they please, which may be permitted
in those which are accustomed to small drinks, and in whom no danger is to be
feared by drinking the same, whether by reason of thick juices which the
drinking of cold water may hinder the dividing of, or by reason of some
weakenness in the bowels, by which they may be offended at the drinking of
water: which unless seeing in our bodies we seldom need, we may rather use
other coolers, such as are Oxymel with water, water of Chicory, Endive, decoct
of barley, juice of Lemmon or Citron, Oxysauharum, Spirit of Vitriol, and Salt,
and the like cooling and opening things. And that the appertion may the more
happily be performed, you must abstain from syrrups and conserves with much
sugar in them, unless they are much watered. If obstruction of the pores of the
skin be present, it is to be opened as I said before.

Their diet ought to be thin and little, Diet.
such as has force to cool and moisten, principally a Ptisan, the meat should
be savoured with juice of Lemmon, Pomegranates, Goose-berries: Their drink
should be barley-water or small beer.

Fernelius 5. cap. of Fevers, Synoch. Bilios. Fernal.
makes mention of another sort of Synocha, which is made by the kindling of the
Spirits and choleric humors without putrefaction, and which arises from the
same causes as an Ephemera, if it happen in a choleric body, which opinion
indeed may take place if it be meant of the thinner and subtiler part of the
hotter blood, which sometimes uses to be called choler, but not if it be spoken
of excrementitious cholar.

The end of the first Book.
BOOK II. Of Putred Fevers.
CHAP. I. Of Putred Fevers in General.
WHereas there is a twofold sort of Fevers, whose heat is inherent in the
parts according to habitude, whereof the one has it is rise, and is continued
by the kindling of the Spirits, and thinnest parts of the blood, without putred
humors, the other has it is original from vapors and putred humors; of the
former kind it is already spoken; The next business is that we handle the putred
Fevers.

That there are putred Fevers many things show; Putred Fevers.
For neither is it dissonant from the nature of humors, but that they may
putrify, since that may happen to every mixed body; and we see humors putrify
otherwise in man's body, as it happens in inflammations, wherein quitture is
generated, as Galen in the 1 of the differences of Fevers, cap. 6. he compares
the putridness whereby the humors putrify in the brain, with that, by which
Sanies is generated in the humors. And that they do actually putrify,
sufficient reasons are given, which hereafter we shall propound, and the matter
it self shows that humors do putrify in the veins. For both blood which
comes forth from breathed veins, and those things which are evacuated by
stoo^, Urine, sweat, sufficiently by their smell and otherwise, argue putridity
of humors. And the way of cure proves the same, for it is not performed by
things that alter, but evacuate humors, which is partly instituted by nature,
partly by the Physician. For if humoral Fevers could be made without
putrefaction, they might also be cured by altering things only. And indeed such
Fevers are not only malignant as some think, but the same signs appear, and the
same way of cure is exhibited to intermittent and continued, What Putrefaction
is.
which are void of all malignity and pestilency.

Aristotlc. 4. Met. c. 1. defines putrefaction to be the corruption of the
proper and natural heat in every moist body, by reason of external ambient
heat, but by Galen 11 Meth. med. c. 8. without doubt not so much regarding the
common and adequate subject of putrefaction, as to man's body, subject to
medicinal consideration. It is (says he) a change of the whole substance of the
body putrefying to corruption, by reason of extraneous heat; the ultimate end
of putrefaction is the dissolution of the parts whereof the mixed body consists,
and the corruption of the whole mixture.

That we may here pass by the tedious disputations which are extant amongst
Philosophers and Physicians concerning putrefaction, this is to be taken notice
of, How manifold it is,
that putrefaction in respect of the mixed body putrefying, the one, is
according to the whole and perfect, according to the who^
whereby mixed bodies are plainly dissolved into Elements, out of which they are
bred: The other is in some part, and imperfect, whereby these which are full of
moisture, in some part.
putrify. For seeing the moisture wherewith it abounds cannot wholly be drawn
out, only some parts thereof, especially the thinner are. And such
putrefaction, namely, according to parts, agrees to humors also; namely, when
some particles of theirs are really corrupted, and they loose their form: Yet
the whole humor must not necessarily loose it is form; thence it continues it is
name, and those corrupted parts being evacuated, it returns to its former
nature; unless the corruption have so far gone, that mutation is made into
another kind. Which putrefaction, is putrefaction indeed, and not alteration
only. For although the whole be not corrupted, yet some parts thereof are
really corrupted.

Putrefaction in a body is caused by extraneous heat, The cause of putrefaction.
and when the humors are no longer governed by the natural heat, but are
destitute thereof, they are corrupted. Therefore all things whatsoever which
may be an occasion to hinder the innate heat, so that it cannot in its due
manner govern the humors, may be said to be the cause of putrefaction of the
humors.

Putrefaction of humors though oftentimes it be caused by obstruction, and
bowels, and prohibiting of free transpiration, since that, as Galen. 11. Meth.
med. c. ^. writes, things hot and moist, in a hot and moist place not being
fanned and cooled by wine easily putrify: Yet putrefaction may be occasioned
without this, by the meeting with putred things, and other causes, which
debilitate the native heat, and bring in an extraneous heat.

First, certain humors by reason of some internal defect, Default of humors.
of heir own accord tend to putrefaction, or at least are casily overcome come
by small causes of putrefaction, and having gotten the least occasion fall into
putrefaction: Such vice humors contract first from bad meats, of the which
they are generated, whether they are such by nature, or any other ways
corrupted: Moreover by meats which are easily corrupted, such are fruits
rareripe. Thirdly, from the ill dressing of meats, or ill concoction, or when
they are taken in excess, or at unseasonable hours, or after a preposterous
manner. Fourthly, by the default of the parts appointed for concoction, by
reason whereof even the best aliment may be corrupted. Lastly by reason of
other causes which either impede concoction, or retain execrements, as also the
preposterous use of the six Non-naturals. Therefore by how much the more of
such humors are cumulated in the body, by so much the more easily they
putrify. For nature does not defend excrementitious humors so carefully as
those which are fit to nourish the body; whence they are easily corrupted and
putrify. Blood also out of the veins, being out of it is natural place, and of a
hot and moist nature easily is corrupted. But although such humors turn to
putrefaction of their own accord, and being in a hot and moist place; yet it
happens sooner if any other cause be added. Nay good humors also in a sound
body if they are the cause in p^sse of putrefaction may become putted.

Amongst all these causes the first and chiefest is the hinderance of
transpiration and ventilation, Transpiration hindered.
whether it happen by straitnes of the pores of the skin, or by obstruction of
vessels and passages in the more inward parts of the body. For hot and moist
things in a hot place unless they are ventilated, easily putrify. Narrowness of
pores is occasioned either by constriction from cold, or astringent things, or
dryness, as staying under the Sunbeams; or by Obstructions, which either
plenty or vicosity, or thickness of humors brings forth. Moreover the internal
passages are stopped, either through store of blood overflowing in the body,
or plenty of it contracted up and down in many parts, or by the thickness and
viscousness of humors.

Secondly, Causae califacientes.
those things cause putrefaction, which can kindle preter-natural heat in
humors, and call out the native heat; in which number is the Fever Ephemera,
which for this cause is often changed into a putred in hot and moist bodies:
Moreover the other causes heating, as hot air, a hot bath, too much exercise of
body and mind Meetings with putre^ things.


Lastly, the meeting with putred things, seeing that which is touched by what
is putred, is defiled and putrifieth

From all which it is manifest, that a putred Fever is short, having it is rise
from hot vapors stirred up by putred humors, and heating the heart, and
thence the whole body against nature.

CHAP. II. Of the differences of putred Fevers.
ALthough there are many differences of Fevers, nevertheless those which are
necessary to be known for the performance of their cure, The difference of
putred humors.
are taken either from the matter putrefying, or the place putrified.

For first either solid parts putrify, or humors, or even the Spirits
themselves; concerning which it is controverted as in it is own place shall be
shown. Humors that putrify are as well natural as preter-natural: And those of
every kind, blood, Phlegm, choler, melancholy; which both the variety of those
things which are evacuated by stool, vomit and sweats, and the difference of
Symptoms which happen in Fevers does show, moreover the diversity of causes
which went before it, whereof some generate this, some that humor, and
moreover some afford matter for this, other for that humor. And the humors
either simply putrify, or a malignant venomous quality and contagion is joined
with it. Furthermore the place wherein the humors putrefie is not always the
same; For sometimes the humors putrefie within the veins and arteries,
sometimes without them. And that putrefaction which is within the vessels, is
either equally in all the vessels, or in the greatest, or in certain parts of a
vein.

Whence these differences of Fevers do arise. First, some Fevers are simply
putred, without any malignity or contagion, others malignant, postilent,
contagious. Moreover some Fevers are continual, others intermittent, according
as the putred vapor which is the cause containing of putred Fevers, or heat
stirred up by putred humors either continually heats the heart, and from
thence is diffused over all the body, or by certain intervalls.

Of either of which kinds of Fevers there are again many differences; For
either the putrefaction is kindled in the common vessels, and not in private
passages, whence arise continued Fovers, called Primary: Or the putredity comes
by the inflammation of some peculiar part, and from thence putred vapors are
continually communicated to the heart, which Fevers are called Symptomatical.

Primary continued again are twofold, for some have no augmentation, nor
remission, which they call Fevers containing, or fiery Synochaes.

Others are continued, yet there is some increase of heat, and sometimes
remisness, which are called Synochaes, and by the general name of continual
Fevers.

The continual for the time of their increase and decrease of heat, some are
called tertian, others quotidian, others quartan, according as the heat is
exasperated, daily, each other day, or the fourth day likewise.

Intermitting also according to the time of their invading, some are called,
tertian, others quotidian, others quartan. Nay it is observed that there are
Fevers that have a longer distance between the Paroxismes.

CHAP. III. Of the signs of putred Fovers in general.
APutred Fever is known. The Diagnosticks.
1. From it is heat, which is more gnawing and acrid, then of any other Fever,
and that in the increase and state. For in the beginning of fits, the heat does
not at the first touch of the Pulse discover it is acrimony, but if the hand be
continued longer it may be perceived, which proceeds from fuliginous vapors
which exhale out of putred humors. 2. Because it begins without any manifest
cause. Which indeed is a proper sign, but not an inseparable one, for as often
as any Fever is kindled without any manifest cause, you may well determine it
to be a putred Fever: Yet sometimes humors are so disposed to putrefaction,
that upon any light occasion they will become putred. 3. Urines in putred Fevers
either are crude or else at least afford but obscure notes of concoction,
unless an Ephemeral be degenerated into a putred Fever, otherwise there is no
putred Fever wherein the Urine in the beginning does not appear crude or
obscurely concocted. 4. The pulse is more changed then in other Fevers. 5.
Putred Fevers begin with a cold shaking. Which is a proper, but not an
inseparable sign. It Is a proper sign because neither Diaries nor Hecticks do
ever begin with cold shaking; yet it is not inseparable, because all putred
Fevers do not begin with a cold fit, as a putred Synocha. 6. It is the property
of putred Fevers to return by fits and Paroxismes; and no other Fever has
fits. Yet this is not an inseparable sign, because it does not agree with all
putred Fevers. 7. Lastly, if any sign be present which is proper to any sort of
putred Fevers, it is a sign it may admit of the general appellation of a putred
Fever.

Concerning the event of putred Fevers in general not much can be spoken, The
Prognostic.
since there is great variety and difference of putred Fevers, and the event
various: Only this, that the event is best to be known by comparing the
magnitude of the disease with the strength of the Patient; For if the patient
be very strong, there is much hope of a good end of it, if the party be weak,
there is great danger.

CHAP. IV. Of the cure of putred Fevers in general.
NOw seeing a putred Fever is cherished by the cause containing, Indications in
putred Fevers.
Indications in putred Fevers are taken some from the Fever it self, others
from the cause thereof. Nor indeed ought vital indications to be neglected.
First, a Fever as it is a Fever, indicates cooling things; Moreover as that
heat of the whole depends on a hot putred vapor, as on the cause containing,
the removal of that is also indicated; but because putred vapors depend on
putred matter, they cannot be removed, unless the matter putrified be taken
away; putrefaction cannot be taken away except its cause be removed, as we said
before. First, all evident causes which are present are to be removed; the
antecedent causes and whatsoever is in the body, either of superfluous blood or
peccant humors, they are to be prepared. and if occasion require, to be
evacuated, streightness of passages if it be external or interal in the bowels,
they are to be opened and free ventilation and respiration for the humors is
to be procured, Putrefaction is to be resisted, and the putred humors are to
be cooled and dried; the generation of peccant humors, by ablation of their
cause is to be prevented. Yet nevertheless seeing that these indications are
often contrary, and that those medicines which are administered for the cause,
may make the Fever worse, and the contrary. We must be careful how to perform
these intentions. And for the most part, since the Fever comes last, the cause
is to be taken away first, since the cause has more power then the disease,
and the cause of a putred Fever being taken away, the Fever of necessity
cease.

Yet if the greatness of the Fever enforce, it is necessary to have regard of
the Fever first; and afterward to the taking away of the cause; or certainly
if we may first go to the taking away of the cause, we should be very careful
that by those things by which we take away the cause, we increase not the
Fever. But those things are never to be used for the cure of the Fever, which
increases its cause, fince that for the most pare that is of greatest force.

CHAP. V. Of breathing of a vein.
NOw for the cure to be performed by these intentions, Letting blood.
and first concerning Phlebotomy. Galen 11. meth. medendi. cap. 15. gives this
rule. It is most wholesome he says in all Fevers to open a vein, not only in
continued, but also in all others which the putrefying humor stirs up,
Whether, when, and why to be done in a putred Fever.
especially when neither age nor want of strength prohibites it. And he adds
this reason; For nature which rules our bodies being enlighthed, and
unburthened of that by which as with a pack it was oppressed, what remains, it
will overcome without difficulty, and therefore not being forgetful of its
proper office, will both concoct what can be concocted, and cast out what may
be emitted. Yet this precept of Galen is to be rightly understood and
explained. For although there are many occasions for opening a vein, and
Authors cannot agree about the reason why Galen commands Phlebotomy in putred
Fevers: Yet it is clear he did it, that by evacuation of the blood, nature might
be enlightened and freed from the greatest part of her burden, for when blood
abounds, the opening of a vein, and purging of Cacochymy are the best remedies;
furthermore when it is a plethorick body, without doubt we should open a vein.
In some measure the breathing of a vein, does take away the cacochymy contained
in the veins, and mixed with the blood, since the vein being opened, the
vicious humors go out with the blood, especially because purgation which can
take away foul humors out of the veins, is not so safe as the breathing of a
vein to be appointed at the beginning of a Fever. For although Phlebotomy
cannot take away all the ill humors out of the veins, yet nature is lessned
some part of her burden, and therefore can concoct and master the remainder
the more easily, for it may be that the plenty of blood, which before the
sickness was no trouble to the party, now being sick and weakened with a Fever,
may become burthensom unto him. And although some good blood be emitted
therewith, yet that hurts not the sick, but rather helps, as is said: As we
also see by critical Hemorrhodes, that nature sends out no small quantity of
good blood together. Yet nature for the most part uses to drive no small part
of peccant humors to the extreme and subcutaneous parts; thence and in the
first place most commonly the worst blood comes first out. Whence it is
manifest especially in continual Fevers, in those who abound with blood, or
have peccant humors mixed with their blood, that bleeding is proper, and that
at the beginning, that nature may be unladed of part of her burden, but if
vicious humors are not intermingled with the blood in the greater veins, the
breathing of a vein for evacuation thereof is not to be used.

Cooling and fanning the blood is performed by lerting blood: but they are only
to be done when bleeding will not cool it alone. Rules allowing Phlebotomy.


We are not only to observe whether bleeding be needful, but also whether the
party be strong enough to suffer it, when the strength of the vital faculty is
principally to be required, so that the strength do not languish by too great
store of blood suffocating the Spirits, Age, Habit of body, and condition of
the ambient air show the strength.

But how much blood is to be taken away, The quantity that may be taken.
first by the plenty of blood, then by comparing the strength of the Patient
with the greatness of the disease, will be manifest; for greater quantity
requires larger emission, lesser, less; robustious bodies require larger
breathings of veins, weaker require less. The strength varies according to
temperament, habit of body, age, sex, season of the year, the condition of the
Heavens, and the Region, as also in regard of certain Symptoms, which use to
be accompanied with Fevers, as of watchings, pain, and such like.

As for the time for letting blood, The time.
it is to be done when it is indicated, and no way prohibited; which is in the
beginning, and by how much the more the disease hastens to increase, so much
the sooner blood is to be taken away, The place.
but if the concoctions are more dull and slow, Pulebotomy may be deferred
longer.

Veins that are opened for evacuation are best in the middle of the arm; yet if
the sick be weak, and that also revulsion is to be made from the head, the
veins in the foot are to be opened to the greatest benefit of the sick.

CHAP. VI. Of Purging.
BUt because all putred Fevers have their original from foul humors: Purgation
Now we are to consider by what means they may be evacuated, but seeing those
things which evacuate them are twofold, Lenitives and Purges, properly so
called: Lenitives are safely to be administered in the beginning of all putred
Fevers, because there are scarce any bodies wherein the stomach, guts, and
Mesaraick veins contain not some of the peccant humors.

These evacuations are to be caused by Clysters, Clysters.
called loosening medicines, and by vomit. The Clysters are made of Mallows,
Marshmallows, Violets, Pellitory, Beares-breech, Mercury, common Oil, or mixed
with Violets, brown Sugar, Cassia, Lenitives.
Elect Lenitive, Diacatholicon Hiera, and such like.

Or those lenitive medicines may be given which are at this day in use: Syrrup
of Roses solutive, of Violets solutive, Honey of Roses solutive, Tamarinds,
Cassia, Manna, the lenitive Electuary simple, Cream of Tartar.

You must use such medicines at the times of remisness and intermittings, when
the Fever least offends, whether it be carly in the morning or in the evening.

Sometimes also in the beginning of Fevers you may administer a vomit; when
great store of matter is contained in the stomach and adjacent parts, whereof
no concoction can be expected, the which uses to corrupt and putrify in the
body, and oftentimes that is easily vomited out, which with great difficulty is
purged out. Vomits.


The Vomits are set down in the fifth Book of the Institutions part. 1. Sect.
1. cap. 12. Some give at this day the roots of Asarabecca, from half a dram
to a dram. The Chemists use white Vitriol, Salt of Vitriol, Medicines
prepared of Antimony; which do not open only the first passages, but stir the
whole body: These are to be used with much caution, and as Hippoc. Purging
medicines.
1 Aphor. 24. Not without skilful advice.

Concerning Purgers at what time they are to be used, there is great
controversy; for although vicious humors at any time during the desease, show
that they ought to be taken away; Yet they ought not to be evacuated at any
time, but instead of an Oracle, Galen admonishes four of preservation of
health, c. 5. the Aphorism of Hippocrates is to be had in esteem, 22. Sect. 1.
Such as are concocted and ripe, ought to be purged and removed, not crude;
neither in the beginnings, unless the matter trouble much, which seldom comes
to pass. But although some interpret this Aphorism otherwise, yet if it be
diligently considered, 'twill be manifest, that Hippocrates meant to speak only
of putred Fevers, and of no other disease, and by crude humors intends those
that by reason of their putresection in putred Fevers ought not to be purged,
being unfit; by concocted he intends such as are fitting to be purged: The
words crudity and concoction, being transsated from their proper signification
of crudity and concoction to excrementitious humors.

Although there are certain other preparations of humors for purgation both in
Fevers and out of Fevers: Concoction of humors.
Yet the name of concoction belongs not to them, and we must distinguish
betwixt concoction and preparation of humors. Concoction, whereof Hippocrates
speaks, is a reducing of the putred humors into a better condition, and less
obnoxious to the body, and a separation of them from good blood, that they may
the more profitably be evacuated out of the body; hence concoction belongs only
to humors, which are contained in the Veins, and mixed with the blood, but
those that are in other places, and not mixed with the blood, may be purged at
any time. For these humors unless they are reduced to a certain mediocrity as
they are capable of, and are separated from laudable blood, the Physician in
vain, and with much detriment to the sick, endeavors to expel them by
purging. For neither will the humors follow the foregoing medicine, neither
has the Physician nature for his assistant, since the matter is only stirred
and troubled, and various Symptoms arise; either the strength is weakened by
the vio^ence of a strong medicine, or the native heat is consumed and weakened.

Yet flatulent humors may be purged without concoction; Flatulent humors.
For although these are not as yet concocted, yet because there is not only
danger lest they should fall upon some principal part, but also because being
thin, and already in motion, they easily follow their leading medicine; and the
Physician has nature to assist him, which alone sometimes expells such humors
at the beginning, to the great advantage of the sick. But by flatulent humors
here, we are not to understand only those which hitherto are moved to no
determinate part, but also those which although they rush into some part yet
they are still moveable, and so disposed, that they will easily remove into
another part, and according to their manner, are hitherto wandering, but have
not any fixed seat any where.

Concoction, whereof we here speak, is the work of nature only, which when it is
strong, gives what perfection they are capable of receiving, even to the
vicious humors, as may be seen in the generation of quitture; and this
concoction is made only in putred Fevers* For whilst the humors ferment in
the veins, like new wine, and the good and bad are mixed together, and cannot
easily be separated: They are called crude, but when the humors are appeased
and cooled, and the good may easily be separated from the evil, they are said
to be concocted.

CHAP. VII. Of Concoction and Separation of humors.
ALthough the concoction of humors be the work of nature only. Yet a Physician
may help her by his medicines, which may either cherish and strengthen the
native heat, or take away impediments which may hinder nature in concocting,
Digestive medicines.
and reduce the excess of qualities to mediocrity. And medicines of the latter
of these two kinds are called Digestives and Concoctives, namely, such as cool
the hot humors, heat the cold, moisten the dry, attenuate the thick,
incrassate the thin, and if there are any other excesses of qualities, reduces
them to mediocrity.

So Choleric humors because they are hot to be allayed; Concocters of
choleric humors.
and tempered with cold medicines, and their tenuity if too much, to be reduced
to mediocrity, and its power of inflaming to be prohibited. These perform this,
Chichory, Endive, Sowthistle, Garden-Endive, Sorrel, Burrage, Bugloss,
Violets, Barley; the greater and lesser cooleing seeds, the juice of Lemmon
Pomegranates, Goose-berries, Vinegar, Spirit of the salt of Vitriol, and
medicines prepared of these.

Phlegmatic humors because they are thick and dull, Phlegmatic.
require attenuating, and cutting medicines; such are the opening roots, Hysop,
Bittony, Agrimony, Venus-hair, Vinegar, also Spirit of Vitriol.

In a Melancholy humor, Melancholy.
attenuating medicines are also useful, but such as moisten withal: Such as are
Burrage, Bugloss, Polypody, Caeterach or Spleen-wort, and such like.

But because in all these Fevers, Resisting of putrefaction.
corruption of humors is present, those things which resist putrefaction are
also necessary, such are Vinegar, Juice of Lemmon, Citron, Pomegranates,
Sorrel, Spirit of Salt of Vitriol.

And those things which are spoken about concoction and crudity of humors,
principally take place in continued and acute Fevers, which is manifest from
Hippocrates, who 1. Ash. 24. adjoynes, In acute diseases seldom, and about the
beginnings, purging is to be used, and that with diligent premeditation, and 2
Aphor. 29. In the beginning of diseases if ought be to he moved, move it; but
when it flourishes it is best to be quiet, namely, if the matter swell big in
acute diseases, presently at the beginning it is to be evacuated, but if not, a
concoction is to be expected, which nature alone performing, very often uses
to expel vicious humors, which if it be not done, the Physician uses to do
it: The same crudity and concoction is required in intermitting Fevers, for
since their causes are situated in the Mesaraick veins, and the Mesaraick
veins contain and elaborate blood of their own accord, if peccant humors be
any where mingled with that blood, and begin to putrefie, crudity is said to be
present: But when those humors are so conquered by nature, that they may
easily be separated, concoction is performed.

Although in intermitting Fevers in every fit some of the peccant matter be
evacuated, yet notwithstanding the humor, which is the fuel of such Fevers, is
not first taken away before the concoction be performed, and the bad are
separated from the good: That which in quartanes uses to be long in doing; For
although each Paroxism some may be expelled, yet as Galen. 2. of the difference
of Fevers. cap. the last teaches, superfluities in the part wherein the fuel
feeding the Fever is contained being left behind, cause new fits, and purgation
is appointed in vain before the humor be concocted and rendered fit to be
purged, whereof shall be spoken amongst the intermitting Fevers. Preparing of
humers.


But besides this concoction and preparation of humors, there is yet need of
other things, which when the humors are concocted, are to be exhibited: For
considering purgation that it may be happily used, the passages ought to be
open and the humors fluid, if the passages are obstructed, and thick sluggish
humors be present, the ways through which the humors ought to pass are to be
opened, and the humors to be cut and taken away,

CHAP. VIII. Of Sudorificks and Diuretics.
BUt because nature for the most part expells the concocted matter by sweats,
Causing sweat.
so that almost no Fever without them cease and is well cured. The Physician
ought to imitate nature, and the body being evacuated, to discuss the
remainders by sweats: The Sudorifiques that at this day are in use, are,
Carduusbenedictus, Scabions, Fumetary, Tormentill, Zedoarie, Hartshorn, Elder,
Bezoar-stone, Methridate, and such like, but no sudoriferous medicine ought to
be administered, if any Crisis by stool, vomit, or Hemerrhodes at the nose be
extant, lest nature should be disturbed in it is work. They are most
conveniently exhibited at that time, when nature her self uses to remove
humors, which happens either before any paroxysm, or at the end thereof.

By Urine also sometimes part of the fevourish matter is evacuated, Urine
provoked.
and therefore Diuretics after other evacuations are to be appointed, and the
most temperate amongst them are to be chosen, which together attenuate the
humors, and free the passages from obstructions, as Maidenhair, Sparagus,
Agrimony, etc. But those things which are cold, may timely be used also, since
they correct the hot distemper of the humors and parts.

CHAP. IX. Of Diet in putred Fevers.
LAstly concerning diet, Diet.
and first, of meat and drink, not only regarding the use of them, for the
comfort and refreshment of our strength, but in respect of what is to be
permitted, and what prohibited; for when nature is most busied in concoction
and evacuation of matter, she ought not to be called from that work to the
concoction of meat, hence Hippo. 1. Aphor. 8. When the violence of the disease
is great, diet is to be used most sparingly, and ibid. Aphor. 11. In the
Paroxism it self, food is to be taken away; for it affords mischief: and when
by circuit the Fever returns in the fits we ought to abstain.

In the administration of diet in Fevers, we are to observe, form, Form of Diet.
quantity, quality, and time. The form of diet is threefold, thick,
indifferent, and thin. Which of these are most proper for every one, is to be
collected by comparing the strength of the sick with the morbifique cause;
neither ought we to give more meat then the strength can concoct: and we ought
to consider whether the strength do more require food, or the disease forbid
it, or the contrary: for by how much the busier nature is in oppugning the
morbifique cause, by so much the less three ought to be burdened with food: She
is by so much the more busied in opposing the disease, by how much the paroxism
is nearer at hand, hence Hippocrates 1. Aphor. 8. When the disease is in it is
vigor, then it is necessary to use the thinnest food, and 1. Aph. 7. When the
disease is peracute, there are extreme labourings; and at height, the thinnest
nutriment is to be taken. But when it is not at height, and that we may use more
nourishing things, by so much is to varied from the thinnest of all, by how
much the disease is remitted and abated, and ibid. 10. Those who expect the
vigor forthwith to come, ought presently to take a little nourishment. They
who expect it afterward much, and should both in the vigor of it, and a
little before it, abstain. But beforehand the sick should be more plentifully
nourished, that he might be the better able to endure the disease. But how diet
is to be moderated according to the strength, Hippocrates teaches, 1 Aphor. 9.
We ought to conjecture by the sick, whether he can hold out to the vigor of
the disease by the prescribed diet or not, or whether he will first faint, and
being insufficient with such food, should dye before the disease depart and be
overcome. And 1. Aphor. 13. Old men that are not decrepid easily endure to
fast, according to these, middle aged men, young men less, children least of
all; and amongst them especially such as are endued with the choicest and most
acute wits: Custom also and course of life is to be considered in prescribing
of diet.

The quantity of meat also is to be considered by comparing of the disease with
the strength of the sick: Quantity.
For since that we must never give more food then can be concocted at the time
when nature is most busied in opposing the morbifique cause, the least quantity
of food is to be taken, which is in the height thereof.

Concerning the quality of meat, Quality.
since it is to be considered either as it is meat, or as it is medicinal meat,
in the former respect those meats are to be chosen that are of easiest
concoction, full of good juice, facile to be distributed, and which has the
least excrements: But if it be considered as Medicinal, First, it ought to be
contrary to the Fever, and therefore it should be cold and moist, 1. Aphor. 16.
moreover it should be repugnant to the causes, and all excess of qualities in
them.

The time for food is most proper when it is indicated, Time.
when the body requires nourishment, which is when the former meat is
concocted, and no sign is present, which may prohibit the taking of it, to wit,
no combat betwixt nature and the disease; therefore during the fits, we ought
to abstain. 1. Aphor. 11. unless the strength be much decayed and spent.

Care also is to be taken what drink is fittest in Fevers, for although it be
easier concocted then meat, Drink.
and by it is cooling it mitigates the heat, and the dryness is hindered: Yet we
are to be careful that nature be not burdened with it, and the concoction of
matter hindered by it, and therefore in intermitting Fevers during the Paroxism,
we should abstain from drink as near as we can: But in continued Fevers, when
heat, thirst, and debility of strength do require, you may give more drink; but
sithence drink is to be considered, not as drink only, but as medicinal, hence
it comes to pass, that at certain times, certain drinks are to be chosen. Drink
considered as drink, ought to be given according to the rules for meat: But as
it is considered as altering, by how much the dry heat is more intense, by so
much the more, hotter drinks are to be avoided, and the colder to be chosen.
Yet regard is to be taken of the cause, and oftentimes there will be need of
attenuating and absterging drinks, and not of cooling only; and the matter
being deeper fastened in the part, admits not cooling drink. The drinking of
cold water is only useful in acute Fevers, it is never proper in intermittent.
Fair water is often altered with barley, which is called a decoction, and
barley-water. Instead of drink, Juleps are also exhibited, water mixed with
Honey, Oxymel, Emulsions, Whey, strong beer, wine. But seeing certain drinks
for certain Fevers are most convenient, we may more properly handle them
severally amongst the different kinds of Fevers, of which sorts are peculiar
for such a particular Fever then in general to treat thereof.

The air in all Fevers ought to be pure, cold rather then hot, yet so tempered,
Air.
that the drawing in thereof may rather allay the fevourish heat, then meeting
with a naked body, cause it to shut its own pores, which hinders the discussion
of vapors and sweats, and therefore the sick is to be covered with outward
garments, but such as are light, that so the heat may be drawn to the outmost
parts of the body.

Sleep ought to be moderate. Rest in putred Fevers is most advantageous: Sleep,
rest. Excrements, passions of the mind.
Excrements ought not to be retained beyond measure, but to be ejected in due
time. The passions of the mind ought to be at peace, and sadness, and anger are
to be avoided.

CHAP. X. Of the differences of putred Fevers.
HItherto we have spoken of putred Fevers in general, The differences of putred
Fevers.
it remains that now we speak of them particularly. First their differences are
a little more clearly to be explained. And they are taken chiefly from the
matter putrefying, and the place of putrefaction.

As for the matter, Feversarise either from choler, or phlegm, From the matter.
blood or melancholy: To which not without reason is added a serous humor,
especially that Ichor, which is very evil, easily obnoxious to putrefaction, A
serous humor.
and causes the blood and other humors to putrefie more easily. Whence some
are of opinion that Ephemeral Fevers, which commonly are said to arise from
Spirits kindled, do all proceed from the ebullition of the serous part of the
venous or arterious blood: And much more a Synocha without putrefaction;
although the vital Spirits being heat may first allure the heat to the serous
humor. The same show that all Synochaes or Fevers containing, as they are
called, which have no periods, as well putred as not putred, do arise from the
same aqueous and serous humor, whether putrefying or not putrefying; whereof
the Tract of Fevers may be seen.

Those Fevers which proceed from blood do all keep a certain continuity and
equality; and are neither exasperated daily, From blood. Phlegm. Choler.
nor each other day, nor the fourth day, but those which do arise from
Phlegmatic, chollerick, or melancholy humors, all have their periods, whether
they are continued or intermittent.

Besides these there are other Fevers, Melancholy.
which although they are exasperated, yet have no certain periods, such are
those which arise from inflammation, putrefaction, worms, corrupted milk; From
other causes.
as in Infants, blood out of the Vessels, chyle, and blood imperfect,
putrefying in the Mesaraicks.

The matter whereof putred vapors are bred in Fevers, From the place.
is either contained within the vessels or without. The vessels which carry the
perfect blood, as the vena cava, and the arteries, or the more imperfect, as
the Meseraick veins. within the vessels.
Whilst blood putrifies in the vena cava, there arise continued Fevers,
whereof some are called Synochaes, or containing Fevers, others continued
instead of a genus and periodick continued. If excrementitious humors putrefie
in the Mesaraicks, intermittent Fevers are stirred up, but if imperfect blood
putrify in the Mesaraick veins, continued Fevers are raised, but calm ones.

Putrefying matter without the veslels, Without the vessels.
sending putred vapors to the veins and arteries, kindles continued Fevers.
Such are first Symptomatical, which proceed from inflammations of certain
parts. Moreover calmer Fevers, which proceed from the stubborness of the guts
and their obstructions. Thirdly, those that are caused by an Ulcer, Fistula,
and all putrefaction. Fourthly, from corrupt milk, as in Infants, from blood
putrefying without the vessels, also the matter of Catarrhs, whence they are
called Catarrhal Fevers.

Lastly, there are Fevers called Comitatae, or Companions, which are occasioned
from matter putrefying in the veins, Fevers accompanied.
part whereof when nature either expells out of the body, which happens in a
Diarrhaea, Dysentery, and a Catarrh, or protrudeth into some part, which
happens in the Meazles, Small Pox, Straggling pains, Quinsey, Peripneumonie,
Frenzy, Erisipelas, oftentimes. Another disease then accompanies the Fever.

CHAP. XI. Of a continued putred primary Fever, and first of a Synocha in
particular.
NOw concerning putred Fevers in particular, A primary continued Fever.
and first we will handle a primary continued Fever: A primary continued Fever
is that which comes not to apurexie before it be plainly taken away; and has
its rise from putred humors contained in the greater branches of the vena cava
and artery. For since that thence putred vapors are continually sent to the
heart, a continued heat is also caused, thence until it fully be cured there is
no absence of fire, neither does it return by intervalls, with tremblings and
shaking fits.

Primary continued Fevers are twofold, Some without any remission or
exacerbation of the heat, continue from the beginning to the end: But there are
others, wherein the heat before the Fever be thoroughly cured, does never
totally depart, yet at certain periods is increased. The former are called
fiery Synochaes, and Fevers containing; the other are called Synoches, or
continued, instead of a genus.

The Fever Synocha putred, A Puered Synocha.
is a Fever, which without any slacking or increasing afflicts from the
beginning to the end, arising from putrefaction of the blood in the greater
branches of the vena cava. Although continued Fevers may arise out of vessels
of determinate parts, yet such are Symptomatical: And if they are true
Synochaes, which have their original from the default of any part, as from the
womb offending: Yet that part only affords an occasion, the polluted, putredity
being communicated, that the blood in the greater vessels might corrupt. But
there are Fevers risen from determinate parts, for the most part continued
Periodicks.

So sometimes peccant matter in the first passages collected in the first
concoction, which uses to go to some of the humors, which at certain Periods
are moved, and has not as yet received its limits for motion, it uses then to
corrupt the humors, and communicate putrefaction to the vena cava, which
Fevers for the most part are malignant.

A putred Synocha has its original for the most part from transpiration
hindered, and want of ventilation of the blood, The cause.
and hot fuliginous retentions, by reason of obstruction of veins, as well in
the skin, as also in the internal parts. And the blood appointed to nourish the
body putrifies in these Synochaes, and putrefying, continually sends hot
vapors to the heart. For when preter-natural heat is so kindled in the veins,
that nature can no longer rule it, it becomes putred and is corrupted. Nor is
there any need that the putred blood should be turned into another humor
presently. For blood of its own nature is apt to putrefaction, and in
inflammations we see it changed to quitture, not into choler; though nothing
hinder it in the veins but that it might: And especially the Ichor or thin
waterish part of the blood is apt to turn to putrefaction, and by reason of the
Ichor the blood in the first place is corrupted, which happens, when the
vapors which ought to transpire, are retained in the veins. Yet the whole
blood does not putrify, but some parts thereof, which so long as they are not
separated from the good blood, crudity is said to be present, which afterward
by concoction are separated from the good blood, which being done, Nature
appoints evacuation, by which the blood returns to its former purity again.

A Synocha is threefold, Acmastick, i. e. when it remains always in the same
state, namely, Differences.
when so much of the humor daily putrifies as is discussed, this is called
also Homotonos. Epacmastick or Anabaticos is when the heat continually
increases, and more of the matter is kindled then can be discussed.
Paraemastick is when there is more discussed then corrupted, and thence the
heat always decresseth. Furthermore it blood which putrifies be temperate
absolute, it is called a sanguinious Synoch a in particular: But if it be
hotter, which uses to be called choleric, the disease is then called Synocha
bilosa.

The Fever is known first by this, Diagnostick signs.
that it continues from the beginning to the end without any exasperation and
mutation: Moreover because the Pulse is great, vehement, swift, frequent,
unequal and inordinate. And in a Synocha proceeding from temperate blood the
signs of Plethory are present: The blood to him that touches seems much and
full of vapors, and is not so troublesome and sharp as in other Fevers, and
other signs are present which are observed in a Synocha that is not putred. A
putred Synocha is distinguished from a non-putred by certain signs. The heat in
a putred is sharper then in a non-putred. In a putred the urine is red, thick
and troubled, without any sediment, and crude, or a little concocted in the
beginning; the Pulse affords signs of putrefaction, and all the Symptoms are
greater then in a Fever that is not putred.

A Synochabilosa happens to those that are troubled with choleric blood, and
the heat is sharper then in a Synocha proceeding from temperate blood, thirst
is more troublesome, the urine thinner and sharper, and other signs which are
usual in choleric Fevers are discerned.

This Fever is the most simple amongst the putred, Prognostics.
and easiest to be cured. And being pure, seldom passes seven days, but the
spurious is extended to the fourteenth day, and is terminated sooner or later,
as the signs of concoction appear sooner or later. A white urine in a Synocha
is evil. The least dangerous of all is that which is called Synochos
Paracmasticos, next to that Acmasticos: But that is most dangerous which
continually increases, and is called Epacmasticos, which easily degenerates
into a disease called Causus. And by how much the fewer the evil Symptoms are,
by so much the better hopes; the more they are, the more danger is shown.

The whole cure consists in taking away the cause, Indicatious.
and altering the fevourish heat. Blood therefore as abounding in plenty is to
be lessened, the pores of the skin to be opened, the causes of obstructions
being taken away. The fevourish heat is to be tempered and allayed, if there be
strength, as for the most part there is, thin diet is to be used.

Therefore a vein is forthwith to be opened in the right arm, a Clyster or
lenitive medicine being given first, if occasion require, and to take away as
much blood as the strength will permit. Breathing of a vein.
and you may more boldly take away blood in this, then in any other sort of
Fever.

Blood being evacuated, Medicines.
that the concoction may be made more facile, we are to use those things which
allay the heat, free from obstructions, and resist putrefaction; namely, the
juice of Sorrel, Lemmons, Citrons, and Syrrups and Conserves prepared of them,
Syrrup of Sorrel simple, Oxymel simple, Oxysauharum simple, Spirit of Vitriol,
and the four cold seeds with cooling waters are to be administered.

Principally we ought to endeavor that the pores of the skin may be freed from
obstruction, which for the most part is the cause of this disease, which thing
Oxymel and wine mingled with honey, and the honey dissolved, will conveniently
perform, since they are easily carried to the outmost parts of the body, and
attenuate dull thick humors, and simple Oxymel resists putrefaction.

Concoction being perfected, the Ancients used to drink cold water, and gave so
much of it to drink, as might not only extinguish the fevourish hear, but that
the matter concocted might be evacuated by stool, vomit or sweats. But in our
countries, sick people are not so accustomed to drink cold water, and many
inconveniences are to be feared by the use thereof. So likewise swimming in
cold water, which was usual with the Ancients, does not agree with our bodies.

The concoction being perfected, nature uses for the most part critically to
evacuate the corrupted matter, which if it be not done, it ought to be
performed by the Physician with purging medicines.

Diet in this Fever ought to be thin, Diet.
because both that blood abounds, and the disease is short; It should be
cooling and moistening, and also to have power of attenuating thick humors,
and deterging viscid ones.

CHAP. XII. Of a Causus, or Burning Fever.
WHereas amongst continued Fevers there is often mention made of a Causus, we
are also here to say something of it: But a Causus is not any difference of a
Fever, but rather a measure expressing the quality of fevourish heat. The word
Causus is sometimes taken generally, and not so properly, sometimes
specialiter, and more properly: Generally for any sort of Fever whose heat is
vehement, in particular for a Fever which has two Pathognomonicks, great heat,
extreme and unextinguishable thirst. A Causus properly and in specie so called,
is again twofold, legitimate and spurious: legitimate is that which has
always, and that evidently, those two signs joined with it: an illegitimate
is that wherein those two signs are not so evident.

Whence it is manifest that burning Fevers, Burning Fevers.
and such as properly and in specie are so called, are continued Fevers, and
arise from choler. And so a Causus or burning Fever properly so called, is a
Fever continued, Bilions, and indeed either Synocha bilosa, which we have newly
handled, or a continued tertian, whereof we are to speak next.

The Pathognomonick signs as we said before, are two, vehement and burning
heat, and unquenchable thirst, although the sick shall drink; Diagnosticks.
and the more legitimate the Causus is, by so much these signs are greater,
yet the thirst is sometimes resisted if a little cough happen, which may draw
humors from the neighboring parts.

Concurrent signs there are many, as a dry tongue, rough, black, watching,
giddiness of the brain, difficulty of breathing, thick and great, and the sick
continually blow, opening their mouth, that the hot spirits may the easier
exhale.

These Fevers if they are pure, Prognostics.
never continue long. For nature cannot long endure such burning and vehement
heat; and the Symptoms which accompany it with their vehemence. And for the
most part they are terminated the seventh day, sometimes the ninth, eleventh,
fourteenth: but the spurious are protracted longer, and all of them are
dangerous according to Hippocrates 4. Aphor. 43. Fevers of what kind soever
that have no intermission by the third day, are the stronger, and fuller of
danger. Yet some are more dangerous then others, according to the violence of
the heat, and of the Symptoms, and force of the strength, and by how much the
greater digression is made from the natural state, by so much the more
dangerous is the Fever. Hence if an old man be troubled with a burning Fever,
which seldom happens, it is deadly, as Galen has it, 1. Aphor. 14. They lie
down in no less danger who are exeedingly burnt in cold air: Who if they have
not great strength, neither the signs of concoction appear, it can not be that
they should escape, as the same Galen 11. Met. med. cap. 9. writes. To whom if
vehement Symptoms happen, by so much the more dangerous the disease shall be,
whether they are Pathognomonick or supervenient, yet if by the other signs, it
be manifest to be a burning Fever, and that thirst be wanting, this also is
dangerous, for it shows the sick either to be in a Delirium, or that the
desiring faculty of the stomach fails.

Black urines are also evil, as also thin, crude, and such as have other ill
tokens in them.

But it is good if the sick can easily endure his sickness, the Symptoms being
not without vehemence, if he can easily fetch breath; if he complain of pain in
no internal part, if he sleep; if he find benefit by his sleep; if the body be
equally hot and soft, if the tongue be not too dry, if the urine be good. But
if when the signs of concoction appear, and that there is much strength, in a
critical day there happen large Hemorrhodes, or bleeding at the nose, without
doubt the sick escapes: For it is proper if there be any other of the pure
burning Fevers, that they should be cured by bleeding. Yet sometimes they are
determined by Sweats, looseness of the belly, vomits, and imposthums. But there
are many Prognostics of burning Fevers in Hippocrates in Prognosticis,
Porrheticus, and Choacis praenotionibus, and there are many expounded in the
Institutions, lib. 3. part. 3.

But by what means burning Fevers are to be cured, appears by what has been
spoken of a Synocha bilosa with putrefaction, and those things that shall be
said of the cure of the continued Tertian shall make manifest.

CHAP. XIII. Of continued Periodick Fevers in general, and of a continued
Tertian.
ANother kind of continued putred Fevers which they call in particular
continued, comprehends those Fevers, Continus periodick Fevers.
which indeed continually remain, and have no remission before they are plainly
dissolved, yet at certain periods they are exasperated, whence they are called
continued periodick and proportionated Fevers.

But as Fevers containing have their original from the blood appointed for
nourishing the body; so continued Periodicks, their causes.
as also intermittints proceed from an excrementitious humor and Cacochymie.
Therefore continued Periodicks agree in this with Fevers containing, that both
their causes are contained in the vena cava, but with intermittents in this
that both proceed from excrementitious humors. But they differ from Fevers
containing, in that they proceed from alimentary blood; these from an
excrementitious humor: From intermittent because the matter which is the cause
of continued Periodicks is generated in the second concoction, and contained in
the vena cava: But that matter which is the cause of intermitting Fevers is
contained in the first concoction, or certainly in those parts which are about
the liver, which are not appointed for perfect sanguification. Namely, the
matter of continued Periodick Fevers is generated in the Organs of the second
concoction, if for any cause whatsoever it be not rightly performed. For then
the peccant humors generated in the second concoction are sent with the blood
into the veins, which there stirs up these continued periodick Fevers.

Which matter since it is not only confused with the blood, as in intermitting
Fevers, The reason of its continuity.
but from the very first original is mixed therewith thoroughly. Nature also
cannot expel it before concoction, and therefore the Fever from the beginning
continually lasts. Yet these Fevers have exasperations at set times, because
that from the instruments of the second concoction, fresh matter which is the
cause of these periods is afforded, and indeed for the most part from the
liver: Whence also continued Tertians are most frequent.

These Fevers are generally known because they never come to apurexie, Signs.
yet at certain periods they are increased and remitted. Neither does cold,
trembling, nor shaking fits precede their exasperation, neither does sweat
follow their remission.

There are three kinds of these Fevers.

For some are exasperated each other day, Differences.
and proceed from Choler, and are called Tertians continued. Others every day
which are caused by Phlegm, and are called continued quotidians. Others the
fourth day, which arise from Melancholy, and are called Quartans continued.

First a tertian continued is a putred Fever, A Tertian continued.
arising from blood with ill juice and choler putrefying in the vena cava,
indeed continued, but afflicting most the third day.

The causes of this Fever are all things which can increase store of choleric
Cacochymy in the veins, The cause.
and being cumulated there of choleric Cacochymy in the veins, and being
cumulated there can introduce putrefaction; such as are before propounded.

This Fever is thus known, Signs.
in that it is continued, and the third day it is exasperated. Yet there are
present other signs and Symptoms of continued and burning Fevers.

But what is to be hoped concerning their event, Prognostics.
is manifest from things which are spoken of the Prognostics of burning Fevers.

Concerning the indications for cure, Cure.
this Fever if it be pure, since it is exceeding hot and burning, and the cause
thereof hot and dry, it requires extraordinary cooling and moistening, and
indeed more then any other Fever.

The humor it self indicates evacuation; but crudity for the most part forbids
it: but if the Fever be spurious, regard is together to be had to the humor
which is mixed with choler: if the Symptoms need it they are to be resisted
likewise.

Therefore a vein is to be opened so that the strength will permit it, by which
means both some part of the peccant humor may be evacuated, Opening a vein.
and the blood cooled and revell'd from the more noble parts. And nature her
self sometimes uses to make evacuation by the nose in the beginning of these
Fevers, whereby the Fever is wont to be abated; but the vein should be opened
in the cubit forthwith in the beginning, or certainly in the augmentation, and
blood is to be taken in such plenty as the strength of the patient requires.

But you are not to appoint purgation unless the matter be turged. Lenitives.
Yet it is very necessary that the belly and first passages be evacuated before
a vein be opened, but the medicines which perform that, ought to be cold and
moist not hot; or if they are hot, they should be tempered with the mingling of
cold.

Afterward altering, namely, Alteratives.
cooling and moistening medicines are to be exhibited, both which prepare the
humor appointed by nature for concoction, such as are, Syrrup of Sorrel
simple, Oxymel simple, compound, Oxysauharum simple, Syrrup of Sorrel,
Wood Sorrel, the juice of Lemmon, Pomegranate, the accidity of Endive, Cichory,
Violets, Gooseberries, the four greater cold seeds, Purcelane, Lettice, the
flowers of Water Lillies, Santalum, Water of barley, Sorrele Endive, Cichory,
Strawberries, Water Lillies, Purcelane, spec. Diamargariti frigidi, and such
like, to which for the resisting of putrefaction and hindering inflammation may
be added, Spirit of Vitriol and Salt, Nitre prepared is also commended: If
Phlegm be mixed, opening and attenuating things are to be added; such as the
roots of Fennel, Sparagus graminis, and medicines prepared of them,

In leek colored aeruginous choler, John Langius. l. 3. epist. 1. c. 4.
commends Crystal.

Topical medicines are also profitable to mitigate the heat, as Epithems,
Oils, and Unguents, made of cooling things, Topics.
which should be applied to the heart, liver, or back. Yet you must be careful
that you close not the pores of the skin thereby, and hinder transpiration, and
therefore before the height they are seldom used, unless it be when the heat is
equally distributed through the whole body, and it is more commodious if they
are applied hot then cold.

The matter being concocted, that nature might be strengthened, and stimulated
to expulsion, and that the matter might be expelled either by stool or sweat,
the Ancients used great quantities of cold drinks, as Galen teaches 9. meth.
cap. 5. and 4. de rat. vict. in acut. 12.

But if so be that after concoction nature do not institute evacuation,
Purgation
it is to be done by the Physician, with Syrrup of Roses and Violets solutive,
the pulp of Tamarindes, Manna, Rubarb, Trypheta Persica, such as have Scamony
in them are not to be admitted; yet sometimes some of Electuarii rosati Mesua,
de psyllio and of juice of Roses may be given.

For causing Urine in these Fevers an emulsion is profitable, prepared of the
four great cold seeds, Diuretics
with the whey of Goats milk, or barley and strawberry water, or with a
decoction of the roots of Parsley.

Sweats also ought to be provoked with medicines proper for that purpose,
Sydorificks
which hereafter shall be mentioned amongst malignant Fevers.

Diet ought to be thin; but according as the height of the disease is nearer or
farther off, Diet.
it ought to be thicker or thinner. The meat and drink ought to be cooling and
moistening, whence a Ptisan is profitable in these Fevers, the rest should be
seasoned with juice of Lemmon and Pomgranates: The drink should b^ barley
water, or water boiled with the juice of Lemmon or Pomegranates, and suggar or
small beer. The air should be cold, and if it be not so by nature, it should be
prepared by art.

If Phlegm be mingled with choler, and the Fever be a continued Tertian or
burning Notha, blood is to be taken away more sparingly: In the preparation of
humors, those things are to be added which attenuate Phlegm. Agarick is to be
mixed with the Purgers.

CHAP. XIV. Of a continued Quotidian.
A Continued Quotidian vulgarly called Latica, because it has a certain hidden
and obscure heat, A continued Quotidian.
is indeed a Fever continually lasting, yet having every day exasperations
arising from indigested phlegmatic humors in the vena cava.

The cause of this Fever is Phlegm mixed with blood in the vena cava, and there
putrefying, Cause.
and therefore those fall into these Fevers which are of such an age and nature
as that their bodies are moister, as children and infants, as also old men and
such as have grosser bodies, and are given to their bellies and to idleness,
and dwell in moist places, but not young men and such as are choleric.

The signs of continued periodick Fevers are also manifest in this Fever, only
the violence is most about the evening. Signs.
The heat first is gentle, a little afterward more sharp, and sometimes seems
to abate, and sometimes to increase, by reason of the thickness of the phlegm
which purrisieth. The pulses are not so thick and frequent, the urine is not so
fiery and red as in other Fevers but thicker, nor are the other Symptoms so
vehement as in other Fevers.

Concerning the event. 1. Prognostics.
This Fever by reason of the thickness of the humor is long, and hard to be
cured, and therefore dangerous. And by how much the thicker the phlegm is by so
much the more violent and durable, so that it is not ended before the swetieth
or sixtieth day, and the beginning is scarce past before the twentieth. 2. It
continues lesser time where many evacuations happen. That which is pure is
also longer then that which is mixed with choler, and by how much the worser
Symptoms are present, and the strength weaker, by so much the greater danger
there is, which if they are not, health is to be hoped for. 3. By reason of the
duration of the Fever, and weakness of the Liver, the sick for the most part
fall into Cachexy and Dropsy.

As to the cure this Fever is more dangerous in respect of the cause, then of
its heat; Cure.
and therefore since it depends on phlegm that is to be heat, attenuated, cut,
and afterward being concocted and prepared, evacuated, and regard is to be had
of the strength, principally of the stomach and Liver.

Therefore in the beginning the stomach and first ways are to be opened and
evacuated by Clisters and lenitive medicines, Lenitives.
or else the matter inherent in the stomach is to be ejected by vomit. Opening
a vein.


But although the cause of this Fever be cold, yet because it is mixed with
blood and putrifieth, some blood may be taken away by opening of a vein, in
case that the urine be thick and red, and that the strength will bear it and
the age, that nature may be eased of some part of her burden.

Afterward preparation and concoction of the matter is to be endeavored with
attenuating things which do not heat much; Preparing and altering.
therefore in the beginning use Syrrup of Sorrel simple, with honey of roses,
Oxymel simple, Syrrup of Hysop, Bittony, with the water or decoction of
Maidenhair, Sparagus, Grass, Fennel, Hysop, and medicines prepared of those
plants; also Spirit of Vitriol and Salt.

When any signs of concoction have appeared you may exhibit some gentle Purger
of phlegm, Purging.
of Agarick, the leaves of Senna and such like: Hence you must come to stronger
preparing and purging things, and so the matter which cannot be evacuated at
once, is to be prepared, concocted, and evacuated at several times. And because
a pure continued Quotidian seldom happens, but that either choler or
melancholy is intermixed, we are to look to these humors also, and to add
Cichory, Burrage, Provoke urine and Sweat.
Fumitory, Rubarb, and the leaves of Senna.

After the greatest part of the matter is evacuated, the remainder is to be
emitted by urine and sweat using such medicines as occasion the same.

But since that by reason of the duration of the disease the stomach and liver
are especially offended, Strengthening Medicines.
things that corroborate these parts are to be administered, troches of
Wo^mwood, of Rubarb, of Roses, with the powders of aromatici rosati and
diaxyaloes.

The Diet ought to be attenuating, Diet.
cutting, and clensing, the meats therefore ought to be of good juice, easy of
concoction, and affording little excrement. Fish are not proper in this Fever,
the flesh should be seasoned with Parsley, Fennel, Time, Hysop, Savory,
Rosemary, Cinnamon. In the beginning nourish somewhat more plentifully, that the
sick may endure to the height of the disease, but when it is near the state
abate aliment by degrees. Yet if crudities be in the stomach and first passages
by sparing diet the three first days they may be abated and consumed,
afterward such a diet as we have mentioned may be observed. In the beginning
the sick should abstain from wine, and in its stead use water and honey; yet if
by custom it be required, give it small and mixed with water. Small beer is
also convenient, when concoction appears, wine is more safely administered,
whereby the concoction is assisted, the stomach strengthened, and the humors
driven out by urine.

Of the Fever Epiala.
THe Fever called the Epiala is referred to continued putred Fevers, The Fever
Epiala.
which it self is indeed continued and quotidian, yet differs from the other
Quotidians in this, that the sick at the same time endure heat and cold, and
the heat and cold together are dispersed through the smallest particles of the
whole body, as Galen teaches de inaeq. intemperie. cap. 8. and 2. de diff.
Febr. c. 6.

Galen in the place newly quoted, draws this Fever from acid and vitrious
phlegm puttrefying; Cause.
yet in his book of an unequal distemper, cap. 8. he adds bitter choler,
whence he infers that since heat and cold are perceived together in one place,
it argues mixture of phlegm and choler; in another place he determines it to
arise from vitreous phlegm, part whereof putrefying, exciteth heat, the other
not putrefying causes trembling and cold. Yet Platerus refers them to
intermitting Fevers, and says that Epialaes are generated when intermitting
Fevers happen together in one and the same day, and the cold of the one
begins before the heat of the other be ended, or moreover when intermitting
Fevers concur with continued, and the heat of the continued always remains, but
the intermittent Fever coming, a trembling and cold fit is occasioned.

The cure of this Fever differs not much from the cure of other Fevers arising
from phlegm, The Cure.
only that it requires stronger attenuating and cutting medicines, because
there is greater frigidity and crudity in this then in the rest; also though
the humor it self seem to require stronger Purgers, yet the weak cannot bear
them, and therefore evacuation by degrees is to be appointed.

Of the Syncopal Fever.
MOreover to these Fevers belongs a Syncopal Fever, commonly called a humorous
Fever, Syncopal Fever.
in which there is more of pituitous and crude humors then in other Fevers
that are phlegmatic; and moreover a debility of the orifice of the stomach is
adjoined, whence the sick easily fall into a Syncope, especially when the Fever
begins.

This Fever is hard to be cured, since the sick by reason of their extreme
weakness and danger of continual soundings, cannot endure necessary
evacuations, The Prognostic.
and especially if the pulse be weak, small and unequal, the Fever is exceeding
dangerous.

But evacuations are most properly occasioned by frictions, as Galen teaches
in his twelfth of the method of curing, cap. 3. Cure.
Clysters and Lenitives also with medicines opening the first passages only and
causing no commotion of the other humors.

The first passages being opened and cleansed, we come to preparing and
evacuating humors, as in other Fevers petuitous, and medicines to prevent the
sounding fits are also to be administered.

The meats should be not much, thin as to substance, easy of concoction, Diet.
and generating as little phlegm as may be, and they are to be taken often. The
drink should be wine which has power to nourish, heat and attenuate, and does
not increase phlegm. Hydromel is also good wherein Hysop has been boiled.

CHAP. XV. Of a continued Quartane.
LAstly a continued Quartane is a Fever, A continued quartan.
whose heat is indeed continued, yet the fourth day it is exasperated, it
proceeds from melancholy mixed with blood putrefying in the vena cava.

The cause is a melancholy humor putrefying in the vena cava, The cause.
hence all things that can generate melancholy and crowd it into the vena cava,
and putresie, are the causes of this Fever.

It is known by its continued heat, the Diagnosticks.
raging the fourth day, without trembling fear or shaking fits going before, or
sweats following afterward, the pulse in the beginning is small and slow,
afterward great, full, and swifter then in an intermitting Fever, wherein it is
most intended in the height.

This is the rarest of all Fevers, ^^ognosticks.
but dangerous and far more desperate then a continued Quartane, and
debilitates nature exceedingly; it lasts till the fourtieth day oftentimes,
and beyond it.

Most part of the cure is the same with that of a continued Quartane, Cure.
and because the humor, the cause of the Fever is contained in the vena cava,
and there mixed with the blood in the beginning, those things that open the
first passages being first exhibited, a vein is to be opened, afterward phlegm
is to be concocted and evacuated. Yet you should heat and attenuate more
sparingly then in intermittent Fevers, but to moisten more and add those
things which may allay the heat of the putrefying humors, such as are in other
cases convenient against choler.

The humor being prepared, purging is to be used, and a purge should be given
the next day after the fit, which at first should be given the next day after
the fit; which at first should be gentle, but if nature order no Crisis,
stronger may afterward be given, Diuretics and Sudorifiques may also be given
after concoction, but such as are not so hot, and those given in intermittent
Fevers; and when the strength is much debilitated confortatives are to be
exhibited, prepared of Burrage, Bugloss, Balm, flowers of Rosemary,
Gilliflowers, Confection of Alkerms, and such like.

Such Diet is to be appointed as in intermittent Quartanes, Diet.
yet the diet should be thinner and cool more then in intermittent Fevers,
since that the heat is greater and the height nearer the use of the smaller
sort of wine, although it may be allowed, yet it must be taken more sparingly
then in intermittents, and if the heat be greater, wholly abstain from wine.

CHAP. XVI. Of Symptomatical Fevers.
BEsides these continued primary Fevers which have hitherto been explained,
Symptomatical Fevers.
there are yet other continued Fevers called Symptomatical and accidental,
which happen upon some other disease which has gone before, and which follows
as a Symptom the disease, and is taken away at the cure of the disease, and so
these Fevers follow other diseases which being taken away, they cease. Whence
the Ancients, also as Galen teaches, 4. Aphor. 73. said those only were
fevourish, which were sick without an inflammation or other distemper, but
those that did febricitate by reason of an inflammation of the side, lungs or
any other part, they did not call them fevourish, but Pleuretick,
Peripneumoniack, Hepatick, or other such like names.

But there is not only one sort of these Fevers, Differences.
yet the principal and most usual is that which follows an inflammation of some
internal part near the heart, or which has consent with the heart, when from
blood powered into the inflamed part and putrefying, vapors are communicated to
the heart, and heat it; which in a Pleurisy, Peripneumony and Angina happens
as we are commonly taught. But although it cannot be denied but that from the
inflammation of these and other such like parts Symptomatical Fevers may arise,
and that the Fevers ensuing the inflammations in accidental wounds do prove it;
yet if we diligently consider it, all those Fevers which are commonly called
Symptomatical are not such but primary.

For first putrefaction is kindled in the vena cava, whence a continued primary
Fever is stirred up; Fevers accompanied.
but because nature is burdened with the weight of those peccant humors; she
uses to force them as much as it could out of those greater vessels, and from
a public and Kingly seat as it were into lesser veins and smaller parts of
the body, the blood with those vicious humors being diffused into those lesser
parts causes inflammation. And it is manifest by this, because a Fever for the
most part precedes inflammation it does not follow it, and oftentimes the
matter passes from one part to another, whence changes of diseases are made.
Hence these Fevers are properly called by Platerus Comitatae rather then
Symptomatical, and such Febres Gomitatae are not only those which have an
inflammation of any part accompanied with them, but also those, to which other
evils are annexed, namely a Diarrhea, a Dysentery, Spots, Measles, the small
Pox, wandering pains, the Gout of the joints, or running Gout, Catarrhs. For all
these evils do arise when nature being oppressed with the weight of its burden
of peccant humors, it protrudes some part of them out of the vessels.

A Fever of this kind is also accompanied, which is an Erysipelas, Erysipelas
or Rose.
called by the Germans Rose; for this Fever does not proceed from an
inflammation of an external part, but this evil accompanies the Fever; for when
the thinner and hotter blood burns in the vessels by what means soever,
putrifies, and is corrupted, and acquires a vicious quality, which principally
is caused by anger, and fear, nature being stimulated protrudes the same to
some external part of the body, whence this evil invadeth with a trembling and
quaking, and whilst the matter striving to go outward, cease on the
Glandules under the Armpits, and about the groin; some of the humor that is
stirred up, sticks there, and pain and swellings are there perceived, till at
length it manifests it self in the leg or some other external part which may be
known by the heat, pain, and rosy color.

But we do not assent unto Platerus in that he says that all those Fevers are
simple and pure continued, and are without any putrefaction.

The Urines, that we may pass by other things, do manifestly show putrefaction,
which has the same tokens of crudity and concoction as in other putred Fevers,
and nature sometimes critically, sometimes Symptomatically, expells the matter
offensive to it; for it does not only expel by insensible transpiration, and by
a moist steam, which uses to be in Ephemeraes and Synochaes which are without
putrefaction.

Some of these Fevers whether they arise from an inflammation of the parts, or
whether they have that as a companion, Differences of Fevers.
are called Phlegmonides, which principally proceed from blood; but those which
arise from Erysipelas or inflammation, are called Erusipolatodes, and inflame
fires. Phlegmonides. Typhodes. Lipyriae.


To these belong the Fever that leaves fire as it were behind it, which burns
so exceedingly, that all the interals are as it were burnt, but the external
parts grow cold, and that during the whole course of the disease; and this
Fever arises from an Erisipelas or inflammation of any internal part, but
principally of the stomach, and from blood and Spirits meeting in the part
inflamed.

The second kind of Symptomatical Fevers which is called Lenta, proceeds not
from any inflammation of the bowels, Febrelentae.
but from some obstruction and hidden putrefaction, that is, from matter
without the vessels, spread over the substance of any of the interals, or at
least impacted, and putrefying in the capillar veins dispersed near the
substance of the interals, and has its rise from the substance of the interal
decaying; whence there is so great quantity as that when the matter is gotten
into larger and wider vessels, vapors cannot be transmitted to the heart, and
so a Febris Lenta is stirred up, which therefore is unequal and keeps no
certain order.

This Fever is the gentlest of all, and molesteth not the sick with any
grievous Symptom, so that the sick oftentimes thinks himself well. In the mean
while the strength decays, that the sick can scarce go forward, and the body
is no ways refreshed by aliment, but wastes by degrees, whence sometimes this
Fever is accounted with an Hectic, and therefore when there is any suspicion
of this Fever, in the first place we must diligently search the Hypocondries
and Hypogastries, to try whether any tumor be to be discerned in any of them;
some signs of putrefaction also will appear in the urine, and discover
themselves in the Pulse.

This Fever is more durable, and goes beyond the terms of other Fevers, and
often ends not in forty days, nor is it gone until the humor fastened to
the interal be consumed.

The third sort of Symptomatical Fevers is, Fevers from putrefaction of
interals.
that which arises from the putrefaction of any interal, from whence putred
vapors through the veins inserted might be sent to the heart, heat that, and
might stir up a continued Fever, whereby the body by degrees might be
extenuated and wither. And this Fever is sometimes more violent, sometimes more
mild, according as the putrefaction is more or less. This often happens in
putrefaction of the lungs in such as are Phthisical; so it is found that the
Caul or Kell, Mesentery, Womb, and other parts are corrupted, and thence a
Fever kindled. In like manner from Fistulaes penetrating into the internal
parts a Febris lenta being stirred up, it is observed, that some do consume and
waste.

The fourth kind of Symptomatical Fevers is when either from corrupt milk, From
corrupt milk. Putrified blood, Worms.
which often happens in Infants, or from blood putrefying somewhere without the
vessels, or from worms, putred vapors are communicated to the heart, that is
heated, and a Fever irritated.

To these may be referred that Fever which arises from crudity, which is
familiar amongst little children from their eating of sweet things, which has
with it a tumor and inflammation of the Hypocondries, which the Germans call
Das Herngespam, from the abundance of crude humors collected in the stomach
and neighboring parts, which begin to putrefie and are turned into wind.
Diagn^stick signs:


Symptomatical Fevers properly so called, are known by this, that they come
after diseases of private parts, and the first sort of these Fevers is known
from hence, because it follows an inflammation of some certain part: as on the
contrary, Fevers called Comitatae, first appear and invade with rigor and
trembling, to which afterward a Fever happens.

But those Lentae or slow Fevers are known by their slow heat, wherewith notes
of putrefaction in the urine and pulse appear, the sick are weak scarce able to
go, the body wastes by little and little, and the Fever is lengthened for the
most part beyond forty days; they are tormented by the use of purging. But
when the cause of these Fevers is hidden, it is very hardly to be distinguished,
and therefore the Hypocondries and other internal parts are to be observed with
great diligence, and we are to enquire whether any tumor or pain be to be found
there.

But those which arise from the putrefaction of any part are more easily known,
nor indeed can the corruption of the part be hidden, unless it be ignoble.

So that Fever which proceeds from corrupt milk or blood is easily known by its
signs; as also that which arises from crudity is manifest from their loathing
things blowing up and swelling of the Hypocondries.

Although these Fevers in respect of themselves for the most part are not
dangerous because they are mild, The Prognostic.
yet in regard of their causes on which they depend, we ought to doubt whether
they are dangerous or not, as also whether they are long or short; for those
which follow an inflammation of any part are short; since that the inflammation
it self cannot be long, but the danger of them depends on the inflammation.

The Febres Lentae are for the most part long, and often continue more then
forty days. And although not by their violence yet by their duration they
debilitate the strength; they are cured also with difficulty, because their
cause pertinaciously inheres in some interal.

Those Fevers are very dangerous and seldom curable which come from the
corruption and putrefaction of any part; because the part can seldom be cured.

But those Fevers which proceed from corrupted mill: and blood, worms or
crudity, are often acute and dangerous, and bring with them grievous Symptoms,
as Epilepsies, Convulsions; yet they last not long, neither are they hard to be
cured, but the cause being taken away they cease.

The way of cure ought to be aimed at by striking at the cause whereon it
depends. The Cure.
If therefore a Symptomatical Fever depend on an inflammation of any part, the
cure is to be directed to the inflammation it self, which being cured, the
Fever cease. And therefore most remedies which are convenient to assuage
inflammations are here useful. Yet in regard of the part affected, the way of
cure sometimes differs, the part affected is diligently to be weighed: Whereof
it shall be spoken in the cure of particular affects.

The Febres Lentae since they proceed from extraordinary obstructions of the
bowels, require opening, attenuating, and deterging medicines. And such are to
be chosen as are appropriated to each part, and such as strengthen the tone of
the interals, which for the most part is debilitated, yet by intervalls gentle
purgation may be used. Neither are Diuretics to be omitted in their season.
Externally also if the part affected will bear it, Emollients and Discutients
are to be applied.

If the Symptomatical Fever proceed from the corruption and putrefaction of any
part, that cure is to be instituted which agrees to Ulcers and Fistulaes of
the internal parts.

If it be occasioned by corrupt milk or blood, Worms, or crude and corrupt
meats we are to endeavor that those causes be taken away conveniently, either
by vomit or cleansing and evacuating medicines, and together to resist
putrefaction and fevourish heat.

In the cure of accompanied Fevers, we are to look no less to the Fever then
that conjunct disease or companion, and the metion of nature is not to be
impeded, The cure of accompanied Fevers.
least the peccant humor retained in the body should cause more danger; and
therefore although it be not profitable to hinder an inflammation when it is
beginning: Yet the humor that is the cause or that evil is also to be
evacuated, which is most conveniently done for the most part by breathing of a
vein, which together affords evacuation and revulsion. Yet it shall be
profitable also to empty the firft passages, since that oftentimes the matter
is gathered together in them; and since the matter for the most part is thin,
and often makes toward the extremties of the body, and is often full of
malignity, it is conveniently expelled by sweat.

CHAP. XVII. Of intermitting Fevers in general.
AFter continued Fevers, intermitting are to be explained. Intermitting Fevers.
But although the Ancients did extend the name of intermitting Fevers more
largely, and attributed the same to all Fevers which admit of some change of
heat, and are sometimes exasperated, sometimes remitted, and so to continued
periodicks: yet afterward use brought it to pass that those Fevers only were
called intermittent, which sometimes cease and come to that apurexy or want of
fire.

The proximate cause of an intermitting Fever is a putred vapor, their
proximate cause.
elevated from the putrefaction of excrementitious humors, not continually as
in continued Fevers, but by certain intervalls sent to the heart, and heating
the same contrary to nature.

But how it comes to pass, The fire place of Intermitting Fevers.
that the putred vapor is not continually sent to the heart but at certain
times is very obscure. For the explanation whereof since the knowledge of the
place wherein putrefaction arises, does not a little conduce, and whence the
putred vapors are communicated to the heart, which Galen calls the Furnace and
Chimney in his 2. of the differences of Fevers, cap. the last, and in his 15.
of the method of curing. cap. the fourth, that therefore is first to be
explained. But since it is beyond the bounds of our Breviary of Institutions to
reckon up the various and different opinions of Physicians concerning it, we
will here set down that opinion which we think truest. The Chimney or Furnace
and place wherein the matter the cause of intermitting Fevers is generated, are
the Mesaraick veins, wherein the matter which suffices to irritate each single
Paroxism, is generated during the time of its interval. And that many things
which happen about intermitting Fevers do prove; namely Loathing, Vomitting,
Dolor of the heart, Extension and pain of the Midriffe, Intumescence about the
Ventricle, Bitterness about the mouth, Belching, and such like; for in the
beginning of intermitting Fevers pure choler is often ejected by vomit in
great abundance, which out of the more remote veins could not be evacuated in
that manner, and about the cava of the Liver. Fernelius says he has found the
quantity of a pound by weight after the death of a Patient.

This choler being cast out the Fever is often cured, which is a sign that it
is the cause of the Fever, and that it is collected in those first ways or
passages. Which Fomentations also used to the Hypocondries at the beginning of
a Paroxysm shows by the mitigation of the trembling and shaking.

This matter is gathered together in the Mesaraick veins a long time before it
brings forth a Fever, but when it begins to putrefie, grow hot, and be changed,
its heat being diffused over the whole body it exciteth a Fever; which when it
is dispersed, the fevourish heat and Paroxism cease, and the Fever leaves so
long as till new matter which in like manner putrifieth in its due time, is
generated.

But although the matter which is the cause of intermitting Fevers be generated
in the Mesaraick veins and first passages: the cause of intermitting Fevers
contained in the v^na cava.
Yet the whole does not reside and continue included in them, but is sent to
the vena cava and arteries, both during the fit and out of the same. Nor is it
here necessary to seek for occult and blind passages, through which the putred
vapors should be sent to the heart during the Paroxism, since there are
manifest passages enough; for the branches of the Gate-vein are inserted into
the substance of the Liver, and the mouths of these have communion with the
vena cava, and the arteries going from the heart are joined in the stomach,
guts, spleen and other parts to the Mesaraick veins. Yet it is probable that the
fevourish matter may be communicated to the veins not principally and only in
the Paroxism, but moreover some part thereof by that passage which is from the
Meseraick veins to the Liver continually may be carried to them; whence both by
Galen. 1. de cris. cap. 7. and other Physicians a Fever is called a passion of
a venomous nature. And that is first manifest from the urines, which show
evident notes of crudity and concoction in Intermittents. Hence also it comes
to pass that urines during the Paroxisms are laudable and like to theirs who
are well, since that the peccant humor is then protruded by nature out of the
veins toward the circumference of the body, and so the blood in the veins is
become purer, which again in the intervals of fits is polluted by the vicious
humor proceeding from the chimney of the Fever. The same is manifest out of
those things which happen at the beginning of a fit, and at that time which the
Greeks call Episemasian; for then spontaneous lassitudes, stretching,
compression of pulses, and other things happen which indicate that the matter
which is to stir the Fever begins to be moved and as it were to swell in those
common vessels, veins and arteries.

That vicious humor accumulated partly in the Mesaraick veins, partly in the
vena cava when in time it putrifieth, nature stimulated and irritated
oftentimes strives several ways, first by vomit and stool, afterward by sweats
and urine sensibly to evacuate the same, as also through the pores of the skin,
and by insensible transpiration it may discuss the same being resolved into
vapors and steam. For since that peccant humor is not exactly mingled with
the blood but confusedly, nature may easily separate the same from the good
blood, and may shake it off each single fit; which being discussed, since
putred vapors cannot any more be communicated to the heart, the Fever also
cease and apurexie ensues.

But because that as long as the Fever continues some seeds and sparks are
left in the granary and chimney, Causes of the return of fits.
and seeing that there is imbecility in the part, it is necessary that the
humor flowing to it, although it be good, should be defiled with that
pollution and excrement which was left as it were with leaven, and through the
debility of the part be corrupted, and so new matter of a future Paroxism be
generated. And these fits continue, and so often return, until that those
seeds, that putrefaction, and those sparks are fully taken away from thence,
and the weakness of that part restored. Yet it seems probable that the whole
matter which is the cause of a Fever does not putrify together in the first
Paroxism, but that part which is apt to putrefaction, in the other fits the
rest, until the whole be putrified and consumed.

By these things it is manifest both where the matter that is the cause of
putred Fevers is generated, Cause of (...).
how it causes a fit, by what ways it is evacuated, and how the matter which
is the cause of a new Paroxism is generated, and so the cause of Paroxisms and
the recourse of intermitting Fevers is explained. But what the reason is why
these Fevers return at set times, some sooner, some later, is now another
question, and that most intricate, which is easier to ask then answer? But that
we may here forbear to recite the opinions of others, which are very many, we
will mention only that which seems most probable to us, so far as in this
humane dimness of our understanding in so obscure a business we are able to
discover. And first, that Fevers keep such certain periods, experience does
manifest; whereby it appears, that some Fevers return the third, some the
fourth day, and that oftentimes it observes not only the same hour, but minute
of invasion although the fits may sometimes anticipate, sometimes retard for
certain reasons. But the cause why paroxisms return at certain times, we
conceive is to be sought from the diversity of humors: For those effects, as
Valleriola says, in any one sort of things, which perpetually agree to the
things, and are made in the like manner, into what body, and at what time
soever they happen to come, these are to be referred to the proper substance of
that of the which they are made; but to make return through certain days, and
to irritate accessions, both agrees perpetually to humors and the recourses in
this manner, always at equal intervals (unless a perverting of the order of
periods happen from elsewhere) are made: Therefore it shall be from such or
such a nature of humors that the recourse shall be made in the same sort;
namely, the causes of periods and intermitting Fevers, are excrementitious
humors. Choler, Melancholy; Phlegm; and those Fevers which return the third
day, proceed from a Choleric humor; those on the fourth from Melancholy;
those that come every day, so that they are not double Tertians, proceed from
Phlegm.

Yet the cause of periods cannot be drawn simply from humors, but as they
acquire a peculiar quality from putrefaction or corruption, by reason whereof
at a certain time, they wax hot and begin to be moved. For sithence this effect
is definite and determinate, which carries it self alike in all individuals,
it is necessary that it have a certain definite and determinate cause in all
individuals that are alike; which since that neither disposition of parts, nor
quantity of humors (for we see that although the store of matter decreaseth,
and the fits are become shorter, nevertheless they do return at their usual
time) nor manifest quality of humor, thickness, viscidity, tenuity, or some
such like, which uses to vary, can be a quality; we must needs fly to a
peculiar and proper quality and nature of a humor; which also when it is
changed, the form of the Fever it self is changed; for when Choler is turned
into Melancholy, the Fever which used to come the third day, comes on the
fourth; and this quality also may afterward remain in the humor, when the
putrefaction cease, and the Fever depending thereon. Whence, as Fornelius in
his to of Fevers witnesses, the torments of the Cholick, Pains of the Joints,
and such like diseases arising after long continued Tertians and Quartans, do
likewise keep certain periods, by reason of that disposition which they have
received from the corruption or putrefaction of the humors.

Yet if any one be willing to determine that the said occult propriety is
derived, Order of the fits
not from corruption only, but that celestial causes do also concur to its
generation, I will not much contend with him; for we see that principally about
the Solstices and Aequinoctials, such Fevers, especially the most durable of
them, do begin and end.

But although Fevers keep certain periods, yet there is a certain difference in
them also; for sometimes the fit returns just at the expected time: sometimes the
following paroxisme returns sooner then the former; which form is called
proleptick: sometimes the following fit comes later then the former, and that
form is called Hysteric; and indeed sometimes through the whole course of the
disease, such a form is observed, and oftentimes from the beginning of a Fever,
until the end of the same the paroxismes anticipate, or come after the expected
time: but sometimes in some there is anticipation, in some post pofition,
otherwise the fits comes at the same time.

For the most part they say, The cause of anticipation and coming late.
that anticipation happens when the humors by some error in diet are
augmented, or are moved by medicines, anger, exercise, and such like causes.
But the fits return flower, when the matter is diminished, or thickened: Which
indeed when the accustomary paroxisme is changed, that it may be so, as we do
not deny; so when the Fever keeps always some certain form, either proleptick
or hysteric, the cause rather seems to be taken from the diversity of the
humor; for although Choler, according to its manner, being corrupted, is the
cause of a Tertian, Melancholy of a Quartan; yet Choler and Melancholy,
according to the diversity of Bodies and Temperaments, do oftentimes vary
something; Hence also it happens, that although that putred leaven, or occult
quality introduced by choler, be the cause of the circuit of a Tertian,
Melancholy being brought in of a Quartan: yet according to the difference of a
humor, it may happen so, that the effervescence, or fervency of humors, may
come sooner or later by some hours.

Concerning the longitude or brevity of some Paroxisms that depends on the
paucity or plenty of matter, The cause of the length of Fits.
disposition of the humors and body: For a plentiful quantity of humors is
the cause of a longer fit then a small; so a thick humor causes a longer then
a thin, since it cannot be so soon discussed as a thin. If the strength of the
body be great, which can more easily discuss what is offensive, then theirs who
are weak; the shorter fit follows: Also a thinner constitution of body, as
being more apt for the discussing of the matter, is the cause of a shorter fit;
a thicker, of a longer. And when all the causes which occasion a short paroxism
concur, a very short fit is raised: But when all those that produce a long are
present, the paroxism is extreme long. When certain causes are present which
make a short fit, and some are wanting of them, an indifferent betwixt both
happens.

And so much of the nature, place, and motion of the proximate cause, which
exciteth intermittent Fevers; The more remote causes of intermitting Fevers.
But the more remote causes, and those things which conduce to the generation
and corruption of that matter in the Meseraick veins, are meat and drink of
evil juice, but yiedling matter for peccant humors answering to their own
nature; and an ill disposition of stomach, whereof meats turn into choler, or
become sour, an intemperate constitution of Air; for although diverse humors
are generated in different bodies naturally, yet if there be great vehemence of
manifest causes, even in bodies of different constitutions, they may produce
the same humors and diseases depending on them.

As for the difference of intermitting Fevers, Difference.
they proceed from the diversity of humors; for there are so many sorts of
intermitting Fevers, as there are of humors by which they are produced; for
there are according to the vulgar opinion, three sorts of excrementitious
humors, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, and so three kinds of intermitting
Fevers, Bilious, Pituitous, and Melancholy; which differences we usually call a
Tertian intermittent, a quotidian intermittent, and a quartane intermittent.
And in case those humors are sincere, pure Fevers are generated; if they are
mixed, spurious. And that Fever which proceeds from pure Choler, is called a
pure Tertian, but that which arises from yellow Choler mixed with some other
humor, is called a Bastard Tertian.

But concerning a quotidian intermittent, Of a quotidian, whether any be.
the matter is not so plain: For Fernelius accounts this the rarest of all
other, and scarce one of them happens amongst six hundred; and that those
intermittent Fevers which daily afflict, for the most part he rather accounts
them double Tertians: But Platerus flatly denies a Quotidian Fever, and wholly
agrees with Galen 8. Meth. med. cap. 5. where he appoints only a twofold
crudity; the one nitrous, the other acid: and they only seem to afford matter
for two sorts of Fevers, Choleric and Melancholy. For although Phlegm also,
according to preheminency, and most principally, be called a crude humor; yet
since it is exceeding cold, it can scarcely putrify and excite a Fever.

But whether there are more circuits of Fevers, Whether there are Quintan
Fevers.
and whether besides Tertians, Quartans, and if there be any such thing as
Quotidians, there are also other Fevers which are extended beyond the fifth
circuit, is doubtful. Galen saw no such: Nevertheless Hypocrates, and other
Physicians, observed Fevers which returned the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth,
ninth day: But what the cause of this course is, is very obscure. Some seek the
cause of such fits out of the diverse constitution of Choler and Melancholy;
and Andreas Caesalpinus Art. Med. lib. 2. cap. 15. refers Quintans to Choler,
Septanes to Melancholy; and determines such flower returns of Fits to be a kind
of renewing of one or more simple accessions; and the Quintan to be a kind of
Tertian, wherein the third day is without a paroxism; and a Septan to be a sort
of Quartan, renewing the accession of the fourth day. But most derive the
reason of these circuits from the various mixture of Melancholy humors with
others. But although it be probable that all these Fevers, as keeping longer
periods, proceed from a Melancholy humor; yet a mixture of that humor seems
not necessary: Because no humor can be appointed to be mixed with a
Melancholy, which can be a cause of a slower period then it self: for those
humors, both Choleric and Melancholy, are not always of the same sort; and
moreover, the corruption also which they suffer, is not always the same; so
that it is no wonder that the effect also varies, which proceeding from them is
not always the same: And as in epidemical diseases, sometimes rare and
wonderful corruptions of humors happen, so in Intermittents, that some such
thing may likewise happen, is not altogether absurd.

Intermitting Fevers are easily known; Diagnostick signs.
for they come to Apurexie, and at certain times; and indeed, as Galen 1. ad
Glaucan. cap. 5.2. de crisib. cap. 3. and 2. de diff. Febr. cap. 3. teaches,
they return with shaking, horror, or cold, For although that sometimes Fevers do
occur which seem intermittent, and invade without any rigor, trembling, or
cold; yet really they are not such, but only slow and obscure continued ones;
or in case they are really intermittent, they are not pure; whose Idea Galen
propounds but spurious.

But these Fevers are less dangerous then continued; Prognostics.
and seldom, unless the strength be decayed, or in regard of age, or some
other cause, or some error committed in diet, are mortal, sithence it may be
convenient during the apurexie to gather strength, and administer necessary
medicines.

Concerning the cure of these Fevers in general: Indications and Cure
Since their cause is collected and generated in the meseraick veins, there
putrifies, and thence is diffused over all the body, and at length is discussed
by insensible transpiration or sweats: But the cause of the recourse of the
Fever, as Galen teaches, 2. de Febr. cap. the last is a twofold vicious
disposition in a body, the one a certain pollution or putrefaction left after
the former paroxisme; the other imbecility of the member or part, generating
excrementitious humors; what therefore is to be done in each sort of Fever,
easily appears from hence.

For sithence the beginning of generation and corruption of humors producing a
Fever, is in the first passages, Purging
we are to endeavor to purge out that peccant humor, before it corrupts the
rest of the blood, and brings weakness, and a vicious disposition to the parts;
but we must proceed warily in those evacuations, since there is not the same
reason of all intermitting Fevers: For when that vicious and excrementious
humor, the cause of a Fever, in the meseraicks is mixed with blood, crudity
also, and concoction, according to their manner are necessary; whereby the
vicious humors may be separated from the good, and rendered fit for evacuation:
and that often happens in a short time in Fevers full of Choler, and the
choleric humor is otherwise apt enough to motion: But in a Quartan the humor
is more stubborn, and moreover according to Galen 1. ad Glau. cap. 11. no
strong medicine is easily to be admitted at the beginning.

And Sudorifiques are not at all (or altogether) to be used, Sweats
unless evacuations have preceded; for if many vicious and excrementitious
humors do hitherto abide in the first ways, it may easily come to pass that by
reason of hydroticks untimely exhibited, they may be detruded thence to the
more noble parts, and may become the cause of various and grievous evils, and
such as may bring more danger then the Fever it self.

As for breathing of a vein, Letting blood.
it is not indicated from the primary cause of intermitting Fevers, which is
generated in the meseraick veins, where the greatest part abides: Yet because
that sometimes blood also abounds, which may easily be corrupted and polluted by
the vicious humors, and so if it be too plentiful, cannot be well governed by
nature when it is weakened by a Fever; and in the progress of the disease, from
thence some of the peccant matter passes into the vena cava, and is mixed with
the blood, it is sometimes needful to open a vein, which nevertheless is not to
be appointed presently in the beginning, before the evacuation of the primary
passages.

If the Fever be not cured by these evacuations, we are to endeavor that the
causes of the returns of fits may be taken away, and moreover two things remain
to be done; namely, that that disposition and weakness of the part generating
vicious humors, may be taken away, which is performed by altering medicines,
which together correct the fault of the humor, and discuss that pollution, and
those seeds which were left out of the putrefaction of humors: and indeed that
paroxisms depend on that pollution, and that when it is taken away the Fever
cease, appears from hence, That whilst that is driven by nature to the
circumference of the body, out of the veins, and that Pustules are raised about
the lips, nose, and other parts of the face, the Fever cease Wann der Mundt
oder die Nase auss schiaget.

But it is principally taken away by Sudorifiques; yet there are also certain
other medicines known both to Physicians and to the vulgar, Febrifuga.
which take away feverish fits, and therefore are called Febrilia, Puretagoga,
and such as specifically cause, and are called The flight of a Fever, or
Febrifuga, which nevertheless cause no sweat, but without doubt some other way
take away that seed, and by consequence the paroxism, such as commonly are
accounted the powder of burnt shells of Cockles or Snails or of the Pearl
bearing shells, or mother of pearl calcined, of River Crabs, and principally
their eyes, which are so called prepared, and such like: But how they perform
this, is not explained by Authors. That I may speak my own opinion, such like
medicines seem by a certain precipitation to take away that force of heating
and stirring up a paroxism which is in the humors, to which Opiats seem to
belong: yet such like cannot be given safely, unless the vicious humors, and
those things which may afford the reason of the antecedent cause be first taken
away; for otherwise those things which may be expelled by nature when it is
irritated in a paroxisme, are left in the body, and afterward may become the
cause of a Chachexie, Dropsy, Jaundies, Cholick pains, and of other gri^vous
evils.

Externally also are applied certain medicines to cure intermitting Fevers, of
Cobwebs, oil of Spiders, and certain vesicatories, Topical Medicines.
which without doubt, that which they do, is performed by drawing out, and
evacuating of that Feverish corruption and pollution.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Intermitting Fevers in particular, and first of an
Intermitting Tertian.
AFter we have handled intermitting Fevers in general, An intermitting Tertian.
we will now go through them in particular; amongst them the most frequent is a
Tertian intermitting, which arises from Choler putrefying in the meseraick
veins.

But there is a certain difference of these Fevers; for first, Its difference.
Choler it self out of which these Fevers are generated, is not of the same
kind; for sometimes the choler is like to that natural choler which afterward
is collected in the Galls bladder; sometimes it is preternatural green and
aeruginous, such as sometimes by those that are Feverish, is evacuated by vomit
or stool. Moreover, Choler either putrifies alone, or else has some other
humor mixed with it; Phlegm or Melancholy that causes a pure, this a bastard
Tertian. They differ also in respect of duration; for if the fits are not
extended beyond twelve hours, they are wont to be called pure tertians; but in
case the Fit be extended above twelve hours, they are no more called exquisite
and pure tertians, but either simply tertians, or spurious tertians; and when
the paroxism is extended above twenty four hours, they are called extense
tertians; but this is occasioned either by the thinness or thickness, plenty or
paucity of the humor. For by how much the Choler is thinner or lesser, by so
much the sooner it is discussed, but by how much the thicker, or more mixed with
thick humors, or the more plentiful, by so much the longer the paroxism
continues.

The causes of this Fever are all those things which can generate
excrementitious choler, namely a hot and dry distemper; The causes generating,
Choler signs of a true Tertian.
hot constitution of air, cating of hot meats, and drinking of hot drinks,
using of hot medicines, watching, fasting, labor, and too much exercise: For
although that in the Liver also yellow choler may be generated, yet it is very
often generated by the error of the first concoction, and fault of the
meseraick vein; therefore whether much choler be generated in the stomach by
reason of meats, or by default of the stomach, and is carried to the meseraick
veins with the chyle, and there is heaped up, and at length putrifieth, a Fever
is kindled.

If the causes generating Phlegm and Melancholy be annexed to those that
generate choler, spurious tertians are bred.

This Fever presently invadeth, A pure Tertian.
if it be pure, with a shaking fit, as it were pricking the flesh; afterward
when the cold fit cease, presently much heat follows, sharp and biting, and
in its vigor is extended equally over the body, whence the sick draw their
breath much, and are troubled with thirst. The pulses in the beginning of a fit
are little, weak, slow, and thin; but the fit increasing, they become vehement,
swift, frequent, and in some measure hard, and void of all inequalities besides
Feverish. When the fit comes to the height, and the sick drinks, many vapors
are sent through the skin, vomiting of choler follows, which oftentimes uses
to happen after the cold fit also, the belly is loosened, choler is pissed out,
or sometimes more then these happen. Afterward a sweating out of hot vapors
ensues over the whole body, and the pulse is swift, great, vehement, such as
theirs use to be who are overheated by exercise. The Urine is of a light red,
or deep yellow, and afterward has a white cloud or suspension. The fit
lasts not above twelve hours, and the causes which generate melancholy, have
either gone before, or are then present.

A bastard tertian is known from the causes which do not generate pure choler,
A spurious Tertian.
but to gather Phlegm or Melancholy: The heat is not so sharp as in a pure
tertian, but more mild, neither is it presently diffused over the whole body.
Neither is this Fever dissolved by vomitting of yellow choler, or by sweat, but
certain vapors go out in the declination, and if any sweats come forth, they
either are not universal, or if they are universal, they cure not the Fever.
The Urine is not so fiery as in a pure tertian, and the signs of concoction do
not appear so soon in it. The pulse in the beginning is hard, and that hardness
increases daily, until the seventh paroxism, then by degrees it becomes
softer, and the Urines also appear more concocted. The paroxism is often
extended to eighteen hours and more: yet sometimes, to wit if the matter be
less, and Nature strong, it is likewise terminated in twelve hours. It ends
not in seven fits, but often endures till it comes to fourteen, and sometimes
to twenty.

But these Fevers are least dangerous amongst all the putred ones 4.
Prognostics.
Aphor. 43. and such as are pure, do not long continue, but at seven fits they
are accounted at the height, 4. Aphor. 59. Sometimes they are terminated at the
third or fourth fit; but spurious tertians, as they are more frequent, so they
continue longer: for although if the matter be little, and necessary medicines
are timely exhibited, they sometimes cease at the fifth or seventh paroxism, yet
for the most part they scarce end at fourteen fits, and are often lengthned out
to the fortieth day; sometimes they continue six months, and end with some
disease of the Liver or Spleen, or else are also ch^rished by them.

Although Tertians for the most part are not dangerous, yet sometimes they
become pernicious. First, If any error be committed by the sick, or the
Physician. Secondly, If the humor which Nature endeavors to expel, should
fall upon any principal part. Thirdly, If the humor be exceeding thin, putred,
or filthy. Fourthly, If a thin humor have a thick one mixed with it, and stir
the same, and inflame it. Fifthly, If a thick humor poured out by heat, either
fall down into some principal part, or cause a dangerous Catarrh, or Asthma, or
the Gout, or draw the womb into consent. Sixthly, If the humor acquire a
malignant quality.

But in the cure of this Fever, as also in others, Indications and Cure.
regard must be had of the Fever, the cause and nature of it; the Fever
indicates cooling and moistning things, the same Choler also, as being the
cause requires, which also ought to be evacuated: yet if another humor be
mixed with it, altering preparing and evacuating medicines, which that humor
requires, are to be mixed; and because the abundance of the matter is in the
meseraick veins, the vicious humor is to be purged out of them, and if need
be, prepared before it infect the good blood: afterward also it is to be
altered, and the disposition of the part generating peccant humors to be
corrected. Lastly, We must endeavor that the pollution and putrefaction may be
discussed by Sudorifiques.

First therefore, the first passages are to be cleansed, Purgers.
either by Clysters, or lenitive Medicines exhibited of the Syrup of Roses
solutive, Manna, Cassia, to which also we may add Rhubarb, Agarick, the leaves
of Senna, according as the quality of the peccant humor requires. Vomits also
convenient may be given, especially if the sick be troubled with pain in the
heart, loathing, and a desire to vomit: And since the matter consists in the
meseraick veins, and that nature her self at the beginning of the paroxism
strives to expel it either by vomit or stool, the Physician ought to be
observant to it, and to eject the matter, if Nature endeavor to expel it by
stool or vomit; and because the matter for the most part in the first passages
is either more abundant, or has thick humors mixed therewith, there is need
not only of lenitives, but those medicines also which we lately mentioned; nay
sometimes of some of the Electuary of Fleawort or Fleabane, of the juice of
Roses, Rosati Mesuae: Yet care must be taken that we do not draw the humors
out of the veins into the first passages.

Concerning the opening of a vein, Opening a vein.
although Choler residing in the meseraick veins do not require it, yet if
there be store of blood, and the peccant humor out of the first region of the
body have penetrated the vena cava, which may be discerned by the thickness and
redness of the Urine, and if the party be strong, a vein may be breathed; and
moreover note, that not at the first invading, but afterward, Phlebotomy is to
be used: Yet regard of the Fever is to be had; for if it be a pure Tertian,
which uses to be shorter, a vein is to be opened more timely, if it be
required, because if it be referred till after the third fit, the disease comes
to its height; but if it be a bastard tertian, you may defer it till after the
third paroxism, namely, because more of the morbifique matter is then mixed
with the blood in the vena cava; but blood is to be taken away in less quantity
in a pure Tertian; because as in continued Fevers that is not the primary
indicant, and the strength cannot bear the taking away of a greater quantity,
blood may be taken away more safely, and in greater abundance in a spurious
tertian: But the opening of a vein is most conveniently appointed during the
intermission.

Afterward those medicines are to be exhibited which both correct the
qualities of the choleric humor exceeding, Preparatives.
whereby it is troublesome to nature, and also the vicious disposition in the
part generating excrementitious humors, and such as are contrary to that
pollution which remains after putrefaction; such are cooling and moistning
things, which together have a power of purging the first ways, and of resisting
putrefaction; such are Cichory, Sowthistle, Endive, Sorrel, Barley, the four
great, and four small cold seeds, the juice of Citron or Limon, and medicines
prepared out of these, Syrup of Sorrel, Acetosa simplex, Oxysauharum, Syrup of
Cichory, Endive de acitocitate citri, with waters and decoctions of the same,
to which in spurious tertians we may add those things which are proper for
Phlegm and Melancholy, the roots of Fennel, grass, asparogus, asarabecca,
polypodie, carduus benedictus, centurie the lesser, wormwood, scolopendrium,
betony, the spirit of vitriol and salt is profitable, cream of Tartar, Tartar
vitriolated.

But amongst those medicines there are some which by a certain peculiar force
are said to oppugn Tertians; Specificks
amongst which notwithstanding for the most part manifest causes may be rendered
for it: such are Sowthistle, Camomil, Century the lesser, Plantane, Devils bit.

Altering medicines being given, Purgers.
if the Fever be more pertinacious, sometimes purging and vomiting are
convenient, which for the most part are to be administered on the intermitting
day; but if it be advertised that the matter during the paroxism does incline
toward the stomach, or tend downwards, it is lawful even when the fit is
present to administer vomits, or a gentle purge, yet so that before the
beginning of the paroxism the operation may be past, in case a purge be given.

Amongst the vomits, Asarabecca and Broom are principally commended; amongst
the purges, Rhubarb; to those that are stronger, the Electuary or Fleawort or
Fleabane, Elect. Rosatem, Mesne, and of the juice of Roses may be given in
spurious Tertians; Agarick or Senna may be added, in whom it is also necessary
to repeat preparatives and purgations.

The body being sufficiently purged, Medicines causing of urine.
the remainder is to be taken away by Diuretics: In a pure Tertian an Emulsion
of the four great cold seeds is profitable, made with the whey of Goats milk,
or the water of Barley, Strawberries, Cichory. In a spurious, a decoction of
the roots of Grass, Sparagus, Fennel, Maidenhair, red Parsnips, Bindweed,
flowers of Camomil and Wormwood are convenient.

But principally the Physician ought to imitate nature, Sweats.
which at the end of the paroxisme uses to move sweats, and should discuss the
Relics of the vicious humors by fudoriferous medicines given either before
or after the paroxism; and indeed in pure Tertians, wherein nature usually
causes sweat in the end of the fit, it often suffices that the sick drink only
Barley water, or the water of Sorrel, or Carduus benedictus may be given with
the Syrup of the juice of Citron or Limmon. In spurious, hotter medicines are
to be used, such as hereafter shall be mentioned amongst malignant Fevers,
which being given some hours before the paroxism, often prevents or cures the
same.

If the Fever be not cured with these remedies, Coroloratives.
and that there be any sign of viscous matter, and that the Liver and Spleen
are likewise affected, regard thereunto must also be had; and since the Liver
for the most part in bastard Tertians is obstructed by thick choler, or choler
mixed with thick humors, which pollutes the blood, those things which cleanse
the body from choler are to be used; to which purpose Wormwood is very good to
be used, which has a force of deterging choler, and bringing away the same by
stool and urine, as also has century the lesser, Troches also of Wormwood, of
Rhubarb, Gentian and such like are also profitable; care also must be taken of
the Spleen and Stomach, if they are debilitated.

There are certain other medicines given sometimes, Febrifuga.
which are called Febrifuga, of which it is spoken in the foregoing chapter.

And besides these, Topical Medicines.
there are yet others, which are externally applied to the body to cure Fevers;
namely, a plaster of cobwebs, with unguento populio, the leaves of Shepherds
pouch, nettles, crowfoot, and other vesiccatories.

Concerning Diet, Diet.
in a pure intermitting Tertian, the same diet uses to be kept for the most
part as in a continued Tertian, they are to abstain from honey, sweet things,
and all those things which engender choler, wine is not to be drunk before
concoction: but when the notes of concoction have appeared, you may use it, so
it be thin and watery; meat is to be given when the paroxism is past, unless
Syncope imminent persuade the contrary, Galen 10. Meth. Med. c. 5.

In bastard Tertians two things are principally to be observed concerning diet;
first, that the disease by too plentiful a diet may not be increased. Secondly,
that the strength by too slender a diet may not be debilitated, which should
hold out most in a long disease; and therefore the magnitude of the disease,
and the greatness of the strength are to be compared one with another; and in
case the strength be greater, and the matter harder to be concocted, the
thinner diet is to be used, but the larger diet, if the strength be weak, and
the matter easier to be concocted. The drink should not only cool and moisten,
but also cut, and therefore it may be mixed with Hysop and wild Marjerom, and
if water sweetened with honey be exhibited, Vinegar being thereunto added, that
Choler may be thereby corrected.

CHAP. XIX. Of a Quotidian Intermittent.
THe second sort of intermitting Fevers is that which proceeds from Phlegm, A
Quotidian Fever
which because it takes them every day, is called a quotidian. Fernelius writes
that this is the rarest of all Fevers, and that which scarce happens once
amongst six hundred: Nay there are some who plainly deny it: and although many
are affected every day, yet they are sick of a double Tertian, or treble
Quartan.

The cause of this Fever sithence it is Phlegm putrefying in the meseraick
veins, all those things may be causes of this Fever, The cause
which conduce to the generation of Phlegm, namely, weakness of the bowels,
especially of the stomach, heat, cold and moist aliment, and too great plenty
of them.

This Fever is known by the causes generating Phlegm which went before,
Diagnostick signs.
and also by the signs of Phlegm abounding in the body, explained in lib. 3. of
Institutions part. 2. cap. 2, This Fever chiefly comes to invade in the night,
only with coldness of the extreme parts, and trembling: The heat after
refrigeration slowly invades, so that sometimes heat, sometimes cold is
perceived; and the heat at the first does not seem sharp, but habituous; yet if
the hand put thereunto continue some time, it appears a little sharp, and when
it is diffused over the whole body, it does not burn much, so that the sick do
not breath extraordinarily, neither are they very thirsty: The face is not very
red, but for the most part yellowish, or a little puffed up; the eyes in the
beginning are white, thin, and crude; afterward when the matter is concocted,
they become thick, troubled, and oftentimes also red. In the first paroxisms
also they sweat not, but in the progress of the disease they sweat a little;
the Pulse also is exceeding little, thin, and more then in Quartans, but
equally slow; the paroxism is extended to eighteen hours, and the interval,
which is six hours, is seldom pure and free; nay it is often extended to four
and twenty hours.

But how long this Fever shall continue, Prognostics.
may be conjectured by the signs of concoction appearing sooner or later in the
Urine, and by the longitude and brevity of the paroxism; for if nature timely
aim at some evacuation, it affords hopes of shortness of the disease: But this
Fever as being that which arises from a pertinacious humor is long, and
continues unto forty days three months or more, and is not without danger;
and when the Stomach and Liver are much affected with it, the sick are often
cast into a Dropsy and Cachexy.

The cure for the most part is the same with a Quotidian continued; The Cure
for the pituitous humor is to be prepared and evacuated, to wit, the first
passages are to be opened with Clisters accommodated to the pituitous humor;
breathing a vein is scarce used, but a Vomit is more useful then in any other
sort of Fever, because the stomach is principally affected, but it is to be
occasioned by seed of Radish, Orach, of Dill, flowers of Broom, in those that
are strong, with Spurge, and others that are every where known.

The Phlegmatic humor is to be prepared with convenient medicines; Preparers.
the opening roots, Hysop, wild Marjoram, Betony, Maiden hair, Agrimony,
Groundpine, Camomil, and other things convenient for Phlegm, Syrup of Sorrel
simple and compound, Syrup of the two and of the five Roots, Honey of Roses,
Syrup Byzant, simple and compound, of Hysop, Oxymel simple and compound with
Squills, spirit of Salt and Vitriol.

The matter in the first place being prepared, Purgers.
it should be evacuated with Agarick, Mechoachan, Turbith, Troches of Alhandal,
Elect. Indo Diaphaenico, Diacarthamo, pills of Hieca, with Agarick, and such
like.

Sweat and Urine also should be provoked with medicines made of Fennel, Movers
of Urine and sweat.
Carduus Benedictus, Salsa Parilla, wood of Sassafras, Treacle, and Mithridate;
and lastly the Bowels, but especially the Stomach and Liver are to be
strengthened.

CHAP. XX. Of an Intermitting Quartan.
THe third sort of intermitting Fevers which arises from a Melancholy humor
putrefying in the meseraick veins, A Quartan.
and seizes on the fourth day also, whence it is called a Quartan.

The proximate cause of a Quartan Fever is a melancholy humor collected in the
meseraick veins about the spleen and adjacent Bowels, The cause
and there putrefying, and that sometimes natural by its own nature cold and
dry, and sometimes it participates with some adustion; But the more remote
causes are, all those things which conduce to the generation of black and
melancholy humors, namely meats and drinks apt to generate this humor;
amongst the which is vinegar, of the which Hypocrates 3. vich. rat. in acut. t.
38. writes, it attenuateth melancholy humors, raises them, and frames many
visions in the mind: For Vinegar is a Leader or stirrer of Melancholy. The time
is principally in Autumn, especially if a hot Summer have preceded.

This Fever is known by its quartane circuit, Signs,
and signs of melancholy abounding in the body, and it invadeth with a certain
unequal disturbance of the body, the which a cold shaking fit follows, which
at the first is little, or at leastwise instead thereof there is at the first
refrigeration and horror, in the progress of the disease the cold paroxism is
always greater, and at length most vehement with pain, causing the bones to
knock together. The heat is kindled by degrees, neither is it burning, but
somewhat mild. The pulse is thin and slow, and although in the vigor of the
paroxism it become swift and frequent, yet in comparison of Tertians it is thin
and slow. The Urines at first are thin and white, but in the progress of time
higher colored and thicker. Sweats in the beginning are not frequent, but in
the progress of the disease plentiful.

And thus things are in a pure quartan, but in a bastard one tokens of some
humor mixed do appear, and heat, thirst, watchings, and other symptoms are
more grievous.

This Fever continues the longest of all other, Prognostics.
and oftentimes is not only extended to some months, but years; and if it be
not gone by the next solstice or aequinectial, after it was first taken, it
lasts for the most part till the next after, and for the most part goes away
in the Spring. It Is safe and without danger, if it be legitimate, and without
any disease of any of the bowels: But that which is joined with black choler is
more dangerous, as also that which is with some grievous distemper of some of
the intrals, and casts the sick into a dropsy, the scurvie, or a consumption.

As concerning the cure, Indications
if this Fever proceed from a pure melancholy humor, that since it is cold,
dry, thick, it is to be moistened and attenuated, or if it be also adust, it is
in some measure to be cooled, afterward to be purged with convenient medicines.

The causes generating are to be removed, and in case other humors are mixed,
regard must be had of them. The Fever it self indicates cooling and moistning;
yet regard of the strength must be had, least by the duration of the disease
that be impaired, as also of the stomach, spleen, and liver, least they are
offended.

This Fever is to be handled gentl^ at the first, Cure
neither are strong medicines to be used at the beginning of cure, sithence the
melancholy humor may be exasperated by the use of them, and out of a simple
Quartan, a double or treble may easily be raised, Galen 1. Opening a vein.
ad Glauc. cap. 11. yet there is least danger in Vomits.

The first passages of the Body therefore are first to be evacuated with
clisters, lenitive medicines, and vomits also; afterward in case blood abound
therewith, a vein is to be opened; and in case it issue forth black and thick,
the greater quantity is to be taken, that by this means both the plenty of
blood may be diminished, and that part of the melancholy humor which is poured
out into the vena cava may be evacuated; but if the blood coming forth appear
to be thin and yellow, it is forthwith to be stopped: And indeed where there is
store of blood (the first passages being cleansed) a vein may be opened; but if
this Fever begin without store of blood, a vein is not to be breathed presently
at the beginning, but when some of the peccant humor is drawn into the veins,
and mingled with the blood: The Basilick or median vein either may be opened,
most commend the opening of the Salvatella; yet they have not as yet rendered
any sufficient reason why that should be preferred before others.

The blood being evacuated, the peccant matter must be prepared and concocted,
Preparers.
and likewise that disposition of the body to generate vicious humors is to be
corrected: And indeed, in case a Quartan Fever proceed only from natural
melancholy, moistning things are to be first used, but heating things should be
more moderate; but if adust humors are mixed, there will be use of things
moderately cooling, but in the progress of the disease, there will be need of
cutting and attenuating medicines: If the pituitous humor be mixed therewith,
in the beginning there will be need also of attenuating and cutting things, and
it may be more safe to heat a little: Hence are to be administered, Burrage,
Bugloss, Violets, Maidenhair, Cichory, Fumitory, Ceterach, Hearts-tongue,
Germander, Ground Pine, Carduus Benedictus, the Roots of Marshmallows,
Licoras, Chichory, the opening roots, Polipody, Gentian, Fern, the barks of
Tamarisk, Capparum, Roots of Walnut Trees, Flowers and seed of Broom, of the
Vine, Ash, Citron, juice of Apples, and compounds of these, and sometimes this
or that may be chosen or mixed according as the nature of the peccant humor
requires.

The concoction and evacuation of the matter must be by intervals repealed,
Purging Medicines
and when the matter is in some measure prepared, purging medicines are to be
prepared of Polipody, Epithynum, leaves of Senna, roots of Jalop, black
Hellebore, lapidis Lazuli, and compounds of these Syrup of Apples, Regis Sapor,
Electuary called Diacatholicon, Confection of Hameck, with the compound powder
of Senna and Diasenna, Tartarious pills, or pills evacuating melancholy of
lapis Lazuli, Armoniack, beginning with the more mild or gentle ones.

A Vomit also is convenient, by which oftentimes pertinacious Quartans are
cured: So Galen of Treacle ad Pisonem, cap. Vomits
15. the day before the fit, after Supper he gives a vomit, the next day after
early, the juice or dilution of Wormwood, and two hours before the paroxism,
Treacle; the gentler Vomits are of the decoction of Dill and Radish with
Oxymel; the stronger are Asarabecca, and Gratiola, or Hedge-hysop; The
strongest were made by the Ancients of black Hellebore; at this day such
medicines are made of Antimony.

If the Hemorrhodes can be opened, Hemorrhodes.
there will be much good expected thereby; seeing that the flowing of these,
preserves and frees a man from many diseases arising from adust and melancholy
humors. The opening and preparing things before mentioned, may also cause
Urine.

Moreover, Sudorificks.
for the discussing the relics of the matter after purging, and that the
matter is concocted, sudorifiques are to be exhibited an hour or two before the
paroxism. Galen has two medicines in use for this purpose; the one ex succo
Cyraniaco, and Treacle, which is also in use at this day. It Is profitable to
use the use of Gentian, Carduus benedictus, Antidotus Saxonica so called, and
such like.

To these belong those medicines also which may help by a certain propriety, or
hidden quality, Appropriated medicines.
whereof notwithstanding a reason may be given for the most part; to wit, such
as may discuss and consume the relics of the humor, and strengthen the
bowels: such are the juice of Wormwood, Vervain, Roots of Masterwort, Plantane.
Others also commend other medicines, which for the most part provoke sweat
likewise, and may safely be exhibited in due season.

But Opiates, and such like, Hindering the fits.
which only have power to check the fit, are not always safely to be
administered, because they only stupifie the expulsive faculty, and dull it, and
prohibit the endeavors of nature, and hinder the motion of the matter, and
the humors offending being detained in the body, may cause other evils.
Fruthermore above the wrists, and where the pulses beat, may be applied those
things which we have mentioned before amongst the Tertians.

In the mean time we should always be careful of the interal^, and endeavor
that they may be strengthened, and that the spleen may not be obstructed, swell,
or become scirrous and hardened, which often uses to come to pass.

Amongst other symptoms, Mitigatiof cold fits.
for the most part cold shaking fits are most troublesome of the patient, which
may be mitigated by the giving of Treacle or Mithridate before the paroxism,
and anointing of the spine of the back with oil of Camomil, Dill, Costus, Rue,
Pepper, Bays, with Treacle and Mithridate.

Also there should be applied to those parts that principally cherish the
Fever, Topical things.
and which are especially troubled with pain during the time of the fit,
plasters, somentations, and unguents, especially to the spleen, and those to
be made of Marsh mallows, Tamarisk, Broom, Dill, Camomil, Armoniack, Bdellium.

As concerning diet, it should be meat of good concoction, and easy digestion,
and no ways apt to generate melancholy humors, but rather such as may hinder
the increase of them. The meat therefore should be moistning and heating in
melancholy, and if an adust humor be mixed therewith, it should be somewhat
cooling, yet so, that it may not be destitute or power and and force to
attenuate that which is thick; the meats also mixed with Burrage, Bugloss,
Fennel, Parsley, Capers, Cinnamon, Saffron, and such like. Meats affording thick
and viscous juices must wholly be refrained. If a Quartan arise of it self
without any preceding disease, at first a little thinner diet is proper, then
diet somewhat thicker is to be used, and at last toward the height, a little
thinner is to be again administered: But if a Quartan succeed another disease,
at first diet a little thicker is to be taken, and afterward by degrees
toward the height, somewhat to be detracted from that: And in case the sick
will endure it, let him fast that day his fit comes, or at least six hours
before the paroxism, let him eat nothing, according to Hypocrat. 1. Aphor. 11.
and 19. For meats then given, afford not any nourishment to the body, but to
the disease: And many Quartans, as also Tertians are prolonged, not by their
own nature, but by errors in diet, especially because the sick either in the
fit, or newly before it comes, do not abstain from meat and drink.

Their drink should be white wine, thin, mature, and not austere, or Beer that
has worked well, and is not flatulent; and the wine and beer may be mixed with
herbs good against the melancholy humor abovenamed.

Fevers which have longer periods, Quintan Fevers.
and return on the fifth or seventh day, or afterward, since they all proceed
from a melancholy humor, or melancholy declining into a black and adust
humor, or have a black humor mixed, as is manifest from the ^^^ation, and
other symptoms, there is also the same reason of curing them as of Quartans:
yet what the nature of the humor is, ought diligently to be observed.

CHAP. XXI. Of Compound Fevers, and Semi-Tertians.
BEsides these simple Fevers hitherto mentioned, Fevers compounded.
there are yet Compound Fevers, which is, when one Fever is complicate with
another. They are divided into confused and explicit.

They are commonly called confused, Confused
when two Fevers begin and end at the same time, so that they can scarcely be
discerned; namely, when several humors confused amongst themselves, putrify
in the same place, and each or every of them preserves its own proper nature;
which nevertheless how it might be done, scarce seems possible: Implicit
But implicit are those that are so joined together, as that the nature and
symptoms of either of them severally and peculiarly may be known.

That complication happens many ways; for first, a non-putred is joined with a
putred, as a hectic with a putred; moreover a putred with a putred, and that
several ways; for first, continued are mixed with continued, and intermittent
with intermittent; and that either of the same sort, whence there are double
Tertians, double and treble Quartans; or different, but that is rarer, as a
Tertian intermitting with a Quotidian intermitting, and a Tertian intermitting
with a Quartan intermitting, continued Tertians with intermitting, when a
Tertian intermitting with continued Quotidian, or an intermitting Quotidian
with a continued Tertian is mixed, which Fevers are called Semi-Tertians.

There are three ways of composition of Fevers, Three ways of composition of
Fevers.
and three differences of compounded Fevers; Subintrante, Coalternate, and
Communicant.

Subintrante are, when the fit of the one Fever begins before the termination
of the other: Coalternate, when one paroxism being-ended, by and by after a
short interval, another begins a Communicant are such whereof the paroxisme of
the one does begin forthwith after the end of the other, there being no
interval.

Compound Fevers are known by the signs of simple Fevers, and principally by
the returns of cold tremblings and shakings after rest; Signs of compound
Fevers.
and in case a cold fit happens, and sweat do not follow afterward, or that
one sweat happen after many fits. The pulse also if in a continued Fever it be
often contracted, motion of new matter, and of a new paroxism, and so it is a
token of a compound Fever.

But these Fevers are for the most part more dangerous then others,
Prognostics.
since that they more afflict the patient then simple, and a set time for their
paroxisms is for the most part wanting, and especially in case the compound
Fevers consist of several humors, and they are more difficult to be cured,
seeing those things that are accommodated to one humor, are not fit for
another.

But their cure depends on the manner of cure of their simples, Cure
and to every humor and Fever that is kindled, thereby are to be exhibited
their opposite remedies.

But that we may say something of compound Fevers, we will add somewhat
concerning a double and treble Tertian and Quartian, and likewise of a
Semitertian

A double or triple Tertian is caused by choler putrefying in two or three
places in the meseraick veins; A double Tertian.
and indeed, if choler putrify in two places, a double Tertian is made, which
afflicts either every day once, or in one day twice, that the next day after
the sick may be free from the fit: A treble Tertian.
But in case it putrify in three places, a treble Tertian arises, which in
the space of two days afflicts thrice, one day once, the other day twice. Nay
choler may putrify in four or five places, and more, and so many, or such
Tertians then will ensue.

A double Quotidian is caused by Phlegm putrefying in two places, A double
Quotidian.
and invadeth the sick twice in the space of four and twenty hours.

A double Quartan is caused by a melancholy humor putrefying in two places; A
double Quartan
and those that are troubled therewith, are one day free from a Fever, and the
two next are troubled with it. But such as are troubled with a treble Quartan,
are Feverish every day; Nay, it is not impossible but that those that are
troubled with a compound Quartan, should be affected twice in one day.

And indeed a double Tertian is often such from the beginning, A treble Quartan
but a double or triple Quartan for the most part from the untimely use of
medicines, especially of hot sodorifiques, it is become such, because the crude
matter is only stirred up, but not discussed, but dispersed over more parts.

Cure
A compound Tertian and Quartan is cured as other Tertians and Quartans are:
yet this is to be taken notice of, that the meats or medicines may be used at
fit times in regard of the paroxisme.

As for a Semitertian which by the Greeks is called a Semitertian fire, it is
compounded of a Tertian and a Quotidian, Semitertian.
the one continued, the other intermittent, and indeed principally of an
intermitting Tertian, and continued Quotidian, and has its continuity from
Phlegm, its hoirour from intermitting, as commonly it is taught; whence these are
also called horrid Fevers. But although I should not deny that humors putrify
together in the vena cava, and the meseraick veins, and that from thence there
may arise complicate Fevers, which have various exacerbations and mutations in
their symptoms; yet it seems not absurd to call those Fevers also
Semitertians, which by their nature are indeed intermitting Tertians, yet when
it is joined with an inflammation of any Intral, a symptomatical continued Fever
is stirred up; for when the Feverish part of the matter is thrust out with the
blood into the Guts, Stomach, Liver, and parts adjacent, an inflammation is
caused, and thence a continued symptomatical Fever, which being complicate with
an intermitting Tertian, constitutes a Semitertian, which in respect of the
intermitting Fever is horrid, in regard of the symptomatical continued. That
which Physicians observations teach us, by whom it is found out, by the
dissected bodies of such as have died in Semitertians, that there are
inflammations about the hollow parts of the Liver, as also in the Stomach,
Guts, Mesentery, Kell or Cawl, Spleen; Whence it is easy to give a reason of a
trembling or shaking fit in this Fever; for it happens sometimes ordinately,
according to the nature of the intermittent Fever; sometimes inordinately, when
the inflammation seizes on some new part, or when quitture or purulent matter
is made; according to Hippocrates, 2. Aphorism. 4.7. Sometimes malignity happens
to be joined with these Fevers, and then for the most part they are popular,
and there are many affected therewith.

This Fever is known, Signs:
and if it be according as it is commonly described, compounded of a continued
Quotidian, and an intermitting Tertian, by the signs of each Fever; for a
continued Fever on the one humor, daily brings a paroxism, but the other
every third day, and so in one day there will be two fits, in the other but
one. See Galen. 2. de diff. Febr. cap. 7. But if it proceed from an
inflammation of any Intral adjoined, signs of an inflammation are present, and
together therewith the intermittent Fever keeps it likeness; malignity, if it
be present, Prognesticks.
is known by its signs.

This Fever is altogether dangerous, both in regard of its continuity, and of
its symptoms, as also of its inflammation or malignity.

The cure thereof depends either on the cure of an intermitting Tertian, Cure.
or a continued Quotidian, or on the cure of a single or double intermitting
Fever, and of an inflammation of Intrals.

The Third Book. Of a Hectic Fever.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of a Hectic Fever.
ANd so these things of putred Fevers are handled, A Hectic Fever.
and consequently the first sort of Fevers, whose heat according to
inclination, disposition, or habitude, is in the living parts of the body; It
still remains that we speak of Hecticks, wherein the Feverish distemper becomes
as it were habitual, and so possesses the living parts of the body, that
although it be fostered by no cause, yet nevertheless it can subsist without it.

There are two things necessary for the generation of this Fever, Causes
aptness of the subject to receive and entertain preternatural heat, and a
continual and vehement action of causes heating and introducing Fevers. An apt
habit of body to take this Fever, is a hot and dry body, whether it be natural,
or from what cause soever it proceed.

These Fevers are generated two ways; Manner of generation.
for either they follow other Fevers, whether burning or lasting, when their
heat is vehement; or being durable, it possesses all the parts, and consumes
their moisture; or they arise from themselves, and from evident causes, which
if they are weaker or lighter, they produce Ephemeraes; if stronger, they bring
forth Hecticks.

But there are certain degrees of a Hectic Fever: The first is, Differences.
when the rorid humidity is dried. The second, when the fleshy and fatty
substance perishes. The third is, when the heat likewise invadeth the (...):
And indeed when the rorid humidity only grows (...) is not as yet consumed,
it is called a Hectic without a Consumption; but when that humidity is consumed
and dried up, it is called a Hectic with wasting or marasmodes.

A Hectic also is sometimes simple and alone, sometimes it is joined with
putrefaction.

CHAP. II. Of the signs of a Hectic Fever.
A Hectic Fever is known by its continual heat, causing no pain, Diagnostick
signs.
as being equal; and Hectic which indeed at the first touch is weak,
afterward it appears sharper: It is perceived more in the Arteries then the
other parts: And moreover, the heat after taking food, within an hour or two is
increased, and the Pulse either is changed, as to greatness or swiftness, yet
so, that its ascending appears strong and free, and none of those things
precede which forego the fits of putred Fevers most commonly; and this mutation
of pulse and heat, endures until the aliment be distributed. The pulse also in
this Fever is little, Signs of differences.
frequent, and moderately swift; and by how much the more the strength
receives this Fever, by so much the more the body is consumed, and the
strength debilitated, so that the sick can scarce lift up the eyelids, and
together with it in the second place, fatness in Urine swims like cobwebs.
Lastly, The same things which appear in an hippocratical face, as it is
described by Hippocrates, are also discerned in a marasmodes or Hectic, with
wasting.

A Hectic with a Putred, Signs of a Hectic with a Putred.
and an Intermittent conjunct, is known from hence; That the fit declining, the
heat nevertheless, although remiss, some is left thereof, and there is great
languishing of the strength, and all the other parts are more temperate, only
the parts where the arteries are become hotter, and the pulse loses not its
swiftness and frequency, and the sick takes food, but is not strengthened
thereby. A Hectic joined with a continued putrid Fever, is difficult to be
known; yet it may be known from hence, namely, because the dry calidity remains
after the end of the declination, or of the whole Fever, or its periods; and
the body is more extenuated then otherwise it uses to be, the Urine also
becomes oily, as may appear.

It is hard to know a Hectic in the beginning of it; Prognostics.
it is not so difficult to cure at the first: but that which is nearer to
wasting, or a consumption, is easily known, but hardly cured, and at the last
it becomes plainly incurable.

CHAP. III. Of the Cure of a Hectic Fever.
LAstly concerning the cure: Indications and Cure.
The hot and dry distemper indicates cooling and moistning, the strength
requires preservation, and whatsoever of the humid and solid parts is consumed
and dried, is to be restored with moistning things; and indeed moistning things
are more safe; but in giving cooling things we must be cautious, lest that the
native heat already being weak, should by that means be extinguished. But if a
Hectic Fever have a Putred one joined therewith, the Hectic cannot be cured,
unless the other Fever be first taken away.

Medicines cooling and moistning are, Violets, Burrage, Medicines
Bugloss, Waterlillies, Roses, Endive, Succory, Mallows the four greater cold
seeds, Poppy. Out of which several medicines for present use may be prepared.

Externally, A Bath of fair water may be used most profitably, External things,
of which Galen 10. Meth. Medend. cap. 10. Which that it may moisten the more,
Mallows, Violets, Bearsbreech may be added: it is convenient also to use a Bath
of warm milk. After the Bath, let the body be anointed, but principally the
spine of the back, with oil of Violets, sweet Almonds, Water lillies, Roses;
Cooling and moistning medicines may be also applied both to the Breast and
Liver, as also to the Reins.

But the greatest hope of cure consists in Diet: Diet.
The Air should be temperate, or moderately cold: Meats should be cooling and
moistning, easy of concoction, and of good juice, having in them few
excrements, and such as is not presently dispersed. In the first place Milk is
profitable, which as Galen 4. de Simp. Medic. Facult. cap. 17. teaches, it is
cold and moist, easy of concoction, of the best nourishment, and has great
power of moistning and refreshing the substance of our bodies; Which lest it
should be coagulated in the stomach, some Sugar or Salt should be mixed
therewith; and it should only be taken in such a quantity as may well be
concocted by the stomach. Strengthening and Restorative Broths are also
profitable, of which it is spoken elsewhere, as also food of Almonds, Pine, and
Pistack nuts, the four greater cold seeds, and of white Poppy.

But meats in such as are sick in Hecticks, should be given in small quantity,
but often, by reason of the imbecility of their strength. Their drink in our
Countries should be Ale or Beer, or Water and Wine, white and sweet. Their
sleep should be somewhat longer. If a Putred be joined with a Hectic, we must
endeavor that the Putred Fever may be first taken away, yet the Hectic not to
be neglected, lest that whilst we use remedies only for the Putred Fever, the
Hectic may be increased; if we use means only to cure the Hectic, the Putred
may be increased.

The Fourth Book. Of the Plague, and of Pestilential and Malignant Fevers.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of the Pestilence.
HItherto we have finished the essential differences of Fevers; it remains that
we now should speak of the accidental. Amongst which, the principal and most
necessary to be known, are those that enfold the Pestilence, pestilential
Fevers and malignant.

And indeed concerning the Plague, with which, What the Plague is.
although not always, yet most commonly a Fever is joined; That name is most
noted to be attributed to the most pernicious and destructive of all others:
But what the nature of that disease is, amongst Authors is much controverted.
For first of all, sithence various and several kinds of diseases and symptoms
may appear in the Plague: Yet because they are also often perceived without the
plague, the nature of the plague is not to be placed in so many diseases and
symptoms differing in specie, but in some peculiar sort: Nor does the being
epidemical or contagious, constitute the nature of the pestilence, since other
diseases also may be universal and contagious.

But since that this is granted by all, The plague a disease of the heart
that the Plague spreads most, when many are infected together with the same
disease, and they die, and others are infected: Hence it may easily appear,
that the plague is primarily a disease of that part on the which life depends
chiefly, and the which being hurt, a man is in very great danger of his life,
namely the heart, the fountain of life, and storehouse of vital heat: For
although the humor wherein the venom inhereth may subsist in diverse parts
(whence the same diseases and symptoms in every pestilence are not the same to
appearance) yet in what place soever it subsisteth, it has a peculiar
antipathy with the heart, and thereby destroys a man so suddenly.

But from whence that force and quality so mischievous and inimicous to the
heart, Whether the nature of the plague consist in putrefaction.
has its original, and depends, of that there is a very great controversy
amongst Physicians; and indeed, some do conceive that the Pestilence only
consists of putrefaction, and conclude, that by putrefaction the nature of
the Pestilence may be consumed. But because they themselves acknowledge that
all putred Fevers are not pestilential, they strive variously to determine it
in putrefaction, and that they diverse ways strive to explain, but all in vain.
Whatsoever therefore putrefaction is concluded to be, it suffices not to
constitute the pestilence; for there are measures and degrees of putrefaction
also whatsoever they are, since that they differ only according to magis and
minus, they differ not in their kind, neither do they separate the plague from
the rest of the putred Fevers. Moreover the Plague hurts in another kind then
a putred Fever does; for it spreads it self for the most part in a moment, and
brings forth pernicious effects, it diffuseth it self in an astonishing manner,
and into whatsoever it enters, a very little of the pestilent venom may lie
hidden any where a long time, and remain whole, and afterward be taken into
the body, and on a sudden produce such grievous symptoms, and brings forth
such effects as are not in the power of the primary qualities, on which the
ground of putrefaction depends: Moreover, if the plague should proceed from
putrefaction only, a Fever also would never be without the pestilence: yet
since it is observed that a Fever is without the plague, as out of Hippocrates
3. epid. comm. 4.25.55. Galen de simp. med. facult. de terra Armenia. Jac. de
partib. in 1. quarti Avicen. cap. de Febre Pestilent. Alex. Benedicto, Fr.
Valleriola loc. comm. lib. 3. c. 18. and out of others it is manifest. Lastly,
the way of cure is far different from that of other putred Fevers, and the
pestilent poison indicates and requires alexipharmall means, which in other
putred Fevers are neither indicated nor have any place.

Therefore we have determined that the plague does consist in a hidden quality,
and in its nature wholly adverse to the heart, and that the pestilential poison
is endued with such a quality, which by the effects of it, as we lately said,
beyond the primary qualities does prove.

Contagion is joined with the pestilence, and pestilential poisons have always
contagion joined with them as a proper accident, because it belongs to all
plagues, but not only to the plague.

Therefore we define the pestilence to be a venomous disease of the heart, from
venomous matter, Definition of it.
and in its whole substance peculiarly adverse to the heart, and gotten by
infection, and therefore is of it self infectious, and suddenly and jointly
hurting all the actions of the heart, very acute, deadly, introducing
destructive symptoms of all sorts.

But what the specifique nature of this venom is, and what its differences are
in diverse constitutions pestilential, no man can easily explain. To me it seems
probable to be the highest degree of corruption, which indeed the humors in
our bodies can possibly receive; to which through many alterations, mutations,
and fermentations it comes, and into which diseases which went before, at
length degenerate: Whence it comes to pass, that when the Plague reigns, other
sporadick diseases that come not by ordinary means, and all benign diseases
for the most part are silent, and those epidemical diseases that reigned before
cease.

CHAP. II. Of the causes of the Pestilence.
COncerning the causes of the Pestilence, A cause
or this great corruption, they are twofold; some of them generating the
Pestilence, others propagating the same, which are comprehended under the name
of contagion. In the former rank are Air, Stars, course of Diet, Poisons,
imagination and terror.

For first, Air.
Air sometimes contains in it the seeds of the pestilence, which when by drawing
in the air by our breath, men draw in that therewith, and so the pestilence is
stirred up in them, and that when it happens, most grievous pestilential
constitutions are occasioned, and is far more pernicious then to those to whom
the contagion of the plague is only transferred. Air becomes pestilential, when
there is in it excess of heat and moisture, which dispose bodies to
putrefaction; such a constitution of air Hippocrates describes 3. epid. comm.
3. yet the Plague may be bred also without such a constitution of air, and that
very corruption it self is not terminated in the primary qualities; but it is
necessary that certain occult qualities, and that somewhat divine, mentioned by
Hippocrates should concur, but it takes its venenosity and pestilential quality
first from heaven, whilst that the air by a peculiar influence from the stars,
whether it be so disposed in the first qualities, that it should putrify and
be corrupted, or in an occult manner also it be so disposed and affected, that
in it poisonous seeds are generated, which in their whole substance are adverse
to man.

To which thing Astrologers teach, that Saturn does principally act his part.
Moreover the Air may receive its pestilential seeds from the caverns of the
earth, whilst from thence venomous steams exhale, being generated in the air
long pend up before; to which purpose Earthquakes much conduce, which move
venomous steams in that manner, and open ways for their evaporation; so out of
a chest which has been long shut, being opened, the plague comes forth, as
Julius Capitolinus has noted in Vero: The same may happen in standing pools
and lakes, and corrupted waters in Wells. Lastly, Histori^^ inform us, that the
air has been infected by the carcasses of such as have been slain, and by the
corruption of multitudes of dead locusts.

Secondly, although the stars by corrupting of the air may be the cause of the
pestilence whilst they so corrupt it, as that that pestilence which is
contained in it, the seeds or sparks being communicated to man, they excite the
plague in him: yet by it self also, by affecting of man's very body, they may
cause the plague, whilst either they dispose the air so, that whether by
manifest or occult qualities, it is rendered not fit for the preservation of
mankind, but corrupts the humors therein, so that they become of a
pestilential nature; or also proximately and immediately by occult influencies,
they corrupt man's body, and principally the humors and spirits contained
therein; concerning which thing Astrologers are to be advised with. Common Diet.


Thirdly, Pestilential venom may be generated from common Diet. That which
often happens in a long dearth of provision, in Camps and Sieges, where men are
compelled to make use of corrupt and unwholesome meat, by reason whereof ill
humors are generated; which being detained in the body, are more corrupted,
and at length become pestilential; as Histories sufficiently testify.

Fourthly Unguents and venomous powders being spread abroad may cause the
plague, Poisonous things.
being that which by mischievous persons has been done and committed, as
histories again inform us: yet if any one would refer this kind of cause to
contagion or infection, Imagination.
we will not contend with him.

Fifthly, The cause is imagination, terror, and fear; and experience has
taught us, that some whilst they have beheld those that were infected with the
plague, or dead of it, or seeing some go out of a house that was then infected,
by reason of too much terror and fear, have fallen sick of the plague: I have
observed the same to proceed from anger.

CHAP. III. Of Contagion.
ANd these are the causes, by means whereof the pestilent poison may be
generated in the air, or in man's body; yet it often comes to pass, that neither
the air, nor evil diet, nor any of the rest of these causes have stirred up the
pestilence, but otherwise from elsewhere being brought into some place by
contagion, and afterward by contagion also it is diffused into more places.
Infection.
For although there are other diseases contagious also, yet the plague is the
most infectious of all others.

Contagion is a production of the like diseased or sickly affect in another
body, by pollution sent out from a discased body, but there are three things
required to perfect contagion: A contagious body it self that may infect
others, a disease or an affect contrary to nature, which is communicated to
another, and the body which is infected.

First, a contagious body is that which whilst it is sick of any disease,
diffuseth not the disease it self (for the actident goes not out of the
subject) but some of the morbifique cause out of it self, and communicates it
to another, and so in this manner excites the same disease in it. For that
which is communicated to another from out of a contagious body, is not the
disease it self, but a certain body flying out of the diseased body, and
received into another, having power of stirring up the same in it. The Greeks
call it Noseras apocriscis, and aporroias, and miasmata: The Latins, the
pollutions and seeds of contagion; and since that we see that such seeds have
not only hurtful qualities in the smallest quantities, and that they easily
insinuate themselves into the body, but also they endure a long time, and
retain their strength entire, and they are most exactly mixed, and are some way
spirituous, Infection how many ways it is spread.
and it is necessary they should sow their store of strength by some occult
quality.

But contagion is not scattered after one manner, for sometimes it goes out by
breathing, sometimes through the pores of the skin, or in the form of vapors,
or of sweat and filth adhering to the skin, and is communicated to other
bodies. And this seed goes out most plentifully from an infected body, when
the poison is too strong for nature, and overcomes it, which happens in those
that are dying.

The seeds of contagion are communicated either by immedidiate contact, or by
some medium and vehicle. This vehicle is twofold; air, and some fuel, as they
call it: Air, when it receives the seeds of contagion from infected bodies, it
can carry them to places nigh, yea and sometimes more remote places. That has
the nature of fuel in it, which can receive the seeds of contagion, and
communicate the same to another; which kind of bodies are thin and porous, as
Flax, Cotton, Feathers, the hairy skins of animals, and garments made of them,
feathers also of birds, and birds themselves; and it is found out for a truth,
that those pestilential sparks have often lain hid in the cinders or ashes; and
it may come to pass, that any one may carry the sparks of it about him in his
garments, and not be infected, and yet they being moved and shaked, may infect
another.

But the seed of a contagious pestilence when it is received into a body, it
brings in that disposition with it wherewith that body from out of which it
came was afflicted, and that for the most part suddenly, yet sometimes it is
found to lie hid some days in the body before it denudates it self.

Thirdly, Concerning the body that receives the pestilent treasury, although no
man can promise to himself immunity from the pestilent venom, yet it is
certain some are more easily, some more hardly infected. The cause whereof
without all doubt consists in some peculiar occult quality of the heart, by
the power whereof it has or has not strength to resist the venomous
pestilence; yet because the venomous quality is not transferred without a
subject out of the infected body into another, it will more powerfully
insinuate it self if it be received into a body proportionable and like unto
that wherein it was generated: whence kinsmen are sooner affected then others.
Yet there are also other things that occasion the more facile reception of the
pestilence; for such as breath stronger, and such as have wide and open pores
of their bodies, easier take in the seeds of the plague, inhering in the Air,
or any place apt to retain it.

CHAP. IIII. Of the signs of the Plague.
MOreover concerning the signs, Diagnostick signs
that I may say nothing of approaching signs, desiring brevity, but only by
what means it may be known we will speak. Indeed the plague when many have been
infected, may easily be known; but before many have been overspread thereby,
there is scarce any pathognomick sign by which it can certainly be known, that
one or a few being affected are sick of the plague; afterward when more are
visited, it is not so difficult to be known, especially when all sporadick
diseases for the most part are silent: For first, the plague seizes on many,
and the most it kills. Secondly, It Is contagious, and easily given to others,
and it is more contagious then any other disease. Thirdly, by its violence it
destroys the strength, and principally the vital spirits. Whence fourthly, when
little, frequent, and unequal pulses are made, palpitation of the heart
happens, lipothymie, syncope, and great anguish and perplexity altogether.
Fifthly, If the disease be protracted, and the venom corrupt the humors,
evils and symptoms happen of all kinds, and the whole order of the body is
disturbed; Fevers happen, diverse wheals or pustules, buboes, carbuncles; yet if
there are no pushes, bubo, or carbuncle appear, we must not therefore conclude
that the sick has not the plague; for it often happens that before they come
out, and can be drived out by reason of the debility of nature, the sick die
with the violence of the disease. There happens likewise other symptoms of all
sorts; for when the strength of the body is debilitated by the vehemence of the
poison, the humors and spirits are corrupted, the excrements are changed, and
the urine either becomes crude, or fully corrupted, the sweats are stinking and
untimely, filthy, foetid, ill colored excrements proceed from the belly, the
qualities of the body are variously changed, and there is nothing at all in
burning and malignant Fevers, which may not appear likewise in the pestilence:
Prognostics
But there is no disease at all to which the Aphorism of Hippocrat. 19. sect.
2. does more agree: for oftentimes when the plague flatters most, it brings
unexpected death; and on the contrary, those that have seemed desperate, often
recover when past hope.

But there is the more hopes when tumors come forth suddenly in a place that is
not dangerous, and after their coming forth the symptoms abate, also if the
wheals are of a good color, and with remission of symptoms; if medicines,
meat and drink are not vomited up again, if sweats come out with lightsomness
to the sick, and other signs are discerned, which use to be present in salutary
Fevers.

But the greatest danger is, when tumors come not enough out, and carbuncles
draw near to the heart, or vanish again; if giddiness in the head, watchings, a
coma, or convulsion fits are present, if the sick shall say every thing
stinketh, if trembling of the heart, fainting of the spirits be present, if all
things are thrown up by vomiting, if the extremities of the body wax cold, if
the sweat be cold, if the excrements are of diverse colors, black, and
stinking, and if the other ill symptoms of malignant Fevers be present.

CHAP. V. Of preservation from the Pestilence.
BUt because it is safer to prevent the Plague, Preservatives.
then being present to expel it out of the body, we should therefore be careful
first to prevent it. The way of preservation (with Gods assistance, which we
ought to seek by prayers) consists in two things.

The first is, That all those causes that may occasion the sickness may be
avoided.

Furthermore, that the force of those causes when they cannot be avoided, may
be broken, and our bodies rendered less apt to entertain them, and more able to
resist them.

First therefore if the Plague reign any where, all commerce with the infected
is to be avoided, and if any one be certainly infected, he should be separated
from the rest with all his household stuff, indeed for many weeks, and the house
infected (as hereafter shall be showed) cleansed; and in case it be doubtful
whether any one be sick of it or no, it is better to be too cautious then
careless.

But if the pestilence be now sown in any place, it is safest to remove from
thence, according to that common verse, Mox long tarde, cede recede redi.
Forthwith far from it go,
Returning come back slow.


The reasons of which do not prove that he should change his place, the
assistance of God being implored, he should often use medicines against poison,
and fortific the body with those things that resist contagion, as also he
should endeavor that his body should be free from all excrements, and
preserved in its natural state.

And that we may begin a posteriore, Purging.
the body is not to be rashly weakened with strong medicines; yet if any vicious
humor shall be in the body, lest that the force of the Alexipharmacal
medicines should be debilitated, or the venomous poison should easily take root
in the body, it is to be purged by little and little with lenitives; to which
purpose the most profitable are pills of Ruffi, so called from the authors
name, and by custom called Pestilential pills; out of which also is made the
Elixir proprietatis, oil of Vitriol being thereunto added: Syrup of Roses
solutive is also profitable, and Rhubarb, Agarick, and medicines compounded
with them, which are every where extant. If blood abound, it may be abated by
opening of a vein.

The Diet ought to be such, Diet.
whereby vicious humors may not be cumulated; and with meats and drinks most
principally things good against poison should be mixed; and also, if as it may
easily happen, any of the vicious humors be cumulated, let them be purged by
the said medicines.

And forasmuch as Fontanels take away excrementitious humors by little and
little, and hence take away the provision for the plague, they also in
pestilential times are profitable.

Mediocrity also is to be kept in exercise and rest, sleeping and waking, and
the passions of the mind, and principally as much as it is possible, intentive
thoughts of the plague, and fear of the same is to be shaken out of our minds.

Besides these, two things more are yet necessary for our preservation from the
plague: First to take heed that none of the pestilential seed be attracted;
Furthermore, if that happen, we being ignorant thereof, our bodies should be
fortified against it.

First therefore we should endeavor that the Air wherein we live be pure; The
Air how to be purified.
and therefore first public places are to be cleansed from all filth, and the
air should be purified with fire, principally of the wood of Juniper, Oak,
Pine, Bays, and odoriferous plants being kindled; furthermore, every one should
avoid company, and therefore solemn and frequent meetings are justly forbid by
the Magistrate. The windows likewise toward places infected should be kept
shut, and the air (as I newly said) with burnt woods, or with vinegar
bezoarted, being poured upon hot bricks, or with suffumigations, or with pyrion
powder kindled, should be purified.

No man should go abroad until the Sun be an hour or two high, How every man
ought to fortify himself against the Plague.
neither fasting, nor unarmed with alexipharmacal things, therefore balls of
Amber, Nodules, sweet Limments mixed with Treacle, oil of Rue, Znezedoaric,
Angelica, Citron, Juniper, and such like should be held to the nostrils, and
under the tongue convenient troches should be held, cordial bags should be
applied to the region of the heart.

Amulets likewise of poisonous things are commended by many, Amulets
as Arsnick, powder of a Toad, Quicksilver and such like being prepared,
descriptions whereof are every where extant: which whatsoever they do, without
question they perform in such manner, that they draw the venomous poison to
themselves, by the similitude of their own substance, and turn it from the
heart; as those that are wounded with a Scorpion, with the oil thereof being
externally anointed, are forthwith healed: yet you must take keed that those
bags, or mass of such things be not heated by motion, lest the strength of the
poison should be communicated to the heart through the pores of the skin.

But the greatest hope of health and security, Alexipharnicks.
is in medicines that resist poison, out of which those are to be selected
which by long experience have been approved; The simples are, Angelica,
Valerian, Tormentil, Carduus Benedictus, Sorrel, Dittany of Crete and white,
Rue, Swallow-wort, Scordium, Scabicon, Divels-bit, Burnet, Olsnicium, Fluellin,
Vipers-grass, Marigolds, Wormwood, Tansie, Zedoary, Masterwort, Gentian,
Juniper berries, Walnuts, Hartshorn, Bolealmanick, Terra sigillata, an Emerald,
a Hyacinth.

Out of which are various compounds; amongst which those that excel, and are
approved by long use, are Mithridate, Treacle and Confectio Liberantis, as also
that antidote which is ascribed to King Mithridates, of which Pliny lib. 23.
cap. 8. as also Theriaca Diatessaron, to which the moderns have added many
more, as the Electuary of Saffron, or of an Egg, as it is called, Dioscordium,
Tracastory, Antidotus Saxonica, Antidotus Guidonis de Cauliaco, Pulvis Caesaris
rubeus, and Gryseus Electuarium Camphoratum Kigleri, and many more, which the
Tracts of diverse Authors concerning the pestilence afford such as are
profitable, as well for preservation from the Plague, as for the cure thereof;
so that it becomes us to be more solicitous about the choice of them, then the
store of them here: And amongst so great plenty, it is more safe nevertheless to
depend on those that have been approved by long use and experience, then such
as are newly invented, what color or pretense soever they afford themselves.
But because those strong and hot medicines are not proper for women with child,
nor children, they should have medicines of Hartshorn, the bone of the heart
of a Stag (or Deer) the roots of Tormentil, Pearl, Bole Almenick, Coral, Bezor,
and precious stones: And since that there is no small difference amongst
Alexipharmacal Medicines according to the qualities they have besides their
occult ones, every one of them does not agree with every age and season: for in
a hotter Air, medicines that are not so hot are to be used; which must also be
observed in those which in regard of their age or constitution of body are
hotter, lest that humor should be kindled, and a Fever from thence arise
afterward; or if some are hotter, they should be prepared with Vinegar, or
taken with Syrup acetos. Citri, Sorrel great or small, Pomgranates.

For there is no depending upon one medicine against poison, but they are to be
varied, lest that nature should be accustomed to it, and thereby can receive
little benefit by it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Cure of the Pestilence.
IF in any disease in the world, certainly in this an exact way of cure is to
be used, Cure.
since that the smallest fault being committed by any, may become an
irreparable damage: But because the right reason of Cure depends on
indications, and seeing that the Plague is an occult disease, and its nature
consists in an occult quality, which by its peculiar force is mischievous to
the heart, and is very contagious; but that is introduced by a cause endued
with the same quality; Hence it is manifest, that that occult quality indicates
a medicine alexipharmacal contrary to it, and shows that the cause in the body,
whether taken by breathing in, or contact, or by what means soever contracted,
should be removed and eradicated; But how that ought to be done, is
controverted amongst Physicians.

For first, since that neither Phlebotomy, Breathing a Vein.
nor Purgation are indicated by the pestilence, quatenus it is the pestilence,
whether they are to be used or not is controverted.

First, Concerning the opening of a Vein, since that it neither cures the
disease, nor takes away the venom, nor the cause, it is rarely to be used, and
in that Pestilence which is occasioned by evil Diet, it is wholly to be omitted,
as also in that which arises from a pestilential constitution of Air, unless
there be very great store of blood which must be diminished, and its heat
mitigated: But if the Plague come by infection, and there be that plenty of
blood as may cause us to fear lest that a putred Fever should happen, which may
become no less dangerous to the sick then the Plague it self, or that it be
observed that the blood flows violently to inconvenient places, and that the
strength is rather oppressed by its plenty, then dissipated, you may breath a
Vein, yet only bleed what the strength can well bear with; and that should be
in the beginning, for when twelve hours or more are passed away, it is safer to
omit bleeding, because the strength being debilitated with the violence of the
poison, it cannot well bear it. Concerning the place for breathing of a Vein,
such a place is to be chosen, as may help the motion of Nature, not hinder it,
and may together divert the pestilent matter from a noble part; Therefore if a
Parotis break out behind the ears, or a Bubo under the Armpits, or a Carbuncle
in the superior parts, a Vein should be opened in the Arm on the same side;
but if a Bubo come in the Groyn, a Vein should be opened in the foot on the
same side. But if a Carbuncle should arise in either of the Legs, seeing that
uses to cause an inflammation, and great pain, by which the strength is
weakened, it is convenient to open a Vein in the contrary leg; for neither is the
motion of nature hindered by this means, but the matter is drawn from the
superior parts toward the inferior, and a great flux to the part affected,
and the increase of the inflammation is hereby prevented.

Moreover Purgation also is not indicated by the pestilence, Purgation.
nor can the seeds of the Plague be eradicated by any purging medicine, unless
perhaps a great disturbance of nature being made, which must then be joined
with danger: and for as much as Nature for the most part expels the pestilent
venom to the outparts of the body, this motion of Nature by Purgation is
hindered, and the pestilent venom is drawn into the internal parts, and is more
mixed with the humors, and the motion of humors being stirred up, most
dangerous, nay deadly vomits and sluxes are occasioned: And therefore not in
purging, but in medicines that resist poison, principally, and next under God
the hope of health and safety is to be placed.

Wherefore it will be safest for any one that shall think himself to be
infected with the Plague, Use of Alexipharmicks.
having first implored the assistance of almighty God, to fly to those
medicines resisting venom, mentioned in the fifth chapter before, and to take
some one experienced and approved medicine; and in case it be vomited up at the
first, then it is best to take of it again forthwith; nay, in case it be
retained, it will not suffice to take of it but once, but the Alexipharmacal
medicine should be repeated thrice in the space of four and twenty hours, and
so to continue for two days, until that the force of the poison shall be
broken. The medicine being taken, the sick should forthwith compose themselves
to sweat, especially the second time after taking, they should keep out the
cold Air, and if the strength will bear it, they should continue their sweat
for two hours space: The sick should by no means sleep, until he has sweat
twice, and between the sweats should be refreshed with Conserve and Syrup of
Roses, Sorrel, acetos. Citri, of Pomgranates, red Gooseberries, with cordial
and odoriferous waters applied to the Nostril, and sprinkled about the
Bedchamber. It shall be profitable also to take warm bread out of the oven,
and fill a hollow part of it with Treacle, and apply it to the Navel, or to the
Armpits, that it may draw the venom to it; The sweat being ended, the body
should be rubbed and dried with clean warm linen clothes, being careful that
no cold air be admitted, and the sheets and coverings of the beds should be
changed. After the sweat, the sick should be nourished with meats that afford
good juice, and easy of concoction, yet taken but in a small quantity.

When the sick has sweat once, if there be need of opening a vein, let it be
done in that manner as is already heretofore expressed: And when the
Alexipharmicks have been taken of two days by the sick, and the body is
Cacochymick, or the Plague depend upon some internal default of humors, and
that great danger of a Fever be to be feared, it will be convenient to
administer a purge, that some part of the matter putrefying and increasing, the
Fever may be abated; so that Nature may overcome the rest more easily: they
should be gentle, as Syrup of Roses solutive Tamarinds, Rhubarb, Agarick,
Pestilential Pills, Tryphera Persica, Sir. Diasercos.

Afterward if it be not needful to cause sweat (which nevertheless ought not
to be hindered if it come on a critical day) such medicines are to be continued
as hinder putrefaction, resist a malignant Fever, and extinguish the flames in
the bowels and humors.

And then we must be wary how we use Treacle, or any of the other hot
medicines, without any respect of the disease, nature, age, and other
circumstances; wherefore when the Fever has set upon the body, such things are
not to be exhibited, unless they are mixed with cold things, or else cold
things alone may be given, such as Syrup, acetos. Citri, of Sorrel,
Pomgranates, red Gooseberries, rubi Idaei, as also Pearl, Coral, precious
stones, Bezoar.

But since that Nature for the most part uses to send the most venomous part
of the matter to the out-parts of the body, Cure of Buboes.
and occasions Buboes and Carbuncles: If the venom perfectly, or most part of
it be driven out into a Bubo, which may be known by the remission of the Fever
and Symptoms, we must expect ripening, although not perfectly, as in other
tumors, yet it must be helped by all means; for if either a Bubo come not
enough out, or be increased overmuch, and still the Fever and symptoms abate
not, and the sick no ways mends, we must endeavor that a way may be opened for
the letting out the venom.

Therefore either vesiccatories must be applied, or the skin must be
scarrified, that the poison may freely expire, and the pestilent humors fly
out; a young chicken also, or pigeon, the feathers about the rump being pulled
off, should to the great advantage of the sick be applied to it, although no
incision be made, and that should be often repeated; or a dried Toad being
moistened with wine, should be applied: afterward we must endeavor that the
rest of the matter may be brought to maturity by proper medicines described
every where up and down; into the place opened by Incision, convenient
digestives should be put; and if the incision be not made deep enough, and the
quitture be still therein detained, the tumor must be opened with an Incision
knife, and the Ulcer mundifyed with proper medicines, and it must not be healed
up, until all the venom be come out.

But Carbuncles are forthwith to be scarrified, Cure of Carbuncles
and that deep enough, that the pestilent and corrupt humor may come forth,
afterward some convenient plaster must be applied, such as may be of the soot
of a chimney, and others, described up and down in Authors: Some apply the
plaster de Magnete Arsenicali, it is proper to apply a dried Toad also, being
first powd'red, in wine, to the places adjacent, lest the venom should return
to the internal parts; some defensitive of cooling, drying, and binding things
must be applied; some make a circle with a Sapphire stone about the Carbuncle,
lest the poison should creep farther, and thereby extinguish the same; and if
the Carbuncle be too much increased, and cause great pain, a vein should be
opened under the same, that so the corrupt blood may be evacuated, and to abate
the heat, a plaster of Houndstongue is to be applied.

When an Escar shall be generated, it must be taken away with a convenient
Unguent, and the Ulcer must be mundified and cured in due manner; but during
the whole time of the cure, twice every seven days a potion of the temperate
medicines that resist venom should be drunk, lest any of the malignity should
remain in the Body.

CHAP. VII. Of the Nature of a Pestilent and Malignant Fever, and of the
difference of them from the Plague.
FOrasmuch as the highest degree of corruption of humors is in the Pestilence,
we must as it were ascend to it by the malignant and pestilent Fevers: of them
therefore we will now speak, in what respect these three, the Pestilence, a
pestilent and malignant Fever differ.

That the pestilence consists in a certain occult quality merely adverse to
mankind, and that it is infectious, The plague pestilent and malignant Fevers,
how they differ.
and that a Fever is not of the same essence therewith, but yet commonly
accompanies it, is already showed: And therefore the Plague it self also, when
it has a Fever joined with it, may not without cause in some measure be called
a pestilential Fever: yet other Fevers also are called pestilent without the
plague, wherein the corruption of humors has not yet attained that high degree
which may constitute the nature of venomous pestilence, yet they contain in
them somewhat like to that venomous and malignant pestilence, and moreover
either are not pernicious, or contagious as the plague, if they are both of
them, yet they are less destructive then the plague; for the difference of a
pestilential Fever, so called in particular, and of the venomous pestilence
(since the nature of them both is unknown) betrays it self in this, by the
vehemence and contagiousness of it, which is perceived to be less, not only in
sporadick Fevers, but in epidemical pestilentials, then in the plague it self:
But concerning malignant Fevers, although they by a general name signify truly
pestilentials, yet in particular those are called malignant, wherein there is a
less degree of corruption then in those that are truly pestilential, and
wherein the humors which kindle the Fever contain in them some occult quality
tending to venenosity; whence there is less destruction and infection, sometimes
there is none.

And that the matter may be handled in few words, if it appear by the symptoms
in any Fever, that besides putrefaction there is a lso some occult and malign
quality, and yet but few die thereof, whether they are epidemical Fevers, or
sporadick, or contagious, or not contagious; this is the first degree of
corruption, and such a Fever in particular is called malignant; but in case
many die, and yet others are not infected, or although there be some contagion,
and some destruction, and yet neither the contagion nor destructive power have
attained to the highest degree, and many continue well in health, it is a
pestilent Fever in particular. Lastly, if so be many which begin to be visited
die, and that most every where are infected, and that the contagion be spread
over remote places, it is the plague.

CHAP. VIII. To what kind of Fevers Pestilent and Malignant ones pertain.
MOreover since there are three kinds of Fevers, To what kind of Fevers
pestilent and malignant ones belong.
Ephemeral, Putred, and Hectic, and again of putred Fevers, there are some
differences: it is now enquired to what kind of Fevers malignant and pestilent
do belong, or whether malignancy and pestilency belong to all Fevers, or to
some certain kind only.

But we have already determined that there are no Ephemeraes nor Hecticks
pestilent and malignant, because that in all pestilent and malignant Fevers,
there are manifest tokens of corruption or putrefaction of humors, although
that malignant and pestilent humor have likewise a manifest antipathy with the
spirits, and may stir up a dangerous Fever.

But all putred pestilential Fevers are continued, since the force of the
venomous putrefaction is such, as that it can easily diffuse it self into all
the veins and arteries, and may easily corrupt the humors.

But malignant Fevers in particular so called, may also be intermittent, as
experience shows: Neither is it impossible, that even in the first passages
of the body, the putrefying humors may acquire some malignity; and seeing that
in such Fevers the force of the venom is not so great, nothing hinders but
that Nature may appoint certain excretions at appointed periods.

Continued pestilent and malignant Fevers, are particularly addicted to no sort
of them, but according as putrefaction happens into this or that sickly
preparation, so this or that continued Fever is stirred up, sometimes a Synocha,
sometimes a periodick; whence various symptoms likewise do arise, according to
the sickly provision.

Moreover concerning the differences of malignant and pestilential Fevers, The
differences of pestilent and malignant Fevers.
since that in every such Fever there are found two things, the putrefaction it
self, from whence the Fever arises, and malignity; in respect of these also,
do the Fevers differ. For sometimes equally from putrefaction and malignity,
danger is at hand; which Fevers, if the putrefaction and malignity be great,
are exceeding dangerous; but if neither the malignancy nor putrefaction be
much, the Fevers are not dangerous. Sometimes there is more putrefaction, but
the malignancy is not much; and then the Fever comes nearer to the nature of
other putred Fevers: but sometimes the putrefaction is not much, but the
malignant quality vehement, and such Fevers seem to be mild but they are most
fraudulent and dangerous.

Concerning the nature of Pestilency and Malignity, although it be occult, yet
from its effects we may apprehend a certain variety, whilst sometimes spots,
sometimes Measles, sometimes wheals come forth; sometimes too great sweats,
sometimes Catarrhs, Pleurisies and other evils, according to the antipathy which
the venom has with this or that particular part.

CHAP. IX. Of the causes of a Pestilent and Malignant Fever.
AS for the causes of these Fevers, Cause.
because their malignancy is less then theirs of the pestilence, and through
this, as it were by degrees, we ascend to the Pestilence, those which are the
causes of the Plague, for the most part, are the same with those of malignant
and pestilent Fevers; but more mild, as principally air, heaven, course of
diet, and contagion.

Namely malignant Fevers in the first place do arise from a sickly provision of
the body; for it arises from meat that is bad, fit for corruption, and very
obnoxious to putrefaction, whereof Galen may be seen, in his book of Meats
affording good and bad juice, and the humors may be so corrupted in our
bodies, as that they become venomous, of which I have spoken in the
Institutions in the second book, part 2. cap. 12. Furthermore from common
causes likewise, namely unprofitable constitution of Air, as also from the
influence of Stars.

But pestilent Fevers so called in particular, have the same causes, but more
grievous, which at length if they are increased, produce the pestilence; whence
Fevers malignant and pestilent long continuing, at length turn to the plague.

CHAP. X. Of the Signs of Malignant and Pestilent Fevers.
IN the same manenr is it about the Diagnostick signs: The Dianostick signs of
pestilent Fevers.
for in a pestilential Fever peculiarly so called, the same signs almost appear
as in the plague, only fewer, or more gentle; and such Fevers are not so
dangerous nor so infectious as the Plague it self.

But as to the signs of their differences, if both malignity and putrefaction
be very much, the strength will be much weakened, and grievous, nay the most
dangerous symptoms appear: If the putrefaction be very great, the malignancy
little, the feverish symptoms which accompany putrefaction are vehement
enough, but the strength is not so much debilitated. But if the putrefaction be
not great, but the malignant quality vehement, the symptoms which accompany
the Fever are gentle enough, but the strength is exceedingly weakened.

If the humors only are affected, there appear Buboes, Carbuncles,
Imposthumes, Spots, Pushes, and other tokens of putred Fevers, if the spirits
are much infected, these signs are wanting, neither is the heat great, the
strength suddenly languisheth, and the sick are troubled with faintings, the
pulses are unequal, weak, and languishing, and the Fever it self in one two or
three days space is terminated by health or death. Lastly, if the heart be much
infected, great defect of the strength is present, and the sick do not complain
of any great heat.

As concerning Malignant Fevers; Of malignant.
they are very difficult to be known at the first, because the malignity often
lies hid, and shows not it self, unless when it take strength; wherefore all
signs are diligently to be weighed, and if any thing be suspected, it must be
seriously pondered; but all the signs of a malignant Fever are greater then
those of a Fever; and the symptoms which appear, are more vehement then those
which can proceed from a Fever, namely weakness of strength, unquietness, more
anxiety then the feverish heat would occasion; the pulse is freqnent, little,
weak, or if it seem to be natural, other evil symptoms are present, the Urine
sometimes is like unto those who are in health; sometimes thin and crude, having
in it no sediment, or in case it have any, it is more like an excrement then a
sediment; sometimes it is thick, discolored, troubled, muddy, having a red and
troubled sediment; the heat is more mild then the nature of the disease, and
symptoms seem to afford: the face or countenance is much changed from its
lively and natural state; and therefore by these signs pestilent and malignant
fevers may be easily known: yet there are other things happen, heaviness to
sleep, watchings, diliriums, pains of the head, noises and deafness of the
ears, loathing or vomiting, flux of the belly, hemorrhodes of the nose, tumors
arise behind the ears, under the armpits, and about the groin, also diverse
specks, and almost no evil which can be observed in other perilous Fevers but
may here be discerned.

Concerning the prognostics, and first of pestilential Fevers, Prognostics.
there is the same with them for the most part as of the pestilence; for by how
much the more grievous the symptoms are, and the strength more debilitated, by
so much the more danger is portended; but by how much the milder the symptoms
are, and the strength firmer, by so much is there the more hope of health.

There is the same reason in malignant Fevers for the most part, and what is to
be hoped concerning the event in every such Fever, is manifest out of those
things which are spoken in the Institutions, Book 3. part 3. chap. 4, 5, 6, 7,
8.

CHAP. XI. Of the Cure of Malignant and Pestilential Fevers in general.
COncerning the cure of pestilent and malignant Fevers, Cure.
since there are two things in these Fevers contrary to nature, venom, or
malignity, and the Fever; by what means the Fever may be resisted, is manifest
from those things that have been said hitherto concerning Fevers: how malignity
also may be resisted out of those things which are already spoken concerning
the pestilence, is plainly showed.

The greatest difficulty here is in this, to which of them we must have an eye
first, and which last, and how the malignity may be taken away without
increasing the Fever, and on the contrary, the Fever may be regarded without
increasing the malignity. Which that it may rightly be done, the pestilent
venom and malignity, and the putrefaction and Fever are to be considered and
poised together amongst themselves, and regard to be taken whence the greatest
danger may arise; and in the first place look to that, yet so, as that the
other may not totally be neglected.

Wherefore in a pestilential Fever, The Cure of the plague in particular.
Sudorificks Bleeding
as being that wherein malignity most troubles, presently we should fly to
Alexipharmicks and Sudorifiques; yet those are to be rather chosen which are
the more temperate, such as were formerly proposed against the pestilence;
afterward if need be, a vein should be opened, and that timely, and scarce
after the fourth day, before all things shall be disturbed in the body, and the
strength be weakened, namely, when blood does either abound in quantity, so that
it distendeth the vessels, or it is a burden to the strength, or is stirred by
some motion, that it may be feared lest it should be carried to some principal
part; but if the disease have made some progress, and the strength now labors,
the breathing of a vein is more safely omitted then untimely appointed; but in
case the strength will not suffer a vein to be opened, cupping with scarrifying
is fit to be used to the inferior parts.

But purging at the beginning of these Fevers is not convenient, Purging.
unless such as may purge only the first ways without any manifest agitation of
the rest of the humors; but stronger are not convenient, because they stir the
humors, and mix the venom with them the more, and often cause dangerous
fluxes of the paunch.

If the matter tend upwards, Vomits.
and there be any nauseousness, vomit is to be provoked by the weaker sort of
medicines causing them.

Hence we are to come again to the Alexipharmacal medicines, which
notwithstanding should be such, as that the humors should not thereby be
increased: Therefore those are to be exhibited that are more temperate, and
together do resist putrefaction; such are Sorrel, Citrons, Pomgranates,
Cinquefoyl, Tormentil, Hartshorn, the bone of a Hearts heart, Bezoar stone,
Bolealmenack, Terra Sigillata, and such like, and medicines prepared of these,
but principally Bezoar water is often to be administered, as being that which
does forthwith penetrate, which may be so tempered, as that it may resist the
Fever and putrefaction; and therefore with such medicines, Syrup of Sorrel,
Limmon, Pomgranates, Sorrel, Vesicatories.
and young Sorrel, and such like are to be mixed.

The matter being diminished, vesiccatories may be applied to the Legs and
Wrists, Cure of a malignant Fever in particular. Purging,
to the advantage of the sick, since that they draw the venomous matter from
the interior parts to the exterior, without any trouble or weakening of the
strength.

But if it be a malignant Fever in particular so called, and the putrefaction
more then the malignity, the first passages are first to be purged, and not
only with lenitive Clisters, but lenitives also are to be given, as Syrup of
Roses solutive, Manna, Cassia, Tamarinds, Agarick, Rhubarb, Tryphera Persica,
especially if the matter swell: But we must wholly abstain from the strongest,
as Scammony, Coloquintida, Turbith, and such like. And indeed, if the
putrefaction presently increases, and a more vehement Fever is thereby
kindled, and especially if the humors swell, presently that is to be done, and
that before the third day.

But these things in general cannot sufficiently determine; these tracts in
particular of these Fevers, show the way more clearly; for such pestilent and
malignant Fevers are sometimes propagated by infection, when it is most safe
that the pollution in what manner soever taken, should be expelled by
Sudorifiques and Alexipharmicks out of the body, and afterward, if occasion do
require, to appoint purgation and Phlebotomie; sometimes likewise nature it self
expells the matter to the circumference of the body, as it uses to happen in
the Measles and small Pox; but then Nature is also troubled in her work, and
the matter which is thrust out to the exterior parts of the body, ought not to
be called in again by purging, but it is rather to be helped by Sudorifiques and
Alexipharmicks in its work; but sometimes the Fever is occasioned by vicious
preparation of the humors, or is cherished thereby, and the peccant matter in
the Stomach, near the Midriff and first passages, manifests it self by vomit,
pain, heat, bitterness of the mouth, anxiety, and other tokens, which
necessarily should be avoided by vomit or purgation.

The first passages being opened, and the body evacuated, Bleeding.
presently the opening of a vein is to be appointed, if it be needful, and that
before the fourth day.

After purging the body and opening a vein, Sudorificks.
if occasion require, it is convenient to use some Sudorifique, but such as may
not increase the Fever, such as we have already proposed; and although sweat
does not always follow, yet such medicines are to be continued and exhibited
daily, that so the body may by degrees be apt to sweat, and that nature at
length of its own accord, in its own time, may expel peccant humors by sweats;
but the stronger Sudorifiques at the first, debilitate Natures strength; and
since the humors in these Fevers are not always so disposed that they can be
discussed by sweats, yet the thinner are dispersed, and the thicker remains
behind. Altering preparing medicines.
Wherefore preparation and alteration of the humors is to be ordered by those
medicines which open, and if occasion require, may cut those humors, and may
resist ebullition and putrefaction, extinguish the heat of the Fever, and
resist malignity, and may by degrees dispose nature to sweats; such are Sorrel,
Scordium, Carduus Benedictus, Scorzoneca, the seed of Citron, Roots of
Tormentil, Cinquefoyl, juice of Citron, Pomgranates, and Syrups of these,
Spirit of Vitriol: when the humors are sufficiently prepared, unless Nature
expel alone, they are to be evacuated by a convenient passage, but then also
lenitive medicines must be used, and purgation scarce to be ordered before the
fourteenth day.

If Nature tend to evacuation by urine, Causing Urine.
it is to be helped by an emulsion of the seeds of Melons, Citron or Limmon,
Carduus benedictus, with the water of Sorrel, Mayden-hair, and such like.

But during the whole time of the sickness, Topical things.
as well in malignant as in pestilent Fevers, medicines are to be applied to
the Pulses and heart, such as strengthen the heart, and resist malignity, which
are very where extant; Symptoms also, if any urge and debilitate the strength,
are to be taken away and mitigated, as in their own place shall be showed.

Concerning Diet, Diet.
the meat should be of good juice, and of easy digestion; and to beware that
when the strength languisheth Nature be not over-burthened; the meats also
should be mixed with such things as resist this Fever, we must abstain from
wine, unless swooning fits happen, but it is more convenient to use small beer,
a decoction also of Hartshorn may well be given, with such a quantity of
Spirit of Vitriol as may render it grateful to the taste, to which also some
Juleps of Roses and Violets may be added: It allays thirst, likewise opens
obstructions drives away putrefaction, and resists malignancy; of Aegyptii,
as Prosper Alpinus in his fourth book of Medicines Egypt. chap. the fourth.
Pulp. of Tamarinds and Barberries, the fruits being dried, with the seeds of
Fennel or Limmon, they pour them into abundance of fair water, and so prepare a
Drink, which they administer to the sick during the whole time of the disease
in malignant and pestilent Fevers, and confide much in the use of this Drink,
since that it is found that Tamarinds and the fruit of Barberries do
exceedingly resist putrefaction in Fevers.

CHAP. XII. Of a Malignant Fever, with the Measles and Small Pox.
ALthough the nature of malignity, Small Pox and Measles.
from whence malignant Fevers are denominated be occult, and therefore much
cannot be spoken of the differences of these Fevers, yet there is not one
reason only even of the same, but some variety shows it self by the effects and
symptoms, whence also certain differences of malignant Fevers are are
appointed, of which we will now speak in particular.

First, there happen Fevers wherein pushes or eminent tubercles break forth,
and sometimes certain spots show themselves: the Greeks call them Exanthemata,
and Ecth^mata the Latins Papulas and Pustulas, and at this day they are called
the Measles and Small Pox; which names, although they are not used in the same
manner by all, yet the most at this day call variolas, parvos varos, little
spots or Measles, and they give this name to those pushes full of humors,
which for the most part suppurate, which the Germans call die Biatterne and
Bocten; but they call those Mobillos, which are spots only in the skin, or
rather small tubercles in the skin, which the Germans call die Masserne.

Variolae are pustules breaking forth in the skin and parts adjacent,
Definition.
with a continued Fever occasioned by the fervency of the blood, and sent forth
by the expulsive faculty; but Morbilli are little red spots or tubercles coming
out in the skin with a continued Fever, bred by the ebullition of the blood,
and sent out by the expulsive faculty.

Of both kinds there are some differences; for of Variolae, some are greater,
some less; some white, others yellow, or of some other color; some break out
forth with, and rise high, and are ripened and encompassed with a red circle,
and come forth without any grievous symptoms, and are not dangerous; others
are yellow, come forth slowly, and presently pitch again, and have a livid
circle about them, and are dangerous.

To the Variolas belong those pustules also which break out of the body, and
are about the bigness of Lupines, Differences.
and shining like Crystal, out of which a certain waterish substance issues;
which some therefore call Chrystals, the Germans call them Shaffsblattern, oder
Bindvocten, which are less dangerous, and without any manifest Fever for the
most part they do appear.

Moreover to the Variolaes belong those tubercles coming out here and there in
places, and are free from quitture, which the Germans call Steinbocten, and are
for the most part the least of all the kinds of Variol. and freest from danger,
which befalls children often without a Fever, and are presently healed; so that
Infants seldom take their beds for them,

To the Poxes or Measles certain small red tubercles do belong, which invade
with heat, and a cough and other symptoms of the Pox, yet less dangerous then
the pox; the Ge^mans call them die Rittein, or die Rottein, because they are
red; sometimes they come alone, sometimes are mixed with the Pox, and sometimes
come after the Pox is healed; which disease Halyaabas calls Rubcolam, lib. 8.
Theoric. cap. 14. Moreover there are other breakings out which seem to be
referred to Poxes, which the Neapolitans call Rossoniam and Rossaliam, as
Johannes Philippus Ingrastiat of tumors speaks; by others they are called
Purples, and Eruthemata, yet some call the red spots or Patechii, purples: They
are red, and as it were fiery spots, because scarce worthy to be called
tumors, coming out over all the body, as it were certain small Eryspelaes at
the beginning of the sickness, or on the fourth or fifth day: In the progress
of the disease it spreads over all the body, as if it were on fire, or as if
one were sick of an universal Erysipelas, which color, as in the beginning, so
in the declination, is turned into spots, which again on the seventh or ninth
day vanish, falling away from the skin like scales of Fishes.

The subject of spots and pushes is the skin, Subject.
and other parts answering to the skin in proportion; for it has been found in
dead bodies, that the superficies of the Intrals, and on their skin without
side the Pox have been settled.

Concerning the cause of these, Cause.
there is difficult and great controversy amongst Physicians; The Arabicks,
and those which follow them, attribute the cause of the small Pox and Measles
to the uncleanness of the blood, contracted from the menstruous blood in the
womb, by the Infant which was there nourished with it; for they say, that this
filth being left in the body, does lie still, like unto leven, until stirred;
so that the whole blood, boyls like new wine, and so whatsoever is in it of
impurity, is separated and sent to the outside of the body; and they therefore
say so, because they observed that almost all men at some time are troubled
with the Pox or Measles, and those which have had them once or twice, for the
most part are free from them ever after.

Others are against this opinion, and say, that it proceeds from some occult
celestial cause, whose impression, children being more infirm, are apter to
take, then those that are strong and in years; neither do they think it
probable, that Infants are nourished in the womb with unclean blood, or that
this impurity can lie hidden so long in man's body, since it is known that not
only Infants, but youths, nay such as are well in years, and old men also some
times fall sick of the small Pox, which formerly have been sick of Fevers, and
troubled with scabs, in whom (in case any impurity had been in the blood, it
ought to have been then taken away.

But in regard both opinions contain difficulties in them, and both seem to be
held up with probable arguments; let us join them together; for if the Pox and
Measles are epidemical and infectious, it is not to be denied but that they then
arise from a certain peculiar malignant disposition of air,: Then Infants, as
being more tender, sooner are infected; although it cannot be denied, that from
an external cause, an infirmity lying hidden within, may be brought forth into
action, yet if the power of the malignity be greater, those of ripe years may
sometimes be afflicted: But if the Pox or Measles come forth scattered here and
there, it is probable that they proceed from the impurity of the womb, whereby a
vicious disposition of the body is contracted by the party in the infancy
especially if there be no fault in the Air; for although an infant in the womb
be nourished with the purest blood of the mother, yet when it becomes bigger,
and wants more nourishment, it cannot be but that it must draw some of the
depraved humors which are cumulated in the womb with it. Whence it is known,
that Infants have been born sick of the small Pox, or had them come forth
presently after they come into the world: Yet it is not impossible but that from
ill Diet the same vitiousness may be contracted, as from the menstruous blood
in the womb, and that may happen to those that have had the small Pox twice or
thrice, although it may likewise happen by reason of the first pollution and
defilement, of which some relics were left.

The small Pox and Measles always come forth with a Fever; Whether any and
what Fever may be joined with the Small Pox and Measles.
for they are stirred up by a certain crisis, and that ebullition not only
happens to the subcutanial veins, but also to the greater; whence heat is
communicated to the heart, and a Fever is kindled, and that Fever is made a
putred Synocha, as may appear by the equal heat, and the matter contained in
the Pox; and that which is gentle, often vanishes within a few days, neither
is it regarded by Infants, nor the standers by; but that which is more
vehement, if the disease be to determine with safety, will abate when the Pox
comes forth; sometimes these Fevers become pestilential, and then many Infants
are extinguished.

And thus the small Pox and Measles are generated from internal causes; yet
external causes likewise do often concur, as humors corrupting in this manner,
or lying hidden, have force of moving: The first is Air, by reason of the
influence of Stars, or causes otherwise so disposed, as that they may corrupt
the humors in this manner. Moreover contagion, when a certain sickly effluvium
or steam from bodies diseased of the small Pox or Measles, is communicated to
another body, and causes the same disease therein.

But of Poxes and pushes there is certain differences, as has been said, in
substance, quantity, and quality. According to substance, some consist of this,
some of that humor; according to quantity, some are big and many, others small
and few: according to quality, some are white, others red, yellow, livid,
violet color, etc. Some come out suddenly, others slowly; some are presently
healed and vanish, others continue long; some afflict only the external parts
of the body, some the internal also.

But when the Pox or Measles are coming, Diagnostick signs.
there is present pain in the head, eyes, and throat, an itching of the
nostrils, sneezing, terror in sleep, fits like epileptical ones, pain on the
back, burning and pricking in the skin, difficulty of breathing, a dry cough,
trembling of the feet, yawning, retching, palpation of the heart, which actions
so hurt, proceeds from the ebullition of the blood, and fuliginous vapors sent
from the heart, and dispersed over all the body. Their Urine is often like unto
theirs who are in health, the peccant matter being thrust out to the
extremities of the body; yet sometimes it is troubled by reason of the great
ebullition of humors, the hemorrhodes of the Nose are frequent, tears use to
fall from the eyes of their own accord, or the eyes show as if they were ready
to weep; sometimes vomiting happens, the face and eyes are red, the skin rough,
the voice hoarse, and lastly, a Fever by the ebullition of humors is kindled;
If these signs therefore for the most part are present, and are increased on
the third or fourth day, and certain red spots appear in the skin, it is a sign
that the Pox or Measles are at hand; and this suspicion is increased if the Pox
reign thereabouts. A little afterward those specks are exalted like grains of
Mellet, and afterward changed into pustules full of quitture, and are become
Pox, or are extended abroad, and small tubercles are made, and the Measles are
produced.

The nature of humors is principally known by the color, Signs of Causes, and
of the part affected.
for if the pox proceed from a choleric humor mixed with blood, they are more
red, and do itch more from Phlegm, they are whiter, from melancholy blacker:
sometimes likewise they are of violet color, green, lead color, and with
greater corruption of humors: If they possess not only the skin, but also the
internal parts, the Fever is greater, thence comes great difficulty of
breathing, straitness of the breast, a greater cough, pain in the stomach and
guts most vehement.

Small Pox and Measles are numbered amongst acute diseases, Prognostics.
and are terminated within fourteen days; they come forth commonly about the
fourth day, they increase till the seventh, the height is manifest the
eleventh, and from thence to the fourteenth is the declination; but the drying
of them continues till the twentieth day sometimes.

The Fever adjoined, the magnitude of symptoms, the manner of the Pox, and the
strength or the sick show the event. For if the Fever and all the other
symptoms after the coming out of them do abate, if large hemorrhodes of the
nose have preceded, if the pustules are great, white and red, soft eminent, not
alike, come forth quickly, and are soon ripened, a good event is to be hoped
for.

On the contrary, the Fever if it be great, and be not mitigated after the
coming out of the Pox, and the tubercles are violet color, green, livid, haad,
contiguous, come forth and ripen slowly, and the symptoms which use to be in
malignant Fevers be more grievous, the strength weaker, they portend danger,
and either bring death, or some great evils in the eyes, nose, chops, gullet,
lungs, guts, liver, reins, and leave filthy pits and scars in the skin.

There is in a manner the same reason of the Measles, which the more mild the
Fever and symptoms are, the less danger; but by how much the greater, the more
danger is adjoined with them; they are sooner discerned, neither are they so
lothsom to the sight; red ones likewise, and those that soon appear are more
mild, but those that are green, violet color, black and come forth slowly are
worst.

But the worst is, when the Pox or Measles come not thoroughly out, or do vanish
again, for then by the matter left within, or returning in, a greater Fever is
kindled, symptoms become greater, and the sick, for the most part, perish.

The chief scope of the cure must be, Indications and Cure.
that since Nature strives to expel the matter to the remote parts of the body
to assist it: the second is, That the pravity of the matter may be corrected:
The third, That the strength may be fortified: And lastly, To take care that no
part of the body receive any detriment.

The endeavors of Nature are furthered if the humors are driven out to the
circumference of the body, and the impediments that may disturb the matter in
its coming forth, whether it be store of matter, or pravity of it, or
obstruction of the bowels must be taken away.

But because this evil principally invades Infants, Bleeding.
breathing of a vein is not necessary, since their age will not tolerate it,
but if it happen in an age that will bear it, and the abundance of blood
require evacuation, presently at the beginning before the becoming out of them,
a vein is to be opened, that nature being eased of part of its burden, may the
easier expel the remainder.

Strong Purges are not to be used, lest nature should be hindered in its
endeavor, or a dangerous looseness should be occasioned; yet if the body be
bound, it may be relaxed by a lenitive Medicine or Clister, which together
allays the heat of the humors, and strengthens the internal parts.

Moreover we must observe whether Nature do its office in expelling; Expelling
thing.
for then there is no need to help it with many medicines, especially heating
ones.

But if the Pox come out slowly, Nature should be helped with expelling
Medicines; yet such things should be mixed therewith, as may strengthen the
internal parts, mitigate the heat of the humors, and resist malignity.

The expelling Medicines are, Roots and Seeds of Fennel, Turnip, Carduus
benedictus, Columbine, Limmon, the Roots of white Dittany, Burnet, Maidenhair,
Marigold flowers, decoction of red Parsnips, Scordium, Scabions, Myrrh, Figs,
Lentiles, and other things that resist malignity.

These things cool and resist malignity, Sorrel, Cooling things.
young Sorrel, Lettice, Waterlillies, Purcelane, Barley, Tormentil, Endive,
Cichory, Juice of Limmons, Oxysaucharum, Rob of Currants; In giving of which,
regard must be had to the malignity and Fever together, and according as need
shall require, the medicines must be chosen or mixed.

Medicines of Figs, Lentiles, Lacca, and Tragacanthwere, in use amongst the
Arabians, which were likewise used by latter Physicians; yet if the malignity
be great, you may sly to more exquisite resisters of poison.

But principally we must endeavor to beware that the sick take not the fresh
air, but be rather placed in a hot place, that the pores of the skin may be
kept open, and that nothing may hinder Nature in expelling,

And we must be careful also, that the eyes, nostrils, How the parts are to be
defended.
and internal parts may not be hurt; and therefore the Lungs are to be
fortified and strengthened with medicines of Poppy, Lentiles, Violets,
Tragacanth Roses, the guts with strengthners, and moderate binders, the eyes,
and nose with such like, as their infirmities do show they have need of. The
mouth and chops should be washed with decoction of Plantane, red Roses, flowers
of Pomgranates, Prunellas, Syrup of Pomgranates, and such like.

Whilst the wheals are ripening, there will be much itching, but beware of
scratching, lest you thereby cause scars in the skin; if the quitture be white,
and the pustules not too great, it is best to commit the whole business to
nature; but if they are great, or many of them joined together, when by their
whiteness, softness, and freeness from pain they shall appear to be ripe
enough, they may be opened with a silver or golden needle best.

Concerning Diet, Diet.
the sick by all means must be kept from the cold air, neither must he be kept
too hot, lest it make him faint: The manner of Diet as in other acute Fevers,
is to be appointed, namely thin; yet to Infants, if their stomachs will bear
it, some meat may be given, because their bodies are not diaphoretick, and by
reason of their store of innate heat, cannot so well endure fasting: from meats
that are salt, acrid, flat, which may increase an ebullition of humors, we
must refrain, and those that moderately cool and bind, and allay the heat of
the blood, must be administered. Wine at the first is not convenient, but rather
small Beer, or Barley water; but in the progress of the disease, when the
symptoms slacken, to those that are accustomed to it, a little of the smallest
wine may be granted.

There ought to be temperate moderation of the other non-naturals likewise,
watchings and sleep, the sick should sleep moderately: In the beginning of the
Pox or Measles, there should be gentle frictions of the legs and arms used,
whereby the humors might be called out to the circumference of the body. It Is
in use to put a red cloth to the bed in the sight of the sick, to cause motion
of humors to the exterior parts. The Belly should be kept open with a gentle
Clyster, if need require: Lastly, all vehement perturbations of the mind must
be avoided, especially anger and fear.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Spotted Fever.
MOreover, another sort of malignant Fever is, Patechiae
when certain spots like the biting of gnats appear in the skin; There are of
diverse colors, but principally red, called by Authors Puncticulae, Peticulae,
and Patechiae, whence the Fevers are also called Peticulares, Patechiales,
Lenticulares.

These spots are without all itching, extuberancies, and ulceration, as in
Poxes; and these spots in these Fevers appear principally in the back, arms,
legs, and breasts, namely in places through which the most eminent veins and
arteries do pass, but in the face they do seldom appear, because it is always
obvious to the external Air.

These spots have their original from the thinner parts of the putred and
corrupt humor, The cause.
whence they suddenly come out and vanish; but although they are made by the
expulsive faculty, driving this part of the corrupt humor to the extremities
of the body; yet that seldom happens critically, because they come out for the
most part at the beginning, the matter being not as yet concocted, neither is
there any notable evacuation of the matter made by them, nor the sick are not
the better for them, but for the most part by how much the more plentifully
they come forth, by so much the greater store of corrupt matter is indicated,
which notwithstanding as is said already, is not sufficiently evacuated by
those spots.

There are of those spots several differences; for first, Difference.
they differ in color, some are red, arising from the more temperate blood
putrified; others yellow and green, when choler is putrified; others, Pomgranet
color and black, when melancholy, putrifieth. Moreover they differ in
quantity, for some come out more plentifully, others more sparingly; some are
greater, others less, according to the quantity and thickness of the humor,
and strength or weakness of nature: some come out at the beginning, others in
the progress of the disease.

This Fever is known by the signs of Malignant Fevers in general already set
down; and when the spots join together, Diagnostick signs.
they show malignity more plainly.

But what event of these Fevers may be hoped for, is manifest by the
prognostics of malignant Fevers in general. Prognostics.
Concerning the spots themselves, although it be good that the peccant matter
be carried to the extremities of the body, yet by these spots they cannot
sufficiently be evacuated; therefore although if they are plentiful, they show
that store of matter is present; yet they shake it not of, and therefore they
portend danger rather then health: Neither is their paucity always good, and
although it signify no store of matter, yet it also denotes debility of
nature: These spots (if they lie hidden) are evil signs; because they show that
the matter which before was coming to the outside of the body, does now tend
inwards, and go to the head, heart, or some internal part. Red spots are most
safe, yellow and green worse, and pomgranate color and black most dangerous.
Although such as come out at the first appear symptoma^^cal, yet those that
break forth the seventh day, or thereabouts, are critical: yet unless other
good signs are present, put no confidence in them, because they do not
sufficiently evacuate the matter; but if they come out slowly, it is evil; for
that happens either by reason of the thickness of the matter, into which if the
malignity fall, it is not easily overcome, or else by reason of density of the
skin, which hinders free transpiration.

Lastly concerning the cure, Cure.
those things that are spoken about the cure of malignant Fevers, are here also
convenient, namely, the belly is to be loosned either by Clister or lenitive
medicine; or if the matter tend upward, and the sick be inclinable to vomit, a
Vomit must be given.

Then if occasion require, Bleeding.
a vein is to be opened before the fourth day, or else afterward to be
omitted; but whether the spots now coming forth do hinder the breathing of a
vein, is showed in the Institutions lib. 5. part. 2. sect. 1. cap. 17.

But since nature it self strives to protrude the matter we see to the
extremities of the body, and it is profitable in all malignant diseases to drive
out the matter from the greater to the lesser vessels, and to free the bowels
from vicious humors, the endeavors of nature is here to be assisted, Sweats
and the matter tending to the outmost parts of the body, is by it to be
evacuated; because that otherwise that which is malignant will admit of no
concoction.

Therefore let the sick be kept in a place moderately hot, and forthwith some
Sudorifique medicine, and which also may resist malignity given, such as are
before propounded for the plague and malignant Fevers in general, and for the
Measles and small Pox; yet those are to be selected amongst them that may not
increase the feverish heat; and the Fever and the malignity are to be weighed
together, and of that which most requires it, regard must be taken.

Sometimes a looseness happens in this Fever, When a looseness comes, what must
be done.
which unless it be too great, should not be stopped, but the business should
be committed to nature, and in the interim, only with altering medicines, and
such as resist malignity, the morbifique cause must be resisted.

Afterward to fortify nature, Pearls, Coral, Hartshorn, juice of Pomgranates,
Citron, Confectio de Hyacintho, Alkermes, and such like are to be exhibited.

Externally likewise medicines are to be applied to the region of the heart,
and to the pulses, Topical medicines.
which draw venom from the heart, and resist malignity, and some use an
unction ex Hydraeolo, and niter to relax the skin, and draw out humors.

Neither is it unprofitable to apply vesiccatories to the arms, Vesiccatories.
especially if the external parts are cold, and the internal burn, and that
pains in the head, deliriums, a lethargy, and other symptoms in the head are
present; for so both the humors are called from within outward, and are
likewise refelled from the head.

CHAP. XIV. Of the English Sweat.
THere was a kind of Fever malignant, The English sweat
which began in England in the year 1486. and thence it took the name of the
English Sweat, and it reigned there about forty years, and killed almost an
infinite number of Englishmen: Hence being spread through the Netherlands,
Germany, the Low Countries, Holland, Zeland, Brabant in Belgia, Flanders, Dane,
Norway, France, it continued until the year 1530.

The same Fever was accompanied with Sweats, and was called the Sudatory Fever;
for those which were troubled with this Fever, abounded with Sweat, without
Bubo, Carbuncle, or puttings forth; the sweat perpetually and in great
abundance coming out, until the dissolution of the disease, which happened within
twenty four hours space: Together the sick languished, deficient in mind, with
unquietness, troubled at heart, pain in the head, and also with palpitation of
the heart, and they had a pulse, thick, frequent, swift, and unequal; and the
palpitation of the heart accompanied those that escaped, oftentimes some years,
sometimes till death.

But the cause of this disease was inherent in the most subtle parts of the
blood and spirits, The cause
which were together affected, which the shortness of the disease argues, and
without doubt the blood and spirits contracted this malignity from some evil
disposition of Air, and other corruption; whence also this disease in many
places in the Low Countries with cloudy air, suddenly invaded men, and the
birds also were found dead under the Trees, and 'twas observed that they had
pustules under their wings like Vetches or Tares: But what manner of corruption
of the Air it was, can scarce be explained.

For this was a most cruel disease, Prognostics.
and within the space of twenty four hours, it either killed men, or left them
senseless: and indeed at the first when this disease did invade any City, it
troubled them fifty or sixty times, but it scarce troubled them the hundredth
time.

But the chief business of the cure consisted in the promotion of sweat, Cure.
and weakening venom, which nature of its own accord endeavored; for all those
that did not further the sweats, nor use cordials, and took fresh air, died
within four and twenty hours.

In occasioning Sweats, the strength must be regarded, which in case it be
weak, the sweat must so be moderated, that thereby it may not be debilitated
more, and dejected: for it is observed, that by too much causing sweat, and
whilst the sick beyond their power to suffer, are covered in their beds,
abundance of men have been stifled: During sweating, the sick should be hindered
from sleep.

They used to occasion sweat, and infringe the malignity, water or Sorrel,
Scabious, Terra Sigillata, Bolearmenick, Dittany, Carduus benedictus, Zedoaric,
Tormentil, Waterlillies, Burrage; Species liberantis is also proper, and such
like, which use to be applied in malignant Fevers, and the Pox. During the
Sweats, the sick should be refreshed with the juice of the Syrup of Citron,
Pomgranates, Sorrel, and other things before mentioned about the plague.
Odoraments should also be applied to the Nose. When the sick has sweat enough,
some of the weight of the clothes should be abated by degrees, and the sweat at
last diligently wiped off and cleansed.

CHAP. XV. Of the Ungarick Disease.
AMongst the malignant Fevers, Of the Hungarian disease.
there is also a disease called the Ungarick, because it was first known in
Hungary in the year 1556. and thence it is thought 'twas spread almost over all
Europe, Indeed some think the patechial Fever, and the Ungarick Disease are the
same; and it is true that spots often happen in that, but not always is it so,
and the name of a patechial Fever is extended larger then the Ungarick disease;
for this is a certain kind of malignant Fever, or if it have spots, and is
patechial, yet this disease is bred in Camps by reason of evil Diet, whence we
think it to be properly called the Military disease, or the Disease of the
Camps, because that not only in former times in Hungary, but elsewhere, it
wandered up and down in the Camps hitherto, and thence is dispersed up and down.
But there is a malignant and infectious Fever called Morbus Ungaricus; it is
continued, and has great store of vicious humors about the stomach and first
passages joined therewith.

The proximate cause of this Fever is putrefaction, The causes.
the causes and malignant corruption of the humors in the vena cava. But they
are cumulated and corrupted by errors of Diet, and first by default of the Air,
which in Hungary is extreme thick and in the night filled with clouds, or if
they are discussed, it is very thin and in the Summer time most hot; and
otherwise, likewise in the Camps it is not most profitable; because that in them
it is most common to lie under the open canopy, and to draw the vapors which
come from the air and the rain, and when their clothes are wet, cannot change
them, and in winter time are often penned up in little hot-houses. Moreover bad
diet may be a cause of this disease, wherewith Soldiers (for want of better)
are forced to make shift with, and those for the most part which are accustomed
to fare better; hence because good chyle cannot be generated by evil diet, and
the errors of the first concoction cannot be corrected in the second, many
filthy humors are collected within the first passages, which with the chyle
are carried to the Liver, and thence into the veins, and from that evil chyle
bad blood is generated, which even voluntarily tends to corruption and
putrefaction, and at length an unprofitable disposition of air coming, it does
not only putrify, but becomes malign. Whence not only a putred continued
Fever, Nature of the Ungarick disease.
but also a malignant is stirred up, and one that is also infectious, which may
also infect those that have no ill humors in their bodies, whence the
symptoms do something differ. And as according to Diet, situation, and other
circumstances, the matter occasioning a disease is not always the same, so
there happens differences in the symptoms joined with the Fever. Nay in the
Fever it self there arises certain differences in regard of the peccant
humor, whence from some arise putred Synochas, from others burning choleric
Fevers: But although great store of peccant matter, as has been said,
occasioned by evil diet, be collected for the most part in the stomach and
first passages, yet that is not the containing cause of the Fever, but only
symptomatical, stirred up by the Feverish heat, especially in the beginning of
the disease, that it causes pain in the heart, anxiety, burning about the
midrif, and vomiting, and increases and cherishes the Fever it self.

And all other symptoms which appear in other malignant Fevers, may here also
be present, Diagnostick signs:
and for the most part spots and specks appear; but amongst other things, the
pain of the head for the most part is exceeding troublesome; thence this
disease amonst the vulgar took its name die hauptcranctheit. Most that take
this disease from ill diet, do complain of pain in the stomach, and under the
pointed gristle, where a certain retention and hardness is likewise observed.
There is great thirst presently at the beginning, and the tongue dry and rough,
a little after they are troubled with deliriums, which are gone again when the
matter falls down to the ears, and then deafness ensues.

It Is an acute disease, Prognostics
and is terminated at most in about fourteen days commonly, yet in some not
until twenty days. But what event of this disease may be hoped for, is manifest
by what has been already said concerning malignant Fevers in general; namely,
by how much the strength is the greater, and the symptoms lesser, by so much
is there the more hopes of recovery; on the contrary, by how much the symptoms
are the greater and more, and the strength weaker, by so much the more danger;
with some when a looseness happens, it is a good crisis, but to most when the
matter ascends to the head, and thence down to the ears, and deafness
follows, it is an argument of health.

But as in other malignant Fevers, so likewise in this, the curing must be
performed by taking away what feeds it, and resisting the malignant quality,
yet the symptoms are not to be neglected.

And first concerning the Fever, Purging.
and its cause in those that have contracted this disease from ill diet, or in
the camps, this thing happens that the vicious humors are not only contained
in the vena cava, as in other Synochas and burning Fevers, but there is great
store of humors lies hidden in the stomach, and about the first passages,
which is known by the antecedent diet, pain in the stomach, anxiety, heat about
the midrif, and vomiting; for then that matter is forthwith to be evacuated, as
being such as does severally exist, separated from the other humors, it will
not come to any concoction, but corrupts both meat and medicines being taken,
and Sudorifiques and other medicines which are taken, are carried into the more
destructive parts of the body, and it increases the Fever.

But this may be done by purging, Purging
amongst the medicines Agarick is principally commended, then also Vomits, by
which oftentimes great store of Phlegmatic and Choleric humors, of all kinds
are evacuated, which lay hidden about the stomach: But for those which took the
disease only by infection, and in whom peccant humors are not collected in the
stomach by reason of ill Diet; there is no need of Vomits or Purgation, but
it is sufficient only to evacuate the first passages by lenitives.

When the first passages shall be freed from peccant humors, Bleeding
forthwith the first or second day a vein must be opened, if it be necessary,
and the strength of the sick will bear it; but in case some days are slipped
over, and the strength be weakened, and the party be troubled with vomiting, or
have a looseness, the breathing of a vein is to be omitted. The vein should be
opened in the arm, or if the party be weak, in the ancle, which likewise
conveniently refels the matter from the head, and in this disease is very
profitable.

Nature being thus eased of its burden, Sudorifiques.
forthwith Sudorifiques, and such medicines as resist malignity are to be
given, yet they are so to be tempered, as that they may not increase the heat
of the humors, nor augment the Fever. Here Hartshorn prepared, bezoar stone,
Antimonium, Diaphoreticum, Bez^ardicum minerale, Terra Sigillata, Pulvis
Caesaris rubeus, Montaynanae, Species liberantis, and other such like before
mentioned about malignant and pestilent Fevers in general is manifest. If we
may use Mithridate, Treacle, and such like, that are hot, by reason of the
vehemence of the malignity, lest the heat should be increased, they are to be
allayed with cold waters and vinegar, to which there may conveniently be added
spirit of Vitriol and Tartar, but it is not sufficient once only to use such
medicines to provoke sweat, or twice, but again and daily to corroborate the
spirits, resist malignity and putrefaction, yet in a lesser quantity then
usual, and moreover species Elect. de Gemmis, temperate Cordials, Diamargarit.
Frigid. Confectio de Hyacintho, Sper. Viniol and Tartar, Bezoar water, and
other things before mentioned in the cure of the Plague, and other malignant
Fevers.

Externally likewise to the heart is to be applied, External things.
and to the Pulses Medicines, as also the spirits are to be preserved with
odoraments, and the malignity to be resisted; which were also mentioned before
in the cure of the Plague, and other malignant Fevers.

Lastly, Diet.
the Diet should be the same as in malignant Fevers is expressed, and indeed
the aliment to resist putrefaction should be dry; to abate the Fever, cold, and
mixed with Cordials, or have cordial qualities: Wine in this Fever is hurtful,
and for the most part those that refrain it not, die.

CHAP. XVI. Of a Malignant Fever with the Cramp.
THere are likewise other malignant Fevers, A malignant Fever with the Cramp.
which had accompanied with them certain other diseases, namely the Cramp,
Catarhs, a Cough, and the Squincy; for in the year 1596, and 1597. in the
Bishopric of Collen, Westphalia, the County Waldestein, Wittenstein, and
Hassia, there reigned a disease joined with a Fever, which they then called die
Kriebeltcranctheir, Kriempstsucht, oder Bichende Senche.

It seized upon men with a twitching and kind of benummedness in the hands and
feet, sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, and sometimes on both: Hence
a Convulsion invaded men on a sudden when they were about their daily
employments, and first the fingers and toes were troubled, which Convulsion
afterward came to the arms, knees, shoulders, hips, and indeed the whole body,
until the sick would lie down, and roll up their bodies round like a Ball, or
else stretch out themselves straight at length: Terrible pains accompanied this
evil, and great clamours and schrietchings did the sick make; some vomited when
it first took them. This disease sometimes continued some days or weeks in the
limbs, before it seized on the head, although fitting medicines were
administered; which if they were neglected, the head was then presently
troubled, and some had Epilepsies, after which fits some lay as it were dead
six or eight hours, others were troubled with drowsiness, others with
giddiness, which continued till the fourth day, and beyond with some, which
either blindness or deafness ensued, or the Palsy: When the fit left them, men
were exceeding hungry contrary to nature; afterward for the most part a
looseness followed, and in the most, the hands and feet swelled or broke out
with swellings full of waterish humors, but sweat never ensued. This disease
was infectious, and the infection would continue in the body being taken once,
six, seven, or twelve months.

This disease had its original from pestilential thin humors first invading
the brain and all the nerves; The cause
but those malignant humors proceeded from bad diet when there was scarcity of
provision.

This disease was grievous, dangerous, and hard to be cured, for such as were
stricken with an Epilepsie, were scarce totally cured at all, but at intervals
would have some fits, and such as were troubled with deliriums, became stupid.
Others every year in the month of December and January, would be troubled with
it.

The Cure consisted in evacuating of the peccant humors, and corroborating of
the Nerves. First, Cure.
therefore the vicious humors are to be purged out of the first passages with
Hermodactils, Turbith, Spurge prepared, Diagrydium Electuary, called
Diaphenicum, of the juice of Roses, there being added Caster, Costus, seed of
Rue and Commin.

Afterward Medicines against the Convulsion, were given of Piony, Birdly me of
the Oak, Caster, Sage, Man's skull adding thereto medicines resisting malignity,
with the root of Swallow-wort, Devils bit, Treacle, Mithridate; and so purging
and altering medicines are to be taken by turns, and continued: The external
parts were anointed and fomented with those medicines which were proper for
other Convulsions.

CHAP. XVII. Of a malignant Fever, with a Catarrh, and a Cough, and the Squincy.
Sometimes an Epidemical Catarrh and Cough accompany Malignant Fevers; A
malignant Fever with a Catarrh and a Cough.
such a Fever in the year 1510. 1557. (...) 1580. and 1591. and especially in
the year 1580. spread over most parts of Europe under the Northern Equinoctial
And that disease was then called a Feverish Catarrh, and a Chatarrish Fever,
also a suffocating Fever, der Bien und Schafshusten, Shafteranctheit und hus
Nerwehe.

This Fever came with heaviness in sleep, pain of the head, a dry cough, pain
of the breasts, hoarseness, pain of the stomach, difficulty of breathing, which
even when the cough ceased would continue till the fourteenth day.

This Fever proceeded from the moistness of the fort-going years; The causes.
for when peccant humors were cumulated in the body, by reason of that
irregularity of the air, and at length became putred, and malignant, and
adverse to the head and breast; thence a continued Fever was kindled, and with
part of the peccant humors gotten into the brain and breasts, a catarrh and
cough was generated.

This disease, although most men had it, yet it was not mortal; for almost all
men had it, and scarce one of a thousand died therewith.

This Fever was cured as other malignant Fevers, Cure.
also by regarding the putrefaction and malignity, and lastly, in having
respect to the head and breast, which were principally troubled with this
Catarrh and Cough.

Breathing a vein was not then proper, and it was found by experience, that for
the most part they all died that were let blood.

But lenitive purgers were proper, because the matter did reside in the first
ways; afterward there was administered such things as might alter the matter
in the head and breast, as use to be given for a Catarrh and a Cough, and those
things that resisted malignity were not to be neglected.

Lastly, A malignant fever with a Squincy.
sometimes a Squincy, Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, is joined with a malignant
Fever, and spreads over many places, as it happened in the year 1348. as
Fracastorius relates, and in the year 1557. as Dodonaeus in chap. 21. of his
observations witnesses, and in the year 1564. likewise.

Which Fevers for the most part did arise from the contrariety of air, and
principally from its over-moist constrution, even as epidemial dysenteries
arose from precedent dryness of the air, such as happened in the year 158^, and
1626.

Those Fevers were cured as others that were malignant. But this is to be noted
besides, Cure.
that regard must be taken of that part wherein the force of the disease or
symptom joined therewith resides most, and the disease and symptom which
accompany the malignant Fever should be cured in the same manner as is
propounded in the cure of particular diseases.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Cure of Symptomatical Fevers.
LAstly, Symptomee of Fevers.
there often happens in Fevers various symptoms, which are no less troublesome
to the sick then the Fevers themselves, and therefore they require cure by
themselves, and should be taken away, or abated. Such are first pain of the
head, too much watching profound sleep, delitiums, convulsions, ^p^epsies,
dryness of the tongue, thirst, pain of the heart, looseness, faintings and
swoonings: All which proceed from the humor that was the cause of the Fever,
or from vapors and fumes proceeding from it, and so molesteth this or that
part either with its plenty, excess of primary qualities or malignancy.

Universal Pu^gers first used, these symptoms are taken away by revessing,
repeling, eissipating that matter from the part affected, to the more remote
parts; as need shall require that excess o^ qualities wherewith they are most
troubled, to be altered and corrected, or even the malignity, if there be any,
must be oppugne^ with contrary remedies, and the parts, if occasion requisie,
strengthened; or the symptoms themselves must be resisted with proper remedies.
All which how to be performed, in particular to explain, is beyond the purpose
of our Institutions, but practical books should be advised with concerning it,
and especially the cause of each symptom must be diligently sought out;
because the same symptom often proceeds from diverse causes; and moreover
cannot always be be cured with the same Medicine.

Glory and Thanksgiving be to God.
FINIS.

