THE ANTIQUITIES OF PALMYRA.

Containing the HISTORY OF THE CITY, and its EMPERORS, From its Foundation to
the Present Time.

WITH An APPENDIX of Critical Observations on the Names, Religion, and
Government of the Country.

AND A COMMENTARY on the Inscriptions lately found there.

LONDON, Printed for S. Smith and B. Walford, Printers to the Royal Sociey, at
the Princes-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1696.

blazon or coat of arms MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715

GEORGIUS D. G. MAG. BR. FR. ET. HIB. REX F.D.



SOCIETATI REGIAE
In Collegio Greshamensi
Supremo Numini, and Laboranti Naturae
Horas utilissime impendenti,
Verae Philosophiae instauratrici,
Mathematum, and politioris Litteraturae
Arbitrae, and Sequestrae,
Eruditi orbis Delicijs,
Quam ambierunt Princip^um Maximi,
Venerantur, quotquot Musis litarunt
Farraginem hanc
RERUM PALMYRENARUM
(...) exaratam
Summo, quo decet, cultu, and observantia
Lubens merito more majorum,
D.D.D.C.Q.
AB. SELLERUS.

THE PREFACE.
THE Learned World having been for some years in expectation of a Description
of the Antiquities of Palmyra from some accurate Traveller, whose Curiosity
might prompt him to visit those Deserts, that he might enrich Europe with the
Rarities of that remote Province of the East, of which the World had had but a
very obscure, if any, account; some worthy English Merchants, pursuant to the
Dictates of that nobler Genius, that actuates the generous Members of the
Levant Company, overlookt all the Difficulties and Hazards, that accompany such
an Enterprise, and attempted the Discovery. And though the first Essay was not
crowned with so good Success, as it deserved, through the Treachery and
Baseness of the Arab Prince, who at that time governed the Country; the second
Voyage was performed to the great Satisfaction of Mankind, and it is to their
Munificence, that we owe those Journals, which the Royal Society has lately
published. Nor is this the only Instance, wherein those eminent Merchants have
been Benefactors to the Commonwealth of Letters; their Company consisting of
Men of good Birth, and gentile Education, of liberal Fortunes, and as large
Minds; and may their Success in their worldly Affairs be suited to their great
Deserts, may they always flourish, and always be in a capacity to do worthy
Actions.

To the jealous Arabs the Undertaking seemed ridiculous, that prudent Men
should contract a great Expense only to transcribe a few imperfect
Inscriptions, and take a view of old Ruins, and perhaps there are some Censors
who live nearer than the Deserts of Tadhmur, who are of the same opinion; but
the Men of Judgment in all Ages have entertained different Sentiments, and
Providence seems to have been particularly concerned in the Preservation of
many Fragments of Antique Litterature. When L. 2. p. 121.
Strabo treats of Olynthus, and other Cities of Greece, which had been utterly
destroyed before his time, insomuch as whosoever traveled those parts, might
justly question whither ever those places had been inhabited; he subjoins, that
the Curious and Inquisitive were pleased to visit those Ruins, being desirous
to see the Theaters, where so many noble Actions had been performed, and to pay
Homage to the Ashes of those Illustrious Persons, who lay there buried: (And
what a Spirit of Emulation does it raise in every generous Soul to prompt him
to sublime Actions, when he views the Tombs, or hears the Story of the Heroes
of former Ages?) And in the days of In Charont.
Lucian, when many Cities had been swallowed up of Earthquakes, or buried in
the Sea, though Rivers themselves had been lost, and absorpt, that they never
more appeared, yet the Tomb of Inachus was preserved at Argos, a Memorial of
the Achievements of that first King of the Morea.

Neither Strabo, nor Mela, take any notice of Palmyra, nor (which is more to be
admired) many of the Arabian Geographers, neither Alferganus, nor the
Geographer commonly called the Nubian, neither Nasser Eddin nor Vlug Beig, set
out by our Learned Mr. Greaves; its Situation was very remote from both Rome
and Athens, in the midst of vast Deserts, which detered the curious Traveller;
and its Empire, and Glory were so short-lived, that we cannot expect a large
Description of its State and Fortunes from the ancient Writers. But such
Memorials, as either they, or the later Historians have afforded, I have taken
care to digest into method, and to offer them to the present Age. Had we
Domninus the Historian of Antioch, who lived in the Neighborhood, or
Philostratus of Athens, or Nicostratus of Trebizond, who wrote the History of
those times, particularly the Affairs of the East, it would have been no
difficult Province to have given a more perfect account of that Country; or had
we but that one Oration of the most accurate Longinus, which he wrote in praise
of Odaenathus, that no doubt would have furnished a sufficient stock of
Materials toward the writing the Life of that Great Man; but these are
Blessings lost to the World, and, I fear, past retrieving.

It may look like a bold, and daring Undertaking, to adventure to build a Large
Structure with so few Materials; but I have been as careful in my accounts, as
I was qualified to be, and according to my Understanding have confined my self
to the strict Rules of Truth, and exactly followed my Vouchers, (whom for that
reason I have cited in the Margin;) for he, who pretends to write History
without Authorities, may be said to be Author of a Romance, or a Collector of
Dreams, but can never be allowed to be a good Historian. And if I have been, as
I take it for granted, mistaken in any of my Conjectures, (as I have frequently
taken that liberty, but no where, that I know of, without some grounds for my
so doing) it is no wonder, and will be easily pardoned, when it is considered,
that even the Historians of that Country, and of the early Ages, knew not all
the particulars of the Palmyrene Affairs; that Theodorit himself the Bishop of
Cyrus in Cyrrhestica, a Neighboring Province, in less than two hundred years
after the Reign of Odaenathus, is so mistaken, as to affirm, that Zenobia was
constituted the Toparch of Syria, and Phoenicia by the Persians, after they had
routed the Romans, and that he, who digs in a dark Mine, may be allowed a
little failure in his Work; and I shall thank any Learned Man, who shall
correct my Errors, and set the History in a better light.

I have dealt with my Reader, as I love to be treated my self, having been
always pleased with a full account of whatever is material on any subject, when
profestly handled; and I have given my Authorities in the Margin, not to make a
show of much acquaintance with Books, but to inform the Reader that I have not
imposed on him, and to direct him where he may satisfy himself, if he doubts. I
have used the words Palmyra and Tadhmur promiscuously, because, though the new
name, whither imposed by a Conqueror, or given for any other reason, prevailed
among the Greeks and Romans, yet the old Syriac name kept its Interest among
the Natives, and has at this day recovered an entire Possession, as some other
neighboring Cities in that Country have done: So Caesarea in Palestine is at
present called, as of old, Paneas; and Petra in Arabia, is now named Bosra, to
omit other Instances. For, as Lib. 14. c. 8. Seleucus Nicator urbes construxit
multis opibus firmas, and viribus, quarum ad praesens plereque licet Graecis
nominibus appellentur, quae iisdem ad arbitrium imposita sunt conditoris,
primogenita tamen nomina non amittunt, quae ex Assyria lingua institutores
veteres indiderunt.
Ammianus Marcellinus has well observed, When Seleucus Nicator rebuilt many old
Cities in Syria, (among whom we may reckon Palmyra) and gave them Strength and
Riches, though many of them are still called by the Greek Names, which their
Founder Seleucus gave them; yet they did at the same time among the Natives
retain their old Syrian Appellations, which their first Founders imposed.
(Hence came it, that the new name of Adrianople given to Palmyra, was in a
little time worn out; and though the Greeks called the Island of Corsica Diod.
Sic. l. 5. p. 205.
Cyrnus, the Natives still maintained the Interest of the true name, and it
continues to this day; Steph. (...).
and though Heraclea was for a while called Plistarchia, in time it asserted its
ancient Right, and was called as formerly, Heraclea.) And I heartily wish, that
the Learned Men, who have visited those Oriental Countries had furnished
themselves with Instruments, and spent some time in taking the exact Longitudes
and Latitudes of the several Cities.

In the Chronological Accounts, I have followed the commonly received Epochas,
and accordingly fixed my Series of Times, without entering into an overnice
Examination of particular Disputes in Chronology, which was not so consonant to
my present Subject, having fixed the year of the Creation according to the
Computation of our most Learned Archbishop Usher. I have freely used the names
of the Heathen Gods, (though for the most part with a distinguishing Epithet;)
and besides, the necessity of my Subject, which obliged me to it, I might plead
the usual practice in other Languages, that the Fathers did the same; and some
of the ancient Christians, who went larger lengths than I ever durst, witness
that Epitaph in Gruter 1050.
, (Jovis optimi maximi beneficio hic in spe resurrectionis quiescit;) nor can I
be persuaded, that such Studies are disagreeable to my Profession, (if any
passage of that kind appears in the History, I here renounce it, and may it be,
as if it had never been said or written) while the Learned Synesius has
published the Life of Typhon, and Osiris, St. Ambrose, (as it is said) and
Palladius, the History of the Brachmanes, and Nonnus, besides his Paraphrase
upon St. John, was the Author of the Dionysiaca. Though, after all, I must
profess, I expect to be treated rudely by some sour Critics; but having no
private design in these Papers, I shall please my self to be corrected by a Man
of Sense and Temper, and for the rest of the Tribe, they are beneath
Consideration; it must be acknowledged, that a Treatise of this kind ought to
have been written in the Learned Language, (as probably it may be hereafter;)
but it was requisite to publish the Commentary in the same Language with the
Text, and that the Journals having been set forth in English, the History ought
to be written in the same Tongue; and had not a good part of my Papers, when
finished, been unhappily lost past retrieving, my Genius also nauseating the
Drudgery of doing the same thing over again, I might perhaps have managed the
Subject with more Accuracy. P. 258.
I have affirmed, that the Saturns and Jupiters of the Heathens were born after
the days of Job and of Joshua, and herein I have followed the Fathers,
particularly Theophilus of Antioch, (an excellent Chronologist, and who by that
unanswerable Argument has ruined all that was then said for the Eternity of
the World, and of the Heathen Gods) who in one place of his excellent Work
against Autolycus, (which for this reason is justly styled by Lactantius, liber
de temporibus) affirms, L. 2. p. 58.
that Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, were much younger than the Creation;
in a second, L. 3. p. 258.
that Jupiter was much younger than Moses, and the Law; but more expressly in a
third, P. 282.
that Cronus and Belus, i. e. Saturn, as Thallus says in his History, lived but
322 years before the Trojan War; whereas Moses lived 630 years before that
famous Epoch. And the Chronologer Petavius proves, that when Saturn fled into
Italy, driven out by his Son Jupiter, Ehud was then a Judge in Israel, about
the year 1330 before Christ; and that from the time of Janus, to whom Saturn
fled, to Aeneas, the whole was not 200 years.

The Arabic Authors, as well as the common People of the Country, are to this
day possessed with the Opinion, that Tadmur was built by Solomon, and that by the
help of Spirits, as was also Baalbec, (says Benjamin Tudelensis) the
superstitious Jews and Arabs thinking it impossible that Art should perfect a
stupendous Building without the assistance of a familiar. If the City were
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, before he laid siege to Jerusalem, as John Malela
expressly affirms, and in this account we may give him Credit, because he was of
that Country, and may be presumed, not to be ignorant of the Affairs of Syria)
then it is not improbable, that Seleucus Nicator, the Founder of the Syrian
Empire, rebuilt Tadhmur, as he did many other Cities; and that then, in honor
to him, and compliance with both their Benefactor and Conqueror; they dated
their public Writings from the first year of his Empire, the era
Seleucidarum, as it is commonly styled. The Situation of the City fitted it for
a public Mart, and the Cities Alalis, Sura, Ptol. l. 5. c. 15.
and Alamata, being parts of Palmyrene, and built on the Banks of the
Euphrates, may be presumed the Ports, where they brought their Goods, either
exported, or imported on that noble River, the Cities being subject to the
Re-publick. Of what Bigness, and Capacity for carriage the River that did run
by its Walls was, we know not, it having been many years since absorpt. That
there ran a River there in Ptolemy's time, the Geogragrapher affirms expressly,
that many other Rivers have been lost in Earthquakes, to which the Eastern
Regions are very subject, no Man doubts; and some which yet continue to run,
are soon buried: L. 1. c. 13.
Mela avers, that a great River arises near Corycus in Cilicia; and having made
a great noise, is immediately swallowed, and disappears; and the River that
runs by Aleppo, is in a few hours afterward buried in the Sands.

When the Romans began to enlarge their Conquests in Syria, I question not but
Palmyra was under the Jurisdiction of the Arabs; for when Pompey the Great,
after the Death of the famous Mithradates, marched against Aretas the King of
the Arabs, ( Appian calls him King of the Nabataean Arabs) ann. V. C. 690. ante
Christum 63. his Kingdom reached from the River Euphrates to the Red Sea, says
Dio, L. 36.
(in which compass Palmyra must be included;) this Aretas was doubtless one of
the Al-Hariths of the Arabians, who were Kings of Gessan, and in later Ages
Lords of Taahmur. After which time, I believe, it acknowledged the Roman Power,
but was governed by its own Laws, having under its immediate Jurisdiction,
besides the three Cities on the River already mentioned, twelve more in the
Inland of Syria. When Trajan made his glorious Expedition into Persia, I
conjecture, Palmyra was a Sufferer in the common Calamity of that Country, for
Pliny says it was sometime in the Roman, at others in the Parthian Interest, or
else it would not have needed Hadrian's assistance to rebuild, and beautify it;
while other Cities tasted of Trajan's Bounty, for from Trajan's Expedition (in
the 8th year of his Reign, of Christ 105.) the Inhabitants of Bozra and Petra,
dated their Writings, says the Author of the Alexandrian Chronicle: L. 3. p.
105.
and Zosimus affirms, that at Zaragardia, not far from the Euphrates on the
Persian side, in his time there stood a noble Throne built of stone, which the
Natives called Trajan's Throne; erected, I doubt not, in memory of his
illustrious Achievements in that Country. But whatever Palmyra might have
suffered under Trajan, was repaired by his Successor, who gave the City his own
name, and they in Gratitude made Vows for his Recovery; not in the last, the
19th of his Reign, as through haste is said, F. 35, 36.
(he reigned almost 22 years;) but in the seventeenth, from which Sickness he
recovered to dye afterward in greater torment, (and this I mention here, that
I may correct the Mistake in the History:) To this City Septimius Severus may
also be presumed a Benefactor, (to whom before his famous Expedition against
the Parthians, Spart. vit. Septim. p. 67.
when he routed Niger, with whom the Arabs, Parthians, and the Inhabitants of
Adiabene, joined their Forces) the Re-publick gave their assistance against the
Allies of the Empire, and adopted his name into their most eminent Families;
after which time, till the Reign of Zenobia, I take them to have been in
confederacy with, and subject to the Emperors; for they assisted both Alexander
Severus and Gordian, in their Expeditions into the East against the Persians,
as the Inscriptions testify; only it looks probable, that upon the Captivity of
Valerian, the Senate for a while dissembled their Interests, and acknowledged
the Power of Sapores. In the Battle at Immae, where Zenobia was routed, S.
Hierom affirms, that Pompeianus the Frank settled at Antioch, but the Family
was unquestionably fixed in that Country long before; Capitol. Marcus.
for when Marcus the Philosopher undertook the German War, he married his
Daughter to Claudius Pompeianus, who was of Antioch. This also I mention to
correct another Mistake. After the Captivity of Zenobia, the City was a
Spectacle of pity; but being a necessary Frontier, was repaired, and in
Dioclesian's time was the Seat of the Governor of the Province. In the days of
Constantius, the Inhabitants were noted, as now, for great Robbers, P. 8.
says the old Geographer, set out by Gothofred, and governed by Women; but that
I take for granted is an Error, as if, when Zenobia had begun to wield a
Scepter, none but her own Sex in that Country durst pretend to command. Malel.
part 2. p. 39.
Theodosius the Great divided Libanesia from the Seacoast of Phoenicia, and
made it a distinct Province, Emesa being the Metropolis, under whose
Jurisdiction Palmyra was put, and so continued, when the Followers of Mahomet
had made themselves Masters of that Country, and for many Centuries after; for
in Abulfedas's time, above 1300 after Christ, Tadhmur acknowledged Hems, (
Emesa) its Metropolis, and probably it was so after his time. In the Reign of
the same Theodosius, (if P. 28. ed. Gron.
Ethicus, or whoever goes under that name, lived in those days) or before (for
St. Hierome is said to have translated him) Palmyra is reckoned among the
famous Towns of the East; as it is also by P. 8.
Julius Honorius, who lived before Theodoric; for Cassiodore mentions him, (
Palmira damascus, read Palmyra, Damascus) and the Author of the Alexandrian
Chronicon among the famous Cities of the fourth Climate, reckons Palmyra, with
Apamea, Emesa, etc. in Caele Syria. In Justinian's time it became the Residence
of the Governor of the East, and subject to the Constantinopolitan Empire, but
it is probable did not continue long in that State; for about the year of Christ
640. when Heraclius was Emperor, Jabalah the Son of Al Iham was King of Gassan,
and Lord of Tadhmur, (perhaps a Tributary to Heraclius) who being overcome by
Omar the Caliph, one of Mahomet's Successors; submitted, and turned Mohammedan;
but, repenting, he afterward went to Constantinople, Pococ. not. in Specim.
hist. Ar. p. 77, 136.
and became a Christian; and at this time, I believe, Mahometanism settled it
self at Tadhmur, the Tribe of Gassan being before those days Christian.

I shall not particularly undertake to demonstrate the Usefulness of Coins and
Inscriptions, the Learned World has been already fully convinced of that
truth; how many difficult, and obscure Passages in Chronology have been set in
their due light, how many Series of Kings have been regularly deduc't, what
Rites and Customs both sacred and civil have been by those helps discovered,
needs no further proof; though were there nothing, else at Palmyra to be seen,
but the noble Ruins of the Temples and Palaces, built according to the best
and boldest Rules of the ancient Architecture, I should think a Journey thither
on that Errand alone worth the Undertaking. And though the oldest of the
Palmyrene Inscriptions is a hundred years younger than our blessed Savior's
Incarnation (as I have made appear in the Commentary) yet they are not so
contemptible as some have imagined, but afford us some Memorials of those
times, which no where else occur. And by the same Argument, (the use of the
Greek E, which appears not till about Domitian's time) by which I postpone the
oldest Inscription at Tadhmur a hundred years, may we prove the Spuriousness of
that Table preserved at Rome, which is reported to contain the very Title,
which by Pilate's Order was affixt to the Cross of our Lord, for therein (...)
is written with the same sort of E.

It must be confessed, that in the Palmyrene Inscriptions are some peculiar
words, which occur not in the Lexica, as (...), etc.) of which sort there are
more in other old Marbles; nor is it any wonder, that in a remote part of
Syria, where a different Language was spoken, Pric. in Apul. Apolog. p. 67. De
foedere Hierapytniorum, and Priansens. sciunt doctiores usquequo huc progredi
licet, scripta hoc genus non intra Lexicorum septa coercenda: satisque de
Interpretis fide, ac judicio constare, qui sciet, ubi legem sequi, ubi dare
oporteat.
the Greek should not be so pure, as at Athens; and in such cases a Critic is
left to his own Judgment: nor is it a Disreputation to his Fidelity, or acumen,
if he happen to wander, where he has no Guide.

The Usefulness of the Journals and History will never be controverted, when
it is considered, that they give us the account of a Country, hardly before
known to the present Age, and of many Rites and Cermonies, which the European
World counts ridiculous, but will appear very ancient and defensible; for no
Nation under Heaven has been so tenacious of old Usages, as the Orientals. Of
which I shall give a few instances.

That the Arabs should suspect the Europeans, that in those Ruins, among so
many Sepulchers, they should seek for Treasures, is no wonder to me, since it
was very usual under the Foundations of all magnificent Structures to bury
great Sums of Money, probably that the Coin, when the Building was ruinous,
might discover the Founder, Talismans also being set up in several places to
direct the curious Enquirer. Thus Jamblic. ap. Phot. cod. 94.
Rhodanes found a great quantity of Gold by the Directions of a Pillar, upon
which was pourtrayed a Lion; and a like Story is related in the Life of Aesop:
And in David's Tomb, Josephus says, the High Priest Hyrcanus found a vast
Treasure; but the Author of the P. 364.
Alexandrian Chronicle avers, that it was Hezekiah, who first opened the Tomb
to show the Riches of his Ancestors to the King of Babylon's Ambassadors, and
that for profaning the Ashes of his Fathers, God devoted his Posterity to
Captivity.

That they should account a young Camel dressed a noble Feast, will cease to be a
Subject of wonder or diversion, when we remember, that Custom is the Judge of
good or coarse Meats, that every Nation, even in the civilized parts of Europe,
differ in their Notions of preferable Dishes, and that a Treat of the best
things the Country affords ought to be reckoned a Feast. To which we may add,
that their Ancestors lived on the same fare; that L. 16. p. 767.
Strabo calls the Arabs of his time Camel-eaters; that Adv. Jovin. l. 2. c. 6.
St. Hierome avers, that the Arabs and Saracens, and all other the barbarous
Inhabitants of the Desert, lived upon the Milk and Flesh of their Camels, (and
so says Abulfarajus) that both Hist. anim. l. 6. c. 26.
Aristotle and 11. 41.
Pliny reckon the Flesh, and the Milk of Camels, not only among the wholesome,
but among delicious Meats; and that In Clio.
Herodotus affirms, that the Persians of quality on their Birthdays, (which was
a solemn Festival among them) among other Dishes, treated their Friends with a
whole Ox, and a whole Camel dressed; that Apud. Athen. l. 4.
Antiphanes says, that a Camel served up hot was a Feast for a King; and that
the Emperor Lamprid. p. 108.
Elagabalus (who was a Native of that part of Syria, where the Emir, who
treated the English Merchants, lived) in imitation of Apicius (who was no
contemptible Judge of luxurious Eating, having spent a fair Estate in the
Gratifications of his Palate, and being since his Death quoted as an Author for
all the Varieties of the old Cookery) used to eat the feet of Camels, as an
extraordinary Dish; and when he would appear magnificent, caused to be brought
in at Supper entire Camels for the Service of his Friends.

Pilaw (or Rice) is another Dish among the Arabs, as also among the Persians,
Indians and Turks, and so it was of old, says Lib. 15.
Strabo. The Arabs of this Age live as their Ancestors, who wandered up and down
with their Families, and Cattle, and fixed for a while, wherever they found
Water for themselves, and Grass, for their Herds; their Tents are now, as of
old, made of Camels Hair, (the Camel is in truth the most useful of Animals to
them; the Flesh is their Meat, the Milk their Drink, their Tents are made of
their Hair, their Carriage is upon Camels, and their Riches a numerous Herd of
them) they marry as many Wives as they are able to maintain; Am. Marcellin. l.
23. c. 6.
generally hate Drunkenness, and avoid it as the Plague; never make Water
standing, nor ease nature, but in a place of great Privacy; and those, who are
military Men, sit armed at the Table, and never put off their Scimitars till
they go to bed; all which Customs Ammianus observed were practiced among the
old Inhabitants of those Countries. They measure their Journies, not by leagues
or miles, but by hours and days, as the old Syrians did; impaleing is a
Punishment usual to this day, and the Criminal is forced to carry his Stake to
the place of Execution, as the Person to be crucified anciently carried his
Cross. The Custom of putting the whole Family to Death for the Offense of the
Chief of it, (of notorious and heinous, as the Murder of their Prince, or the
like) is not quite difus'd to this day in Persia; and as Valerian, and others
were flead alive, so was Marc Antonio Bragadini, the Venetian Governor of
Famagusta, tortured by the Turks, when Cyprus was taken; his Skin being salted
and stuffed, according to the old Persian Method. And as the same Valerian, clad
in his Royal Purple, with his Back lifted Sapores into the Saddle; so was
Bajazet forced to assist Tamerlane, when he mounted. The Men of Condition used
of old to ride with a Banner, and so they continue to do to this day. A Present
of one or more Changes of Raiment was a Mark of Favor among the Egyptians,
Jews and Syrians, as long since as the days of the Patriarch Joseph; and the
Habit (the Calaat) sent by the Grand Seignior, or the King of Persia, to any
Subject or Foreigner, is now one of the highest Instances of Royal Bounty.

In the Monuments of their Dead the Persians of former Ages placed Magi to keep
the Tomb; Arrian. l. 6. expedit. Alex. p. 144
and in this present Age the Mahometans give a Maintenance to a greater or less
number of Moullah's, who read the Law in the Moschees, and take care of the
Sepulchers, where their Princes are interred. And as of old they hired their
Women Mourners to make a solemn Lamentation at Funerals, so now the Jewish
Women are hired for the same purpose. I shall add no more, but that at Aleppo,
(as my worthy Friend Mr. Aaron Goodyear informs me, to whom I profess my self
indebted for many useful Notices) in the Month of June the Women go to the
River, and with solemn Sorrow bewail Tammuz, and afterward make themselves
very merry; which is no other, than the practice of one of the oldest
Superstitions in the World, of which I shall treat at large.

The Heathen Mythologists affirm, Apollodor. Bibliot. l. 3. c. 13.
that Cinyras the Assyrian founded the City of Paphos in the Island of Cyprus;
where, having married the Daughter of the King of that Country, he begat
Oxyporus and Adonis; that Adonis was very beautiful, and beloved by Venus, when
an Infant, who, that he might be bred carefully, sent him to Proserpina to be
educated; but when she came to demand him, Proserpina resus'd to deliver her
Charge; whereupon the Controversy was decided by Jupiter, that the Youth should
stay a third part of the year with Proserpina, another third with Venus, and
the remainder should be at his own Disposal. But Adonis being pleased with the
Charms of Beauty, chose to spend two thirds of his time with Venus, who
passionately loved him; for which reason Diana being displeased with him, sent
a wild Boar to assault him, by whose Teeth he fell a Sacrifice to her
Indignation. Vid. Cyril. in Is. l. 2. tem. 3. p. 274.
But others tell the Story differently, that Cinyras lay with his own Daughter
Myrrha, on whom he begat Adonis; but, being ashamed of his Incest, exposed the
Infant on the top of the Mountains, where the Nymphs nursed and kept him, till
he grew a most beautiful Youth, spending most of his time in his Sports; at
which Age Venus seeing him, sell violently in love with him, and chose him her
Gallant; that this created Jealousy in Mars, who turned himself into the shape
of a wild Boar, and slew him; which, when Venus heard of, she gave her self up
to the extravagant Sallies of an ungovernable Grief, and at last resolved to
follow him into the Shades to demand him there; but Proserpina refusing to
deliver him, they comprimis'd the Affair, that he should be half the year in
the inferior World, and the other half in this; upon which Venus returned very
joyful, and having informed her Followers of the Agreement, they instituted a
solemn Festival, which was continued to be celebrated with all the
Demonstrations of public Exultation.

This Story, Plutarc. de Isid. and Osirid.
with a little Variation, the Egyptian Writers (from whom the Asiaticks
derived most of their Superstitious Rites and Observances) tell us, under the
name of Osiris, whom Typhon nailed up in a Chest, (or Coffin) which he threw
into the Nile, that it might be swallowed up of the Sea; that Isis, as soon as
she heard of it, immediately went upon the search of Osiris, inquiring of all
she met, till at last some Children informed her, what Typhon had done;
whereupon, taking Anubis with her, she sailed down the River, and through the
Ocean, till she came to Byblus in Syria, where she found the Ark (or coffin)
resting upon a Sprig of Heath, which she carried with her into the Ship, and so
returned to Egypt, and there hid the Coffin at Butis, where her Son Orus was
nursed; that Typhon hunting in those parts by the Light of the Moon, which was
then at full, found the Coffin, and cutting the Body into fourteen pieces
scattered it up and down in several places; whereupon Isis hearing of the Fact,
sailed up and down the Marches in a Boat of Reeds, till she had gathered up the
scattered Limbs, which she buried in diverse places, to prevent any further
Attempts of Typhon, and to create Osiris greater honor. In the Egyptian Month
Athyr, they say, Osiris was slain; and on the seventeenth of their Month Tybi,
Isis returned from Byblus, having spent almost two Months in the search. From
this Original came the practice of the Egyptian Priests, who upon the first of
those Anniversaries pretended, that the Body of Osiris was hid in their
Temples, where, no one knew, whereupon they lamented him, as if that had been
the very day, wherein he was murdered by Typhon; they shaved, and made bald
their Heads, V. Herodot. Euterp. Jul. Firmic. Lucian. de Dea Sir. Cyril. and
Procop. in Isai. 18. etc.
(the Custom of such, as were in the deepest Mourning) they thumpt their
Breasts, they wandered up and down the Streets making heavy Lamentations, (in
imitation of the Mournings, and Peregrinations of Isis;) and if there happened
to be any of the Inhabitants of Caria at that time in Egypt, they slasht their
Faces with Knives and Lancets, (as the Priests of Baal used to do, when their
Idol would not answer them;) they cut their Arms, and very often made Incisions
into the Wounds of the last year, not quite healed: And after they had done
this for some time, ( Plutarch says, for 4 days) they pretended to find the
Body, which they had been so earnestly looking for; and on the nineteenth day
of the Month Athyr, when it was night the Priests made their Procession to the
River with an Ark of Gold covered with the holy Stole; upon which, as soon as
they had poured Water, the Bystanders cried out, ((...)) we have found him,
let us turn our Lamentations into Joy: After this they returned and made merry,
treating themselves with Cakes, whereon they stamped the Figure of a Seahorse,
i. e. Typhon; and at the same time they wrote an Epistle to the Women of
Byblus, that Adonis was found, (for he, whom the Egyptians called Osiris, the
Phaenicians and Syrians named Thammuz, says St. Hierome, and Adonis, says Cyril
and Procopius;) this Epistle they put into an Earthen Pot, say the abovenamed
Fathers, ((...), Lucian calls it (...);) the Jews say, 'twas an Ark, or little
Ship made of Reeds or Paper, which, after the performance of some (probably
Magical) Rites, they sealed and committed to the Waves, and of its own accord
in seven days time it was carried by the Winds to Byblus, but never to any
other place on the Seacoast of Phaenicia: And when the Women of that City
received it, they put an end to their Lamentations, and begun their joyful
Festival with Dances, and solemn Feasting. As the precise time of the beginning
the Festival at Byblus commenc't from the hour, in which they received the
Epistle from Egypt; so the exact time to begin the Mourning was fixed, says
Lucian, by another extraordinary Circumstance; the River Adonis at that season,
from its rise on the side of Mount Libanus, to its fall into the Sea, being all
bloody, the Sea it self also for a considerable space being discolored with
the same, (the Natives believing that at that time Adonis was actually slain on
the Mountain, and that his Blood altered the Color both of the River and the
Ocean) though one of the more inquisitive Byblians told Lucian, that the bloody
face of the Waters proceeded from a reddish sort of Earth, which the strong
Winds, that at that time used to blow, brought down into the River, and gave
the Streams their Tincture. At this time the Woman began their Mourning,
(having first offered the Sacrifices of the Dead to Adonis, as the Egyptians
used to do) and shaved their Heads, (which, whoever refused to do, was by way
of Penance obliged for a whole day to prostitute her self to all Strangers, and
whatever she got, was to be spent in a Sacrifice to Venus) their Lamentations,
says L. 19.
Ammianus Marcellinus being as extravagant, as those of a Mother for an only
Son.

The Epistles sent from Alexandria to give notice, that Osiris or Adonis was
found, are mentioned, say the Fathers, by the Prophet Isaiah, 18.2. Woe to the
Land that sends their Ambassadors by the Sea in Vessels of Bullrushes upon the
water; or, as the Septuagint more pertinently, (...)) and the mournful
Solemnity by the Prophet Ezekiel, 8.14. who among the abominable Idolatries of
the People of the Jews, mentions the Women's weeping for Thammuz: Cyril. in Is.
(...); ita and Procop. in loc. and Theodorit, in Ezekiel. 8. Hieron. ib. Stephan.
(...). Procop. ubi supr. (...).
For from Egypt the Superstition spread it self over all the neighboring
Countries, over Phaenicia, Syria, and Cyprus; who challenged the mock Deity for
their own; nor did the peculiar People of God, the Israelites, escape the
Infection, but they also fell into the same Madness.

The old Arabian Zabii, says Ben Maimon, affirm, that in that night in which
Thammuz was slain, all the Idols that were in the World, met at Babylon in the
Temple of the Sun, who related to them what had befallen Thammuz; whereupon the
Images wept, and lamented all night, and the next Morning every one of them
flew back to his old station: From whence, says he, came the Custom of Mourning
early in the Morning over Thammuz, in the Month called by his name: the Month
Thammuz, says St. Hierome, answers to our June; and the Jewish Astronomers call
the Sun's entrance into Cancer, Thekupha Thammuz, the Revolution or Period of
Thammuz. The whole Feast was called by the Greeks, (...), or (...); the Death
of the mock God (...), the Search after him (...), the findhim (...). The
Festivals having a place in the old Calendar; Gruter, 138, 139.
in which we find Isid. Aavigium, not Lavatio, as Vrsinus reads it, but
navigium, as it ought to be read; and in another Month Heurisis. V. Macrob.
Saturnal. l. 1. c. 21.
The whole had its Mythological Moral; for by Adonis, Osiris, and Thammuz, was
meant the Sun, who when the Summer Solstice was past, moving backward toward
the South, seemed to have deprived the Northern Hemisphere of his Presence, and
Influences.

L. 2. c. 4. l. 4. c. 14.
Julius Pollux says, that the Inhabitants of Phaenicia called Adonis, Gingras,
probably from the name of a Pipe, made of the Bone of a Gooseleg, which they
used in his Solemnity, which made a very melancholy, and sorrowful Music; and
they had a Dance called by the same name in remembrance of the first Inventor
of Husbandry, who died in the Summertime, as he was hunting, and who is
honored yearly with a mournful Song by the Farmers of the Country, (who at
that time used to sow their Wheat and Barley in the Fields near the Cities,
says the Scholiast on Therocritus) accompanied by as doleful Instrumental
Music. The Custom still in use at Aleppo of frequenting the River at this
Festival, I presume had its Original also in Egypt, where the Inhabitants paid
a peculiar Veneration to the Waters of Nilus, as St. Athanasius, who was born
there, affirms; and Lactantius adds, that they worshipped the River yearly,
because there Isis begun her search of Osiris.

That all this Pomp was older than the Jewish Captivity, the holy Writ avers;
it lasted to the days of Plutarch, and the Astronomer Ptolomee, who mention it;
(as do almost all the old Apologists for Christianity:) Julius Pollux
enumerates the Ceremonies of the Mourning in the Reign of Commodus; and Lucian
avers, that he saw one of those little Arks that brought the Letter from
Alexandria floating into the Harbor, while he was at Byblus; the practice
continued in Egypt, when Cyril was Patriarch there, about the year 440 after
Christ, and in Phaenicia in the times of Procopius of Gaza, who lived above a
100 years after Cyril; and to this day is in use at Aleppo, as my honored
Friend informs me, and probably in some other Cities of that Country.

I thought it necessary to make this Digression, which is not disagreeable to
my Subject; and if the Reader (whom I earnestly desire to correct the Errata,
before he begins the Book) find any advantage by the Undertaking, I shall not
think my time ill employed.

The CONTENTS of the several Chapters in the History.
Chap. 1. THE Building of Tadmur by Solomon, Page 3. Chap. 2. The Situation,
Product, and Inhabitants, p. 6. Chap. 3. The Commerce, and Riches of the City,
p. 11. Chap. 4. The Civil Government of the City from Solmon 's time, p. 16.
Chap. 5. The Religion, and Ecclesiastical Government, p. 19. Chap. 6. Its
several Fortunes from its Foundation to Alexander the Great, p. 24. Chap. 7.
Its State under the Kings of Syria to Augustus, p. 26. Chap. 8. Its Condition
from the Reign of Augustus to Hadrian, p. 28. Chap. 9. The State of the City
under Hadrian, p. 33. Chap. 10. Its several Fortunes from Hadrian to Gallienus,
p. 38. Chap. 11. The Life and Athievements of Odenathus, p. 42. Chap. 12. The
State of the Roman Empire at that time, with a Continuation of the Acts of
Odenathus, p. 47. Chap. 13. The Folly and Stupidity of Gallienus, with the
Victory of Odenathus over the Persians, p. 53. Chap. 14. The Victory of
Odenathus over Quietus and Balista, p. 60. Chap. 15. The Murder of Odenathus,
the short Reign of Maeonius, with his Character, p. 66. Chap. 16. The Death of
the Emperor Valerian, p. 70. Chap. 17. The Original, and Birth of Zenobia, p.
76. Chap. 18. Her Learning, Magnificence, and Virtues, p. 80. Chap. 19. The
Religion of Zenobia, p. 85. Chap. 20. Her Courage and Bravery, p. 89. Chap. 21.
Her illustrious Atchivements, Victory over Heraclian, and Conquest of Egypt,
p. 94. Chap. 22. The Reign of Aurelian, the Battle of Imma, p. 100. Chap. 23.
The fatal Battle of Emesa, the Siege of Palmyra, p. 105. Chap. 24. Palmyra
taken, Zenobia made a Prisoner, p. 111. Chap. 25. Zenobia 's Ministers slain,
and among them Longinus, p. 115. Chap. 26. The Rebellion of the Palmyrenians,
the City destroyed by Aurelian, p. 117. Chap. 27. The History of Firmius,
Zenobia 's Confederate, p. 121. Chap. 28. The Account of Zenobia, till Aurelian
's triumph, p. 124. Chap. 29. The triumph of Aurelian over Zenobia and
Tetricus, p. 127. Chap. 30. The History of Zenobia after the triumph till her
Death, with an Account of her Family, p. 133. Chap. 31. The Murder of
Aurelian, p. 136. Chap. 32. The State of Palmyra under Dioclesian, p. 140.
Chap. 33. The History of Palmyra from the Reign of Honorius to Justinian, p.
150. Chap. 34. The State of Palmyra from Justinian to the present Age, p. 153.
In the Appendix.
THE Inscriptions, p. 163. Chap. 1. Of the names Tadmur and Palmyra, p. 175.
Chap. 2. Of the names of the Inhabitants, p. 187. Chap. 3. Of the public
Officers, p. 197. Chap. 4. Of their Idolatry and Superstition, p. 241. Chap. 5.
An Account of Vaballathus, p. 272. Chap. 6. The History of Longinus, p. 287.
Chap. 7. The Commentary on the Inscriptions, p. 295.
view of Palmyra A View of the Ruins of Palmyra alias Tadmor, taken on the
Southern Side.


THE HISTORY OF Palmyra.
HISTORIES of Remote Countries, and Strange Revolutions, have been always
entertained with Respect: And the pleasure of Seeing at so great a Distance,
and Hearing of dismal Catastrophe's, wherein we have no other immediate share,
but that of Wonder and Pity, is not to be reckoned among the meanest
Satisfactions of a Wise Man's Life; since every Turn of Providence in a Foreign
Nation, every new Scene of Prosperity or Adversity is a Lesson to the rest of
the World: And the best Rules of Behavior both for a public and private
Capacity, are deducible from such remarkable Occurrences.

And among all the great Revolutions that have called for the Astonishment and
Commiseration of Mankind, the several Fortunes of Palmyra are not the least
remarkable; a Country far distant from our Region, distinguished by Nature from
the rest of the World by a separate Situation; and an Empire, that in the space
of Ten Years overran all the East, baffled the Forces of the Persians, subdued
Egypt, and made all Asia to the Hellespont tremble; But in a few Months
afterward was stripped of all its Grandeur, and by degrees reduced to the lowest
state of Poverty, as it is this day. Of this Country I intend to treat, of its
Founder, and Antiquity; its Situation, and Plenty; its Government
Ecclesiastical and Civil; and its several Fortunes and Conditions, as far as my
Reading will assist me, till some more able Critic shall undertake the Task;
and I shall begin with such an Account of the Place as the Ancients furnish us
with.

CHAP. I.
WHen Solomon had finished his stupendous Temple at Jerusalem (which better
deserved to be reckoned among the World's Wonders, than that at Ephesus,) and
the Noble Palace which he built for himself, 1 King. 9.10, 18. 2 Chronicles. 8.3, 4.
in the Twentieth Year of his Reign he made War against Hamath-Zobah, which had
been subdued by David, but revolted; and having conquered it, he built Tadmor
in the Wilderness, the Upper and Nether Bethhoron, Baalath, and all the
Store-Cities, which he strongly fortified with Walls, and Gates, and Bars; they
being his Frontier Towns, and the Limits of his vast Empire: 2 Chronicles. 9.26.
For he reigned over all the Kings from the River (Euphrates) to the Land of
the Philistines, and to the Border of Egypt. 1 King. 4.24.
From Tiphsac even to Azzah: i. e. from Gaza to Thapsachus, which Was one of
the Passes over the Euphrates.

The Arabic Translator of 2 Chronicles. 8.3. implies, that Tadmor was a City before
Solomon's time, and that he only reedified it; that it was a Metropolis of old,
as it was in the latter times, and had many Towns under its Jurisdiction: nor
is it altogether improbable, those Parts of the World near the Place where the
Ark rested after the Deluge ceased, being first peopled. The Arabic Historian
Verse Poc. p. 53.
Abulfarajus, says, That Solomon, in the Twenty fourth Year of his Reign,
having destroyed the City of Antioch, built seven Cities in its stead, of which
Tadmor was one. But the Fabulous Historian of Antioch, Par. 1. p. 185. and Par.
2. p. 152.
John Matela, averrs, That the Foundations of Palmyra were laid in the same
place in which David slew Goliath, and cut off his Head with his own Sword; and
that King Solomon, in Memory of this great Victory, built a Noble City there,
and, from the Fate of the Giant, called it Palmyra. While Antiq. l. 8. c. 2.
Josephus thus informs us, That Solomon, after he had built Gazara, which
Pharaoh, having taken it from the Philistines, gave to his Daughter, not far
from it built two Cities, Betachora, and Baleth, with other Places, to which he
might retire for his Pleasure, that he might enjoy a temperate Air, excellent
Fruits, and pleasant Streams: From whence he past into the Desert above Syria,
and making himself Master of it, laid the Foundations of a great City (which
Hier. in Ezekiel. 47.
he beautified with extraordinary Buildings) two Days Journey from the Upper
Syria, and one from Euphrates, but from Babylon six Days Journey. And the
reason why he built this City so far from the inhabited Places of Syria, was,
that in the Upper Parts there was no Water, but in that Place only there were
Fountains and Wells (as it appears by the Peutinger Tables, that near it stood
the Centum Putei.) Concerning the Names Tadhmur, and Palmyra, consult the
Appendix.
When therefore he had built the City, and fenced it with strong Walls, he
named it Tadmor, as it is now called by the Syrians, while the Greeks call it
Palmyra.

CHAP. II.
FRom its Founder and Name, I shall proceed to consider its Situation and
Plenty. As to its Situation, from the Description that Josephus gives of it, it
is plain, that, though it stood in a Desert Country, it was a very Fertile Spot
of Ground, the Air being very moderate and healthy: For when Epist. ad Porph.
Longinus invites his Friend Porphyry thither, he encourages him to undertake
the Journey, upon two Accounts; first, That they might renew their old
Friendship; secondly, That he might recover his broken Health, by the
excellency of the Air of Palmyra.

Lib. 8. p. 205.
Ptolemy places it East from Alexanandria; (in the same Climate with Antioch,
Seleucia, Hierapolis, Emesa, and other Cities of Alexandria, says the Author of
the Alexandrian Chronicon,) Chron. Alex. p. 82.
in the Longit. of 71 degrees. 30 min. and the Latit. of 34 degrees. the Longest Day
being there above 14 Hours.

The first Inhabitants of Tadmur, I conjecture, were the Sons of Abraham by
Keturah; for they are said to be sent by their Father into the East, Genesis 25.6.
i. e. into the East from Jerusalem, and the Land of Canaan, into the Deserts of
Arabia, and the Countries bordering on the Euphrates, whose Inhabitants are
called, in Holy Writ, The Children of the East; and were, for that reason also,
called Saracens, that is, Orientals, or Easterlings, (as our most Learned
Pocock affirms.) Now the Saracens are said by Lib. 23. cap. ult.
Amm. Marcellinus, to be the Arabes Scenitae (though Pliny and Ptolomy
distinguish them) to whom the Palmyrenians were conterminous, if not the same;
and for this reason, I doubt not, but Odenathus, in all the latter Writers, is
called the King of the Saracens; though Zenobia, in her Letter to Aurelian,
distinguishes the Saracens from her Subjects, reckoning the Saracens among her
Foreign Troops and Auxiliaries. In the Ecclesiaslick Notitia, it is accounted a
part of Phoenicia Libanesia. And Porphyry, treating of Longinus's Inviting him
to Palmyra, says, He undertook to persuade him to leave Sicily, and to travel
into Phoenicia. Others make it a part of Arabia; but it is commonly reputed by
Ptolemy, and others, a part of Syria, as Phoenicia is another part of that
large Country: though Zenobia, in her Letter abovementioned, distinguishes the
Palmyrenians from the Syrians, (as L. 1. p. 40.
Zosimus also does.

That it stood in a Wilderness, besides the Holy Writ, and Josephus, Not. Hist.
tom. 1. l. 1.. 21. p. 583. ad Paris.
Pliny, who was Contemporary with the Jewish Historian, agrees, who thus
describes it: Palmyra is a City eminent in its Situation, in the riches of its
Soil, and its pleasant Streams, being surrounded on every side with a vast
Desert of Sand: It seems to have been separated from the rest of the World, and
did preseve its Liberty in a private Condition between the two Mighty Empires,
the Roman and Parthian; and as soon as any War happens to break out, it is
equally their care to engage it on their side, and in their Interest: It is
distant from Seleucia on the Tygris 337 Miles; from the neighboring Shore of
Syria, or the Mediterranean, 203; and from Damascus 176. The same Author, in
other places also, mentions the Solitudes of Palmyra; beyond which, on one
hand, is Stelendena (a Country not so much as named by other Writers;) on the
other side, they reached home to Emesa; and to the Westward, as far as Petra in
Arabia Felix, from whence to the Persian Gulf, it was all Desert.

It was distant from the Euphrates a Day's Journey, says Vbi sup.
Josephus: Not far from that Noble River, says Lib. 5. Bell. Civ. p. 676.
Appian, (for as soon as Marc. Antony threatened the Sack of the City, the
Inhabitants immediately transported all their Goods beyond the River, the Banks
of which they defended with their Archers, and so leaving the Town empty,
baffled the Design, and deceived the Expectations of the Roman Troops,) but
situate by a River that run by its Walls, whose Name Ptolemy either knew not,
or omitted. But other Geographers call it Palmyra, Domin. Marius Niger,
Maginus, etc.
affirming, that it had its Rise in the Palmyrene Mountains, ran through the
Country, and at last emptied it self into the Euphrates, though now there are
no footsteps of its course left: Nor is it a wonder, that a small River should
be swallowed up in a long tract of Time, of such vast quantities of Sand.

When Solomon built it, he gave it all the Advantages of Strength and Security
that the Rules of Fortification in that Age allowed of; and it continued so as
long as it was a Frontier Garrison, fenced with strong Walls, and an
advantageous Situation; but better guarded by a brave Garrison, the Militia of
Palmyra being esteemed very stout. Their Archers were excellent Marks-men, says
Vbi sup.
Appian, and their Horsemen well armed with heavy Armor, and very secure,
(the Army of Zenobia, says the Historian, consisting of Anchers, Zosim. l. 1.
p. 44.
and Horsemen armed Cap-a-pe,) who, notwithstanding the weight of their Arms,
were much better Horsemen than the Romans; and such a Zonar. tom. 2. p. 237.
Value did they set upon their Horses, that no greater Affront or Disgrace
could be offered to a Palmyrenian, than to take his Horse from him. Nor did the
Romans disdain their Assistance; for in their Militia with the Assyrians and
Moors, the Inhabitants of Palmyrene and Osroene were mustered.

CHAP. III.
PALMTRA was the Metropolis of the Province, and gave it its Name, being a
Place of great Antiquity, and great Trade; Rich, says Pliny, in the Fertility
of its Soil, but much more so by its Commerce; for it had not only the
Advantage of its own Commodities, but was the Thorough-fare of all the
Merchants that lived beyond it toward the Mediterranean, who traded to Forath,
and Charax, and other Ports on the Persian Gulf, if I rightly understand Not.
Hist. l. 6.. 32. p. 722.
Pliny, who says, that at Petra in Arabia the two Ways met, both of those who
came through Palmyra (probably from Antioch, Seleucia in Pisidia, Laodicea, and
other conterminous Places,) and of those also who came from Gaza, traveling
toward the Gulf, it being impossible, but the Caravans, who made that their
constant Road both to and from Persia, must help to enrich the Stages where
they Baited.

But this was not all its Happiness; its Inhabitants were great Merchants, says
Vbi sup.
Appian. And Marc. Antony thought the Plunder of this City a sufficient
Recompense for all the Fatigues and Hardships which his Horse endured in that
Country, during the Persian War, though he failed of his Attempt: They had
formed themselves into a Company, under a President and Governor of their own.
(An East India Trade cannot well be carried on by a single Person, though he
were one of the Merchants of Tire, who were Companions of Princes.) For I find
in one of the Inscriptions, Page 99.
that Septimius Orodes was honored with an Illustrious Testimonial from (...),
a word that appears in no Author, that I know of (...), like (...) ( Etym. M.
p. 474.) or (...), (Id. ib.) Those Governors of the Affairs of Trade were
called at Athens (...) ( Etym. M. and Harpocrat. v. (...).) Their Number, says
Aristotle, was Ten: Their Business, to Over-see the Ports, and to take care of
the Corn that was brought thither; for which purpose they had their (...), and
it was reckoned among the most Honorable Benefactions, to build such a
Granary. Philostrat. Vit. Polemon. Smyrnae. (...).
the Presidents, or Chiefs of the Merchants. And I doubt not, but they carried
the Manufactures, and other Commodities of Asia, down the Euphrates to Balsora,
or perhaps no farther than Vologesia, Vid. Append.
and brought from Persia the Merchandises of India and Arabia, and so furnished
the Romans with Spices, and Silks, and other rich Goods: For though they are
said to lie far from the Sea, and without the advantage of the River (which
must be retracted, since it anciently had the assistance of a River, though it
is since lost in the Sands,) yet it must be acknowledged, they were not far
from the Euphrates, a Noble and Navigable River, and had the convenience of
their Camels and Dromedaries, by which sort of Carriage all the Riches of the
East were formerly brought into Europe by Caravans, before the Cape of
Good-Hope was discovered.

But Palmyra had its own Product, Salt, with which the Inhabitants now drive a
trade; and Dates, the Fruits of their Palm Trees, which were not only great
Delicacies at Rome, and elsewhere, Plut. Sympos. 8. qu. 4.
(for Nicolaus Damascenus thought the Dates of Syria a fit Present for
Augustus, and Phoenicia has its Name from its The Country being called
Palmifera, and the Palm Tree placed commonly on the reverse of their Coins: For
which reason, I believe, that the Tree in the Palmyrene Marble, that stands
between Alaghelus and Malachbelus, is not a Pine, as Gruter and Monsieur Spon
affirm, but a Palm Tree ill engraved.
Palm Trees, but was of the same Use to the Asiaticks, that the Cocoa is to the
Indians, if we may believe Lib. 16. p. 746.
Strabo, who affirms, that the Country about Euphrates produces great
quantities of Barley, but that the want of all other things was supplied by
their Palm Trees; that that single Tree afforded the Inhabitants both Wine and
Vinegar, Honey and Meal; and out of it they wove their Clothes: The Shells
serve the Smiths for Fire; and when you have soakt the Shells in Water, you may
feed your Cattle, your Oxen and Sheep with them: And it is reported, that there
is a Persic Poem, which enumerates Three hundred and sixty Uses (one for every
Day of the old Year) of the PalmTree. Id. p. 778.
In some Places of Arabia they are perfumed: And those in Plut. ubi sup.
Syria, as they are most Beautiful to the Eye, so they are of a most delicious
Taste to the Palate.

And the Ruins of its pompous Buildings yet standing, erected before it became
the Seat of the Eastern Empire, are a further and undeniable Demonstration,
that, notwithstanding its unhappy Situation in the Confines of two such Potent
and Contentious Neighbors, as the Romans and the Parthians, it was once a very
Flourishing and Wealthy Place, though now it looks like the Residence of
Beggary and Famine.

CHAP. IV.
THE Government of Palmyra comes next to be considered, both in Ecclesiastical
and Civil Affairs. And first, in Civil Affairs.

As long as it was in the hands of Solomon, I question not but it was governed,
as the rest of his Provinces were, by such Lieutenants as himself appointed
(the (...) and (...) of the several (...), whom Ant. l. 8. c. 2.
Josephus mentions) under Rehoboam, I take it for granted, it revolted with the
rest of Syria, when Rezin became King of Damascus: but whether it submitted to
the Power of Rezin, or formed it self into a Commonwealth, as it was
afterward, or what its Government was till the days of Augustus, we have no
Records. In his time, probably, it was governed by a Prince, or Toparch; almost
every Town in Parthia, and the neighboring Syria, upon the Death of Julius
Caesar, or rather after the fatal Overthrow of Crassus, Appian l. 5. Bell.
Civil. p. 671.
being seized upon by some Tyrant, the Parthians supporting porting them in
their Usurpations, having been invited by those Roytelets to their Assistance.
But supposing that it had fallen under one of those petty Princes, in Pliny's
time it recovered its old Form of Government; for he affirms, that in his days
Palmyra was ((...), sui Juris) neither subject to the Romans, nor the
Parthians, as F. Harduin well interprets the words (privata sort) of the
Natural Historian. And Vopisc Aurel,
Aurelian, in his Letter to Zenobia, when he requires her to surrender herself,
promises, that the Inhabitants of the Country should be governed by their own
Laws. And of this the Inscriptions are an unquestionable Evidence, wherein
(...), etc. (...).
the Senate and People of Palmyra are frequently said to have erected Monuments
to those Illustrious Persons who had deserved well of the Republic. And
Septimius Odaenathus, and Septimius Aeranes his Son, are said to be Men of the
Senatorian Dignity; and Rupilius Orodes, both a Senator, and of the Council of
State.

In the Reign of Antoninus Caracalla it was a Roman Colony, as appears by the
Coins: But under Odaenathus and his Sons it became the Seat of the Oriental
Empire, conquered all Egypt, and forced a great part of the Roman Empire to
acknowledge its Jurisdiction, being possessed of all the East as far as Ancyra,
and in a fair way to possess all Bythynia, as far as Chalcedon, had not the
Natives taken Arms in behalf of Aurelian: But it is now under an Arab Prince,
Nominated by, and Tributary to the Ottoman Port.

CHAP. V.
THE Religion of Palmyra, when it was subject to King Solomon, was, I question
not, Jewish; but how long they retained Circumcision among them, after God in
his just Judgment had confined Rehoboam's Kingdom to narrower Limits, I know
not: This is very plain, that very many of the Proper Names of the Inhabitants
in after Ages are Jewish, and Zenobia her self (who by her Name appears to have
been a Syrian, and probably of Tadhmur, for there her Father lived when she
lost her Empire, though she derived her self Originally from Cleopatra Queen of
Egypt) was a Jewess. And it is not altogether unlikely, that Longinus, in
Complaisance to the Religion of his Mistress, in his admirable Treatise of the
Sublime, speaks so honorably of Moses and his Writings: And if we may credit
Benjamin Tudelensis, even in his time there were Two thousand professed Jews
Inhabitants of that City. In process of time, I doubt not but they blended the
Jewish Rites with those of the Gentiles, (as the new Inhabitants of Samaria
did, after the Natives had been transported by Shalmanezer,) till at last
Paganism prevailed.

After Christianity was planted in the World, and St. Thaddeus had preached the
Gospel by our Blessed Savior's own Order at Edessa; I believe, that Holy
Religion soon spread it self into the Neighborhood, even to Tadhmur, though
Paganism was not quite dispossessed; as appears by the Inscriptions to their
Country Gods, Alagbelus, and M. Malachbelus, Jaribolus, Venus Aphacitis, and
others, who all had at Palmyra their Temples, Priests, and Services. It was
very early an Episcopal See, if not an Archiepiscopal, because it was the
Metropolis of a Country: but in the Subscriptions of the ancient Councils, or
the Notitiae of the Church, we have very little or no mention of its Prelates.
Marinus, Bishop of Palmyra, is said to have subscribed the Canons of the First
General Council at Niece; and in the Sixth Act of that at Chalcedon, John
Bishop of Palmyra being absent, made his Subscription by the Hand of the
Archbishop of Damascus; At which time (as from its being ruined by Aurelian),
it held the rank of a poor Bishopric, and was under the Metropolitan of
Damascus: But in the Notitia collected by Leo the Wise, Edessa is the
Metropolis of Phoenicia Libanesia, in the Patriarchate of Antioch, whose
Suffragans were the Bishops of Laodicea, Palmyra, etc. by which it appears,
that in Leo's time, Ann. Dom. 900. it was still a Bishopric; and when it lost
that Honor, I cannot determine.

In the Roman Martyrology of Baronius, on the 15th of June is celebrated the
Memory of the Saints Lybia and Leonis, who were Sisters; and of Eutropia, a
Girl of Twelve Years old, all of Palmyra, who by diverse Torments obtained the
Crown of Martyrdom. It is true, there is no mention of these Brave Women in the
Old Roman Martyrology, as Rosweyd accounts it, nor in Ado of Vienna, but the
Acts of St. Febronia, who suffered under Dioclesian at Sibapolis (perhaps
Scythopolis, V. Mart. Jun. 25.
or the (...)) in Syria, mention them, as Persons who suffered in the same
cruel Persecution. It is plain, from the Inscriptions found at Tadhmur, that
Dioclesian had been in that Country; and from the Church-Historians, that he
raised a violent Persecution in Syria: And that which gave Rise to it, was in
all likelihood that which Eusebius observes, that, a little while after the
Christians of Nicodemia had felt the Fury of the Emperor, several Confederacies
were formed in Melitene, and other Parts of Syria, to seize the Empire, and to
dethrone Dioclesian. Now, in every Insurrection or Tumult, the Christians were
sure to suffer, as the Authors of Sedition, though they were the most Peaceable
and Loyal Men in the World, both by Principle and Practice.

Thus Christianity subsisted in those days of Persecution, when the Number of
Martyrs increased the Number of Confessors: But then Peace and Plenty were, by
the Bounty of the Great Constantine and his Successors made the Churches
Patrimony. I question not but the Followers of our Blessed Savior, at Palmyra,
had their share of the Prosperity which their Brethren enjoyed; till the
Viciousness of the Christian Morals, and the execrable Opinions and Heresies
that debaucht the Faith of the Orientals, subjected those once Famous Churches
to the Mohammedan Yoke: For as soon as Syria submitted to the Power, and
acknowledged the Dominion of the Successors of that False Prophet, I presume,
Palmyra was by degrees reduced to the mean Condition in which it now is; for
perhaps, no one City has run so many risks of different Fortune, as Palmyra,
though it has hitherto preserved its ancient Name and Situation; while, of
Ctesiphon and Persepolis, Niniveh and Babylon, with many other Cities in that
part of Asia, it may be averred, what the Psalmist says of Sodom, and the other
Cities which God destroyed, their Memorial is perished with them.

CHAP. VI.
IT is a very difficult Task, to give a just and clear Account of the several
Fates of Ancient Kingdoms and Governments, especially when Nature has seemed
to please it self, by placing them in a remote Situation, and at a distance
both of Place and Communication from other Nations: And this is the case of
Tadhmur, which was repaired, if not built by Solomon, a Great, a Wise, and a
Victorious Prince, who beautified it with whatever might afford it Strength and
Ornament; lost, I take it for granted, in a little time after, under his Son
Rehoboam, when, through his Folly, and God's just Judgment, the greatest part
of his Territories revolted from him. I conjecture, that as long as the Kingdom
of Damascus kept up its Grandeur, so long Palmyra was in Peace, either under
those Kings, or under the Conduct of its own Senate: 2 King. 23.29.
But when Pharaoh Necoh went up against the King of Assyria to the River
Euphrates, and made himself Master of all Syria, I doubt not but it was for a
while subject to him, till Nebuchadnezzar conquered all those Countries home to
the Gates of Pelusium, now Damiata. The Jo. Males. par. 2. page 152.
Fabulous Historian of Antioch would have the World believe, that when
Nebuchadnezzar intended to Besiege Jerusalem, it was in the hands of the Jews,
who had Manned it with a very stout Garrison; and that Victorious Prince, not
thinking fit to leave a Place so well fortified behind him, sat down before
it; and when he had taken it, burnt it, and then besieged and took Jerusalem.

After this, it continued tributary to the Princes of the Babylonish and
Persian Empires, though perhaps governed by a Senate of its own Citizens; and
in the same State it remained under the Successors of the Great Alexander (the
Kings of Syria) being united by Seleucus, I doubt not, to the rest of his
Territories; whence, in like manner, as the other Cities under his Government,
it received the Use of the Syrian Epoch, the Era Antiochena, Dhilcarnain, or
Seleucidarum, and the Names of the Macedonian Months, which the Inscriptions
undeniably prove.

CHAP. VII.
SYRIA (says Bell. Civ. l. 5. p. 676.
Appian) was governed by the Posterity of Selencus Nicator, to the days of
Antiochus Pius, and his Son: but when Pompey the Great conquered it, and made
it a Province, it was governed by a Roman President: The first who bore that
Office, was Scaurus; and after him, though not immediately, Gabinius. Gabinius
was succeeded by Crassus, who being slain by the Parthians left his Government
to Bibulus. But whether, in all this space of time, while the Roman Eagle
hovered over the East, Palmyra was a Sharer in in the Common Calamity, and felt
the Talons of that Bird of Prey, we have no Accounts.

After the Death of Julius Caesar, every City submitted to a Prince of their
own; the Parthians affording them their Assistance, having, upon the Invitation
of those Tyrants, penetrated Syria. This incensed Marc Antony, who expelled the
Usurpers, exacted heavy Taxes from other Cities, and attempted Palmyra. For
when Cleopatra, who waited on him in Cilicia, was returned home, Antony, who
had given himself up to her Embraces, and, to the loss of his Honor, obeyed
all her Dictates, commanded his Horse to Plunder Palmyra, upon the light and
trifling pretext, that by reason of their Situation in the Confines of the
Romans and Parthians, the Palmyrenians were firm to neither Interest, but
minded their own Profit, and, the Increase of their Trade and Merchandise; but
in truth, that he might pay his Soldiers with the Spoils of that wealthy City.

The Inhabitants of Palmyra being aware of the Invasion, carried all their rich
Movables to the other side of the River, the Banks of which they lined with
their Archers. Upon which, Antony's Troops finding the City empty of
Inhabitants, and of the Riches they so eagerly coveted, having lost their
labor, returned to their Camp. This Invasion occasioned the next Parthian War,
many of the petty Princes of Syria flying for Shelter to the Parthians, while
Marc Antony, having been so scandalously foiled, stayed no longer in Syria to
settle Affairs, and quiet Disturbances, but hastened into Egypt to attend
Cleopatra, to whom he had entirely devoted himself and his Fortunes.

CHAP. VIII.
IN this state of Freedom, Ease and Plenty, it continued under Augustus; and
the succeeding Emperors governed by their own Officers and Laws, as Pliny
expressly averrs, till the Reign of Trajan, when, I conjecture, it fell into the
same Common Calamity with Edessa, Nisibis, Dio Cass. Traj.
and other Frontier Towns of the East (whose fate it is commonly to be harrast
on both sides;) for Trajan having, in his Sixth Consulate, declared War against
the Armenians and Parthians, upon the pretext, That the King of Armenia had
received his Crown from the King of Persia, whereas he ought to have taken it
from the hands of the Roman Emperor; but in truth, stimulated by his desire of
Vainglory, made an Expedition into the East, reduced Armenia, and settled the
Government of that Country; took Nisibis and Batnae, and was honored by the
Senate with the Name of Parthicus, added to his other Titles. After which, he
wintered at Antioch, where he, by an extraordinary Providence, and with much
difficulty, escaped perishing in that great Earthquake which had almost ruind
that Noble City. After this, he returned into the East, past the Euphrates,
subdued all Adiabene, Arbela, and Gaugamela, and came to Babylon; the Parthians
being unable to oppose him, having been much weakened by their Civil
Dissentions. Then he past the Tigris, and went to Ctesiphon, and thence pursued
his Conquests to the Ocean, where he declared, That if he had been as young as
Alexander, he would have followed the Example of that Illustrious Prince, and
have sailed into India. But while he was thus amusing himself with his vain
Ambitious Thoughts, the Provinces which he had subdued revolted, and seized and
murdered the Roman Garrisons. Whereupon, Trajan commanded Lusius and Maximus
to chastise the Rebels, and to reduce the Cities to Terms of Duty and
Obedience. In this Expedition Maximus was slain in Battle; but Lusius recovered
Nisibis, took Edessa, as he did also Seleucia, and other Places, by his
Lieutenant-Generals: Whereupon, to prevent their future Revolt, Trajan gave the
Parthians a King, and settled the Estate of the East (as In Aurelian.
Vopiscus calls that Country, because, in respect of Rome, the Sun seemed to
rise in Parthia,) and this the Coins confirm, which mention the reducing of
Armenia and Mesopotamia under the Power and Jurisdiction of the Romans in this
Emperor's Reign.

At this time, it is probable, Palmyra was much ruined; for otherwise it would
not have wanted the favorable Assistance of Trajan's Successor, who may be
justly reckoned their Second Founder. Hadrian was a magnificent Prince, and a
great Builder (and for that reason called the Wall-Flower, a great number of
eminent Edifices owing their Being and Beauty to his Liberality:) He it was who
built the Fora at Nicodemia and Nice, Chron. Alex. p. 598.
the Four Highways, and that part of the Wall that looks toward Bithynia: At
Cyzicum he built the Temple, and floar'd it with Marble: And in many other
Places he either erected New, or repaired the Old Buildings, both Sacred and
Civil. And in almost every City of his vast Empire, he left some Marks of his
Magnificence. Hadrian.
Dio Cassius affirming, that he generously assisted all the Towns that were
subject to his Empire, or confederate with it, of which he visited more than
any of his Predecessors, a great part of his Reign being employed in more than
one Progress through those spacious Territories: some Cities he adorned with
Aqueducts, others with safe Ports; upon some he bestowed a Donative of Corn, or
Public Buildings; upon others, Money or Privileges. Jo. Malel. par. 1. page
363, 364.
At Antioch he repaired what had been destroyed by that terrible and furious
Earthquake that in Trajan's time had almost buried that noble City in its own
Ruins; as he did the Temple at Cyzicum, which in his own Reign had been
destroyed by another Earthquake, and made it one of the World's Wonders for
Architecture and Beauty, bestowing great Privileges upon the poor undone
Inhabitants, which was the noblest Charity: He also re-erected the Colossus at
Rhodes, which had been many years before thrown down by an Earthquake. Above
all, he was a great Benefactor to the City of Athens, toward which he always
expressed a peculiar Regard; as in Requital, they called him, while alive,
Adrianus Olympius in their Coins and Inscriptions; as he was in several other
Cities, after his death, Deify'd, especially in Syria; for to speak the Truth,
and to be doing Good, were, in the esteem even of the Heathen World, most
God-like Qualities.

CHAP. IX.
BUT the Liberality of this Munificent Emperor was not confined to Greece, or
the adjacent Parts of Asia; the remoter Cities of Syria, who had suffered so
deeply during the War which Trajan made in the East, were not excluded from
their share in his Bounty: For he had been a Spart. Hadr.
Lieutenant General in that Expedition, and had seen the dismal Effects of War,
and Military Rage and Rapine; and upon the Death of Trajan, had made a Peace
with the Parthians (envious of the Glory of his Predecessor, says Sextus Rufus,
very maliciously,) having removed the King, whom Trajan had set over them, and
withdrawn the Roman Armies out of all the Countries beyond the Euphrates; and
because he was not ambitious to have his Name inscribed on all his Public
Buildings, as it was customary, he gave it to the Cities which he new built or
beautified, among whom we must reckon Palmyra, Steph. de Vrb.
which, after he had repaired its Ruins, he called Hadrianople; and (with the
leave of Father Harduin, perhaps the Coin in the King of France's Treasury, and
in Monsieur Patin, p. 203. with this Incription, ADPIAN -- TPOPOLI) may be
ascribed not to Hadrianople in Thrace, nor that other City in Cyrenaica of the
same Name, but to Palmyra, which was a Mother-City, as appears by the Page 99.
Inscriptions, and by Ptolemy, who not only reckons it among the Metropoles of
Coelesyria, but makes it the Capital of the Province of Palmyrene, which had
its Denomination from it. And it is not unfitly represented by a Woman sitting
on a Hill: For Tadmor is enclosed on three sides with long ridges of
Mountains, the Castle being built on one of them, which commands the Entrance
into the City: And to this City I would ascribe the Coin of Caracalla, in
Monsieur Patin, p. 302. with the Figure of an Archer almost Naked on the
reverse, his Thin Habit implying the Heats; and his Arms, the Militia of his
Country; the Sagittarii of Palmyrene being Famous in History.

This City, I doubt not, but Adrian visited, when, in the Sixth Year of his
Empire, he made his Progress into the East, and received the Homage of all the
Kings and Toparchs, whose Territories lay in those Parts. And this his
Expedition, I understand to be meant in the Inscriptions. In which Expedition,
Page 105.
Malech Agrippa, the Son of Jaraius, was the second time the Secretary of the
City; and when that Prince happened to draw near his end, and the Palmyrenians
were in fear of losing their Patron, their Neighbors of the City Tieve, three
Days Journey from Tadmor toward the Euphrates (probably the Oriza of Ptolemy,
as the Learned Mr. Halley conjectures) and a City of Paelmyrene, as Ptolemy
reckons it, made their Vows for his Recovery, (as appears by the Inscription:)
Page 109.
For in the Last Year, the Nineteenth of his Reign, (not the Seventh, as the
Era of Seleucidae is mistaken in the First Account,) Agathangelus of Abila,
Vid. Append.
the Decapolitan, built an Arch, or Cupola, in the Temple of Jupiter, and
erected a Bed of State (or Pulvinar, usually dedicated to the Heathen Deities)
to Jupiter the Thunderer, for the Health of the Emperor Adrian his Lord; who
languisht a long time before he died, Spart. Hadr.
and suffered such Agonies of Pain, that he would fain have persuaded his
Servant, who attended him, to have run him through; and when that Persuasive
would not prevail, would either have stabbed or poisoned himself. So difficult
was it for this Great Emperor to breathe his last.

But when Aurelius Antoninus had prevailed with the Senate to have him Deify'd,
and appointed him the Honors properly given to the Gods, with a College of
Priests, and Attendants to do the Service of the Temples erected to him at
Puteoli, and elsewhere, (which Societies continued to the Reign of Gruter.
CCCCVII. 1, 2. CIOIX. 9.
Septimius Severus at Rome; but how long in the Cities of the East, I know
not,) and had instituted Public Games in his Name, (from which Gratitude to
his Patron, the Historian says. Aurelius had the Name of Pius given him.)

The Cities of the East, in Imitation of Italy, had their Sodales Hadrianales
also (and Temples, questionless, erected to his Memory) of which Samosata is an
undemiable Instance, where L. Grut. ubi sup.
Fabius M. F. Gal. Cilo, Prefect of the City, was a Fellow of the College of
Priests deputed to the Service of the Deisy'd Emperor Adrian; particularly
Palmyra, who gratefully commemorated her Second Founder allowed of his
Consecration, built him a Temple, and devoted some of her Inhabitants to the
Service thereof, as appears by the Inscription in Gruter; Vid. Append.
and by another among those lately published, where he is called Adrian the God;
and I am apt to believe, that the little Temple mentioned in the Journal, Page
104, 105.
was erected to his Memory, as well as to Jupiter. Such Societies were erected
in most Cities of the Empire, to one or other of their deceased, but deify'd
Princes, called Collegia Sacerdot alia by Lampridius, in the Life of Commodus,
p. 50. and they had, according to their Rank and Dignity, their several
Vexilla, or Banners, to distinguish them, called Vexilla Collegiorum, and Signa
Templorum, by Trebellius Pollio, in the Life of Gallienus, p. 178. For as the
Heathen Mock-Deities had their (...), so their Emperors, when advanced to that
Honor, had their (...), with all the Pomp and Ceremony that accompanied the
Service of their Gods. (Vid. Gruter.)


CHAP. X.
THE City having been repaired, we may justly suppose, that by the Advantages
of its Situation and Trade, and the continuance of a long Peace with the
Parthians, not often interrupted, (except in the War which Septimius Severus
made against them, when he took both Ctesiphon and Babylon, Zosim. l. 1. p. 4.
and reduced all Arabia, having ma^cht through that Arabia where the Scenitae
pitched their Tents, in which Country Tadmur lay,) it arrived to its ancient
Glory, when the Emperor Antoninus Caracalla honored it with the Privileges of
a Vlpian. l. 1. de Censib.
Roman Colony Juris Italici (for there was a difference between Colonies, all
were not Juris Italici, as Palmyra was,) Colonia Palmyra it is styled in the
Goltz. These. page 151.
Coins of that Emperor, a Metropolis and a Colony, in the Inscriptions;
probably in Honor of his Mother, whom he afterward made his Wife, Julia Domna,
who was of this Country; but whether of Emisa (as several Authors affirm) or
Palnoyra, or some third City, I am not certain: A Native of Syria we know she
was, for so says Spartian. Septim. p. 65.
Spartianus; and Oppian her Contemporary, calls her, the (...). Oppian. (...).
p. 4.

Assvrian Venus, and a Moon that was never Eclipst, or in her Wain. The same
Poet, in the same place, mentioning the Destruction of the Parthians, and the
Taking of Ctesiphon (as the Coins do mention the Mezob. p. 295.
Victoria Parthica of that Prince) as do also the Historians; in which
Expedition, I doubt not but the Palmyrenians, in Gratitude, Declared for his
Interest.

This Honor and Privilege of a Roman Colony, Palmyra kept, in the Reign of
Alexander Severus (for under him, the great Lawyer Vlpian flourisht) and
assisted him with their Forces in his Expedition into the East, in the Fisth
Year of his Reign, (of which Undertaking. Vit. Al. Severi. page 131, 133, 134.
Lampridius gives so august a Character; though Herodian upon this, as upon all
other occasions, lessens, and would obscure the Achievements of that excellent
Prince. In this Expedition, Journal, p. 97.
Aurelius Zenobius being, as I conjecture, the Commander of the Forces of the
Republic of Palmyra, attended, and was an unwearied Assistant to Rutilius
Crispinus, the Roman General, Vid. Append.
and discharged the Offices of a Man of Conduct and Courage against the
Persians, and deserved the most ample Testimonials of his Bravery and Prudence.

But Palmyra never arrived to such an illustrious pitch of Glory, as it did
under Odenathus and his Sons, who established it the Seat of the Eastern Empire,
and beautified and strengthened it accordingly; and for a few Years it afforded
as remarkable Transactions of War and State, as any other part of the World can
boast of, in so short a space of Time: And therefore I shall give my self the
liberty to treat more largely of these Affairs, and to deduce the Series of the
History of the Imperial Family of Palmyra, as far as the Ancients afford us
light, and shall leave the judicious Reader to his choice, what Memoirs he will
give most credit to,

coinage coin EPT NOIA E

front L E

reverse coin IMP C HERODIANVS AVG

front SALVS AVGVSTI

reverse coin AYT. K. DO. AYPLIANO E.

front OYAAATHO ATHNOY AYT. EPIA

reverse coin EPTIIA NOIA E

front L E

reverse coin IMP C AVRELIANVS AVG

front VABALATHVS VCRIM DR

reverse coin AYT. K.L.D. AYPLIANO E.

front OYAAATHO ATHNOY AYT. EPIA

reverse

having taken care in every Paragraph to produce my Vouchers; while I bemoan
heartily the loss of Vranius his ((...)) Arabic History, in the Second of
which Books he treated of Palmyra; as also of Domninus of Antioch, whom Malela
commonly follows; and of Philostratus of Athens, the Historiographer, who lived
under Aurelian, and wrote the Transactions of his own Time: but particularly I
regret the want of that Oration which Longinus made in Praise of Odenathus, and
called by his Name, of which Libanius makes mention in his Epistles, which
would questionless have given a more ample History of that Illustrious Prince,
than all the jejune Narratives of the Roman Historians. But since we must
follow the Light that is given us, I shall first begin with Odenathus, then
treat of Zenobia, and their Children.

CHAP. XI.
ODENATHVS (says Lib. 7. cap. 22.
Orosius) was a Man of mean Birth and Original, ( Odenathus Quidam, as he
styles him:) A Man of Palmyra (says Vbi Infr.
Zonaras:) Of no Reputation, and unknown (says Lib. 4.134.
Agathias,) till he made his Name Famous by his Conquests over the Persians,
and other eminent Achievements, which give him an extraordinary Character in
the ancient Historians. Breviar.
Sextus Rufus says, that he was a Decurio of Palmyra; which being a word of
large signification, may in that Author, I think, be rendered a Procurator, or
Senator: And so he is styled in the Page 88. Ibid. P. 99.
Inscriptions, if he be the same Person, Septimius Odethus, the Most
Illustrious Senator, the Son of Airanes Nephew of Vaballathus; of which Order
also his Son Septimius Airanes was. And L. 1. p. 36.
Zosimus says expressly, that his Ancestors were Men of Honor and Condition,
having been in past Ages enobled by the neighboring Kings. Page 382.
Georgius Syncellus calls him a great Soldier, and probably he was the General
of the Forces of the Commonwealth of Palmyra: A Prince (says Page 192.
Pollio) accomplished in the Art Military, and from his Youth a great Hunter,
(Hunting being in those days, according to the most ancient Practice, the
Recreation and Exercise of the most Eminent Persons, a Sport that bred them to
great Hardiness and Resolution, and much Experience in War,) he bestowed his
leisure hours in destroying Lions, Leopards, Bears, and other Beasts of Prey,
inuring himself to bear the Fatigues of Labor, to endure the Hardships of
Heat, and Showers, and the other Toils incident to a Woodman's Life; and by
these Methods brought himself to a Habit of enduring the scorching Beams of the
Sun, and the annoyance of the Dust, in his Wars with the Persians.

The later Greeks frequently style him the King of the Saracens, of the
Barbarous Saracens, as if he had been a Phylarchus of some part of Arabia: Lib.
23. cap. ult.
Ammianus averring, that those who were anciently called Arabes Scenitae, were
afterward called Saracens, (but herein he differs from both Pliny and
Ptolemy:) A Name (says Scaliger) never used by any Author before Ptolemy;
whereas Pliny, who lived at least fifty Years before that excellent Astronomer,
expressly mentions them. Now the Saracens, over whom Odenathus and Zenobia
reigned, had been of old, says Procopius Confederate with the Romans.

And as the Quality of this Mighty Prince has been mistaken, so have his
Actions been wrongfully represented: Orosius affirming, that he formed an Army
of the Boors of Syria, and with those Rusticks overcame the Persians; and so
says Sextus Rufus. But they confound two Stories, if we may credit Par. 1. p.
391, etc.
Malela; for he affirms, that when Sapores had overrun all Syria, and had
taken, plundered and burnt Antioch (which happened in the 314th. Year of the
Era Antiochena, the 12th. of the Reigns of Valerian and Gallienus,) he
afterward ravaged all the East to Emesa, a City of Phoenicia Libanesia,
carrying with him, whither soever he went, Fire and Sword, and all the
Instruments of Cruelty: but when he came to Emesa, Sampsigeramus the Priest of
Venus, having collected a hasty Army of the Countrymen of that Province,
placed himself in the Head of them in his Priestly Habit; which created him
Respect from all who saw him, particularly from the King of Persia, to whom he
said he was sent an Empassador: Upon which, while the King was discoursing him,
one of the Boors threw a Stone from his Sling, and hitting Sapores in the
Forehead, slew him; whereupon the Army believing that the Romans were falling
on their Camp, left all their Booty, and fled, Sampsigeramus pursuing them; and
that while the scattered Persians were making their escape, Enathus a
Confederate of the Romans, the King of the Barbarous Saracens, and Lord of that
part of Arabia, met them upon the Borders, and destroyed the remainders of that
scattered Army, as Domninus the Chronologer of Antioch affirms, to whom Malela
gives credit; while Philostratus the Historian (as the same Malela confesses)
who lived a Contemporary with those Princes, gives a different Account; That
after Sapores had made such great Devastations in Syria, had ravaged Cilicia
and burnt all her eminent Cities, ( Domninus says, the King went not in Person,
but sent Spates his General with an Army to commit those Outrages,) as he was
returning through Cappadocia into Persia, Enathus the King of the Saracens came
forth to meet him, and pay the Respects of a Confederate, and at length slew
him. But to set the History in its true Light, it will be requisite to take a
short View of the State of the Empire at that time.

CHAP. XII.
THE Roman Interest in the East having been sinking for some years after the
Death of Gordianus, under his Successor Philip, who was also his Murderer, as
also under Decius, Gallus, and Aemilianus; Valerian, and his Son Gallienus,
were chosen to wear the Purple; the Persians in the mean time ravaging the
East, as the Scythians overran and pillaged the rest of the Empire.

This Devastation continued for some years, till at last Valerian marched
against the Scythians, who had taken Chalcedon, burnt the City of Nice, and
pillaged and set fire to the famous Temple of Diana at Ephesus; and after that,
he attempted to drive the Persians out of their New Conquests, Anno Christi,
260, but very unfortunately; for having engaged his Troops in those vast
Deserts, where the Rays of the Sun were very fervent, and few places afforded
Water sufficient for an Army, and Forage and Provisions must be brought from a
great distance, Valerian sent Ambassadors to Sapores, Eclogae Legate. Petii
Patricii, p. 29.
laden with Gold, to buy a Peace: But the cruel and crafty Monarch knowing the
necessitous Condition of the Roman Army, and being incensed, that Valerian, in
his Letters, had not treated him with all the Pompous Titles which the Persians
Kings used to assume to themselves, detained the Ambassadors for a while in
Prison, till he had gotten all his Forces in a readiness to March, and then
dismissed them, Zosim. l. 1. p. 32.
with this Answer, That if Valerian would give him a Meeting, they would agree
upon Articles among themselves, that should be for the Common Good of both
Empires. To this Meeting, Valerian, pressed by the Necessity of his Affairs, very
imprudently assented: but as he was pursuing his Journey, accompanied only with
a few Attendants, he was seized on by the Persian Soldiers, and made a
Prisoner; Sapores using him with all rigor and contempt, setting his Foot on
his Neck every time he mounted his Horse, till after some years he flayed him,
and so put an end to his miserable Life.

In this Expedition, Odenathus, (who, during the Reigns of Decius, Trebonianus,
Gallus, and Volusianus, while the Persians had seized and pillaged Mesopotamia,
Syria, and the adjacent Provinces, had probably joined himself to to the
Conquering Party, and acknowledged the Jurisdiction of the Persians, not being
able, alone, and unassisted, to oppose so great a Power,) seeing the Roman
Emperor engaged in Person in the Head of a puissant Army for the recovery of
the East, and knowing that his Ancestors had received many signal Favors from
the Emperors, Predecessors to Valerian, was easily persuaded to declare for the
Roman Interest. But when Valerian was taken Captive, Odenathus bethought
himself, and endeavored to make his Peace, having found the Persian Monarch so
much Superior to the Roman. Whereupon, being convinced of the necessity he was
under to smooth the Mind of that haughty Prince, he formed an Embassy, loaded
several Camels with most noble Presents, especially of such things which Persia
did not produce, and sent them to Sapores with the most submissive Letters,
affirming, That in the whole War he had not been an Enemy to that Great King.
But the proud Persian commanded his Servants to throw the Presents into the
River, and tearing the Letters, he trampled them under his Feet, expressing
himself in an angry Tone to this purpose, Who is this insolent Man, and from
whence, that he dares write his Letters to his Liege Lord and Sovereign? If he
intends to alleviate his Punishment, let him come hither with his Hands tied
behind his Back, fall at my Feet, and beg my Pardon; but if he refuses, let him
know, that I will destroy him and his Family, and ruin his Country.

What effect this sharp Answer had upon the Prince of Palmyra, we want
Information; but I doubt not, he dissembled his Resentment, made the best Terms
he could for himself, and waited an Opportunity to revenge the Injury; which,
in a few years offered it self, when Gallienus gave him his Commission to
insult the Persians.

To support the Opinion, That Odenathus was was an Ally, if not a Subject of
the Persians, before Valerian attempted the recovery of the East out of their
hands, Trebellius Pollio affirms, That when Cyriades pretended to the Empire,
he robbed his Father of a vast Sum of Silver and Gold, and with it fled to the
Persians; and having insinuated himself into the Affections of Sapores, and
entered into a Confederacy with him, incited him to make War upon the Romans,
after he had engaged Odenathus in the same Design; that he took Antioch and
Caesarea, and made himself, either by downright Force, or the Terror of his
Arms, Lord of the East; whereupon he assumed the Title of Augustus: But when
Valerian came into the East, he was slain by his Soldiers. This Alliance he
made with the King of Persia (says Tom. 3. page 25.
Tristan) in the First or Second Year of Valerian, in the Fourth (says
Mezzobarba,) and he reigned at least two years, say the Goltz. Thesaur. p. 72.
Coins. But Salmasius will not allow, that Odenathus was concerned in this
Attempt upon Syria; but Odomastes (perhaps Oromastes) whom he supposes a
General, or a Tributary Prince to the Persian; though it is not altogether
improbable, but the Prince of Palmyra might be engaged in this Design, not only
because in League with the Persian, but also, because being an Ambitious,
Politic and Warlike Prince, he was willing to enlarge his Limits, and to take
the Advantage of the distracted Estate of the Roman Empire at that time, to
make Additions to his own Territories. But when Valerian was marching into the
East, and Cyriades was slain, then he bethought himself, and in good time
changed his Party, and declared for the Romans: Which enraged Sapores, and gave
occasion to him to upbraid Odenathus, when Valerian was made Prisoner, with his
Apostasy from his Duty.

CHAP. XIII.
THE Wings of the Roman Eagle having been thus deplumed, and the Glory of the
Empire eclip'st, while Valerian wore the Chains, and daily suffered the
Insolences of the King of Persia, it might have been with Justice expected that
Gallienus should have exerted his utmost Powers to release his Father, and set
his Country and Subjects free. But instead of applying himself to such becoming
Undertakings, which would have given new Life to his People, and new Laurels to
himself, (who had in the beginning of his Reign behaved himself like a Man of
Courage and Conduct,) he gave himself up to all manner of Voluptuousness, and
permitted the Commonwealth to be shipwrackt, inasmuch as he not only neglected
to make an attempt for his Father's Release, (while, by the Barbarians, the
neighboring Princes, who were Confederate with the Persians, Sapores was
solicited with all earnestness to set him at liberty, and to make a Aurel.
Victor. Caess. p. 155.
Peace, of which the Letters still extant in Trebellius Pollio are an
undeniable Demonstration; while also the Bactrians, Iberians, Albanians, and
Tauroscythae, wrote to the Roman Generals, promising their Assistance to redeem
him out of an ignominious Slavery,) but suffered the Goths, A.D. 261. say the
Fasti Idatiani; but Cassiodore says, Anno 263. to overrun all Thrace, Macedon,
and Achaia, with the neighboring Provinces, Zosim. l. 1. p. 34.
one Party of them ravaging Illyricum, and pillaging all its Cities, another
invading Italy, and marching to the very Gates of Rome, while the Parthians
made their Inroads into. Mesopotamia, and the Syrian Banditti harrast the East,
Aug. Ep. 80.
insomuch as the Considerate part of Mankind thought the World near its End,
(and the sad Effects of those Eruptions were visible, in the Ruins of many a
Noble City and Country, almost Two hundred Years after, both in the East and
West, says Lib. 7. cap. 22.
Orosius,) while every bold Pretender durst set up his Title to the Empire in
the West, who could defend his Usurpation with his Sword; his Father Valerian
languishing all the while under a severe Captivity, Treb. Pol. p. 175.
till his Age and his Afflictions had covered him with Gray Hairs.

When the Affairs of the Empire were in this perplexed estate, Eutrop. l. 9..
10. Treb. Pol. p. 178, 179.
and their Interest at the lowest ebb, Gallienus having deserted the Care of
the Republic, sauntred away his Time idly, or spent it ridiculously in the
Company of Ropedancers and Stage Players, and laughed at the loss of many a
fertile and rich Province; while Posthumus maintained its Grandeur in the West,
and preserved Gallia; and Odenathus in the East attackt and subdued the
Persians. For when that senseless Emperor saw himself so miserably oppressed on
all hands, awakened by the Outcries of his People, he for a little while
roused himself out of his Lethargy, and looked about him; and seeing all at
stake, requested Odenathus, Zosim. l. 1. page 36. Zonar. T. 2. p. 235, 237.
the Governor-General, or Praetor, of Palmyrene, and Consederate of the Romans,
(the Prince of that Country, says Trebellius Pollio,) to drive the Persians out
of the Roman Territories: Odenathus considered, that if he did not interpose,
it would be impossible but that Sapores would in a small time, under so
negligent a Prince as Gallienus, have made himself Master of the World, and
that his own Native Country must necessarily have been made an Appendage of
that Empire; and for this reason, as well as to revenge the Affront offered him
in the Slight put on his Ambassadors, he joined his Forces to the remains of
the Roman Army, who still continued to support the Reputation of that August
Empire in the East: And in this difficult Undertaking he behaved himself with
so much Address, and such an extraordinary Courage, that he humbled the Pride
of the Greatest of the Eastern Monarchs in the midst of all his Glory and
Triumphs: For he first fell upon the Persian General, and having routed him,
recovered Nisibis and Mesopotamia out of the Hands of the Invaders; then
attack't the King of Persia with a Success suitable to his Bravery; Philostr.
ap. Malel. par. 1. p. 393. and Zonar. Tom. 2. p. 237. Agath. l. 4. p. 134.
for as Sapores was returning home, laden with the Spoils of Syria and
Cilicia, Odenathus came out to meet him, as one of his Allies; but under that
pretext he deluded him, having way-lay'd him as he past through Euphratesia
(called of old Commagene, says Procopius; Augusto-Euphratesia, by Theodorit a
Bishop of that Country,) so straightened him, that being to march through a
Valley whose Ways were too steep and rugged for his Carriages, he slew all his
Prisoners, and threw them into the Hollows, and by that means past over his
heavy Baggage. After this, he fought and routed the Army of the Persians, and
made so great a slaughter of their Troops, that Delegationib. p. 45.
Peter the Historian, a Man of the Senatorian Dignity, and Ambassador to
Chosroes King of Persia, affirms, That when Sapores had past the Euphrates with
the remains of his shattered Army, his Soldiers thinking themselves secure, by
their station on the other side of the River, embraced one another with
unexpressible Transports: After which, Sapores sent to the Garrison at Edessa,
promising them to give them all the Money which he had plundered in Syria, if
they would not molest him in his March, but suffer him quietly to hasten Home
through their Territory; subjoyning, that he did not offer them this great
Sum, as if he were afraid of them, but that he might make the more speed into
Persia, to celebrate a great Festival that he was near, not being willing to be
hindered in his Design. To this the Garrison consented, received the Money, and
gave him leave to pass by the City unmolested.

By this Victory, Odenathus not only preserved the Roman Territories in the
East, and defended the Limits, but recovered several Cities which the Persians
had usurpt, and made his Inroads as far as Ctesiphon, the Royal Seat of those
Eastern Princes, obliging them to quit their other Conquests, to defend their
Wives and Children. In this Expedition also he made himself Master of the
Treasures of that Great Monarch; and of what those Kings held more valuable and
more precious than all their Wealth, his Concubines; and at the same time he
took many of the Nobility Prisoners. This was so Meritorious an Action, that
the Trib. Pol. p. 192.
Roman Historian confesses, That without this Interposition, the Interest of
the Empire had been entirely sunk in the East: And withal, he informs us, That
Odenathus assumed the Name of King, before he raised his Army, (though the
Greek Writers allow him to have only been declared General of the East, an
Honorary Trust conferred on none but Persons of the best Condition and
Qualifications,) that his Wife Zenobia, his eldest Son Herod, and his two
younger Sons Herennianus and Timolaus, acpany'd him, when ( Anno Christi, 246.)
he fought and routed that Potent Monarch, and recovered the Territories that he
had usurped on this side the River.

To reward these brave Services, Treb. Pol. p. 180.
Gallienus declared him Augustus, and his Copart'ner in the Empire, (so that
the Historians with great injustice reckon Odenathus and his Son Herodian among
the Tyrants, as if they had been Usurpers, who ought to have been inserted into
the Catalogue of the Lawful Emperors,) and commanded Money to be stamp't in his
Name, the reverse of which represented the Captive Persians following his
Triumphant Chariot: The Senate, the City, and all the People of Rome, being
wonderfully pleased with the Performance.

This Declaration of Gallienus entitled Odenathus to the Possession of the
East, while his illustrious Archievements proved him worthy of the Purple: And
accordingly, upon his return from Ctesiphon, he assumed the Habit and Style,
and Declared his Son Herodes his Copart'ner in the Empire, and Princeps
Juventutis; as, besides the Historians, the Coins do fully declare.

CHAP. XIV.
Odenathus having thus atton'd for the Negligence of Gallienus, supported the
sinking Fortune of that August Empire, and preserved his own Native Country in
its own Quiet and Freedom, and behaved himself with so dextrous an Address, and
such an extraordinary Courage, that he humbled the Pride of the Greatest of the
Eastern Monarchs, and acquired a great Reputation to his Arms; and having spent
some time in settling his new Conquests, (though he failed of his main
Enterprise of releasing Valerian, who was, upon this Irruption of the
Palmyrenians, slain by Sapores,) at the Request of Gallienus, Treb. Pol. p.
192. Zonar. T. 2. p. 237.
he undertook to suppress Macrianus, who had, in Opposition to Gallienus,
Declared himself Emperor in Phoenicia, (though Eusebius avers, that himself did
not assume the Purple, but that he made his Sons Emperors.) and was
acknowledged by the Roman Army under his Command. But Macrianus having baffled
the Scythians, Zonar. Syncel. p. 382. Treb. Pol. p. 176.
and driven them out of Achaia, was retired with his Eldest Son, of his own
Name, into Illyricum, where, in a pitched Battle, they were both slain by
Aureolus, another of the Pretenders to the Empire: But Macrianus had left
Quietus the Younger of his Sons in the East, with the Title of Augustus, under
the Conduct of Balista an Experienced General. Balista was the Praefectus
Praetorio to the Emperor Valerian, a Captain of rare Capacity, and singular
Courage, of great Wisdom and Foresight, and as great Resolution and Bravery; he
was General of the Horse under Macrianus in the East. And when Macrianus that
Country, he, with Quietus the Second Son of Macrianus, managed the War with so
much Courage and good Fortune, that while he attack't Sapores on one hand, and
Odenathus on the other, they drove him to take shelter in the Deserts of
Persia; upon which Victory they assumed the Title of Emperors, which engaged
Gallienus against them: Therefore Odenathus marched and fought them at Emesa,
where Balista fell by the Sword of Odenathus, Quietus by the Hands of the
Citizens of Emesa, says Zonaras; while Trebellius Pollio in one place affirms,
Page 116.
That after the Army was routed, the Soldiers seized both Quietus and Balista,
and delivered them to Odenathus, who slew them: Page 194.
but in another place he says, That the common report was (sew Writers
accounting for Balista's Actions, after he was Declared Emperor, while they
treat more largely of his Performances, while he was Praefectus Praetorio of
the East) that he was flain by a Private Sentinel of Odenathus's Army, as he
was sleeping in his Tent: but in a third place he affirms, Page 176.
That the Army of Quietus, instigated by Balista, slew the young Prince, and
having thrown his Body over the Walls of Emesa, immediately surrendered: Others
(as he says) affirming, Page 193.
That Odenathus having slain Quietus, gave Balista his Life; but that Balista,
not daring to trust either Gallienus, Aureolus, or Odenathus, assumed the
Imperial Purple. Nor does the Report want Authors, that he was slain at Daphne,
near Antioch, at a Farm which he had purchased, where helived a private life:
while very many others averr, That having Declared himself Emperor, he was
murdered by those whom Aureolus sent to apprehend Quietus, whom he demanded as
part of his Plunder, having slain his Father, and Elder Brother. The Accounts
even of those Times being so various, it cannot be expected that the Writers of
the present Age should better adjust the History, while we are obliged to the
Information of the Coins, Goltz. These. p. 72.
that Balista reigned Three Years at least, and that his Name was Servius
Anicius (or Sergius Anicetus) Balista. Whatever his Fate was, as to his Titles,
he was an Illustrious Person, happy in his Undertakings, and had a singular
Faculty in providing his Army with Provisions and Necessaries; and so well
versed in Politics, that Valerian acknowledged, that he had learned the Rules
of Government from Balista, and that he was one of the most Provident and most
Experienced Generals of the Age. But whether he was that Callistus whom Zonaras
affirms to have been chosen by the Roman Troops their General, after the
Captivity of Valerian, and who, when he saw the Persians carelessly wandering up
and down, as if they had no more Enemies to conquer, fell upon them, and routed
them, I will not determine, though it be highly probable, the Names being very
like ( Callistus, and Balistas,) and the exploits seem to be the same. But in
this one Circumstance Zonaras is mistaken, who attributes the Taking the
Baggage and Concubines of Sapores to Callistus, which was the Achievement of
Odenathus.

When Odenathus had thus completed the Conquest of the East, and wrested it
out of the Hands both of the Roman Rebels, and the Persian Usurpers, Treb. Pol.
p. 176, 179.
he gave an exact Narrative of all his Proceedings to Gallienus, and sent him
the Persian Nobility, whom he had taken Prisoners: And that besotted Prince had
the confidence to triumph at Rome, for the Victories which Odenathus got in
Euphratesia.

Immediately upon this, Sincel ubi sup.
Odenathus being a Captain of indefatigable Courage, and great Expedition,
engaged himself in the Expulsion of the Goths, who made their Irruptions into
Phrygia, Cappadocia, and Galatia, and threatened the East. But having marched
through Cappadocia to Heraclea of Pontus, the Scythians, terrified with the
Name of the Illustrious General, retired; but as he was preparing to pursue
them, he was most unfortunately and most barbarously murdered. Treb. Pol. p.
184.
The Anger of God against the Roman Commonwealth being most visibly seen;
because, after Valerian was slain, he would not reserve Odenathus for its
Preservation.

CHAP. XV.
THE Manner of Odenathus his Death is differently related, though the Historians
agree in the main. Vbi supr.
Malela, The Paragraph in Malela is so confused, and is such a Jumble of the
Actions of Gallienus, Odenathus and Aurelian, that I cannot but profess, I
should rather attribute the Mistakes to the Transeriber or Interpolator, than
to the Author, though so great a Fabler.
after his fabulous wont, affirms, That he was slain by Gallienus. L. 1. p. 36.
Zosimus, That while he was at Emisa, celebrating either his own, or some
Friend's Birthday, he was by Treachery murdered. But the generality of
Writers assert, That Odenathus, with his Son Herodes, were slain as they were
about to pursue the Scythians, who fled before them: That the Parricide who
made the Assassination, was his Kinsman, his Brother's Son, Moeonius; whom
Syncellus calls Odaenathus (probably according to the Mode of that Time and
Country, Moeonius Odaenathus:) and that he, for a few days after, assumed the
Title of Emperor, (as appears by the Coins,) but that he was suddenly dispatched
by those very Soldiers who had been wheadled to cloth him with the Imperial
Purple. So fell the most Unjust of Men to his Relations, the most Disloyal
Traitor to his Prince, the most Ungrateful Villain to his Benefactor, and the
most Profligate of Wretches.

Maeonius was induced to imbrue his Hands in the Blood of his King, Pol. p.
192, 193. Cuspin. Caes. p. 74.
his Relation, and his Friend; instigated (say some) by Zenobia, who, to
dispatch a Son-in-Law, that hindered her Children from succeeding to the Empire
of the East, (for Herodes, or Herodian, was the Son of Odenathus by a former
Wife,) was content at the same time to see her Husband stabbed. But more
probably he committed the execrable Murder, being instigated by the most
malicious of Tempers, and an abominable mixture of Envy and Ambition; this
prompted him to destroy one of the best of Emperors, upon the pretext, that his
Son Herod was a Man of extraordinary Softness and Delicacy, (as Men who are
naturally Kind and Good-natured, are apt to be Effeminate. Voluptuous and
Amorous,) and because his Father had given him all the King of Persia's
Concubines, all his Treasures, and all the Gems taken in the War: Or rather,
upon an old Grudge; Zonar. T. 2. p. 237.
for the fierce Young Man accompanying his Uncle in his Manly Exercise of
Hunting, presumed, the first of the Company, to throw his Javelin at the Wild
Beast that was roused; and being reproved for it by his Uncle, that Honor
being reserved for the most Eminent Person of the Hunt) in contempt of the
Reprimand, persisted to gratify his own Humor, and committed the same Crime a
second and a third time: Whereupon, Odenathus ordered him to be dismounted, and
his Horse taken from him, (which was the greatest Affront that could be offered
to a Man of Quality in that country.) Upon this, the hot Spark could not
forbear exprespressing his Resentments, and threatening Revenge. Whereupon he
was confined: but in a little time, at the Intercession of Herodes, Odenathus
set him at liberty. But the Pardon was as uneasily digested as the Affront,
(the injured Person may be inclined to remit the Offense; but he who does the
Wrong, never forgives;) for he watch't his Opportunity, and imbrued his Hands
in the Blood of both his King, and his Advocate.

Thus fell that Great Prince and his Eldest Son, both Emperors, after Odenathus
had Reigned Four Years, (and Herodes at least Three, as the Coins expressly
prove; it being probable, that Odenathus wore the Purple some time after
Gallienus declared him Emperor, before he assumed Herodes to be his Copartner
in his Government,) leaving his Crown and Scepter by Right to his Grandson
Vaballathus, Vid. Append.
but in the Possession of, and de Facto to Zenobia, and her Sons Herennianus
and Timolaus.

CHAP. XVI.
O Denathus was murdered the same Year that Gallienus was slain, but some time
before him. For, Anno Christi 260, Valerian was taken, in the Sixth Year of his
Reign; after which, the Persians managed the Affairs of the East according to
their own Will and Pleasure. Valerian's Son, and his Copart'ner in the Empire,
Gallienus, being lost in the mazes of his Vices, and so devoted to his
Pleasures, that his Name was not so much as mentioned in the Army, who seemed
to have forgotten him, as entirely as he had forgotten himself, and all
Princely Qualifications; for he rejoiced at his Father's Captivity, which clad
all Rome in Mourning, and covered every Wise Man with Tears; and diverted
himself with Stage Plays, Treb. Pol. p. 176, 182.
Horse-races, and the Combats of the Gladiators; in making himself Beds of
Roses to wallow in, in the Summertime; and Beds of Melons, to gratify his
Palate in the Winter; in building Castles of Apples, and other Fruits, and
exercising his noble Courage in attacking them; in finding out Methods how to
Preserve Grapes Sound and Untainted three Years, and Wines always in the Must,
Figs always Green, and Apples Ripe in every Month in the Year; as if he had
been born a Slave to his Belly and his Pleasures. He spent all his time in Riot
and Luxury, in Wine and Women; never would drink, but out of a Golden Bowl
(despising Glass, because common and cheap,) and every time changed his Wine:
his Concubines sat at the same Table with him; and at the next Table to him,
his Buffoons, Parasites and Jesters. His Clothes were foreign, and different
from the Habit of the Roman Princes his Predecessors; his Hair powdered with
Gold, and his Head crowned with Rays; while his most intimate Privy-Counsellers
were the Roman Ladies. And in this dissolute Course he lived till the Year of
Christ, 264. when Odenathus undertook and revenged the Quarrel, and baffled and
put to flight the formidable Host, In which Year, it is very probable, the
Persian King, enraged at his loss of Honor, Spoils, and Conquered Territories,
put Valerian to Death. Anno 268, Odenathus was murdered, and the same year
Gallienus was slain. For thus the Treb. Pol. p. 184.
Historian states his Accounts of Time: Whereas Valerian and his Son reigned
Fifteen Years, in the Sixth Valerian was taken Prisoner by the Persians; after
which, Gallienus reigned Nine Years, some say Ten: For its certain, that he
celebrated his Decennalia at Rome; and after that, overcame the Goths, made a
Peace with Odenathus, an Agreement with Aureolus, and overcame Posthumus and
Lollianus. -- After which, he was slain near Milan, by the Hand of Cerronius
(or Cecropius) the General of the Dalmatian Troops.

What the Quarrel was between Gallienus and Odenathus, and upon what Reasons,
no Historian, that I know of, gives any Account: but perhaps the Coins hint it;
for in those of Gallienus, Anno Christi 266, a year and more before Odenathus
was murdered, there often occurs Pax Augg. Concordia Augg. (with two Right
Hands joined.) It Is true, Mezzobarba understands the Inscriptions, of the Union
between Gallienus and the junior Valerian; but besides that Valerian was not
Emperor till the next year after those Coins were stamped, Anno Christi 267, as
Mezzobarba himself confesses, we never read of any Dispute between them; for
the Younger Valerian was a Prince of excellent Temper and Modesty; but a
Quarrel there was between Odenathus and Gallienus (as Trebellius Pollio says
expressly.) Much less can I interpret the Coins to have relation to Valerian the
Father, as Monsieur Patin does; for long before this year, Valerian was a
Prisoner in Persia, and probably murdered.

It must be confessed, that there is great variety of Opinions concerning the Age
of Valerian; and that it is very difficult to adjust the precise time of his
Death, which happened at so great a distance from Rome, and in a Country at
open War with the Emperor, which precluded all Communication. But I shall
endeavor to fix the Time. Tom. 3. page 1.
Monsieur Tristan says expressly, That Valerian was born An. V.C. 937. Anno
Christi 185; and that he was murdered an. aet. 75, Christi 260, the very year
in which he was made a Prisoner. But the whole Assertion is precarious, and
built upon the wrong Supposition, That he lived but 75 years, and was flayed
the very year in which he was taken.

Signior Mezzobarba affirms, that he was slain an. aet. 77. but fixes no year
either from the Building of Rome, or from our Blessed Savior's Birth. The
Writers of the Imperial History of those Times say only in general, that he
lived to a great Age in the state of Captivity: While the Writer of the
Chronicon, commonly called the Alexandrian, allows him to have lived but 61
years; but expressly affirms, that he reigned 14 years, and that he was put to
death by the Persians when Claudius and Paternus were Consuls, Anno Christi
268/9.

Most of the Old Fasti averr, that Valerian and Gallienus reigned 15 years; and
so does Trebellius Pollio; and that Valerian was taken by the Persians,
Gallieno 7. and Sabinillo Coss. Anno Christi 266. (as Idatius declares.)

Among all which Writers, there is great Variety, but little Truth; while its
plain to me, that Valerian was alive when Odenathus first took Arms for his
Release (and so could not be put to Death the same year in which he was taken.)
Page 179.
Trebellius Pollio expressly affirming, that Odenathus exerted his utmost
Vigor; and attended to nothing else but that Valerian might recover his
Liberty. And the same Author as expressly avers, Page 184.
that Valerian was dead before Odenathus was murdered: The Anger of God (as he
says) appearing visibly against the Roman Commonwealth, in that after Valerian
was slain, he would not suffer Odenathus to live. I am therefore of the Opinion
of the learned Monsieur Patin, Page 405.
that as soon as Sapores had experimented, to his cost, the Bravery and Conduct
of the King of Palmyra, and understood that his Design was to restore the
Captive Valerian to his Liberty, from an ignominious Slavery; then his Rage
transported him to that barbarous and inhumane Act of Cruelty, A. C. 264; and
if we may credit the Coin in Goltzius, he was Deify'd after his Death. Thesaur.
p. 70.
But enough of this Digression; let us return to Zenobia.

CHAP. XVII.
SEptimia Zenobia (for so she was called, and for the knowledge of her first
Name we are wholly obliged to the Coins) being thus left by her Husband the
Empress of the East, (for as she followed him in all his Wars, so she
accompanied him in his Expedition against the Goths, when he was assassinated
at Heraclea,) and acknowledged to be so by the Army (after they had dispatched
her Ephemerous Competitor Maeonius, a Man of the loosest Manners, profuse
Luxury, and an ungovernable Temper) managed that vast Empire with a Bravery and
Conduct truly Heroic, and above her Sex; and by the Assistance of the wise
Ministers and Generals Odenathus left her, kept up the Reputation of her
Government, and advanced it. She was Prudent and Fair, Learned and Stout; as
rigorous as a Tyrant, to those who were perverse and obstinate; but humane and
kind to all who were ready to live under Laws and Discipline. She surpast even
her Husband, who was one of the most Illustrious Personages in the World, in
Courage, Magnanimity, and every generous Quality. In a word, she was an addroit
Accomplished Lady, who had all the transcendent Qualities that would create her
the Esteem of the World, and render her worthy the Noblest Throne upon Earth,
being of High Birth, Extraordinary Accomplishments, and the Greatest
Performances.

Her Original was Noble, Treb. Pol. p. 196, 198, 200.
and the best Blood of the Egyptian Kings flowed in her Veins; for she derived
her self from the Family of the Ptolemy's, and from Cleopatra; and had a great
Regard for the last Queen of Egypt, whom with Dido and Semiramis she
celebrated, as the Heroins of their several Ages; Zenobia particularly
proposing to her self the Imitation of all Cleopatra's Illustrious
Qualifications, while she avoided those Vices that eclip'st her Glory. Her
Mother's Name we are ignorant of, but her Father was Achilleus (Zozimus calls
him Antiochus) whom the Palmyrenians chose to be their Prince, Vopisc. p. 219.
when they took Arms against Aurelian. To him, Zosimus says, that Aurelian gave
his Life and Liberty, after he had made him his Prisoner. Nor is it the most
unpardonable Conjectures, to imagine that he was the Father of Lucius Epidius
Achilleus, who twenty years afterthe Sack of Palmyra, being made Governor of
Egypt, took upon him the Imperial Purple, and maintained his Pretensions for
six years at the least, as the Coins expressly inform us; and at last, after he
had been besieged eight Months in Alexandrid, was overcome by Dioclesian and
Galerius, and put to death.

Her Beauty was as Illustrious as her Birth, Id. p. 192.
but Manly and August, not Soft and Effeminate; Cornelius Capitolinus
affirming, that she was the Handsomest of all the Eastern Ladies, (though Syria
were famous for Beauties, more than one of the Roman Empresses owing their
Birth to that Country:) Her Face was of a Brownish color, Page 199.
(and it is no wonder that she appeared so at Rome, who in Palmyrene had been
inured to march in the Head of her Army, on foot, several miles at a time,
where the Rays of the Sun were so servent and so troublesome.) Her Eyes Black
and Sparkling, her Mien Divine, her Charms Irresistible; her Teeth of such an
extraordinary Whiteness, that some Men thought them Pearls: Her Voice Clear and
Masculine: And all her Shapes Regular and Lovely.

And with her Beauty, she had Youth and Vigor; for after her Captivity, she
was married at Rome, and there had Children by a Man of the Senatorian Dignity.

But all the Symmetry of her Face, and the Beauties of her Mien, were not fit
to stand in competition with the more ravishing Accomplishments of her Mind.

CHAP. XVIII.
HEr Ancestor Cleopatra was a Lady of great Wit, Plut. M. Anton. p. School. and
pass. edit. Steph.
and many Languages; so that she seldom made use of an Interpreter, but her
self answered all Foreigners that petitioned her in their own Languages,
Aethiopians, Troglodytes, Jews, Arabs, Syrians, Medes and Parthians; whereas
her Predecessors hardly understood the Speech of their own Country, the Greek
and the Coptick; and all this variety was recommended by a charming Delivery;
her Words flowing with a delicate Sweetness, intermixed with a becoming
Raillery: The several Languages which she spoke, were like the several Notes of
a well-tuned Lute; every thing that she said, was harmonious, and gave a new
pleasure to all who heard her. And in this Qualification Pol. p. 199.
Zenobia strove to imitate that Great Lady; she had some knowledge of the Latin
Tongue, but out of Modesty used it not: but she spoke Greek, and the Language
of Egypt, in perfection: And so well skilled was she in the Alexandrian and
Oriental Histories, that she is said to have written an Epitome of them; and
she was also acquainted with as much of the Roman Affairs, as were treated of
in Greek. And though she understood other Tongues more accurately than the
Latin, and thought it not worth her while to be a Critic in it; yet she
commanded her Sons to inure themselves to the Language of Rome, rather than
that of Greece, (which they spoke but seldom, and with some difficulty,)
designing them probably, in her ambitious Thoughts, for the Government of that
proud City, as she had already declared them Emperors; to which end she had
provided her self of a pompous Chariot, in which she intended to have made her
triumphant Entry into the Capital of the World, as a Conqueror; while it
happened that she was carried in the same Chariot a Captive into that haughty
City. Vopis^


And as she was very Learned her self, so she became a declared Patroness of
Arts, and a Favourer of Scholars. Longinus (the best Critic of the Age he
lived in, and perhaps of any Age, and a Philosopher of unquestionable
Reputation) fixed his Residence at the Court of this Heroic Empress, was
admitted to a share in our Councils, taught her Greek, and was probably made
the Governor of her Sons: And, could Longinus have persuaded Porphyry, whom by
Letter he earnestly invited to Palmyra (with the Queen's Allowance, I doubt
not) that admirable Platonist had tasted of her Bounty, as did Paulus of
Samosata, and other Votaries of Learning in that Age.

Id. p. 198. Sec. Satrectionem.
Her Magnificence went an equipage with her Learning and her Charms. From the
Coins it appears, that she took the Name of Augusta, managing the Empire not
only in her Son's Name (as the Historian says) but in her own: And while
Gallienus was sauntring in Rome among Fiddlers and Players, she kept the State
of a Persian Monarch; and to perpetuate her Memory, she built a City on the
Banks of the River Euphrates, toward the West, five Miles from the Castle of
Mambri, nearer to the Roman Territories, but three Days Journey from Circesium,
which she called by her own Name, Zenobia; which, Proeop. Pers. l. 2. c. 5. p.
97. and de Aedific. l. 2. c. 8. p. 42, 43.
when in after Ages it fell into decay, was repaired, fortified and beautified
by Justinian; and the Place where the Emperor Aurelian gave her a House at
Tivoli, thought it self happy to change its old Name for that of this
magnificent Princess.

Her Court was pompous, her Grandeur eminent, she was adored like the Eastern
Kings, and her Treats were as splendid as any of those made by the Roman
Emperors. She usually wore the Royal Robe, and a Diadem; but when she made a
Speech to her Army, she put on a Helmet, and appeared like a second Pallas. Her
Cimar was of Purple trimmed round the Edges with rich Gems, and clasped in the
middle with a large sparkling Diamond, instead of a Button; her Arm being often
bare.

At her Feasts she was served in Gold Plate, enchast with Precious-stones,
after the manner of Cleopatra; and chose to be attended rather by elderly
Eunuchs, than Women. And the part she bore in the Triumph of Aurelian (than
which Rome never saw any thing more Pompous) though it demonstrated her great
Misfortune, yet was suited to her magnificent Temper; for she was loaded with
Gems of the greatest Magnitude and Value, probably the Spoils of her own
Cabinet; which, though she were a Lady of a vigorous Constitution, much
incommoded her, during the Cavalcade. Her Feet and Hands were chained with
Golden Fetters; and her Necklace was a massy Gold Chain, the end of which was
held up by a Persian Buffoon.

She was Chaste to a Miracle, (and in this she differed from her Ancestor the
Queen of Egypt, whose Lewdness blemished her other Accomplishments,) inasmuch as
she never enjoyed her Husband's Company, but for the sake of Children; and as
soon as she found she had Conceived, she retired, according to the Custom of
the Jews, of whom P^^ag. l. 2. c. 12.
Clemens of Alexandria gives the same Character.

And in the midst of all her Plenty, her Temperance was admirable, being always
sober; though sometimes she used to drink with her Captains, to ingratiate her
self to them; and at other times, with the Armenians and Persians, the better
to dive into their Secrets.

Upon all Occasions she was very Liberal, and yet managed her Largesses with
great Prudence; and took more care of her Revenues, than most Monarchs usually
do: And this appeared by the vast Sums found in her Coffers, when she fell
into the Hands of Aurelian.

CHAP. XIX.
ZEnobia's Religion was at first Pagan; Phot. Cod. (...). page 802. Gr.
but she forsook the Heathen Polytheism, and became a Jewess, by whose
Persuasions, I know not, (for Philastrius was certainly in a Dream, when he
aver'd, That Paulus of Samosata, Bishop of Antioch, being a Judaizing
Christian, and a Teacher of the Necessity of Circumcision, and other Mosaical
Rites, persuaded her to turn Jew: Nor can I acquit Monsieur Tristan of
Inadvertency, Tom. 3. p. 203.
when he quotes Photius, That Odenathus also quitted the Idolatry in which he
had been bred, and turned Jew probably upon the Persuasions of his Wife; and
that there is reason to believe, that both of them were converted by Paulus of
Samosata to Christianity; for all that he says, is without Authority, and
groundless.) But notwithstanding her Religion, she behaved her self with great
Temper and Meekness toward the Christians her Subjects, neither endeavoring
to compel their Consciences, nor to seize their Churches. She was a Hater of
Persecution, though she were a New Convert, (and such Persons are generally
very warm, and acted by an extraordinary Zeal,) and though she was of a
Religion whose Proselytes have always been Haters of all who differ from them
in Principles; for Epist. ad Solitar.
St. Athanasius says, That she was so Just to the Christians, as not to convert
their Churches into Synagogues.

It is the common Opinion, Niceph. l. 6. c. 27.
that she was in a fair way to have embraced Christianity, if she had fallen into
good Hands; that Paulus of Samosata, the Patriarch of Antioch, undertook the
Province, and took great pains therein, ( Zenobia being an excellent Disputant,
and admirably skilled in Controversy,) but having unhappily fallen into the
Heresy of Artemon, he infused into her Mind very mean Notions of our Blessed
Savior, That he was a mere Man, and not of the same Nature with God the
Father; and that this occasioned his Deposition, and probably the loss of his
designed Disciple. But it is almost indisputably certain, that all this fair
Story is built on a Mistake of the words of Theodorit, who only says, That
Paulus fell into the Heresy of Artemon; Lib. 2. de Haerisib. n. Paulus.
and affirmed, That our Savior was only a mere Man; by this means designing to
ingratiate himself with, and to flatter Zenobia, Vid. Vales. in Eusebius. l. 7. c.
30.
who was a Jewess, and so would not allow Jesus to be God.

It is plain from the Ecclesiastic Historian, that she had a great regard for
Paul, that she made him her Ducenarius, or Procurator at Antioch; and that he
affected rather to be called by that Title, than that of Bishop, being a
haughty Man, and a Lover of Secular Grandeur; but for his Heresy, and his vain
and disallowable Morals, he was condemned by a Synod at Antioch, Eusebius. l. 7.
c. 28, 29.
Anno Christi 166, and the 12th. Year of Gallienus, in which year Dionysius
Bishop of Alexandria died: But the proud Patriarch, supported by his powerful
Patroness, despised the Determination of the Synod. Whereupon, the Catholic
Prelates, after Aurelian, the declared Enemy of Zenobia, had assumed the
Purple, called a Second Synod, deposed the Heretic, and filled the Sea with
Domnus, Son of his Predecessor Demetrianus: But though Condemned by two Synods,
the Heretic maintained his pretended Title to his Jurisdiction, and kept the
Possession of his Episcopal Palace and Revenues, though his Throne were
possessed by a more Orthodox Prelate. Whereupon, the Synod appealed to
Aurelian, who ordered Paul to be Ejected by the Secular Power. So well affected
was that Emperor toward the Christian Church at that time, though afterward he
changed his Behavior. And it is not the most groundless of Conjectures, that
Aurelian was so ready to serve the Orthodox against the Heretic; because Paul
was a Favorite and Dependant of Zenobia his Enemy, while the Catholics were
his Friends, and good Subjects.

CHAP. XX.
AND now, having accounted for her Religion, I shall adventure to describe her
Course of Life, and Practices. She used her self to all sorts of becoming Manly
Exercise; and showed, upon all Occasions, a Hardiness above that of her soft
Sex. She often rode on Horseback, commonly in a Chariot, seldom was carried in
a Chair, Treb. Pol. p. 192.
and very frequently marched three or four miles on foot in the Head of her
Army, having inured her self to bear the Fatigues of War, the Scorchings of the
Sun, and the parch't Sands of the Deserts: For her Education was like that of
her Husband's; and in the opinion of some very good Judges, the Wife was the
braver of the two; the most Courageous, as well as the Fairest of her Sex. She
often armed her Head with a Casque, and as often assisted at her Councils of
War; and such an esteem she had of true Magnanmity, that she told Aurelian,
That she accounted Gallienus and Aureolus Milksops, but she esteemed him
qualified to make an Emperor of the World; because he was a Stout and
Adventurous General. She accompanied Odenathus in all his Expeditions, and was
with him when he so succesfully attempted the Persians.

The Persians, it must be confessed, used to carry their Wives with them into the
Field, but rather for Show and Magnificence, that they might enjoy the pleasure
of seeing a fierce Battle fought, and be exempt from all the Hazards of it; but
Zenobia went into the Field as a great General, and had her share in the
Dangers of the Engagement.

And this part of her August Character her Enemy Aurelian gave her: 1b. p. 198.
For when it was objected to him, That he made a mighty bustle about a Trifle,
when he triumph't over an unfortunate Woman: -- He told the Senate, That they
knew not the Accomplishments of that Great Lady; That she was Prudent and
Politic in her Councils, and Constant to her Resolutions; That she had an
entire and undisputed Power over her Army; was very Liberal, when Necessity
required; and very Sharp, when Severity was requisite; That it was by her
Conduct, that Odenathus overcame the Persians, put Sapores to flight, and
marched to the Walls of Ctesiphon; That she made all the East, and all Egypt
tremble, when neither the Arabs, nor the Saracens, nor the Armenians could
affright them; and and that he gave her her Life, upon the prospect that such
an extraordinary Heroine, who could preserve and manage the vast Empire of the
East for her self and Children, would be of great Advantage to the
Commonwealth, and teach the Romans the Rules of Conduct and Government.

To make good this Character, and to let the World see how well the Delicate
Sex might be accomplished for Rule and Dominion, she told the Emperor, That if
she had succeeded in her Attempt, she designed to have constituted Victoria,
the Wife of Victorinus, another brave Lady of that Age (who had made more than
one Emperor, and took to her self the Title of Augusta, and is styled in the
Coins and Historians, Matter Castrorum) her Companion in the Royal Dignity, and
between them they would have divided the Empire of the World.

The only Fault which I find her charged with (except her Fear, when she fell
into the Hands of Aurelian, which prompted her to discover all her Friends and
Assistants to that cruel Prince, who presently murdered them, for in this she
fell beneath the Great Cleopatra,) was her dislike of her Son-in-Law Herodes,
whom Odenathus had begotten on a former Wife, and that she consented to his
murder, that the Empire might devolve on her own Sons, Herennianus and
Timolaus. But this is reported by only one Historian; and I cannot believe,
that to rid her hands of a Son-in-Law, she would consent to the Parricide of
her Husband, whom she loved so dearly, and who so well deserved it; for they
both fell at the same time, and by the same Hand. But Diamonds have their
Flaws; and the richest Metals, some Alloy.

I have thus endeavored to set this Heroine in a true Light; for it would not
have been just, to treat a Princess of such rare Endowments both of Mind and
Body (who was the Ornament of her Sex, and the Wonder of the Age she lived in,
reverenced over all the East, and admired even at Rome by her bitterest
Adversaries) with a meager and jejune Character, though the best Descriptions,
even of the ancient Writers, fall below her Merit. And now I shall proceed to a
more particular Account of her Achievements.

CHAP. XXI.
ODenathus and Herodian being slain, Treb. Pol. p. 180, 197.
Zenobia, during the Minority of her two Sons (who were left very young)
Herennianus and Timolaus, whom she declared Principes Juventutis and Augusti,
took upon her the Empire, (Monsieur Patin says, Page 430.
That Gallienus gave her the Title of Empress, but without Proof: but whether
it was given her, or she assumed it, Theodorit and Nicephorus Callisti are much
mistaken, who call her only the Toparch of the Country, and affirm, that she
owed her Dominion and Territory to the Persians, who having overcome the
Romans, gave her the Government of Syria and Phoenice,) and she managed it not
like a Woman, nor only better than Gallienus, but with more Courage and better
Conduct than many famous Emperors, and gave Gallienus a Specimen of her
Abilities, in a few Months after she had undertook to weild her Scepter. For
when the News of Odenathus's Murder was brought to Rome, the Emperor, who had
some Courage (for he was an odd mixture of Softness and Hardiness) made
Preparations of War, though very late, against the Persians, to revenge his
Fathers ignominious and barbarous Death; and to this end, sent an Army under
Heraclianus the Praefectus Praetorio, a famous General, and a true Lover of his
Country, into the East. But Zenobia, jealous of his Design, and resolved
neither to dethrone her Sons, nor to divest her self of the Imperial Purple,
and acknowledge the Roman Authority, met him upon the Borders of Persia, fought
him, and routed and destroyed his whole Army. This General Heraclian, Caess. p.
74.
Cuspinian calls Herodian, by a great Mistake, affirming, that he was the
Governor of Gallia (Dux Galliae;) and that he was opposed by Zenobia, because
he made the Expedition into Persia without her Order.

Heraclianus, Zosim. l. 1. p. 37. Treb. Pol. p. 181.
upon his return from this unfortunate Expedition, where his Honor had been
sacrificed, and his Life with great difficulty saved, having assisted in the
driving the Scythians or Goths out of Greece, entered into a Conspiracy with
Claudius, the next Man in Dignity and Employment to the Emperor; and having
engaged Cecropius, the General of the Dalmatian Forces, in the Design, they by
his Hand slew Gallienus, (this Cecropius, The General of the Dalmatians, Tom.
3. p. 177.
Monsieur Tristan believes to be the same Cecrops the Moor, whom L. 1. p. 35.
Zosimus affirms to have assumed the Empire, when Gallienus returned from
Germany to Rome, to drive the Scythians out of Italy; and that he was called
the Moor, because made Governor of Mauritania by Claudius: Whereas Zosimus
affirms, that the other Disturbers of that Reign of Gallienus, Cecrops,
Antoninus, and the like, were brought to condign Punishment by him, only
Aurelius survived: And if so, Cecropius in Zosimus could not be the same who
murdered Gallienus,) and by a general Consent Claudius was declared Emperor,
who (as Aurelian in his Letters declares) suffered Zenobia to Reign quietly,
Treb. Pol. p. 199.
while he was busied in the Gothic War. And in this he acted very politickly,
that that Warlike Lady preserving the Boundaries of the Eastern Empire free
from Disturbance, he might the more securely accomplish his other Designs; and
in this Resolution he persisted, Pol. p. 204.
though the Senate, when he was elected, cried out five times, O Emperor
Claudius, deliver us from the Palmyrenians: And again seven times, O Emperor
Claudius, rescue us from Zenobia and Victorina. For he was forced to
acknowledge in his Letters, That as Tetricus had made himself Master of all
France and Spain; so the Queen of Palmyra, to their shame be it spoken, was
possessed of all their Archers.

While the Forces of the Empire were employed by Claudius, Zosim. l. 1. p. 39,
40. Pollio, ubi sup.
in the First Year of his Reign ( Anno Christi 270, Antiochianus and Orphitus
being Consuls) to compel the Scythians to repass the Danube, and to return to
their own Country, (for they had ravaged Asia and Achaia, Acarnania, Boeotia,
Thessaly, and the adjacent Countries,) Zenobia sent her Troops into Egypt, to
reduce that fertile Country under her Jurisdiction; the Inhabitants of that
rich Province having, upon the News of the Death of Gallienus, unanimously
acknowledged and taken the Oath of Allegiance to Claudius, though he were
absent. This Zenobia resented, as an Injury offered to her own Title, and the
Succession of her Sons, it being usual for the Junior Augustus, upon the Death
of the Elder, to claim the Possession of the whole Empire: Or else she took
this occasion to assert her Pretensions to that Kingdom; for she derived her
Pedigree from the Family of the Ptolemy's, and particularly from Cleopatra the
last Queen of that Country, whom the Romans had by force dispossessed.

To make this Conquest, she sent her General Zabdas into Egypt (where a Party
of the Natives, under Timagenes ( Pollio calls him Timogenes) had already
declared for her Interest, and supported her Claim) who with a powerful Army of
Seventy thousand Men, made up of Palmyrenians, Syrians and Barbarians, fought
Fifty thousand Egyptians, and after a very sharp Engagement (in which the
Militia of Palmyra continued the Fight with unwearied Obstinacy and
Pertinaciousness) got the Victory: After which, having left Five thousand of
his Soldiers behind him to keep the Country in awe, he returned to Palmyra.

While this Invasion was made, Probus, whom the Emperor Claudius had declared
the Prefect of Egypt, was, according to Command, scouring the neighboring
Seas of the Pirates, who, in those times of Disorder, much infested the bottom
of the Streights: But as soon as he heard the fatal News, that during his
Absence, Egypt had been subdued; he returned with all speed, forming an Army of
what Forces he had with him, and such other of the Natives as were content to
List themselves for the Service, and to throw off the Yoke of the Palmyrenians,
which they hated; and making an Attempt upon the Guards whom Zabdas had left to
preserve his New Conquest in Obedience, he drove them out of the Country.

Upon the Report of this Revolution, Zabdas returned; but Probus having in the
mean time strengthened his Troops with Recruits from Lybia, and the remoter
Parts of Egypt, attack't the Enemy, got the Victory, and drove the Men of
Palmyra a second time out of that Country.

In pursuit of this Victory, Probus possessed himself of a Hill near Babylon (the
Egyptian City of that Name) that he might preclude Zabdas from retiring into
Syria. But Timagenes, who exactly knew all the Country, with Two thousand
Palmyrenians got to the top of the Hill, unknown to the Egyptians, and falling
upon them unexpectedly, cut them all off. Which when their General saw, he, not
willing to outlive his Honor, fell on his own Sword.

CHAP. XXII.
EGyt being thus reduced under the Power of Zenobia, the remainder of the
Barbarians, who outlived the Battle fought between Claudius and the Goths, at
Naissus, secured themselves within a Tabor of their Wagons, and so made their
Retreat: A violent Pestilence at the same time raging in both Camps; in which
Contagion, Claudius, one of the most Accomplished of the Roman Princes, breathed
his last. To him Quintillus his Brother succeeded; but hearing that Aurelian
was chosen Emperor, he ordered his Physicians to cut his Veins, and so expired.

Aurelian having baffled the Scythians, and subdued all the Pretenders to the
Government, having built the Walls of Rome, and settled the Civil State of that
City (which took up the two first Years of his Reign) undertook an Expedition
into the East, to reduce Palmyra, which at that time had brought under its
Jurisdiction all Egypt, and all the East, home to Ancyra the Metropolis of
Galatia; and would have extended its Conquests over Bithynia to the Gates of
Chalcedon, if the Inhabitants, having been made acquainted with the Resolutions
of Aurelian, had not emancipated themselves from that Yoke.

Aurelian did not march directly into the East, Vopisc. p. 216.
but secured the Provinces through which he went, being forced to fight many
Battles by the way, before he reached Syria. For in Illyricum and Thrace he
overthrew the remainders of the Goths, and slew Five thousand of them, with
their Commander Cannabas. After which, he marched through Byzantium into
Bithynia, which had declared for his Interests; took Tyana, which was betrayed
to him by Heraclammon, but spared the City, for the sake of the Philosopher
Apollonius, who was born there, while he ordered the Traitor to be executed;
all the other Cities between Tyana and Antioch rendering themselves.

Near Antioch, Zenobia had fixed her station, in the Head of a numerous Army
advantagiously posted. But Aurelian was a Prince of Undaunted Courage, a Bold
Spirit, and Dextrous Address; and prepared himself, as became a Prudent
General, for a Battle: And observing, that the Strength of Zenobia's Forces
consisted in her Horsemen, (who were armed Cap-a-pee, and better understood
Horsemanship than the Roman Troops) he posted his Foot beyond the River
Orontes, in a separate Body, and commanded his Horse not to engage the
Palmyrenians while their Body was fresh and lusty; but when they charged, to
retire, and dissemble a Flight, till the extreme Heat of the Weather, and the
Weight of their heavy Arms had tired them, and forced them to desist from the
Pursuit. The due Observation of this Order got the Victory: For when the
Romans, by this manner of Fighting, had satigued the Palmyrenian Troops, and
tired their Horses, then they charged them with the utmost Vigor, and as they
fell from their Horses, or their Horses sunk under them, trod them under their
feet. The Slaughter was various; some were slain with the Sword, others stifled
with the fall of their own Horses upon them, a third sort trampled to death by
the Roman Troops, while the scattered remainders of that great Army fled to
Antioch.

This Battle was fought (says Chron. ex verse. Hier.
Eusebius) in the second Year of the 250th. Olympiad, Anno Christi 273, at apud
Timas. Hier. (lege apud Imas, an easy Mistake of the Copyist for aput Imas.)
apud Imas, in Sextus Rufus, and Eutropius. In Ptolemy, (...). In Georgius
Syncellus, (...). In St. Hier. Vit. Malchi, Imma. -- It was a Town of Seleucis,
between Gindarus and Gephyra, says Ptolemy. And Hier. says, that the Desert of
Chalcis is situate between Imma and Emesa to the South.
Imma, not far from Antioch, and in the Engagement Pompeianus the Frank (whose
Family thereupon settled at Antioch, and was in being in St. Jerome's time, his
dear Friend Euagrius being of that House and Lineage) did the Emperor
extraordinary Service, and behaved himself with great Bravery. And it was this
Battle, or rather the Shadow of a Battle, says L. 7. c. 23.
Orosius, for Zenobia was rather frighted than beaten into Submission) that put
that Great Princess into the Hands of the Romans, and decided the Controversy
(say Eutropius, and Aurelius Victor.) But they are both mistaken; for Zenobia
lost her Empire in a much sharper Engagement at Emesa, where her Forces were
entirely routed: Of which more in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXIII.
ZAbdas the General of Zenobia's Army, Zosim. p. 45.
a Commander of great Experience, and (till then) as great Success, fearing
lest the People of Antioch, upon the report of the loss of the Battle, should
have fallen upon and insulted the remains of his Conquered Troops, having found
a Man who somewhat resembled Aurelian, clad him in such Habit as that Prince
used to wear when he fought, leading him through the Streets of that large City
in Triumph, as if he had gotten the Victory, and made the Emperor his Prisoner.

By this Stratagem Zabdas imposed upon the Citizens of Antioch, and amuzed them
the remaining part of that Day, till the Night coming on, he retired with
Zenobia to Emesa: And thus he deluded the Antiochians, who otherwise would have
much incommoded his Retreat, and escaped being surpised and ruined by
Aurelian; for the Emperor had recalled his Foot from the other side of the
Orontes, with an Intention, the next day, to have failen upon the relics of
the Palmyrenian Army on every side: But his Design was frustrated by the flight
of Zenobia; whereupon he altered his Intentions, and entered Antioch, being
received by the Citizens with all the Marks of Zeal for his Service; and was so
well pleased with the Testimonies of their Repentance and Submission, that he
published an Indemnity to the Inhabitants, and recalled those who had fled out
of fear of being punished for adhering to the Interests of the Queen of Palmyra.

At this time Aurelian was informed, that a Party of the Palmyrenians had
posted themselves advantageously on a Hill that overlooked Daphne, the famous
Suburb of Antioch, in confidence that the Steepness of the Place would secure
them from all the Attacks of the Romans. But the Emperor commanded his Infantry
to draw themselves into their Close Order, and to cover themselves with their
Shields, so to bear off the Darts and Stones that their Adversaries might hurl
down upon them: And by this method they got an easy Victory, and put all their
Enemies to flight; whom the Romans pursued so closely, that some were forced to
throw themselves off from the Precipices, and so were torn in pieces, while the
remainder perish't by the Swords of the Victors.

After this, the Cities of Apamea, Larissa and Arethusa opened their Gates, and
submitted to the Conqueror, receiving him with all the Marks of Honor and
Respect. But Aurelian understanding that the Army of Zenobia, and her Allies,
being no less than Seventy thousand Men, were encamp't in the Plain before
Emesa, immediately moved toward them, and encamp't with his Dalmatian, Mysian
and Pannonian Horse, with the Legions of Noricum and Rhaetia, and with his
Praetorian Bands, who were all select Troops, and tried Men, in view of the
Enemy. Besides these Regiments, Aurelian had in his Army several Troops of
Moorish Horse, of the Militia of Asia, from Tyana, and from Mesopotamia, Syria,
Phenicia, and Palestine, all choice Men.

When the Armies engaged, the Roman Horse took care not to be enclosed by the
Palmyrenians, who were superior to them in number, and galled them very
severely, breaking and disordering their Ranks. But as they were about to turn
their backs, the Roman Foot charged the Enemy's Troops so briskly, that they
soon put them to flight. Upon this followed a bloody slaughter, the Jews
falling on with their Clubs and Maces, which made a thundering and unusual
Noise upon the Armor of Brass and Iron in which the Palmyrenians charged: The
whole Country was covered with the Carcasses of Men and Horses, while the few
that escaped, fled to the City.

Zenobia being extremely grieved, as she ought, at her Defeat, deliberated what
she should do; and it was unanimously in Council agreed, That she should desert
Emesa (the Inhabitants of the City being her Enemies, and wishing well to the
Romans) and betake her self to Palmyra, where being more secure, she might
consult at leisure how to repair her lost Fortunes. This Advice she immediately
complied with, and fled to Palmyra.

The News of her flight being brought to Aurelian, he entered Emesa in Triumph,
covered with the Trophies of a noble Victory, and was received by the Citizens
with all the Marks of Joy, and according to the Deserts of an Invincible Hero.
At Emesa he seized the Treasures of Zenobia, which, by reason of her
precipitate haste, she was forced to leave behind her, and then with all
imaginable speed moved toward Palmyra. In his March, Vopisc. p. 218.
the Syrian Banditti much infested his Camp; for they had, Victor. p. 155.
during the Disturbances of the Empire, made themselves very formidable, their
Troops being numerous, their Horses fleet to admiration, and the Deserts
favoring their retreat with their Prey; inasmuch as at this time it was
Proverbial at Rome, That none but Women and Thieves governed the East.

When Aurelian had quitted himself of these troublesome Attendants, he formed
the Siege of Palmyra, straightly beleaguing the City, and fortifying his Camp
with Castles, while the neighboring Nations furnished him with all sorts of
Provisions. The Besieged, in the mean time, being possessed with a vain Opinion,
That their City was Impregnable, derided the Attempts of the Romans, as if they
must be forced, in a few days, to raise their Siege, for want of Necessaries;
while the City was well provided with all the requisites of War, the Garrison
numerous and brave, and engaged to fight, not, as before, for Glory and
Conquest, but for their Wives and Children, and their own Liberties, their All
being at stake: For it was beyond the reach of Fancy to imagine (says Aurelian,
in his Letter to Mucapores) what vast quantities of Arms and Military Stores
were in that City; that no part of the Wall was without two or three Engines to
throw Darts, and other Instruments of Mischief, into the Enemies Camp; that
with some of their Machines they threw Fire among their Tents; and that the
Garrison behaved themselves with so much Resolution, that Aurelian having been
wounded with an Arrow, had like to have breathed his last under the Walls of
Palmyra.

CHAP. XXIV.
THis Resolution of the Besieged, joined to the many Fatigues the Emperor was
obliged to undergo, made him almost quite weary of his Design: Whereupon he
wrote to Zenobia, requiring her to surrender the Place, and promising her and
her Confederates, that they should be allowed to live in great Plenty and
Security, in such a part of the Empire as the Senate should appoint, upon
Condition, that all her Treasure and Arms, her Horses and Camels, should be
given up to the Romans; after which, Palmyra should be permitted to be a Free
Commonwealth, as it had been in past Ages. But the haughty Queen kept up her
Courage, though her Fortunes were sunk, and returned the Emperor this Answer:

Zenobia the Queen of the East, To the Emperor Aurelian.
NO Man ever yet, except your self, durst demand of me, what your Letters
require. Whatsoever is to be achieved in War, must be gotten by Courage and
Resolution. You command me to surrender my self and Empire; but you have
forgotten, that Cleopatra chose rather to die by her own Hand, than to lessen
and outlive her Grandeur. I am not destitute of Assistance; I daily expect
Succors from the Persians: The Saracens and Armenians are in my Interests; and
the very Free-booters of my Country have already insulted and baffled your
Army. When these Auxiliary Troops arrive, which I look for from all Quarters,
you will abate of your imperious Demands, though you now require me to yield,
as if you had already gotten an entire Conquest, and had made your self Lord of
all the East.


This Epistle inflamed Aurelian, and put him upon doing all that a wise and
brave General ought to have attempted, to reduce the City; he intercepted the
Persian Succors, and debaucht the Saracens and Armenians, whom he corrupted by
Money, and bought off, till they deserted, according to the Custom of those
fickle and changeable Nations, who are true only to their own Interests, and
pay their Homage and Services to that Prince who bids most for them.

When the Garrison heard that all their Relief was cut off, and saw the Emperor
bent to carry on his Attacks with the utmost vigor, being also much pressed with
the want of Necessaries, they determined to send their Queen over the Euphrates
into Persia, to beg the Assistance of that great King; and to this end, they
did set Zenobia on a female Camel, which sort of Creatures run swifter than any
Horse, (others say, on a swift Dromedary,) and conveyed her out of the City.

Aurelian, vexed heartily that his Enemy had made her escape, dispatched his
Light Horse to overtake her, who seized on her as she was just embark't,
endeavoring to reach the farther side of the Euphrates, and brought her back
to the Roman Camp with mighty Joy and Triumph.

In the mean time, the Garrison was divided in their Sentiments, one Party of
them resolving to maintain the Town to the last Man, and to the last drop of
their Blood; while others were determined to supplicate the Emperor's Pardon,
and to surrender. And this last Opinion prevailed; whereupon, Aurelian having
given his Promise, that they should be indemnify'd for whatever was past, they
opened their Gates, and begged the Conqueror's Mercy, who received them with
all Kindness, and took care they should not suffer any damage.

CHAP. XXV.
THus was that proud City, emulous of the Glory of Old Rome, reduced under the
Power of Aurelian, who having possessed himself of all the Treasure and rich
Movables of it, returned to Emesa, and there sat in Judgment on Zenobia and
her Accomplices. For the Army were ready to mutiny, and petitioned, that she
that had been the cause of all their Hardships, should be Executed. But
Aurelian, who had a grand Esteem for her Courage, and other Heroical
Qualifications, and who could not have forgotten the Merits of her Husband
Odenathus, and his great Services, who supported the sinking Empire in the
East, and preserved it from utter Ruin, thought it beneath the Courage of a
brave Man to murder a Woman, one of so rare Endowments, and who had for some
years worn the Sacred Purple, in cold blood; and being convinced, that it would
more contribute to his Glory, to carry her in Triumph to Rome, than to put her
to Death in the East, he preserved her from the Rage of the incensed Soldiers;
and to satisfy the Mutinous, sharply expostulated with her the Reasons of her
Obstinacy, and caused all those to be slain who had engaged her to take up Arms
against Aurelian. This occasioned the Execution of many eminent Persons, among
whom the most learned Longinus met his Fate with great Resolution; and to the
last, he bore his Sufferings with a Philosophical Courage, and was so far from
being affrighted with the Shadows of the Grave, that he comforted his Friends
who bemoaned his Destiny, and convinced them, that if this lower World be but
one large Prison, he is the happiest Man who is soonest discharged and set at
liberty.

CHAP. XXVI.
THe Affairs of the East having thus been adjusted, Vopisc. p. 219.
and the Country left without Disturbance, Zosim. l. 1, p. 55:
Aurelian determined to return into Europe; but before he could reach Rome,
while he was passing through Rhodopa, a Province of Thrace, the Inhabitants of
Palmyra, who could not content themselves with their meaner Circumstances (the
loss of their Empire being a continual Affliction) resolved to betake
themselves to their Arms, to recover their ancient Grandeur. In pursuit of this
Design, they fell upon Sandario, and the Six hundred Archers whom the Emperor
had left there in Garrison, and putting them to the Sword, chose Achilleus (the
Father of their Captive Queen Zenobia) their Prince. But as soon as the Emperor
heard of the Revolt, being a General of unwearied Diligence and Dispatch, he
immediately marched back into Asia, and utterly destroyed that unhappy City.

This part of the Story Zosimus tells somewhat differently; That the Men of
Palmyra, instigated by Apsaeus, who had in former times been a busy Agitator
among them, attempted to persuade Marcellieus ( T. Nonnius Marcellinus, I
suppose, who afterward was Consul in Year of the Emperor Tacitus, Anno Christi
275,) whom Aurelian had constituted his Governor of Mesopotamia, and the
Praefectus Praetorio of the East, to take upon him the Empire. He put them off
from day to day; and under the pretext of considering so weighty an Affair,
before he determined his Resolutions, gained time till he had certify'd
Aurelian of the Revolt; but at last he positively refused to take the Purple.
Whereupon they chose Antiochus their King, and armed themselves in his defense.

Upon the News that Marcellinus sent, the Emperor doubled his March, and in a
short time came to Antioch; the Inhabitants, who were busied about their
Sports, in seeing the Horse-races, being surpised at his coming; from whence
he immediately speeded to Palmyra, which without fighting he took, and razed,
giving Antiochus his Life and Liberty, accounting him beneath his Anger.

In the Sack of the City, the Soldiers were surfeited with Blood and Rapine (as
Aurelian, in his Letters to Cejonius Bassus, relates) sparing neither Age, Sex
nor Quality, involving Women and Children, Old and Young, the Nobility and the
Boors in the same common Ruin, till there was hardly left a Man to inhabit the
City, or to manure the Ground.

Such a Revenge satiated even the fierce Temper of Aurelian, inasmuch as he he
wrote to Cejonius Bassus (or rather Cerronius, according to the old Copies,
probably the same Cerronius, the General of the Dalmatian Troops, who slew
Gallienus, whom, I conjecture, Aurelian left the Governor of Palmyrene) to put
a period to the Carnage, and to spare the poor remains of that unfortunate
City, enjoining him expressly to build the Temple of the Sun (which had been
sacked and rifled by the Soldiers of the Third Legion) as magnificently as it
had been in times past (and by the Ruins of it extant at this Vid. Append.
day, it appears to have been a stupendous Building) to the repairing this
noble Structure he enjoined him to expend 300 Pound weight of Gold, which he
found in the Coffers of Zenobia, besides 1800 Pound weight of Silver, which was
raised from the sale of the Peoples Goods, together with the Crown Jewels, all
which he ordered to be sold, to make Money to beautify the Temple, while
himself promises to write to the Senate to send a Priest from Rome to Dedicate
it.

After this, Aurelian returned into Europe without any disturbance, carrying
the unhappy Zenobia his Prisoner with him to Rome, till she became one of the
Ornaments of his Triumph; whither I shall follow her, to complete her Story,
when I have briefly considered the Fortunes of her Associate Firmius.

CHAP. XVII.
WHen Aurelian had put to death all Zenobia's Counselors, Military Officers,
and Associates, and destroyed the City, Marcus Firmius (as the Coins style him,
while the Historians call him Firmus) one of the Confederates of the Captive
Princess, took upon him the Title of Emperor, Vopis. p. 242.
and endeavored to revenge her Quarrel: He was born at Seleucia, and bred up
to all manner of robust Exercises, Nature having fitted him with a Gigantick
Body qualified for such Undertakings; his Stature was tall to a Prodigy; and
his Limbs so firm, that supporting himself only with his Hands, he could endure
the Smiths, when they had laid an Anvil on his bare Breast, to smite on it with
their Sledges: And proportionable to his Strength was his Stomach, for he used
to eat an Ostrich at a Meal; and could swallow at a sitting, though his usual
Drink was Water, as much Wine as two Buckets would hold: He had also amast vast
Wealth, having often sent his Ships to trade in the East Indies, which returned
laden with all sort of rich Goods, and among other Rarities, two Elephants
Teeth of ten Foot long: And of the Products of Egypt, he had in his Warehouse
as much Paper and Glue as would maintain an Army. Vid. Salmas. in loc.
And, that he might keep a Port suitable to his Station, to his Riches, and his
Dignity, he built him a noble and pompous Palace at Alexandria.

Firmius having thus filled his Coffers, and provided all things necessary to
maintain the Interest he resolved to engage in, declared himself a Friend and
Confederate to Zenobia, (nor is it altogether improbable that Zenobia
constituted him, being a Man of extraordinary Strength and Courage, and Master
of a great Estate, her Governor over Egypt, when Zabdas had conquered it,) and
when that Illustrious Queen fell into her Misfortunes, he entered into a League
with the Blemmyoe and Saracens, and then declared himself Emperor (as the Coins
expressly prove, though Aurelian, according to the Custom of that Age, which
styled all Tyrants and Usurpers Thieves, will not allow him a better Title than
that of the Egyptian Robber, and though Vopiscus says that he declared Egypt a
Free State, refusing to assume the Ensigns of Royalty) and having recollected
the scattered Forces of Zenobia's Army, undertook to support the improsperous
Cause, and to defend Alexandria.

But no Power could resist the Genius of Aurelian; for after the return of that
great Man from Carrae, Firmius fell a Victor to the Conqueror, and some say,
became his own Executioner. But Aurelian himself affirms, that after he had
routed his Army, he besieged him in Alexandria, and having taken the City by
Storm, he severely chastised the Citizens for their Sedition, but Crucified
their Ephemerous Emperor (for he did not reign a full Year) which was the usual
Punishment to which Thieves were Condemned.

From Egypt the fierce and indefatigable Emperor marched his Troops toward the
West, vexed and angry that Tetricus still maintained his Pretensions to the
Purple in France; but upon his approach, Tetricus, who could no longer endure
nor digest the Insolence of his Legions, gave up his Army to Aurelian, who
having thus quietted the Affairs of both the East and West, returned to Rome
with his Captives, which City he resolved to enter in State, as the Lord of the
Universe.

CHAP. XXVIII.
THe Affairs of Zenobia, after she fell into the Hands of Aurelian, are
differently related. L. 1. p. 55.
Zosimus avers, that the Victorious Emperor carried her, her Son, and all her
Accomplices with him toward Rome, and that it was reported, that she either
died of some Disease, or that refusing all manner of Sustenance, she starved
her self; and that the rest of the Captives, except her Son, were Shipwrack't,
and drowned in the Streights, between Chalcedon and Byzantium. Pay. 2. p. 397.
Malela says, that Aurelian caused her to ride on a Dromedary, and carried her
with him through all the East, till he came to Antioch, where for three Days he
exposed her to the sight of the People, laden with Fetters, who had often seen
her in the height of her Glory; after which, he transported her to Rome, where,
after she had acted her part among the Princes of the conquered Provinces, he
caused her to be Beheaded. But Tom. 2. p. 240.
Zonaras talks doubtfully, his Authors from whom he derived his Notices
differing in their Accounts; some affirming, that the Victor used her with the
greatest Clemency, and married her at Rome to a Man of Quality, ( Syncellus
says he was a Senator,) others, that she died by the way, oppressed with grief
for the loss of her Empire, and that Aurelian himself married one of her
Daughters, and disposed of the others for Wives to the most Illustrious of the
Romans.

But in the Memoirs of the Western Affairs, we are rather to be guided by the
Writers of that Country, who may be presumed to have been better acquainted
with what was done in their own Country, than those who lived at a great
distance in the East. And they all agree, Hier. Chron. Eutrop. Treb. Pol. etc.
that Zenobia survived all her Misfortunes, that Aurelian gave her her Life for
her own sake, and for the Merits of Odenathus, and that she lived very happily
in Italy, after she, having been divested of the Empire of the East, had made
her Figure in the Triumph of Aurelian; and I shall account for the Pomp of it,
which the Historian says was Specious and Magnificent, because that was the
last of the Imperial Triumphs, which was made according to the ancient manner.
Though it must be confessed, that Onuphrius Panvinius says, that the last Triumph
was that of Belisarius, who, by the Order of the Emperor Justinian, was allowed
to make his Entry into the City of Constantinople in a Triumphant Chariot,
drawn by four Horses a breast, after he had recovered Africa out of the hands
of the Vandals, and made Gelimer their King his Prisoner; and that his
Scholiast Joachim Maderus affirms, that Heraclius, Johannes Commenus, and
Manuel his Son, had their several Triumphs: But these have no relation to Rome,
but to Constantinople. And of the Triumph of Belisarius, Procopius says
expressly, Vandal. l. 2. c. 9. p. 255. (...), etc.
that it was not according to the ancient method, but that he began his
Procession at his own House, from whence he marched on foot to the Hippodrome,
and from thence to the Imperial Throne; and withal he avers, that for near Six
hundred Years before Belisarius, the Honor of the Triumph was not given to any
other, since the days of Titus and Trajan, and those other great Emperors who
had conquered the Barbarians; among whom, I suppose, he includes Aurelian.

CHAP. XXIX.
THe Triumphal Pomp was always very August: Vopisc. p. 220. and Onufr. de
Triumph. p. 140.
The whole Senate marched in their several Ranks toward the Capitol, being
followed by the Trumpets of War, who sounding a Charge, introduced the
Representations of the several Countries that had been subdued, and the Cities
that had been taken, done in exquisite Imagery and Picture: After these
followed the Riches of the Conquered Provinces, vast quantities of Gold and
Silver, and noble Gems, Crowns and Royal Robes, and the other Ornaments of
Royalty and Grandeur, intermixed with the Arms that were peculiar to the
Regions that had been reduced under the Roman Power: These were succeeded,
among others, by a long Train of Sacrifices, and Priests attending that
Service, all clad in rich Garments of Silk and Purple, interwove with Gold:
Then came the Chariots of the unfortunate Princes, with a long train of their
faithful Subjects, who, to show their Fidelity, were content to follow the
adverse Fortune of their Sovereigns.

When Aurelian made his Entry into that superb City, there were three Royal
Chariots very remarkable: The first belonged to the Hero Odenathus, (while
alive) richly adorned with Gold, and Silver, and Precious-Stones, which gave it
a peculiar Luster. The second, no less glorious than the first, was a Present
made by the King of Persia to the Great Aurelian, (who also presented him with
a Purple Robe, of so beautiful a Dye, dipped in the Indies, that nothing of the
Imperial Wardrobe, or the Cabinets of the Roman Ladies, was comparable to it.)
The third, was the Chariot which Zenobia had caused to be made for her self, in
hopes to have entered Rome in Triumph, after she had reduced that proud City.
It Is true, she made her entry into Rome in the same Chariot; but she rode in it
a Captive, not a Queen.

These Chariots were followed by a fourth, which (as it was reported) did once
belong to the King of the Goths, drawn by four Stags abreast, in which
Aurelian (clad in the famous Purple abovementioned, which he afterward
dedicated to Jupiter Capitolinus, and which after Ages looked on with
Admiration) was drawn to the Capitol, where he sacrificed the Stags, according
to a Vow made to Jupiter, when he took the Chariot. In the head of these
Chariots marched twenty Elephants; of Lybian Lions, Vid. Salmas. in Vopisc.
page 371.
Leopards and Panthers, as also of those of Palestine, two hundred; which,
after the Triumph was ended, Aurelian bestowed on his private Friends, that he
might lessen the Public Expense. These were sollowed by four Tygars, by
several Camelopardali, Elks, and other strange Beasts, each in their orders.

Part of this Pomp consisted of eight hundred pair of Gladiators destined to
the Entertainment of the People, and of an infinite number of Captives; for,
besides the Barbarous Nations of the Blemmyes, the Inhabitants of Axumis, and
of Arabia the Happy; the Indians, Bactrians, Iberians, Saracens and Persians;
and after them, the Goths, the Alans, the Roxolans, the Sarmatians, Franks,
Suevians, Vandals and Germans, with their Hands bound behind their Backs,
preceded the Imperial Chariot. Among these, the principal Men of Palmyra, as
many as had outlived the Calamity of their Country, and the Rebels of Egypt,
had their station. But the most remarkable of the Captives were ten Masculine
Women, who, habited in Men's Clothes, had done extraordinary Service to the
Gothic General; these few being all that survived of the Amazonian Race, who
sought against the Romans; and in the Head of every Nation, was carried the
Name of the Country to which they belonged.

Amid'st this numerous train of Priscners, Tetricus made a peculiar Figure; he
was habited A-la-mode de France, where he had been Emperor, in a Scarlet Cloak,
under which he wore a light Gold-coloured Coat, and a pair of French Breeches;
with him was his Son, whom Tetricus had declared Emperor in France. After him
followed Zenobia, decked to the greatest advantage, but laden with her Golden
Chains, whose weight was supported by her Attendants. The Crown of every
conquered City, distinguished by an eminent Inscription, was carried before
every Nation. After them followed the People of Rome, the Banners of the
several Colleges, and the Ensigns of every Regiment, with the Cuirassiers,
followed by the rest of the Army. And after these the Senators marched (but not
so brisk and merry as otherwise they would have been on such a Solemnity,
because Tetricus, who was a Member of that August Body, was led a Captive in
the Triumph.) It was late e're the Cavalcade reached the Capitol, but Night
before the Emperor returned to the Palace.

On the following Days the common People were solaced with the sight of
Stage Plays, Horse-races, Huntings, the Duels of the Gladiators, and mock
Seafights. And among other the Pleasantries of that merry time, it is not to be
forgotten, that Aurelian, before he made his Expedition into the East, promised
the Romans, that if he returned a Conqueror, he would give a Crown of two Pound
weight to every Citizen, which they expected would be of no worse Metal than
Gold: But the Emperor being neither able nor willing, presented each of them
with a fine Wheaten Loaf in shape of a Crown, and of the same weight, and one
of these he bestowed on every Commoner, every year, as long as he lived.

CHAP. XXX.
WHen this Ceremony was over, Aurelian gave both Tetricus and Zenobia their
Lives, constituting Tetricus The Correctors of any part of a Roman Province
were reckoned in Honor equal to the Men of Consular Dignity. Guther de Offic.
Dom. Aug. l. 1. c. 7. p. 25, 26. and p. 237.
There were two Correctors of Italy (as the Notitia says) the one of Apulia and
Calabria, the other of Lucania, and the Brutii; the Correctors being reckoned
among the Friends of the Emperor, among the Viri Clarissimi, and Spectabiles,
and set to stand on a level with the Presidents of Provinces.
Corrector of Lucania, ( Trebellius Pollio says, of all Italy,) and settling
Zenobia at Rome, where she lived in much Plenty and Honor to a great Age,
maintaining the Port of a Roman Matron, by the Estate which the Emperor possessed
her of in Tivoli, not far from the Emperor Adrian's Palace, and the Place which
is called Conchae (or Concae;) and so well she behaved her self in her new
Habitation, that the Place of her Residence was called Zenobia, from the
illustrious Inhabitant.

The precise Situation of this Zenobia (the Villa of this excellent Princess)
is to this day under dispute: Cons. del Re de l'Antichita Tiburtine, par. 2. c.
5.
Fulvio Cardoli says, that the Ruins of the Villa Zenobia are to be seen in
that Place that is called Colle di Santo Stephano, which is situate near the
Palace of Adrian. But Del Re avers, that Conchae is near the Lake Della
Solforata, called the Baths; that the Plain is to this day called the Plain of
Conche; and, that the noble Marbles to be seen there, are a demonstration that
he was not mistaken in the Situation. The Baths being built (says the learned
Andrea Bacci) by Agrippa, for the use of such as would frequent them; that
three hundred years after their first Foundation, the Place was deputed for the
Habitation of Zenobia; and, that the Cardinal Hyppolito of Ferrara found there
a Jewel of Gold, an Antique Vessel of Silver, and other Ornaments belonging to
the Ladies of those early times, with an Inscription, that in that Place one of
the Daughters of Zenobia was buried. From all which, viz. from the Name Conche,
still remaining, from the Antique Fabrics standing thereabouts, and from what
was found there, it may be gathered, that the Villa Zenobia could not be far
off.

Some Authors affirm, that Zenobia's Sons, Herennianus and Timolaus, were slain
by Aurelian's Order, (Greatness is seldom unaccompanied with Jealousy; and a
Rival Prince never thinks his Title secure, till his Competitor is in his
Grave;) but others say, that they tasted of the Emperor's Clemency, and died at
Rome natural Deaths, the very year in which they were brought thither, Ann.
Chr. 273, Page 385.
(says Mezzobarba;) while Vaballathus having been led in Triumph with his
Mother Zenobia, spent the remainder of his life in a private station. But
whence that learned Man had these Notices, I profess I know not. This we are
sure of, that in the Reign of Constantine the Great, her Posterity were
reckoned among the Nobility of Rome, so says Trebellius Pollio expressly: In the
Reign of Valens the same Family continued in great Reputation, says Eutropius:
And St. Jerome witnesses the same thing for the times of Honorius. And Cardinal
Baronius imagines, that Zenobius the Bishop of Florence, St. Ambrose's
Contemporary, was one of the Descendants of this famous Empress; but I suppose
he built his Conjecture on no other Foundation, but the Likeness of the Names.

Such was the Fate of this illustrious Lady; such the Destiny of Palmyra, the
Metropolis of her Empire, under Aurelian; L. 5. p. 53.
a Catastrophe, if we may credit the Heathen Historian Zosimus (who was a great
Bigot for Paganism) foretold by Oracles, Vid. Append.
and confirmed by more than one sad Omen, which determined the period of that
short-lived Empire.

CHAP. XXXI.
AVrelian having thus subdued all his Adversaries, Aurel. Vit. etc.
and established his own and the Empires Quiet, lived after this in an
extraordinary Pomp and Splendour: He was the first of the Roman Emperors who
habited himself in Cloth of Gold, the first who wore Gems on his Clothes, and
in his Shoes, and put on a Diadem, (the Coin in Oeselius describing him
encircled with a Diadem different from, and more rich than those of his
Predecessors:) He valued himself, as the Recoverer of the Empire both in the
East and West, as the Restorer of the World to its desired Peace and
Tranquillity, and as one who was born a God, Deus and Dominus Natus, on the
reverse of one of his Coins in Mezzobarba, p. 407.
and the Lord of the Universe. He was undoubtedly an eminent Prince, though
born of mean Parents, comparable to the Alexanders, and the Julius Caesar's of
former Ages, if he had not sullied the Luster of his Virtues by his Excessive
Cruelties, of which the Carnage at the Sack of Palmyra is a severe Instance.
And so valuable did he account that Victory, that, to preserve the Memory of it
(according to the Practice of the Roraan Emperors) he added to his Imperial
Titles, among many others, that of the Palmyrenian, as appears by an old
Inscription consecrated to his Honor in the Fifth Year of his Reign, in
Thesaur. p. 274.
Goltzius, ( i. e. the last, says Petavius and Tristan, though the old Ibid.
Coins (and their Authority is to me unquestionable) expressly mention the Sixth
Year of his Reign; and with them agrees the Page 637.
Chronicon, commonly called the Alexandrian,) which is worth the preserving,
because in very few Inscriptions the mention of Palmyra occurs:

MAGNO AUGUSTO PRINCIPI MAX. IMP. FORTISSIMO, CONSERVATORI ORBIS, L. DOMITIO
AURELIANO P. F. PONT. MAX. TRIB. POT. V. P. P. COS. III. PROCOS. GOTH. MAX.
PALMYR. MAX. GER. MAX.

ORDO BRIXIANORUM.

Or, To the Great Augustus.
To the Great and August, the most Illustrious of Princes, the Bravest of
Emperors, the Preserver of the World, Lucius Domitius Aurelianus, Pious and
Happy, the Chief Priest, in the Fifth Year of his Tribunitian Power, the Father
of his Country, Consul the Third time, Proconsul, the most Glorious Conqueror
of the Goths, the Palmyrenians and Germans,

The Brescians dedicate this Inscription.

His Cruelty was the cause of his Death; for his Secretary Eros (or Mnestheus,
as Vopiscus calls him) having been threatened by Aurelian, and fearing his
fierce Temper, thought it advisable to prevent his own Death, by imbruing his
Hands in the Blood of his Master, whom, by the help of his Accomplices in the
Treason, and by the Hand of Mucapores, he slew, as he was taking the Air,
attended with but a thin Guard, while the Camp lay at the New Castle
(Coenophrium) a Mansion between Heraclea and Byzantium, in the Road, toward
Persia, against which Aurelian was marching his Army, Cuspin. Caes. p. 79.
to revenge himself upon that Nation, for assisting Zenobia in the former War
against the Romans.

Thus Aurelian made his Exit, in the Chron. Alex. p. 637.
Seventy fifth Year of his Age; and after his Death, was honored, as the more
deserving Princes usually were, with a Deification, as both the Historians and
the Coins declare.

CHAP. XXXII.
BUt though Palmyra was thus ruined by the Commands of Aurelian, I cannot think
it was wholly razed, it not being consonant to the Wisdom of that August
Government to slight so strong a Garrison upon the Borders; for this would have
been the same, as to invite the Persians to a new Invasion; but that the
Emperor, who gave a particular Order to re-build, beautify and endow the noble
Temple of the Sun, that had been plundered and destroyed by the insolent
Soldiers, did also take care, that the City should be put in a posture of
defense, so as it might obstruct the Irruptions of the Enemy, and that to that
end he constituted Cerronius Bassus the Governor of that Province; though I
doubt not, but it lost the Privileges of a Roman Colony, of a Metropolis, and
in all probability of a Free City, and was only left in the condition of a
Garrison, or Praesidium. For as it was usual to advance a Praesidium, or Fort,
to the Honor of a City, as Bosra in Arabia was promoted by the Emperor
Severus; so, on the contrary, a City often lost its Franchises, when it turned
Rebel to the Emperor. In this condition I suppose it to have been, when
Dioclesian and Maximinian wore the Imperial Purple, Hierocles at that time
being the Prefect of the Province, as appears by the only Latin Inscription
that has been as yet found at Palmyra; the Pillar being erected to the Honor
of the abovenamed Emperors, Vid. Append.
and of Constantius and Galerius Maximianus the Caesar's, who had most happily
founded Castra.

Now, that we may know when Castra was founded, it will be necessary to
consider the State of the Empire at that time. Dioclesian having been opposed
by many Competitors, was particularly rivaled by Achilleus in Egypt; Eutrop.
brev. Idat. Chron.
against him therefore he marched in Person, besieged him in Alexandria, and at
last slew him. After this, he went into Mesopotamia, and there making a halt,
sent Galerius, Ann. Chr. 296, against Narses King of Persia. Galerius rashly
engaging the Persians, between Callinicus and Carrae, with a very small Force,
was routed, and beaten back to the Camp of Dioclesian; who, when he met him,
treated him with so much scorn, that he made him run in his Purple Robe some
Miles by his Chariot-side, like a Footman, before he vouchsafed to speak to
him. But in a little time after this, Ann. Chr. 297, upon Galerius his
important Solicitations, he furnished him with Recruits from Illyricum and
Maesia, and commanded him to retrieve the Honor he had lost in the first
Engagement, and accordingly he behaved himself with so much Bravery in the
second Battle (in which with 25000 Men he broke into the Enemies Camp) that he
routed the Persians, beat them out of Armenia Major, where they had posted
themselves, took the Tents and Baggage of Narses, and a great Booty, made his
Wives, his Sisters, and Children, (his Daughters, says Rufus Festus,) with a
great part of the Persian Nobility, Prisoners, drove the King to fly for
shelter to the remotest Solitudes of his Dominions, and acquitted the Romans
from the ignominy of the Captivity of Valerian.

Narses being reduced to so great extremity by this last Blow, P. Patric.
excerpt. p. 26.
that had almost determined the period of his Empire, chose Appharban, one of
the most trusty and most beloved of his Courtiers (his Praefectus Praetorio, as
the Historian, using the Style of his own Country, calls him) his Chief
Minister, a Man of Address, and happy Application, to be his Ambassador to
Galerius; who having obtained leave to deliver his Message, thus accosted this
victorious Prince; That all Mankind knew, that the two Empires of Rome and
Persia, were two great Luminaries, which, like the two Eyes in the Body, were
to receive Luster, Beauty and Help one from the other; that it was unnatural,
when they endeavored to extinguish each other; that to destroy, and bring to
desolation, could not be reckoned among the illustrious Achievements, but must
be accounted an effect of Madness and Folly; that only meaner Spirits delighted
in the Ruin of their Enemies; that Narseus was not to be reckoned a weak
Prince, because he was unfortunate, but that Galerius being the greatest of
Monarchs, the Conquest of Narseus, who was in no one noble Qualification
inferior to any of his Predecessors, was referv'd by the Destinies for him. And
that he further had it in his Commission to assure him, That though his Master
had a just Title to his Dominions, yet he threw himself upon the Mercy and
Clemency of the Romans; that he would not offer any Terms to Galerius, but
would be content with whatever Articles he would please to allow him, desiring
him to return him his Wives and his Children; that this Humanity would entitle
him to a nobler Conquest, than his victorious Arms; and, that his generous
Usage of his Family already had been such, that he professed his inability to
pay him his Acknowledgments as he deserved. -- (For the Kings Wives and
Children had been treated with all sort of handsome Usage; and the Nobility who
had been made Prisoners of War, except their restraint, found no difference
between their Captivity and Freedom, between the Enemies Camp and their own
Palaces; that not only no Insults were made on their Persons, no Injuries
offered them, but their Entertainment was liberal, and suited to their
Quality.) To this the Persian Ambassador subjoined, That the State of Mankind
was very mutable, and subject to great Alterations,

Upon this Galerius seemed to be in a heat, and answered, That it was not well
done of the Persians, to desire their Adversaries to consider the Instabilty of
Humane Affairs; because, whenever they were blessed with Success, themselves
were the most insolent of Conquerors, and added new Afflictions, by their
opprobrious Usage to those who who were before most heavily oppressed: putting
them in mind of their inhumane Carriage toward the unfortunate Emperor
Valerian, to whom they showed neither Justice nor Moderation; for after you had
circumvented him, and made him your Prisoner, you kept him in Chains, till he
had languisht out many years in durance, and without any regard to his extreme
Age, or his Sacred Character, you used him with scorn, and at last put him to a
cruel and dishonorable Death: And whereas the Rage of the most violent and
wicked Men uses to be appeased, when their Adversaries are dead, your Malice
outlived the Object of it; and though his Body was mortal, you resolved to
treat it with a Tyranny that endeavored to make it self immortal; for having
flayed that great Prince alive, you salted and preserved his Skin, as a lasting
Memorial of your Treachery, and insatiable Cruelty: This last thing, he assured
the Ambassador he mentioned, not that he resolved to follow so ignominious a
President, but to convince the Persians that they could not have any
Pretensions to that Humane Usage which they petitioned for; and that he was
satisfied, that their Argument from the Inconstancy of Humane Affairs, never
made any impression on their Minds in the days of their Prosperity; while he
was resolved to tread in the steps and to imitate the nobler Practices of his
Predecessors, who were accustomed to suppress the Stubborn and Obstinate, but
to comfort and support the Penitent. -- And having thus spoken, he commanded
the Ambassador to return to his Master, and to represent to him the Clemency of
the Romans, of whose Courage he had lately met with an unquestionable
Demonstration, bidding him to expect in a short time the return of the
Prisoners, according to his Desires.

Having dismissed the Persian Ambassador, the Triumphant Galerius returned into
Mesopotamia to Dioclesian, covered with Laurels, and the Trophies of an entire
Victory, and was received with the testimonies of the greatest Honor, as he
justly deserved. At Nisibis, Galerius met the Emperor, without whose Consent
himself, being only Caesar at that time, could not confirm a Peace, and having
made Dioclesian acquainted with the Particulars, consulted with him what
Articles they should propose to the Persian Monarch. P. Patric. Excerp. p. 29.
30.
When they had adjusted the Affair, they sent Sicorius Probus, the Emperor's
Secretary, into Persia, with the Terms of Agreement. The King treated the
Ambassador with all Civility; but, pretending some hinderance or other, carried
him with him from place to place, till he came to Asprudis, a River of Media,
where the scattered remains of his routed Army, having rallyed, and embodied
themselves, pitched their Tents; there he granted the Ambassador all the Demands
of his Master the Emperor, except that the Place of Meeting should be Nisibis:
Upon which the Persian Monarch's Wife and Children were restored him, and the
Captive Nobility had their Liberty.

At this time Castra was founded by Dioclesian, says Lib. 23. cap. 5.
Ammianus Marcellinus, (and Par. 2. p. 17.
Johannes Malela,) which he calls Cercusium; Malela, Circisium; but the
Subscriptions of the Chalcedon Council, Castro-Circon, by a complication of
both Names. For the Irruptions of the Persians into the Roman Territories on
the side of the Euphrates were so destructive to those Provinces, that the
Procop. Persic. l. 2. c. 5. p. 97. and de Aedific. l. 2. c. 3. p. 42.
Emperors saw it very necessary to build several Cities and Castles upon the
Banks of that River, to secure their Borders, particularly in that large and
barren Desert that lies between Euphratesia and the Persian Limits; in that
Solitude Dioclesian erected three Castles built of unbak'd Bricks, of which
number Mambri was one, which was situate five miles below Zenobia; but
Circesium stood three days Journey lower than Zenobia, and as far from Palmyra,
being the last and remotest Castle that the Romans had on their Confines, a
little below Thapsacus; it was built very neat, and very strong, on the
confluence of the Euphrates, and the Abora (or Chaborras, as it is called in
Ptolemy) two noble Rivers, which wash the Walls of the City, being situated on
the farther side of the Euphrates, in that very Angle which the two Rivers make
when they meet: Besides the Ramparts of the Castle, it was defended by a long
Wall, which extended it self for some miles on the sides of both the Rivers,
and was built in the figure of a Triangle. In times past it was a mean place,
and not tenable; but Dioclesian fenced it with high Walls and Towers, when in
the Confines of the Barbarians he fixed the Limits of the Roman Empire, lest
the Persians should by that Pass invade Syria, as they had in times past often
done, to the great detriment of the Provinces, paricularly under Ammian. ubi
supr.
Gallienus, when they marched their Army over this Ford, and sacked and burnt
Antioch. In Malel. par. 2. p. 17.
the Reign of Julian the Apostate it was garrisoned with 6000 Men: and in the
13th. Year of Precop. ubi supr.
Justinian, when Chosroes brought his Forces thither, with a design that way to
invade the Empire, he durst not attempt it. After which time, how long it
continued in the hands of the Emperors of the East, I know not. By all which it
appears, that Castra was founded Anno Christi 27 8/9. and that at that time
Hierocles was Governor of Palmyra.

CHAP. XXXIII.
IN the Reign of Honorius, Palmyra continued a Roman Garrison, the Town being
then under the Inspection of the Dux Phoeniciae, as the Notitiae, collected
probably in that Emperor's Reign, affirm; commanded by a Colonel, or Prefect
of the first Illyrian Legion, which was left there in Garrison. And in this
state it was when Stephen the Grammarian of Constantinople published his Work
concerning the Cities; for he calls it expressly a Castle of Syria ((...),) as
Hermolaus his Epitomator, who dedicated his Breviate to the Emperor Justinian
informs us. But though the Civil Privileges of the City were infringed, it
retained the Honor of an Episcopal See; this fell not under the cognizance of
the Pagan Emperors, and for that reason was not fortified; the Church being
careful to preserve her Rights, when the City honored with the Episcopal
Jurisdiction, had lost here is.

Justinian having determined, in the First Year of his Reign, Ann. Chr. 52. to
make War upon the Persians, resolved to re-build Palmyra, says Procopius, who
thus describes it: Procop. de Aedific. l. 2. c. 11. p. 50. and l. 5. c. 1. p.
95.
That there was a City of Phoenicia, near Mount Libanus, called Palmyra, built
of old in a Country that had no Neighbors but such as were at a great
distance, but most commodiously situated to observe the movements of the
Saracens, the Enemies of the Romans, having been built on purpose to prevent
the Irruptions of those Barbarians into the Roman Territories. This City having
been for a long time deserted, Justinian strengthened with extraordinary
Fortifications, bringing Water to the Place for the support of a strong
Garrison which he fixed there. (And to Justinian I am inclined to attribute the
building the Castle of Palmyra, Vid. Journal p. 84, 85, 103.
rather than to a Prince of the Druses, who never, that we read of, enlarged
their Territories as far as Tadmur; as also, that noble Aqueduct seems to be of
his Foundation, which runs underground in a direct passage five miles, and is
covered all the way with an Arch of bastard-Marble, and a Path on both sides
the Chanel, large enough for two Persons to walk a breast in, with Ventiducts
at every twenty yards distance, being built for the supply of the Garrison with
Water.) This was done (says Chronogr. p. 148.
Theophanes) in the First Year of Justinian, after the Death of his Uncle
Justin, the Emperor having given Commission to Patricius the Armenian, the
Governor of the East, to see the Work done effectually, having furnished him
with Money to that purpose, commanding also the Governor of the East to make
that Place the Seat of his constant Residence, and to preserve the Churches
from the Sacrilegious Saracens.

Eight Years after this, Procop. Bell. Pers. l. 2. c. 1. p. 88.
when Belisarius had reduced Italy under the Obedience of the Emperor, Ann.
Chr. 535, Chosroes King of Persia concerted his Affairs with Alamundarus one of
the Arabian Princes, that he should invade Arethas another of the Saracen
Kings, but in the Roman Interest, upon the pretext, that Arethas detained from
him a little Region called Strata, that lies to the South of the City Palmyra,
but barren of all things being burnt with the fervent Sun, so that it produces
neither Trees nor Fruits, and is destined only to the feeding of a few Cattle.
Id. c. 5. p. 97.
Whereupon Chosroes made an Inroad into the Roman Territories, marched his Army
three days by the Banks of the River Euphrates, till he came to Zenobia, the
Foundation of the Queen of Palmyrene; but finding the Region uninhabited, and
destitute of all Necessaries, the City also refusing to surrender, when
required to do so, he retired to Sura, another City upon the Euphrates.

CHAP. XXXIV.
ABout a hundred Years after the repairing of Palmyra by Justinian, it pleased
God to permit Mahomet, an obscure Arab, to scourge the Eastern Churches for
their Heresies, and their loose Manners; and to lay the Foundations of an
Empire, which, with the Religion called Mohammedan, has prevailed over a great
part of the known World, and in a very few years after the first appearance of
that false Prophet, established its Jurisdiction in Tadmur, where it prevails
to this day.

In the Year of Christ, Elmacin. l. 1. c. 1.
623. the Second of the Hegira, Chosroes the Second, the King of Persia,
commanded all the Churches in Syria and Mesopotamia to be destroyed, carrying
away with him all the Gold and Silver, with all the Ornaments of those Holy
Places, even to the very Marble, into his own Country. It is probable, that
Tadmur was not exempt from this dreadful Persecution: But whatever its Fate was
under Chosroes, it is unquestionable, that a few years afterward it fell into
the Hands of the Mahometans, who, Anno Christi 638, Hegirae 16, having taken
the Capital City of the Persians, and routed Izdigerdes their last King, and
seized his Empire (the Constantinopolitan Princes not concerning themselves, as
they ought, to prevent these sudden and large Conquests) may be presumed to
have made Palmyra their own. After which time, I believe, the Fortifications
were permitted to run to decay, it being no longer a Frontier, since Persia was
in their hands on one side of it, and Arabia on the other: And then also, I
conjecture, it ceased to be a Mart, the Mahometans being in constant Hostility
with the Christians; so that the Caravans not being able to travel safely, the
Trade with the Persian Gulf was diverted and lost; of which beneficial
Commerce the City being deprived, and situate in a desert Country, soon fell
into Poverty and Ruin.

In the Year 659, the 39th. Elmac. l. 1. c. 5.
of the Mohammedan Computation, when Muavias the Son of Abusofianus, with his
Army of Syrians, marched against Alis the Fifth of Mahomet's Successors, he
sent Dahacus with 3000 Men to plunder Iraca, after which they fell into the
Province of Higiaza, and having murdered all the Arabs they met with, loaded
themselves with their Spoils. Whereupon Alis sent against him his General
Hagjar the Son of Adis, with 4000 Men, who folfowed them as far as Tadmur
within the District of Emesa (for so it was reckoned at that time) where they
had a sharp Engagement, in which Dahacus was routed. And by this it is very
plain, that Tadmur came very early into the hands of the Successors of Mahomet.

Anno Christi 746, Id. l. 1. c. 21.
of the Hegira 127, the People of Emesa, at that time the Metropolis of the
Country, rebelled against Merwan the Caliph, who came against the Town with a
strong Force, and besieged it: Whereupon the Inhabitants supplicated his
Pardon, promised Obedience, and opened their Gates. But when the Caliph had
entered the City in the Head of 300 Men, the Citizens betook themselves to their
Arms, and slew all the Soldiers, Merwan himself hardly escaping through the
Gate that leads to Tadmur, (the old Roman Road lay from Emesa to Apamea, and
thence to Palmyra, but the direct Road lay through the Desert, without touching
at Apamea;) and when Suleiman the Son of Hisjam, being created Caliph, in
opposition to Merwan, by the Men of Basra, was overthrown in Battle, he
retired, first to Emesa, which he fortified; but being a second time beaten, he
fled to Tadmur, leaving his Brother Saidus his Lieutenant in Emesa. From which
Passages it appears to me credible, that Tadmur was then a Place of little
Trade or Interest, but a Sanctuary for the Unfortunate, for Banditti, and
Free-booters, who fled thither, and found a secure retreat, being protected by
the advantageous Situation of the Town, which for several Days Journey was on
every side surrounded with wild and uninhabited Solitudes.

And if I might be allowed a bold Conjecture, how the River that ran by
Palmyra, in Ptolemy's time, and which Marius Niger says emptied it self into
the Euphrates, happened so to be lost, that now there remain no footsteps of
it; I would affirm, Elmacin, l. 2. c. 11.
that it was buried in that terrible Earthquake that happened in those
Countries, Anno Christi 859, of the Hegira 245, which ruined many a noble City,
threw down the Palace at Bagdat, did great damage to Carrae, Emesa, Damascus,
Edessa, Laodicea, and all along the Coast of Syria: for at this time, the
Arabic Historian avers, that a River vanished (nor is it unusual in such most
violent Concussions) being swallowed up of the Earth, that no Man ever could
discover what new Channel it had found under ground. At this time, it is highly
probable, Tadmur did not escape, when all the neighboring Cities were harrast,
and then the River might be absorpt. Nor does Justinian's bringing Water to
Tadmur, for the service of his Garrison, contradict this Opinion, because a
River may be for other uses, and yet not fit for Drink, many other of the
Springs in those Countries being brackish and sulphurous.

About the Year of Christ 1172, Itiner. p. 57, 58.
Benjamin Tudelensis the Jew, among other Parts of the East which he visited in
his Travels, touched at Tadmur, and he informs us (though he is mistaken in the
exact distances of Places) that from Baalbeck (or Baalath) built by Solomon in
the Valley of Libanus, to Tadmur in the Desert, was four Days Journey; that
Solomon built it of large Stones, and fenced it with a strong Wall; that it was
built in a Desert far from any Inhabitants; and that in his time there were in
the City 2000 stout Jews, who waged War with the Christians, and with the Arabs
the Subjects of Sultan Noraldin, but were ready to assist their Neighbors the
Ishmaelites. From which Passage it appears, that in Benjamin's time, the
Eastern Jews, a Race of known Wanderers, had nested in Tadmur, deserted
probably by the Arabs, and that they lived by Rapine and Inroads.

When the Caliphs of Babylon began to lose their Empire, I question not but
Tadmur became subject to the Mamalukes; and upon the fall of their Empire, to
the Grand Signior, under whose Jurisdiction they now live, though governed by a
Prince of their own, and by the Usage of our English Merchants, when Melham was
their Emir, it is put past all doubt that they have not forgotten, to this day,
the Custom of their Ancestors, of robbing all that fall into their hands; for
which Rapines, and their other ill management, their Emirs are frequently
deposed, and sometimes strangled by the Ottoman Port; so Melham, who robbed the
English Merchants, was in some time after surpised by the Bassa of Aleppo, and
put to death. Hassine, his Successor, was, Anno 1693, deposed, and one Dor
substituted the Emir of those Arabs.

Thus I have, according to the best of my Understanding, given the History of
Palmyra, from its first Foundation, to the present Age: And by this Account we
may learn, that Cities, as well as their Inhabitants, have their Infancy and
Youth, their Riper Years, and their ^^ecrepit Days; that nothing can resist the
Insults of Time, and the Barbarity of Ungovernable Conquerors; and that it is
impossible to erect a Monument to our Memory, that shall be lasting, but a
noble Series of Virtuous and Brave Actions, that they only rescue from
Oblivion, and give Immortality, when Marbles shall Moulder into Dust, and the
World it self shall be no more.

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX: OR, Critical Observations Upon the Names of Palmyra and Tadmur;
AND THE INHABITANTS, Their Offices and Religion.

Together with an Account of Vaballathus and Longinus: AND A Commentary on the
Inscriptions.

Inscriptiones Palmyrenae.
I. Sepulchralia.
I. 1. TO NEION TOY TAPPHEoNO EKTIEN EXIDIoN EPTIIO ODAINATHO O LAPPOTATO
YNKLT[IKO] AIPANOY OYAALLATHOY TOY NAoPOY AYToTE KAI YIOI AYTOY KAI YIoNOI EI
TO PAN-TELE AIoNION TEIN.

II. 2. APTHEIN ALEXANDPOY TOY KAPADTOY OYAALLATHOYTOY YoNOY OPAIO AIPANOY ANP
AYT N ENEKEN NEI DYTPo TOY Y ETOY.

III. 3. TO NEION EKTIAN EKALE ANNAIO OAEI AL OYAALLATHOY TOY ANNAIOY TOY
ELALOY AYTo KAI YIOI ETOY DIY NO SANDIKOY.

IV. 4. NEION AIoNION GEPA oKODOEN GIO OKIOY TOY KAILKIALIOY TOY A........ OY
EITE EAYTON KAI YIOY KAI EKGONOY ETOY DIT NEI XANDIKo.

II. Elogia Honoraria.
I. Publica ex decreto Senatus. 5. OYA KAI O DO ALILAENA PANOY OKIOY TOY
AIPANOY TOY ATHTHA KAI AIPANN TON PATEPA AYTOY EYEEIS KAI PILOPATPIDA K[AI]
PANTI TPOPo [EY]EIo APEANTA TPATPIDIKAI PATPIOI THEOI TEI APIN ETOY NY L NO
XANDIKOY.

II. 6. OIL KAI O DO APEIEIN APIAOY TOY IAPIoLEOY KAI OKION YION AYTOY EYEEI
KAI PILOPATPIDA TEI APIN....

III. 7. OIL KAI O DO IOYLION AYPLION NOION TON KAI ADILAN DIALOY TOY NAOYOY
TPATGANT'A EN EPIDIA THEOY ALEXANDPOY KAI YPPETANTA PAPOYIA DINEKEI POYTILLIOY
KPIPEINOY TOY GAENOY KAI EPIDAAI OYXILLATIOIN AGOPANOANTATE KAI OIKONIoNA
PEIDANTA PAToN KAI KALo POLEITEYAENON o DIA TAYTA APTYPTHENTA YPO THEOY
IAPIoLOY KAI YPO IOYLIOY....... TOY EXOoTATOY EPAPOY TOY IEPOY PPAIToPIOY KAI T
PATPIDO TON PILOPATPIN TEI APIN ETOY DNP.

IV. 8. OYL[ KAI O D] O EPTIION TON KPATITON E[PITPOPON ]EATOY DOYKN[APION]....
EODOTN T T[OKOLo] NEIAKAI ANAKOKOIA[NTA T]A YNODIAS EX IDIoN KAI APTYPTHENTA
YPO IoN APEPOPoNKAI LAPPo TPATGANTA KAI AAGOPAOANTA T AYT TPOKOLoNEIA KAI
PLEITA OIKOTHEN ANALoANTA KAIAPEANTA TTE AYT OIL KAI ToDo KAI NYNEI LAPPo
YPOIAPON ToN TOY DIO LOY IE[P]oN TEI ENEKEN ET............ XANDIKo.

II. Elogia Honoraria privata.
I. 9. IOYLION AYPLAION EEIDAN OKIOY TOY EEIDOY....... AToPOAIDAIOI IN A[Y]To
KATELTONTE E OLOGEIADA ENPOPOIAN ETAN APEANTA AYTOI TEI APIN XANDIKo TOY NP
ETOY....

II. 10. EPTIION OYOPoDN TON KPATITON EPITPOPON EATOY DOYKNAPION KAI In another
Copy, taken by Mr. Goodyear, AP.. APTN: in a third, APLPTN.
APOAPETN IOYLIO AYPLIO AN KAIANOI TOY.. LENAIOY: in a third, TOY TOYLE^OY.
EAL KAIANOY YOY [E]LENAIOY IPPEY POYAoN.
PoAIoN TON PION.
PILON KAI PPOTATN ETOY OP.. NEI XANDIKo.

III. 11. ETI[ION OYOPoDN] TON KPA[TITON EPITPO]PON EA[TOY DOYK]NAPION KA[I
APOAPE] TN IOYLIOT AY[PLI]O E[AL] PYILO [ELENAI]O ALoA NAOYO[Y] O KPATITO TON
[PILON]. KAI PPOTATN TEI ENEKEN ETOY.... [NEI X]ANDIKo.

IV. 12. EPTIION AIPANN ODAINLTY TON LAPPOTATON YNKLYIKON.

V. 13. EXA...... NToN AYPLI.... PLIODoP..... TPATIoT LE...... K ToN PATPoN TEI
KAI EYAPITIA APIN ETOY GXP.

VI. 14.... YPILION OYOPoDN [YNKL]TIKON KAI OYLEYTN PALYPNON LA KAOAPA TON
PI[LON] TEI APIN E TOY OP.

VII. 15. ALENTON KAI AGPIPPAN IAPAIOY TOY PAAIOY GPAATED GENOENON TO DEYTEPON
EPIDI[A] TEOY ADPIANOY ALIA PAPAOTA XENOI TE KAI POLEITA[I.]

EN... N YPPETANTA TT......... ^^TEYA TOY........ YPO... EKAI...... TON NAON
TON.... DIO.... NToT......

VIII. Arsoffae in Monasterio Maronitarum. 16. EPI EEPGE EPIEKo. TE EYNGEN^
APoNIE TE oPEPIEKo.

III. Anathemata. 17. DII YPSITo EGITo KAI EPKOo oLANO NOIOY TOY AIPANOY TOY
OKIOY TOY ATHTHA EPIELETO AIPETHEI EPKA PG YPO IAPIoLOY THEOY TON o[ON] EX
IDIoN ANETHKEN ETOY DOY NO YPEPEPETAIOY K.

IV. VOTA. Tievae. 18. DII EGITo KEPAYNIo YPEP oTPIA TPA. ADPIANOY E.... TOY
KYPIOY AGATANGELO AILNO T DEKAPOLEO TN KAAPAN oKODOEN KAI TN KLIN.... EX IDIoN
ANETKEN ETOY EY NO LoOY.

V. Imperatorum Memoriae. 19......... es Orbis and Propagatores Generis Humani,
D. D. N. N. Diocletianus......... ssimi Impp. and Constantius, and Maximianus
Nobb. Caes. Castra feliciter condiderunt.

....... ntes Ossiano Hieroclete V.P. Praes. Provinciae D. N. M. O. eorum.

Briadenae.
APIEPoTH AAI LINDIOY TOY AP ETOY

DIA ATEPNOY K[AI P]APPOY KAI AIKOY KNETN.

-- Y -- N

Andrenae.
I. IEYXAENO EGo IoANN EPETYA -- KAI EYAPIToN To THo PPO -- ENIKA YPEP ToN
AAPTIoN ON.

II. Ad Portam Australem. AYT PYL TD KYP.. DIKAIOI EIEELEYEONTAI EN AYG.

III. Ad Portam Occidentalem. THG G

IV. YPION PON IAL.

V. IAYTI... LIKA...

VI... PIO ToN D^YNAE... oNAN TILPI THEOE IAKo T.

VII. AYXIToN.

VIII. + EL EEKI.

IX. ELIE.

X. ps.

THE APPENDIX.
HAving finished my primary Task, I shall apply my self to some other
Considerations of a similar nature; which I was unwilling to interweave with
the thread of the History, that the Discourse might appear uniform, and all of
a piece: I have therefore reserved for this Appendix such Critical Observations
as I had made upon the Names of the Place, and of the Inhabitants, with the
Honorary Offices which the Men of Eminence bore in the City: To which I have
added an Account of their Idolatry; with a short separate History of
Vaballathus and Longinus, two Great Men of Palmyra; intending to conclude the
Dissertations with some Remarks upon the Inscriptions found among the Ruins of
this once Illustrious City.

CHAP. I. Of the Names Tadmur, and Palmyra.
THE preceding History having given an Account of the Foundation of Palmyra, I
shall in this Chapter account for the Names which were given it, in the Syriac
Language Tadmur, but in the Greek Palmyra, (says Josephus.)

And first of Tadmur, (...), in the Hebrew, 2 Chronicles. 8.34. (...), as the
Septuagint. Or as the Alexandrian Copy, much nearer to the Original, (...). The
F. Harduin therefore very ineptly, in his Notes on Pliny, calls it Theudemer;
and Josephus as inartificially, (...). It must be confessed, that St. Hierom, in
Ezekiel. 47. (and he is followed by Monsieur Spon, and others) affirms, that
Thamar in the Prophet, who is stating the Limits of Judaea to the South, is no
other than Tadmur; Hie vero terminus plagae australis; h. e. meridianae,
incipit a Thamar, quae urbs in solitudine est, quam and Solomon miris operibus
instruxit, and hodie Palmyra nuncupatur, Hebreoque sermon Thamar dicitur, quae
in lingua nostra Palma sonat: And I was once enclinable to have corrected the
Translation of the Septuagint from the Hebrew; and instead of what we now read,
(...), to have read, (...). from Thamar, the City of Palm Trees, or Palmyra:
But I have since altered my Opinion, because Thamar is exprefly said to be the
Border of Judaea to the South, whereas Palmyra lies near directly East from
Jerusalem, and am apt to believe that St. Hierom was deceived by the like
signification of the words; Tamar in Hebrew (not Tadmur) signifying a
Palm Tree, while Palmyra is not allowed to be of a Roman, but Greek Original;
and if so, cannot be derived from Palma, a pure Latin word; and that the
Septuagint read the Text aright, Theman being toward the South of Judaea,
Theman, says the Targum of Jonathan, i. e. Jericho, a Town (says Eusebius de
Locis Hebr.) 15 Miles distant from Petra in Arabia, and is, in the Old
Testament, often put for the whole Country South of Judaea; the (...) in the
Septuagint being not far distant from it, as Strabo ( l. 16. p. 259.) affirms,
That Petra is the Metropolis of Arabia Nabataea; That the Country round it is
Desert, especially toward Judaea; That it is situate three or four Days
Journey from Jericho, and five from the Palmetum, or City of Palm Trees, as I
would render it.

I was also once of the Opinion, that Palmyra had its Denomination from the
Palm Trees, as St. Jerome says expressly, though Tadmur be not a word of that
signification, (but seems to me to be derived rather from (...) implying its
admirable and stupendous Situation, probably because a fertile Spot of Ground
in the midst of a vast Desert.) But because Josephus seems to determine it to
be of Greek Original, I cannot think it derived from (...), an Egyptian Deity;
for what had the Gods of Egypt to do near the Banks of Euphrates? nor from
(...), a King or Father; but from (...), which signifies a Persian Shield; or
Parma, as the Latins render it, ( Hesych. (...), Glossar. Vet. (...).) For the
Palmyrenians were near Neighbors to the Persians, while at a great distance
from either Rome or Egypt, and from them with whom they maintained a continual
Commerce, might receive the Name of their City, which very well agrees to a
strong Frontier Town, built for the defense of the Borders; and this exactly
quadrates with the Arabic (...) Damar, Praesidium. And we may as well derive
Palmyrene from a Persick Original, as the neighboring Province Osrhoene (the
two Provinces being often confounded, for Photius Cod. (...). styles Zenobia
(...), The Queen of Osrhoene,) which was without any dispute so denominated
from Osroes (or Chosroes) the King of that Country, Procop. l. 1. Pers. c. 17.
p. 49.
and a Confederate of the Persians, who gave his Name to Edessa, and the
Territory round it. For I cannot be of the mind of Malela, though he seems, by
his often mentioning it, Par. 1. p. 182. Par. 2. p. 153.
to be fond of his Etymology, that it was called Palmyra, (...), because it was
the Place where Goliath received his Fate at the Hands of King David; though
the Humor of giving Names to Cities or Countries, from such Fabulous
Encounters, has not been altogether disused; for says Damascius ( apud Phod.
Cot. 242.) some affirmed, that his Native City, Damascus, was so called from
Ascus, a Giant whom Jupiter there overcame, ((...):) And, I fear, some of our
Historians, zealous for the Honor of Brute, will be found guilty of the same
Crime.

But though I cannot believe the Fiction of David's slaying Goliath at Palmyra,
yet it is very probable, that that stout and victorious Prince might have
extended his Empire as far as Palmyra, Bechart. Spanhem. Hist. Job. and Hyde
Not. in Abr. Peritzol. p. 60.
when he invaded Hadad-Ezer King of Soba, (2 Samuel 8.3. 1 Chronicles. 18.3.) the
Euphrates being the Eastern Limit of Syria Sobah (from beyond which River
Hadad-Ezer brought his Auxiliaries, i. e. from Mesopotamia, 2 Samuel 10.16. there
called Syria beyond the River,) as Damascus was the Western: And Palmyra is
said, 2 Chronicles. 8.3, 4. to be situated in Hamath Soba, or Syria Soba; and the
two Cities of Arabia the Desert, Sabe and Barathena in Ptolomy, seem to be Soba
and Berothai, Cities of the Sabeans, mentioned in the Sacred Writings.

Castaldus and Ortelius affirm that Palmyra is now called Amegara; but Sanson
says it is called Faid, as do Nicolosius in his Hercules Siculus, Par. 3. P.
263.
and others; whereas it still retains its old Denomination Tadhmur, as it
always did among the Syrians and Arabs. L. 2. p. 72.
The old Geographer of Ravenna reckons it among the Cities of Caele-Syria, (for
so I will adventure to correct that Author, Syria Cilensin Comagenis, which
Monsieur Porcheron reads Syria Seleucis, but it should be read Syria Cele in
Comagenis,) but calls it Malmiora, which the Editor says is mistaken for
Palmyra, and with him I agree. Though perhaps Tamira in the same Author may be
set for Tadmira (as Hepolis for Heliopolis) for that Geographer lived in the
7th Century, Ib.
when that City having fallen into the Hands of the Arabs, had recovered its
ancient Syriack, or Arabic Name.

I have in the History affirmed, from the Authority of Lib. 1. Censibus.
Vlpian, that Caracalla made Palmyra a Colony Juris Italici; but if I might be
allowed a Conjecture, I could think, that Septimius Severus made it a Colony,
as he did several other Cities in that Country, Rhesaina, Tyrus, Laodicea,
Nisibis, and Singara, which from his Name were styled in the Coins Septimia
Rhesaina, Colonia Septimia Tyrus, Septimia Colonia Laodicea, Septimia Colonia
Nisibis, (or as it is always in the Coins, (...),) but that his Son Caracalla
gave it the Privileges of an Italian City, as Vlpian affirms; for it seems to
me past all doubt, from the frequent use of the Names Septimius, and Septimia,
by the Inhabitants of Palmyra, who gave it as a Praenomen to the People of both
Sexes, of the best Families and Condition, that the Citizens of Tadmur had a
very reverend regard for the Emperor Septimius Severus; but we want Coins to
determine this Question.

In an Inscription, about the Year 296. Page 99. Journal.
(for I am willing to supply the Date from the former Inscription, page 98.
because they both treat of the same Person) Tadmur is called (...), as if it
were the Mother of other Colonies, says the Editor, (a word that occurs not in
any Author) which was a very honorable appellation, Thucyd. l. 1. 25. p. 15.
Ed. Ox. cum Schol.
the Colonies being obliged (...) ( i. e. (...)) to Honor their Mother City,
and to give it the Preference the Law had appointed; but the word should be
divided into (...), i. e. (...) and (...), Palmyra being both a Metropolis and
a Colony, as were several other Cities in Syria, as appears from the Coins.
Colonia Damascus Metropolis. (...). Sephyrus Metropolis Colonia. Tyrus
Metropolis Colonia.

Now, though to be a Roman Colony, was a great Honor, and entitled the City to
great Privileges; yet it must be acknowledged that it left the City deprived
of its former unlimited Liberty: for in time past it was governed by its own
Statutes; Agel. lib. 16. c. 13. Harduin. Antirrhet. p. 37, 52.
but when made a Colony, was under the Roman Jurisdiction, paid Submission to
their Laws, and Tribute to the Emperors, from which it was before exempt; and
if a Frontier Town, as Palmyra was, it admitted of a Roman Garrison (the First
Legion of the Illyrians being posted there) with the Liberty reserved to the
Citizens, that they were to be Listed as Romans into their Legions, not as
Auxiliaries.

In the Ecclesiastic Notitia, Palmyra was at first a Metropolitan, as long as
it was the Chief City of the Province, i. e. till its Destruction by Aurelian.
At the Division of the Empire by Constantine the Great, it was a Suffragan See
under the Archbishop of Damascus, who, in the Sixth Act of the Council held at
Chalcedon, thus subscribes for the Bishops of his Province, (...), etc. From
whence also it appears that that Church was Orthodox in those days; and that
Palmyra was the first of the Suffragans to that Metropolitan; but afterward it
became subject to the Metropolitan of Edessa, as appears by the Notitia of the
Emperor Leo; since which time it has no longer a place in the Ecclesiastical
Account, Christianity having been, for some Ages, totally banished from Palmyrene

Whether the Merchants, who Traveled from Syria to Seleucia, Strab. lib. 16.
p. 747.
and Babylon, through the Country of the Arabes Scenitae, through the Malii, and
their Deserts, and Ferried over the Euphrates near Anthemusia in Mesopotamia, a
City Situate near the river Aborrhas, took Palmyra in their way, I cannot
determine; nor whether Alexander the Great marched his Army through or by that
City, when having left Egypt, and past through Phaenicia to Thapsacus, he carried
his Troops over the Euphrates; since none of the Writers of the Achievements
of that Miraculous Prince take any notice of Palmyra; though it be to me
unquestionable, that Palmyra submitted to that irresistible Conqueror, as did
many other Cities, of whom the Historians make not any mention.

The Situation of the City, as to its Longitude and Latitude, is differently
accounted for by the Writers of the Country, the Arabs (as the very Learned Dr.
Hyde informs me) Ismael Abul-Feda, Geograph. M.S.
the Prince of Hamah. i. e. of that part of Syria, wherein Tadmur was Situate,
(who was Born in the Year 672. of the Mohammedan Era, and constituted the Lord
of the Country in the Year 710. of the same Computation) confesses, that his
Countrymen, who make it part of Arabia, are not agreed, three several Authors
placing it in different degrees.

The first fixes it in Long. 67.40. Lat. 34.00. The second in Long. 67. 40.
Lat. 30.00. The third in Long. 64.00. Lat. 33.50.
But Calcashendi, T^n. 1. p. 321.
another Arabian Author, gives this Account out of other Writers, as the
Excellent Master of the Oriental Languages, Dr. Hyde Translates him -- As for
the Territory of Tadmur -- the Author of the Book Al Tariph says, it is Situate
between the Two Villages and Rahba, and is reckoned to be in Arabia, in the
fourth of the Seven Climes: The Author of the Book of Longitudes says, its
Longitude is 62 degrees, and its Latitude 34 degrees. The Lord of Hamath (i. e.
Abulpheda) says, it belongs to the Territory of Hems (i. e. Emesa) on the
East Side of it, and that most of its Soil is saltish; that in it there is a
sort of sour Plant called Nagjel, and also Olives. There are likewise very
great, and Ancient Ruins, consisting of Pillars, and Rocks, and a Castle with a
Wall. The Author of the Book, called, Al Raud Almitar says, that it was
Originally an Ancient City, which the Spirits Built for Solomon, with
extraordinary Fortifications. It was called Tadmur from Tadmur the Daughter of
Hassan, whose Sepulcher is there, and Solomon did Inhabit it after her. The
Author of the Book Al-Azizi says, that between Tadmur and Damascus are 59
Miles; between Tadmur and Rahba 102 Miles. The Lord of Hamath says, it is from
Hem's about three Stations. The only difference in the Accounts is in this,
that the Longitude of Palmyra in words at length, out of the Book of
Longitudes, is 62. which in Abulpheda's Geography is 67. where it is expressed in
Letters; which must be attributed to the Carelessness of the Transcribers.

I was a little surpised, when reading Al Edrisi (commonly, but wrongly,
called the Nubian Geographer) I found a Tademyr in Spain, which comprehended
the Kingdoms of Murcia and Tarragon, and was inclined to believe that the
Caliph sent a Colony from the Syrian Tadmur (as well as from the other Cities
of his vast Dominions) to People Spain, when he had conquered it, who from
their own Native City gave the Name to that part of Spain: But my Learned and
much honored Friend Dr. Bernard, has informed me, that the Spanish Tademir may
be derived, as to Name, and no otherwise, from the Syrian Tadmor, or from
(...), Tadmera, Mescella Populi, from a mixture of several Nations inhabiting
there; as Tidal, in Holy Writ, is called the King of the Nations; and Galilee
styled Galilee of the Gentiles.

The Arabs of this Age say, that in ancient time Solomon Ebn el Doud (or the
Son of David) built a City in that Place, which being destroyed, was reedify'd
by a strange People; and the present Inhabitants pretend to show you the top of
a Mountain where one of Solomon's Concubines lies buried, as if that Great King
had fixed his Court there, having destined it to his Retirement and Pleasures,
as Josephus seems to affirm.

CHAP. II. Of the Names of the Palmyrenians.
FRom the Names of the City, I shall proceed to consider the Names of the
Inhabitants, and I question not, but as their first Language was Hebrew, or
Syriack, so the People had Syriack, or Hebrew Names. This wants no further
Confirmation, the Inscriptions put it past all doubt, Odenathus, Airanes,
Vaballathus, Mocimus, Orodes, Zabdas, Matthas, Jaribolus, etc. being all pure
Syriack; and had the Curiosity of our English Travelers directed them to have
transcribed the Syriack Inscriptions, as well as the Greek, at Tadmur; I doubt
not, but as we might from them have retrieved the old Syriack Alphabet, so we
also might have been enabled to correct more than one Mistake either of the
Graver, or Transcriber (as I shall unquestionably demonstrate there are such)
in the Names of the People of that famous City. This Method, I doubt not, the
Palmyrenians made use of, that their public Monuments, as long as they
continued, might preserve the knowledge of their ancient Native Language; and I
hope some attempt will be made to recover at least the understanding of their
Letters: For Monsieur Petit's Specimen, in Spon's Miscellanies, is all Dream;
and that Learned Man, if he had been in Earnest, would doubtless have given us
his Alphabet, and the Inscriptions accordingly reduced into the Hebrew, or some
other known Character. It Is true, he says they are the Phaenician (probably the
same with the old Syriack) Letters, (for Gruter's Opinion, that they are
Arabic, is not to be defended,) but I refer the Reader to Antony Gallandius's
Confutation of Mr. Petit, in the same Miscellanies.

After the Romans had extended their Empire into the remoter Parts of Syria;
the Men of Palmyra, agreeable to the Practice of the other Nations of the East,
assumed to themselves a Prae-Nomen, the Custom of having Two Names having been
taken up by the Greeks and Syrians about the Times of Trajan; and this seems to
be confirmed by the Sepulchral Inscriptions at Tadmur, N. 3, 4.
the most ancient of which were erected under Trajan, where the Names of
Elabelus, Mannaeus, Soraechus, Malchus, Vaballathus, Gichus, Mocimus, stand
alone, without any Prae-nomina; but in the Inscriptions of Aftertimes,
Septimius, Rupilius, Julius Aurelius, frequently occur, which being Roman, were
prefixed to their Syriack Names, (as some of them had two Syriack Names, the
last having probably been givent to those who were adopted into other Families,
as Phanius Mocimus, qui and Airanes, Julius Aurelius Zenobius qui and Zabdilas
--) the Fore-Name Septimius was in very frequent use at Tadmur, probably in
Honor of Septimius Severus the Emperor, their Benefactor: The First of their
Emperors was Septimius Odenathus; their only Empress, Septimia Zenobia; their
Great Men, Septimius Orodes, and Septimius Airanes. Now, the Prae-Nomen being
either Greek or Roman, the second the proper Syriack Name of the Person, was
post-pon'd to that, which was assumed, ex. gr. Septimius Zenobius, Longinus
Cassimus, Julius Aurelius Zenobius, Alexander Capadetus, Julius Aurelius Ealmes
(if it should not rather be read Palms, for he is said to be a Roman, and a
Gentleman of one of their Troops: Now, Palma is a known Name among the Romans;
Palma, the Consul and the Lieutenant General to Trajan, in his Parthian
Expedition, is very famous, who being of a contrary Faction to Adrian, Spart.
Hadr. p. 2, 4.
was slain at Terracina, by the Order of the Senate.) And for this reason, I
cannot agree with the Learned Mr. Halley, correcting the Coins of Vaballathus,
and reading Airanes for Hermeias; for it is plain, that in those Names the first
is Greek, or Latin, the latter Syriack; which also confirms me in my Opinion,
that Vaballathus was the Son of Herodes (or Herodianus) and that the Father's
Name was Athenas Herodes; of which more hereafter.

It is also observable, that the Palmyrenians, like their Neighbors the Arabs,
with their own Names gave their Pedigree, reckoning up their Ancestors, many
times, to their Great-Grand-Father: This the Saracenic History puts out of all
dispute as to the Arabs; and the Inscriptions, as to the Inhabitants of Tadmur.

Now to show that the Names are of Syriack or Hebrew Extraction, as the prae
Nomina of Greek or Latin, is an easy Undertaking. Jaribolus, or Jariboleus, is
Jerubbaal ( Gideon's Name;) Bareiches is Barachias, Baruchus, Tom. 3. Mon.
Graec. p. 346.
or Barachus, (of which Name were Baruch the Prophet Jeremy's Scribe; and a
Bishop, (...), and Borochus the Judge in Jamblichus) Ouorodes is Orodes, and
Herod; Soraechus, Saruch, Nahar's Father, Genesis 11. and in Jamblicus's Apud.
Phot. Cod. 94.
Babylonicks, Soraechus, the Son of Soraechus the Publican, makes a
considerable Figure; Simon is purely Hebrew; Vaballathus is Balathus with the
Arabic Praefix; Bal, Belus, Bolathus, and Balathus, the same Name in
Damascius; Ballatha is the Name of a Syrian City, in Ptolemy; and Sanballat (
i. e. the Prince Ballathus) appears, in Holy Writ, the Governor of Mesopotamia,
(...), Nehem. 2.9. and Vaballathus, in Vopiscus, is called Balbatus, for
Ballathus. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30.
Bolanus was one of the Bishops, who, in the Synod of Antioch, condemned Paulus
of Samosata. Matthas among the Men, and Martha among the Women, are also
Hebrew; Matthas, Matthat, Matthan, Mattathas; Airanes, Aarones; Jaraius, Jair;
Elabelus is Elbelus, or the God Bell -- sometimes Alagbelus, Alagabalus,
corruptly Heliogabalus. Mannaeus is the same Name with Manoah, Judge. 13.2.
or, as the LXX. (...), or Manahath, 1 Chronicles. 1.40. Zenobius was a common Name
among the Phaenicians and Syrians. L. 8. c. 13.
Eusebius mentions two Martyrs of that Name, who suffered in the Dioclesian
Persecution, the one an admirable Physician, the other a Presbyter of the
Church of Sidon. Against Zenobius of Emesa, Phot. ^od. 228.
Ephremius the Patriarch of Antioch wrote a Learned Treatise. And Zenobius a
Bishop of Cilicia was Martyred in the same Persecution, with his Wife, and his
Sister Zenobia, says Simeon Metaphrastes; and the Wife of Basiliscus the
Emperor was also called Zenobia. Malech, Malchus, and Malchion (of which Name
was an Eminent Id. l. 7. c. 29.
Presbyter of Antioch, who opposed Paulus of Samosata the Heretical Patriarch
of that See) are from the same Original; as is Malechus Podosaces, who was the
Prince (or Phylarchus) of the Arabians, Am. Marcel. l. 24.
in the times of the Emperor Julian; and Melham, the Name of the late Prince of
Tadmur, who treated the English Merchants with so much Injustice. Zebeidas
Zabdas, and Zabdilas, are the same; of which Name were Zabdas Bishop of
Jerusalem after Hymenaeus, and Zabdi ( Josh. 7.3.) while the ignorant
Transcribers of the Historian Vopiscus have turned Zenobia's General Zabdas
into a Woman, ( Vopisc. p. 217. contra Zenobiam, and Zabam ejus Sociam.)
Samsus, Samson, (...) in the LXX. are of the same Original; and from thence is
Sampsa (or (...)) Esdr. 4.8. and Samsaiceramus one of the Princes of Syria
under Pompey, another of that Name, being the Priest of Venus under Gallienus;
and Sampsa a City in Arabia, says Stephanus, (...). And Epiphan. Haer. 53.
(...). And in the same Stephanus, (...).

Odaenathus is also of a Syrian Family; of which Name was a Philosopher, the
Scholar of the Junior Plutarch, says Suidas out of Damascius ((...)) who ought
to be remembered, Vid. (...).
if only for that one excellent Sentence of his, That it is very difficult, and
next to impossible, for Men either to think or speak of God, as He is. John
Malela always calls the Emperor Enathus; and he, being of Antioch, may have
been presumed to have understood the Language, Names and Manners of his own
Country, De Martyrib. Palaest. p. 333.
Syria. And Eusebius, among the Martyrs of Palestine, who suffered in the
Dioclesian Persecution, reckons Ennathas a Woman of Scythopolis. And I have
been inclined to believe, that Enathus and Ignatius were the same Name (
Ignatius only better turned to please the Ear of the Greeks and Romans,) and
that, in Honor of Odaenathus, Gallienus assumed the Name, who, in two rare
Coins in Monsieur Page 413.
Patin, and as rare an Inscription in In H. A. Script. p. 509.
Fulvius Vrsinus, is styled Publius Licinius Ignatius Gallienus; or as F.
Harduin, p. 330. from another Coin, Egnatius.

As to the Name Mocimus, I have been under suspense, whether I should correct
the Books from the Monuments, or believe that the Transcriber of the
Inscriptions might mistake a K for an N, which letters are not of a very
different make, and turn and read Monimus for Mocimus. Apud Julian. Orat. IV.
p. 281.
Jamblichus, who was born at Chalcis, not far from Edessa, says, that Monimus
was the Mercury of the People of Edessa: And Apud Phot. Cod. (...).
Damascius, in the Life of Isidore the Philosopher, says that Jamblichus
derived himself from Monimus and Sampsaiceramus, the Roytelets of Syria; V.
(...).
and the Critics have corrected Stephanus, (...). reading (...) for (...). But
since the Name occurs so often in the Inscriptions at Palmyra, and is always
written (...), I am inclined to think that that was the right reading, and
ought not to be altered, and that from thence Jamblichus and others are to be
corrected.

Nor is it to be omitted, that the Palmyrenians, as well as other Nations, gave
the Names of their Gods to their Princes, and Illustrious Persons, as appears
by the frequent use of Jaribolus, Mocimus, Vaballathus, Elabelus, and
Sampsaiceramus, among them; as of Adonijah, and Elijah, etc. among the Jews; of
Belshazzar, and Nebuchadnezzar, among the Babylonians; of Mithrobarzanes, and
Mithradates, among the Persians; of Taautus, Serapion, Heracles, Heraclammon,
Ammonius, Isidorus, Psammatosiris, Orus, Orion, etc. among the Egyptians; of
Cronius, Posidonius, Hephestion, Dionysius, Apollos, among the Greeks; of
Ithobalus, and Abibalus, among the Yyrians; of Annibal, Asdr^bal, and Maherbal,
among the Carthaginians; of Saturninus, Jovianus, Martius, Mercurialis, and
Venerius, among the Romans. And in like manner the Custom prevailed over the
Northern, and other Nations, as might easily be proved.

CHAP. III. Of their Public Offices.
FRom the Names of the Inhabitants, I proceed to consider the several Officers
that managed the Affairs of the Commonwealth; for the Senate, in whose hands
the Government was, and to whom was the Dernier Resort, constituted several
Officers for the due Administration of the Duties of Religion and Justice.

(...).
And because the Eastern Nations were much addicted to Idleness, and great
Lovers of Diversion (few of the Turks, Arabs or Persians of the present Age
being enclinable to hard labor, most of their time being spent in smoking
Tobacco, and drinking Coffee,) insomuch that they too often preferred their
voluptuous Satisfactions (for they spent thirty Nights together in continued
Revellings) to their Safety; Maleld. 1. p. 313.
(for when Sapores, after he had made Valerian his Prisoner, sacked the City of
Antioch, they were so intent and busied in seeing the Actors of a Farce,
Ammian. l. 3. c. 5.
that till one of their Mimicks, turning him round, told them with
astonishment, that the Swords of the Persians were at their Throats, they saw
nothing of their Danger: Zosim. lib. up. 55.
And when the Emperor Aurelian returned the second time to Palmyra, he
surpised the same Antiochians, so intent upon the sight of their Horse-Races,
that when they thought him in Thrace, he was in their Marketplace.) I will
first treat of their (...), or Aedilis, the Rich and Eminent Person, who
furnished the Money for their Public Spectacles, and was at the Charge of the
Plays, Vid. Malel. l. 9. p. 290. L. 12. p. 272, 273.
though they had great Bequests often made to this purpose, and sometimes the
Expense was defrayed out of the Public Treasury; (for that they had such an
Officer at Tadmur, the Inscriptions put out of all dispute.) Their Original
Office, it is true, was like that of our Harpocrat. (...). So the Etymolog. M.
Hesyc. (...). Glossar. vet. Aedilis, (...), Aed^^at, (...), Aedilicius,
Aedilis. Ariemid. (...). l. 2. c. 13. (...). And Dio, in his History, always
uses (...) for Aedilis.
Clerks of the Market (if not at first deputed to inspect the Temples, and
their Revenues, and to file the Records,) where they enquired into whatever was
bought or sold, and regulated the Prices; and their number at Athens (says
Aristotle, in his Book of that Commonwealth, cited by Harpocration) was Twenty,
Five in the Pireaeus, and Fifteen in the City. But that which made them most
acceptable to the Common People, was their Secundary Employment, to entertain
the Citizens with whatever might contribute to their Diversion, upon their own
Pocket; and perhaps it often happened, Ludos facere Aedilem Cic. l. 1. de Orat.
argentum ad ludos commodare. l. 28. D. de auro, argento, etc. aediles plebis
ludorum maxim gratia creatos. Vid. Gronov. Observe. l. 4. c. 21.
that the same Persons who furnished the Expense, was the President, and Judge
of the Games (both the (...) and (...),) who, if the whole Province met (the
(...)) was from the Name of the Country called the (...), as there were (...),
etc. And therefore Ruffinus, in his Version of the Martyrdom of St. Polycarp,
renders (...), in Eusebius's Greek by Munerarius, the Person who managed the
Expense of the Spectacula, very properly.

This Generosity made so deep and lasting an Impression upon the Populace, who
are generally led by Appearances, Reinesii-Inscript. class. 6. n. cxxi.
and satisfied with Show, that they often erected Monuments to the Memory of
their Benefactors, for thiS very reason. So the City of Taenarium (in the Gulf
of Sparta) celebrated the Glory of Tiberius Claudius Charito, in this noble
Inscription:

(...) f. (...).
(...). Hoc est. (...). Subaudi (...).

The City of the Taenarians have honored Tiberius Claudius Charito, their most
excellent Citizen, for his great Prudence, and his unspeakable Magnificence,
when he was the Aedile (or (...)) of their City. This Monument was erected by
the Order and Decree of the Senate.

^^d. Gro^vii memor. Cosson. ^. 146.
In like manner Claudius Paulinus was rewarded by the Senate and People of
Smyrna (for I conjecture that the Marble found in that City belongs to it) with
a noble Monument erected to the Memory of his Daughter; because he he had been
the General of their Horse, one of the chief of their Council, their Aedilis,
and Questor, and President of their Senate Hesychius gives another sense of
(...). -- Id. (...).vel (...) -- Id. (...). V. Not. in par. 1. marm. Oxon. p.
106.
(which last was the highest Civil Honor he could attain to; Plin. Panegyric.
for even at Rome the Consul presided in the Senate, when the Emperor was
present, if the Emperor himself was not Consul.) Thus the City of Antioch
erected a Marble Statue in Daphne to Artabanus, one of their Citizens, Malel.
par. 1. lib. 12. p. 381.
who was the first syriarcha who presided over the Olympic Games celebrated in
that City in the Reign of the Emperor Commodus, with this Inscription, To the
eternal memory of Artaban.

And thus the Senate and People of Palmyra, among the other Achievements of
Jullus Aurelius Zenobius, and of Septimius Orodes, celebrated them, that they
had magnificently and splendidly discharged this Office; particularly Zenobius,
that he managed that Province, when he undertook it, with an extraordinary
Liberality. For they distinguished between what was done at the expense of the
Public, and came out of the Treasury, and what was expended by the Officer out
of his own Coffers; and themselves took care, if the Commonwealth did not, to
record this Circumstance; Transact. p. 99, 103, 109.
so Bolanus is said to have built an Altar, (...), at his own charge; and
Agathangelus, to have erected a Canopy, and a Bed of State, (...): Vid. page
105.
And so Septimius is said to have supplied the Company (or Caravans of
Travelers) (...). And Mareades, Malel. par. 1. p. 390.
who had been one of the Magistrates of Antioch, was, in the Reign of
Gallienus, by the Vote of the whole Senate and People, ejected out of the
Government; because, whatever Party he was obliged to provide for in the
Public Horse-Races, he not only refused to lay out any Money of his own, but
cheated the Public of what was destined by the City to those Diversions, (the
Emperors afterward Enacting, That whosoever was appointed to inspect the Ludi
Circenses, L. 10. tit. 31.. 20.
which was the Office of the Duumviri, and alienated or diverted to another use
any part of the Revenue destined to that Service, should be obliged to refund.)
This Disgrace occasioned his flying to Sapores the King of Persia, in those
dissolute Times, to whom he gave an Account of the unhappy State of his Native
Country, and the Carelessness of the Inhabitants, which occasioned the ruin of
that noble City, as is already mentioned, the Traitor himself being sacrificed
by that very Prince whom he had invited into Syria, to the angry Manes of his
abused Country; Beheaded (says Malela,) Burnt alive (says Vbi sup.
Ammianus Marcellinus.) And Oeconomic. c. 4.
Xenophon, introducing Socrates instructing Critobulus as to what would be
expected from a Man of his Figure and Fortune at Athens, after he had informed
him, that he must very frequently be at the charge of noble Sacrifices, and
magnificent Entertainments and Feasts, he adds, That it would be expected from
him, that he would be obliged to keep Horses for the Public Races ((...),) and
if he should ever refuse so to treat the Citizens, they would punish him as
severely as if he had robbed their Houses. So passionately were the People of
those Ages and Countries addicted to the Spectacula, and so much did they think
them their due.

(...).
The Senators of Palmyra were Men of Eminence and Condition, and the most
Honorable Members of the Republic, and therefore are styled in the
Inscriptions ((...)) Most Illustrious: But of those Senators, some, I
conjecture, were a standing Council of State, (as the (...) were at Athens, and
in most Commonwealths, some similar Court;) for Rupilius Orodes is said to be
both a Senator and a Counselor ((...):) So that as the V. Marm. Oxon. n. 46.
(...) and (...) were distinguished at Athens, so at Palmyra the (...) and (...)
had their Distinctions. For as the Romans had their Senate, so other Cities had
theirs; their Court of Aldermen, who governed the People (their Duumviri
representing the Consuls.) of which Senators some were Eminent and Principal
for Authority and Influence; and such, probably, were the (...) at Palmyra, Men
who had borne the Office of the Duumvirate, and for that reason were not only
of the Senatorian, Memor. Cosson. Marm. 2. p. 140.
but Consular Dignity, ((...) as it is worded in another Inscription.)

The Name (...), it must be confessed, is commonly given to every Member of that
Court; so the old Glossary. (...), Decurio, Curialis; called Decuriones,
because whenever the Colonies, or Municipia, were established, and the
Government of those Cities first instituted, the Decurio (like our Alderman of
the Ward) had his particular Province appointed, and his Number of Persons,
whom he inspected (Nonius Marcel. Decuriones a numero, cui praeerant,
dicebantur,) but the whole Order, or aggregate Body, governed all the
Inhabitants, and are therefore called, in the Laws, and ancient Histories,
Decuriones Civitatum, Municipiorum, and Coloniarum. L. 6. Epist. ad Sept.
Great care (says Tully) was used in the choice of such Governors, the Names of
the Candidates being, before the Election, proposed to the People, that they
might make their just Exceptions, if they had any, against the Person. When any
Public Business was to be done, the Senators were solemnly summoned to the
Court; Vid. Not. in Cod. l. 10. T. 31. n. 1.
for out of their Body the Duumviri were chosen (who were to be nominated three
Months before they entered upon their Province;) as also the Aediles, (and in
some Places the Dictators and Praetors,) the Court being obliged to give
immediate Notice to every Officer, if absent, whom they had elected: The
Inspection of the Treasury was committed to them; they were entrusted with the
Management and Disposal of all Bequests, and of the Public Money; they were to
take care that the Granaries should always be full, that the City might not
want Bread: They imposed and levied Taxes: In short, the whole Management of
the Commonwealth was in their hands.

It must be granted, that the Discharge of the Office was very expensive, and
they were accountable for whatever Public Money should be embezled or
misapplied, Vid. B. Brisso. l. 4. Select. Antiquit.
and were encumbered with a troublesome Province; for the Senator was not to
leave the City, to go to the Court, either upon the Public, or his own private
Affairs, without leave from the President of the Province: They were prohibited
the applying themselves to a Military Employment; and if any Man scrupled to
serve his Country, after he was chosen, the Law compelled him for two Years
together to do the Office of a Duumvir (unless the Court exempted him, or he
had the consent of the Citizens to excuse him;) nor would flying to a Monastery
give a Protection; a Religious House was not then a Sanctuary to skreen a Man
from Civil Employments. And therefore in the Nov. 46.
Novels of the Emperor Leo (after whose Reign the word does not occur in the
Laws, nor is it to be found in the Basilica) the Office of the Ducurio is
styled (...), an Employment very burthensom and grievous, and probably, the
Person, when chosen, was obliged to give to the Public Treasury a Sum of
Money; it being mentioned Grut. 475.3.
as a great Honor done to Titius Chresimus, that for the Merits of his Father,
the Senate admitted him into their Society gratuitously, Ob merita Patris
honorem Decurinatus gratuitum decrevit Ordo Decurionum.

But as the Office was thus molested (inasmuch as it was sometimes inflicted as
a Punishment for some Offenses) so their Privileges were very great, and their
Station very honorable; they were exempt from all extraordinary Employments,
and from enduring the Torture; were not to be condemned to the Mines, not to be
Burnt alive, thrown to the Wild Beasts, Crucified, or Beheaded, (but if
Criminal, were Imprisoned, and Fettered, till the Emperor had declared his
Pleasure, and determined their Fate,) and the Honor was derived to the Family,
to the Fathers and the Children of the Senators, who were by this means
ennobled; the Men of Worth were capable of being chosen Members of the Court at
Fifteen; and if any of them arrived to the Age of Seventy, or proved the Father
of Twelve Children, he was excused from the Fatigue, while he enjoyed all the
Privileges of a Senator; nor could he be compelled to go out of the Province,
unless in cases of most urgent necessity. Their Body was styled Ordo
Decurionum; the Roll in which their Edicts were entered, Album Decurionum; their
Habits distinctive and ornamental (Decurionalibus Vestimentis Ornatus;) Grut.
p. 372.7.
their Houses were supplied with Water upon the Public Charge (ut Aquae
digitus in Domo ejus flueret, commodisque Publicis, Id. 475.3.
ac si decurio frueretur;) and they were capable of the greatest Bequests,
above Fifteen hundred Pound having been given by C. Torasius, Grut. p. 279.3.
to furnish out the Expense of a great Supper, annually provided on the
Birthday of his Son, for the Ducuriones of the City, and for a Largess in
Money to the Poor. And if any generous Person, when dying, left Legacies to the
People, they were entrusted with the Disposal, (as appears by the Inscriptions
D. F. D. I. P. h. e. Decurionum fide dividenda in publicum.) And if the Emperor
resolved to express his Indignation against any People, he denied them the
Privilege of being ruled by a Senate of their own Inhabitants, and left their
Lives and Fortunes to the Discretion and Integrity of their Governor, who was a
Foreigner. Dio. l. 51. p. 451.
So Augustus punished the proud City of Alexandria; for when he had conquered
Egypt, he constituted Cornelius Gallus their Governor, but would not permit any
Citizen a share in Public Affairs, while he allowed other Cities their
Privileges, ((...),) and in this state they continued till Septimius Severus
gave them (the Jus buleutarum) the liberty to be governed by their own
Citizens; Spartian. Severus, p. 70.
and his Son Antoninus put them into the capacity of being chosen Senators at
Rome, which, I conjecture, was one of the Privileges of the Decuriones in the
Colonies.

That this Title was very Honorable in the Colony of Palmyra, appears from
Sextus Rufus, who calls Odenathus, before he assumed the Purple, by the Name of
Decurio Palmyrenus, which Trebellius Pollio explains by Princeps Civitatis; for
the Senators were the principal Men of the Cities where they resided.

(...).
In Imitation of the Roman Methods of Government, the Palmyrenians had also
their Procuratores Ducenarii; of which Order was Septimius Orodes, under
Odenathus; and Paulus of Samosata, the Patriarch of Antioch, under Zenobia. The
Original of the Office is to be deduced from the Times of Augustus, who,
Sneton. August. n. 32.
for the better and more regular government of his Subjects to the three Courts
of Judicature, which had been formerly erected, added a fourth, styled Decuria
Ducenariorum of an inferior Order, the Judges whereof, at their first
Institution, were appointed to determine Causes of less moment, but were in
process of time advanced to a nobler Jurisdiction; they were commonly Men of
Quality, of the Equestrian Dignity, though sometimes Liberti, (but in those
days the Emperors Freed-Men made no contemptible Figure in the Commonwealth,)
the Custom, before the Reign of Augustus, was, Dio. l. 53. p. 506.
that every Officer furnished the Expense of his Employment without any Charge
to the Public, but that wise and munificent Prince considering the Temptations
such Officers, who were no way provided for out of the Exchequer, were exposed
to, appointed every one his Salary: And from hence the Ducenarii had their
Name, and not from their collecting the Tribute of the Provinces, and the Sums
which they exacted (the Ducentesima) though that was a part of their Business,
as of the Proconsul, where he presided, but from the Pension, which by the
Imperial Constitution was to be paid them (which Capitolinus calls Ducenum H.
S. stipendium, as the Law mentions the Procuratores Centenarii and Sexagenarii
for the same reason.) For this Dio avers expressly, whatever some learned Men
affirm to the contrary, Vbi sup.
-- (...) the Salary being proportioned to the Quality of the Person and his
Employment; the Sum being limited as well as the Office: For the Procurator
was not permitted to levy Soldiers, nor to raise larger Taxes upon the
Provincials, than were appointed by the Emperor, or Senate; he was obligede to
resign, whenever required; and not to lingerin the Province after his time was
expired, but to return to Rome in three Months.

In a few Years their Authority was enlarged, became great and illustrious;
Tacit. Annal. 12.
Claudius obliged the Senate to enact it, That whatever was determined by the
Emperor's Procurator, should be looked on as valid, as if himself had decided
the Controversy in Person. And when the Senate had Past it as an Act, L. 1. D.
de Offic. Proc. Caes.
it was reckoned among the Laws of the Empire. The Office was seldom bestowed
on a private Person, unless of extraordinary Merit, but upon a Man of Eminence,
and a Favorite of the Emperor's: Id. Vit, Agric.
He was empowered to inspect all Public Affairs; but the proper Business of
the Procurator, was to over-see the Public Revenue; his Office in the Province
entitling him to the same Charge that the Praefecti Aerarii (the Lords of the
Treasury) had at Rome; and it was a step to the Senatorian Dignity, as that was
many times to the Imperial; Capitolin. Pertinax, p. 54.
for Pertinax was the Procurator Ducenarius in Dacia, before he assumed the
Purple. Their Title was (...), as appears by the Inscription, and by Holy Writ,
(for Festus is, Act. 26.25. called (...).) They had their Guards to protect
them ((...)) says E. H. 7.30.
Eusebius, their Retinue was great, and their Attendance numerous; sometimes
they represented the Presidents of the Provinces ( Procurator Caesaris Vice
Praesidis Provinciae fungetur, says the Law; and the old Inscriptions Grut. p.
376.
Procur. August. and Proleg. Provinciae Rhetiae, and Vindelic.) At other times
both Offices were united; for Id. p. 487. 6.
P. Vibius was both Procurator and Praeses of Sardinia: And whenever the
President resided in the Province, the Procurator was his Assessor in the
Courts of Judicature, and had an equal Vote in the Determination of such Causes
as were brought before them. This Power of making inspection into all Matters,
often encouraged them to be very troublesome, (insomuch that the Emperor
Constanstine the Great thought fit to restrain their Power, and regulate their
Exactions;) and they were of old more particularly guilty of molesting the
Primitive Christians, whom they persecuted with extreme Severity, compelling
the weaker sort to Blaspheme, or Compound, while they caused the resolute
Confessors to be tortured to Death. This the Novatian Commentary in Apud. Phot.
Cod. 182. page 214.
Eulogius demonstrates, that in the Persecution begun by Decius and Valerian,
Perennius the Ducenarius, by Order of the Emperors, pursued the Christians at
Rome, and in the neighboring Countries, with the greatest severity, murdering
some, and compelling others to commit Idolatry. About which time, St. Cyprian
informs us, Ep. 170. Edit. Oxon.
that Martialis and Basilides, two Spanish Bishops, had appeared before the
Procurator Ducenarius, and had taken out Libels of Security from him; that they
had sacrificed to Idols. And that which supported Paulus of Samosata, Patriarch
of Antioch, against the Catholic Church, which had in a Synod solemnly
condemned him, was, Eusebius. 7.10.
his Authority of Procurator to Zenobia his Patroness; upon which he valued
himself, for it supported his Pride and Grandeur, and therefore chose rather to
be called by the Name of Ducenarius, than Bishop, (and accordingly he kept up
the state of a Civil Officer, and Minister of Justice, had his Tribunal, and a
Sublime Throne, together with his Secretum, ( Secretarium, or Auditorium) Court
of Judicatory, in the innermost part of the Praetorium, separated from the rest
of the Hall by Railes and Curtains, that being the Place where the Chief
Magistrate used to sit, when he took cognizance of Criminal Causes.) And in an
old Inscription, Grut. 346.1.
Q. Aelius Januarius is said to have been the Procurator of Osroene, and Syria
Caele.

But this was not the sole signification of the word Ducenarius; for by it
sometimes was meant, L. 2. c. 8.
one who commanded Two Hundred Men (so says Vegetius) as the Centenarius did
One Hundred. And thus Ad Parumach.
St. Jerome musters the Officers of a Regiment, Post Tribunum Primicerius,
deinde Senator, Ducenarius, Biarchus, Circitor, Eques. So the old Glossary,
Ducenarius (...). Dux Ducenarius, in These. p. 102.
Goltzius. Vir Ducenarius, as Salmasius reads the old Inscription in P. 457. 8.
Gruter. Tribunus Militaris Legionis Tertiae Italicae; not Ducenarius Tribuni,
as Scaliger says in the excellent Index to that laborious and useful Work;
though perhaps the imperfect words of the Inscription may be supplied, and read
Procurator Ducenarius, Tribunus, etc. They are called Protectores Ducenarii in
another Inscription; the (...), Grut. p. 531. 2.
Commanders of Two Companies of the Lifeguards, who of old, as among us, were
treated with the Title of Colonels, and accordingly respected and paid: The
difference of Title between these Military Ducenarii and the Procurators
consisting in this, that the Office of the former was styled Dignitas
Ducentena, of the later Dignitas Ducenaria.

(...).
Among other Officers of Note and Figure at Palmyra, the (...), or Secretary of
the Senate and People, was very eminent; and among others who had been chosen
to that Honor, Malech Agrippa is remarkable in the Inscriptions, who a second
time managed that Office, when Alexander the Emperor came into Syria.

The Secretaries or Scribes at Rome were very numerous, being divided into
their several Classes or Decuriae, Tacit. Annal. l. 13.
their Office obliging them to attend upon the respective Magistrate, to whom
they did belong, whether he were the Praetor, Aedile, Quaestor, General of the
Fleet, or the High Priest (or the Wardens of the Port at Athens,) for every one
of these had his Scriba; the Employment was very honorable, (for the Secretary
was very little inferior to the Chief Magistrate, either in Dignity or
Authority, being often of the First Rank of the Nobility,) Orat. 8. in Verr.
so says Tully, Scribarum Ordo est honestus -- quod eorum hominum fidei tabulae
publicae, periculaque Magistratuum commitantur. He was Elected into the Office,
says Julius Pollux. Vbi infr.
And Aristotle, in his Account of the Commonwealth of Athens, affirms, that he
was the Keeper of the Public Records (and Tully says the same) enrolled all
the Decrees of the Senate, and was an Assessor in the Courts of Judicature. And
therefore Suidas is mistaken, when he avers, that they had no other Employment,
than to Write, Jul. Pol. l. 8. c. 8, 9, 11.
and Read, or Publish the Orders of the Senate: There were Three (...) at
Athens, of whom the First kept all the Public Writings, the Letters and
Decrees of the City, and he was chosen out of the (...) by the Council: To the
Second, the keeping of all the Laws was entrusted, and he also was nominated by
the Council: But the Third was the Secratary of the People, chosen by the
Commons, and he it was who read all the Writings of the People, says the
Scholiast of Thucydides, or rather read all the Public Orders both to the
Senate and People: His Method of Proceeding is thus stated by Ammonius, In
(...).
(...). The Grammateus having several Orders of Council in his Hand, which he
was to publish to the People; he began with the first, and read the Name of the
Person who proposed the Decree, his Father's Name, and the Name of the Tribe or
People to which he belonged, and then published the Decree it self; after which,
he proceeded to the second, and third, till he had published them all.

The Name of the Secretary was always inserted into every Decree, together with
the (...), or President of of the Senate for the time being, or the Praetor.
Thus the Inscription at Agrigentum (Gergento) in Sicily, Grut. 401.
(...). And very often his Name had the precedence in the Decree, as appears by
several Instances; Andocyd. de Myster.
(...). Thucyd. l. 3. v. V. Cl. Not. in Marm. Ox. 46.
(...). And in the Coins, the Name of the (...), as of a public eminent
Officer, from whose Year of Government the People made their Computation, is
frequently inserted, particularly in those of the Cities of Caria, where, I
suppose, the (...) was the Chief Magistrate. One of the Coins of Mylasa is said
to be stamped (...), (and Hybreas the Orator governed the City, says Lib. 14. p.
659.
Strabo.) So the Coin of the Magnesians, upon the Maeander, in the Reign of
Maximinus, was stamped (...). And another of the Ephestans, (...), when Ariston
was their Secretary. And so Honorable was the Office, Act. 19.
and so Great the Authority at Ephesus, that when the whole City was in an
Uproar, and all the People of Asia fermented into a violent Tumult, (for it is
highly probable, that the Insult was made upon St. Paul, when the (...), the
Community of Asia, were met to celebrate their Public Games,) he, by his
single Authority and Command, dismissed and dispersed the riotous Assembly.

And I conjecture, that it was one reason why the same Person was not long
continued in this Office, to prevent any mischievous Innovations which might be
made in the Republic by an Officer who and so great a Trust, and had it in his
Power to make himself very Popular. For it was a Law at Athens, V. Petit. de
legib. Attic.
That no Man should be twice (...), under the same Magistracy: Though (...)
Person might be chosen a second time, under new Magistrates, as appears by the
Palmyrene Inscription; for though some Places of Trust were, by special Favor,
and upon great Merit, given for Life, some of their High Priests being
constituted (...) yet, though Sigonius affirms the contrary, even the High
Priesthood it self was limited, and probably Annual in many Places. So Grut.
448.1.
Papirius Alexander is said to be High Priest the second time (though in the
same Inscription he is called the Priest of Bacchus for his Life.) And in a
Coin of the Magnesians, near Sipylus, Apphianus is said to be Praetor and High
Priest the second time. So several Cities were constituted (...), the second
and third time. And T. Fl. Taeanus ( Gruter calls him Aelianus) is said to have
been the thirteenth time, (...), in the (...). And Cleogenes, in the Decree of
the Senate and People of Athens, Petit. ubi sup. p. 232.
is said to have been the first time Secretary ((...),) as Malech Agrippa
managed that Province a second time at Palmyra. Nor was the (...) always a
Civil Officer, or Minister of State, but sometimes an Ecclesiastic, and
Minister of Religion; for the High Priest had always ways his Secretary; to
which Office no Man was at first admitted, but he who was of the Patrician
Dignity. Thus Cl. Paulinus, V. Gronov. Memor. Cosson. p. 146. Marm. 22.
in a curious Inscription lately brought from the Levant, is styled the General
of the Horse, the Prutanis, Aedilis, Quaestor, President of the Senate,
President of the Gymnasium (or Gymnasiarch,) Master of the Ordnance (or
Armory,) the Custos Rotulorum, and Secretary of the Olympic Games. Where we
may observe, that the (...) and (...) were distinct Offices, the one a Civil,
the other a Sacred Employment: But that the first also was very Honorable; for
in another Inscription brought from the same Place, T. Fl. Marm. Ox. 116.
Onesimus Paternianus, is styled the Master of the Ordnance, the Guardian of
the Temple of the Nemeses, the General of their Horse, the Keeper of their
Records, the First (...) (or (...),) the Aedile, the Quaestor of the City, and
honored with many other great Offices: as also, Grut. p. 219.
that he was chosen by Vote; that he was to take into his Custody the Tables
wherein the Laws were written; that he was obliged to preserve the Originals of
all the Leagues, and to keep in a strong Box all the Books belonging to his
Office, and the Public Affairs; and when he shall be required by the
Community, he shall bring them into the Senate House; and whenever the Society
shall choose another ((...)) Custos Rotulorum, he shall deliver up his Trust.

But in process of time, no Layman was permitted to be Secretary to the High
Priest, he was always chosen out of the inferior Sacred Orders, and in the old
Inseriptions is styled Scriba, a Libris Pontificalibus, who transcribed and
preserved all the Ritual, and other Books, that belonged to the High Priest's
Office, and many times he managed the Revenues of the Sacerdotal College, being
the Treasurer of the Temple. So Q. Ingenuus Maximianus was Scriba Publicus
Pontif. Grut. 306.7.
and Curator Aerarii, the Keeper of the Records of the Temple, (and Public
Treaties and Leagues, besides the Deeds of private Families, were for the most
part deposited in Temples.) And the Treasurer; so Nehemiah made Shelemiah the
Priest, and Zadock the Scribe, and the Levite Pedaiah, Treasurers of the Temple
( Nehem. 13.13.) And Ingenuus is styled Scriba Publicus, because the High
Priest had besides him (as I conjecture) another private Secretary for his own
Affairs. So Livius Theona is said to be ab Epistolis Graecis, Id. 587.6.
Scriba, a Libris Pontificalibus. Such Public Scribes belonging to the
Highpriests, were those probably of whom we read in the Sacred Writings, the
Chief Priests and the Scribes being commonly joined together, ((...), Mat.
26.3. Mar. 10.33. a very honorable Station, for God is said to imprint Glory
on the Face of the Scribe, Ecclus. 10.5.) and they continued in Employment
among the Jews, when the High Priesthood ceased, 600 Years after our Savior's
time; for when Gregentius introduces the eminent Jews, Disput. cum Herbano Judge.
who attended their Champion Herbanus to the Disputation about Religion, at
Tephra, he reckons up a multitude of Scribes, and Pharisees, and Lawyers, who
were present at the Debate of the Controversy, they being the most illustrious
Persons of the Nation; (...).

Among the chief Ministers at Antioch (a City with which Palmyra had a great
Commerce) the Secretary of the Olympic Games was habited, Malel. l. 12. P. 377.
and worshipped as a God; for when Commodus the Emperor had confirmed the Bequest
of Sosibius to the People of Antioch, that every Fifth Year they might, for
Forty five Days together, celebrate the Olympic Games, the next Officer to the
Alytarches (who was the President of the Assembly, and made Laws for the good
and decent Management of those Sports) was the (...), who represented Apollo;
he was chosen by the Senate and People, clad, all the time the Solemnity
lasted, in a White Garment, his Head adorned with a Crown of pure Gold shaped
like the Leaves of Laurel, and was worshipped as if he had been Apollo. This
Officer, if the Olympic Games were peculiar to Antioch in the East, as to Elis
in Greece, (so says the learned Commentator on the Oxford Marbles, though the
above cited Inscription in Honor of Paulinus persuades me to believe that the
Games were also celebrated at Smyrna,) was also peculiar to that City. But the
rest of Asia had their other Games in Honor of the Emperors (which were
celebrated by the ((...),) Communities of Asia, Galatia, Bithynia, etc. wherein
the (...) had a principal share. This Office, perhaps, was discharged by Malech
Agrippa at Palmyra, in the Games celebrated in Honor of Alexander the Emperor,
when he came into that part of Syria, in the ((...)) general Meeting of the
Inhabitants of that Province.

At Alexandria, one Order of their Priests were called (...), (and among them,
probably, he who was of more eminent Worth and Station was styled (...)
Scribarum Primus, as among the Lictors, the (...) was Lictorum Princeps,) of
whose extraordinary Sobriety, Continency, and other Virtues, together with
their love of Solitude and Abstinences, Cheraemon the Stoic (who was of the
same Order, say Theodorit and Tzetzes, Ap. Porph, (...). l. 4.
though Strabo speak slightly of him) gives a large Account. And St. Clemens of
Alexandria describes their Habit; (...). l. 6.
(...). That the Sacred Scribe had Wings on his Head (like a Mercury;) that he
carried a Book in his Hand, and a Pot, or Vessel, (for so I render (...), not
Regulam, as the Interpreter: For who carries Ink in a Rule? Ink must be carried
in a Vial, or Pot. So Hesych. (...) ( lege (...)) (...), as I would correct the
learned Grammarian. Id. (...) and so (...)) in which was Ink, and a Pen, to
write with: His Provence was to be acquainted with, and to know exactly the
Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians, to understand Cosmography and Geography, the
Motions of the Sun and Moon, with the Influences of the Seven Planets, the
Chorography of Egypt, the Description of the River Nilus, the Use of the
several Vessels and Instruments employed in Holy Offices, the state of all
Consecrated Places, the several kinds of Measures, and whatever else was
necessary for the accomplishing their Sacred Studies. For in Egypt the Priests
were obliged to make themselves Masters of the Thirty six Books of Hermes,
which contained their Sacred Philosophy, treating of Religion and Nature, (the
other Six Books of his Works being Medicinal,) among whom the Prophet (the
Chief Priest, or Prefect of the the Temple) was bound to learn Ten for his
part (called (...), the Sacerdotal Books) wherein Hermes treated of the Laws,
and the Gods, and the whole Discipline of the Priesthood; the Chanter ((...),
or (...),) the (...) (or (...), as Cheraemon calls them) with the (...), L. 1.
Hieroglyph.
being obliged to learn the rest. And Orus Apollo says, that he who would
describe an (...) in Hieroglyphick, ought to represent him by Ink, a Sieve, and
a Reed: Of the Reed the Egyptians made their Pens, so that Ink, and a Reed,
denoted his Profession; the Sieve (which also was made of the Reed, or Bulrush)
his Condition and Quality, that he was well provided for, and had leisure to
study, those who want Bread being compelled to apply themselves to Mechanical
Trades. And the same Author informs us, they were Judges of Life and Death, not
that they pronounced the Sentence of Condemnation upon Criminals, or granted
Pardons or Reprieves; but that in times of Sickness, they determined whether
the Patient should live or die: (...), (which is, I doubt not, an Egptian word,
nor does it occur in any Lexicon, only in Hesychius I find (...), and perhaps
(...)) for the (...) had a Sacred Book, which they called Ambres (probably a
Medicinal Treatise, one of the six Books of Hermes, which he wrote upon that
Subject) by the Inspection of which, they judged whether the sick Person would
either die, or recover. So much for the (...).

(...).
It is unquestionable, that the Heathens treated their Mock-Deities (and they
did so in smitation of what the True God himself commanded the Jews under the
Mosaical Constitutions) as great Princes use to be served. The Temple was the
Palace of the God, the Priests his Servants; he had every Day his Sacrifices,
(and the Heathen Notion was, That the Deity lived upon the Steams and Blood of
those Oblations, as the True God is said to smell a sweetsmelling savor.) The
Temple was nobly furnished with whatever might serve for Pomp or Use, with
Tables (on which the Meat Offerings and Drink Offerings were presented,) with
Pulvinaria and Lectisternia; with Beds, and Pillows of State, whereon he might
rest himself, (for they believed him Personally present in the Place that was
consecrated to his Honor, as the True God dwelt in the Sanctum Sanctorum) and
whatever other Utensils were requisite: And on the Days of High Solemnity, the
People were entertained at the Expense of the Idol (though themselves paid for
it, part of their own Sacrifices being deputed to that use) with Music, and a
splendid Feast, particularly on the Anniversary Festival of the Dedication of
the Temple; and a Master of the Feast was constituted to see all things managed
with decorum, and in good Order. This Officer, probably, is called, in the
Sacred Writings, (...) in the Palmyrene Inscription, (...) the Symposiarch, in
the Sacrifices of Jupiter Belus; which Office was discharged by Septimius
Orodes. Varro calls the Symposiarch, Modimperator; Arrian, (...) Plutarch,
sometimes, (...), at other times (...), or (...). The Place (as well as the
Entertainment) was called (...). Hesyc. (...). The Seats, or Couches, whereon
the Guests were placed, (...). So the old Glossary. Lectus Genialis, (...).) L.
6. c. 1.
Jubius Pollux says the Symposiarch was the Curator, the Director and Governor
of the Feast; (the (...), or (...), in Aristophanes,) and that he was chosen
either by Lot, or by Vote; by Lot, says In Epict. l. 1. c. 25.
Arrian. Plutarch, in a Treatise written on purpose on this Subject with great
accuracy, as if he had been forming a Statue of Wax, how a Symposiarch ought to
behave himself, says, Quaest, Conviv. l. 1. Probl. 4.
That in his time the Practice was grown into disuse, (I suppose he means in
Private Feasts; for in Solemn Festivals, I question not but it was preserved,)
and that he and his Friends would endeavor to restore it; That the King (so he
calls the Symposiarch) was crowned, after he had been chosen by the common
Consent of the Company; That his Province was, to make and impose the Laws of
Drinking; That he ought to be a Man of Skill in that Exercise, and a Man of
Prudence, to consider that he governed his Friends, (That a Tyrannical
Administration would mis-become such a Prince,) and so to order the
distribution of the Wine according to every Man's capacity, that no one in the
Company might prove troublesome in his Drink, and so to mix Water with every
Glass, that every Man might be able to bear it: By which Method they did wind
up every Man's Humor to such a peg, that the dissonant Tempers, as Discords in
Music make Harmony, might promote the Mirth and Good Humor of the Company. He
blames some Men, who turned the Room into a Court of Justice, a School, or a
Playhouse, introducing Orators with their Declamations, Music and Dancers,
all which he dislikes. He distinguishes between Private and Public Feasts;
between what was Sacred, and what not; and censures Alcibiades and Theodorus,
that they managed the Private Feast of Polytion, as if it had been an
Entertainment at a Solemn Sacrifice; for they had their Torch-bearers, and
Ecclesiastical Officers who explained the Mysteries (Hierophantae,) whereas
nothing should be said or done in such a Meeting, but what is agreeable to the
Design; That a strict decorum ought to be observed in such Meetings; That a Man
with a hoarse Voice ought not to be commanded to sing, nor a lame Man to dance,
nor an old Fellow to comb his Bald Head; That the Institution was serious, though
the Management pleasant and jocular; and that a Reward was given to him who
should entertain the Company with any thing that was new and diverting,
provided it were comely and honest. Thus Plutarch.

That all the Company obeyed the Master of the Feast, is plain from that
passage in Arrian, Vbi sup.
who says, That in the Saturnalia the King was chosen by Lot; That he commanded
every one in Company, and ordered him his Business. (...) ( lege (...)) etc.
Drink you, and do you fill, while the third Man sings; Go you home, you have
your Dose, and come you in: -- And every Man obeys, lest he should disturb the
Mirth of the Company. The Rule of Drinking was stated and known, every Man
according to his capacity, the Symposiarch being Judge, and every wise Man as
much as he pleased. So when the King of Persia made his Feast to his Subjects
((...), the LXX. render it) they all drank according to Law, so say our
Translators; but the LXX. (...), not according to the Rules which were usually
prescribed by the Master of the Feast, every Man drank what himself pleased.
And when Agesilaus the Great, Plut. Apophth. Laconic.
being chosen the Symposiarch, was asked by the Servant who filled the Wine,
what quantity of Liquor he should give to every Man? If there be much Wine
(says he) give every Man as much as he desires; if but a little, divide it
equal. And I question not but these Rules of Drinking were observed in Solemn,
Public and Religious Festivals, as well as in Private Entertainments, since
much of the Pagan Religion consisted in good Eating and Drinking, and other
Methods of Jollity.

(...).
Nor were the Senate of Palmyra only concerned for the immediate Rites of their
own City, but they chose out of their Men of Condition, one or more to inspect
the Places in their Neigh-bourhood, dedicated to their Religious Worship. So
Bolanus the Son of Zenobius, the Nephew of Airanes, who was the Son of Mocimus,
the Grandson of Matthas, was the Curator of the Fountain dedicated to Venus, at
Nacle (or Naclis) a City that was situate between Heliopolis (the Syrian
Heliopolis) and Biblus, under Jaribolus, who being one of their ((...))
Country Gods, was the President of the Place. Of Jaribolus I shall treat
hereafter; at present, of the Overseer or Guardian of the Fountain. The
Curators (that is the true Roman Name) were those who probably superintended
the Repairs of the Fountain, collected and improved the Revenues, and made
Provision for the great Crowds who came thither to consult the Oracle, or
visited the Place, out of (mistaken) Devotion, at the solemn times appointed:
They were the Aeditui Fontium, or the (...).

There were several sorts of (...) among the Ancients, who had their
Denomination from their Concerns: The Overseer of the Appian way ((...)) occurs
in Gruter, P. 495.2.
(and the People of Spain were for a while very eager Disputants for the Honor
of a new Saint, whose Tomb they had found, called St. Viar, through their
mistake of a broken Inscription, of which only these Fragments remained, S.
VIAR, i.e. Curatores Viarum.) So the (...) were the Overseers of their Games,
says Julius Pollux. L. 3. c. 30.
(...). And Princes are said to be (...) -- (...) -- Preservers of the Rights
of Religion, and of their Subjects. The Curators of the Imperial Palaces and
Revenues were Men of the Senatorian, and sometimes of the Consular Dignity,
Lib. 5.
says Agathias: (...). And the Wardens of the Port at Athens are styled (...)
in Harpocration, who inspected the Ships, that bought Corn into the Port, and
took care that the City might not want Bread. They were, says Lib. 6. p. 411.
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, (...), Assistants to the Demarchus at Athens,
Copartners with him in his Government, and Judges of Causes: But now, says he,
from one part of their Business, they are called (...), the Guardians of Holy
Places. The Trust was thought too great for any single Person. At Athens the
number was Five, Aristot. (...). Apud Harpocrat.
the President (or (...),) with Four Assessors, who were chosen by the People,
two out of the Citizens in general, the third out of the Eumolpidae, the fourth
out of the Ceryces (the Descendants from Eumolpus and Ceryx.) In the
Panathenaea and Dionysia their number was increased to Ten, one out of every
Tribe; but their Business was only the oversight of the Games (the Wrestlings,
Pollux. l. 8. c. 9, V. c. 8.
Horseraces, and Music:) And when the greater Mysteries were celebrated, Ten
inferior Priests ((...)) were added to the (...) and (...), as Assistants in
Sacrificing.

But though the Number at Athens, of their Curators of their Mysteries and
Sacred Places, were but Four; at Nacle, its plain, they were more, from the
Inscription, Eight at the least, and how many more we know not. At Ancyra in
Galatia, the (...) was a Person of great Honor, from whose Office they
commonly dated their Inscriptions, the Senate and People crecting a Monument to
the Honor of Fulvius Rusticus Aemilianus their Benefactor, V. Maym. I. in
Memor. Cosson. p. 140.
(...), when Menotesbius Alexander was their (...), (so I am inclined to render
it, not that he only took care of the Inscription.) Marm. 3. p. 141.
Another Inscription was set up to the Honor of T. Fl. Taeanus, (...) (when
Agesilaus Secundus was Phylarchus, so they called the Commander of the Horse of
every Tribe, who was a Lieutenant General to the General of the Horse, says
Harpocration,) Flavius Asclepius and Aurelius Asclepius ((...)) being Curators,
for there were more than One at Ancyra; and sometimes the same Person was both
the Phylarchus and (...). Marm. 4. p. 142.
Another Inscription to the Honor of the same Taeanus being erected ((...))
when Posthumous and Antonius Antoninus were both (...) and (...). But this I
propose only as a Conjecture, and shall be glad to be corrected, if mistaken.

CHAP. IV. Of their Idolatry and Superstition.
I Shall not undertake to fix the Epoch of the Original of Idolatry, nor
determine what Creature on this side the Highest Heaven, which is the Throne of
the Great Creator of the World, was the first Object of Superstitious Worship;
but I have great reason to believe, that when Religious Adoration was first
transferred from the True God, it was given to the Heavenly Bodies, to the Sun
and Moon, they being the most illustrious Visible part of the Creation, and for
ought that any Man, the oldest in the World, could remember or know (further
than Revelation gave him infallible Instruction) might be, as they have
continued Unchangeable and Incorruptible in their Nature, so Eternal in their
Duration, they having been made and fixed in their glorious Spheres, before the
first Man's Breath was breathed into his Nostrils from Above: Whereas the older
Heathens knew the Pedigree, and the times of the several Births of their
Saturns and Jupiters, and the whole Race of Gods derived from them; their first
Books of Heathen Divinity being written upon the Subject of the Theogony, or
the Generation of their Gods.

But besides the Antiquity of their Original, their Usefulness and Beneficence
to the World was another Encouragement to the Worship of the Sun and Moon; (and
if we examine the late Pretensions of Polytheism, we shall find, that in a
great part it proceeded from this Belief, That such and such Persons having
been Benefactors to the World in many useful Inventions, they were for those
Reasons, after their deaths, Deify'd and adored.) For what greater Blessings
were the Heathens sensible of, than what the Sun, and, in a less degree, the
Moon bestowed, who not only distinguished the Seasons of the Year (the variety
of which are necessary to the Productions of the Earth, and the growth of
Animals) and regulated the Computations of Time, but gave to all Creatures
Health and Vigor, and the Preservatives of Life; Light, the first Blessing the
World ever saw, and the truest Emblem of the Divinity; and Heat, and genial
Warmth, to cherish and Promote the Ease of Mankind, which also produced all
things necessary for Life, formed Minerals in the Bowels of the Earth, and
regulated the Motions of the Sea.

And when some of the most ancient of the Eastern Sages, finding some Discords
in Nature, which they could not reconcile, agreed to assert two First
Principles of Good and Evil, yet they chose the Sun to represent Both (as a
common Agent in both their Names;) because when the Sun was in their Horizon,
they were Partakers of its Light, and its Heat; but when it retired, they were
covered with Darkness (unless supplied by the Moon) because his Influences gave
Life, and promoted the Generation of Animals, but his Absence introduced
Corruption and Death. And to preserve the remembrance, since the Sun was not
always in view, the Orientals maintained an Unexstinguisht Fire to represent it
(nothing here below comeing so near to the Image of that great Light, as Fire.)
Nor did those Sages believe those glorious Planets to be mere Machines fixed to
their Orbs, but, as the Platonists talked of Intelligences, who moved those
great Bodies, so they thought them the Residences of the Divinity (the Sensible
Sun to be the Seat of the Intellectual Sun.) And so the Manichees, who had
their two first Principles from the Persian Magi, aver'd, that our Blessed
Savior dwelt in the Sun: And therefore they, contrary to the Christians of
those early Ages, who constantly and at all times adored toward the East,
directed their Worship toward the Sun, in what part soever of the Heavens he
was, believing that to be the Tabernacle fixed for our Blessed Lord, in which
he lived and moved. And among the Egyptians (between whom and the Persians, or
Chaldeans, there was a Dispute for Seniority in the Schools of ancient
Learning) they had a Tradition, That the first Books of Religious Worship were
given to them by a Hawk, who brought them to the Priests of Egypt from the Sun,
whose Bird the Hawk was, and by which they represented that noble Planet; as
they did also Venus, says Horapollo.

And its unquestionable to me, that Baal, V. Seld de Diis Syris.
Moloch, Milchom, Rimmon, Chemosh, Chiun, Nisroch, Nergal, and several other
Deities mentioned in the Sacred Writings; as also Saturn, Jupiter, Hercules,
Osiris, Belus, Apollo, Mithras, Marnas, etc. were no other than the Sun: as
Astarte, Urania, Isis, Milytta, Alilath, Cybele, Juno, Lucina, Diana, and
Venus, were no other than the Moon. The Phaenicians called the Sun, (...) (says
Philo Byblius) The only God of Heaven, who hears all Men's Prayers, and inspects
all their Wants, says Orpheus, (and from Orpheus the Pythagoreans, as from
Pythagoras the Platonists, and other Greeks, received their Knowledge of the
Gods, says In Plat. Timaeum, p. 289.
Proclus, out of Pythagoras himself; (...)). The King, says Julian (i. e.
Moloch) the Governor of all Things. And the Moon is called the Queen of Heaven,
in Holy Writ; and the Mother of the World, in Alexander of Aphrodisias, and
Plutarch. For though the Heathen Deities were worshipped differently in different
Countries, and under different Names, they had all relation to the same thing,
says Artemidorus, (...). l. 1. c. 9. p. 14.
((...).) And this I shall briefly prove.

That the Sun is described under that variety of Names, is plain from the
ancient Writers and Inscriptions: Saturn was the Sun, says Ad Autolic. l. 3. p.
282.
Theophilus; (the Orientals worshipped Saturn, whom they called Bell, or Baal; and
these Orientals were the Phaenicians and Syrians, says Damascius, in the Life
of Isidorus, Apud Phot. Cod. ^42.
who called Saturn, El, Bell, and Bolathus; and no Man doubts but Bell was the
Sun:) And so was Jupiter in the Esteem of the same Syrians, says Saturn. l. 1.
c. 23.
Macrobius; Assyrii quoque Solemn sub nomine Jovis, quem (...) nominant, maximis
ceremoniis celebrant in civitate, quae Heliopolis nuncupatur; (who, in the
Palmyrene Inscriptions, is called (...), in others, (...).) And Herodotus says,
the Persians called the whole Circle of the Heavens, i. e. the Course of the
Sun, Jupiter. And from the Coins we learn, that the Ancients had their (...),
i. e. the Sun; as well as their (...), the Moon. Par. 1. p. 20.
Malela informs us, That Mars was Baal; That the Assyrians erected a Pillar at
first to Mars, whom in the days of Justinian they continued to worship, calling
him, in the Persian Tongue, the God Baal, i. e. Mars the Warlike. (Though
Jamblichus avers, that Azizus, i. e. Mars, among the Syrians, was but one of
the Assessors, or Attendants of the Sun.) No Man doubts but that Apollo was the
Sun; (and as it was customary to hang up Tables of extraordinary Cures, with
the Method of Cure, in the Temple of Aesculapius at Coos; so was it usual, at
Heliopolis, to do so in the Temple of the Sun: For C. 121.
Nicolaus Myrepsus says, that the Medicine called Climax Hermaicus was
transcribed from the Original preserved in the Temple of the Sun at Heliopolis,
written in the Cilician Characters.) And so was Adonis, says Satur. l. 1. c. 21.
Macrobius, (Adonim Solemn esse non dubitabitur, inspecta religione Assyriorum,
apud quos Veneris Architidis, and Adonis maxima olim veneratio viguit, quam
nunc Phaenices tenent) worshipped both by the Syrians and Phaenicians. Now
Adonis, among the Phaenicians, signifies a Lord, (...), says Hesychius; i. e.
Adonai, among the Jews; among the Syrians, Moloch; but by the Egyptians,
Tammuz. Mercury (the Syrian Mocimus, in Jamblichus) was one of the Attendants
of the Sun; and so was Hercules; as Mnevis and Apis were sacred to the Sun and
Moon in Egypt, and Anubis was reckoned of his Guard, In Plat. Polit. p. 417.
((...), says Proclus;) as the Baetuli in Syria were reckoned his Assistants,
says Damascius: And such, I suppose, were Jaribolus, and Malachbelus, and
Alagbelus (or Elabelus, as it is written in the Inscriptions) at Palmyra: not
the Summer and Winter Sun, as Mr. Seldom; nor the Sun and Moon, as Mr. Halley;
but Dii Patrii, or Penates, Assistants to the Sun. For the Sun was reputed the
King of Heaven, surrounded with numerous Guards, and a Crowd of Attendants,
(called, in Holy Writ, the Host of Heven,) the Signs of the Zodiac were
reckoned his Assessors; and the Planets, his Lictors, his (...), or
Mace-bearers, says our very learned Seldom, out of the Ancients; and it is
considerable, that most of his Names among the Orientals, were rather
expressive of his Dignity, than his Nature, as Baal, Moloch, Mithras, Marnas,
Adonis, and the like, which are all Titles of Honor and Authority.

And if Jupiter Thalassius were the Heathen Neptune, then Neptune was the Sun;
(...), says Hesychius; He was worshipped at Sidon: And it is well known, that the
Sun was the God of the Sidonians. And Nonnus, in his Dionysiaca, Lib. 11.
says (...), etc. That he was called Belus by the Syrians (the Inhabitants of
Euphrates, at Palmyra, and thereabout,) Ammon in Lybia, Apis in Egypt, Saturn
among the Arabs; but among the Assyrians, Jupiter, Nor was Pluto a different
Deity, says the Emperor Julian, whose excellent Oration in Praise of the Sun is
well worth reading, (...).

That Sarapis also was the Sun, is plain from what is already said, and from
the old Inscription in XXII. 10, 11.
Gruter, (...). And Par. 2. p. 46.
Malela says, that Theodosius caused to be shut up at Alexandria ((...)) the
Temple of Serapis the Sun. That the Persian Mithras was the same Deity, no Man
doubts. Oeconom. c. 8.
Xenophon, who had been in that Country, says that they swore by Mithras the
Sun. And the ancient Inscription in XXXIII. 9.
Gruter is dedicated (...). And whereas Damascius says, that at Heliopolis, the
Image of Gennaeus, in the Temple of Jupiter, was worshipped in the Figure of a
Lion erect; what does it represent, but the Mithrae Leones, of which Tertullian
treats? so was Bell. Serve. in Aen. 1. Lingua Punica Bal dicitur apud Assyrios
autem Bell -- and Saturnus, and Sol. And Zosimus says, L. 1. p. 56.
that when Aurelian had built a noble Temple at Rome to the Honor of the Sun,
he placed in it (...), read it (...)) the Images of the Sun, who was Belus,
which he had brought with him from Palmyra: This Bell was the same with the Deus
Belenus of the Germans, and the Abellio of the ancient Gauls, and accordingly
they offered Humane Sacrifices to him: Hominem optimam, and gratissimam Diis
victimam, says L. 3. c. 2.
Mela of the old Gauls. Thus was Moloch worshipped among the Jews, Edomites, and
others, who sacrificed their Children to the Idol. The same Oblation did the
Africans make to Saturn; and Elagabalus the Emperor, to his Country God
Alagbaal his Namesake, says In Pseud. Anton. l. 5.
Herodian.

That Osiris, Omphis, and Nilus, were different Names of the same glorious
Luminary, our learned Mr. Seldom has undeniably proved. And so was Orus, says
Horapollo, L. 1. Hierogl.
((...).) In short, Julian says, that all the several Names of the Heathen Gods
were expressive in a different manner of the Glory of the Sun; (...). Nor did
the Arabs, in the time of Alexander the Great, worship any other Gods but the
Heaven, i. e. the Sun and Bacchus, says L. 7. de Expedit. Alex.
Arrian, [or rather Bacchus and Urania, as Herodotus, and Celsus in Origin,
affirm, i. e. the Sun, and the Moon; for Bacchus was no other than Auson.
Epigr. 29.
Osiris, and Adonis,] the Island of Nosala, and some other whole Countries,
being dedicated to his Service. In Palestine they devoted Horses and Chariots
to his Honor, to denote the Swiftness of his Motion, 1 King. 23. and they
worshipped him toward the East, the Rising-Sun, Ezekiel. 8. turning their Backs upon
the Sanctum Sanctorum, which was toward the West. His Festival was celebrated
with great Pomp, says Julian; his Birthday was celerated on the 25th. of
December, says the old Calendar, and his Day of the Week, at Antioch, was
dedicated, in their highest Solemnities, to the noblest Exercises, the
Horse-races, says Malela. And when the Heathens swore with the greatest
gravity, Marm. Oxon. 1.
they called him to witness the Truth of what they said; (...) (not (...), as
it is published,) I swear by Jupiter, the Earth, the Sun, and the other Gods.
And this I mention, that I may take leave to mention another such Correction in
Edit. Ox. p. 7.
Aristeas; (...), etc. (not (...):) for if so, it should be (...), etc.

The Moon was reputed the Sister and Wife of the Sun, as Juno was of Jupiter;
and the same with Venus, says Philochorus, in Macrobius. Now, Venus was a very
comprehensive Name among the Ancients, says Tetrabib. l. 1.
Ptolemy, The Syrians worship Venus, as the Mother of the Gods, ((...),)
calling her by several Names in several Countries. And Plutarch affirms, In
Crass.
that the Goddess of Hierapolis was by some called Venus; by others, Juno; by a
third sort, Nature, that gave Beginning and Seeds to all Things: By the
Assyrians, Arabs, and Persians, she was adored under the Name of Urania, says
Lib. 3.
Herodotus: And in Africa, says Apologet.
Tertullian. And Lib. 6. Met.
Apuleius calls her Dea Caelestis magna Jovis germana, and conjux. And so says
Plotinus, ( Urania was Venus and Juno, the Wife and Sister of Jupiter.) And she
is called by Lib. 5.
Herodotus, (...), the Governess of the Stars, i. e. the Queen of Heaven. (And
for this reason the Egyptians accounted it absurd to call Heaven, (...), by a
word of the Masculine Gender; they styling it Urania, because the Moon governs
all Things.) And therefore Elagabalus the Emperor being himself called by the
Name of the Sun, called his Wife Urania, as if they had been the Sun and Moon.
de Dea Sir.
Lucian says, that the Syrians at Byblos (the next Town to Hierapolis, for this
reason, in the Coins, called (...), the Sacred Byblus) worshipped Venus and
Adonis with great Solemnity, and that the Phaenician Astarte was the Moon,
((...), says Procopius, in 2 King. 17.) she being adored in Syria under that
Name, in the days of (...). l. 1. c. 9. p. 14.
Artemidorus, i.e. under the Antonines, ((...).) And the abovementioned Lucian
says, that the Juno at Hierapolis (the Goddess of Syria) was of all Shapes, but
still the same Goddess; she was in some Features like Minerva; in others, like
Venus, the Moon, Rhea, Diana, Nemesis, and the Destinies. Vbi sup.
Macrobius says, that the Syrians worshipped Adonis ( i. e. the Sun,) and Venus
Architis ( i. e. the Moon.) Some Critics read the word Adargidis, others,
Dercitidis; but Mr. Seldom, Aphaciditis. And it must be acknowledged, that
Venus was solemnly worshipped at Aphaca, a Place not far from Hierapolis; and so
probably was she at Arca, a City in Syria, not far from Aphaca, and near both
Hierapolis and Byblus, the Place where Alexander Severus was born, says P. 114,
118.
Lampridius (who in one place calls it Vrbs Arcena; in another, Arca Caesarea)
one of the Inland Ptol. l. 5. c. 15.
Cities of Phaenicia. So that I think the words in Macrobius need not
correction: for as from Aphaca is derived Aphacitis; so from Arca, Arcitis.
Venus being the known Deity of all that Country, De C. D. l. 4. c. 10.
St. Austin wonders why the Heathens should account Vesta and Venus the same,
while the one was the Goddess of Chastity, the other the Patroness of Lewdness:
But his Admiration would have ceased, had he considered, that the same
Mock-Divinity was represented under those different Names. That Isis, Lucina,
Diana, Hecate, etc. were the Moon, is proved by Mr. Seldom: And though Athens
were Minerva's own City (and she the Patroness of Modesty,) yet Theseus their
Founder commanded the Citizens to worship (...), says Attic. p. 20.
Pausanias, the same, I suppose, with Pallas. The Pythagoreans sacrificed to
Venus ( i. e. the Moon) on the Sixth Day of their Week, i. e. Friday, says Vit.
Pythag. l. 1. c. 28.
Jamblichus; a Day sacred also among the Arabs (being dedicated to their
Urania) long before Mahometanism prevailed among them. And lest the Moon should
be treated with an inferior Worship, and appear without Attendants, the
Ancients offered Immortal Fire to Her, as well as to the Sun, says Julian, and
gave her a Paredrus, or Companion; (...), in Hesychius; the (...) Sors Lunae,
says Mr. Seldom; Satur. l. 1. c. 19.
but Macrobius says, that (...) is the Moon herself.

And it is to be observed, that the Ancients allowed not of Sexes among their
Gods; or rather, thought every God of both: Hence Orpheus calls the Moon,
(...). And so is Bacchus styled, (...).

And Calvus the old Poet, in Macrobius, Pollentemque Deum Venerem.

And the Deus Lunus was famous in the East, worshipped at Carrae in Mesopotamia
(on whose Coins a Cock is stamped, bebecause he was (...), says Vit. Pyth. l. 1.
c. 18. and l. 2. c. 21.
Jamblichus in the esteem of the Pythagoreans, (...), sacred to the Sun and
Moon,) at Ancyra in Galatia, at Antioch in Pisidia, at Nisa in Caria, at Gaba
in Galilee, at Juliopolis in Bithynia, at Magnesia in Asia, at Saettae in
Lydia, and at Sibiduda in Phrygia Salutaris, as the Coins in F. Harduin
expressly declare.

It is highly probable, that the Worship of the Sun was the Religion of the
Chaldeans, in Abraham's time, when God rescued that learned and devout
Patriarch from the Prejudices of his Education, and the Persecutions of his
Adversaries; (and if the Sacred Rites of the Chaldeans had their Original in
Egypt, and were thence transplanted into the East, the Idolatry begun much
earlier:) But this we are sure of, that the first Account that is given us of
Idolatry, in the oldest Book in the World, the oldest, at least, that is come
to the hands of the Men of the later Ages (the Book of Job, which, I may
presume, was penned before the History of the Creation it self) is that of the
Worship of the Sun and Moon, of Job 31.26, 27.
worshipping the Sun in his splendor, and the Moon walking in her brightness,
long before any of the Heathen Saturns or Jupiters could enter their claim,
they all having been born long after Job's time. And the Form of Adoration
there mentioned is very ancient (Kissing the Hand, and paying Obeisance,) which
is naturally rendered by (...) and Adoratio, among the Greeks and Latins. And
when the Jews turned Idolaters, they are said, Judge. 10. to worship Baalim and
Ashteroth, that is, in the Punick Language, says St. Augustine, the Jupiters
and Juno's of the Heathen World; by which he cannot mean other than the Sun and
Moon: For Jupiter and Juno, in the Age just after Joshua, were not then in
Embryo; and when the Gentiles of succeeding Ages, the latter School of the
Platenists (who were great Admirers of the Orphick and Pythagorean Rites)
ashamed of the Accounts which the old Poets gave of their Gods, turned all the
Story of Homer and Hesiod into Mythology; they still continued the Worship of
those glorious Planets. With what Pomp and Ceremony of Eloquence does Julian
the Apostate Emperor treat of this Subject, in his Hymn written in Praise of
the Sun, styling him, the King of all the World, the Most Divine Prince, and
the Common Father of Mankind, ( Aurelian calls him a Deity that he was sure of,
Deus certus Sol.) and, that all things, from one end of the World to the other,
were governed by his Providence; affirming, that for his own part, he had from
a Youth a great regard for him; and that at Constantinople they kept an Annual
Feast, and offered Sacrifices to his Honor. Nor does he forget the Moon, who
was solemnly worshipped at Athens after his time: For N. 11,
Marinus, in the Life of Proclus, informs us, that when Lachares and Syrianus,
upon the first appearance of the Moon, did adore the Goddess ((...),) that
Proclus retiring a little way from them, put off his Shoes (another Custom and
Rite of Religious Worship, as old at least as Moses, when he conversed with God
in the Bush, continued by the Platonists, in compliance with the Rule of
Pythagoras, (...), that he who would sacrifice, ought to discalceate,) and then
saluted, i. e. adored the Deity, ((...).) L. 4. p. 245.
And when Zosimus the Pagan Historian studiously aggravates the Severity of the
Edict of Theodosius, who destroyed all the Heathen Temples and Images, he
subjoins, that it was very dangerous for any Man, at that time, to assert the
Rights of Paganism, to affirm that the Heathen Deities were Gods, or so much as
to look up to Heaven, and to worship the Sun and the Moon ((...).) And at this
day, among those poor Savages who inhabit the remotest part of Earth, in
Greenland, and other Parts of the North, if they have any Religious Ceremonies,
any Object of Worship, they bow down to the Rising-Sun, and acknowledge its
Divinity: As in like manner the old Scythians, L. 3. c. 5.
with whom one continued Night, as in Greenland, lasted half the Year, worshipped
Apollo, says Mela. Nor could the Christians easily be weaned from this Custom
at Rome, a long time after Christianity had prevailed there; for many of them,
in the days of Pope Leo the Great, Ser. 7. de Nativitat. Christi.
when they came into the Church of St. Peter, as they went up the Steps that
led to the Altar, turning themselves about, bowed their Heads, and worshipped the
Rising-Sun.

This Worship was objected to the Jews, in the days of the first Roman
Emperors, by Petronius and Juvenal, that they worshipped nothing but the Clouds,
and the Sun, (for so I render Caeli Numen,) i. e. in the Sacred Style, the Host
of Heaven. And in the Reign of Honorius and Theodosius, the Caelicolae were a
new upstart Sect of Superstitious Votaries ( Nomen inauditum quodammodo novum
crimen superstitionis vindicantes, Cod. l. 1. tit. 9.. 12.
in the words of the Law) called Caelicolae, says the Collector of the Synopsis
(...), because they worshipped the Heavens ((...)) who had their separate Places
of Meeting, their different Rites, and distinct Ministers of their Religious
Ceremonies: But whether they were Jews, the remains of the old Essens, as some
affirm, (though the Law seems to me plainly to distinguish the Caelicolae from
the Jews,) or some Christian Heretics, the Progenitors of the Euchitae (as
others affirm, though the Law also seems to distinguish them, when it makes
them liable to the same Penalties with Heretics,) or rather some of the
Remains of the old Heathens, who renounced their Saturns and Jupiters (whose
Divinities they could not vindicate; because whatever is God, must be Eternal)
but stuck to the Worship of the Sun and Moon, as the later Platonists did,
because they believed them Eternal, and of the same Duration with the Supreme
Being, I will not undertake to determine.

Considering what has been already asserted, I think it needs not much more
Proof, that Syria was eminently famous for the Worship of the Sun and Moon. In
Syria, it is most probable, that this Idolatry either had its first Original, or
its most immediate Propagation; and there it continued till Paganism breathed
its last in that part of the East, till the Followers of Mahomet, professed
Enemies of Polytheism, made use of the Sword to extirpate it. The whole Country
seemed to be devoted to this Service; Edessa is called the Region dedicated to
the Sun, from the Beginnings of Time ((...)) and sow as Hierapolis-Byblis said
to be consecrated to Venus and Adonis, and so was all Phaenicia. Aeschylus, in
his Supplices, styles Phaenicia, (...), i. e. says the Scholiast, because all
the Coast about Mount Libanus was particularly addicted to the Worship of that
Deity: The Worship begun in Assyria (or Syria;) from them the Men of Ascalon
brought it into Phaenicia, and from them the Cypriotes derived their
Superstition.) Ammian, Marcel. l. 23. c. 23.
And in the Emperor Julian's time, the Moon (the same with Venus, as I have
already proved) was most solemnly worshipped at Carrae, and in all the adjacent
Country; and their most illustrious Princes thought it not a diminution of
their Honor to be Priests to their Gods; Herodian. l. 5.
Bassianus and Alexianus (i. e. Elagabalus, and Alexander Severus his Brother)
were both consecrated Priests of the Sun, though both reputed the Sons of
Caracalla the Emperor, and their Mother was undoubtedly the Empress Julia's
Sister, and themselves Candidates of the Empire, (and, as of old, the Eldest of
the Family was both Prince and Priest; so Herodian affirms that Bassianus was
consecrated to that Service, because the Office peculiarly belonged to the
Eldest Brother:) Ithobalus, or Ethbaal the King of Tire, was the Priest of
Astarte, Ad Autolic. p. 257.
says Theophilus: And when Pompey, having subdued Mithradates, distributed
Kingdoms among the great Men of Asia, who had given him Assistance, he made
Archelaus the Priest of Venus, in Commagene; which entitled him to a
Principality and Authority not inferior to the Royal Dignity, says Bell.
Mithrad. p. 251.
Appian. And what extraordinary Influence Sampsaigeramus the Priest of the same
Idol at Emesa had upon that Country, has been already demonstrated.

How much addicted Palmyra was to Venus, who appointed Curators of her Fountain
at Nacle, out of her most eminent Inhabitants, and what a glorious Temple was
erected in that City to the Sun, so adorned and beautified, that Aurelian
thought the Spoils worthy his carrying to Rome, has been formerly mentioned;
and though that victorious Prince, in the heat of Action, could not prohibit
his Soldiers the plundering and defacing that noble Structure, he soon after
took care, though the rest of the City was left buried in its own Ruins, that
the Temple should be re-edified; Vopisc. p. 219.
for Aurelian had a particular Veneration for the Sun (whose Figure appears
often on his Coins,) Id. p. 213, 217.
his Mother had been the Priestess of Apollo, in the place where he was born;
and when his Affairs at Emesa (in his Engagement with Zenobia) were desperate,
it is pretended that his Foot were encouraged to support his routed Horse, by an
extraordinary Person whom he knew not at that time; but when he returned to
Emesa, and went into the Temple of Elagabalus to give Thanks for his Victory,
he there met the same Figure which had appeared to him; whereupon he founded a
Temple in that City to the Sun, (a new Temple, without doubt; Herod. ubi sup.
for the Temple of the Sun was famous at Emesa before Aurelian's time, for its
Beauty and Magnificence, its extraordinary Riches, and the Quality of the
Votaries who sent their Offerings thither, the neighboring Barbarous Princes
every Year making their Presents to Elagabalus,) and another at Rome, Zosim. l.
1. p. 56.
upon which he bestowed a vast Sum of Money, adorned it with the the Spoils
of the famous Temple at Palmyra, having at the same time offered his own
unparalleled Robe to the Deity.

In Syria, and the neighboring Provinces, lived the Philosophers who kept up
the Reputation of Paganism, when it was exposed to the severest Prosecution of
the Imperial Edicts: Porphyry was of Tire; Sopater a Syrian; Jamblicus a Native
of Chalcis; Vranius was of Apamia; Eustathius and Aedesius, Cappadocians;
Proclus of Lycia; Marinus a Samaritan of the City of Sichem; Damascius of
Damascus; Simplicius a Cilician; Hermias and Diogenes, Phaenicians; Isidorus of
Gaza, etc. And whatever progress Christianity might have made in other Places,
it is plain, from the Epistle of Julian to Libanius, that Heathenism defended
its Possession in Syria; for when that unhappy Apostate Emperor made his
Expedition into Persia, from Berrhaea to Batnae, all the Country was full of
Sacrifices; the smell of Incense had persum'd the Air; and at Hierapolis he met
with more than a few who had been Confessors, in the former Reigns, for the
Ancient Rites. In Malela's time, the Assyrians continued to worship Mars, or
Baal; and whoever shall read Damascius's Life of Isidorus, may satisfy himself
what Methods the Philosophers of those days used to support the Interest of
Polytheism, what Visions they pretended to, what Magical Rites they used, and
what Miracles were wrought in Confirmation of their Opinions; Zosimus
affirming, that in his time a Globe of Fire hovered up and down in the Air,
about the Temple of Venus, at Aphaca, the Place whither the Men of Palmyra sent
to learn their Fate, when Aurelian threatened them with Ruin, says that
bigoted Advocate of Idolatry, who thus relates the Story; That when they
having consulted the Oracle at Seleucia, in Cilicia, had received from thence a
melancholy Answer, they sent to Aphaca, a Place situate between Heliopolis and
Byblus, where the Temple of Venus Aphacitis stood: Near that Temple was a
natural Fountain, that seemed as if it had been made by Art; to this Fountain
the People of that Country, at those Set-Times, when they met there, brought
their Offerings, either of Gold or Silver, Silks, or Linen Clothes, or
whatever else was of Value: If Venus was pleased with the Oblation, the
Garments that were offered sunk to the bottom, as well as the heavy Metals; but
if the Deity was displeased, all swom on the top of the Fountain; and that this
Omen befell the Men of Palmyra, the Year when their City was destroyed. But the
Oracular Fountain, that foretold the Ruin of Palmyra, could not secure it self
from a like fate in a few Years after, under Constantine the Great, which
Eusebius, the Church Historian, thus relates; Eusebius. Vit. Constant. l. 3. c.
55. and Orat. de laud. Constant.
That the pious Emperor having been informed, that the pretext of Religion, was
only a cover for notorious Debaucheries, resolved to destroy all those Places
that were destined to the Gratifications of the Flesh, particularly the famous
Temple of Venus in Phaenicia: That on one part of the Mount Libanus, near the
top of it, in Aphaca, a Grove and Temple had been consecrated to Venus, not in
the middle of a City, or in the Highway, where the Ambition of the Heathens
prompted them, for the most part, to build their Temples, but in a retired
Place, remote from all Towns, and public Roads, where a School of Lewdness was
erected, where effeminate Men prostituted themselves to unnatural Lusts, in
honor of the Demon; and the Female Sex, laying aside all regard to Modesty
and Religion, devoted themselves to gratify the irregular Desires of all
Pretenders, they living without Control or Observation; because no virtuous
Person durst approach the Place; till that illustrious Prince commanded his
Soldiers to demolish the Temple, and so put a period to those abominable
Practices, giving the Pagan Inhabitants truer Notions of Religion and Chastity:
This, says Eusebius, was the Fate of that infamous Temple. But see the Malice
and Disingenuity of a zealous Heathen: Zosimus affirms, that a miraculous Fire
hovered over the Place in his time. And Damascius tells strange Stories of the
same nature, Vit. Isidor.
in his days, of the Globes of Flame (the Baetuli) that frequently appeared
about Mount Libanus: That the Worship at Aphaca was in use before Marcus
Antoninus's Reign, the Palmyrene Inscription demonstrates: Zosim. ubi sup.
The Solemn Meetings there were Annual, the Practices most execrable, Lust and
Luxury making a great Figure in all their pretended Religious Ceremonies,
especially in that Country, Lucian himself avering, that at Byblus, De Sir. p.
658. and ult.
a very little way from Nacle, the Women who refused to cut their Hair in the
time of their solemn Mourning for the Death of Adonis, were obliged for a whole
Day to prostitute themselves to all Strangers; and whatever they got, was to be
spent in a Sacrifice to Venus.

Aphaca was the Name of the Place, says Zosimus ((...)) and Eusebius seems to
be of the same Opinion (there being many Cities of that Denomination in Syria,
Eusebius. de loc. Hebr.
one belonging to the Tribe of Juda, another to the Tribe of Asher, a third in
the Coasts of the Amorites, a fourth a City of Syria;) but others, with greater
probability, that the Name of the City was Nacle, (and of the Well Aphaca;) so
says Suidas expressly, V. (...) and v. (...).
upon the Authority of Christodorus, who wrote the History of Nacle, or Naclis,
(a Book which, if extant, would have much illustrated this part of our History)
that it stood near Heliopolis, and that the Rites called (...) (not (...), as
it is in the printed Copy) were there performed. What is meant by (...), the
Lexicographer informs, Etymol. M. V. (...).
that it is a Syriack word, (in the Arabic it signifies Praeputium, or
Vinculum,) and that if it be fit to render such a word into Greek, it signifies
[(...) Hence probably in Hesychius, (...), and (...).]
Embraces, Venus in that place embracing her Darling Adonis; and probably Nacle
has a like signification.

CHAP. V. An Accounu of Vaballathus.
HAving, in the foregoing History, averred, that Vaballathus was not the Son of
Odenathus, as the generality of Writers have attested; but the Grandson of that
heroic Prince, as Monsieur Tristan and F. Harduin have affirmed; I think my
self obliged to give my Reasons for my Opinion; the Roman and Greek Historians
of those times being either wholly ignorant of him, as, I think, Trebellius
Pollio, Zosimus, and others were; or mistaken in his Pedigree, as Vopiscus, who
is the only Author who mentions him, seems to be.

That Odenathus had Grandsons before he assumed the Purple, Trans. p. 88.
appears to me very plain from the Palmyrene Inscription, where Septimius
Odenathus (the same, I believe, with the Emperor of that Name) at that time a
Man of the illustrious Senatorian Order and Dignity, built a Monument for
himself, his Sons, and Nephews, or Grandsons, ((...).) That those Nephews could
not be the Offspring of Herennianus and Timolaus, the Sons of Zenobia, is to me
undoubted; because at their Father's Death they were very young, says the Roman
Historian, (Zenobia, Trebel. Pol. p. 180.
quod parvuli essent filii ejus, qui supererant, Herennianus and Timolaus, ipsa
suscepit imperium,) and therefore may be supposed the Sons of Herodes, or
Herodianus, whom Odenathus begat on a former Wife; and for these Reasons, and
by the help of the Inscriptions, I am inclined to deduce the Line of that
Family after the following manner: NASORUS VABALLATHUS. AIRANES. SEPTIMIUS
ODENATHUS. N. his first Wife ATHENAEVS HERODES. SEPTIMIVS AIRANES. HERMIAS
VABALLATHVS.

SEPTIMIA ZENOBIA his second Wife HERENNIA^^^ TIMOLAVS. Daughters married at
Rome to Persons of the Senatorian Dignity. Their Children at Rome, A. C. 400.








I have been encouraged to believe that Odenathus in the Inscriptions was the
same Person with the Emperor of that Name, from his prae-Nomen Septimius, which
cannot justly be presumed to have been used in the East, before the First
Emperor of that Name made his Inroads into Persia. Now Septimius Severus died,
Anno Christi 211, before which time Odenathus may well presumed to have been
born, being murdered Ann. Chr. 26 and I have given him a second Son, from the
Authority of the Inscriptions, where Septimius Airanes, Page 99.
a Man of the Consular Dignity, is said to have been the Son of Odenathus, the
Date of the InInscription confirming it, viz. A.C. 253. I have also adventured
upon adjusting the Pedigree of his Ancestors, from the same Inscription, Page
88.
where Septimius is said to be the Son of Airanes, the Grandson of Vaballathus,
the Great-Grandson of Nasorus (according to the Method of the Arabs, who
usually reckoned their Descent after that manner;) for I cannot think Airanes
to be the prae-Nomen of Vaballathus, since all their fore-Names were either
Roman or Greek, to neither of which Languages Airanes belongs. I have also
subscribed to the Opinion of Tristan and Harduin, that Vaballathus was the Son
of Herodes; not only because Herodes is in the Coins represented with a Beard,
which implies some Years beyond Youth, while Vaballathus has a very young Face,
but because the Coins declare him to have continued Emperor, after Zenobia was
conquered; and I am so far from thinking that his Mother-in-Law held the Empire
in his Name, that I believe she prosecuted him, as she did his Father, that she
might enthrone her own Children; the Subject, it must be confessed, is much in
the dark, and for want of Directions from the Ancients, it is easy to be
mistaken, but the luckiest Conjecturer in such Cases is the best Critic. It is
plain from the Historians, V. Tristan. Tom. 3. p. 2^8, etc.
that there were violent Contests between Herod and Zenobia, while Odenathus
was alive (as it seldom happens that Mothers-in-Law look over-favourably on
their Predecessor's Children) but that those Disputes served only to advance
the Son in his Father's Favor, who had declared him his Copartner (a little
while after himself had been made Emperor) and consequently his Successor; and
accordingly the Coins mention the third Year of his Reign, whereas Odenathus
wore the Purple but four Years, being then murdered, and with him his Son
Herod. Upon whose Death, I doubt not, but Vaballathus immediately assumed the
Imperial Title and Dignity, as in right he ought, and probably was confirmed in
his Pretensions by Claudius and Aurelian, (otherwise his Name and Titles could
never have appeared on the reverse of the Coins of Aurelian; for neither
Zenobia's nor either of her Son's Name is found on any of the Imperial Coins of
the Romans, because in open Hostility with them; which confirms me, that
Vaballathus was not the Son of that great Queen,) his Fourth Year being
coincident with the First, his Fifth with the Second of Aurelian, (which
unquestionably proves him to have been Declared Augustus, as soon as his Father
was dead;) but being convinced that Zenobia had made the Army firm to her
Interests, and declared her own Sons Emperors, he fled to the Romans for
Protection, who being well assured of the Justice of his Title (his Grandfather
Odenathus having been declared Emperor at Rome, whose right Heir V^ballathus
was, whereas Zenobia had no such Pretensions) treated him with that Respect
which those great Princes used to pay to distressed Monarchs; and I doubt not,
but in Gratitude to his Patrons, he assisted Aurelian, not only with the Equity
of his Cause, but with what Forces he could bring into the Field. In the Sixth
Year of his Reign, he had the Satisfaction to see his Competitors conquered,
and led Captive to Rome; Goltz. Thesaur. p. 73.
and the Coins tell us, that he bore the Title of Emperor in the Fourth Year of
Aurelian, which was the Seventh of Vaballathus, (AYT. K. OYAALLATHOE L.) which
was the Year after Palmyra was ruined. From whence it plainly appears to me,
that he was a Confederate of the Romans in that War, his Effigies and Titles
being stamped on the reverse of Aurelian's Coins, that very Year that he
undertook his Expedition into the East, as well as the Year after Zenobia was
subdued; for that was a Privilege never granted but to those Princes who were
in League with, and had done good Service to the Roman Commonwealth. So
Rhemetalces King of Thrace is joined with Augustus, and Abgarus the Toparch of
Edessa with Marcus Aurelius, to demonstrate their being in the Interests of
those Princes, but with some distinction in the Habit of the Head, or Crown, to
denote their Subjection; for when Vaballathus wears a Wreath or Diadem, then
Aurelian wears a Crown of Laurel; but when Vaballathus wears a Crown of Laurel,
Aurelian wears a Crown radiated, or, as the Heralds call it, rayonee.

How long Vaballathus lived after the Eighth Year of his Reign, or what his
Fate was, I know not; but I am inclined to believe that he sunk by degrees in
the Favor of Aurelian, and being deprived of the Imperial Dignity, was forced
to content himself with the meaner Title of King, or Viceroy, and that this
happened in the two last Years of that Emperor; for to that Year I refer those
Coins, wherein he is styled VABALATHVS REX. V. Fulv. Vrsin. Not. ad Vopisc.
Aurel. Mezzob. p. 407. Patin. Jud. f. 29.
-- VABAL. LATHVS REX VCRIM. P. P. -- VCRIMOR -- VCRIMP -- VCRIMDR. -- VERIMP.
-- VABALATVS ITER. IMP. R. -- all which are Latin, and consequently seem to be
coined, not in the East, but somewhere nearer Rome, but all in the Reign of
Aurelian; and from them I conjecture that Aurelian, after he had settled his
Authority in Syria, destroyed Palmyra, and put an end to the Pretensions of the
Family of Odenathus, obliged Vaballathus to decline the Title of Emperor, and
to use that of the Imperial Vicegerent in the East; and that this is employed in
the Coins, where he is said to be VCRIMOR (wrongly in others VCRIMDR, or
VCRIMP) not Vice Caesaris Rector Imperii Orientalis, as F. Harduin very
ingeniously (because in Aurelian's Age, and long before, Caesar was a Title of
Honor inferior to that of Imperator, Spart. p. 35. Capitolin. p. 24.
Aelius Verus being the first who was declared Caesar, but never was Emperor,
the Title at that time, and in future Ages, being appropriated to the Heir
Apparent of the Empire; so that it should have been Vice Imperatoris, as
Nemesius is styled in Clxviii. 4.
Gruter,) but Vir Clarissimus Rector Imperii Orientalis; for so the Governors
of Provinces were styled, Grut. CL. 9.
in the Language of the Law, and in the old Inscriptions, Fabius Maximus V. C.
Rect. Prove. etc. This Province Vaballathus managed more than once, being said
to be ITER. IMP. R. i. e. iterum Imperii Rector, a second time the Emperor's
Vicegerent in the East; for such were the Toparchs of that Country (the Name
demonstrates it, Toparcha is Vicemgerens,) which was in some Ages filled with
those Roytelets: Such also were Phylarchs of the Arabians, who held their
Dignity at the pleasure of either the Romans or Persians, to whom they were
subject. (Thus Agrippa, upon his Father's Death, was made Prince of Chalcis,
but when he had continued in that Government four Years, Joseph. Antiq. l. 20.
c. 3, 5.
was displaced by Claudius, but made Tetrarch of Iturea, Batanaea, Trachonitis,
and Abilene, to which the same Emperor afterward added a part of Galilee.) But
though their Territory was small, their Ambition commonly was very great, and
the Titles which they affected very pompous, witness a Coin of Antiochus the
Fourth, V. Harduin. Number. p. 587.
one of the little Princes of Sebaste, a corner of Cilicia erected into a
Kingdom by Vespasian, says Ant. l. 18. c. 7.
Josephus, who styles himself (...), the great King; and another of Abgarus on
the reverse of Severus, with the same Title; it being very likely that
Vaballathus, prompted by the like Vanity, styled himself Vaballathus Rex Vcrim.
P. P. Vaballathus the King, and the Father of his Country, (as in a Latin Coin
of Zenobia, whom Theodorit, who was of Cyrrhestica, a Province not far from
Palmyrene, calls the Toparch of Palmyra; she is said to be Queen or Governess
of all the East; Zenobia Aug. totius Orientis R. i. e. Rectrix, or Regina, as
she styles her self in her Letter to Aurelian;) unless this Inscription
intimates to us another change in his Fortune and Tenure, that he was
constituted the Prince of that part of Cyrrhestica, whose chief City was Vrima
(in the Coins, by mistake, Vcrima, and Verima) situate on the Euphrates,
between Samosata and Edessa, near the Midway, and an Episcopal See.

Against this Opinion, that Vaballathus was the Grandson of Odenathus, the
learned Spanheim musters all his Forces, Dissert. 7. de Vsu and Pr Numism. p.
597, etc.
and blames Monsieur Tristan for indulging too much to his own Wit and
Conjectures, while Vopiscus says expressly that Vaballathus was Zenobia's Son, (
If. Casaubon's Notion, that it was only a fictitious Name, through mistake of
the Greeks, who understood not the Syrian Language, needs no further
Confutation;) for which Opinion also Salmasius contends earnestly, the Credit
of Vopiscus supporting it. But it is plain, Not. in Vopisc. p. 380.
that Vopiscus was deceived in that Paragraph, when he says, That Zenobia did
not hold the Empire in the Name of Herennianus and Timolaus, but of her Son
Vaballathus. -- expressly against the Assertion of Trebellius Pollio, 30 Tyr. p.
198.
who affirms the contrary; and of P. 216.
Vopiscus himself, in another place, That Zenobia held the Empire of the East
(Nomine Filiorum) in the Name of her Sons. -- And that the Coins are an
unquestionable Confirmation of this Truth, Spanheim himself confesses, in which
the second and third Years of their Empire is recorded; and therefore (if any
Manuscript would give countenance to the addition) I should think, with
Tristan, that the word (Herodis) is left out, and that it should be read
Vaballathi Herodis Filii; or probably Vopiscus might mistake his Author, (for
P. 209.
he confesses, that he took all his Notices out of the Greek Writers,) and
through haste, read (...) for (...), and so translate Filii for Nepotis. But
the placing the Head of Vaballathus on the reverse of Aurelian's Coins, is to
me an unquestionable Evidence that he was not Zenobia's Son; for I believe
there cannot be one Instance produced of any Emperor who gave such an
Allowance, but to a Friend and Confederate; whereas Zenobia and her Sons were
always in professed Enmity, and open War with the Romans, and the Romans with
them, who were very eager, all through the Reign of Claudius, to have that
haughty Queen subdued, and the Empire wrested out of her Hands. Nor will the
Years of his Reign agree with this Opinion (if Vaballathus were carried a
Prisoner to Rome with Zenobia, and Zenobia did not reign above five or six
Years;) for those in Goltzius mention the Seventh Year of his Reign; one of
which was stamped at Troas, implying, that that City declared for his Interests,
in the fifth Year of his Empire, the Year in which Aurelian went to the East;
and the Figure of Hope on the reverse of one of his Latin Coins, Mauroceni
these. c. 13. p. 143.
implies his Expectation to be restored by that puissant Prince, who had been
so long kept out of his Right by his Mother-in-Law.

But Spanheim enforces his Opinion with a second Argument, That Herod's Name
does not appear in any of the Coins of Vaballathus, nor is there any Proof that
Herod was ever called Athenas, or Athenaeus. To which I answer in general, That
it was the Custom of that Age and Country to have Two Names, the one Latin or
Greek, the other Syriack, as Septimius Odenathus, Hermias Vaballathus; so that
it is not improbable, that Herod was called Athenaeus, ( Athenas, Athenaeus,
Athenodorus, from Athene, i. e. Minerva, as Hermias from Hermes, or Mercury.) I
once thought, that (...), by the transposing the Letters (done by the Greek
Monetarii, ignorant of Syriack) was put for (...), (by which Name Malela, the
Syrian Writer, always calls Odenathus;) but from one of the Coins in Goltzius,
Thesaur. p. 73.
(...) -- I am enclinable to read it, (...), Herodes and Orodes being the same
Name, and always so written in the Inscriptions. But of this Conjecture I must
leave those Persons to be Judges, who have seen those rare Coins, while I
profess I was never so happy.

CHAP. VI. An Account of Longinus.
HAving accounted, as well as I could, for Vaballathus, I shall easily be
pardoned by all the Lovers of Learning, if out of a due Reverence to the Memory
of Longinus, I endeavor to adjust the Particulars of the Life of that
admirable Man.

Who his Father was, we know not, it having been the fate of many other
excellent Persons, that the World has been left ignorant of their Parents, or
the Place of their Nativity; but his Mother's Name was Frontonis, Suid. (...)
the Sister of the famous Fronto (Nephew probably to the great Plutarch) by
Birth of the City of Emesa, by Profession an Orator, who having, in the Reign
of the Emperor Severus, fixed his Residence at Athens, became a Competitor for
Glory in his public Exercises with Philostratus the Elder, and Apsines of
Gadara, and died at Athens, leaving his Nephew Longinus the Critic his Heir.
Whether Longinus was born at Palmyra, as the Editor of his Book of the Sublime
Conjectures, I know not; though it be not altogether improbable that his
Mother, who was of Emesa, might marry at Palmyra, a City not far from it;
though Tanaquil Faber, in his Edition of that excellent Treatise, from that
Passage of Vopiscus in the Life of Aurelian, Page 219.
(That Longinus dictated the haughty Epistle of Zenobia to the Emperor
Aurelian, though it were written in Syriack --) would conclude, that Longinus was
not born in Syria; and that those who determine that that Country was the Place
of his Nativity, are confuted by Vopiscus.

He is usually called Dionysius Longinus, but for what reason, or from what
Manuscripts, I know not; Suidas expressly calling him Cassius, though I rather
think it should be Casimus, as it is in the old Milan Edition of that
Lexicographer, when he reckons up the Authors out of whom he compiled his Work
((...)) Casimus, Abul Casimus, and Al-Casem, being Arabic Names, that commonly
occur in the Saracenick History.

In his younger days he traveled into many Countries to improve his Studies,
Ep. Longini apud Porph. Vit. Plot.
(his Parents giving themselves the Satiffaction to travel with him, and to
observe his Proficiency,) where he contracted an Acquaintance with the most
learned Men of all Nations, who were the Ornaments of that Age, with Euclides,
Democritus, and Proclinus of Troas, the Platonists; with Plotinus, and
Gentilianus Amelius, of the same Sect at Rome; with Ammonius and Origin, under
whose Tuition he was a long time (probably at Alexandria, where also he
acquired the Acquaintance of Heliodorus the Peripatetick;) with Theodotus and
Eubulus, who kept up the Platonic Succession at Athens; with Themistocles and
Phebion, the Stoics; with Annius and Medius, with Herminus and Lysimachus,
with Athenaeus and Musonius, of the same School at Athens; as also with
Ptolemy, and another Ammonius, the Peripateticks.

Having thus gratified his Curiosity in his Travels, and furnished his Mind with
they useful Learning of the Age, he fixed at Athens, probably under the Tuition
of his Uncle Fronto, who engaged him in the Study of Philology, where he soon
discovered his excellent Genius, and was reputed the most famous Critic of his
time, his Judgment of Authors being so much valued, that it became the Standard
of that learned Age; and every Book was either approved or condemned, as
Longinus pronounced its fate. At Athens, I conjecture, he wrote his admirable
accurate Treatise of the Sublime, upon the Importunity of his Friend Posthumous
Terentianus (or, as some other Copies read it, Sect. 10.
Florentianus) to whom he dedicates it; for, speaking of the most celebrated
Orator, he calls him, our Demosthenes, and reckons himself among the Greeks. At
Athens, Porphyry became his Scholar, Eunap. Vit. Porphyrii.
a Privilege much valued in that Age; for Longinus was reputed a living
Library, his Province engaging him to consider and censure the Writings of the
Ancients. And there Longinus changed his Syrian Name Malchus into that of
Porphyrius (as Amelius, upon the same dislike, called him Basileus) training
him up in the Niceties of Gramma^ and Rhetoric, and accomplishing his Juvenile
Studies; and Porphyry, who himself was an excellent Critic, calls him in
gratitude ((...)) the Prince of the Critics, and the best Philologer of his
Age: For if any Man had adventured to correct an ancient Writer, his Opinion
never found Approbation, till it was confirmed by the judicious Longinus. Nor
was his whole time spent in Criticism; though Plotinus, touched with a little
Envy, for they did not agree in all their Sentiments, said he was a good
Philologer, but not a Philosopher; for he professed himself a Platonist, and, as
such, celebrated the Festival of Plato (probably his Birthday) at Athens,
Porphyr. apud Eusebius. Prepar. l. 10. Porph. Vit. Plotini.
according to the Custom of those Times, with great Solemnity, and gave himself
up to that Allegorical way of Writing to which that Sect of Philosophers
indulged; for from him, and Numenius, as well as from the Books of Plato,
Origin learned his method of Allegorizing the Holy Porphyr. apud Eusebius. H. E.
l. 6, c. 19.
Scriptures. How long he filled the Platonic Chair at Athens, or who succeeded
him, I know not; as also, whether he ever lived at Magnesia ad Sipylum, or not,
and were the Praetor of that City, Successor, perhaps, to his Uncle Fronto in
that Office; since I find in the Coins of Valerian, V. Hard. Nummi.
(...). h. e. (...) (another Aurelius Fronto was Praetor of Byzantium, under
Alexander Severus;) and in another of Gallienus, (...). Nor can I fix the Year
when he retired into Syria, and settled himself at Palmyra, where his Learning
and Wisdom rendered him very illustrious, and capacitated him to assist Zenobia
with his Counsels, till his death, and to educate her Sons in all good
Literature. But though he gave himself to the Study and Practice of the Rules
of Government, while he lived at Palmyra, as became a Privy-Counsellor to a
great Queen, V. Gesn. Biblioth.
and there probably writ his Book of Tacticks, for the use of that warlike
Empress; yet he was far from deserting his other beloved Muses, but made
diligent Enquiries after the Writings of all the learned Men of that Age,
Porph. ubi sup.
especially of Plotinus. The Country where he was, lay remote from the known
Seats of polite Learning; the People, in an active and contentious Age, were
more addicted to Arms than Arts: And the Language of Palmyrene was so very
different from the usual learned Tongues, that he looked about him a long time,
till he could find a Copyist that understood so much Greek, as to enable him to
translate the Works of Plotinus; but having found a fit Man, he confined him to
that Province, as himself relates in his Epistle to Porphyry: Such a Value did
he put on the Works of that profound Platonist, though he did not agree entirely
with him, and took an occasion to write against him and Amelius, expressing at
the same time a deep Veneration for them both. He encouraged Amelius to visit
the East, and of him purchased all Plotinus's Works: And having heard that
Porphyry, by his Abstinence, and other Severities, had impaired his
Constitution, he invited him also very earnestly to come to Palmyra, assuring
him that that Air would repair his ruined Health, and kept up his
Correspondence with his old Friends to the day of his death: And there also he
wrote his Panegyric upon Odenathus (probably upon the Death of that heroic
Emperor) which Libanius was so fond of; but whether he composed any of those
Books at Palmyra, either in Critic (for he censured both Poets and Orators) or
Philosophy, the loss of which the learned World bewails, is uncertain: This we
know, that that haughty Epistle which Zenobia sent to Aurelian, when he
required her to resign her Authority, was said to be dictated by this great
Man, the Resentment of which gave occasion to his death; for that severe and
proud Emperor hated any thing that seemed to check his Power, or ruffle his
ambitious Thoughts.

So fell the admirable Longinus, to the grief of all good Men, who bemoan his
fate, and the loss of his excellent Writings, most of which, in all likelihood,
perished when Palmyra was destroyed. I had some Intentions to have subjoined an
Account of his Works, but I supersede that Disquisition, as foreign to my
present Design, till some other Occasion offers.

CHAP. VII. A short Commentary on the Inscriptions.
I Have digested the Inscriptions, not as they are set down in the Journal,
where they are placed as they incidentally fell under the Traveller's Eye, but
under their several Heads, to which they seem reduceable. And first I begin
with the Sepulchral Inscriptions, the Epitaphs inscribed upon the Tombs of the
People of Palmyra.

I.
(...). Which may be thus rendered:

Monumentum sepulchrale propriis sumptibus condidit Septimius Odenathus
eminentissimus Senator, Aeranis filius, Vaballathi nepos, Nasori pronepos, and
sibi, and filces suis, and nepotibus in perpetuum, in honorem sempiternum. This
Inscription contains an Account, That Septimius Odenathus, the most excellent
Senator, had erected that Monument for himself and his Posterity, to preserve
their Name for ever. And he has hitherto had his Wish, the Monument having
escaped the Fury of Time, the Rage of the Roman Soldiers, and the Madness of
the superstitious Arabs, who are professed Enemies to all the remains of
venerable Antiquity. That this Septimius Odenathus was the same illustrious
Person who afterward was declared Emperor, I suppose, P. 27.
I have already proved to be very probable.

(...) occurs not in the Lexicon, but signifies a Place of Burial. The Place is
the Sepulcher, the Epigraphe the Monument, says In 3 Aeneid.
Servius; Operis extructio sepulchrum, nomen inscriptum monimentum; but a
Mausolaeum contained many Sepulchers, as one Sepulcher might include many
Monuments; the Tomb being built very often (as our Vaults) for the service of
the whole Family, as this of Odenathus was erected for himself, his Sons and
Nephews; others, for the Owner, his Children and Servants, etc. whereas
whosoever laid violent Hands on himself, was to be buried alone, Plato, l. 9.
de Legib.
and without an Inscription: The shorter the Epitaph, the more honorable it
was accounted, so it contained the Achievements of the Person there deposited,
it was not to exceed four Heroical Verses, says Plato, ((...)) and of this kind
( i. e. very short) are the Palmyrene Inscriptions. Pausan. l. 2.
But the Men of Sicyon chose a much shorter Method, inscribing only the Name of
the Dead Person (not mentioning so much as his Father's Name) and wishing him
Joy; while the Palmyrenians inserted their Pedigree to four or five Generations
past. By such Monuments the Ancients thought to perpetuate their Memory to
Eternity, and for this reason the Grave is commonly called Domus Aeterna, V.
Gruter. passim.
Domus Perpetua, Domus Aeternalis, and Sepulchri Perpetui Honor; and what is in
this Inscription said to be done (...), is in another Monument said to be,
(...). And with their own Names they inserted those of their Progenitors, that
they also might be enrolled in the Annals of Honor. And they often took care
to inscribe the Epitaph in several Languages, that other Nations might be
thereby instructed in the Name and Virtues of the Dead, (and perhaps, that they
might preserve some remains of their native Language likely to be supplanted
and forgotten.) Capitol. Gordian. 3. p. 165.
Thus, when Philip had slain the Emperor Gordian, the Army buried him at
Circeia Castra (or Circesium) in the Confines of Persia, and wrote his Epitaph
in Greek and Latin, in the Persic, Jewish, and Egyptian Languages, that all
Nations might understand it, To the Deify'd Gordianus, the Conqueror of the
Persians, the Goths and Sarmatians, the Arbiter of the Roman Seditions, the
Conqueror of the Germans; but not the Conqueror of the Philippi, for they
murdered him.

2.
The Second Inscription contains an Epitaph which Soraechus erected to his Wife
Martha, Ann. Christi 178. in the 1 8/9 of Marcus Antoninus the Emperor:

I. (...).
(...). And may thus be rendered:

In memoriam Marthae Alexandri Capadeti filiae, Vaballathi Neptis, Symonis
proneptis Soraechus Aeranis filius, maritus illius posuit mense Martio, A. D.
490. 3.
The Third is of the same nature, appropriated by Malchus to himself and his
Children, tho's built by his Ancestors:

To (...). Hoc Monumentum condiderunt Elabelus, Mannaeus, Sochaeis. Malchus
vero Vaballathi filius, Mannei nepos, Elabeli pronepos sibi, and filiis posuit,
anno 414. mense Aprili. It is plain, that in this Inscription there is a
mistake in the first line, of (...) for (...), and a greater in Grammar, if
Elabelus, Mannaeus, and Sochaeis, be taken for the same Man; I have therefore
rendered it literally from the Greek, and have reason to think that there is
another mistake in the Name (...), for if Malchus were the Grandson of
Mannaeus, the Great Grandson of Elebelus, as the Inscription demonstrates, then
Sochaeis and Vaballathus must be the same Person, for he is expressly called the
Son of Vaballathus; nor is it unpardonable to imagine, that Inscriptions set up
by Syrians, who cannot be presumed exact Masters of Greek, and transcribed in
some haste, might be subject to mistakes, many such (whether of the Graver or
Copyist, I cannot determine) frequently occurring to the diligent Reader; and
therefore I believe that (...) should be changed into (...), or (...) OAEI /
OLLLTHO) the same Name with Vaballathus, by which Alteration the whole
Inscription is very intelligible Sense, and Grammar.

4.
(...) I. (...).
(...). Thus rendered:

Monumentum in sempiternum honorem aedificavit Gichus Mocimi filius,
Caelcialcisi nepos, Mannaei pronepos in sui, and natorum, and posterorum
sepulturam, anno 314, mense Aprili, i. e. Chr. 2o. I very much doubt, that more
than one fault occurs in the Names of the Persons, (and perhaps for (...), we
may read (...) al is a common prefix; and Asisus, or Azisus, a Syrian Name.
Josephus mentions Azizus a Roytelet of Emesa; it was also the Name of their God
Mercury;) and if so, it must be rendered, Mocimi, qui and Azizus, filius,
Mannaei nepos. But I dare not vouch for the Emendation; whatever therefore may
become of that Conjecture, it is certain, that there is a mistake in the Date,
and that for DIT we ought to read DIY. (Y and T are letters easily confounded,)
because in the Inscription, for S, and o for O, and E for E are used, all which
never appear in any genuine Coin, or Marble, till Domitian's time, as the
Critics agree.) This Inscription therefore is of the same Year with the
precedent, the Monument being set up, Ann. Chr. 102, the Fourth of the Emperor
Trajan: And these two are the most ancient Inscriptions at Tadmur. I have
rendered (...) by honos sempiternus, upon the Authority of Hesychius, (...).

5.
From the Inscriptions of the Sepulchers, I proceed to consider their public
Monuments, erected by the Order of the Senate and People of the Commonweal^h of
Tadmur, to the Honor of such of their Citizens who had deserved well of the
Republic. The first that occurs, relates to Alilamenes, or rather Alcamenes.

(...). Senatus, Populusque (Palmyrenus) Alcamenem Panii Mocimi, qui and
Aeranes, filium, Matthae nepotem, and Aeranem illius patrem viros pios, and
patriae amantissimos, and omnimodo public placentes patriae, and penatibus
honoris ergo, anno 450, ultimo mensis Aprilis, h. e. Ann. Chr. 131. Hadriani
Imp. emortuali. Alcamenes is a Name well known, and frequently occurs; but
Alilamenes, no where, that I remember. Thucyd. l. 8.
Alcamenes was one of the Generals of Agis King of Sparta, sent into Eubaea
when that Island revolted from the Athenians, afterward made the Governor of
Chios, and slain by the Athenians at Pireaeus. Another Ttetz. Arel. 8. p. 147.
of that Name, was a famous Statuary in Brass, a Contemporary and Rival of the
great Master Phidias; or perhaps it should be read, Alexamenes. Alexamenes the
Son of Damon was the Polemarchus, or General of the Aetolians, says CXXIX. 15.
Gruter; and instead of Panius, I would read either Pinnius, which is no
unusual Name among the Romans ( L. Pinnius Celer, and L. Pinnius Celsus occur
in the Inscriptions) or rather Phanius; (...), in DV.
Gruter; (...), the Praetor of Apamia, in the Harduin. p. 58.
Coins. That this Phanius Mocimus was also called Airanes, the Inscription
demonstrates, wherein Airanes is expressly called the Father of Alcamenes; they
are both magnified for their Piety, and their Love to their Country (as
Barachias, and Mocimus his Son, are applauded in the next InInscription) to
which they were great Benefactors, while in gratitude their fellow-Citizens
honored such Patrons with the magnificent Titles of (...) ( Founders of their
City,) (...) ( Saviors,) and (...) (Benefactors,) paying them the highest
Respect while alive; and perpetuating their Memory when dead, by a thankful
Remembrance, by public Statues, and noble Inscriptions, according to that
excellent Sentence that is happily preserved among the Fragments of the ancient
Gratitude in one of Gruter's Marbles, 896, 4.
(...). That good Men, even when they are dead, ought to be recompensed, and
celebrated. -- Thus the Senate and People of Ancyra, the Metropolis of the
Tectosagi, honored L. Fulvius Rusticus Aemilianus, Calpurnius Proclus, and T.
V. Marm. Cosson. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Flavius Taeanus, their Benefactors, their Founders, and Saviors. This Title
of Benefactors was sometimes given to Kings, says the Holy Writ, Luke 22.25. to
the Ptolemy's, Mithridates, to Philip of Macedon, and other Princes; even to
Women, so Berenice is called by Eratosthenes: sometimes by Sovereigns to their
Subjects, so Artaxerxes honored Mordecai with the Title of Benefactor and
Savior, says Antiq. l. 11. c. 6.
Josephus. Their Names and Achievements, for the Preservation of their
Masters, being recorded (V. Esth. 6. 1, 2.) and a particular Reward always V.
Heredot. l. 8.
appointed them; at other times to whole Countries, so the Agriaspae were
called Arrian. l. 3. de Exped. Alex. p. 73.
(...), (the Persian Name is Orosangae, says Herodotus,) because they amsted
Cyrus the Son of Cambyses in his Expedition against the Scythians; a Title that
demonstrated their Likeness to the Deities, [for the Egyptians called their
Nilus and Osiris, i. e. the Sun, Omphis, which signifies a Benefactor, says De
Isid. and Osir. and Julian. Orat. 3.
Hermaeus in Plutarch,] to whom also a good Man was sometimes accounted a
Benefactor, for so Clinodemus the Son of Lebotus is by a public Decree of the
Senate and People of Delos declared ((...)) he and his Posterity Benefactors to
the Temple and People of Delos. V. Oxon Marm. Apn. 1. and 3. p. 287.
And Dionysius of Berytus is celebrated as a Benefactor to his Country Gods, so
the learned Editor of the Oxford Marbles, and others, understand the
Inscription, (...), i. e. Beneficus erga Patrios Deos, while the Inscripton may
be thus rendered, I think more properly, Dionysius Zenonis filius Theodori nepos
Berytius beneficus (h. e. solenni decreto Berytiornm (...), seu Benefactor
sancitus) Diis Patriis (Marmor sc. seu aram posuit, seu dedicavit.) Thus in a
curious Inscription found and transcribed by Monsieur Spon, in the Isthmus of
Corinth; the Dedication is made, (...), Miscellan. erudit. Antiquit.. 10. n.
111. p. 363.
Publius Licinius Pyaem. Priscus Iuventianus, the High Priest for Life,
devoting to his Country Gods, and his Country, the Altars which he had built,
the Provisions which he had made for the Athletae, who should come thither to
the Isthmian Games, with other munificent Buildings erected to their Honor:
Upon which account we may well presume him a Favorite to the People of Corinth,
and to the Penates; as Alcamenes and his Father Airanes are said to be pleasing
not only to their fellow-Citizens, but to their Country Gods, who probably by
an Oracle declared their good Opinion of their Persons, and acceptance of their
Services; for so Julius Aurelius Zenobius is in another of these Inscriptions,
P. 97. Transact.
said to be for his extraordinary meritorious Services to his Prince and
Country, honored with a Testimonial from the God Jaribolus, (who was doubtless
one the Country Gods, or Penates of Palmyra;) and Bolanus declared in a third
place to be chosen one of the Curators of the Fountain Aphaca by the same God
Jaribolus, P. 103.
the Heathens paying a great Veneration to their Country Gods, or Penates, (for
so the old Glessaries instruct us. Penates, (...); Goth. l. 1. c. 25. p. 375.
and vice versa (...), Penates: and Procopius says, that Janus was the first of
the ancient Gods, whom the Romans called Penates, (...), h. e. Penates, Ep.
Jamblich.
(...).) For when Julian the Emperor would pass an extravagant Complement upon
his Friend Jamblichus, (if the Epistle be his, which I much doubt) he says,
that as soon as he came into Bithynia, he offered him his Presents, as if he
had been one of his Country Gods, (...).

6.
(...)...... Senatus, populusque Bareichen (seu Barachiam) Amrisamsi filium
Jariboleos nepotem and Mocimum illius filium viros pios, and Patriae amantes
honoris ergo coluit. This honorary Inscription needs no Commentary, since it is
so very like the former, unless it be worth remarking that Jariboleus is here
the Name of a Man, as elsewhere of a God, it being very usual to give the names
of their Deities to their great Men; though perhaps it might not be reckoned
the wildest of Conjectures to imagine, that Amrisamsus was called Jariboleus
after the name of his God, to whose Patronage he had committed himself, and by
whom he was nominated to some Office, perhaps the Priesthood, as Bolanus was by
the same Deity to the Office of Curator of the Fountain Aphaca.

The following Inscription is very noble, and very instructive.

7.
(...) (...). S. P. Q. (Palmyrenus) Julium Aurelium Zenobium, qui and Zabdilas,
Diosmalchi filium, Nassumi Nep. militantem in adventu Dei Alexandri, and
indefessa praesentia, inservientem Rutillio Crispino Duci, and deductis
vexillationibus; aedilem, nec suis parcentem sumptibus, sed and optimum
Magistratum, ideoque testimonio ornatum a Deo Jaribolo, and a Julio......
nobilissimo Praefecto praetorio, and a Patria, Patriae amantem, honoris ergo.
Anno. 554. Christi sc. 242. Gordiani tertii. To understand this Inscription
aright, it is requisite to reflect upon the State of both the Roman and Persian
Empires at that time, which I shall briefly consider. Alexander the Great
having made himself Master of all the East, Zosim. l. 1. page 18.
his Successors the Kings of Syria, kept the Possession of that part of the
Empire, till Arsaces the Parthian, provoked by the Injuries done to his Brother
Tiridates, took Arms, and having slain Pherecles the Governor of the Country,
laid the Foundation of the Parthian Empire (which whither it commenced under
Seleucus Callinicus, or his Father Antiochus, who called himself the God, I
will not undertake to determine:) This Empire lasted 270 Years, L. 2. and
Herodian. l. 6.
says Agathias out of the Records of that Country, from Arsaces their first
King to Artaban the last, under whom Artaxeres, ( Zosimus calls more properly
Artaxerxes) an obscure Persian, but of an aspiring Mind, of great Courage and
Industry, having fermented several of the Natives into a Rebellion, after three
Battles fought with success, seized Artaban, and, having muther'd him, put the
Crown on his own Head, and so translated the Empire a second time to the
Persians. This happened, Agath. l. 4.
says the abovementioned Historian, in the five hundredth and thirty eight
Year of Alexander the Great, ( i. e. of the era Seleucidarum) and in the
fourth Year of Alexander the Son of Mammaea: Artaxerxes having thus conquered
the Parthians, and settled himself in the Throne, the next Year after, viz. the
fifth of Alexander, he made his Incursions into the Roman Territories.
Alexander at first attempted to divert him from his Inroads by his Letters; but
finding the Method unsuccessful, he marched with a powerful Army into the East,
fought that potent Prince, forced him to fly, and got a glorious Victory,
having taken 300 Elephants, Lamprid. page 133.
destroyed 200 more, slain an Hundred and twenty thousand of their Horse,
besides 10000 of their (Cataphractae) Troops, that were armed cap a pe; he also
recovered Mesopotamia out of their hands, and first taught the Persians how to
serve the Romans; after which he returned to Antioch, and from thence to Rome,
where the Senate decreed him a Triumph, as the Reward of his Services on the
25th of September, Anno Christi 22 6/7.

This Victory, says Cassiodore in his Fasti, was obtained in the first Year of
Alexander, Julianus and Crispinus being Consuls, (his Coss. Alexander Xerxem
Regem Persarum vicit) but he is mistaken; for not to mention, that Julian and
Crispinus were not Consuls, till the Year of Alexander (who came to the Empire
Anno aer. vulg. 222. the 10th of March, after Heliogabalus was slain) being
fixed by all the other Fasti, (both those of Idatius, and those, which the most
Learned Mr. Dodwell has published out of the MSS. of Sir H. Savil, and Isaac
Vossius) to the Year of Christ 224. Agathias positively avers, that Artaxerxes
did not assume the Crown of Persia, till the fourth Year of Alexander Mammaeae,
which is exactly coincident with the 538th year of the era Seleucidarum, and
the vulgar Year of Christ 22 6/7 and this account the Historian declares he had
from the Archives of the Persian Kings.

In this Expedition the Palmyrenians declared for the Interests of the Romans,
against the Persian Usurper, and sent their Troops to their assistance under
their General Zenobius. This Zenobius is said to be the Son (...), or (...).
like (...), the Names of the Heathen Gods being usually given to the Men of
illustrious Descent; this Diosmalchus was the Son of Nassumus: Transact. page
98.
In another Inscription a like name occurs, (...). The Expedition of Alexander
is styled (...), that great Prince having been dead some years, when this
Inscription was erected, and by the Senate deified, who appointed him a
College of Priests, called Alexandriani, and ordered a Festival to be kept on
his Birch-day, Lamprid. page 136.
which the Romans continued to celebrate near a hundred years after, in the
days of Constantine the Great; and to this Deification probably the (...) in
the Inscription, has a remote relation; for the Heathens seldom speak of their
Princes, but as of sacred Persons, their Persons were numina, and all their
Laws and Actions divine. Thus (...) is often used; when Eunapius treats of the
Title of Philostratus's Book of the Life of Apollonius, he says, it rather
ought to be styled (...), the Pagans setting up that Impostor in opposition to
our blessed Savior, who being God, made his appearance among Men. So St.
Gregory of Nazianzum, Orat. 38.
calls our blessed Lord's Incarnation (...). It was the common Opinion of those
Ages, that their Gods did upon some solemn days descend from Heaven, put on
humane Shape, and appear in those Cities, for which they had a particular
Regard, (as many of the Ancients thought the Martyrs did frequently show
themselves in those places, either where they had been born, or put to death,
Vid. Dion. Chrysostom. Tars. 1. page 408.
or buried;) and this Descent they called (...); and being prone to Deify their
Princes, and to treat them with all sort of divine Honors, whenever the
Emperor vouchsaft to visit any City, they entertained him with the highest
Testimonies of Joy and Exultation, and reputed the Day a solemn Festival; and
therefore in the Coins (...). V. Harduin. number. p. 397.
And Adventus Augusti faelicissimus frequently occurs, and in another of the
Inscriptions at Palmyra, (...).

The Imperial General in this Expedition was Rutillius Crispinus, (the
Praenomen of that great Man being restored to him from this Inscription, no
ancient Monument else calling him other than Crispinus: Lamprid. p. 61, 63.
) Tullius Crispinus was the Praefectus Praetorio under Didius Julianus; but he
cannot be the Man; but there was another Crispinus, a Man of the Consular
Dignity, who with Menophilus, Capitolin. Maximini. 2. p. 146.
after the barbarous Murder of Alexander Severus, maintained Aquileia against
Maximinus, who in vain besieged it. They were both sent by the Senate to
preserve that important Place; Id. p. to 169.
and they maintained their Province with so much Courage, that the Soldiers
dispairing to take the City, fell upon their Generals, and slew both Maximin
and his Son, in their Tents. The same Crispinus had been long before Colleague
with Julianus in the Consulship ann.. of Alexander Severus, of Christ 224. from
the Death of Alexander the Great 547. and from the Year of Augustus (or the
Epoch of the Battle at Actium) 253. say the ancient Fasti, published by the
most Learned Dodwell. Upon this General Crispinus Zenobius of Palmyra, was a
constant Attendant, assisting the Auxiliary Troops with whatever Necessaries
they stood in need of in those barren Deserts; (...): i. e. Vexillationibus,
Vexillariis, or auxiliariis, the words being of an equivalent inport; for those
very Troops, V. Salmasin H. A. Script. p. 125.455.
which Tacitus calls in one place auxiliorum cohortes, he presently after
styles vexillares cohortes, the whole Roman Army being divided into their own
Legions; and Auxiliaries, says Monsieur Saumaise, auxilia in cohortes divisa,
cohortes in vexilla, itaque cohors semper de auxiliis, and vexilla de
cohortibus; the Dux Vexillorum in the Inscriptions being the same with the
Praepositus auxiliorum.

Zenobius was also (...), or aedile of his City, (the Office I have already
accounted for) and he adorned his Province with great Magnificence, for so I
read (...) (or (...)) (...), the Phrase (...) frequently occuring in these, as
in several other Inscriptions; and for this Reason, among others, he is
honored with the Title of a good Magistrate, (...);) for this generous and
beloved Officer had his public Testimonies, that he deserved the noblest
Character that could have been given of him, since both the Gods and Men were
Vouchers for his Merit; the God Jaribolus, Julius Philippus, the Praefectus
Praetorio of the East, together with all his fellow-Citizens, having publicly
attested his Love to his Country. Of the God Jaribolus, P. 168, 169
and his Oracle, I have spoken already; and the Monument it self is an
undeniable Proof of the Regard his Country had to him, and with what respect
the Roman Governor of the East treated him. Who this Praefectus Praetorio of
the East was, will be easily found, if we reflect on the Date of the
Inscription, an. aer. Seleucid. 554. i. e. Christi 242. the year before the
youngest Gordian was slain; at which time Julius Philippus the Arabian, was the
Praefectus Praet. of the East.

Capitolinus affirms, P. 161, 162.
that Gordian proclaimed the War, and went into Persia, when Praetextatus and
Atticus were Consuls: i. e. says Onuphrius, in the year of Christ, according to
the vulgar Computation, 242. for then C. Ausidius Atticus, and C. Ausinius
Praetextatus were Consuls; that Misitheus died, and Philip succeeded him,
Apriano, and Papo Coss. that is, the year after, an Christi 243. for then C.
Julius Arrianus, and Aemilius Papus were Consuls; but that the Year following,
when Peregrinus, and Fulvius Aemilianus were Consuls, Gordian was slain the
first of March, and Philip succeeded him. So say the Fasti of Idatius, and
others; and so says Cassiodore, (that in the Consulate of Peregrinus and
Aemilianus, Gordian was slain by Philip, as he was returning home crowned with
Laurel for the Conquest of the Persians, not far from the Roman Territories
near Circesium; for there he was buried, that being the Roman Boundary toward
the East; and that the Army built him a Tomb on the Euphrates, the Place being
called the Sepulcher of Gordian, says Aur. Victor, but carried his Bones to
Rome:) nor do the Fasti in Sir H. Savil's MS. set out by Mr. Dodwell, disagree,
only they fix the Consuls a year higher, which the Palmyrene Inscription
confirms, in which Philip is expressly said to have been the Praefectus
Praetorio of the East; an. 554. h. e. Chr. 242.

From whence also we may collect, that the City of Palmyra was in the
Expedition of Gordian, as well as in that of Alexander a Confederate, and an
Assistant to the Romans. How that Commonwealth behaved it self toward Philip
the Murderer, and Successor of Gordian, we have no Records; but from the
rasure in the Inscription we may conclude, that they hated his Name and Memory:
In truth so odious were the Person and Actions of Philip, that no one
Historian, that I remember, has written his Life; and those who treat of him
by the by, call him perfidious Wretch. Aurelius Victor styles him Thraconites,
i. e. a Native of the Region of Traconitis, (born at Bostra in Arabia says
Tristan,) he was of a very mean Parentage and Original; his Father a true Arab,
a Captain of Banditi, (his name Saturninus, says Tristan) his Life ignominious,
and his Death such as he deserved, being sacrificed by Decius to the angry
Manes of his Predecessor; it is true, Eutropius affirms, that he was deify'd
after his Death, but so were many of the worst of Emperors. After he assumed
the Purple, he made an ignominious Peace with the Persians, and leaving his
Brother Priscus his Governor of the East, Zosim. l. 1. p. 20.
he marched to Rome. Priscus behaved himself so insolently in his Office, and
laid such heavy Taxes on the People, that in a little time he became
insufferable, insomuch that the Natives betook themselves to their Arms, and
chose Papianus (others call him Jotapianus) Emperor, having, as it is very
probable, slain Priscus; and Philip himself a little time after fell by the
hand of Decius. And at this time, I believe, the rasure was made in the
Inscription at Palmyra, it being no unusual Practice both at Rome and in the
East, as to deface the Statues of eminent Persons, when fallen into disgrace;
so to scratch out their Names out of the honorary Inscriptions, devoted to
their Memory: Thus in an Epigraphe at Rome, Grut. 161.^
the name of Stilicho is eras't, (though his Titles are left untoucht, as in
the Palmyrene Inscription, V. C. and inlustris militis, and magistri utriusque
militiae,) as is also the name of Fl. Macrobius Longinianus the then Governor
of Rome: Grut. 178.8.330.3.
the name of Maximianus in a 2d, of Commodus in a 3d, to omit other Instances.

8.
(...). S. P. Q (Palmyrenus) Septimium (Orodem) optimum Procuratorem Ducenarium
Augusti, qui oleum curavit donandum Metropoli coloniae, quique privata impensa,
and suo sumptu commeatum mercatoribus iter commune facientibus praebuit; and a
negotiorum praesidibus amplum testimonium adeptus est; fortiter, and cum laud
militantem, and aedilem ejusdem Metropolews coloniae, plurimas etiam opes domi
impendentem; ideoque placentem eidem senatui, Populoque and nunc magnifice
Modimperatorem agentem in sacrificiis Jovis Beli, honoris ergo coluit.
Ann...... mense Martio. In three several Inscriptions erected to the Honor of
Septimius Orodes, this by the Senate of Palmyra, and two others by his Friend
Julius Palms, (for I no way doubt, but they all belong to the same Illustrious
Person, and were set up in the same Year, and the same Month;) he is said to
have been the Procurator Ducenarius to Odaenathus, (for there could be no other
Emperor at Palmyra in the Year of Christ 266.) and to have done many good
Offices for his Country, particularly for the Merchants, who honored him with
a public Testimonial of their Gratitude; what the Office of the (...) was,
Vid. Appen. cap. 3.
what the (...), and (...), I have already declared: the imperfect word....
(...) is by Mr. Halley rendered (...), (it being unquestionable, that the
Ancients did distribute, besides Bread, and other Largesses, Flesh to the
People; the Law calls it Visceratio, and the old Glossary, Visceratio, (...);)
but if I might be allowed the liberty of making another Conjecture, I would
read it (...), (or as the Syrian Graver might spell it (...)) the Custom of
bestowing Oil upon the Citizens on solemn Festivals, being well understood:
Cestrania Severina gave a great Sum to the College of the Dendrophori, Grut.
312.4
that every year upon her Birthday such a quantity of Oil might be distributed
to every one of them. And T. Fundilius Geminus gave, Id. 414.2.
besides his Bequest to the Chest of the Augustales, and the Magistrates, etc.
to the People a Feast, Id. 136.5.
and a Largess of Oil on his Birthday. And L. Caecilius bequeathed to the
Inhabitants of Como every year on the Feast of Neptune, Oil for their Gymnasia,
and their Baths, and for the Exercises in the public Places of Sport, (as I
would rendert he words, in campo.)

I have read (...), (as many other Eastern Cities are styled in the Coins)
though Monsieur Patin, P. 130. etc.
in his Edition of the Coins of Maurocenus, retains (...) in those of the
Cities of Emsea, Carrae, and Antioch, (Cities of the East not far from
Palmyra;) in all which I am of opinion, the word should be rendered Metropolis
colonia, (...) never appearing in any Lexicon; (...) is rendered by the Critics
Conjunctio in via, or iter commune; and Septimius is magnified in the
Inscription for his defraying the Expense of the Caravan, for which reason the
Presidents of the Merchants in a public Meeting gave him their Testimonial,
according to custom: Grut. 309.1.
So Metrodorus the Son of Hermogenes, the Grandson of Metrodorus, was honored
with a Testimonial from the whole Synod, or College of Priests of Ceres, and
advanced to the Office of Stephanephorus, or the President, of their Country in
holy things, ((...)) and others are said to have been ((...)) rewarded with the
Thanks of their public Assemblies; Inscript. Cossou. n. 12.
the Merits of Septimius were as illustrious as his Country's Love toward him:
He had obliged their private Societies, and been very magnificent to the whole
City; he had been an Officer, and behaved himself with Courage and Reputation
under his Prince Odaenathus, probably when he routed the Persians; and was that
year, when the Monument was erected, the Symposiarch in the Festival dedicated
to Jupiter Belus their Patron Deity, viz. in the year 266. after Christ, and of
the Empire of Odaenathus the ^/^.

9.
I proceed in the next place to consider the Monuments erected by private
Persons to the Memory of their Friends: The first of which contains the
grateful Remembrance which the Palmyrene Merchants, trading to Vologesias,
retained of the great Services, which Julius Aurelius Zebeidas did them in that
Expedition.

(...).... Which, with leave to fill up the vacant Spaces, and to correct the
Mistakes, may thus be read and rendered:

(...).... Julium Aurelium Zebeidam Mocimi F. Zebeidae N. perpetuum commercii
curatorem qui cum illo descenderunt ad emporium Vologessiam elegerunt, virum
iis gratissimum, cultus gratia: Mense Martio, anno 558. h. e. Christi 246.
Philippi Arabis Imp. 2o. That Palmyra was a City of great Trade, and the
Inhabitants eminent Merchants, has been already proved from Appian and Pliny;
as also that their Commerce was maintained both with Persia and the Western
Empire; which also was done by other Frontier Cities, though under the
Jurisdiction of the Roman Princes, as by Nisibis and Edessa; of whom the old
Geographer says, that they were peopled with Men of condition, excellently
skilled in all the Methods of Trade, (...).. 16. p. 10
great Navigators, very rich, and Masters of all worldly Plenty; that what they
bought of the Persians, they sold to the Romans, dealing in all sort of
Commodities, but Contraband Goods, Brass and Iron, which they were forbidden to
sell to the Enemies of Persia. Which Character seems exactly suited to the
Palmyrene Merchants.

For that they traded to Vologesias, (a City under the Persian Jurisdiction) is
plain from the Inscription; in which (...) is neither the Town of Olgassus, nor
the Name of a Man, but of a famous City on the Euphrates, not far from its
Confluence with the Tigris. Babylon, says Not. Hist. l. 6.. 30. p. 71.
Pliny, was once the Seat of the Eastern Empire, and the great Mart of Trade;
but it fell into decay, when Seleucus Nicator built Seleucia, where the two
Rivers meet, situated in a most fruitful Soil, and commonly called Babylon. To
eclipse the Glory, and lower the Trade of Seleucia; the Parthians, after they
had made themselves Masters of the East, built Ctesiphon, three miles from
Seleucia on the Eastern Bank of Tigris, and there sixth the Residence of their
Kings; but, this Project not answering expectation, King Vologeses (who in a
Coin in the Cabinet of Pope Alexander the 7th, is styled (...), with all his
lofty Titles, according to the Rhodomontade of the Parthian and Persian Kings;
(...); to which Epithets, in another Coin in Monsieur Patin, is added (...))
being Contemporary with Nero and Vespasian, built another City, which from his
own Name he called Vologesocerta, in the Neighborhood, (18 miles distant, say
the Peutinger Tables;) but to the South of Babylon, and there, probably, fixed
the staple of Trade from the Persian Gulf, and the other parts of the East.
This City is called by Stephanus (...), by Ptolomee (...); Volocessia in the
Peutinger Tables, and Vologessia by Ammianus Marcellinus; but by Pliny,
according to the Persic Termination, Vologesocerta. (...), says Hesychius; to
prove which Assertion there is an eminent Passage in Pliny; N. H. l. 6.. 10. p.
66.
that among the Cities of Armenia the Less, Armosate is situate near the
Euphrates, Carcathiocerta near the Tigris, (which Lib. 11. p. 527.
Strabo affirms, was the Royal City of Sophene;) but on the Mountains
Tigranocerta stood. And for Artasigarta, which Ptolemee L. 5. c. 13.
places in Armenia the Greater, I would read Artaxicerta; Zadracarta being also
the chief City of Hyrcania, says Lib. 3. de exped Alex. p. 71.
Arrian. And I cannot but remark, that this word, either in Termination, or
Praefixt, in almost all Languages signifies a City. In Hebrew Kiriath-Arba is
the City of Arba, Kiriath-Sepher is the City of Books; in the Punick, Carthage
is the new City, in the Scythian, Carpaluk the City of Fish; says Tzetzes,
Chil. 8. c. 224.
(...). And in our own British Cair-Lundein, London; Cair-Kent, Canterbury;
Cair-went, Winchester, etc. and probably among the Egyptians Gran-Cair has
its name from this Original, or al Cahira, as the Arabians call it.

To this City Vologesia, the Merchants of Palmyra traded, not long after it was
made a Mart by the King, who founded it; but the Commerce was often interrupted
by the frequent Wars made by the Romans and Persians against each other;
particularly during the Expedition of Gordianus into the East; but when Philip
the Arab, having murdered that excellent Emperor, succeeded him, and made an
ignominious Peace with Sapores in the first year of his Reign, the Persian
Company at Palmyra sent Julius Aurelius Zebeidas, with other eminent Persons of
their Society, to Vologesia to re-establish their Factory, and adjust all
Differences that had happened since the War broke out; And he discharged that
Office so faithfully, and so much to their Satisfaction, that upon his return
they erected a Monument with an honorary Inscription to his Memory, which is
still preserved, and as a Reward of his great Services, chose him their
President. For so I am inclined to read that broken, and unintelligible part of
the Inscription; (...); i. e. (...); curator; say the Lexicographers; it
commonly signifies rerum divinarum curatorem, (...), but here a President or
Inspector. (...), says Hesychius.

The two following Inscriptions concern the same Persons.

10.
(...). Septimium Orodem optimum Procuratorem Augusti Ducenarium and Archegetam
Julius Aurelius Palms Cassiani F. Melenaei N. Eques Romanus amicum, and
Patronum. Anno 578. mense Martio; h. e. Christi 266. Odenathi 2o. 11.
(...). Septimium Orodem optimum Procuratorem Augusti Ducenarium, and
Archegetam Julius Aurelius Palms, Publius Melenaeus Malchi F. Nassumi N. vir
praestantissimus amicum, and patronum honoris ergo anno.... mense Martio,
(coluerunt.) Of Septimius Orodes, I have discours't in the Comment on the
eighth Inscription, and of his eminent Employments under Odaenathus, as his
Procurator Ducenarius, and in the City, as their Aedilis and Symposiarch; in
these two Inscriptions he is styled (...), (for so I would read the
unintelligible (...) not (...), as Mr. Halley conjectures; the Praefectus
annonae, the Officer, who took care the City should not want Bread; because he
is said to be (...) the Patron of Julius Aurelius Palms the Roman Knight, who
was not a Native of Palmyra, the G and P being Letters easily mistaken one for
the other; and in one Copy of the Inscription it is thus written, APlPTN.) Now
the Archegeta was the Chief, or President of his Tribe, says Hesychius ( V.
(...), Id. v. (...)) the Hero, from whom the Tribe had its name; they were
honored with Statues of Brass, says the V. (...) v. loc.
Etymolog. magnum, and were Persons of the most eminent Dignity; their number
at Athens was ten Erechtheus, Aegeus, Pandion, etc. and of the same number were
their Tribes; their Authority was great, and their Power extensive, ( Hes.
(...): Theodorit, l. 3. (...), citing Plutarch deoracul. defectu, calls
Arsalus, Aryus, and Tosobis, whom Saturn slew, but the Lycians deify'd, (...),
whom Plutarch calls (...); and the same Author in the Life of Lycurgus, says
the King of Sparta was their (...)) the name was particularly given to those
who were the Leaders or Captains of Colonies, when they were transplanted, and
their Protectors: So (...). 6.
Xenophon says of Hercules, (...). Vit. Alcibiad.
Plutarch of Minerva, (...); and the old Inscription to Apollo, in Monsieur It.
Athen. p. 150.
Spon. (...); as he is also styled by Thucydides L. 6. n. 3. p. 349.
, who mentions an Altar erected to Apollo (...), by the Inhabitants of Chalcis,
who left Eubaea, and built Naxus, upon which the Priests ((...)) used to offer
Sacrifice, before they left Sicily, whenever they undertook a Voyage. Apollo
was so called, says the old Scholiast upon Pindar V. Cluver. Sicil. p. 93, 94.
, because he was the Author of that Expedition of the Naxians, when they went
into Sicily; or as Lib. 5. Bell. civil. p. 734.
Appian says, (...).

This President, or Prince of the Tribe, was sometimes styled the Phylarchus,
((...) in Hesychius) or (...), as it is in the Ancyran Inscription above
mentioned; p. 240.
for wherever the (...) is named, V. Memor. Cosson. p. 14.
the (...) is also named in the same Inscription. And the Phylarchs of the
Saracens were so called, because the People were divided into 12 Tribes; over
every one of which was established a Prince, called the Phylarchus, a Custom
kept up by the Goths, and other barbarous Nations. To what number the Tribes at
Palmyra amounted, I know not; but that Septimius Orodes was the chief of one of
them, is manifest from the Inscription; nor do I doubt but those Chiefs had the
power to admit a Foreigner to the Privileges of the Tribe, and to give him
their Protection; and therefore Orodes is said to be Friend to Julius Aurelius
Palms, and his Patron. ((...)) Hesyc. (...) Gloss. vet. (...) Pratrocinium,
(...) Patronus, praepositus. And Harpocration affirms, V. (...), and (...).
that no Foreigner was permitted to leave his own City, and to settle at
Athens, unless one of the Citizens undertook to be his Patron, ((...)) the fine
the Foreigner, when so patronized, paid to the City was 12 Drachmas, called
from those who paid the Tax (...), which whosoever refused to lay down, he was
brought to the ((...)) Officers, who took care of their Tolls, and sold, being
for the most part condemned to the Galleys. Nor can I doubt but the same Custom
of Patronizing Foreigners was observed in other Cities, particularly at
Palmyra; this Patronage sometimes covered only private Persons: Marm. Coslon. 5.
Thus at Ancyra, Flavianus Eutyches acknowledges, C. Ael. Flavianus Sulpicius
his Patron, G. (...), ( Lege (...)) (...). Eutyches, I doubt not, was his
Libertus, and acknowledged the Patronage of his quondam Master, who had made
him free; such Testimonials of Gratitude being as usual, as just, (and
sometimes it happened the Freedman himself became a Patron; so. Grut. 610.3.
Tiberius Claudius the Libertus of Augustus, is called the Patron of his
Parents, to whom he erected a Monument.) Sometimes the Patronage reached
Societies, and Companies of Trade, (so we read of the Patrons of the Colleges
of the Arvales, Grut. pass.
the Dendrophori, the Companies of Smiths, the Braziers, the Fishermen, and
Shipwrights, etc.) sometimes whole Cities and Regions, and the Title and Office
was very honorable, C. Torasius being by the unanimous Suffrages of the
Magistrates chosen the Patron of a Town by the River Clitumnus, (ob merita ejus
erga Remp.) for his great Services done to the Commonwealth.

This Patronage it was requisite that even the Romans themselves (during the
Reign of Odenathus in the East, in whose time the Inscriptions were made)
should court, as Julius Palms did; I call him Palms because it is a known
Roman name, (and perhaps Melenaeus should be written Mellinius, or Menelaus)
for which reason I have inserted Publius for Puilsus. He was a Man of the
Equestrian Dignity, which entitled him at Rome to eminent Privileges; which I
shall not minutely enumerate, only mentioning, that the Roman Knights installed
the Princeps juventutis, presenting him with a Horseman's Shield, ( Parma) and
a Silver Spear; for so says the Ancyran Marble, as Gronovius judiciously has
supplied the eras't Letters. Marm. Ancyr. p. 60.84.
Equites autem Romani universi Principem Juventutis Romanorum parmis utrumque
and hastis argenteis donatum appellaverunt; for that both Caius and Lucius were
Principes juventutis, the Coins put out of all doubt: And that whenever a
Native of any of the Romon Colonies was admitted to the Honor of being made a
Roman Knight, he reckoned the Privilege among his noblest Titles: Grut.
388.4.400.3. Marm. Cos. son. p. 141.
So L. Claudius, the chiefest Person of the Island of Malta, glories in the
Honor, as does Fl. Aelianus, (or Ti. Flavius Taeanus, as it is written in the
Marble of Cosson) though the Highpriest of the whole Province of Galatia, and
Galatarches, the 2d Founder of his native City Ancyra, and their Ambassador to
the Emperor Antoninus.

12.
(...). Septimium Airanem Odaenathi filium senatorem eminentissimum. I have
already proved it not unlikely, that this Airanes was the Son of the Emperor
Odaenathus, before he assumed the Purple, from his name Septimius, the name of
his Father being also inserted, and from the Date of the following Inscription
on the same Pillar, viz. ann. Christi 251. but 13 years before Odaenathus was
chosen by Gallienus, his Co-partner in the Government of the World.

13.
(...). Aurelius Valerius Heliodorus Praefectus Legionis Illyriciorum in
honorem Patrum, and gratulationis ergo anno 363. h. e. Chr. 251. Decii ult. I
have given the name Valerius to Heliodorus to fill up the Vacancy, because it
occurs elsewhere, ( L. P. Valerius Heliodorus) and because the (...) that
appears before (...). seems to be last Letter of (...), a like Vacancy
occurring in the same name in another Inscription. This Heliodorus was, I doubt
not, either the Son of, if not the same Person with, Lucius Aurelius
Heliodorus. the Son of Antiochus, a Citizen of Palmyra; who in an Inscription
at Rome, published by Gruter, (but more accurately by Tristan and Spon) erected
a Silver Statue, ((...)) with all its Ornaments, to Aglibelus and Malachbelus,
the Gods of his Country, for the safety of himself, his Wife and Children, in
the Year 547. according to the Computation of his Country, but in the Year of
Christ 235. being the last year of the Reign of Alexander Severus, the
Inscription lately found at Palmyra bearing date 16 years after, ann. Chr. 251.
which was the last year of the Emperor Decius. He is styled (...), in the
Marble at Rome, ( Tristan reads it (...)) not because an Inhabitant of Palmyra,
which from their Benefactor was called Hadrianople; for then it should have
been written (...), but by mistake of the Graver, or Transcriber; for (...), he
being one of the College of Priests ( Sodalis Hadrianalis) dedicated to the
Service of that Emperor, after the Senate had deify'd him: For, that he was
acknowledged a God at Palmyra, is plain from another Inscription; in which he
is called, (...). And in that City, I doubt not but Heliodorus was one of his
Priests, (...) a Priest of Hadrian, as (...) a Temple built to his Memory, and
(...), the Plays instituted to his Honor. I call him (...), the same with
(...), which occurs in another Reins. cl. VI. n. 101.
Inscription, (or (...) for (...), Propraetore) and have given him the Command
of the Illyrian Legion, because in aftertimes (and probably in the days of
Decius) that Legion was deputed to lie in Garrison at Palmyra, as says the
Notitia of the Oriental Empire; Sub Duce Phaenices Praefecturae, (or, as it is
much better in the MS. Praefectus) Legionis primae Illyriciorum Palmyrae.

Against my Opinion, that both the Inscriptions concern the same Person, I have
met with but one Objection; that in the one Marble he is called a Priest, in
the other a Soldier, as if the Offices were incompatible: But the Answer to the
Objection is very easy, since it was usual in those days for one and the same
Person, to put on the Sacerdotal Habit, and the Military, (as there have been
in all the later Ages of the Church Martial Bishops and Priests) to omit the
Emperors, who were for the most part Generals of their own Armies, and at the
same time Highpriests; and to confine my self to the College of Priests
deputed to the Service of Hadrian: Grut. XLV. 9.
Lucius Ragonius was a Sodalis Hadrianalis, and Legatus Legionis 13. Geminae.
ccccxii. 2.
Septimius Aper Octavius is styled Sodalis Hadrianalis, and Sevir turmae
secundae Equitum Romanorum; and MXC. 13.
M. Aelius Aurelius Cleo, is called Sodalis Hadrianalis, and Tribunus militum,
and Laticlavus Legionis 12. Fulminatricis. To which I may add, that Marc Antony
to ingratiate himself with Augustus, as Appian affirms, became one of the
Priests of Julius Caesar; and DLXV. 4.
Lucius Julius Bonatus was the High Priest of all the Temples in Asia, and the
General of the Forces of the Lydians. Other Instances of this kind frequently
occur in the old Inscriptions.

Not is it a just Argument against my Emendation, that Heliodorus has many
names, it not being unusual for the same Person to have 4 or 5 names; e. gr.
Lucius Livius Sulpicius Galba, Titus Aelius Adrianus Antoninus, P. Licinius
Pyaem. Priscus Juventianus: And among infinite other such Examples, that in
Gruter comes nearest the Palmyrene; DCVIII. 7.
L. P. Valerio Heliodoro Tr. Leg. 2. Adjutricis L. P. Valerius Chilo Filius
ejus. I shall only add, that there was an Aurelius Heliodorus, a Freedman of
one of the Caesar's, whom Gruter mentions, but of which of the Caesar's, or
whither the same Heliodore with the Palmyrenian, I cannot determine.

14.
(...). Rupilium Orodem Senatorem, and Duum-virum Palmyrenum Belacabus Arsacis
filius amicum cultus gratia honoravit, anno 570. h. e. Christi 258. Valeriani
4o. Rupilius is a name that frequently occurs in the Books, and Marbles of the
Ancients, and therefore I shall only mention Rupilius Bonus, whose Daughter
Rupilia Faustina was the Grand mother by the Father's side to the Emperor
Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher, says Capitolinus; P. 22.
whither I have as happily rendered the name of Rupilius Orodes's Friend, who
honored him with the Inscription, (or whither it should be read (...), Belas
Saporis filius, Arsacis nepos, or any other way) I think is not much material.
The Titles of Orodes have been already considered.

15.
(...). (...) Malech, qui and Agrippa, Jaraei fill. Raaei nep. secundo scribam
(civitatis Palmyrenae) in adventu Dei Hadriani, unguenta praebentem tam
hospitibus, quam incolis inservientem exercitui, -- and templum Jovis Beli
(ornantem). I have adventured to change the name Malen, which no where occurs,
into Malech, ( N and X being Letters of similar shape, and make) which is a
known, and common name among the Syrians and Arabs, among whom the Philosopher
Porphyry was called Malchus, Malchus the High-Priest's Servant was probably of
that Country, Am. Marcellin. l. 24. c. 2.
and Malech Podosaces was one of the Phylarchs of Arabia, when Julian the
Apostate Emperor made his Expedition against the Persians: The Office of Malech
Agrippa was very honorable; he was Secretary of State to the Republic of
Palmyra, when Hadrian marched into the East; i. e. in the 6th year of his
Empire, anno Christi 122. says Eusebius. In which Expedition I am encouraged by
the broken parts of the Inscription, to believe he assisted the Army with his
Person, and Services; the Fragments being somewhat like part of the 7th
Inscription; that he was a Benefactor to his City and Country, appears from the
grateful Memorial erected to his name; wherein mention is made of the Temple of
Jupiter Belus, (so I have filled the Vacancy from another N. 8.
Inscription;) to which, I question not but he had been a munificent
Benefactor; perhaps he had been Symposiarch, as Septimius Orodes was
afterward. He also gave a Largess to the public Baths at Palmyra of Oil for
all Persons, who should frequent those Bagnio's, whether Strangers or Citizens;
it being usual among the Ancients to make such Donations: So Gr. 376.5.
L. Caecilius Cilo gave to the People of Como by his Will, Oil for their Baths;
(...), says the old Glossary. For the Baths of every City were looked upon not
only as ornamental, but highly useful, and great Promoters of Health and Vigor;
the building such Structures is reckoned among the noblest Acts of Magnificence
in Agrippa, Titus, Dioclesian, Constantine, and others; the repairing of them
when ruinous, esteemed a Princely Benefaction; some are celebrated for building
Gynmasia, or Porticos, others for floring the Apartments with Marble, a third
sort for bringing Water from a great distance for the Service of the Bagnio;
and others made an allowance for the Oil that should be spent there in the
Gymnasia annexed to the Bath; all which appears in the Inscriptions of Gruter.
P. 180, 181. and pass.
To these Privileges sometimes particular Persons were admitted, or particular
Sexes, mixed Bathings being expressly prohibited, says Lampridius; in other
places only the Freemen of the City, sometimes even Servants were allowed to
frequent the place and Foreigners: P. 181.1.
C. Arunceius Cotta Colonis incolis, hospitibus adventoribus, servisque little
lavationem ex sua pecunia gratuitam perpetuo dedit; Capitolin. Anton. p. 19
and Antoninus Pius gave the People liberty to use his own Bath gratis. To the
Bath there commonly was annexed a Racket-Court (Spaeristerium) as well as a
Bathing-place (Dioclesian in sphaeristerio nymfeum fieri curavit) where those,
P. 178. in 5.
who frequented the Bagnio, gave themselves their Heats, before they went into
the Bath; so Martial, Read pilam, lonat aes thermarum; Ludere pergis?
Virgin vis sola sotus adire domum?
As also a Gymnasium, or Palaestra, where they wrestled, and used other
Exercises; so the same Martial, L. 3. cap. 68
Gymnasium thermae stadium est ex part, recede,
Exuimur, nudos parce videre viros.
In the Bagnio there were two other Apartments, the Calidarium, or Stove, and
the Tepidarium, called unguentarium, tepidarium unctuarium, by Pliny unctorium,
L. 7. c. 32. Sect. 2.
by Julius Pollux (...) ((...)) into these the Wrestlers and others went, when
they had performed their Exercises: De sudorib. p. 455, 456, 459.
Theophrastus affirms, that the generality of the Wrestlers, though healthy,
had very strong and nauseous Sweats, ( Diotimus the Gymnasiarch divides them
into three sorts, according to the degrees of Exercise, and the several Changes
made in the Body) and that if the Fueller made a strong Fire all of the sudden
in the Stove, it caused a less Sweat; but if the Fire were encreast gradually,
it was of more use. I shall not reckon up all the Officers of the Bagnio, (the
Fornacator, the Dendrophori, Aquarii, Pilicrepi, etc.) but mention only the
Alipta, whom Caelius Aurelianus calls Vnctor, and so does the old Glossary,
(...), Vnctor; who anointed the Wrestlers; but this was the Office of an
inferior Servant, the Governor of the Bagnio was called the Alipta, says Jul.
Pollux, L. 3. c. ult. and l. 7. c. 3.
(...); though the word was not allowed among the Ancients, being introduced by
the Writers of the Midling Comedy, ((...);) which is also acknowledged by the
Author of the Etymologicum magnum, who affirms, that instead of (...), the
Ancients used the word (...): But in process of time it was denizen'd; for the
People of Sparta erected a Monument to Gaius Rubrius Bianor the Aleiptes, Grut.
1090. 9.
for his Gravity, according to the Lacedemonian Custom, and for his Virtue in
the Gymnasia. But I cannot agree with the Translator of another Inscription,
Aliptae, for the (...) were not the Governors of the Gymnasium, but the (...)
the Gentlemen, who performed their Exercises, and erected that Monument to Bato
the Gymnasiarch, or Aliptes: The Office was very honorable, for the
Gymnasiarch was often the High Priest of the place for life, Grut. 313. 10.
316. 1.
and honored with other considerable Preferments; and it was reckoned among
his noblest Titles, that he was Governor of the Imperial Bagnio. Id. 327.
The Office of the Gymnasiarch was annual, but it was often given for several
years to the same Person, if he deserved well of the Society; for then, besides
the Continuation in his Dignity, he was honored with a Crown of Gold, Statue,
and Inscriptions to perpetuate his Name and Merit.

When a Bath was built, it was usual to give it a solemn Dedication: 178. 7.
So Dioclesian and Maximian, Constantius and Galerius Emperors, with Severus
and Maximian Caesar's, consecrated the Baths of Dioclesian, (and probably for
this reason does the Historian aggravate the Cruelty of Caracallus, Lamprid. p.
111. 112.
that he murdered several People of all Conditions in the Baths) and some
eminent Persons were deputed Curators to super-intend the Building, that it
might not fall into ruin, nor its Revenues be alienated, or employed to wrong
uses. And such care was taken, that every thing should be kept in due repair,
that though the Revenue has been alienated for many Ages, yet the very Ruins
of those public Buildings at Rome remain to this day very venerable.

16.
At Arsoffa, in the Ruins of a noble Church, upon the Chapiters of several
Marble Pillars, that supported the Body or Nave of the Church, is inscribed the
time of the Foundation of that sacred Building, which is said to have been
erected when Sergius was Bishop of the place.

(...). Episcopo Sergio consanguineo Maronii Chorepiscopi. Whither Maron, or
Maronius, in the Inscription, were the same with the Founder of the Sect of the
Maronites, I cannot determine, nor whither the Church did belong to them; but
it seems probable both from the name, and because the Maronites chief Residence
anciently, as now, was about Mount Libanus, and in the neighboring places
toward the Euphrates.

(...) Leg. (...).
(...). Jovi summo, maximo, and propitio Bolanus Zenobii filius, Airanis nepos,
Mocimi pronepos. Matthae abnepos, curator octavus electus fontis Aphacitidis
sub Jaribolo Deo, aram suis sumptibus posuit, anno 474. mensis Octobris 20.
h.e. Christi 162. M. Aurelii Antonini 2o. I have made the Emendation in the
Inscription (which Mr. Hallifax confesseshe is not overconfident, thatit was
rightly taken) upon the Authority of the ancient Writers, from whom we have
unquestionable Evidence that the oracular Fountain, which the Men of Palmyra
frequently consulted, was called Aphaca, while of the name Ephca there are no
footsteps, that I have met with, in Antiquity. P. 267, 268, etc.
I have already in brief, given the History of the Fountain; to which I think
fit to add, that the Worship of Venus in that place was very ancient, Soz.
Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 5
that the Temple was very famous, that it stood upon the Banks of the River
Adonis, on the side of Mount Libanus, and was of old very illustrious, and much
honored; that upon certain days, after the usual forms of Invocation, a Fire
descended from the top of Mount Libanus, like a Star, and after it had hovered
a while up and down in the Air, plunged it self at last into the River: The
Inhabitants were of Opinion, that the Star was Urania, by which name they call
Venus. To which the Historian adds, that the Temple was utterly destroyed by
the order of the Great Constantine, Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 18.
as Eusebius avers, and with them agrees Socrates; but it is certain, the
Worship, and the Apparitions were continued (if we may credit Zosimus and
Damascius, two bigoted Zealots for Paganism;) for Zosimus in his time, (he
lived in the fifth Century) mentions the Descent of the Star at a certain time
of the year, agreeable to what Sozomen records, and Damascius (who lived about
a hundred years after Zosimus) vouches for the Truth and Frequency of those
Apparitions in his time: It is therefore very probable, that the People of
Heliopolis (as of Emesa, and other parts of Libanesia) being warm Favorers of
the Heathen Rites, would not easily suffer themselves to be weaned from their
Idolatry; but repaired their Temple, and adorned it, though not with so great
Pomp and Splendour; for though Sozomen says expressly, that the Temple of Venus
at Heliopolis was ruined by Constantine's order, yet in the latter end of
Constantius's Reign, it was very famous again, says the (...).. 17. p. 14.
old Geographer set out by Gothofred, and worshipped with great Ceremony, ((...))
it being the common Opinion of the Country, that Venus dwelt there; and through
her Favor so ordered it, that the Woman of Mount Libanus were the fairest of
all the Asiaticks, as they were to a Proverb, ( Socrates says, that they held
their Women in common, and prostituted their Daughters to their Guests;) and I
doubt not but under Julian, by whose Influences and Assistance dying Paganism
began to recover some Strength and Vigor, the Temple also recovered its lost
Reputation; for it is past all dispute, that the Temple at Nacle, was not
utterly destroyed till the days of Mahomet: So says Abulfarajus; Pococ. Specim.
Hist. Ar. p. 5. v. not. p. 90.
for when he reckons up the several Idols of the old Gentile Arabs, which they
worshipped before that Imposter appeared in the World, he says, the Inhabitants
of Thakif worshipped a little Temple in the upper part of Nachla, which was
called Allat, (or Alilat, i. e. the Moon, or Venus, as the Arabs calls her;)
and Abulfeda avers, that the Idol was destroyed and ruined, by the command of
Mahomet, in the ninth year of the Hegira, i. e. in the year of Christ 631.

Near to the Temple of Venus at Nacle, was the Well Aphaca situate; so the
Castalian Fountain at Delphi, stood near the Temple of Apollo, V. Marm. Ox. p.
100.
and another oracular Spring of that name in Daphne the Suburb of Antioch, rose
near the Temple of the same God; which from the times of Seleucus, who built
both the City and the Temple, was very famous, till the Emperor Adrian filled
the Well with stones, and stopped its Current: Julian opened it again; but in a
little time both Fountain and Temple were consumed by Lightning from Heaven.
How those Fountains gave their prophetic Answers, the ancient Writers are not
agreed; some say the Enquirer wrote his Question on a Lawrel-leaf, and threw it
into the Fountain; in which, when he took it out, he found his Fate written;
others, that by the different noise of the Waters, either he, who consulted the
Oracle, or the Priest, deputed to that Office, interpreted the Doom; while a
third sort affirm, that the Priest drank the Water, and having by that means
imbibed the Demon, found himself filled with the Spirit of Prophecy, and
enabled thereby to answer all Questions. How the Well Aphaca gave its
Responses, Zosimus particularly relates; according to which Method the famous
Stygian-water at Bostra in Arabia unriddled Men's Destinies, Damase, apud. Phot.
cod. 242.
which Damascius describes as very terrible; for if the Demon were pleased,
the lightest things thrown into it, would immediately sink to the bottom; but
if the Demon were angry, the biggest and most ponderous things swam on the top
for a while, and at last were thrown out to the Admiration of the Bystanders.
By this Well the Inhabitants used to swear; but if any one had been so hardy as
to perjure himself, the Water that he drank caused a Dropsy in him within the
year: Thus the Water of the Fountain Philostr. vit. Apoll. l. 1. c. 4. Am.
Marcell. l. 23. c. 26. Arist. (...).
Asbamiaeus, near the Temple of Jupiter at Tyana was in taste smooth, and sweet
to those who were honest and just; but if any Man happened to run the hazard.
when he intended to perjure himself, it affected his Eyes, his Hands and his
Feet, and broke out upon him in Sores and Pustules, and great Swellings; nor
could he move from the Well, till he had confest'd himself forsworn: So that
the Water was ordeal, like the Water of Jealousy among the Jews, which to the
Chaste gave a Conception, but to the Unjust, and the Violators of the
Marriage-Vow, caused the Belly to swell, and the Thigh to rot. Of the like kind
were the Fountains in Sicily, called Palici, Arislot. ubi sup. c. 55. Sotion.
de flumin ex Isigono.
by which the People of the Island in cases of the greatest moment used to
swear: He who took the Oath, wrote his Deposition on a Table, which he threw
into the Water; if he attested the truth, the Table swom on the top of the
Waters; if he were perjured, it sunk and disappeared, and the Evidence was in a
burning heat.

Of the Fountain Aphaca, was Bolanus one of the Curators, or Overseers, under
the Inspection of Jaribolus the God; who, I suppose, had here his Oracle, and
gave Directions in the choice of the Officers belonging to it, as well as
Testimonials to those, who had discharged their Province with Honor. Jaribolus
was doubless one of the (...), or (...), of that part of Syria, probably of the
Moon, i. e. Venus, as Alagbelus and Malachbelus were Assessors of the Sun, (the
Signification of the name implies it (...);) so the Egyptians deputed Sigaleon
to be the Parhedrus to Sarapis, the Greeks Attis to the Mother of the Gods,
Erichthonius to Minerva, Virbius to Diana, Hygeia and Telesphorus to
Esculapius, Tychon to the Moon, and to Venus Adonis; and it is not the most
improbable of Conjectures, that he, whom the Greeks called Adonis, the Syrians
might style Jaribolus, (as well as the Egyptians Tammuz) Baal and Adonai being
both equivalent names of Power and Sovereignty. And in after Ages, when
Emperors and others were allowed a solemn Consecration, they also were honored
with the Title of Collateral Judges to Jupiter, whose (...) were in the esteem
of the Heathen World, V. Salm. in H.A. Scrip, p. 38.
the twelve greater Gods; for when Alexander the Great was to be deify'd, he
was called by Demades, the 13th of that Society; and when Alexander, while
alive, was resolved to give his Darling Hephaestion a Deification, Lucian. non.
temer. cred. calumn.
the Greeks in Vain-flattery and Compliance sacrificed to him as an Assessor of
the Gods, ((...)) and they entitled him to Apparitions, to Prophecies and
Dreams, says Lucian, (and for this reason I suppose H. E. ^. 4. c. 7.
Eusebius joins (...) together, when he speaks of the Gnostics:) This
Pageantry of Canonization was acted over again by the Emperor Adrian, to omit
other Instances, when he Deify'd his Pathic Antinous, the Greeks of that Age
attributing to him such Oracles as Hadrian himself had composed, says P. 7.
Capitolinus: To the Memory of that Catamite the Emperor built a City in Egypt
called by his name, Antinoopolis; there he buried him, and there especially
(though the Worship prevailed elsewhere) he appointed him a Temple, Priests and
Prophets, ((...), says Apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8.
Hegesippus) of which number was M. Vlpius Apollonius it 86. 1.
Gruter, and perhaps 326. 1.
Onias, who styles himself the High Priest, and Prophet in another Inscription,
for that he was of Egypt, his name convinces me: It must be confessed, that in
Egypt the most eminent Priest was called the Prophet, says Clemens of
Alexandria; but probably for this reason, because they all pretended to the
Spirit of Prophecy, especially where there was an Oracle, as there was at
Antinoopolis; and the Faculty of Prediction descended often from Father to Son,
as well as the Priesthood, (which among the Greeks as well as the Jews, was
often fixed to a Family;) for which reason T. Porcius is styled the Son of
Proclus Aelianus, a most illustrious Person, and a Prophet in an old Grut. 458.
1.
Inscription; for among the Priests of Isis, (and probably among those devoted
to any other Deity,) (...), says Herodotus Lib. 2. V. Heliodor. l. 1.
; if the Father happened to die, the Son succeeded him. The Habit of these
Prophets, says Lib. 5.
Herodian, was a Vest, or Cassock, reaching down to the Feet, with long
Sleeves; and in the middle of the Vest a stripe of Purple, their Shoes being
made of Linen: This, says the Historian, was the Habit of the Priests of
Phaenicia and Syria. Such an Oracle as this I am inclined to attribute to
Jaribolus, (either at Nacle, or at Palmyra) from whence the People derived
their Predictions of what was to come, and their Testimonials of what was past;
and perhaps the Oracle gave its Answers at the solemn Meetings, when great
numbers of the People of the Country came to the Fountain; for that there were
such ((...)) Conventions at stated times, Zosimus affirms expressly; at which
their Games were celebrated, (as the Agon Gymnicus called Heges. ub. sub.
(...), was performed in honor of the Darling of Adrian) there being
particular Officers deputed to that Service; the chief of which was the
High Priest, 318. 3. 330. 3.
(the Archiereus, or Primus Sacerdos synhodi, (...), as he is styled in the
Inscriptions) and under him the Curators, or (...), of which number Bolanus was
one at Aphaca, (for that I suppose to be the name of the Well, as Eros and
Anteros were the names of two Fountains at Gadara, Asbamiaeus, Castalius, 179.
6. v. and 180. 1.
etc. elsewhere.) In a famous Inscription in Gruter, the Masters or Governors
of the Fons Palatinus, are reckoned up, of whom some were first admitted to the
Honor in that year when Octavius Lenas, and M. Antonius Rufinus were Consuls;
others had born the Office a second time, some a third or fourth; and they are
distinguished from the inferior Officers, (their Ministri) of whom also some had
done the Service a second, others a third year. In that Marble the number of
Governors is eleven, but in the next Inscription the Governors of the Fons
Lollianus are but ten.

In this Inscription Jupiter is not only styled Optimus Maximus, but Propitius
(...), as an Acknowledgment of his Favors; so Isis and Diana are called (...)
in other 40. 10. 73. 1.
Inscriptions.

18.
(...). Jovi maximo fulminanti pro salute Trajani Hadriani Domini sui
Agathangelus Abilenus Decapolites camaram aedificavit, and lectisternium
propriis sumptibus posuit. Anno 445. mense Augusto; h. e. Christi 133. Hadrian
17. This Marble was found at Tieve near three days Journey from Palmyra, in the
Wall of a Mosque, which probably was the old Temple of Jupiter the Thunderer,
(who in other Inscriptions is sometimes styled bronton, fulgurans, tonans,
fulgerator, etc.) in which Agathangelus erected a Cupola, and a Bed of State to
the Honor of the God, and for the Safety or Recovery of his Prince. The name
Agathangelus occurs elsewhere, ( Cn. Cossutius Agathangelus in 644. 1.
Gruter;) ours is said to have been an Inhabitant of Abila, but at the same
time a Decapolitan, which will no longer seem a Difficulty, if we remember that
not only Pliny avers, L. 5. c. 18.
that the Geographers were not agreed, what particular Cities constituted the
Decapolitan Region of Syria, though all confessed the name to have been imposed
from the number of the Cities, and that the Tetrarches of Trachonitis, and
Paneas, that Abila and Arca, etc. do intermix with, and encircle that Region;
but that Ptolome in express words (if we may credit the Palatine MSS.) treating
of the Cities of Syriae Caele, among which he principally names Heliopolis,
Abila Lysaniae, etc. calls them Cities of Decapolis; so that Agathangelus as to
his City was an Inhabitant of Abila, but of the Province or Region of Decapolis.

Agathangelus was a very Loyal Subject, though he lived at a great distance
from the Court; and for the Safety of his Prince built a Cupola, and set up a
Bed of State under it to Jupiter, (...), formix testudo, in the old Glossaries:
(...) in Hesychius. The ancient Baths were so adorned, says Pliny, Lib. 2. Ep.
2.
(fenestras e regione conditor binas confinio camerae pendentis admovit, ut
suscipientium usui fabrefactum lacunar aperiret;) and the Stadia, or
Palaestrae, (for in one of them P. Licinius Priscus built a Piazza, with
several Cupolas, (...);) sometimes the Tombs: Oxon. Marm. n. 79.
So the Tomb of Nilus the Oeconomus of Asia was adorned; but particularly
Temples and Churches: So when Justinian the Emperor new built the Trullus of
the Church of Sancta Sophia, and enlarged it thirty feet in Circumference, he
added two Cupola's to it, one toward the North, the other to the South, ((...))
which continue to this day. Thus Augustus says of himself in the Ancyran
Marble, Philip. 2.
Pulvinar ad circum maximum, aedes in Capitolio fici; and Tully of M. Antony,
who was one of the Priests of Julius, Nec majorem honorem Caesar consecutus est
ab Antonio, quam ut haberet pulvinar, simulachrum, fastigium. Some Authors say,
that the Tholus, Cupola, was a place in the middle of the Camera of the Temple,
V. Guther. jur. Pontif. l. 3. c. 9.
in which those who made Vows hung up their Offerings; others that the Camera
was above the Cupola, like our Lanterns, (so says Philander;) others, that the
Camera was no other than the Cupola it self, which being lessened by degrees,
ended in a point. The Lectisternia are described by L. 7.
Arnobius; habent enim Dij Lectos, atque ut stratis possint mollioribus
incubare pulvinorum tollitur atque excitatur impressio. The Pagan Devotion
inclining them to think, that their Gods ought not to want any thing conducive
to their Ease and Satisfaction. Hesyc. (...), Glossar. vet. pulvinar (...).

Agathangelus built his Camera, and furnished it with a Bed, to fulfill a Vow he
had made for the Welfare of his Prince; V. Gruter.
such Vows commonly occur in the old Inscriptions, (...); pro salute and
gloria, pro salute itus ac reditus Imperatoris, pro salute Imp. totiusque domus
divinae, pro salute, and incolumitate domus divinae, pro salute, and gloria,
pro aeternitare Imperii, and salute Imperatoris. Sometimes they vowed the
Building a new Temple, or the Repairing an old one, sometimes the Adorning a
Temple with Pillars and Chapiters, with Porches, or Cupola's; at other times
the Offering of solemn and pompous Sacrifices, (so C. Betonius the first Priest
of the Emperors, offered the Tauropolium of the whole Province of Narbonne,
XXIX. 12.
for the Safety of Septimius Severus, and M. Aurelius Antoninus Caracallus his
Son, for so the Inscription must be read, M. Aurel. Ant. not M. Aureliani, for
what has the Emperor Aurelian to do with Septimius Severus?) and some Romans
were so over officious, that, when their Prince was sick, in expectancy of a
great Reward, Dio. l. 59. p. 645.
they devoted themselves to Death, ((...)) so the Emperor might recover. So
when Caius Caligula fell into a dangerous Distemper, P. Afranius Potitus, a
Plebeian, bound himself by an Oath, that himself would die, if Caligula might
be cured; and Atanius Secundus, a Man of the Equestrian Dignity, promised to
fight among the Gladiators for the same reason: And the Emperor was so sensible
of the Flattery, that he compelled them both to be as good as their Promises.
We may adjust the Time of this Inscription by the Date; since the Coins inform
us, that ann. 132. the 16th of Hadrian, the Senate and People of Rome made Vows
for his Health, (Senatus populusque vota suscepta. Vota publica. Vota publica,
S. c.) the same Persons in the year following paying their Thanks to Jupiter
for his Recovery, (Jupiter custos. Jovi custodi, S. c.) to this Jupiter on the
same occasion, Agathangelus in Syria, made his Vows, some months after the
Romans had made theirs; the distance from Italy to that part of Asia upon the
Euphrates, being to be allowed for.

19.
The next Inscription is singular as to its Language, and I shall endeavor to
fill up the void spaces thus.

Conservatores orbis, and Propagatores generis humani D. D. N. N. Dioclesianus,
and Maximianus Invictissimi Imperatores; and Constantius and Maximianus.
Nobiles Caesares Castra faeliciter condiderunt

.. ntes Cassiano Hieroclete Viro probo Praeside provinciae Devoti Numini
Majestatique eorum.

I have inserted the name of Maximinus, ( Herculius) because he was at that
time the sole Co-partner of the Empire with Dioclesian: I call them
Conservatores orbis, and invictissimi, from their Coins; and I have changed the
Praenomen of Hierocles into Cassianus, which is well known to be Roman, while
Ossianus no where occurs; the time when the Marble was erected has been already
adjusted; P. 148, 149
for then Dioclesian built several Castles upon the Euphrates, or rather then
he built the Castr Caircesia; for though it was a Frontier Castle before that
time, ( Gordian, when slain by Philip, having been buried there, L. 23. c. 5.
as Capitolinus avers, though Am. Marcellinus, who had been at the place, says
his Tomb was not at Circesium, but at Zaitha seven miles from it: Zosimus says
it was at Dura, Eutropius and Rufus twenty miles from Circesium;) yet it was so
poor and weak a place, says Ammianus, till Dioclesian fortified it with strong
Walls and Towers, that for that reason he may be with justice said to have
built the Castle, as those who have beautified decayed Cities, are commonly
styled by the Greeks ((...)) the Founders of those Places.

20.
In the ruins of Briadeen, the following Inscription was found.

(...). It seems to have been inscribed on an Altar, or some Pillar of a Temple
dedicated to Minerva Lindia, for so I would correct and read it;

(...). Consecratum fuit Minervae Lindiae a Materno, and Pappo, and Marco in
honorem, (Deae.) Anno 541. h. e. 229. Christi. Alexandri Severi 8. That
Alexander Severus was the Darling of the East, no Man will doubt, who considers
that he was not only born in Syria, but had made a victorious Expedition into
Persia to secure the Quiet of his Native Country; and that for his illustrious
Qualities he was deify'd in Libanesia and Palmyrene, as well as at Rome. In his
Reign was the Inscription set up at Briadeen (possibly to fulfill a Vow for his
Preservation) in honor of Minerva Lindia. Lindus is Rhodes, says Suidas V.
(...).
, the name both of the Island and City, where Minerva was worshipped with an
extraordinary Devotion, the Inhabitants sacrificing to her every day, and every
day making a Feast in her Temple. Narrat. 47.
Conon tells us, that the Phaenicians having possessed themselves of Rhodes, were
driven out by the Carians; and that the Dorians, under the Conduct of
Althaemenes, disposest the Carians, and built three Cities in the Island,
Lindus, Jalysus, and Camirus, which at last became one great City, called
Rhodes after the name of the Island: And L. 2. c. 1.
Apollodorus affirms, that Danaus having by the help of his Daughters,
murdered the Sons of his Brother Aegyptus, being his own Sons in Law, built a
Ship by the advice of Minerva, in which himself and Daughters fled out of
Egypt to Rhodes, where he dedicated the Image of Minerva Lindia. Minerva, says
Fab. 277.
Hyginus, built the Ship for Danaus, the first of the kind that ever was seen
in Greece, says 7.46.
Pliny: This Voyage of Danaus, commenc't when Erichthon was King at Athens,
says the noble Collection of Epocha's in the n. 9.
Oxford-Marble, that his Daughters Amymone, Helice, and Archedice, being chosen
by lot by the other Sisters, built the Temple upon the Shore in the Maritime
City of Rhodes, called Lindus; which, says L. 14. p. 655.
Strabo, was situate toward the South, especially toward Alexandria: For in
that City, as L. 5. p. 227.
Diodorus Siculus affirms, he was hospitably received, and therefore built the
Temple, and consecrated the Statue; there he lost three of his Daughters, who
died of the Pestilence, which then raged at Lindus, the rest sailed with their
Father to Argos. The same Historian adds, that Cadmus not long after offered
several Gifts in that Temple, among which was a Brass Vessel made a l'antique,
with an Inscription in Phaenician Characters. But if we may believe the noble
Marble, Cadmus sailed to Thebes eight years before Danaus left Egypt; so that
that part of the Story is a Parachronism in Diodorus. A long time after
Danaus's Death, Amasis the King of Egypt presented the same Minerva of Lindus
with two Statues of Stone, Herod. l. 2. c. 102.
and with a Linen Breastplate of admirable Work, ( Thoraces linei being very
usual among the ancient Captains, as Part. 2. l. 4. c. 11.
Ferrarius unquestionably proves, and Minerva was a warlike Goddess, it was
somewhat like our Silkarmors) because his Country-women built that Temple:
Which, Strabo says, was in his time very illustrious, and much frequented. Nor
was she honored only in that Country, but in Syria, if we may credit the
Inscription. In which I have put (...) for (...), though perhaps it should be
Malchus. Hesyc. (...), 98.7.
in Gruter.

21.
At Andreen, which lies between Briadeen and Aleppo, among the Ruins of an
ancient Church, were found some broken Inscriptions, the Remains of the
Devotions of the Christians of former Ages.

(...) -- (...) -- (...).... Ego Johannes precatus Deum assecutus sum, (quod
petii) and gratias agens Deo (votum solvi ut peccatis meis (sit propitius.)
Over the Southern Door was written,

(...). Porta haec Domini justificat intrantes per illam. Over the Western
Door, which I would read,

(...) Christo Deo optimo Maximo. These Inscriptions do not need a Commentary,
since nothing difficult occurs in them; but they cannot but raise a deep
Commiseration in all Christians to see so many venerable Remains of the ancient
Piety either converted into Mosques, or buried in their own Ruins: No Churches
having in past times been more illustrious for Religion, and good Letters, than
the Oriental, in which at this time there are but some few footsteps of either,
the rest being overrun with Barbarism and Infidelity.

The next broken Inscription is also undoubtedly Christian, (as those wherein
TH(...) (...), and (...) appear;) and, I suppose, contained the names of the
eminent Angels Vriel, Raphael, Gabriel, Michael, (and perhaps the former
Inscription may be thus rendered, (...), according to the form of a similar
Epigraphe in Gruter;) 1048.2.
for it was not unusual to affix the names of those holy Angels upon the
Christian Tombs, out of opinion to engage them to be Guardians of the Sepulcher
(as the modern Pretenders to converse with Spirits, inscribe their names
usually on their Utensils;) so in the Tomb of Mary the Wife of the Emperor
Honorius, on a Plate, were written these names; Michael, Gabriel, Raphael,
Vriel. Id. 287.4.


I have now done with the Monuments of this once famous Country; and, because
there is in every Man an innate Desire of living after he has left this World,
though all Men do not believe there is another; and that they desire, when they
are dead, to be remembered, and well spoken of, that their Actions may not be
confined to the same Grave with their Carcasses; I shall conclude with the wise
Saying of the Roman Orator, That whenever we see such Remains of venerable
Antiquity, such lasting Records of the names, and Achievements of great
Persons, we are admonisht to take care so to regulate our Actions, that we may
convince the World we have settled our prospect upon the Rewards of Future
Ages, and not on the Flatteries of the Present; and to remember, that Monuments
being erected to the Memory of those, who have lived well in this World before
they left it, put us in mind, that there is nothing here permanent, and
immutable, and that it is the Duty of considering Men to aspire toward
Immortality.

A short Chronicle of Palmyra.
PAlmyra, Anno Per. Jul. 3720 Mund. 3010.
built by Solomon after he had finished the Temple, and his own House, which
were 20 years in building. Palmyra destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, P. J. 4125. M.
3415.
before he laid Siege to Jerusalem. Marc. Antony, P. J. 4673. M. 3963. V. C.
Varr. 713. ante Christ. 41.
after the Battle of Philippi, went into Asia, and sent his Troops to pillage
Palmyra. Hadrian, An. Christi 122.
an. Imp. 6. went into the East, rebuilt (probably) Palmyra, and called it
Hadrianople, when Malech Agrippa was the second time Secretary of that City.
Palmyra made a Roman Colony by the Emperor Caracallus, in his Expedition into
Parthia. Palmyra assisted Alexander Severus against Artaxerxes King of Persia,
Zenobius being their General. Gordian against the Persians, Zenobius being
their General. Valerian was taken Prisoner by Sapores King of Persia. Odenathus
routed the Persians, Gallienus. Odenathus, Herodian, slain by Maeonius.
Maeonius, the Ephemerous Emperor of Palmyra, slain a few days after; then
Zenobia assumes the Empire in her own name, and her Sons. Zenobia routed
Heraclianus, 's General. Vaballathus took the Empire. -- Gallienus slain.
Claudius chosen Emperor. Zenobia conquered Egypt by her General Zabdas.
Claudius died. Quintillus reigned 16 days. Aurelian in the later end of the
year was chosen Emperor. Palmyra taken, Aurelian, and Longinus slain; an. of
Vaballathus. Zenobia carried in triumph at Rome. Hierocles, Palmyrene under
Dioclesian. Justinian in the first year of his Reign, repaired and fortified
Palmyra. Palmyra was subjected by the Mahometans, Jabala the Son of Al Iham
being then Lord of Tadhmur, and King of Gassan. Tadhmur between Dahacus and
Adis. Saleiman the Pseudo-Caliph, Merwan, fled to Tadhmur. Benjamin in
Tudelensis was at Tadhmur. Melhom, Emir, or Prince of Tadhmur, when the English
Merchants made their first Journey thither. Hassine the Emir, Dor the Emir of
Tadhmur.
Additions and Emendations.
Page 193. add after Sociam. Nasorus is the same name with Nasir, Abunasir,
Abdolnasir, Nasireddin, which frequently occur in the Saraccnick History. As
does Amrus in the same History, and in the Catalogue of the Kings of Gessan, in
our Learned Pocock, Sochaeis the same with Sychaeus the Husband of Dido.
Sampsus, etc. p. 240. l. 6. after Harpocration, add, though the (...) was
probably the chief Magistrate, or Decurio at Ancyra.

P. 301. l. 3. after Grammar add, perhaps for (...) we should read (...), (though
Mr. H. positively avers, that it was written (...) in the Monument,) and then
Elabelus, Mannaeus, Sochaeis, and Malchus, being all the Sons of Vaballathus,
Grand Sons of Mannaeus, Great-grand Sons of Elabelus, set up that Monument for
themselves, and their Children; or rather (to assert the true reading) erected
that Tomb ((...)) to their Father Vaballathus, ((...)) and to themselves, (and
others, if there were any) his Children. This is one of the oldest Inscriptions
at Palmyra, erected anno Christi 102. the 5th of the Reign of the Emperor
Trajan, Palma his Governor of Syria having some few years before reduced that
part of Arabia under the Roman Power, says Dio. l. 68 which Age no other
Monument exceeds.

Besides Misaccentings, wrong Pointings, misplacing of Letters, and other
little Faults, the Reader is desired, before he enters upon the Book, to
correct the following

ERRATA.

PAge 8. l. 17. preserve. P. 17. dele (...). P. 20. l. 14. del. M. l. 26. r.
Nice. p. 22. l. 21. when. p. 28. l. 6. a State. p. 35. l. 12. r. happened to
fall sick. l. 21. 22. r. for in the seventeenth year of his Reign. p. 36. l. 3.
r. who, living some years after, languisht. p. 48. Marg. Petri. p. 55. l. 15.
f. for r. but. p. 58. l. 3. del. he. p. 59. r. an. 264. p. 62. l. 9. enraged.
p. 72. l. 2. r. after which an. 268. p. 73. for probably r. doubtless. p. 86.
del. the Marg. Note, and insert it p. 87. p. 118 l. 6. r. Marcellinus. l. 8. in
the first year. p. 121. chapter XXVII. p. 131. l. 11. r. declared his Partner in
the Empire. p. 139. Caenophrurium. p. 140. del. in all probability. p. 149. l.
5. r. washed. p. 166. l. 17. del. A. p. 193. (...). p. 196. Heraclas. 201.
Julius. 219. (...). ib. (...). 221. l. 26. (...). 238. (...). l. 12. brought.
p. 239. l. 14. r. five. 248. l. 16. del. Jaribolus, and. p. 249. l. 26. (...).
251. l. 12. r. Xiphiline, and del. the Marg. Note. p. 254. l. 2. the Emp.
married Urania to his Country God Elagabalus, the Moon being the fittest Wise
for the Sun. 263. l. 29. Grandmother. p. 270. Marg. de Dea Sir. ed. ult. 293.
l. 6. transcribe. 299. l. 4. (...). 302. l. 13. fifth. ib. (...). and Pani. l.
17. Chr. 138. p. 304. Marg. l. 2. chil. 310. l. 9. (...). 311. calls him. 312.
r. the same year, viz. the 4th of Alex. 313. l. 22. r. 226. p. 317. l. 3.
commanding, and assisting. 325. Emesa. 332. l. 2. Person. 345. (...). 348.
Sonat. ib lotus. 350. l. 27. and then. 353. l. 7. Anton. tertio. 360. l. pen.
in Gr. 364. l. 15. del. and. 365. Tetrarchies. ib. Syria. ib. fornix. p. 366.
feci.

FINIS.

