LUCIUS ANNAEUS SENECA, HIS FIRST BOOK OF CLEMENCY, Written to NERO CAESAR.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, MDCLIII.

To the Reader.
Reader:
LEst thou at first sight should tax the Author of flattery, in magnifying
the Clemency of Nero, the worst of Tyrants; know, this Tract was written about
the beginning of his Reign, who while he hearkened to the Advice and Counsel
of Seneca, once his Tutor, merited this praise, as appears by that Quinquennium
Neronis, the first five years of his Government, so much celebrated: as also by
that passage between him and Burrus recorded by Seneca and Suetonius, when
after many delays being to sign a Warrant for the Execution of some
Offenders; be cried out, O that I could not write! Though afterward (such a
change there was in him) hearing that vulgar Greek verse repeated, which
Tyberius had so often in his mouth: (...), when I dye let the Earth be set on
fire; nay, while I live said Nero. But whether Seneca suspected that change or
no, it is evident he omitted no endeavor either to confirm him, or else to
make him ashamed to lose that virtue, for which he was so much extolled. And
questionless had he not thrown off not only all virtue, but whole Man; the
very remembrance of this Book would have made him spare the Author. But it is
conceived, the reverence of his life did too much check the resolved
wickedness of the Emperor. And although the present Translator may seem actum
agere in making Seenca English: yet perhaps thou will find he has rendered him
more vigorous, and more like himself in his original; but certainly he has
made him more thine by an easy retention of his various and fluent sentences
in thy memory, through the harmony of Verse. Read therefore and enjoy him; for
as Lipsius his chief Illustrator says, He is in a ready way to goodness who
has begun to love Seneca.

Farewell.
LUCIUS ANNAEVS SENECA His First Book, of CLEMENCY, written to Nero Caesar.
I Nero Caesar, have resolved to write
Of Clemency: to offer to thy sight
A Looking-glass, where thou thy self may view,
And reap the greatest joy that man ere knew.
For though it be the true fruit of good deeds
To know we have done them, and that virtue needs
No praise but from it self: yet thoughts often spent
On a good conscience yield no small content;
And then to cast thine eyes upon the lewd,
Contentious, vile, pernicious multitude,
Which if at length it should cast off this yoke,
To mutual bane each other would provoke:
And seriously within thy self to say:
The gods have culled me out the world to sway.
As their Vicegerent: at my sole command
Both life and death, and all men's fortunes stand:
The fate of things depends on my decree,
Kingdoms receive their joy and grief from me.
No country flourishes but by my smile.
These numerous Legions, which are quiet while
My peace restraines them, at my beck shall fight:
What Nations shall be ruinate dquite,
And what transplanted, what be freed, what bound,
What Kings shall be led captive, and what crowned,
What Cities built, what rased, belongs alone
To my transcendent jurisdiction.
In this so great a power, my wrath nere bent,
My will to any unjust punishment;
No youthful boldness, nor rash insolence,
That provokes patient minds, could mine incense:
Nor have I sought, like most great Kings, my name
TO advance by fear, and gain a dreadful fame,
My sword lies sheathed, or rather bound up still,
I have forborne the meanest blood to spill,
Men though they want abilities, are when
They come to me, welcome, because they are men,
Rigour's suppressed, but mercy stands prepared:
I keep upon my self so strict a guard,
As to the Laws I an account should give,
Which would lie dead, but that by me they live;
Some for their youth, some for their age I spare:
For the honor of their place some pitied are,
Some for their low condition: when I sinde
There can no other reason be assigned,
Why I compassion should be moved to take.
I do it then at least for mine own sake.
Should the immortal gods require this day
The account for all mankind, I would obey.
This, Caesar, may with boldness be aver'd
That of all things thy birthright has conferred,
Upon thy trust, and safe protection,
The Commonwealth through thee has not lost one,
Either by force, or fraud, thou have acquired
What scarce an other Prince has yet desired,
The rarest of all virtues, innocence.
Nor have thou labored without recompense:
For this thy great and matchless worth has found
Grateful esteemers. So our thanks abound:
That no one man, could to an other come
More wished for, then thou to the people of Rome,
Their great and lasting good. But lo thou have
Upon thy self a mighty burden cast,
For few speak now of holy Augustus reign,
Or of Tiberius his first times: It Is vain;
To seek for an example any where
But in thy self: we have a full taste there
Of what we may expect. Yet this were hard,
If hereunto thou were not first prepared
By native goodness; no man has sustaind
A borrowed person long; things which are faind
Return to their first habit: what has grown
From truth, and, as I may so say, our own
Well-grounded root, will gather strength by time,
And by degrees to more perfection clime.
The Roman people thought they under went
A mighty hazard, ere they knew the bent
Of such a noble spirit we now are
In full enjoyment of our public praire.
Nor can we doubt, thou't e're thy self forget;
For though too much felicity does whet
Our appetites to more: and though our mind
Is not so temperate, as to be confined
To any present good, but will proceed
From great to greater things: and that we feed
Upon new hopes, when we have gotten more
Than could by us be hoped for before:
Yet all thy subjects jointly do profess,
To take such pleasure in their happiness,
That they for nothing do so much contend,
As that their happiness may have no end.
To which profession (though but seldom made
By any) these things chiefly them persuade:
The plenteous peace that they enjoy by thee:
And justice placed above all injury.
The blessedness of such a Government,
Where liberty is in its full extent:
And is not curbed in any thing, unless
In what would ruin them, licentiousness.
But that which does to admiration flow,
Is thy most equal Clemency: for though
All other benefits which men possess,
Are as their fortunes make them, more or less:
Yet from thy mercy all, expect the same.
Nor is there any that can lay such claim
To innocence, but he is glad to see
Mercy prepared, him from his faults to free.
However there be some who do maintain,
That bad men only do by mercy gain:
Because it is not properly extended
To any, but to those who have offended:
And that among all virtues, this alone
Is that, which is to guiltless men unknown:
But yet as physic, though it be intended
But for the sick, is nere the less commended
By such as are in health: so Clemency,
Though it be sought by them on whom does lie
A guilt, yet it is had in reverence
By those who have committed no offense.
And guiltless men themselves nay stand in need
Of mercy; since some acts, that do proceed
From fortune, are made faults: and we may see
Virtue as well as innocence set free
By mercy: for in lewd and wicked times,
Praiseworthy deeds are punished as crimes:
Besides most men may become innocent;
Yet it is not fit to forbear punishment
To all: because confusion, and a source
Of vices follow, when we use remorse
To good and bad: and therefore it is fit
To make a difference, between a wit,
That's curable, and that which is past cure,
In pardoning, this rule is always sure:
Neither to be too rigid, nor remiss;
Because no less a cruelty it is,
To pardon all, then none: we must observe
A mean: but yet because we are apt to swerve,
It is the noblest error to incline
To mercy, when we pass the equal line.
But for the present, these I Will lay aside:
And the whole matter in three parts divide.
The first shall be a preface to the rest:
The second shall the nature manifest,
And quality of mercy: for whereas
Some vices do for virtues often pass,
They cannot be distinguished, unless
We by some marks the difference express.
In the third place we will inquire the way
To get this virtue, and to make it stay,
And then convert it to our present use,
For this is certain, that we cannot choose
Among all sorts of virtues any one,
That more becomes a man: for there is none
More sweet, and more humane: and is not so
To us alone, who have been brought to know
That man is found a sociable creature,
And molded for a common good by nature;
But even by those who give up man to pleasure,
And all their words and actions seem to measure
By their own profit. For if we desire
Repose and rest, this virtue will acquire
That which we seek; because it ever stands,
For peace and meekness, and binds up our hands,
But yet there is none whom mercy so much graces,
As Kings and Princes: for in public places,
Power is a glory, and an ornament;
Provided always that it be intent
Upon the peoples safety, but if power
Be hurtful, like a plague it will devour.
No accident his greatness can remove,
Whom all men do confess to be above,
As well as for them: and whose diligence
They ever find awake for the defense
Of every one, no less then the whole State;
Who when he comes abroad, is not with hate,
Shunned like some savage beast rousd from her den,
But gazed upon by multitudes of men
Like a propitious star whose subjects strive,
(That by their death he may be kept alive)
To rush between him and a Traitors sword,
And that their constant watchings may afford
His person secure rest, they stand about
His gates by night, to keep all danger out.
Nor is it without reason, that such care
Is used by men, and nations every where,
To guard their Kings. It Is not a selfe-neglect
Or folly, that such multitudes protect,
And with destruction of their own, uphold
One head, and that perhaps both weak, and old:
For as the body is subservient
Unto the soul, and is more eminent
By that, and more conspicuous, and though
The soul lies close, but where we do not know:
Yet do the hands, and feet, and eyes consent
To serve her: and the skin's her muniment,
At her command we now lie down, then run;
And if that she be covetous, we shun
No sea adventures; if ambitious,
It Is then a brave and glorious act for us,
To thrust our hands into the flaming sire,
Or leap into a gulf if she require:
Even so this vast and numerous multitude,
Which does within it but one soul include,
Is daily guided by that spirit alone,
And governd by the reason of that one:
And should ^^^t counsel be forborne, would strait
Be ruind and distroye'd with it is own weight.
And therefore their own safety men regard
When in the camp so many stand prepared:
Each striving for the front, offers his breast
To wounds, lest the Emprours standard be distressed.
He is the ciment that unites the State:
The vital breath that does inanimate
So many millions: and without it, they
Would be a mutual burden, and a pray.
While the King lives, the people do accord:
But when he dies, they live but by the sword.
That accident will end the Romans peace,
And make so great a Nations fortune cease.
The people will remain without that fear
So long, as they the bridle know to bear:
Which if they once shall break, they will be shie
To take it again, though chance did throw it by;
The bond and tie of this great government
Will into many pieces soon be rent:
And Rome will find, by wanting that direction,
An equal end of rule, and of subjection.
It is not any wonder then that Kings
And Princes, and each Magistrate that brings
Peace to State, should be beloved above
Our common parents, whom we dearly love:
For if the public be by honest men
Prized 'bove their private, it will follow then,
That he on whom the Commonwealth relies,
Should ever be most precious in our eyes.
Caesar had heretofore within the State
So wrapped himself, that but to separate
(...) was to destroy them both. As his good
Lay in their strength, so in a chief theirs stood.
But lo this speech is longer than I meant,
And yet I Am sure, it meets with our intent.
For if, as it appears, thou art the soul,
The State the body, then without control,
Mercy is needful: for while thou do spare
Others, thou spar'st thy self. Then take thou care
Even of ill subjects, as of limbs decayed:
And whenever reason shall persuade
To draw some blood, let the incision be
No more then needs. Thus Clemency, we see,
Is natural to all men: but renoun'd
In Princes, through whose power it finds more ground
To work on: private rage extends not far,
The cruelty of Princes is a war.
For though all virtues do agree, and none
Is as the better, and more honest known:
Yet some may better with some persons suit;
Courage becomes even those, whose low repute,
Has nothing under it: for what is more brave,
Than adverse fortune in contempt to have?
But yet this courage has a larger place
In a high fortune, and receaves more grace
From Courts than Cottages. Mercy appears
In no house, but it banishes all fears:
Yet it is more rare, and therefore more admired
In Princes Courts: for what can be desired
With greater wonderm^^^, than to behold
A man, whose wrath is not to be controld,
To whose grave sentence they forthwith submit
That be condemned, and dare not question it?
And who if furious passion him have seas'd
May not entreated be, to be appeased:
To see, I say, this man himself arrest,
And his vast power convert into the best,
Saying within himself, to kill all have
Power without law, but only I to save.
Great fortune a great courage does require:
And if that fly not full as high or higher
Than she, it brings her also to the ground;
This property in greatness should be found,
To be delightful, gentle, and to slight
Reproaches, and offenses as too light
To be regarded, or looked down upon.
It Is womanish, in passion to run on:
And it is the property of beasts, that are
Not generous, with cruelty to tear
Such as lie on the ground. Whereas the rage
Of Elephants, and Lions will assuage,
When once they conquer. But the ignoble race
Of Bears, and Wolves will dwell upon the place.
Feirce and unbounded anger ill befits
A King: for he not much above him sits,
Whom he his equal makes through wrathful strife:
But if to men obnoxious he gives life,
Or restores honor, then he does a thing,
That appertains to none but to a King.
Life may be taken from Superiors,
But never given but to Inferiors.
It Is proper to great Potentates to save,
Which never can more admiration have,
Then when they may; like gods, great favors give,
By whom we all both good and bad do live.
Then let a Prince, who should reain a mind
Like to the gods, be affable and kind,
To useful and good subjects: and include
Others within the numerous multitude.
Let him rejoice that some live in the State,
And let him also others tolerate.
Think how this City, in whose spacious streets
Such a continued throng of people meets;
Pressing each other, when some lets retard
Their passage; like a torrents course that is bard:
Wherein there is required sufficient way
For three great Theaters, filed every day:
And where there is as much provision spent,
As out of the whole Empire can be sent;
Would be distressed, and brought to desolation,
If only they were left of the whole Nation,
Whom a remorslesse Judge thought fit to spare:
What insolent inquisitors will dare,
TO abide that Law, which they themselves exact?
Are not accusers guilty of the fact
Which they on others lay? we ever find
Those men to pardon others least inclined,
Who have most needed pardon. Let Us confess
We have offended all, some more, some less;
Some of set-purpose, some by chance incited,
Or by an others wickedness invited:
Some from their honest purposes have started
And against their wills from innocence have parted.
Nor can they only say, they did offend,
But must confess, they shall even to the end.
And if there any be who have so purged
Their minds, that they by nothing can be urged
To commit faults, they certainly have gained
That innocence, by being often stained.
But seeing we the gods have mentioned, I
That pattern to a prince may well apply:
Who to his subjects should be such, as he
Would willingly the gods to him should be.
Should then the gods take so severe a course,
As not to be entreated to remorse,
What other power could any King protect,
But that the Inspector would his limbs collect?
But if those gentle powers can be content.
Not suddenly to exact the punishment,
Of Princes crimes with thunder, Is it not
More just that they who have dominion got
Ore other men, should use with gentleness,
Their sovereignty, and cheerfully confess,
The heavens to show more graceful in a bright
And Sunshine day, than when no other light
Appears, but frequent flashes from the Skies,
When all the world in a deep horror lies?
And certainly the aspect of a mild State
The face of a clear sky does imitate.
A cruel Reign is ever troublsome,
And full of darkness, under which none come
But with a trembling and affrighted heart:
And he that causes all, will have his part.
A private person though he be involved
In stiff revenge, is easily absolved,
For fearing to be hurt, he may resent
A wrong, or else p^rhaps he would disgrace prevent.
For it does rather cowardice appear,
Then Clemency, an injury to bear.
But he at whose command, revenge does lie,
Is merciful, if he will pass it by.
Men in mean place may bend their fists, and may
Wrangle and braule, and openly give way
To anger. Among equals strokes pass over,
But for a King intemp'rance to discover;
In un-beseeming words, or to express
Passion in cries, makes Majesty go less.
Thou think it much that the free talk that is used
By common people, is to Kings refused:
And such restraint, thou say, seems to exclude
Empire, and rather slavery obtrude.
But is not this by trial found to be,
A slavery to us, and not to thee?
Their quality is diffrent that both shroud
Themselves, and do continue in the crowd:
Whose virtues struggle long ere they be known,
And into darkness are their vices thrown.
Thy words and deeds to rumor open are.
And therefore there is none should take more care
What fame they have, than they whose fame will fill
The spacious world, let it be what it will:
How many things are not permitted thee,
Which by thy favor we enjoy? It Is free
For me through every street to walk alone,
And need not fear, though waited on by none:
Although at home no arms I do provide,
Nor any sword be hanging at my side:
Thou in this time of peace, which thou do give
To us, and to the world, must armed live.
And can at no time from thy fortune part,
Which thee besieges, for where ere thou art
Pleased to remove, that follows with a train.
And great men justly may of this complain,
As of their highest servitude, that they
Cannot descend, but where they are, must stay.
But this necessity no less does bind
The gods then thee, who are to Heaven confind.
And to descend no more permitted be,
By fates strict law, then it is safe for thee.
Thou to thy height art fixed. Our motions few
Observe, we go, return, our clothes renew
Without a public notice what is done,
Thou can no more be hidden then the Sun.
Thy person always is with shining rays
Invirond, upon which all people gaze.
Think thou that thou come forth? no thou do rise.
No sooner can thou speak but thy voice flies
Through every Country. Thou no sooner art
To anger moved, but every thing does start.
When thy proscription against one comes out,
There is a present trembling round abo^t;
As thunder falls but to a few men's harm,
Yet to the fear of many, so the arm
Of a chastising power, with terror awes,
More then with strokes; and not without a cause.
For he that can do all, is looked upon,
As what he may do, not what he has done.
Besides, much suffering private persons brings
To suffer more with patience, but Kings
By Clemency find a secure defense:
For though strict Justice stops the insolence
Of a few men, yet public hate it draws,
In punishments the will, before the cause,
Should always cease. For otherwise as Trees,
After the are pruned recover by degrees
A fair top: and as some plants we know,
Are often cut, thereby to make them grow:
So does a Princes cruelty augment,
And not the number of his foes prevent.
For parents, children, kindred, friends, substain
The places of those men whom he has slain.
How true this is, shall now be understood
By an example fetched from thine own blood.
Divine Augustus was a gentle Prince,
If him at least we shall consider since
He swayd alone the Scepter; for it is true,
While he with others ruled, his sword he drew.
And having passed the age of eighteen years,
As thou have now, he had, as it appears
Suborned some friends with secret arms to lie
In wait, to entrap the Consul Anthony:
And had his share in the Triumvirate.
But when his age arrived beyond the date
Of forty years, he, being in France, was told,
That Lucius Cinna a weak man, but bold,
Designed his death: the manner, place, and when
TO was to be acted, was discovered then
By one of the confederates. His intent
Was to inflict on him sharp punishment,
But with his friends consulting what was best;
He could not in the night take any rest,
For thinking, that he was to ruin quite
A noble youth, and but for that upright,
Nephew to Pompey; so loath was he now,
TO have one man die: who could before avow
With Anthony at supper time a list
Of dire proscriptions. Thus did he persist
In sad and various thoughts. What then? Shall I
Suffer so treacherous an enemy
To walk secure, while I with cares am fraught?
And shall not he be punished that has sought
Not only to destroy but sacrifice
This head (for it was then their joint advice
To slay him at the Alter) that in vain
Has been so often threatened with the bane
Of civil wars: and having quite allayd
So many storms at Land and Sea, has made
Peace through the world: then, having paused a while,
He spoke much louder, and did more revile
Himself then Cinna: wherefore do thou live
If to so many men thy death will give
A benefit? what end will there be
Of rigor? what of blood? this head, I see,
Must be submitted to young nobles rage,
That they against it may their swords engage.
Life is not so much worth, that unless I
Be now destroyed so many men must die.
But his wife Livia interposing spoke
Unto him thus: A woman's counsel take:
Do like Physicians who are used to try
When proper medicines fail, the contrary.
Rigor has yet stood thee in little stead:
For Lepidus Salvienus followed,
Muraena Lepidus, Muraena gone,
Caepio appeared, and after him came on
Egnatius, for the rest I need not name,
Whose very attemps to mention were a shame:
Be therefore at the length content to try
What profit will arise from Clemency:
And pardon Lucius Cinna. He Is made sure:
He cannot hurt, he may thy fame secure.
Augustus joyful that his inward strife
Was stopped by this good counsel, thankt his wife.
And making it soon known to all those friends
He first consulted, he for Cinna sends:
And being come, he makes an other chair
Be set for him, bidding the rest forbear:
Cinna (said he) I do desire that thou Will without interruption here me now:
And the mean while not into passion break:
Thou after shall have liberty to speak.
When thee I found in arms. not only made,
But borne my foe, I did my wrath persuade
To save thy life, and thy estate restore.
Nor is there at this day a man, that more
Abounds with wealth and happiness, so high,
That Conquerors the Conquered do envy.
The Preist-hood I at thy request gave thee
Omitting those whose fathers joined with me
In several wars: and now thou go about
To flay me, for my love. When he cried out,
May such a madness be by me abhord!
Caesar replied, Cinna, thou breakst thy word:
It was our first agreement thou should not
Give interruption; thou I say do plot,
To take away my life: he named the place,
The day, and the associats, and did trace
The whole design; nay he was so exact
He named the man appointed for the fact.
And when he saw him dashed, and silent, now
Through guilt, not promise: what, said he, do thou
Aim at in this? to be made Prince? alas,
The Commonwealth is but at an ill pass,
If only I obstruct thy way: it is known
Thou art not able to support thine own
House hold affairs. A man made newly free,
In a late private cause prevailed against thee:
Can any thing be easier then to strive
With Caesar? but proceed, if I survive
To cross thy hopes alone. Can thou suppose
Emilius, Fabius Maximus, and those
Sprung from the Cossi and Servilii
Will endure thee? such as do not rely
On empty names: whom their own worth prefers
And are an honor to their Ancestors?
But lest by rendering his whole speech, I make
A volume, know, two hours and more he spoke,
And having so enlarged the punishment
With which alone he meant to be content:
Cinna said he, I give thee life once more,
A Parricide found now, a so before.
Let friendship between us begin henceforth,
Let us contend whether shall show most worth,
I in bestowing, thou in owing life.
He after made him Consul, and the strife
Was that he durst not ask it: to the end
Cinna remaind his true and faithful friend:
And made him his sole heir. From that time none
TO have ploted against Augustus life was known.
Thy great grand fathers father pardoned those
Whom he subdued; how else could he suppose
There would be any left, ore whom to reign?
From the foes party, he did Salust gain,
And the Cocceians also drew off then,
And the Duillians, with that band of men,
Who in so great fidelity persisted,
That they into his own Lifeguard were listed.
Beside, at that time (...) the Domitians,
With the Messala's, and Asinians,
The Ciceronians, and the flower of Rome
To his great mercy debtors were become.
How long did he keep Lepidus alive,
And him of Princely titles not deprive?
From taking the High Priesthood he abstained,
So long as Lepidus in life remaind.
For he that purer honor would not soil
So much, as that it should be called a spoil.
This mercy his estate and life assured,
And more good will and more esteem procurd,
Although he had not fully laid his hand
On Rome, which yet had stoopt to no command;
And at this day preserves him in such fame,
As that no Prince alive the like can clame.
For with the gods we rank him, not because
We are hereto enjoined by the Laws,
But that we so believe. And we confess
Augustus a good Prince, whose worthiness
Deserved that attribute, his Countries Farther:
For which we can no better reason gather,
Then that he used no cruel punishment
Against contumely, which great men resent
Above an injury: that he reproaches slighted:
And that he thought the punishment still lighted
Upon himself, which he on others laid:
And finding the honor of his house betrayed,
By his own daughters lewd adulteries,
That he could those indignities despise:
And did not only not the adulterers slay,
But with a safe conduct sent them away.
This is the height of pard'ning, when it is known
That there are many would thy anger own,
And to please thee, be willing not to spare
The blood of those whom thou shall once declare,
To be offenders, and yet thou to give
Both pardon, and protection to live.
These things Augustus in his age, I find,
Did do, or when he toward age inclined.
Who in his youth was hot, with anger boiled:
Whose thoughts, from many things he did, recoyl'd.
Tween thee and gentle Augustus none dares make
Comparison for mercy, though he take
The advantage of his age more than mature;
It cannot with thy youth the test endure.
His mercy and meekness often times were tried:
Yet after he the Achan sea had die'd
With Roman blood: yet after he had lost
His own and other navies on the coast
Of Sicilie: yet after so much guilt
Of blood, on the Perusian altars spilt,
And by proscriptions. This do not I
Call mercy, but a wearied cruelty.
Thine is true mercy, Caesar, which began
Not from repented cruelty, nor can
Be taxed with the stain of civil blood.
In so great height of power thou have made-good
Thy temprance, and unspeakable good will
To man; and art not taynted with the ill
Of avarice or rashness, or the example
Of former Kings, who on men's necks did trample:
And their great power with rigor did dilate.
But thou the edge of Empire do abate.
Thou, Caesar, have thy Rome unbloody made.
And as thou have with noble boasting said,
No part of the whole world one drop has lost
Of humane blood by me: and which is most
To be admired, none ever had command,
Or had the sword put sooner in his hand:
And therefore mercy as well safety brings,
As great esteem: and is no less to Kings,
Secure than glorious. When they aged die
Their Kingdoms come to their posterity:
The government of Tyrants is both short,
And detestable. Say then, in what sort
Do Kings and Tyrants differ; for we know
Their power is equal, and the same in show?
A tyrant cruel is out of mere will,
A King but through necessity: both kill:
The one as often as public good requires:
The other of himself men's deaths desires.
A tyrant differs from a King in deeds
And not in name. He that the story reads
Of the elder Dionysius, will find,
That he in merit did not come behind
Most Kings: And wherefore should he doubt to call
Sylla a Tyrant, who his rage let fall
When there were no foes left with him to strive,
Whom he of life and fortune might deprive?
And though he the Dictatorship laid down,
And like a private man resumed the gown,
Yet what fierce tyrant ever was so cursed,
Or ere drank humane blood with so much thirst?
At whose command (which nothing could restrain)
Seven thousand Roman Citizens were slain.
And when the Senate, being together met,
And in the Temple of Bellona set
Within the hearing of those men that groaned
Under the sword, their misery bemoaned:
Fathers conscript (said he) let us proceed;
These are a few seditious men that bleed
By my appointment. What he said was true:
For they to Sylla seemed but a few.
But we hereafter shall from Sylla know,
What anger we to enemies should show:
Especially to those that have forsaken
Their fellow Citizens, and on them taken
The name of foes. In the mean time it is clear,
That mercy makes the difference appear
Between a King and tyrant: though both have
Their guards, yet in one is guarded but to save
Peace from disturbance; the other to restrain
Great hatred with great fear, and is in pain
And jealousy while he beholds those bands,
Though he commit himself into their hands;
Thus contraries against contraries are reared.
For as he hated is because he is feared,
So 'cause he is hated he will be feared: and then
That wicked saying, whereby many men
Have been destroyed, he uses. Let them hate
So that they fear not minding with what weight
Rage falls on him, when hatred swells too high.
For temperate fear bold thoughts does qualify:
But when it is continual, and grows
Into extremity, it moves even those
That lie upon the ground to rise, and try
With daring boldness the utmost remedy.
Though savage beasts be compast with a net:
Yet if the hunters then upon them set,
They will attempt to fly through what they fled:
And furiously upon their fear will tred.
That resolution is not to be shaken,
Which from extreme necessity is taken.
Fear must hold forth some safety, and suggest
More hope then harm: they that would quiet rest,
If they be still in danger, will forbear
No hazard, but will rush on them they fear.
A constant guard a peaceful King secures,
By which the common safety he assures.
A gallant soldier being still prepared
To defend peace, stands as his fathers guard.
But he that guards a bloody tyrant, stands
As if he carried danger in his hands.
We cannot in those ministers confide,
Whom we employ but only to provide
Gibbets, and racks, and instruments to slay:
To whom as to wild beasts men are a prey.
A tyrant, lives in more anxietie,
Then any of those who he condemns to die:
For his own conscience threatens him with rods
Of direful vengeance, both from men and gods.
And is reduced to that condition,
He cannot mend, but must in ill go on.
Great cruelty has this which is the worst
Of villainy, that to proceed it is forced.
And finds no way left open of regresse;
For wickedness must strengthen wickedness.
And what can be a greater misery,
Then to be wicked through necessity?
O wretched he, but to himself bove all!
(And they into an odious guilt must fall
That pity him) who uses his great power
With rapines, and with slaughters to devour.
That every where looks with suspicious eyes,
And fearing weapons, to dire weapons flies:
That doubts the faith of nearest friends, is shie
Of his own childrens tender piety.
And when both what he has, and will effect
He so considers, that he does reflect
Upon his conscience full of crimes and frights,
He often fears, and oftener death invites.
And is to himself more odious then to those,
Who by their service are at his dispose.
But he on the other side, whose care is bent
To the whole State, (though it be more intent
To one part then an other, yet there is none,
Whereon he does not look as on his own,)
Ever inclines to mercy: And when need
Requires his stricter Justice to proceed,
He shows with what unwillingness he is brought
To sharper remedies: whose gentle thought
No rancour entertains, nor hostile rage,
But does his power with mild commands aswage.
Who to his subjects labors to approve
His government, with gentleness, and love.
And thinks himself happy enough, if he
Communicates his own felicity.
Courteous in speech, and easy of access,
And that which peoples hearts does most possess,
Retains a clear and loving countenance:
And as he seeks all just desirs to advance,
So neither is he cruel to unjust:
But has a special intrest in the trust
Of all his subjects, whom, from inward sense
They love, defend, and truly reverence.
Of whom the people speak the same at home
They do abroad, all seeking to become
Fathers of children: wishing barrenness,
Caused in time of civil wars, might cease:
And hoping they their children shall engage
The more, because the are born in such an age.
This Prince by his own benefit secured,
Needs not to be in Cittadells immured:
And though he have his guards, yet they are meant
Not for defense, but for an ornament.
What is his duty then? the very same
Of a good father: who sometimes does blame
His children with mild words, sometimes with threats,
And them, if they be stubborn, sometimes beats.
Who having sense, his son will disinherit
For the first fault? unless his lewd demerit
By many enormities his patience moves:
Unless he fears beyond what he reproves,
His resolution, is not easily bent
To wipe his name out of his Testament.
He many trials makes, to work upon
The doubtful disposition of his son,
Although he fears him gone so far past shame,
That he his nature hardly can reclame:
But when he finds him desperate, he flies
With resolution to extremities.
Hope makes him use all means that helpful are;
Extremities accompany despair.
What Parents do, a Prince should do the same:
Whom we the Father of his Country name,
Not with vain flattery: for we apply
All other sirnames to his dignity.
We call him happy, great, and royal; use
All titles, which proud majesty would choose:
But Father of his Country makes it known,
That he thereby a Fathers power must own:
Which is a mild authority, conferred
For childrens sakes, whose good should be preferred
Before his own. A father makes not have
To cut off his own limbs; and if at last
He does it, he would them again restore:
And in the very action does deplore
His loss so long delayed: for when a fact.
Is quickly don, it is near a willing act:
And too much punishing, suspicion draws,
That the chastiser does it without cause.
Within our memory a Roman Knight
Erixo, was run through in open fight,
With writing-pins, because he scourged his son
To death with rods. Nor could the rage begun
By fathers, and by children, have been stayed,
But that Augustus power the fame alay'd.
When Titus Arius plainly had descri'd,
That his son meant to become paricide,
He punished him with exile: which decree
Was much extold by all, by reason he
Was so indulgent, as to be content
In such a crime, with only banishment,
And that an easy one; for he confind
Him to Marselles, and with all assigned
The pension to him, which he had enjoyed
Before his guilt. This bounty did avoid,
(Even in that City where no lewd offense
Wants patronage) all thought of innocence
In him, whom in so great and high debate,
His father could condemn, and yet not hate.
We by this fit example will now gather,
How a good Prince, agrees with a good Father.
Arius intending of this crime to inquite,
The counsel of Augustus did desire.
Who to his house at his request repaired,
And with a private man in counsel shared:
Not saying let him come to me, for so,
The Judgment which from that consult should grow,
Would have been Caesar's, and not his. The cause
Being discussed according to the Laws,
And the allegations of both parties heard;
Caesar, before his sentence he declared,
Caused every Judge his verdict to write down,
Least the Emprors Vote might seem to be their own.
Then ere the books were opened, he did swear,
That he had no intent to be the heir
Of wealthy Arius. Here some abject spirit
Will say, he feared to show a hope to inherit
The fathers goods, by the sons condemnation.
But I think otherwise. For in relation
To a good conscience, we should make defense
Against ill opinions, by firm confidence:
And Princes ought especially to look
Upon their fame; a solemn oath he took,
That he would not inherit his cstate.
By which means Arius had that day the sat
To lose an other heir. But the decree
Of Caesar, was declared to be free:
Who after he had made it evident
That he by his opinion never meant
To make a benefit, (a care that ought
To be established in a Princes thought)
He sentenced the son to be confind,
Only according to his fathers mind.
Not that he should into the sack be put,
Or thrown forth among serpents, or be shut
In some close Goal: nor had he so much thought
Of him he consur'd, as of him that brought
Him to his counsel. It is fit, said he,
That the most easy punishment should be
Inflicted by a father on a son,
Young, and seduced to a crime, not done,
But (which to innocence comes very near)
Not entertained, But with reluctant fear;
Yet that he ought to be removed of right
Both from the City, and his fathers sight:
O Prince whose counsel should be still implored
By fathers in their need, and be adored!
O Prince deserving for his tender care,
With all distressed sons to be co-heire!
This, a Kings mercy justly may be styled,
That where he present is, makes all things mild.
And no man should to him appear so vile,
But he should also be in trouble while
He suffers, who, howere unfortunate,
Is yet a part and member of the State.
Great Empire may admit comparison
With smaller powers: for there are more than one:
Princes their subjects rule, fathers bear sway
Over their children, Masters to obey
Do teach their Scholars, Captains to their bands
Of soldiers, daily send forth their commands.
Who would not blame that father, which for light
Offenses does his children beat and fright?
Which of those tutors has the worthier parts,
Or is most fit to teach the liberal arts?
He that his scholars fleas, because they stick
Upon some words, their sight not being quick:
Because their memories do sometimes fail:
Or he that rather chooses to prevail
With admonitions, and to reprehend
With modesty, thereby to make them mend?
A Captain that too cruel is, will make
His soldiers out of hatred him forsake,
And justly too; for why should we forbear
To be to beasts, yet not to men, severe?
A skilful rider when he tames a horse,
Seeks not to do it with frequent blows, and force,
But with soft stroking, and a gentle hand,
Lest he grow restie, and refuse command.
A hunter, trayning up young dogs to hunt,
Makes use of older hounds which have been wont
To trace wild beasts: nor does he often rate
The young ones, lest their mettle should abate
By a degenerate fear, or make them run
Quite from the rest, their masters rage to shun.
Nay duller cattle that to toil are bred,
When they are too much goard, and threatened,
The yoke and burden will decline. No creature
Is so untractable as man by nature:
And therefore he should always be prepared
With greater industry, and be more spared.
For what is more foolish than to be ashamed
Of rage, when beasts and dogs are to be tamed?
Yet think that man by terror should be forced,
As if a man's condition were the worst.
We cure diseases without anger: this
Disease of mind not to be cured is
By hatred to the patient: he is sure
No good Physician who dispaires to cure.
He by whom subjects ought to be protected,
Should gently deal with those who are affected
In mind: and not the signs of death declare,
And suddenly turn hope into despair.
But he should strive with vices, and contend:
Some for their error he should reprehend,
And others with soft remedies beguile,
Deceiving, but yet curing them the while.
And not to heal alone must be the care
Of Princes, but to leave no shameful scar.
Severe and cruel punishments can bring
At no time any glory to a King:
For who his power will question? but he gains
Highest renown, when he his power restrains:
When many he preserves from others rage,
And against no man does his own engage.
It is a praise to bear a gentle hand
Over our slaves: for even in that command
We ought to weigh, not what the laws permit,
But what for us in equity is sit.
Which bids us spare our vassales, and withold
Our rage from slaves, that are both bought and sold.
How much more equitable is it then,
Not to make slaves of free and honest men?
Who though inferiors do not owe subjection
Unto thy will, but unto thy protection.
A statue is a refuge for a slave:
And though ore him full power by law we have,
Yet there is something in the creatures law,
That in behalf of man keeps man in awe.
Who did not Vedius Pollio as much hate
As did his slaves, because he used to bait
His Lampreys with man's flesh? when the least fault
Was by a save committed, he was caught
And thrown into his fish pond, and exposed,
As it had been to Serpents there enclosed.
O wretch deserving to be stucken dead
A thousand times! whether that he so fed
The Lampreys which he after meant to eat,
Or kept them only to make men their meat.
As cruel Lords when they abroad are seen
Are pointed at, and do provoke the spleen
Of all beholders: so the infamy
Of cruel Princes far and near does fly,
And the uncessant hatred of their crimes
Remains upon record to after times:
Were it not better such had not been borne,
Than borne to public bane? what can adorn
A man of power like mercy, in what way
So ever he is set to bear the sway?
For we must needs confess that what proceeds
From greatest power, most admiration breeds,
Which cannot hurtful be unless it swerve
From natures law, and will not that observe.
For nature first ordained a King; as we
In other creatures, and in Bees may see.
Whose King is centr'd in the safest place,
And has to himself a rome of larger space.
Hes also freed from labor, and remains
As a count-taker of the others pains.
And as good orders kept whille he is alive,
So does his death wholly dissolve the hive.
Nor do they ever suffer more than one,
Which for his courage chosen is alone.
Besides as his condition is the best,
So is his shape and form above the rest:
But the chief difference is, that though by nature
A Be appears a very angry Creature,
And to the model of it is body, prone
To fight on any provocation,
With so much furiousness, that it is found
To leave the sting behind it in the wound.
Yet contrary to all the rest, the King,
Is ever found to be without a sting.
For nature would that he should heither bear
Malice, nor take revenge, that costs so dear:
She him of an offensive sting bereft,
Whereby his anger she unarmed left.
This is a maine example to great Kings,
For nature is accustomed in small things
TO exalt her self, who unto man presents
From flightest subjects, weighty'st arguments.
Why should we therefore be ashamed to learn
From little creatures? since it does concern
A man so much the more his mind to charm
With temprance, as it is apter to do harm.
For my part I could wish that law derived
To men, that they of anger were deprived,
Together with their swords: and that they might
Do hurt but once: not make their hatred fright
With others strength. Fury would soon decay,
Had it no other hand to help to slay,
And that it could not be revenged, unless
It hazarded it self in the success.
Nor is a Tyrants danger thereby cleared,
For he must fear as much as he would be feared:
And must observe the hands of all, and though
He be not aimed at, must not think it so,
But be suspicions slave without release;
Nor can his fear for any moment cease:
Why should a man so sick a life endure,
When he may lead, and be in that secure,
A harmless life? and when he may employ
His saving power to all the peoples joy.
He errs that thinks a King may be safe there,
Where nothing from a King is safe. It Is clear,
Security does always most rely,
Upon a mutual security.
There is no need of strong and lofty Towers,
Built on high hills, to oppose offensive powers:
To dig huge mountains round, to make them steep:
Or into double trenched holds to creep.
Mercy guards Kings wheres'ever they resort.
The love of subjects is the only fort
That is impregnable. What can befall
A King like this, to be prayed for by all?
Not only when an Officer is near:
But when no other present is to hear.
And if his health a little be impaired,
Fear and not hope of change is then declared
By all his subjects: who, his safty prize:
And all that is theirs compared with that despise,
Who think no accident can him betide,
Which they 'tween him and them must not divide.
Mean time he by these daily arguments
Of mutual goodness, hereunto consents:
That, as each virtuous prince has still mantain'd,
He for the State, not that for him's ordained.
Who against this man mischief dares attempt?
Or (if it could be) would not him exempt
From all mis-haps, under whom Justice, Peace,
Safty, and honor flourish and increase?
Through whom the City with great riches fraught
Has all the benefits that can be thought:
Which viewing him like joy does apprehend,
As if the gods vouchsafed to descend:
Looking upon their Sovereign with an eye,
Of reverence, and devotion. For why?
Should he not be accounted to be near
The gods themselves, that does their nature bear?
And is like them both mild and liberal,
His power employing to the good of all.
A King chastises out of two respects,
When either he some great offense detects,
TO have been committed against himself, or when
It is committed against other men.
I Will first clear that wherein himselfe's concerned.
for moderation is more hardly learned
When his revenge to wrath is more a debtor,
Than to example, whereby men grow better.
It Is here superfluous to be put in mind
To shun a light belief, to seek to find
And know the truth, to favor innocence,
Whereby the Judge may seem to have a sense
Of his own fame, which else would be as far
In danger, as the prisoner at the bar;
But this is found to be the property
Of Justice, rather than of Clemency.
We now advise that passions be suppressed
In provocations that are manifest:
And (if it may be safe) to be content
To pardon and remit the punishment.
And to be exorable in his own,
Not in an others injury alone.
For as to bounty, it no whit relates,
To be profuse in other men's estates:
And as he is liberal that always throws
That from himself, which he on men bestows.
So does not Clemency to him belong,
Who is indulgent in another wrong.
But he is merciful, that does refrain
From a revenge, in midst of his own pain.
Who knows his mind arrived to the full height,
When he in greatest power a wrong can slight.
And thinks a Prince with highest glory crowned,
When often provokt, he still is gentle found.
Two benefits seem from revenge to arise:
Him that has wrong it either satisfies,
Or is a safety to the rest. A Prince
Enjoys a fortune of more consequence,
Than that he should on such a help depend:
And his known power much farther does extend,
And is more clear, than that he should be feign
To make it clearer by an others bane.
This my discourse is of a Prince intended,
That is by his inferiors offended.
For where he finds those that his equals were
Standing beneath him, his revenge is there
A slave, a serpent, and a dart have slain
A King, but no man justly can maintain
He saved any, but that he in power
To him he saved, must be superior;
And therefore he a noble use should make
Of what a^ity the gods bestowd, power both to take
And to give life: and chiefly toward those
Who formerly his greatness did oppose.
For having got the sovereignty, it is proof
That he thereby has got revenge enough:
And has attaind to all that can be meant,
By the full benefit of punishment.
For he that owes his life, has lost it: he
That is compelld to beg upon his knee
His life and Kingdom, must be fain to live
A Trophy to his name that life did give:
And being safe, he does his fame more right,
Than if he had been carried from his sight:
For he a daily spectacle remains,
By which the virtue of an other gains
An endless fame: whereas had he been lead
In triumph, he had quickly vanished.
And if he safely could his power restore,
And give him back all that he lost before,
His honor would exceedingly increase:
And he would manifest by that release,
That he desired to take no other thing,
But only glory from a vanquished King.
This is to triumph ore his victory,
And to declare to all the world that he
Found nothing in a conquered hand, that might
The acceptance of a conqueror invite.
But as for Citizens, and men unknown,
And others of a mean condition,
No vengeance should be taken upon such,
Lest honor seem thereby to stoop too much.
Some thou must pardon willingly, to some
Thou must disdain that thy revenge should come:
Whom, though they vex, thou must forbear no less
To kill; than we some vermin for their filthiness.
But touching those which in the public eye
May be condemned, or set at liberty,
It will be fit, that thou should not refuse
Thy wonted mercy toward them to use.
But let us pass to others injuries,
In punishing whereof the law relies
On these three things, which Princes should intend,
That them whom they chastise they may amend;
Or others by their sad example cure;
Or else by cutting off the bad, assure
The safety of the rest. The first will be
With smaller punishments reformed by thee.
For having something left whereto to trust,
They in their future ways will be more just:
Since there is little reason to take care
Of honor, or estate that is in despair.
And it is a kind of freedom from the law
TO have naught to lose; such men stand not in aw:
And for the rest, a Cities manners are
Soonest reformed, when punishments be rare.
For where offenders grow to a multitude,
A custom of offending does intrude.
And frequent condemnations will abate
The infamy of lewdness in a State.
And rigor, which is held the chief redress,
Is by continuance regarded less.
A Prince reformes ill manners, and does heal
Vices more easily in the commonweal,
When he is mild and patient, not as though
He did approve them, but thereby to show
That he is brought with very much regret,
And quite against his will his sword to whet.
The very mercy of a Prince revokes
Offenders from their usual crimes, as strokes
Which from a mild and gentle hand proceed,
Do commonly more shame and sorrow breed.
Besides thou see how often men are led
TO offend, though they be often punished.
Thy father more employed the fatal sack
In five years space, than they who shall look back
To all time past, will find was ever don:
For children did not into vice so run,
As to commit the worst of crimes, until
The law made that a crime. It was the will,
And prudence of those famous men that were
Most skild in natures secrets, to forbear
To mention that detested wickedness,
Which no straind impudence knew how to express,
Lest by ordaining punishment for it,
TO had showed that some might such a crime commit.
By that Law therefore paricides were taught,
And punishment that wickedness first brought.
All piety fell quickly to the ground,
After more sacks then gallowses were found.
That cities thought to goodness much addicted,
Where punishments but rarely are inflicted.
Integrity is therein understood
To be retained as a public good.
A Commonwealth that does so far proceed,
To think it self sincere, is so indeed.
And is offended more with them that fall
From public thrift, because their numbers small.
It Is dangerous, believe me, to declare
To any City, how much ill men are
In number more than good. By a decree
Slaves were to be distinguished from the free
By their apparel. But it soon appeard
What danger to the State was to be feared,
If to our slaves our number once were known.
So should we fear, if thou should pardon none.
TO would to the City soon be manifest
How much the lewder part out weighed the rest.
By many punishments like shame befalls
A Prince, as does by many funerals
Befall Physicians. Most men have a mind
By nature stubburne, to resist inclind.
It strives more when we chafe, than when we sawn;
And follows far more easily than it is drawn:
As generous horses sooner are reclam'd
By gentle bits, so willing minds are framed
To follow mercy of their own accord.
To which the City freely will afford
Kind entertainment, and thereof accept
As of a thing most worthy to be kept.
And therefore in this way more profit will
Arise, for cruelty's no human ill.
It is a bestiall fury to delight
In blood and slaughter, and to throw off quite
The essential qualities of humane nature,
And transmigrate into a savage creature.
Here I (O Alexander) feign would know
What difference it is Lysimacus to throw
Forth to a Lion, or else not forbear
With thine own teeth in pieces him to tear:
That throat is thine, that cruelty thine own.
How heartily thou'd'st wish thy nails were grown
To Talons, and that thou could stretch thy jaws,
To devour those thou catchest in thy paws.
We wish not that thy hand, (thy best friend's bain)
Should mercy toward any entertain.
Or thy fierce heart (destructive to mankind.)
Should without bloodshed satisfaction find.
It Is mercy called when he his friends would kill,
That men be brought to execute his will:
This renders rage abominable, when
It first breaks wonted, then the bounds of men.
It seeks new torments, studies several ways,
And Instruments of cruelty displayes,
Whereby it varies, and inlarges pain,
And fetches pastime out of human bane.
That dire disease of mind comes to the height,
Of madness, when in blood it takes delight.
And has so far proceeded, that it can
Take pleasure in the ruin of a man.
Destruction, hatred, poison, swords attend
At this man's back to bring him to his end.
By whom as many dangers still are feared,
As he for many often has prepared.
Sometimes from private plots, at other times
Through open detestation of his crimes.
For light and private mischeifes do not raise
Whole Cities; but when wickedness displaies
It self with rage, and threatens all, it is met
By multitudes, and round about beset;
Small Serpents creep away: When one's beheld
So great, that it is into a monster sweld:
When with its breath it poisons common springs,
And where it goes, destroys, and venom flings:
It is with crosse-bows shot at. Petty ills,
Deceive and escape, not much against our wills,
But great ones are opposed. So is a house
Not shunned by any, nor thought dangerous,
When one alone is sick. But if 't appear
By frequent deaths to be the Plague, a fear
Possesses the whole Town; from whence men fly,
And to the gods with lifted hands do cry.
So when a fire a private house does sease,
Servants and neighbors bringing water, ease
The rest of trouble, quenching it alone.
But when the flame is to a vastness grown,
And many buildings burnt, it is put out
With devastion of what is round about.
Sometime the cruelty of private men
Has been revenged by servile hands, even when
Their death was certain. People, Nations,
And all that have to Tyrants had relations.
And have endured, or feared their cruel rage,
Have in their ruin ventured to engage.
Their very guards have risen up at length,
And all the hatred; cruelty, and strength
Of impiousnesse, which they by them were taught,
They on the Authors back again have brought.
For what good expectation can be had
From them; whom we instructed to be bad?
Iniquity obays not long, nor will
Be always at command in doing ill.
But lets imagine cruelty secure:
Yet what a Kingdom must that Prince endure?
A Realm that like a City sacked, does wear
The dishiall face of universal fear.
Where all is confused and sad, and no delight
Can be enjoyed without continual fright.
Where feasts afford no safety, but among
His cups, each must set watches on his tongue:
Nor public show wherein occasion's sought
TO have men both into crimes and dangers brought.
And though they be set forth with great expense,
With wealth of Kings, by men of excellence.
Yet upon whom should folly so prevail,
To seek to go from sports into a Gaile?
What wickedness is this (good Gods) to slay,
And suffer cruel rage to bear such sway,
As not to have a sense of human pains,
And to delight in rattling of chains,
And in be-heading men? to come no where
Without much bloodshed, bringing terror there.
How could our lives be worse if we were ruled
By Lions, and by Bears? or if we should
Be governed by serpents, and each creature
That lives by blood, and abhors man by nature.
These void of reason and condemned by us
For cruelty are never furious
To their own kind: among them similitude
Is safe and is not bloodily pursued.
But among men not kindred is excused,
Allies like strangers are by Tyrants used,
That by particular slaughters they may grow,
Whole kingdoms by degrees to overthrow.
Who, to sire Towns, old Cities to devour,
And plow up the foundations, think it power.
And count it not imperial to kill
But now and then: and that unless they fill
Themselves with blood of many men ordaind
TO endure the stroke, think cruelty restraind.
But he that many saves, and does restore
To life such as lie gasping at deaths door,
Merits by Clemency a high renown,
And worthily deserves the Civique Crown.
Then which no ornament can more beseem
A Princes head, or gain him more esteem:
Upon whose Gate this Motto is ingrav'd
In Characters, For having Subjects saved:
No Chariot red with blood of barbrous Kings,
No spoil of conquered foes such honor brings:
It Is divine power to save by Troops in view
Of all the world: but many to pursue
With cruelty, and that without respect,
Of fire and sword, the power is, and the effect.
FINIS.

