TROADES: OR THE Royal Captives.

A TRAGEDY.

Written Originally in Latin, By LUCIUS ANNAEUS SENECA, The PHILOSOPHER.

ENGLISHED By EDWARD SHERBURNE, Esquire With ANNOTATIONS.

LONDON, Printed by Anne Godbid, and John Playford, for Samuel Carr, at the
King's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

TO THE READER.
IF the Reflection upon other Misfortunes, may afford at any time Diversion, or
Improvement, by minding us of the Signal Vicissitudes of Humane Affairs; these
Tragical Scenes, which we now offer to public view, (exhibiting a serious, yet
withal, delightful Representation, of one of the most splendid Calamities that
Antiquity has transmitted to Posterity) may peradventure be looked upon as no
unpleasing Entertainment.

The Poem, as to its Subject, wants nothing of Grandeur to ennoble it, nor, as
to its Composition, of Ingenuity: Having gained by the joint Suffrage of the
most knowing Critics of this latter Age ( Lipsius, Delrius, Scaliger, and
Heinsius) the Title of The Divine Troades. And one of the most Eminent Modern
Masters of Dramatick Poesy among us, Mr. Dryden, in his Essay upon that
Subject, has declared it to be the Master Piece of Seneca; especially that
Scene therein, where Ulys^s is seeking for Astyanax to kill him. There (says
he) you have the Tenderness of a Mother so represented in Andromache, that it
raises Compassion to a high Degree in the Reader, and bears the nearest
Resemblance of any thing in the Ancient Tragedies, to the excellent Scenes of
Passion in Shakespeare, or in Fletcher.

If in this our Version, those commendable Graces of the Original be not
utterly lost, the candid Reader will find something therein, which happily, he
may not dislike.

For the better clearing of the obscurer places in the Poem, there are added
some Mythological, Historical, and Topographical Notes; not such (I must
confess) as may fully answer the expectation of the Critically Learned, yet
such (if I mistake not) as may serve, in some Measure, to satisfy the
ingenious Curiosity of the less knowing Reader.

ARGUMENT.
THE Greeks after ten Years War, having taken and ruined the City of Troy, were
hindered from returning home by cross Winds. The Ghost of Achilles appearing
denies any possibility of returning, until they sacrifice to his Ashes
Polyxena, the Daughter of Priam and Hecuba, in treating about whose Nuptials he
was treacherously slain. Agamemnon out of kindness to Polyxena, denies to have
her sacrificed. This begets a hot Dispute and Contest between Agamemnon and
Pyrrhus, which Calchas at l^ngth decides, by declaring, That not only Polyxena,
but Astyanax likewise, (Son of Hector and Andromache) were both to be slain
e're they could hope for favorable Winds. In pursuance of which prophetical
Decree, the one was by Ulysses thrown headlong from the Scaean Tower; and the
other, habited like a Grecian Bride, sacrificed by Pyrrhus at his Father's
Monument.

Persons represented in the Tragedy.
Hecuba, Queen of Troy. Chorus, of Trojan Ladies. (...), a Grecian Priest.
Agamemnon, King, and General of the Grecians. Calchas, a Grecian Prophet.
Helena. Pyrrhus, Son of Achilles. Andromache, Hector's Widow. An Old Trojan.
Ulysses. Astyanax, Son of Hector and Andromache. Polyxena, Daughter of Priam
and Hecuba, Mute. Nuncius.
THE SCENE, The Ruins of TROY.

TROADES.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Hecuba. Who trust in Thrones, in proud Escurials reign,
Nor fear the Easy Gods.] As Seneca here calls them, Leves Deos, (which we
render easy, that is, soon turned, and wavering;) so Iuvenal calls them
faciles: Claudian, in 2. in Ruffin. instabiles Deos, and lubrica Numina, in
these Verses* Desinat elatis quisquam confidere rebus,
Instabilesque Deos and lubrica Numina discat.
Than which nothing can come nearer to the sense and meaning of our Author.
Gronovius yet will not have this Epithet to be, by Seneca, applied or
appropriated to the superior Deities, but to second Causes working under them,
that is, to Fortune and Ch^nce -- Dii leves (says he) fortuna inconstans and
mutabilis.
Easy Gods, possessed with vain
Credulity of a still Prosperous State,
Me let him look on, and Thee Troy! By Fate
A greater Document was never shown
On what a slippery Hight Pride stands! Overthrown
Is Asia's strong Support] Not to be understood in its largest Extent, as taken
for the (then) Third Part of the World, (by Geographers called Asia Major) but
of so much as was comprised under the Name of Asia Minor, containing all that
Tract of Land, which the Turks (at this day) call Anatolia, divided into four
Parts, of which the greatest, toward the West and the Aege^n Sea (more
properly called Anatolia) has in it the Countries of Bithyn^, Paphlagonia,
Mysia, Phrygia, Lydia, Aeolis, Ionia, Caria, and the greatest part of Galatia.
That toward the North and the Euxine Sea (called at present Amasia, and by the
barbarous People Rum) comprehends Pontus, Capp^docia, and the residue of
Gal^tia. The third and Southerly Part (now called Caramania, by Ortelius,
Cottomanidi^) lying along the Mediterranean Sea, contains the several Provinces
of Cilicia, Pamphylia, and Lycaonia. The fourth and Easterly Part, which is
stretched as far as Euphrates, (and, according to Baudrand, in Ferrariu^'s
Lexicon, at this day called Aladuli) contains all that Tract of Land, by the
Ancients called Armenia Minor. Over all which, and some part likewise of Asia
Major, Priam was Lord Paramount: Whence may be collected the Greatness of his
Dominions.
Asia's strong Support, of Of God-like Hands th'egregious Labor.] The Town was
first built by Dardanu^, and called Dardania; afterward, from Tros, Troj^;
then from Ilus, who much beautified and enlarged it, called Ilium: But the
Walls were afterward, in the time of L^omedon, raised by the hired Labor of
Neptune and Apollo, as Homer first, and from him most of the Ancient Poets have
reported, or rather fabled. The Origin of which Fiction, according to
Eustathiu^, in 1. Odyss. sprung from hence, That Laomedon intending, for the
greater security of his Regal City, to encompass the same with strong Walls,
made use, toward the building of them, of the Treasure dedicated to Apollo and
Neptune. With whom Services, in 2. Aeneid. accords, where he says, That
Laomedon, having vowed a certain Sum of Money to be appropriated to the
Sacrifices in honor of the forementioned Deities, was constrained, upon an
invasion of the Mysians, his Enemies, to divert and employ the same in raising
Walls for the Defense of his City. Whence those Gods are said to have immured
Troy. Eustathius gives yet another Allegory of the Fable, which is this: The
Poets (says he) attribute to the Walls of Troy, by way of excellence, what is
requisite and necessary to all manner of Masonry, which has need of Neptune,
or Moisture, to cement the Materials, (Stones or Brick^) and of Apollo, or the
Heat of the Sun, to dry and harden the Work.
God-like Hands
The egr^gious Labor; under whose Commands
He who cold Seven-mouth'd Tanais.] Though Seneca here gives to Tanais seven
Mouths, or Out-lets, yet none of the ancient Greek Authors do the like. Strabo
mentions two only, which open into the Palus M^otis, distant 60 Stadia one from
the other. P^olemy and Pliny allow no more. Albertus Campensis (as cited by
Stuckius, in Sch^l. ad Periplum Arrian. in Pont. Eux.) affirms them to be
three; Niger, five; But the two mentioned by Strabo, Ptolemy, and Pliny, seem
to be, if not the only, the chief. Delrius conceives Seneca here makes Hecuba
to apply to Tanais what is proper to D^nubius, or Ister, by way of greater
Decorum, as being a Woman, and ignorant of Geographical exactness. But the
Error doubtless is Seneca's own, who, elsewhere, in his Natural Questions,
confounds Danubius with Tanais. Danubius (says he) Sarmaticos impetus cohibens,
and Europam Asiamque disterminans. For it is not Danubius, but Tanais, divides
Europe from Asia. And this was a common Error among the Romans, as is partly
hinted at by Acron, upon Horace, and observed by the Learned Dr. Is. Vossius,
in his Notes upon Scylax Cariandens.
seven-mouth'd Tanais drinks, once bore
Confederate Arms; and he who does adore
The Rising Sun, where Tigris warm Streams stain
Their Waters in the The Erithraean Main.] Here again Delrius's pretended
Decorum must excuse Hecuba and Seneca too. For Tigris falls into the Persian
Gulf, not into the Erithraean, or Red Sea. Some, by rubenti freto, in the
Original, would not have the Red Sea, properly so called, to be here meant, but
the Sea made ruddy by the Morning Light, and the Sun's Rising Beams; which
Interpretation yet, I conceive, will hardly pass without some grains of
allowance.
Erithraean Main;
And she whose Realms the wandering Scythians bound,
Who beats with widowed Troops the Pontick Ground.
Sp^ild by the Sword, now her own Ruins Weight
Bears Pergamus.] Pergamos, Pergamus, Pergamum, and Pergama, was properly the
Castle or Citadel of Troy, as Acropolis or Cecropia of Athens, Byr^a of
Carthage, Ca^mea to Thebes, and the Capitol to Rome. See (besides Servius, in
V^rgil, Aeneid. 2.) Bochart. in Canaan. l. 2. c. 10. And this part of Troy was
that more especially, which Apollo and Neptune are said to have immured and
fortified; according to Apollodorus Bibl. l. 2.
Pergamus; Her Towers which glister'd late
With their fired Buildings fallen: All, All Is oreturn'd
In Flames; Assaracus.] Delrius (and Farnaby following him) makes him the Son
of Ilus, but falsely; for he was not Son, but Brother to Ilus, according to his
Genealogy recorded by Apollodorus, in Biblioth. l. 3. and Co^on in his 12th
Narration. Tros the Son of Erichthonius, and Grandchild of Dardanus, by
Cal^irrhoe the Daughter of Scammander, begot Ilus, Assaracus, and G^nymed.
Assaracus, with his Father Tros. governed Dardania, and, by Hieromnene, the
Daughter of Simo^, begot Cap^s; He, by Themis, the Daughter of Ilus, Anckises;
He, by Venus, Aeneas; Qui Tro^nos Nepo^es in Latinos transtulit; whence
Assaraci Proles, and Assaraci Domus, in V^gil, by way of flattery to ^gustus,
and the Iui^n Family.
Assaracus his Palace burned.
Nor Flames the Victors greedy Hands prevent,
But while yet burning, Troy's for Pillage rent.
Smoke in Waves rising takes Heaven's Sight away,
And black-burnt Cinders smeer the Face of Day.
Measuring with greedy Eye Troy's long sought spoil
The Victor stands, and now his Ten Years Toil
Forgives; astonished at her Ruins, He yet
Scarce thinks it vincible, though won he see it.
The Dardan Wealth Greek Soldiers bear away;
Nor can, a thousand Ships contain the Prey.
To Witness here I call the Adverse Powr's!
And Priam.
Thou, once Ruler of the Phrygian Towers,
Beneath the Ruins of thy Empire laid
My Countries Ashes! and thy Hector.
Dearer Shade,
Who standing, Ilium stood. Ye lesser Ghosts,
My Childrens numerous Souls! What ever Cross
Has fallen, what Ills the inspired Maid foretold,
The God belief forbidding.] Apollo having tempted Cassandra to yield to his
wanton desires, she made him a seeming promise, provided he would bestow upon
her the gift of Prophecy: Which the God having granted her, she denied to make
good her promise. Whereupon Apollo not being able to recall what he had given
her, added to it this curse, that though she Prophesied never so truly, she
should not be believed. Hence that of Propertius, l. 3. Certa loquor, sed nulla
sides. --
(The God belief forbidding) those of Old
Saw pregnant Hecuba; nor held my Peace,
Before Cassandra Prophetess.] She reflects upon the Prophetic Dream she had,
when with Child of Paris, which imported that she was brought to bed of a
Firebrand that would set all Troy on Flame: Of which Apollodorus, l. 3. Ovid.
in Epist. Parid. and others, Whence Paris, by Lycophron is called (...) and
(...), that is, a Firebrand; to which in the following Verses she alludes,
where she says, -- With my Brands you Burn.
a vain Prophetess.
Not crafty Ithacus, nor Diomed,
Nor treacherous Sinon, through your Buildings Spread
These Flames; These Fires are mine; and with my Brands
You Burn. But why lamenting thus Troy's Ruins, Stands
Too long-lived Age? Here Wretch! look here, On These
( Troy's an Old Grief) more fresh Calamities.
I saw (O cruel fact!) the Old King slain;
And, a worse Crime, the sacred Altars stain
Then armed Ajax dared.] A ax O^leus, in the Temple of Minerva, whither
Cassandra fled for Refuge, ravished her before the Sacred Palladium, or Image
of the Goddess, which is said to have turned its Eves up toward the Roof of the
Temple, in abhorrence of his villainous Act; as the Scholiast of Homer in Iliad
V. and Lycophron, tell us.
Then armed Ajax dared. When with Hands wreathed
In's Hair, his Head reversing, Pyrrhus sheathed
In a deep Wound his cursed Blade; which struck
Up to the Hilts, when the King willing took;
Drawn forth, his Aged Throat scarce reek'd with Blood.
Whom not the sense of his extreme Age, could
From so abhorred a Murder once restrain,
Nor present Gods, nor yet Nor yet Jove's Sacred Fane.] The Temple of Jupiter
Hercaus, at whose Altar Priam was slain; which he here calls Sacrum Regri, that
is, the Sacrarium (says Scaliger) ubi inaugurandi Reges in auspicabantur. A
Fane (says Asconius Paedianus in ^. in Verr.) est religiosissimum Templum, unde
fata petuntur. There is a difference between Fanum and Delubrum: Fanum being a
Temple appropriate to one single Deity; Delubrum. a Place, where there were
many Chapels dedicated to several Gods. Vide Do ^iss. Ger. Io. Voss. (...).
Ling. Lat.
Jove's Sacred Fane,
The Glory once of this now levelled State.
He to so many Princes To so many Princes Father.] Apollodorus reckons them up
thus: The Sons by Arisba, his first Wife, Aesacus; by Hecuba, his second Wife,
Daughter of Dimantes, (or, as some will, Cisseus, as others, of Sangarius and
Metope) Hector, Paris, Deiphobus, Helenus, Pam^ones, Polytes, Antiphus,
Hipponous, Polydorus, Troilus. And by other Wives, Melanippus, Gorgythion,
Philaem^n, Hippothous, Glaucus, Agathon, Chersidam^s, (...), Hippodamas,
Mestor, Atas, Doryclus, Lycaon, Dryops, Bias, Chromius, Astygonus, Telestas,
Evander, Cebriones, Mellus, Archemachus, Laodocus, Echephron, ^domeneus,
Hyperion, Ascanius, Democoon, Arr^etas, Deioptes, Clonjus, Echemon, Hypirichus,
Aegeoneus, Lysithous, and Polymedon. The Daughters, by Hecuba, Ilione, (Maxima
Natarum Priami) Creusa, Laodice, Cassandra, Polyxena. By other Wives, Medusa,
Medesicasta, Lysimache, Aristodame. A goodly Number! Of whom we might have
spared the particular nomination, were it not that these Notes are chiefly
intended for the satisfaction of the newly-initiated into these Delphian
Mysteries, to whom happily this kind of Poetical Heraldry may not be altogether
unpleasing.
Father late,
Now wants a Sepulcher, Funeral Fire.] So Manilius, l. 4. -- Priami^sque in
littore Truncus, Cui nec Troja rogus -- Which makes me believe Seneca was not
unacquainted with Manilius his Writings, whom not only in this, but in several
other places, he seems to have imitated.
and Funeral Fire,
His Troy in Flames. Nor can All This Heavens Ire
Appease. To Lords, lo^ Priam's Daughters by
The By the Urn.] It was the Custom among the Greeks and Romans, to draw their
Lots out of an Urn. The Lots were made of round Balls of Clay, on which the
Names or Marks of those that were concerned were impressed, and cast into an
Urn, whence that of Horace, Sat. 1. l. 2. Cervius iratus leges minitatur and
Urnam. This Urn was by the Greeks called Hydria, and by the Romans likewise
Situla, and Sitella, from its form. And this kind of Sortition was threefold,
Divisoria, (which is that here meant) Consultoria, and Divinatoria. In allusion
to this Custom of the Ancients, is that Fiction of the Poets touching the
Distribution of humane Destiny, as to Life and Death, which they will have to
be dispensed by this kind of Sortition. Whence that of Horace, speaking of the
Living, Omne capax movet urna nomen. And,
Omnium versatur urna,
Serius aut ocyus sors exitura.
And Virgil, lib. 6. of the Dead, (...) Minos urnam movet -- In confirmation of
which Heathenish Opinion, I think it not amiss here to add what I find in
Sponius his Appendix to his Antiquities and Curiosities of Lions, lately
published, where he gives us the Sculp of an ancient Relic, being a small
brazen Image of Imarmene, or Destiny, placed upon an Urn of the same Metal,
having under one Foot a Globe, representing the World, and in her Hand a
Hydria, or ^tula, as it were the Fatal Urn of Humanity. A like Statue Levinus
Torrentius reports himself (in his Comment upon that Place of Horace before
cited) to have seen at Rome. in the Garden of Cardinal Caesi, in which was one
of the Parcae, standing with one Foot upon a Wheel, and holding in her Hands
two Lots, or Scrowls, as drawn from this Lottery of Destiny, and underneath
this word, FATIS.
Urn are given. Whom, a scorned Prize, shall I
Attend? Some one may his Wife Hector's make,
Some Some Helenus.] Who was Helenus his first Wife is not certainly known;
(for it is that which is here meant) his second Wife was Andromache, whom
Pyrrhus, at his death, bequeathed to him with the Kingdom of Epirus. Touching
which, see Pausanias, and the Conjecture of Delrius upon this Place.
Helenus, some may Some may Antenor's take.] T^eano was Wife to Antenor, of
whom Servius (in 1. Aeneid.) says, the was Venerabilis inter Trojanos Foemina.
She is mentioned by Homer and Triphiodorus.
Antenor's take:
Perhaps some one thy Bed, Cassandra, seeks;
I Am only a feared Lot to All the Greeks. Cease you my Captive Troops! Your
Plaints forbear!
Beat with your Hands your Breasts, with Cries the Air,
And Troy's sad Obsequies perform: Now round
Id^, that dire Judge's Fatal Seat, resound.
CHORUS Of Captive Trojan Ladies. No rude Crew un-inur'd to Tears
Bid you to mourn: Successive Years
Can witness, this we have never ceast
To do, since first the Phrygian Guest
Amyclae.] A City of Laconia, one of the Hundred with which that Region was
once beautified, built by Amyclas, the Son of Laced^mon, (says Stephanus de
Urbibus) called likewise anciently Li^a, distant 20 Stadia from Sparta, to the
Sea-ward, the most famous in all Laconia, for the Temple of Apollo. In the time
of Pausanias but a small Town, having been twice before that destroyed, first
by Teleclus, the Son of Archelaus, afterward by the D^rians; what is left of
it being at this day called Vordonia, or Vordona, according to Ortelius, from
the Authority of Niger. There was another Amycla in Italy, between Gaeta and
Terracina, seated on the Seashore, and giving its Name to the Bay anciently
called Mare Amyclanum, (at this day, Golso di Gaeta, and, according to
Sa^felicius in Ortelius, Mar di Sp^rlungs) built by the Companions of Castor
and Poll^, (...), and lost by the Silence of its Inhabitants, which gave rise
to the Proverb, Amyclas perdidit silentium. The Reason whereof see in Servius
upon Virgil, lib. 10. and others.
Amyclae reached, and Cybels Pine.] That is, the Ship wherein Paris sailed to
Greece, whose Materials were cut from Mount Ida, which was dedicated to the
Goddess Cybele, or from the Mountain Cyb^le, or Cybela, in Phrygia, whence the
Goddess Rhea her self was so called. Steph^ de Urb. makes it a City and a
Temple in Phrygia, which gave that Name to the Goddess. But Pinedo, in his late
published Observations upon that Author, conceives, that instead of (...) in
Stephanus, it ought rather to be read (...). Which his Conjecture he
strengthens from the Authority of (...), lib. 12. where it is said. That Rhea
was called Dindymene, from the Mountain Dindymus, as Cybele from Cybela: This
Mountain being likewise taken notice of by Ovid, Fast^r. lib. 4. where he
mentions together, Dindymon and Cybelen, and (...) fontibus Idam.
Cybels Pine
Did plow blew Neptune's foaming Brine.
Ten times have Snows crowned Ida's Head,
Barred for the Funerals of our Dead.
Ten times the Mower's Hand has shorn,
With fear, the tufted Fields of Corn,
Yet no Day void of Miseries;
New Matter still new Grief supplies.
On to our Plaints, and as We weep,
Do Thou, O wretched Queen, Time keep with thy advanced Hand.] He reflects upon
the Custom of the Ancients, among whom, in their Lamentations for the Dead,
(which was performed by Women, hired to sing their Naniae, or Lug^bria Carmina)
there was one whom the Romans called Prafica, the Greeks, (...), who did
Ordinare planctus, and, as Festu^ says, Dabat cateris plangendi Modum,
directing the others by her Voice and Hand, to keep due Order, Time, and
Decorum, in their several Parts of the sad and solemn Office, which was
performed both by Vocal and Instrumental Music. Of which, see more in
Kirkmannus and Meursius, de Funeribu^, and (if you please) in Cuperu^,
Observationum, lib. 1. c. 1. The Method of this mournful Solemnity, Seneca has
here exactly observed, by making Hecuba, as it were, the Pr^fica to the rest:
This Cborus seeming to have been acted, not according to the ordinary, but
Musical Pronunciation, like that which at this day the Italians call
Recitative, and which they continue through entire Drama's and Opera's, even to
disgust; as is well observed by Monsieur Hedelin, in his Pratique du Theater.
l. 2. p. 147.
Time keep
With thy advanced Hand: Whilst We,
Skilled in our Parts, do follow Thee.

Hecuba. You faithful Consorts of our Woe
Unbind your Tresses: Let your Hair
About your sad Necks loosely flow,
Powdered with Troy's warm Ashes: Bare
Your Arms; your Vestures, slackly tied
Beneath your naked Bosoms, slide
Down to your Wastes. For whose Bed dressed
Vail'st Thou, O Captive, Shame! thy Breast?
A looser Zone your Garments bind!
Your Cries with frequent strokes be joined!
Hands pressed t'assail! Aye, now you please,
Thus habited! Now Troades
I know you all: Again renew
Your mournful Plaints, and strive t'outdo
Th'Expressions common Sorrows vent,
It Is Hector whom We now lament!

CHORUS. Our Locks o^t torn.] It was customary among the Ancients, for Women,
in mourning for the Dead, to tear their Hair. Of which, instances are every
where to be met with, in the Greek and Latin Poets; practiced likewise by Men.
Hence the example of Achilles upon the Death of Pratroclus, and of Agamemnon in
Homer, and in Actius the Tragedian, as cited by Cicero, Tuscul. 3. Sci^dens
dolor identidem into^sam comam. Upon which Bion the Philosopher is, by Cicero,
introduced, as scoffing at that foolish practice, quasi calvitio ^eror
levaretur. See Kirkman, and Meurs. De funeribus.
Our Locks often torn to wail the Dead,
See! We have all vnfilleted,
And 'bout our shoulders loosely thrown;
Upon our Heads warm Ashes strown.] This likewise was frequent in the funeral
Ceremonies, among the ancient Greeks and Romans, as well as among the Jews; of
which the forecited Authors afford sufficient testimonies.
Ashes strown.

Hecuba. Fill then your Hands; From Troy this yet
We lawfully may take; and let
From your divested Shoulders slide,
Your Garments, down on either side.
Now Bared Bosoms call for blows.] (...), or beating of the Breast, was one of
the most usual expressions of funeral sorrow, and proper to the Praeficae, from
whom the rest of the Mourners received their Cu, and the manner and measure of
their Lamentation; which here Hecuba prescribes, and is answered by the Chorus,
in the following Verses, in all the various and sad expressions of funeral
deplorements. Which, as Seneca here, so Cicero in 3. Tuscul. reckons up thus,
Pedores, Muliebres Lacerationes, Genarum, ^ectoris, Feminum, capitis
percutiones, and calls them, varia et detestabilia genera ^gendi. For by the
XII. Tables these kinds of undecent bewailings where forbidden.
bared Bosoms call for Blows.
Now Sorrow All thy Powr's disclose.
Rhaet^an Shores with Plaints resound,
And Echo the sad Cries rebound:
Nor, as she is wont, ingeminate
The last of Words, but iterate
Troy's Plaints entire; that All the Main
And All the Heavens may ring again.
Now let remorseless Hands infest
With sounding strokes each suffering Breast,
We Are not with usual stripes content;
It Is Hector whom We now lament.

CHORUS. For Thee our Arms We beat, and Blows
On bleeding Shoulders thus impose.
For Thee our Heads these Strokes do bear,
Our nursing Breasts for Thee We tear.
The Wounds which since thy Death remain
Yet green, now freshly bleed again.
Thy Countries strength! Fates Remora!
The tired Phrygians Only stay.
Troy's Rampart! who upheld'st Her Towers
Ten Years against Assailing Powers.
With Thee she fell; One Day A Crave to Hector and his Country gave.] From
hence Ausonius borrowed the Epitaph he has bestowed on Hector, in the following
Distick. Hectoris hic iumulus, cum quo sua Troja sepulta est,
Conduntur pariter quae periere simul.
This Hector's Tomb is, and his Troy's as well;
Together ly they, who together fell.

a Grave
To Hector and his Country gave.

Hecuba. Turn now your Plaints; Let Priam too
Be wept for: Hector has his Due.

CHORUS. Receive our Tears Twice captived King.] Priam was twice made Captive,
first by Telamon and Peleus, Sons of Aeacus, in revenge of his Father
L^omedon's breach of Faith; afterward by Agamemnon, and Pyrrhus, the Son of
Achilles; by whom slain. Of which, Apollodorus, and Hygi^us, de Fabulis.
twice captived King!
Thee Reigning, Fates no Cross did bring
Single on Troy; twice did she feel
Twice Herculean Shafts.] Once by Hercules himself, afterward, by Philoctetes
to whom Hercules bequeathed his envenomed Shafts, without which Troy (as the
Fates had ordered it) could not have been taken; as Pindar, Lycophron,
Sophocles, Apollodorus, and Hyginus, declare.
Herculean Shafts, twice Grecian Steel.
When after All the Tragic Falls
Of Hecub's Race; and Funerals
Of Princely Sons; thy self in fine
Did close their Tragedies with thine.
And to To great Jove a Victim.] Being slain at the Altar of Jupiter Hercaeus,
as is before noted. Quintus Calaber, Lib. 13. is the only Author who makes
mention of Priam's being slain by Pyrrhus, before an Altar of Mercury's (...),
as it is commonly read, perhaps by Mistake for (...). Pausanias, in Phoci.
reports, from the Authority of the Poet Lesches, who wrote (...), ( Ilii
Devastationem) that he was not slain before any Altar, but that Neoptolemus by
chance encountering him, at the Gate of his Palace, there slew him.
great Jove, a Victim slain,
Troy's shores thy Thy Headless Trunk.] He alludes to that of Virgil, -- Iacet
ing^ns littore tr^cus. Upon which place Servius notes, That, according to the
tradition of some of the Ancients, Priam, being taken Prisoner in his own
Palace, was thence, by Pyrrhus, dragged to his Father's Monument, on the Sigaan
shore, where having slain him, he cut off his Head, which he caused to be fixed
upon a Pike, or Lance, and carrie^ about by the Soldiers. By whom likewise (as
Pompo^ Sabinus adds) his headless Corpse was barbarously dragged up and down.
H^c finu Priami fa^orum. --
Headless Trunk sustain.

Hecuba. Your Tears on other Subjects spend,
Ye Ilian Dames, my Priam's End
Is not to be lamented. All
Deceased Priam Happy call.
He to the Infernal Shades went free,
Not thrall'd in Grecian Slaverie.
He never the Atrides saw, He never
The false Ulysses knew, nor ever
Shall Bow his Neck.] This shows the manner how Captives were ordered, in the
triumphal Processions of the Ancients; which Prudentius, l. 2. Contra Symmac,
has thus briefly described, -- Currus summo miramur in arcu
Quadrijugos, stantesque Duces in curribus altis,
Sub pedibusque Ducum Captivos, poplite flexo,
Ad juga depressos, masibusque in terga retortis. etc.
And may serve to explain both these and the following Verses. Who would
further be satisfied, as to the particular Descriptions of the ancient
Triumphs, may consult Appian, in his Lybick History; Plutarch, in the life of
Aemilius; Josephus, in his seventh Book of the Jewish Wars; and Zonaras, Annal.
l. 2. besides Pancirollus, and his Comentator Salmuib, Alexander ab Alexandro,
and Tiraquel upon him, Panvinius, Cuichardus, who have expressly written upon
this Subject.
Bow his Captived Neck, a Prize
In their Triumphed Victories.
Not shall his Hands, which (...) sustained
A (...), be behind Him chained,
Nor in Gold Fetters manacled
Following the Victors Carr, be led
In Pomp through proud Mycenae.

CHORUS. All
Deceased Priam happy call;
Attended at his latest Fate.] This perhaps was written by Seneca, in a
flattering compliance with Nero, who, by Xiphilinus, is reported to have often
declared Priam the happiest of Men, (...), for that he saw his Country and his
Kingdom destroyed with himself. The like sentiment is said to have been owned
by that other Monster of Mankind, Tiberius, as Suetonius and Dion. Cassius
report of him. But happily Seneca, in this, may rather imitate Ovid, who (
Metamorph. 13.) thus makes Hecuba to speak: -- O Priam! I
May call thee happy, after ruined Troy,
Happy in death; Thou see not this sad fate,
Thou lost'st thy life together with thy state.
Mr. Sandy's.
Attended at his latest Fate
With the whole Ruin of his State.
Who now in the In the Elizian Groves delightful Shades.] Where these Elizian
Fields were, is not agreed upon by the Ancient Poets, some placing them in the
O^b of the Moon, some in the Milky way, or Circulus lacteus. Others in the
Fort^ate, Atlantish, or British Islands; Her^dotus and Duris, in Egypt; Virgil
and Lycop^ron, in Greece, not far from Thebes, or in Arcadia: some in India.
Strabo describes them to have been in Hispania Boetica, or in Estramadura.
Wherever they were, this is certain, the Fable sprung (says Delrius in Hercul.
fur. ad verse. 743.) from the sacred story of Paradise: Or, if you will take
Bochartus his Word, from some of the pleasant Discoveries of the Phoenicians
(and as he thinks) in B^tica, in whose Language (being a Dialect of the Hebrew)
Al^z, signifies Latari and exultare; Aliz, Laetus; Alizuth, Exultatio, whence
Elizius (...), A being changed into E, as Enakim for Anakim, Edessa for Adessa,
etc. Hence the Elizian Fields seem to be taken for a Place of Pleasure and
Gladness: To which Virgil alludes, -- Exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium, and pauci l^ta arva tenemus.
And elsewhere, Devenere locos latos, and amoena vireta,
Fortunatorum nemorum sedesque beatas.
See Bochartus in Canaan. l. 1. c. 34.
Elizian Groves
Delightful shades securely roves,
And among the Pious Ghosts makes quest for Hector.] This is not said without
reflecting upon the Opinion of the Ancients touching Hector; for Lycophron
affirms, that Hector was designed after Death for the Islands of the Blessed,
for his exemplary Piety, in reveren^ing and frequently Sacrificing to the Gods,
while Living.
Pious Ghosts makes Quest
For Hector. Happy Priam! "Blessed
"No less is He
"Who e're he be,
"Who falling in Wars bloody strife,
"Sees All things perish with his Life.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Talthibius, and Chorus of old Trojans.
Talthibius. HOw How long in Port etc.] The Greeks in their first Expedition
against Troy were detained in Port Aulis, by the anger of offended Diana, who
could not be appeased, but by the sacrifice of Iphigenia, Agamemnon's Daughter;
and upon their return retarded till they made satisfaction to the Ghost of
incensed Achilles, by sacrificing at his Tomb Polyxena, the Daughter of Priam
and Hecuba.
long in Port the Greeks still windbound are!
When War they seek, or for their Homes prepare!

CHORUS. The Cause declare them and their Fleet detains,
What God it is that their Return restrains.

Talthibius. Amazement strikes my Soul; a trembling Cold
Palsies my Joints. Prodigious Truths when told
Are hardly credited; yet these, these Eyes
Were Witnesses: And now the Sun's uprise
New gilt the Mountain Tops, and Eastern Light
Had clearly vanquished the whole Host of Night;
When on a sudden The shaken ground.] This seems to be no less Philosophically
than Poetically written. For according to the Mysterious Doctrine of the
Egyptians and Chaldeans, the appearance of Heroes was thus properly to be
ushered: Of which, Iambli^bus, de Mysterijs Aegyptiorum (now lately revived by
the Aesculapian industry of my Learned and Honored Friend, Dr. Thomas Gale)
thus writes; (...), ^c. Heroibus adventantibus, plaga quadam Terrae
commoventur, and circumsonant fragores, etc.
the sore-shaken Ground,
Breathed from its Center Bellowing Sound.] He points at the particular kind of
Earthquake, which, from the noise it makes, is called (...), seu mugiens. Of
which Aristotle, in Meteorolog. l. 2. thus renders the cause. (...), etc.
Before the Earthquake there comes a sound, in regard the subtle Spirit which
makes it, struggling against the solid or hollow Bodies, and various Figures of
the subterranean Caverns, is wo^t to render various notes or sounds; so that
sometimes, the Earth (as the Writers of Prodigies affirm) seems (...), to
bellow.
a strange bellowing Sound:
Woods bowed their Heads, the sacred Groves with loud
Cracks rung, like Thunder breaking through a Cloud;
Stones from cleft Ida's Quarries fell: Nor shook
The Earth alone; The Sea, with Terror struck,
The Approach of her Achilles felt, and laid
Her swelling Waves. The Earth yawning then displayed
Her Immense Caves, and from the Depths of Night
Opened a passage to Aetherial Light:
The Tomb disburd'ning, whence the Ghost arose
Of great Achilles; Such when Thracian Foes.] The first exploit of Achilles was
in Mysia, where he encountered and wounded Telephus, who denied him and his
Forces passage toward the Siege Of Troy: of which more in the next Scene.
Thracian Foes
(The Prelude of thy Fates, Troy!) he o'rethrew,
And the white hair'd Neptunian Cycnus slew.] Cycnus was the Son of Neptune,
whom Achilles, at his first arrival before Troy, slew, although he were
invulnerable all over, by strangling him. See Ovid, Metam. l. 12. Tzetzes upon
Lycophron makes him invulnerable all but his Head, where he received his mortal
wound, by the cast of a massy Stone, as Palaephatus reports. He is here called
Neptunian, to distinguish him from others of the same Name; for there were five
so called famous in Poetic Story. The first, Cycnus, the Son of Sthenelus,
King of the Ligurians, Cousin to Phaeton, of whom Ovid, Metam. l. 2. The second
was Son of Apollo, and Hyrie, or Thyrie, of whom likewise Ovid makes mention.
Metam. l. 7. The third was Son of Mars and Pyrene, slain by Hercules, of wh^m
Apollodorus l. 2. and Hyginus, c. 3. The fourth, the Son of Ma^s and Pelopia,
slain also by Hercules, according to Pindar, in Olymp. The fifth, the Son of
Neptune, before mentioned.
Neptunian Cycnus slew.
Or when in Heat of Fight with strenuous Force
Through Troops he charged, and And stopped the Rivers course.] Of this see
Homer, Iliad 21. and Statius, in Achille^d. 1. where by way of Prophecy, he
declares, that -- Aeacides tepido modo Sanguine Teucros
Undabit campos, modo crassa exire vetabi^
Flumina --

stopped the Rivers Course
With slaughterd Carcasses, while Xanthus Tide,
Seeking a Passage through, did slowly glide.
Or such when Victor trailing by the Heels
Trailing by the heels Hector and Troy.] He alludes to what is reported by
Hyginus (De Fabul.) of Achilles, who dragging Hector at his Chariot, cried out
in a vain glorious boast, Expugnavi Trojam.
Hector and Troy, born on Triumphant Wheels.
Then with this voice of Anger fills the Coast:
Go, Go ye lingering Greeks, and rob our Ghost
Of it is due Honors; weigh ungrateful! weigh
Your Anchors, through our Seas to make your Way.
'Twas not with Trifles Greece did satisfy
Achilles Anger, nor a Price less high
Shall she now pay. Polyxena be wed
TO our Ashes; and her Blood let Pyrrhus shed.
This said, he shrouds himself in Night, and sinks
To Hell again: the Earth together shrinks,
Closing her gaping Clefts; the quiet Main
Becalmed lies; the Winds their Rage restrain,
The smooth Seas move with gentle Murmurings,
And Triton, etc.] The Son of Neptune and Amphitrite, according to Hesiod and
Apo^odorus; or of Neptune, and Cela^o, as Tzetzes upon Lycophron, who, in his
C^ssandra, calls him likewise the Son of Nereus. Servi^s, in Aeneid. 1. makes
him the Son of Neptune, and Salaci^, which perhaps is the same with Amphitrite.
He was the prime marine Trumpe^er, and formed Half-man, Half-dolphin, endued
with humane voice, and is here introduced, perhaps in honor of Thetis his
Kinswoman, to sing the Epithalamium to her Son's designed, or rather feigned
Nuptials with the unfortunate Polyxena.
Triton thence the Hymeneal sings.

ACT II. SCENE II.
PYRRHUS, AGAMEMNON.
Pyrrhus. When Home you thought to Sail, full Fraught with Joy,
Achilles fell.] Being shot with an Arrow by Paris, and that treacherously,
having trained him to the Temple of Apollo Thymbr^us, to treat about his
Marriage with Polyxena, according to Tzetzes upon Lycophron, and Servius, in
Aeneid. 6. though Euripides, in Philocte^. Q. Calaber, and Ovid, in Epist.
Hermion. seem to infer, that he was slain by Apollo, with an Arrow shot in his
Heel, where he was only vulnerable (as some fable) in regard he would not
desist, at his request, from infesting the Trojans. But as Hyginus (de Fab. c.
107.) reports, this was done by Apollo, in the likeness of Paris. Others, from
the authority of Homer, in Iliad. 19. and Virgil, Aeneid. 6. will have him shot
by Paris, but that Apollo directed and designed the shaft, as Virgil (loco
citat.) intimates in these verses: Phoebe, graves Trojae semper miserate
labores,
Dardana qui Paridis direxii tela manumque
Corpus in Aeacidae. --

Achilles fell; by whose sole Arm fell Troy.
Whose All-ore-mastering Valor soon repaid
The Loss of that delay which Scyros.] Is an Island in the Aegean Sea, midway
between Lesbos and Euboea, at this day called Scyra, and Scyro (and different
from that Scyrus which by Ptolemy is reckoned one of the Cyclades.) Here
Achilles, by his Mother's advice, was concealed for sometime (to avoid his
going to the war of Troy) in the habit of a young Virgin, (called Pyrrha, from
the color of his hair, being yellow) among the Daughters of King Lycomedes. Of
which, Apollodorus, Bibl. l. 3. Ovid, Metam. l. 13. and St^ius, in Achilleid.
l. 1.
Scyros made,
And Lesbos.] Achilles, after he had left Scyros, before he joined the Grecian
Fleet, put in at Lesbos, one of the most celebrated Islands in the Aegean Sea,
where he made himself Master of a considerable Booty, which the Country People
endeavoring to regain, called to their assistance Trambelus, the Son of
Telamon, then upon the place, who in that Attempt was slain by Achilles. After
which he laid siege to Methym^e, but was notably opposed; insomuch that he
almost despaired of taking the place, until by chance Pis^dice, the King's
Daughter, seeing him from the Wall, became enamored of his Person, and
promised to betray the Town to him, on condition he would Marry her; which
being seemingly consented to by Achilles, the Town was accordingly delivered to
him. But he, in detestation of her unnatural treachery, not only refused to
Marry her, but caused her to be stoned to Death by his Soldiers. These were his
exploits in Lesbos, as they are recorded by Parthenius, in Erotic. c. 21. and
26. partly from the authority of Euph^rion, partly from that of an anonymous
Poet, who (...), wrote of the Lesbian Affairs; of which the Verses are cited by
Parthenius, and from him, by Delrius, in his Notes upon this Tragedy.
Lesbos, that divides the Aegean Flood;
For Troy's Fall doubtful still, he absent, stood.
Should you now haste to satisfy his Will,
Yet were it tardy Satisfaction still.
Now every Chief his proper share has took;
For less Reward can so much Virtue look?
Merits he Nothing? Who, when (charged to shun
Wars Hazards) his Life's Course he might have run
In peaceful Quiet beyond Nestor's years;
Yet slighting his Disguise and Mother's Fears,
He Himself Man by assumed Arms confessed.] The Story or Fable is this;
Achilles, as is before noted, being concealed in Scyros, by his Mother, among
the Daughters of Lycomedes, in the habit of one of the same Sex, could by no
means be found out, till the Greeks, consulting Calchas, were by him told where
he lay hid in disguize, upon which Ulysses, and, as Statius (in Achilleid.)
adds, Diomed (with whom the Scholiast upon Homer joins likewise Phoenix and
Nestor) was sent to Scyros, to discover him. Who did it by this Stratagem.
Coming like a Merchant with several Wares to sell, he exposed them in the Court
of Lycomedes; where among diverse sorts of Women's Dresses, and other
Accoutrements, proper for them, He set out sundry Arms, as well offen^e as
defensive, of curious Workmanship. While the Virgins were looking upon such
Merchandises as were agreeable to them, Achilles regarded only the Arms.
Whereupon Ulysses gave private notice to a Trumpeter he had brought with him,
to sound, at a fitting distance, a Charge, as if some Enemy were coming upon
them. At which the young Ladies, affrighted, ran speedily away, to secure
themselves, only Achilles undauntedly seized upon a Buckler and a laveline, and
put himself in a posture of desending his Life. By which act he discovered
himself to Ulysses, who, by fair persuasions, so wrought with him, that he went
along with the Greeks to the Trojan War, See the History at large in Hyginus,
De Fabulis, cap. 96. in Statius, Achilleid. l. 2. and Natalis Comes, l. 9. c. 1.
himself Man, by assumed Arms, confessed.
When Telephus with barbarous Pride represt
Our Entrance into Mysia, His yet rude Hand in that Prince's blood ^e first
imbrued.] The manner how Telephus was wounded, and afterward cured by
Achillos, is thus related, both by Tzetzes upon Lycophron, and Eustathius, in
Iliad. 1. The Greek Army, marching to the siege of Troy, mistook their way, and
fell into Mysia; where they were vigorously opposed by Telephus, King of that
Country, who had like to have given them a total defeat, had not Bacchus, in
requital of Agamemnon his many Sacrifices to him, caused a Vine suddenly to
spring out of the Earth, with whose entangling branches, Telephus his Legs, or,
as some say, those of his Horse, were ensnared, so that he was thrown to the
ground, and at the same time dangerously wounded by Achilles, (to which Pindar
seems to allude, in Isthm. Ode 8.) Of this hurt he could find no cure, till,
consulting the Oracle, he was told, that he was to expect remedy from the Hand
only that had wounded him. Whereupon he had recourse to Achilles, who gave him
present cure, on condition he should be Guide to the Greeks, in their March
against Troy, which in gratitude, he afterward performed. The means of his
Cure is variously reported. Some will have it by scraping the rust of his
Spear-head, into Telephus his Wound. Others, that it was by the Juice of an
Herb, called Syderiti^, taught him by Chiron, very prevalent in the curing of
Wounds; the Herb, from this application of Achilles, being afterward called
Achillea. Others, that it was by a Plaster of Verdigrease, of which they
attribute the Invention to Achilles. Some, by a mixture of the Spearrust and
Plaster. But Pliny inclines rather to the first, because the ancient Pictures
(says he) represent him scraping the rust of his Spear-head, with his Sword,
into Telephus his Wound; the Poets and Painters agreeing herein. Vide Plin. l.
25. c. 5. and l. 34. c. 15.
his yet rude
Hand in that Prince's Blood he first imbrued.
Who felt with what a force the Same could wound,
Yet in his Cure, that no less gentle found.
Thebes.] Of this name Stephanus, De Urbibus, reckons up no less than nine
Cities. But that here meant is the Cilician Thebes, where E^tion, Father of
Andromache Reigned, called (...), and (...), by Eustathius, in Iliad. 1.
because built, in loco campestri and plano. See Pinedo. upon Stephanus. This
City Achilles is here said to have ruined, with the slaughter of its Prince.
Hence that of Ovid, met. l. 12. where Achilles boasts of himself, Ectionea^
implevi sanguine Thebas.
Thebes and Eetion by his Arms pursued,
Both tell; His State and He at once subdued.
The small Lyrnessus.] A City of Troas, the Birthplace of Hippodamia, the
Daughter of Briseus, thence called Briseis, and Wise of Mineus, King thereof,
whom Achilles, according to Homer, Iliad. 2. is said to have slain, bringing
away Briseis Captive from the subverted City.
Lyrnessus Mountain-seated Towers,
He with like Slaughter levelled by his Powers.
Enobled by fair Briseis Captive made.
He Chryse.] A Town of Phrygia Minor, where Chryses, the Priest of Apollo, and
Father to Astynome, or Chrysis, lived, whom they will have to be Brother to
Briseus, Father of Hippodamia, or Briseis, who lived at Pedasus. Both which
Towns Achilles having sacked and ruined, and dividing the Spoils among the
Soldiers and Commanders, he gave to Agamemnon, Astynome, or Chryseis,
reserving to himself Hippodamia, or Briseis. But Clryses, Astinome's Father,
being Apollo's Priest, demanded his Daughter from Agamemnon, but was dismissed
with threats and injuries. Apollo, therefore, to vindicate his Priest, sent a
Plague into the Grecian Army; whereupon, to appease the God, Chryseis was
restored to her Father: And Agamemnon suspecting Achilles to have encouraged
Chryles in re-demanding his Daughter, took away Hippodamia, or Briseis from
Achilles, whence grew the differences between those Princes.
Chryse, cause of Kingly Difference, laid
In her own Ruins. Tenedos.] -- Notissima fama Insula -- as described by
Virgil, lying in sight of the Trojan Shore, heretofore called Leucophrys, as
Stephanus De Urbihus writes, sacred to Apollo, who there had his Temple; and
was honored with the title of Apollo Smin^hius. It retains at this day its old
name, being vulgarly called Tenedo.
Tenedos renowned
By Fame, and Cilla.] There were anciently three Cities of this Name; one in
Africa; another of Aeolis; and a third in Cilicia, being that here meant,
(...), where Apollo had a Temple, as Hesychius writes; whence he derived the
Attribute of Cillaus, as Strabo, lib. 13. testifies. And here I cannot but
acquaint the Reader, that Gro^ovius his Text differs from the Vulgar, he
reading, from the Authority of the Florentine Manuscript, the immediately
foregoing Verses in the Original, thus, Et nota fama Tenedos, and quae pascuo
Foecunda pingui Thracios nutrit Greges
Syros, fretumque Lesbos Aegeum secans
Et sacra Phoeb^ Cilla. --
Where he takes the fifth Verse in the beginning of this Scene, and inserts it
the third of the forecited, viz. Syros, fretumque, etc. We have yet followed
the vulgar Editions, nor without reason; which we could easily make out, both
against Delrius his Exceptions, and those of Gronovius, would the narrow limits
of this Page allow me to expatiate.
Cilla rich in fertile Ground
To Phoebus sacred, whose fat Pastures fed
Large Thracian Flocks, by him were vanquished.
What? and those Lands through which Caycus.] A River of Mysia, according to
Virgil, Georg l. 4. by whom it is called Mysiusque Caycus, Strabo, l. 12. makes
it a River of Aeol^; Lucan, of Idalis, being a Province of the lesser Asia,
where he writes, -- Gelido Tellus persusa Cayco Idalis -- By Ovid ( Metam. l.
2.) it is called Teuthrantaeusque Caycus, from Teuthrantia, a Province of
Mysia, so called from Teuthras, King thereof. Ovid likewise tells us ( Metam.
l. 15.) that it was first called Mysus in these Verses. Et Mysum, capitisque
suiripaque prioris
Poenituisse ferunt, alia nunc ^re Caycum.
And Mysus, his first Head and Banks disclaimed,
Runs a new Course, and is Caycus named.
It was likewise anciently called Adurus; Then Astraeus, from Astraeus, the Son
of Neptune, who threw himself into it: Also Pauraus, which name was changed
into Caycus, and by means of Caycus, Son of Mercury and Ocyrhoe, who having
slain Timander, a Noble Mysian, and being pursued, cast himself into it, as
Plutarch, (...). reports. At this day it is most commonly called Girmasti; by
Niger, Castri; by others, Chiay, as Ortelius and Ferrarius affirm.
Caycus flows;
Whose Streams augment by dissolved Vernal Snows.
These so great Slaughters, Nations mighty dread,
Like Whirle winds through So many Cities.] There are reckoned to be taken and
sacked by Achilles in his Expedition to Troy, no less than twelve Maritime, and
eleven Inland Towns and Cities, as himself boasts, Iliad. 9. Twelve Cities with
my Fleet I did destroy,
Eleven with my Landforces. --

so many Cities spread,
Which might have been another closing Fame,
Were but his His Marches Actions.] To the same sense -- Claudian, in 4. Cons.
Honorii. Quod longis alii bellis po^uere mereri,
Hoc tibi dat Stilis bonis iter. --
And in De Laud. Stilich, Vestra manus dubio quicquid discrimin^ gessit,
Transcurrens egit (...). --
Which he seems to have borrowed from this place of our Author.
Marches Actions; thus He came:
And in so many Glorious Conquests sha^'d
The Spoils of War, while he for War prepared.
Though we His other Merits should refrain;
Were not this One sufficient? Hector slain!
He Ilium conquered; 'twas but sacked by you.
Our Parents Noble Praises We Will pursue,
And his brave Acts, for which that Praise is due.
Who knows not Hector, in his Fathers Sight;
In's Unkles, Memnon.] Son of Tithon ( Priam's Brother) and Au^ora, according
to Ovid, Apollodorus, Philostratus, and most of the sabulous Writers; or
according to ^schylus, as cited by Strabo, l. 15. of Tithon and Ciss^a, was
sent to the succor of Troy, with 10000 Ethiopians, and 10000 Susians, by
Theutamus, Monarch of Asia, (the Twentieth in descent from Ninus and Semiramis)
and slain by Achilles, in revenge of his Friend Antilochus, formerly killed by
Memnon. Of which act Pindar, in 6. Nem. makes a Glorious mention. But Cedrenus
(in Histor. compend.) reports, that Ajax having encountered Memnon, and forced
him to let fall his Buckler, Achilles being near at hand, took hold of that
Advantage, and running him through the Throat, with his Javelin
(unsouldier-like) killed him. Philostratus (in vi^a Apollon. l. 6.) reports,
that the Ethiopian Memnon was never at Troy, and (in Heroic.) makes mention of
two Memnons; the one, the Ethiopian Prince; the other, a Trojan, the same here
killed by Achilles.
Memnon, fell by him in fight?
Whose Death his Parents Cheeks with sorrow pal'd,
And Morning's rosy Looks in Mourning veiled.
Himself abhorred the fatal Precedent,
And learned, that Sons of Gods were not exempt
From Death. Penthesilea.] Queen of the Amazons, who after many Encounters with
Achilles, wherein he was still worsted by her, was at the last slain by him;
but not without his extreme regret: Having discovered, after her Helmet was
pulled off, her admirable Beauty, which was, even in death more conquering than
her Arms, while living. For upon sight of it, he became most passionately in
love with her, as Propertius, l. 3. Eleg. 11. testifies in these words; Aurea
cui postquam nudavit cassida frontem,
Vicit victorem candida forma suum.
See more to this purpose, in Q. Calaber, l. 1. Lycophron, in Cassandra,
Tzetzes upon him, and Servius in 11. Virg. Aeneid. Dares Phrygius yet reports,
that Penthesilea was slain by Pyrrhus, not by Achilles; which happily may have
more of truth in it, than what is reported by Eustathius, from the tradition of
some of the Ancients, that Achilles was slain by Penthesilea, and afterward
(being resuscitated by the Prayers of his Mother) slew her, who first slew him.
Penthesilea too, of All
Our Fears the last, did by his Valor fall.
A Virgin then might but his Due be thought,
Though even from From Argos, or Mycenae.] That is, either one of Agamemnon's
own Race and Family, or of the choicest of his Subjects, the Argiv^s, or
Mycenians; Argos and Mycenae being two of the chiefest Cities, within his
Principalities, and the Places where he had his Court and Residence.
Argos or Mycenae brought,
Prized you his Merits justly: Can you move
A Doubt yet, or refuse his Will t'approve?
Think you it is Cruelty to Peleus Son
To offer Priam's Daughter? when Iphigenia.
your own
A Sacrifice to Helena was made?
For what even Precedent allows, We plead.

Agamemnon. "It Is Childish weakness, etc.] Whether this contest between Pyrrhus
and Agamemnon, be taken from that, between Teucer, and the Atrides, in
Sophocles his Ajax, as Delrius supposes, or from Euripides his Menalippe (of
which there are some fragments in Stob^us) as Heinsius conjectures, is but
uncertain. This we may with clearer probability affirm, that Seneca, under the
Person of Pyrrhus, seems to set forth the violent and headstrong humor of his
Tyrannical Nero, shrouding himself under that of Agamemnon, and by that means
occultly chastizing the extravagancies of that Prince's fierce and unbridled
disposition.
It Is Childish Weakness not to rule our Ire.
"Others the Heat of Youth inflames: This Fire
In Pyrrhus is Hereditary. We
Have felt Thy Father's Rage.] Achilies, for the Loss of Bris^is, taken from
him by Agamemnon, affronted him with outrageous language, and would have drawn
his Sword to have killed him, but was hindered by Pallas, and the interposing
Eloquence of Nestor. Horace (de Art. Poet.) has drawn his Picture to the Life,
in these Verses. Scriptor honoratum si forte reponis Achillem,
Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, acer,
Iura neget sibi nata, nihil non arroget armis.
Which Ben. Johnson has thus Copied. -- If again
Honored Achilles chance by thee be seized,
Keep him still active, angry, unappeas'd;
Sharp and contemning Laws, which at him aim,
And daring any thing by Arms to claim.

thy Fathers Rage; and the Injury
Of his high Threats have suffered heretofore.
'The more thy Power, thy Patience should be more.
Why with the Blood of a Young Virgin slain,
Seek'st Thou so Great a Leader's Ghost to stain?
"'It Is fit this first We learn to know, what e're
"The The Victor ought to do, the vanquished bear.] Alexander the Great, in
Quintus Curtius, pretends to have fully understood and practiced this point of
Bravery and Justice, where he says, Et vincere, and consulere victis scio.
Victor ought to do; the Vanquished bear.
"No violent Dominions long endure:
"'It Is Moderation makes a Throne stand sure.
"When Fortune swells our State to an Excess,
"'It Is Wisdom to restrain our Happiness:
"The Turns of Chance, and too propitious Powr's
"Still fearing; Conquest teaching, how few Hours
"Can to subversion bring the Greatest State.
Troy's Fall has raised our Thoughts to too elate,
Too stern a Pride; In the same Place We stand
From whence she fell. Once with too proud a Hand
I must confess I bare my self, but what
Might have raised others Thoughts, Success; even that
Has humbled Mine. Thou Priam make me Proud!
Thou bid'st Me fear. "What but a splendid Shroud
"Of Vanity, may We think Crowns to be,
"Our Brows impaling with false Majesty,
"Which Chance, in one short Hour, may make her spoil,
"Without Without a thousand Ships, etc.] Mention being made, not only here,
but also in some other places of this Poem, of the number of the Grecian Ships
employed in the Trojan War, by the round sum of One Thousand; it is not yet to
be understood, as if that were the just number of the Fleet, but only a
conjectural account thereof. For Homer (in Iliad. 2.) gives in a List of 1186.
The Scholiast of Euripides (in Trag. O^est.) 1155. Dares Phrygius, 1140.
Cedrenus (Histor. Compe^d.) 1198. Thucydides (lib. 1.) and Dion Prusiaeus
(Orat. 11.) 1200. Dictys Cretensis, 1255. Of all which Numbers, those given in
by Homer and Thucydides seem to have the best warrant of Authority. And having
said thus much of the Number of the Ships, it will not be amiss here, to give
the Reader a Computation of the Army and Forces, by those Ships transported to
the Seige of Troy. And if any Fastidious Heads shall look upon these minute
Remarks, as unprofitable, or impertinent. I shall oppose against their censure
the example of the incomparable Monsieur Bachet, who, in his curious
Annotations upon Ovid's Heroical Epistles (whence he has gained no less repute
in Poetical Learning, than he has done in Mathematical, by his admirable
Commentary upon Diophantus) has condescended to handle these very particulars,
whose footsteps in this inquiry we follow, and accordingly find, that
Eustathius (in Iliad. 2.) reckons them to amount to 120000. adding, that
Aristarchus made them no less than 142320 Soldiers; for Authors differ no less
about the Muster of the Forces, than they do in the Number of the Ships. There
is a passage or two in Homer, whence the computation may be made; the the
first, Iliad. 8. where the Trojan Camp is described, to contain 1000. Fires,
and Fifty Soldiers allotted to warm themselves at each. By which reckoning, it
may appear, that the Trojans, with their Allies, were only 50000. strong. Now
in the second Iliad, Agamemnon boasts, that there were more than ten Greeks to
every Trojan, By which account the Grecian Army would amount to above Five
Hundred Thousand Men. And yet that seems incredible, in regard, that in the
most flourishing State of Greece, which was about the time of Xerxes his
Invasion, all Greece could not make head against Mardonius, with an Army of
above a Hundred Thousand. The sorementioned Monsieur Ba^het, in his Commentary
upon the fifth Book of Diophantus his Arith. produces an Epigram (published in
Agone Homeri and Hesiodi, set forth in Greek) where Homer is introduced, to
answer Hesiod's Question, touching the Number of the Grecian Army; thus in
Latin, Septeni luxere foci, sed quemlibet ante
Quinquaginta caro verubus transfixa tremebat,
Nongen^sque veru Danais data fercula ab uno.
Which is resolved, by Multiplying together 7 (the Number of the Fires, and 50
(the Number of the Spits) making 350. then, by that, Multiplying 900. the
Number of Men, fed by the Flesh on one Spit, which will make the Number of
315000. Soldiers. But Thucydides, a most grave Historian ( lib. 1.) computes
the Number after this manner. He supposes, that, in every one of the greater
Ships, there might be 120. Soldiers; in every one of the lesser 50* both
amounting to 170. Of which sum of 170. taking a Medium, by halving, there will
then remain 85. the Number of Men supposed to be in each Ship, one with
another. Wherefore Multiplying the Number of Homer's whole Fleet, being 1186.
Ships, by 85. the Product will be 100810. Soldiers: or, according to Thucydides
his own List of the Ships, being 1200. Multiplied by 85, as asoresaid, 102000
Men.
a Thousand Ships, or Ten Years Toil.
"So slow a Fate attends not All. And Greece!
(If with thy leave I may confess it) This
I Will say; I would have Ilium distressed,
Nay more, subdued; [ Her ruin yet repressed.] The example of Marcellus, at
Syracu^e, in this particular, is memorable, and conformable to the Clemency
here professed by Agamemnon, as it is represented by Silius Italicus, lib. 3.
-- Post quam sublimis ab alto
Aggere, despexit trepidam clangoribus urbem,
Inque suo positum nutu, stent moenia Regum,
An nullos Oriens videat lux crastina muros,
Ingemuit, nimiumque viris, tantumque licere
Horruit; and propere (...) ir a
Iussit stare domos --
-- Sic (...)
Pro praeda fu^t --

her Ruin yet represt;
But the hot Rage of an incensed Foe,
And Victory, by Night obtained, know
No Curb. What cruel or unworthy Fact
May seem committed, that Revenge did act,
And Darkness, which does Fury forward thrust,
And the Victorious Sword; whose killing Lust
Having once tasted Blood's never satisfied.
If ought of ruined Troy may yet abide
After All This, now let it stand secured:
Enough, more than enough, she has endured.
That at thy Father's Tomb the Princess should
Be made a Sacrifice, and with her Blood
Sprinkle his Ashes, or that yet so vile
Cruel a Murder We should Nuptials style,
We Will never permit: it is We must bear the Blame:
"Who ought, yet not forbids Ill, bids the same.

Pyrrhus. Shall then Achilles Ghost due Honors want?


Agamemnon. Dues it shall have, and every Tongue shall chant
His Praise; and Lands unknown resound his Fame,
And celebrate the Glory of his Name.
If yet his Ashes naught but Blood can ease,
Let that of slaughtered Herds his Ghost appease.
But let no Blood be spilt to be bewailed,
By wretched Mothers: How ye Gods prevailed,
Or whence did this inhumane Custom rise
Of making [ Making Man to Man a Sacrifice.] The original of this impious kind
of Sacrifice seems to be derived anciently from that Example of Abraham's
obedience to the Divine Command, in offering his Son Isaac. Of which, besides
the authority of Scripture, mention is made even by profane Historians, as
Eusebius (in Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 19.) testifies, from the Writings of
Melo, cited by Alexander Polyhistor. Hence by Satanical emulation, or
instigation, these humane (or rather inhumane) Immolations seem to have been
propagated, among the ancient Heathens, in their Sacrifices to their Fictitious
Deities, Saturn, Belus, or Moloch, Jupiter, Apollo, or Mithra, Venus, Diana,
Mercury; nay, to Heroes, Emperors, Kings, Princes, private Persons, and what
is yet worse, even to Brutes and Monsters; touching which, (to spare the
citations of ancient Testimonies) see the late Treatise of Iacobus Geusius, De
Victimis Humanis; where whatever may concern that subject is laboriously
collected. Besides what the Reader may meet with, in Stuckius, De Sacrificiis
Gentil. Gerard. Io. Vossius, De Origin and Progressu Idolatr. l. 1. and
Saubertus, de Sacrific. Veterum, c. 21. or in our learned Seldom, De Dii^ Syris
Syntagm. 1. c. 6. together with Andreas Beyerus thereupon, In Additament. and
Schedius, De Diis German. c. 32.
Man to Man a Sacrifice!
Think but what Hate would to thy Sire accrue,
Should such dire Rites be to his Honor due.

Pyrrhus. Thou insolently Haughty in Success,
As fearfully dejected in Distress!
Tyrant over Kings! does new-sprung Love infest
Yet once again with sudden Flames thy Breast?
Does Agamemnon think that he shall still
Thus wrong Achilles? No; know Pyrrhus will,
Or see this Victim offered to his Grave,
Or else a greater, worthier Victim have:
This Sword here thinks it does too long abstain
From Royal Blood, and Priam's Ghost would fain
Have a King's bear it Company.

Agamemnon. It Is true;
The greatest Praise that is to Pyrrhus due,
Is that he murdered Priam, whom his Sire
Spared when his Suppliant.] Coming to implore the redemption of Hector's
Corpse, of which see the relation in Homer's Iliad 24.
Spared when his Suppliant.

Pyrrhus. It Is Truth entire;
We know it: that They who were my Father's Foes
Were forced to be his Suppliants; you amongst those.
But Priam was the Stouter of the Two,
He came in Person to petition; You
Not yet so Valiant as to supplicate,
Like a tame Coward, chose to delegate
Ajax and Ithacus.] To these Homer (Iliad 9.) adds Phaenix, as chief of the
Embassy, whom Ovid ( in Epist. Briseid. ad Achillem.) follows. These, at the
entreaty of Agamemnon, su'd to make his peace with Achilles, not only by
proffering him to return Briseis, but offering him also rich Presents, both
which the obstinate Hero refused.
Ajax and Ithacus to make your Prayer,
Whilst you lay sculking, and kept close for fear.

Agamemnon. But your brave Father feared not it is confessed,
He amongst fired Ships, and slaughtered Greeks could rest
Secure; unmindful of his Charge; and run
Upon his Lute.] Achilles, besides his Martial Arts, was trained up by Chyron,
in Physic, and Music, Vocal and Instrumental, in which he became an excellent
Proficient, and for which he is celebrated by the ancient Poets. This Lute, or
Lyre of his, is said to have been that of Mercury's, which Corybas, the Son of
Iasion* and Nephew of Dardanus, is reported (according to Diodorus Siculus, l.
5.) to have left at Lymessus, and which Achilles, when he took that Town,
sound, and carried away with him. From this yet Homer, (Iliad. 9.) dissents,
telling us, that when the Ambassadors sent from Agamemnon came to him, they
found him playing upon a Silver-neck'd Lute, curiously wrought, which, among
other spoils, he brought from the sack of Eetionean Thebes.
Upon his Lute nimble Division.

Pyrrhus. Yet was great Hector, who your Arms despised,
At sound but of his Lute with fear surpised.
And in the midst of Terror and dismay
His Navy yet in peaceful Quiet lay.

Agamemnon. Yes, the same Navy Priam durst to board.


Pyrrhus. "'It Is Kingly to a King Life to afford.


Agamemnon. Then why a King did you deprive of Breath?


Pyrrhus. "There Is Mercy sometimes shown in giving Death.


Agamemnon. So you would in Mercy Sacrifice a Maid?


Pyrrhus. And such a Sacrifice can you dissuade,
Who offered your own Child?

Agamemnon. "Their Kingdom's Good
"Kings should prefer before their Childrens Blood.

Pyrrhus. Forbid a Captiv's Death no Law e're did.


Agamemnon. "What the Law does not, is by Shame forbid.


Pyrrhus. "What likes, is lawful, by All Victors thought.


Agamemnon. "TO whom much is lawful, to like, little ought.


Pyrrhus. Before these thus vant'st thou, who by Pyrrhus are
Freed from the Bondage of a Ten Years War?

Agamemnon. Breeds Breeds Scyrus such high Blood.] The Poet perhaps alludes to
the Proverb, or common byword, Scyrius Principatus, which is meant of a mean,
and low Principality, as Suidas testifies, in voce (...), in regard the Island
is stony and unfruitful; whence, according to Bochartus (in Canaan, l. 1. c.
12.) the name seems to be derived. See likewise Erasmus, in Adag. Scyrius
Principatus.
Scyrus such high Blood?


Pyrrhus. Scy^us which knows
-- Which knows No Brothers Sins. As Myce^ae and Argos were guilty of. For
Atreus and Thyestes, the Sons of Pelops, by Hippodamia, were first guilty of
the Murder of their Brother-in-law Chrys^ppus, whom Pelops begat on Axioche,
his Concubine. Afterward, Thyestes, by the help of Aerope, the Wife of Atreus,
whom he had seduced to play the Adulter^ss, became Master of his Brother's
Golden-Fleec'd Ram (which was the fatal Ornament of his Kingdom) upon which
Atreus, to be revenged, kills three of Thyestes his Children, then Hostages in
his Court, and inviting Thyestes to a Treatment of seeming reconcillation,
feasts him with the Flesh and Blood of his Children. From the sight of which
horrid Banquet, the Sun is said to have withdrawn his light. See Hyginus, De
Fabul, Pausani^, in (...). and the Tragedy of Thyestes, among those which go
under the name of Sen^ca's.
No Brothers Sins.

Agamemnon. Which strait'ning Seas enclose.


Pyrrhus. Yes, Seas that owe us a Relation;
Indeed -- Thyestes noble House, Great Atreus too -- Ironically spoken, and
reflecting upon the unhappy miscarriages of Agamemnon his Family (of which in
the foregoing Note) being notwithstanding of a very Illustrious Original. For
Jupiter, on Pluto, Daughter of Hym^s, (as Hyginus, de Fabulis, c. 15. makes
her) or as some will, of Oceanus, as others, of Saturn. begot Ta^talus. He, on
(...), or (according to Hyginus, c. (...).) on Dio^e, Daughter of Atlas,
Pelops; Who by Hippodamia, only Daughter of O^omaus, had Atreus, and Thyestes;
Atreus, by Aerop^, Daughter of Crateus Agamemnon, and Menelaus, thence called
Atri^s. Though Servius ( in Ae^id. 1.) tells us, the name Atrides was (...)
us^patum, Agamemnon and Menelaus being the Sons of Plysthe^es, and not of
Atreus. Which difference of opinion some reconcile thus, making Plysthe^es the
Son of Atreus, and to have died very young, but to have been Father of two
Sons, Agamemnon and Menelaus, whom he left to the care and tuition of their
Grandfather, Atreus, whence they were called Atrides, But the most common, and
most prevalent opinion is, that they were really the Sons of Atreus; and that
after the Death of their Father (slain by Aegysthus, the Son of Thyestes) they
were conveyed (as Tzetzes tells the Story, Chil. Hist. 18.) by one
Trotecomp^us, to Polyp^idus, King of Sicyonia, who the better to secure them
from the malice of Thyestes, sent them to Oen^us, King of Aetolia. Not long
after which, Ty^darus, King of Sparta, taking notice of them to be hopeful
Princes, adopted them for his Sons-in-law, Marrying his two Daughters,
Clyte^nestra and Helena, the one to Agamemnon, the other to Menelaus.
Thyestes noble House W' have known,
Great Atreus too.

Agamemnon. Out thou Girls Bastard Brat,
Got by Achilles, when scarce Man.

Pyrrhus. Achilles, who to the whole World allied
Enjoys the Honors of the Deify'd.] Achilles, soon after his death, was
honored with Divine Rites. Of which the ancient Scholiast upon Statius his
Achilles, explicating this Verse, Iliaci scopulos habitare Sepulchri, thus
writes, Ubi Achillem pro Deo consecraturi erant Mortales. For near his Tomb, on
the Sigaean Promontary, he had a Temple dedicated to him, called Achilleion,
where he was worshipped by the Ilienses, as Brita^icus notes upon the same
verse. Pausanias, in Laconicis, tells of a Temple near Sp^rta. dedicated to
him, and built by Praces, Grandchild of Pergamus, Son of Neoptolemus, or
Pyrrhus, where the Athlet^, or Combatants, who went into the Plane-tree Grove,
on Solemn days to fight, offered Sacrifice to Achilles, before the Combat. And
Dion Prusi^us ( Orat. 36.) reports that his Countrymen, the ^orystenitae, had
him in highest veneration, to whom they built a Temple, in a certain Island,
which they called after his Name. By the Athenians likewise he was worshipped
as their Tutelar Deity, by whose supposed Protection, both that City and the
whole Region of Attica (as Zosimus in 4. Hist. from the Authority of Syrianus,
the Philosopher, would persuade his Reader to believe) was preserved from the
threatening ruin of Earthquakes, generally infesting all Greece, in the time of
Valens, the Eastern Emperor. The same Zosimus in his fifth Book, likewise
adding, that when Alaricbus besieged that City, with intent to have destroyed
it, he was frighted from his design, by the appearance of this angry Demi-God,
at the Prayers, and Intercession of the Bes^eged. Not to mention the Honors
done him by Alexander the Great, and Antonius Car^calla, the Roman Emperor, in
their Parentations at his Monument, mentioned by Arrian and Herodian. The
overcurious criticizing of Gronovius upon this place, endeavoring to wrest
the Original text from the common Reading of the Words, as we have rendered
them, is to little purpose.
Enjoys the Honors of the Deifi'd,
Who can a Claim to Seas by Thetis move,
To Hell by Aeacus, to Heaven by Jove.

Agamemnon. Yes, He who fell by Paris feeble Hand.


Pyrrhus. Whom yet not any of the Gods durst stand
In open fight.

Agamemnon. Sir, I could rule your Tongue,
And give your Boldness due Correction;
But that this Sword of Ours, knows how to spare
Even Captives: Let the Gods Interpreter,
Calchas, be called, and what the Fates command
By Him, to that We willingly will stand.

Enter Calchas. Agamemnon. Thou Sacred Minister, who loos'dst the Bar
Which stopped the Grecian Navy, and the War,
Whose Art unlocks the Heavens, expounds their Laws,
And from Beasts Entrails, Thunder, Comets, draws
The sure Presages of ensuing Fate,
Whose Words We purchased at so dear a Rate,
Now here declare what it is the Gods intend:
And this our Strife, let thy grave Counsel end.

Calchas. The usual means, Fates of Return afford
The Greeks. To the Tomb of the Thessalian Lord
The Virgin must be sacrificed; so dressed
As Grecian Brides are at their Nuptial Feast,
And Pyrrhus wedded to thy Sire by Thee,
With these due Rites shall she espoused be.
Yet is not This our Fleets sole Remora.
More Noble Blood than Thine, Polyxena,
The Fates require. Great Hector's only Son
From some high Turret must be headlong thrown;
So have the Gods decreed he should be slain.
Then may your Conquering Navy plough the Main. In the following C^orus,
consisting of Trojan Women, aptly enough introduced, to question the verity of
Achilles's rising from the Dead, as rumored in the foregoing Act, Seneca takes
occasion to make them speak his own Epicur^an and S^oical Sentiments, in
prejudice to the Persuasion of the Souls Immortality, thereby rendering the
subject of their Discourse confessedly impious* In so much, that Delrius,
(otherwise no less a friend to him, than his friend Lipsius) is here forced to
leave him, and to cry out, Valeat Seneca cum suis Animae necatoribus; having
first prepared an Antidote against his poisonous Assertions, therein
vindicating the Soul's Immortality, by Arguments, drawn not only from the
Reasonings of the wisest Philosophers, and the common Sentiment of most
Nations, but also from the Dictates of Scripture, Fathers, Councils, and the
mee^ light of Nature. To which, by way of pre-caution, we refer the unwary
Reader.


CHORUS. IS it a Truth? or Fiction blinds
Our fearful Minds?
That when to Earth We Bodies give,
Souls yet do live.] The Stoics are not all of one persuasion, touching the
state of the Soul, after the Death of the Body; some affirming it to dye with
the Body, as Panaetius, and his Followers. Others, with Cleanthes, (with whom
likewise Chrys^ppus in part consents, as to the Souls only of the Wise,) allow
to them a survivance after the Body, but not to endure longer than the Worlds
general Conflagration. Which opinion Cicero (in 1. Tuscul.) has thus
ingeniously expressed: Sto^ci usuram nobis largiuntur, tanquam Cornicibus; Diu
mansuros (...) A^tmos, semper, negunt.
Souls yet do live?
That when the The Wife has closed with cries
The Husband's Eyes.
The Ancients, as well Greeks as Romans, were most superstitiously observant of
the Ceremony of closing the Eyes of the Dead, and this was always done, or
intended to be done, by those of nearest Relation, as of Wives for their
Husbands, Husbands for their Wives, Parents for their Children Children for
their Parents, and so in order, according to their Degree of Proximity, by
Blood or Friendship. Of the manner of performing which Ceremony, and of the
Reasons for it, the Reader may find a particular account, in Kirkmannus de
Funeribus, lib. 1. c. 6. and Meursius upon the same subject, lib. singular. c.
3.
Wife has closed with Cries
The Husbands Eyes,
When the last fatal day of Light
Has spoiled our Sight,
When to Ashes turned
Our Bones are Urn'd.
After the Corpse was burnt (which was the manner of the ancient Funeral) they
collected the remaining Bones and Ashes of the Dead; which Office, or Duty
among the Romans, was called Ossilegium. The Bon^ and Ashes so collected
together, they be sprinkled with Wine and other odorous Liquors, and bedewed
with their Tears, then put them up into small Vessels, which they called Urns;
which Urns or Vessels were distinguished by their proper names of Ossuaria and
Cin^raria. See the forecited Authors in the precedent Note.
And when to Dust and Ashes turned
Our Bones are urn'd;
Souls stand yet in no Need at All
Of Funeral.
But that A longer life with pain
They still retain.
This is the best condition which the most eminent of the Stoics allow to a
separated Soul; for the Life of a Soul, after the Body's Death, the Stoics (as
Delrius upon this place notes) (...) miseriam rebantur, though Lactantius (lib.
7.) reports Zeno to have taught otherwise. The words of Lactantius are these:
Esse Inferos Zenon Stoicus docuit, and seeds Piorum ab Impiis esse discretas;
and illos quidem quietas, ac delectabiles incolere regiones, ^os vero liter^
poenas in teneb^osis locis, atque in coeni voraginibus horrendis.
a longer Life with pain
They still retain?
Or dye We quite? nor ought We have
Survives the Grave?
When like to Smoke immix'd with Skies,
The Spirit flies.
And Tapers are applied
To the naked side.
Alluding to the ancient Custom or Ceremony, in setting fire to the Funeral
Pile whereon the dead body was to be burnt, which was done by the nearest of
kin of the Male Sex, who (as Virgil expresses the manner of doing it) --
subjectam more Parentum
Aversam tenuere facem --
going backward, and turning their Faces from the Pile, Ut id officium
necessitatis esse ostenderent, non voluntatis, says Servius upon that place:
adding likewise, that these Funeral Lights or Torches were made ex funibus, of
twisted Cords, (which, as Is^dore tells us, were cera circunda^i;) whence Varro
derives the denomination of Funeral.
Funeral Tapers are applied
To the naked Side.
What e're Sol's Rising does disclose,
A Setting shows;
What e're the Sea with flowing Waves
Or ebbing laves;
Old Time that moves with winged pace
Does soon deface.
With the same swiftness the Signs roll
Round, round the Pole,
With the same course Day's Ruler steers
The fleeting Years;
With the same speed th'oblique-pac'd Moon
Does wheeling run:
We all are hurried to our Fates,
Our Lives last Dates;
And when we reach the Stygian Shore,
Are then no more.
As Smoke which springs from Fire is soon
Dispersed and gone;
Or Clouds which we but now beheld,
By Winds dispel'd;
The Spirit which informs this Clay
So fleets away.
Nothing is after Death; and this
Too Nothing is.
Seneca here does not so much seem to declare, as to confirm his Opinion (to
use Heinsius's Expression) which he has elsewhere to this purpose laid down,
both in his Epistles to Lucilius, and particularly in Consolat. ad Marciam,
from whom his Nephew Lucan has borrowed thus much in the third of his
Pharsalia: Aut nihil est sensus animis a morte reli^um,
Aut mors ipsa nihil --
Or Souls no sense do after Death retain.
Or Death is nothing --
To a much better and contrary sense Propertius, lib. 3. El^g. Sunt aliquid
Ma^es, Lethum non omnia finit.
Nothing is after Death; and this
Too Nothing is:
The Gaol, or the extremest space
Of a swift Race.
The Covetous.] That is, the desirous of death, in hopes thereby to better
their Condition.
The Covetous their Hopes forbear,
The sad] That is, those that fear punishment for their Offenses after death.
The Sad their fear.
Ask'st thou when e're thou come to die,
Where thou shall lie?
Where lie th'unborn.] This is but a Repetition of what he elsewhere declares,
(Consolat. ad Marc.) Mors nos in illam tranquillitatem, in qua, antequam
nasceremur, jacuimus, repo^it. Si mortuorum aliquis miseretur, and nonnatorum
misereatur.
Where lie th'unborn. Away Time rakes us,
Then Chaos takes us.
Death's Individual; like kind
To Body or Mind.
What e're of Taenarus they sing, etc.] The same Position he maintains in
Consolat. ad Marciam, in these words, Illa quae nobis inferos faciunt
terribiles fabula est, etc. Luserunt ista Poet^, and vanis nos agitavere
terroribus. Where we may see he has in this place only transferred the sense
of his Philosophical Prose into Poetical Numbers; and from this Instance and
the foregoing clearly infer, (were there no other Arguments to evince it) that
Seneca the Philosopher was the Author of this Tragedy.
What e're of Taenarus they sing,
And Hell's fierce King,
How Cerberus still guards the Port
Of The Stygian Court,
Are all but idle Rumors found,
And empty Sound;
Like the vain Terrors of the Night,
Or Dreams that fright.

ACT III.
SCENE I.
Andromache, Senex, Astyanax mute.
Andromache. Why tear you thus your Hair, and weeping beat
Your wretched Breasts, ye Phrygian Dames? We yet
Suffer but lightly, if we suffer what
Is only to be wept. Troy fell but late
To you, to me long since. When in our view
Cruel Achilles at his Chariot drew
My Hector's Limbs; whilst with a Weight unknown
The trembling Axletree did seem to groan.
Then, then was Troy overthrown, then Ilium fell;
Sense of that Grief makes me unsensible.
And now by Death freed from Captivity
I Would follow Hector; but this Boy here, he
Witholds me; he (sweet Child) my Will restrains,
And from a much-desired Death detains.
It Is he that makes me yet the Gods entreat;
He to my Griefs a longer time has set.
And though my greatest Comfort, took from me
The greatest Comfort in my Misery,
Security from Fear; no place does rest
For happier Fortune with the worst oppressed
And saddest Miseries: "For to fear still
"When Hope has left us, is the worst of Ill.

Senex. What sudden Fear does thy sad Mind surprise?


Andromache. From our great Ills still greater Ills arise.
Nor yet can Iliums fatal Woes have end.

Senex. What further Miseries does Heaven intend?


Andromache. Hell's opened; and our Foes, that we might n'ere
Want Terror, rising from their Graves appear.
And can this only to the Greeks befall?
Sure Death is equally the same to all.
That common Fear all Phrygians does distress;
But my sad Dream does me alone oppress.

Senex. Declare, what did thy dreadful Dream present?


Andromache. Two parts of quiet Night were almost spent,
And now the Seven Triones.] The words in the Original are, Clarumque septem
verterant stella jugum. meaning those in the Constellation of the Northern Bear
or Wain, which the Latins call Septem Triones, from their resemblance of Oxen
drawing a Wain, Of which thus Fest^s: Septem Triones septem stella appellantur,
abubus junctis, quos Triones veteres appellant, quod juncti arant terram quasi
Teriones. And to the same purpose Varro de Lingua Lat. l. 6. Triones and Boves
appellantur a Bubulcis etiam nunc, maxim cum arant terram: Eque is ut dicti
valentes Glebarii, qui facile proscindunt Glebas, sic omnes qui terram arabant,
a terra Teriones, unde Triones, etc. Upon which score I have made bold here to
adopt the word into English, and (as I conceive) with as good sense, and better
sound in Verse, than by plainly and flatly rendering Septem Stellae the Seven
Stars. Whether the word may pass among us. I leave to the Modern Censors of
Language: This I cannot but add, that among the Romans it was taken up by some
of the Lucretian Family, as a distinct Cognomen. Whence among the Cons^lar
Coins we find some of L. LUCRETIUS TRIO, on the reverse of which is stamped the
Figure of an Half Moon and the Seven Stars, or Septem Triones; Quibus notis
(says Fulvius Ursinus in Famil. Roman.) opinor L. Lucre^ium cognominis sui
originem indicare voluisse. See likewise to this purpose Scaliger upon Festus,
as before cited.
Seven Triones had wheeled round
Their glittering Wain, when Rest (a Stranger found
To my afflicted Thoughts) in a short Sleep
Upon my wearied Eyes did gently creep,
(If such Amaze of Mind yet Sleep may be.)
Strait to my thinking I did Hector see.
Not such as when against the Argives bent
On Grecian Ships Idaean Flames.] That is, Torches or Firebrands made of Pine,
cut from Mount Id^, wherewith the Trojans attempted to fire the Grecian Fleet,
led by the Conduct and Valor of Hector. Of which Exploit see H^er in the 12,
13, 14, and 15 of his Iliads.
Idaean Flames he sent;
Nor such when he his Foes with slaughter struck,
And real Spoils from False Achilles.] Meaning Patroclus dressed in the Armor
of Achilles. For Patroclus seeing the Greeks worsted by Hector, and their Ships
begun to be fired, begged of Achilles that he would permit him the use of his
Arms, and the Conduct of the Myrmidons. Which being granted him he bravely
charged the Trojans, and forced them to a Retreat. In which Action he was first
wounded by Euphorbus, and forced to retire; yet not without the intervening
assistance of Apollo, who before had caused his Armor to be loosened, and to
fall from him: Whereupon Hector pursuing him, killed him outright. Whence dying
he thus upbraids Hector in Homer Iliad 16. Pernicious Fate and Phoebus first
o'rethrew me,
Euphorbus next, you are but the third that slew me.

false Achilles took.
Nor did his sprightly Eyes with Lightning glance,
But with a sad dejected Countenance
Like mine he stood; his Hair all soiled and wet,
(It joy'd me although such to see him yet.)
His Head then shaking thus at length he spoke;
Awake, my dear Andromache, awake,
And quickly hence As^yanax convey;
Let him be closely hid, no other way
Is left to save him: thy sad Cries forbear.
Griev'st thou Troy's fallen? would God it wholly were.
Quickly dispatch, and to some secret place
Convey this small last hopes of all our Race.
Sleep from my Senses a cold horror shook,
When staring round with an affrighted look
Wretch, I (my Child forgot) for Hector sought;
But lo the fleeting shadow, whilst I thought
To have embraced it, fled. O my dear Astyanax.
Joy,
True Blood of thy great Sire, sole Hopes of Troy!
Unhappy Issue of too famed a Race!
Too like thy Father, even such a Face
My Hector had; his Gait such, so he bare
His conquering Arms; so did his curled Hair
Part on his threatening Forehead, -- So from's Head Covering his Neck 'bout his
tall Shoulders spread.] Hector's fashion or manner of wearing his Hair was
peculiar, being raised up from his Forehead, and upon the Crown carried back to
the hinder part of his Head, and thence falling down about his Neck, as Julius
Pollux from the Testimony of Timaeus shows, l. 2. c. 3. Which kind of Tonsure
or ordering of the Hair came to be called Hector^ Coma, of which see Lycophron
in Cassand, and upon him Meu^sius and Canterus. Affected by Cal^gula and Nero
the Roman Emperors, and others of the Claudian Family, as Su^tonius testifies;
who says of the former, that it was his manner to go Capillo pone occipitium
submissiore, ut cervicem etiam obtegeret: And of the later, that Com^m
peregrinatione Ac^aic a etiam pone verticem submiserit. See not only the
particular description of this kind of Tonsure, but also the representation
thereof in Sculpture, from an ancient Intaglia in Io. Angelo Canini his
Ico^ographia.
so from's Head
Covering his Neck, 'bout his tall Shoulders spread.
O Son, too late unto thy Country born,
Too soon unto thy Mother! will that Turn,
That happy Revolution never come,
That I may see thee build up Ilium,
And her fled Citizens reduce once more,
And to their Town and them their Name restore?
But I forget my self, and fondly crave
Too happy things: "Enough poor Captives have
"If they may live. What place, Wretch, can secure
Thy Fears? sweet Child, where shall I hide thee sure?
That late proud Palace, rich in Wealth and Fame,
Built by the Gods, worthy even Envy's Aim,
Is now to a rude Heap of Ashes turned,
All Is levelled with the Ground, the whole Town burned
In wastful Flames; nor does there now abide
So much of Tr^y as may one Infant hide.
What place would fittest serve for my intent?
Hard by's my Husbands stately Monument,
Which even the Enemy does reverence,
Which with much Cost, nor less Magnificence,
(On his own Sorrows too too prodigal)
Old Priam built; there I may best of all
Entrust him with his Sire. -- A cold Sweat flows
Over all my Limbs, my Mind distracted grows,
And dreads the omen of the dismal place.

Senex. "Often a supposed Destruction (in this case)
"Men from a real Ruin has preserved.
No other Hope of Safety is reserved.
A great and fatal Weight on him does lie,
The Greatness of his own Nobility.

Andromache. Pray Heaven no one discover or betray him.


Senex. Let there be none to witness where you lay him.


Andromache. How if the Enemy demand the Boy?


Senex. Say, He was murdered in subverted Troy.


Andromache. What boot's it to lie hid a while, that past,
To fall into their cruel Hands at last?

Senex. Despair not, hope for better Fate: "The first
"Charge of the Victors Fury is the worst.

Andromache. Alas what should we hope, if he can never
Be kept concealed without apparent Fear?

Senex. "Choice of their Safety the Secure may make,
"Those in distress must hold of any take.

Andromache. What Desert place or unfrequented Land
Will give thee safe Repose? What friendly Hand
Protect us? To our Fears who will comfort yield?
O thou who always did, thy own now shield,
Great Hector! This dear Treasure from thy Wife
Receive, let thy dead Ashes guard his Life.
Come Child, enter this Tomb; back why do start?
Scorn'st thou to lurk in holes? His Fathers Heart
In him I see; he shames to fear. -- Quit, quit
Thy Princely thoughts now, and take such as fit
Thy present state. See all of Ilium
That Is left, a Child, a Captive, and a Tomb.
Submit to Heavens Decree, nor fear to enter
Thy Fathers Monument; go boldly, venture.
There, if on Wretches Fates compassion have,
Thou Wilt Safety find; if Death they give, a Grave.

Senex. He Is hid: but lest thy Fears should him betray,
Remove some distance hence another way.

Andromache. "The nearer that we fear, we fear the less:
But if you please let us withdraw --

Senex. Whist, peace:
Madam, your sad Complaints a while suspend,
The The Cephalenian Prince.] Ulysses, from Cephalenia, an Island in the (...)
Sea, 120 miles in compass, distant about 20 miles from Za^t, of which he was
Lord. The Island had anciently four Cities, denominated from the four Sons of
Cephalus, Pro^esus, Samus, P^leus, and Cra^s. Now only one, of the same Name
with the Island, remains, with some Villages, and a Port called Argostol^, six
miles from Cephalenia Southwards. See (...)* in Ferrarli Lexic^. It was
heretofore called Sam^ or Samus, and (according to some, says Ortelius) Tap^s;
at present by the Italians Cefalonia, and is under the Dominion of the
Ve^etians.
Cephalenian Prince this way does bend.

Andromache. Cleave, Earth! and thou, dear Spouse, rend up the Ground
From lowest Hell, and in that dark Profound
Hide our Loves pledge. He comes, he comes, his Pace
And Looks speak Plots; there is Mischief in his Face.

SCENE II.
Enter Ulysses. Ulysses. THe Minister of a severe Decree
I come; yet beg this first, that you would be
So charitable toward me to believe,
(Although they utterance from my mouth receive)
The words I shall deliver are not mine,
But what the Votes of all the Greeks enjoin.
Whose late Return to their loved Homes withstands
Great Hectors Heir: Him Destiny demands.
Still doubtful Hopes of an uncertain Peace,
And fear of Vengeance will the Greeks oppress,
Nor suffer them to lay down Arms so long
As thy Son lives, Andromache.

Andromache. This Song
Does Calchas your great Prophet sing?

Ulysses. Although
He had said nothing, Hector tells us so.
Whose Stock we dread: "A generous Race aspires
"Unto the Worth and Virtue of their Sires.
So the great Herds small Play-fellow, which now
Sports in the Pastures with scarce budded Brow,
Strait with advanced Crest and armed Head,
Commands the Flock which late his Father led.
And so the tender Sprout of some tall Tree
Late felled, shoots up in a short time to be
Equal to that from whence it sprung, and lends
To Earth a Shade, to Heaven its Boughs extends.
So the small Ashes of a mighty Fire
Carelessly left, into new Flames aspire.
"Grief does indeed matters unjustly state,
"And makes of things but a wrong Estimate.
Yet if our Case you duly shall perpend,
You Will not think strange if after ten Years end,
The Old Soldier spent with Toil new Wars should fear,
And never enough ruined Troy; for never
Can we enjoy Security of Mind,
Our selves not safe, whilst still we fear to find
Another Hector in Astyanax.
Then rid us of this Terror that thus wracks
Our thoughts. This is the only cause of stay
Unto our Fleet, ready to wing its way.
Nor think me cruel 'cause by Fates compelled
I Hectors Son require; had Heaven so willed,
I had as soon asked Agamemnon's Son.] Orestes, who was formerly called Ach^us,
according to Plutarch de Orac. Pyth. Ptolem^us Hephaestion ( apud Photium)
reports he was born upon the Feast Day of Ceres, surnamed Erinnys, thereby
presaging, that he should one day be tormented by Furies, as he happened to be,
for the Murder of his Mother Clytemnestra, and her Adulterer Aegysthus, in
revenge of his Fathers Death by them contrived.
Agamemnon's Son,
Then suffer what the Victors self has done.

Andromache. Would God, dear Child, I had thee in my Hand,
Or knew thy present Fortune, or what Land
Now harbors thee; though Swords transpierc'd my Breast,
Though galling Chains my captived Hands oppressed,
Or Flames beset me round, they never should move
Me yet to quit a Mothers Faith or Love.
Poor Infant, O where art thou? what strange Fate
Is fallen on thee? wandrest thou desolate
In untrac'd Fields? or perishedst thou, my Joy,
Amidst the Smoke and Flames of burning Troy?
Or has the Victor in a wanton Mood
Of Cruelty played with thy Childish Blood,
And murdered thee in sport? Or by some Beast
Slain, do thy Limbs Idaean Vultures feast?

Ulysses. Come, come, dissemble not; it is hard to cheat
Ulysses: Know we can the The Plots defeat Of Mothers, although Goddesses.]
Alluding to the Design of Thetis in concealing her Son Achilles, to prevent his
going to the Tr^jan War, which by Ulysses was detected and defeated.
Plots defeat
Of Mothers although Goddesses. ^ay
With these vain shifts, and where thy Son is, say.

Andromache. Where Is Hector? Priam? all the Trojans? You
For one ask, I for all.

Ulysses. Torture shall scrue,
Since our Persuasions cannot gain a free,
A forced Confession from thee.

Andromache. Alas she
Is against the worst of Fate secured still,
That die not only can, but ought, and will.

Ulysses. These Boasts at Deaths approach will quickly fly.


Andromache. No, Ithacus; if me thou would terrify,
Threaten me Life, for Death's my wish.

Ulysses. Fire, Blows,
And Tortures shall enforce thee to disclose
The Secrets of thy Breast. "Oft-times we see
"Severity works more than Lenity.

Andromache. Doom me to Flames, dissect with Wounds, and try
All torturing Arts that witty Cruelty
Did e're devise; Thirst, Famine, all Plagues, through
My Bowels burning Irons thrust; or mue
Me up in some dark noisome Dungeon: And
(If yet you think not these enough) command
Whatever Cruelties on captived Foes
A haughty barbarous Victor dare impose:
No Tortures e're shall a Confession wrest,
Nor Terrors daunt my stout Maternal Breast.

Ulysses. This obstinate Love thou to thy Child do bear
Warns all the Greeks to like Parental Care.
After a War so far, so long, loss I
Should fear the Ills Calchas does prophecy,
Feared I but for my self: but it is not us
Thou threatst alone, but my My Telemachus.] Telemachus was the Son of Ulysses
and Penelope, born a little before he went to the Trojan War, who therefore
(according to Eustat^ius in ^. Odyss.) at his parting gave him that Name, as
desiring he might lead his Life (...), far from the hazards of War and Battles,
which he himself was unfortunately enforced then to undergo.
Telemachus.

Andromache. And must I comfort then afford my Foes
Against my will? I must. -- Sorrow disclose
Thy hidden Griefs. Now ye Atrides cheer!
And be thou still to Greeks the Messenger
Of happy News, Great Hector's Son is dead.

Ulysses. Where be the Proofs may make this credited?


Andromache. So fall on me what e're the Victor's Rage
May threat; so Fates to my maturer Age
An easy close; and where I had my Birth
Afford me Burial: So may the Earth
Lie light on Hector's Bones, as he bereaved
Of Light lies amongst the Dead, and has received
The dues of Funeral.

Ulysses. Fate's in his Fate
Accomplished, and firm Peace to Greece, then strait
Pronounce, Ulysses. -- Stay, fond Man, what do?
Shall Grecians thee, and thou a Mother trust?
Perhaps she feigns, nor fears her dreadful Curse.
Fear Imprecations they that fear naught worse.
She Has sworn it is true; if so, then her Sons loss
What can she fear to her a heavier Cross?
Now ^mmon all thy slights together; be
Wholly Ulysses. Truth's never hid long. We
Must sift her thoroughly. -- See, she weeps, sighs, mourns,
With anxious steps, now this, now that way turns.
And our words catches with a heedful Ear;
We must use Art, she does not grieve, but fear.
That with the sorrows of some Mothers we
Condole it is fit, but we must gratulate thee,
Happy in misery and thy Sons loss!
For whom a heavier Death intended was,
Who from that lofty Tower which now alone
Remains of Troy was destined to be thrown.

Andromache. My Heart faints, Fear shakes all my Joints, a cold
Congealing Frost upon my Blood lays hold.

Ulysses. See, see, she trembles; this must be the way.
Her Fears a Mothers Love in her betray.
I Will fright her further yet. -- Go, search with speed
This Foe, that by his Mothers Fraud is hid,
This only Plague of Greece; find him where e're
He lies. -- So, have y'him? bring him here.
Why lookst thou back and tremblest? -- Now he dies.

To himself. Andromache. Would God this Fear from present grounds did rise;
Alas, it is with us habitual. "The Mind
"From what it long has learnt is late declined.

Ulysses. Since thy Sons better Fate prevented has
The Lustral Sacrifice, thus Calchas says,
Our Fleet may hope return if we appease
With Hector's Ashes the incensed Seas,
And raze his Monument unto the Ground.
Now since the Son by death a way has found
To escape the Justice of his destined doom,
We must exact it from his Father's Tomb.

Andromache. What shall I do? my Mind a double Fear
Distracts; here my poor Child, the Ashes there
Of my dear Husband. Which shall I first prize?
Bear witness ye relentless Deities,
And thy blessed Manes, real Gods to me!
Naught, Hector, in my Son I pleasing see
But thy self only: Long then may he live
Thy Representative. -- And shall I give
My Husband's Ashes to the Waves? Over vast
Seas suffer that his rifled Bones be cast?
Let the other rather die. -- And can thou be
Spectatress of thy own Child's Tragedy?
See him thrown headlong from the Tower's steep height?
I can and will, rather than Hector yet
Be after death the Victor's Spoil again.
Think yet this lives, has sense, can feel his pain,
Whilst the other Fates from Ills secured have.
Why staggerest thou? resolve strait which to save.
Ungrateful, doubt'st thou? there thy Hector is.
Mistaken Wretch, either is Hector: This
Yet young and living, who in time may be
Th'Avenger of his Father's death. -- Still we
Cannot save both. -- Resolve of the two however
To save him yet whom most the Grecians fear.

Ulysses. The Prophet's words shall be fulfilled; the place
I will demolish.

Andromache. Which ye Sold-


Ulysses. Deface
The Monument.

Andromache. The Faith of Gods and thee,
Achilles, we appeal to. Pyrrhus, see
Thy Father's Gift made good.

Ulysses. Down it shall go,
And with its Ruins the wide Champain strew.

Andromache. No Wickedness ye Greeks have you refrained,
But this alone; Temples you have profaned,
And Gods propitious to you; yet ye you spared
The Mansions of the Dead. I amprepar'd
To hinder their intent, and will oppose
With weak unarmed Hands these armed Foes.
Anger and Indignation strengthen me!
Penthesilea like I Will amongst them fly,
Or Mad Agave.] Daughter of Cadmus and Hermione, Wife of Echion, and Mother of
Pentbeus Prince of Thebes, an Enemy to the Bacchan^lian Festivals. Whereupon
his Mother Agave, distracted with the fury of Bacchus, together with her
Sisters, supposing him a wild Bore, fell upon him, and transfixed him with
their Javelins, then cut him in pieces. See the Fable at large in Ovid: Metam.
l. 3. and Hyginus de Fab. c. 184.
mad Agave, that the Woods did trace,
Shaking her Thyrsus with a frantic pace,
Dealing dire Wounds insensibly, and by
Defending bear his Ashes company.

Ulysses. What does a Woman's passion move your hearts,
And vainer Cries? On Slaves, and ply your parts.

Andromache. First by your bloody hands let me be slain.
Up from Avernus! break thy fatal Chain;
Rise, Hector, rise, Ulysses to subdue,
Thy Ghost alone will be sufficient. View
How Arms he brandishes! how Flames do fly
From his stout Hands! See y'him? Or is it I
That see him only?

Ulysses. Down with it to the Ground.


Andromache. What do? wilt see one Ruin then confound
Father and Son* Perhaps my prayers may yet
Appease them; strait resolve, or else the weight
Of The falling Tomb will crush thy Child to death.
First lose he any where his wretched Breath,
Or e're the Father the Son's ruin be,
Or Son the Father's. -- Thus, Ulysses, we
Low as thy Knees fall.] Supplicants among the Ancients, in grave and capital
cases, were wont to embrace the Knees of those whom they supplicated; they
conceiving a kind of Reverence due to those Parts; fortasse quia inest iis
vitalitas, says Pli^y: In regard, as he adds, on either side of them there is a
certain Concavity or Hollowness, which if pierced lets out Life as if ones
Throat were cut. And therefore, says he, H^c supplices allingunt, ad haec manus
te^unt, haec ut aras adorant. Hence the supplicating Formulae, Per tua obsecro
genua, P^r haec genua te obtestor; of which in Brissonius l. 8. They used
likewise, besides laying hold of the Knees with one Hand, to touch the Chin
with the other; but this was peculiar only to the Greeks. It was usual
likewise to lay their Hands by way of Submission under the Feet of those whose
Mercy they implored, as is here intimated, and sometimes to kiss them. Some
give the reason of these different Applications, for they touched the Head,
Beard, or Chin, quando consensum expetebant. The Hands quaado Auxilium the
Knees quando felicem successum rerum, says Schmidius in Pindar. Nem. Od. ^. The
Jews used to put their Hand under the Thigh of him whom they craved favor
from. To these submissive Deportments they added their Tears; whence that of
Claudian. de Rapt. Proserp. l. 8. -- Genibusque suas cum supplice ^etu
Admovere manus. --
But of this see more in Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 2. c. 19. and his
learned Commentator Tiraquel* Stuckius de S^rif. Gentil. p. 87. La Cerda in
Virg. (...). 3. and 10. and Josephus Laurentius in his Polymathia l. 1.
dissert. 27. where the several Circumstances relating to this matter are
particularly handled.
Low as thy Knees fall, and beneath thy Feet
These Hands (which yet no Man's e're touched) submit.
Pity a Mother's woes, with patience hear
Her pious plaints, and lend a gentle Ear.
"And how much higher Heaven has advanced thy state,
"So much the less depress a Wretches fate.
"When to the Miserable we extend
"Our Charity, we unto Fortune lend.
So to the chaste Embraces of thy Wife
May thou in peace return, and Fates the life
Of old Laertes till that day extend.
So may thy Son, thy Age's hope, transcend
Thy hopes and wishes, live more Years to see
Than has his Grandsire, wiser prove than thee.
O pity! all my comfort's in this Boy.

Ulysses. Produce him first, then what you ask enjoy.


SCENE III.
Ulysses, Andromache, Astyanax.
Andromache. FOrth from the hollow Entrals of the Tomb
Thou wretched Theft of thy sad Mother come!
The Terror of a thousand Ships here see,
Ulysses, this poor Child! down on thy Knee,
Thy Lord with humble reverence adore,
And Mercy with submissive hands implore.
Nor think it shame for Wretches to submit
To what e're Fortune wills; the thoughts now quit
Of thy great Ancestors, nor Priam call
To mind, nor his great Power; forget it all,
And Hector too: assume a Captives state.
And though unsensible of thy own fate,
Poor Wretch, thou be, yet from our sense of woes
Example take, weep as thy Mother does.
It Is not the first time Troy has seen her Prince
Shed tears: so Priam, when a Child long since
The wrath of Stern Alcides pacified.] Hercules having taken Troy, and slain
Laomedon, gave his Daughter Hesione to Telamon, with further assurance, that
those among the Captives, whom she should desire to be released, should be
granted her. Whereupon she desired that her Brother (...) then a Child should
be given her. Hercules replied, that he was then to be made a Slave. Upon which
pulling off her rich Veil from her ^ead, she therewith ransomed him. Whence he
was afterward called ^iamus, (...). from his being so redeemed, and was by
Her^les not only restored to his Liberty, but also to his Kingdom. See (...)
Fab. 89. and Apollodorus Biblioth. l. 2. and Tze^zes in Lycophro^. But Diodorus
Siculus lib. 4. reports, that he was restored to his Kingdom by Hercules, for
the Justice and Kindness sh^wn to Hercules his Ambassadors, whom his Father had
imprisoned, to whom he afforded the means of making their Escape. For which
Hercules, after he had taken Troy, and slain Laomedon, seated him on his
Father's Throne.
stern Alcides pacified;
He who so fierce was, who in strength outvy'd
Even Monsters, who from Hell's forced Gates could yet
Through ways impervious open a Retreat:
Quelled by the Tears of his small Enemy;
Resume (says he) thy former Royalty,
And in thy Father's Throne and Empire reign.
But Faith more firmly than he did, maintain.
Happy that such a Victor him did seize!
Learn thou the gentle wrath of Hercules.
Or only please his Arms? See before thine eyes
No less a Suppliant than that Suppliant lies;
And begs but only Life, his Crown and State
He leaves to Fortune and the will of Fate.

Ulysses. Trust me the Mothers Sorrow moves me much,
But nearer me the Grecian Mothers touch,
To whose no little Grief this Child aspires.

Andromache. And shall he then the Ruins which these Fires
Have made, repair? these Hands erect Troy's Fall?
Poor are the hopes she has if these be all.
We Trojans are not so subdued, that yet
We should to any be a Fear: is it Great
Hector in him you look at? think withal,
That Hector yet was dragged 'bout Ilium's Wall.
Nay he himself, did he now live to see
Troy's Fate, would of an humbler Spirit be.
"Great Minds by pressures of great Ills are broke.
Or would you punish? Than a Slavish Yoke
What to free Necks more grievous? let him bring
His Mind to serve. This who will deny a King?

Ulysses. Not we, but Calchas this denies to thee.


Andromache. O thou damned Author of all Villainy!
Thou by whose Valor none yet ever died,
Whose Treacheries the Greeks themselves have tried.
The Prophet and the abused Deities
Do thou pretend? No, 't's thine own Enterprise,
Thou base Night-Souldier. Thou whose Manhoods proof
The Sun never witnessed; only stout enough
To kill a Child: Now thou may brag and say,
Thou have dared something yet in open day.

Ulysses. Enough the Greeks, too well the Trojans, know
Ulysses worth; but time we cannot now
Spend in vain talk. The Fleet does Anchor weigh.

Andromache. Yet so much time afford us, as to pay
A Mother's last dues to my dying Boy;
And by our strict Embraces satisfy
My greedy Sorrows.

Ulysses. Would our power could give
Thy woes relief; yet what we can receive,
As long a time as thou thy self shall please
To part and weep. "Tears Sorrow's burden ease.

Andromache. O thou sweet Pledge of all my hopes! the Grace
Of a now ruined, but once glorious Race!
Terror of Greece! the Period of all
Thy Countries Ruins! her last Funeral!
Vain Comfort of thy wretched Mother, who
(Fondly God knows) of Heaven did often sue,
Thou might in war thy Father equallize,
In peace thy Grandsire; but Heaven both denies.
The Ilian Scepter thou shall never sway,
Nor shall the Phrygian Realms thy Laws obey,
Nor conquered Nations stoop thy Yoke to bear.
The Greeks thou never shall foil, nor Pyrrhus e're,
T'avenge thy Sire, at thy proud Chariot trail:
Nor with light brandished Arms wild Beasts assail
In the wide Forests: nor, when e're it falls,
Shall solemnize Troy's chief of Festivals,
And Well trained Troops in noble Motions lead] This was that kind of Exercise
which was called Troja, proper to the Phrygians, being an imitation of a Fight
on Horseback, with nimble motions and turnings in exact time and measure; which
Asca^us is said to have instituted at his building of long Alba, in
commemoration of what was used to be practiced in his Native Country, and is
described by Virgil Aeneid 5. This Servius will have to be the same with that
which they call the Pyrrhick Dance, but erroneously, as Meursius in his
Orchestra, and Salmasius in Exerc. Plinian have noted. For the Pyrrhick Dance
was Saltatio Pedestris, this Lusus Equestris; the former was performed by Men
and Women mixed together on Foot; the later only by Youths on Horseback. The
former was invented by Pyrrhus Son of Achilles, or Pyrrhicus the Lacedemonian;
the other not invented, but renovated by Ascanius. La Cerda from the Authority
of Wolfang. L^zius, conceives the Original of Tournaments to come from this
Trojan Exercise, and to be called Torneamenta, quasi Trojamenta, with what
probability let the Reader judge.
well trained Troops in noble Motions lead:
Nor 'bout the sacred Altars nimbly tread;
And when exciting Notes shrill Cornets sound,
In In Phrygian Temples dance an antic round.] Dancing was a part of the
Religious Worship of the ancient Ethnicks. What kind of Dance yet is here
particularly meant is not easily determined; unless it be that which was called
(...), being a lofty kind of Dance, and seems to be appropriated to the Honor
of Apollo, as Meursius in Orchestra, from the Authority of Menander the
Rhetorician, tells us; and was so called, because they sung and danced about
the Altar while the Sacrifice was burning. Which Dance was thus ordered: First
they moved from the left hand to the right, then from the right they turned
again to the left. The former Motion was in imitation of that of the Zodiac,
the later in conformity to that of the Heavens Lastly, they danced and skipped
round about the Altar. And this was done in a mixed Company of Men and Women,
according to the Testimony of Athenaus l. 14. But perhaps here is rather meant
the Saltatio Corybantia, in Hor^our of Cybele the Phrygian Goddess, who was
particularly affected with those kinds of Measures; of which see Lucian (...),
De Saltatione.
Phrygian Temples dance an antic round.
A Death than Death it self more sad, for thee
Remains; and Trojan Walls shall something see
More woeful yet than Hector dragged.

Ulysses. Here close
Thy mournful plaints; immoderate sorrow knows
No bounds.

Andromache. The time we for our Tears demand
Alas is small; permit yet with this Hand
I close his Eyes in life though not in death.
Dear Child, although so young thou lose thy breath,
Yet thou dy'st feared. Go, thy Troy looks for thee;
Go, and in freedom thy free Trojans see.

Astyanax. O pity, Mother!


Andromache. Alas, why do thou wring
My Hand, and to my Side (vain refuge!) cling?
As when a sucking Fawn a Lion spies,
Or roaring hears, strait to the Hind it flies:
Yet the fierce Beast frighting the Dam away,
With murdering Fangs seizes the tender prey.
So from my Bosom will the cruel Foe
Drag thee, poor Child! Yet (Dearest) e're thou go
Take my last Kisses, Tears, and this torn Hair;
Then to thy Father full of me repair.
Tell him, if former passions Ghosts do move,
Nor Funeral Flames extinguish those of Love,
Hector is much to blame, to let his Wife
Enthralled by Greeks, thus lead a Servile Life,
Though he lie still, Achilles yet could rise.
Take from my Head again, and from my Eyes,
These Tears and Tresses; all that now is left
Andromache, of Hector since berest.
These Kisses to thy Father bear from me:
But leave this Robe, that may some Comfort be
(When thou art gone) to thy poor Mother; this
Did thy Sire's Tomb and sacred Ashes kiss:
So shall these Lips, if any Relics here
Of their loved Dust, yet unshook off, appear.

Ulysses. She Will never have done; -- "Grief knows not what is fit.
Bear hence this stop of the Arg^lic Fleet.

CHORUS. WHat Seats shall We poor Captives find?
Where are our new Abodes designed?
Planted in Hilly Thessaly.] A most celebrated, but hilly Region of Greece,
wherein are the Famous Mountains of Ossa, Pelion, and Olympus, on the North;
Oeta, and Othrys on the South; and Pindus, on the West, anciently called
Pelasgia; by which name, and Pelasgion Argos, it is only known in Homer. And
therefore Seneca here, and other Writers, who make mention of Thessaly, within
the compass of the Trojan times, do it by a kind of Prolepsis, as is noted by
Pinedo, upon Steph. de Ur^ibus, in voce (...). It is known in Poetical Stories,
by several Names, being called Pyrrhaea, from Pyrrha, the Wife of Deucalion; as
Pand^ra, from his Mother; Aemonia, from Aemon; Nesonis, from Neson, the Son of
Thessalus; and from Thessalus, the Son of Aemon (according to Strabo l. 9.) or
(according to Diod. Siculus l. 4.) of Jason and Medea, Thessalia. It was
anciently divided into four Parts, Phthiotis, (...), Thessaliotis, and
Pelasgiotis. The Modern vulgar Names, by which it is known, are diverse; being
by Castaldus called, Comenolitari; by Antonius Geufraus, Theumenestia; by
Lazius, Lamina, as both Orte^us and Ferrarius affirm. But the most vulgar name,
by which, (according to Br^etius) it is known amongst the Turks (now Lords
thereof) is Ianna.
hilly Thessalie,
Or shady Shady Tempe.] A most pleasant part of Thessaly, lying in a delightful
Valley, through which the River Peneus glides, hemmed about by Hills and Woods,
elegantly described by Aelian ( Var. Hist. l. 3. c. 1.) here called Opa^a
Tempe, and by Statius, and Lucan, Umbrosa, Nemorosaque Tempe: Its name,
according to the excellently-learned Doctor Isaac Vossius, Observe. in Melam,
being derived a regione loci. And therefore Mela thus speaks of it, Hic sacro
Nemore nobilia Tempe. For a (...), and by contraction, (...), and thence,
according to the Aeolick Dialect. changing (...) into (...), (...), signifies
lucum vel fanum; where the People offered Sacrifice, and performed divine Rites
continually. Which unintermined Worship of the Gods (to use Aelian's words)
made the place sacred.
Tempe shall we be?
Or sent to Phthia.] A City and Region of Thessaly, so called, according to
Stephanus, de Urb. from Phthius, the Son of Neptune and Larissa, the
birthplace of Achilles, whence, by Horace, he is called Phthius Achilles,
sam'd for the breeding of good Soldiers. Palmerlus, ( in Exerc. p. 404.) from
the Authority of Pausanias, tells us, that anciently, there were two Phthia's,
one in Thessaly, of which Protesilaus was Prince, whose Inhabitants were called
(...). The other, in Achaia Phthiotide, whose Inhabitants were called (...), of
which Achilles was Lord. To confirm which, he cites the Author of the brief
Scholia's upon Homer. Iliad. (...).
Phthia's rugged Fields?
Phthia, which stoutest Soldiers yields.
Or stony Stony Trachin.] A City of Phocis, according to Strabo; according to
Stephanus, of Thessaly, seated under Mount Oeta, built by Hercules, and so
called, from the roughness and asperity of its soil and situation.
Trachy's? fitter Place
For Cattle of a hardy Race.
Shall us Iolchos] A City of Thessaly, so called from Iolchus the Son of
A^yrus, the Birthplace of Jason, from whence he with the Minya set sail in the
first Ship Argo, under the Conduct of Typhis, for the Golden Fleece, as the
Poets fable. Though to speak trulier, the Argonauts set sail from Pagasae, the
Port where Argo was built, and not from Iolchus, which was seated within the
Land 30 stadia, di ^ ant from the Sea or the Pagasaean Bay. Its modern name is
Iaco. according to the Testimony of Ferrarius.
Iolchos entertain,
Proud in the Conquest of the Main?
Or Creet, whose spacious Land is round
With Creet, etc.] An Island in the Mediterranean Sea, more known than that it
needs here to be described; heretosore from the number of its Cities called
Hecatompolis.
hundred of fair Cities crowned?
Or barren Tricca.] A City of Thessaly, so denominated from Tricca the Daughter
of Peneus; (at this day called Tricala, according to Sophianus) an Episcopal
See under the Metropolitan of Larissa: And in nothing more famous, than that
Heliodorus (the incomparable Author of The Fair Ethiopian) there sat Bishop
in the time of Arcadius and Honorius Emperors; the Honor of which he is said
rather to have parted with, than with the Reputation of having been Author of
that most (...) Piece, if we may believe Nicephorus. The truth of which (...)
much doubted of by the Learned Monsieur Hue^ius, in his (...) l'Origine des
Romans.
Tricca? small Gyrton.] A City of Macedonia in the Region of Stymphalia, not
far from the Lake and City of Lychnidus, to the East; by Strabo called
^blegyiae, by Pausanias, Andreis, at this day Tachi Volicati, according to
Nardus, as Ferrarius testifies. The Vulgar Editions have in the Original
Gorty^e, but we are beholding to Gronovius for this truer reading.
Gyrton?
Or Modon.] A City of Peloponnesus on the borders of Messenia Southwest,
heretofore called Metbone, at this day by the Turks, Moytune, part of the
Territories of Philoctetes, according to Homer Iliad. 2. and (...) l. 9. at
this time in a flourishing condition, being a Praefectship of the Turks, and a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of P^tras. There is another Metbone of
Thrace, which Stephanus confounds with this; but see the Error rectified by
Pi^edo.
Modon with light Bents o'regrown?
Or the The Oetoean Woods recess.] Melibae^ a City seated in the recess of a
large Bay at the foot of the Mountains Ossa and ^elion, and within the
Promontory sepias, according to Mela l. 2. c. 3. ennobled by the Birth of
Philoctetes, to whom Hercules bequeathed his fatal Shafts that were to be
employed against Troy, (built by Magnes the Great-Grand-Son of Aeolus, and
Father of Hymenaus, according to Antonius Liberalis) and so called from the
Name of his Wife, as Eustathius in Iliad. 2. testifies.
Oetoean Woods Recess,
Which more than once to Troy's Distress
Shafts Fatal sent? Or must we store
Thin-peopl'd Thin-peopled Olenos.] A City of Achaia so called from Olenus the
Son of Jupiter and Anaxi^ea, one of the Danaides according to Stephanus, from
the Authority of Ister in Egypt. Coloniis. Or as others will, from Olenos the
Son of Vulcan, its Founder; here said to be thin-peopled. Which answers to what
Pausanias in Achaic. writes of it, where he says, That it appears by the
Elegies of Hermesianax, that it was from the beginning (...), but a small Town;
and in process of time deserted by its Inhabitants, (...), by reason of its
debility. For we find, that in Strabo's time it was totally deserted, being
transferred to Dymae, the Ruins thereof (as he says) appearing between Patrae
and Dymae. There is likewise another place in Aetolia, of the same name,
mentioned by Homer Iliad. 2.
Olenos with more?
Or unto Pleuron] A City of Aetolia, by St^ius ( ^heb. l. 4.) called Meleagria
Pleuron, as if by him built, or rather because he was there born. Strabo l. 10.
says, there were two Cities of the same name, the Old and the New; his words
are to this purpose: Near to Aracynthus the Inhabitants built the new Pleuron,
leaving the old, which lay near to Calydon, in a fertile and plain soil, when
that Region was wasted by Demetrius surnamed Aetolicus. It is at this day
called Bozichistran, (according to the Testimony of S. Gall) in a Manuscript of
Cardinal Barberine's Library, cited by Baudrand. in Ferrar. Diana was an Enemy
to this Town, in regard Oeneus, when Prince thereof, sacrificing of the first
fruits of his Land to the Celestial Deities, omitted her: whereupon she sent
the Calydonian Bore to waste and ravage his Country; of which the Fable is
sufficiently known in Ovid. Met. l. 8.
Pleuron shall wego,
Pleuron the Virgin Dians Foe?
Or to fair-harbour'd Fair harbored Trazen.] The Original of this Town is much
to this effect delivered by Pausanias in Corinthiac. Hyperes and Anthas Sons of
Neptune and Alcyone, Daughter of Atlas, founded in Peloponnesus two Towns,
called after their names Hypere^ and Anthea. Afterward Traezen and Pitheus
Sons of Pelops, having their Seats in the neighboring Territory, soon made
themselves Masters of the said Towns; and Pitheus uniting them into one City,
gave it the Name of Traezen from his Brother Traezen, not long before deceased;
being also called Aphrodisias, Saronica, Posidonias, and Apollonias, as is
mentioned by Stephanus de Urbibus. Its Situation according to Strabo being 15
stadia from the Sea, where it has a fair Port, heretofore called Portus
Saronicus, and Pogonus, in Greek (...) signifying a Beard; whence grew the
Proverb of sending Beardless people (...), unto Traezen; of which see Suidas in
voce (...). Traezen at this day according to Niger is vulgarly called Damala,
according to Castaldus, Pleda.
Traezen get?
Or Pelion.] A noted Mountain of Thessaly contiguous to Ossa and Olympus, at
this day (according to Io. Tze^zes) called Petras, which Dica^rcbus Siculus (as
liny l. 2. reports) sound, by the measure of its Perpendicular, to be 1250
Paces higher than any other Mountain of Thessaly, though Pliny seems withal to
doubt the truth of this Assertion.
Pelion, Prothous proud seat.] The Vulgar Latin Editions have instead of
Prothous Proteus, but erroneously; which error Gronovius by the help of the
Florentine Manuscript has rectified. Prothous was Commander of the Magnetians
in the Trojan War, mentioned by Homer Iliad. 2. in these Verses. (...),
(...).
Prothous, Teuthredon's Son, the Magnets led,
Near Peneus and shady Pelion bred.

Prothous proud Seat?
Third step to Heaven, where Chiron laid
In's Cell, which eating Time had made.] The Original has, montis exesi antro;
where we may take notice of the different acceptions of the words antrum,
caverna, and spelunca. As to the first we find according to Ammonius, (...)
esse (...), a spontaneous or natural Cavity. The difference between caverna and
spelunca some make to be this, that the former is made by cutting into a Rock,
the other an accidental foramen of the Earth. Others will have the former to be
natural, and the later artificial or the work of hands. So Ammonius, (...). Now
which of these was this Cell of Chiron, Statius in 1. Achilleid. will best
inform us, where he thus describes it: -- Domus ardua montem
Perforat, and certo suspendit Pelion Arcu,
Pars exhausta manu, partem sua ruperat ^tas.
Where we see the Poet's Ingenuity has united and reconciled the several
differences.
In's Cell, which eating Time had made
In the Hills side, often used to whet
His Achilles.
Pupil's Courage, (then too great)
By singing to his Harp's tuned strings
Battles and bloody Bickerings?
Or make Carystus.] A Maritim City of Eub^a, on the South of the said Island,
at the foot of the Hill Ocha, looking to the Myrtoan Sea; so called from
Carystus the Son of Chiron, whence (says Stephanus) by Theodoridas it is called
Chironia, famous for rich Quarries of Marble, the most eminent and noted being
that of a Seagreen color, of which Statius; -- concolor alto Venaemari -- And
elsewhere, -- gaudens fluctus ^quare ( or fluctu cer^are) Carystus. As
Salmasius ( Notis in Iul Capitolin.) reads and corrects the Verse.
Caristus, rich in vein'd
Marble, with various colors stained?
Or Chalcis.] The chief City of Euboea, seated upon the Euripus, at this day
called Negroponte, by the modern Greeks Egripos, by the Turks Egribis, as
Leunclavius affirms; and so they call the Euripus upon which it is seated.
Whence Sponius (in his Voyages) conceives the Original of that corrupt name
Nigroponte to arise. For the ^ranks (as he notes) at their first coming into
these parts, hearing the Islanders say when they went to this Town, (...), i.
e. to Egripos, from their misunderstood Dialect, and their corrupt
pronuntiation thereof, clapping the last letter in (...) to the beginning of
Egripos, they formed this name Negroponte. Which seems to afford a better
Original of the name than that of the Italians, who call it Nigroponte, from I
know not what Bridge of black stone, which never was nor is now to be sound.
The old Chalcis seems to be so called according to Stephanus, from Comb the
Daughter of Asopus, called likewise Chalcis; o^ as he says, (...), from
Brass-works or ^ounderies there first set up: Or as Bochartus ( in C^anaan l.
1. c. 13.) would rather have it from the Phoenician word ^lakin, which
signifies to divide, Quia medium spatium inter Chalci^em and Baeoticam impetu
maris divisum est, and per angustiam (...), (says he) as Sicily from Rhegium,
so called a rumpendo, which in Greek is (...). Stephanus reckons up four other
Cities of the same name; one in the Territory of Corinth, another in. Ae^olia,
a third in Syria, and a fourth in S^ythia. See likewise Sam. Tenullius Notis in
(...). Chalcidens; in Nicomach. Arithm. p. 63, 64.
Chalcis, placed on a rough Shore,
Where the swift Euripus does roar.] A narrow Strait of the (...) Sea, running
with a violent Eddy between Boeotia and the Island Eub^s, at this day called
Stretto di Negroponte, famous for its wonderful Tides, of which Mela, Livy,
Strabo, Pliny, Sui^as, have written, but diversely; some reporting it to flow
and ebb six times, some seven, some no less than 14 times in 24 hours. But no
better Account can be given hereof, than what is delivered by a late Learned
Jesuit Paul Babin, in a Letter of his inserted by Sponius, in his Voyage into
the Levant, and confirmed by his own experience. According to w^om the Euripus
is said to have two sorts of Tides, the one regular and common with the Ocean,
the other irregular and extraordinary; of which he gives this following Table,
respecting the several phases of the Moon, viz. From the first day of the N^w
Moon to the eighth following it is regular; from thence (beginning with the
first Quarter) to the thirteenth day it is irregular, f^owing 12, 13, or 14
times, and as often ebbing in 24 hours. From thence (about Full Moon) to the
twentieth day following it is regular again. Then commencing with the last
Quarter to the twenty sixth day it continues irregular; after that reassuming
its regular course. So that in every Moon there are reckoned 11 days of
^regular, and 18 or 19 days of regular motion. Of the Cause of this strange
Effect, partly proceeding from Winds, partly from the Influence of the Moon and
Eddy-like motions of the Ocean's intercepted waters in that narrow Strait, see
the Observations of the most Learned Doctor Isaac Vossius, in McIam, l. 2. c. 7
p. 211.
Euripus does roar?
Or shelter in Calydnae] And Island seated by Strabo near Tenedos in the Aegean
Sea. Hesychius places it not far from Rbodes: so called according to Stephanus
from Calydnus the Son of Coelus. Others make two Islands of that name, among
whom Lycophron in Cassandra, who from them brings the Snakes that murdered the
Sons of Laoc^on: as Quintus Smyrnaus likewise, lib. 12. who makes yet but one
Island of it, and calls it Calydna: and Eustathius (ad Iliad. 2.) says it was
called Calydnae plurally, as (...) and Athen^: being likewise called Calymna
and Calymnia, ^amous for excellent Hone^, according to Ovid. Met. l. 8. --
F^cus da que me^e Calydna: Whence Mel Calyd^ium and (...).
Calydnae find,
Easily reached by any wind?
Or Gonoessa.] A City of Perrhibae^ according to Stephanus Hom. Il. 2. and
Eustathius upon him makes it a Promontory of Pellene, or a City there seated,
calling it (...), altam Gonoessam. By reason of which situation it is (as our
Author adds) much exposed to Winds and Tempells. Pausanias in Corinth. calls it
Gonussa, and makes it a City seated above Sicyon; and in Acbaic. will have its
true name to be Donussa, telling us that Pisistratus, or whoever was employed
by him in collecting the scattered Verses of Homer together, through ignorance
corrupted its name. Lycophro^ mentions it ad verse. 869. upon which his
Commentator Tzetzes makes it a City of Thessaly, and adds, that there was a
Lake of the same name in Sicily, to which Menelaus in his wandering course was
driven.
Gonoessa, which never fails
Of stormy Blasts and blustering Gales?
Or to Enispae.] A City of Arcadia, according to Stephanus, and (as he adds) by
some made to be a City of Cletoria or Phocis, mentioned by Homer Iliad. 2.
where he calls it (...), which Statius (The^aid. l. 4.) has imitated, where it
is by him called Ventosa Enispe. Pausanias in Arcadicis writes, that it was by
some reported to have been an Island in the River Ladon, as Statia and Rhipe
were; but he censures it for a very Erroneous Opinion. Strabo l. 8. writes,
that both Enispae and the other two were long before his time so utterly
ruined, that no remains of them were possibly to be found.
Enispae shall we steer,
Which Boreas angry Breath does fear?
For Sea-girt Peparethos.] An Island in the Aegean Sea, one of the Cyclades
over against the Coast of Magnesia, as Strabo l. 3. and 9. places it. Pliny l.
4. c. 12. places it over against Mount Athos; Athos (says he) ante se habet
insulas quatuor, Peparethum cum oppido, quondam Euoenum dictam, for the noble
Wine it yielded. It is by Ovid Met l. 7. celebrated likewise for its Fertility
in Olives in this Verse; -- nitidaeque ferax Peparethos Olivae. It is by Niger
called Lemene, by Castaldus Saraquino, by others Opula. But part of its old
name seems yet to adhere to it; for in the Vulgar Nautical Tables it is called
Peperi, according to Ferrarius and Bau^rand.
Peparethos stand,
Which lies against Acte's pointed Land.] In all the Latin Originals the Verse
is thus read: -- Attica pendens Peparethos or a. by an unexcusable Error in
Seneca (as Gronovius censures it) as inconsisistent with Geographical
exactness. This Delrius long since observed, and therefore instead of Attica
supposes it might be better read Actia, from Act a Promontory and City of
Magnesia, of which Stephanus in voce (...). Where he likewise adds, that
Demetrius remembers by that name the Region and Shore by Mount Athos, over
against which and Magnesia, Geographers place the Island of Peparethos. Which
Conjecture grounded upon fair probability we have followed in our Version.
Acte's pointed Land?
Or seek Eleusis.] A Maritime City of Attica seated between M^gara and Portus
^us, so called (...), ab adventu Cereri^. For Ceres in search after Proserpina
came thither, and was kindly received by Celeus; in requital of which she
showed to his Son Trip^olemus the way of sowing Corn* Though others report it
was so called from Eleusis or Eleusi^ the Son of Mercury and Da^ra, Daughter of
Oceanus, whom some will have to be the Father of Triptolemus. At this day it is
called Seps^a, as Sophianus testifies, and famous for the Temple of C^res,
where the Ele^inian Mysteries were celebrated, built by I^ynus, and (as Strabo
l. 9. reports) capable of as much ^ompany as any Theater.
Eleusis through the Deep,
Where Silent Mysteries.] The Eleusinian Rites and Ceremonies were (...) called
Mysteria, and observed with so great secrecy, that it was death for any one to
reveal them as is manifest by the story of Diagoras Melius his being for
divulging them condemned by the Athenians, who offered a Talent of Gold to any
to kill him, and two Talents to such as should bring him alive to Judgment. Of
which Suidas in voce (...). etc. Hence they are called Silent Mysteries, the
particular description whereof the Reader may find in Meursius, who has
written expressly upon that subject, as Pe^rus (...) in (...). and Io. Fasoldus
in his Gracorum veterum (...).
silent Festivals they keep?
Or Ajax his Ajax his true Salamine.] The Salamis or Salamine here meant is an
Island near the Athenian Coast, with a City of the same name, here called Ajax
his true Salamine, to distinguish it from the Salamine built by his Brother
Teucer in Cyprus during his Exile. For as Velleius Paterc. tells us, Teucer non
receptus a patre Telamon^, ^b segnitiem non vindicat^ fratris injuri^, (he
means the affront given by Ulysses about Achilles his Arms, the occasion of his
death) Cyprum appulsus, cognominem patriae suae Sal^mina constituit. Which
Cyprian Salamine is by Authors called Ambigua, quia dubitandum nomen Salaminis
fecit, says Gronovius Observe. l. 1. c. 3. the Attick Salamine being the true
Country of Ajax. And therefore by Ma^lius and Lucan (as well as by our Author
here) the Epithet Ver^ is given to it by Horace, to the other that of Ambigua,
in these Verses, Od. 7. l. 1. -- certus enim promisit Apoll^
Ambiguam tellure nova Salamina futuram.
Apollo certainly in a new Land
Promised Ambiguous Salamine should stand.
The Is^and was anciently (according to Strabo) called Scirus, Cychre^, and
Pityussa. The modern name (as Ferrarius from the Authority of Sophianus
reports) being Coluri.
true Salamine?
Or Calydon.] A City of Aetolia, where Dian^ was worshipped by the name of
Laphria, who incensed against Oeneus for his neglect in sacrificing to her,
sent the Calydonian Boar to waste his Country, slain by Meleager and Atalanta,
of which see the Fable in Ovid. Met. l. 8. Pausanias in Arcad. reports, that
the two great Tusks of this Boar were kept in the Temple of Minerva in Alea, a
Town of Arcadia, and were from thence by Augustus Caesar transported to Rome,
one of them being extant in his time half an Ell in length.
Calydon, by a wild Swine
His furious Mischiefs famed? Or make
For Bessa.] A Town of the Locrians, mentioned by Homer Iliad. 2. so called
(according to Strabo l. 9.) as being seated in a Heathy Plain.
Bessa and Scarpbe.] Another City of the Locrians, seated upon a higher ground,
so called (according to Strab^) in regard the Fields and Country about it were
thick beset with Woods and Fruit Trees. Whence Cas^ubon upon that place affirms
the true name to be Tarphe. For (...) and not (...) signifies densitas
sylvarum. Of which Conjecture of his he is much opinionated, and maintains the
former Name to be an inveterate error of the ancient Copies. Strabo in the same
place likewise reports, that in his time it was called Pharyg^, and that Juno
had there a Temple, and was thence called Juno Pharyg^. He adds further in his
first Book, from the Authority of Demetrius C^latianus, that it was almost
totally ruined by an Earthquake. But it seems some Relics thereof are yet
remaining, and called Bondo^iza, according to Moletius, apud Ferrarium.
Scarphe, where the Lake-
Like Titaressus.] Or, as the Greeks write it, Titaresius, a River of Thessaly,
qui it Orcus, says Vibius Sequester. Strabo likewise ( lib. 7.) writes, that it
was anciently called Europus. It rises from the Mountain Titarus, and falls
into Peneus, and by reason of the oily thickness of it Waters, mingles not with
it, but swims upon it; Quem Stygia palude crescere quidam autumant, adds Vibius
Sequester; thus described by Lucan, Pharsal. lib. 6. Solus in alterius nomen
cum ventrit undae
Defendit Titaressus ^quas; lapsusque supern^
Gurgite Penei pro siccis utitur arvis.
Hunc fama est Styg^s manare paludibus amnem,
Et capitis memorem fluvii contagia vilis
Nolle pa^i, super^que sibi servare timorem.
Thus rendered by Mr. Tho. May. Alone his stream pure Titaressus keeps,
Though in a different-named Flood he creeps;
And, using Peneus as his Ground, he flows
Above: from Styx they say, this River rose,
Who, mindful of his Spring, scorns with base Floods
To mix, but keeps the reverence of the Gods.

Titaressus with dull Waves
Creeping along, the Valleys laves?
Or shall we at the last set down
In Pylos.] A City of Messe^ia, in Peloponnesus. Of which name Strabo and
Stephanus reckon three Towns, whereof two seated upon the Seacoast. One in
Elis, at the foot of the Mountain Scollis; another in Messenia, near
Coryphasium; a third in Arcadia; all in Peloponnesus. Every of which, the
respective Inhabitants boasted to be the Country of Nestor. But the Nestorian
Pylos was the Messenian, which was likewise called Nelea, by Pausanias; by
Ptolemy, Abarinus; by Stephanus, Coriphasium; by Sui^as, Spacteria; Its modern
name, according to Sophianus, being Navarino; according to Niger, and the
Italian Nautica^ Tables, (Test Leunclavio) Zonichia.
Pylos, Aged Nestor's Town?
Pharis.] a City of Laconia, mentioned by Homer, in his Catalogue, or second
Book of the Iliads, destroyed, as Pausanias writes, by the Lacedamonians, in
the time of Teleclus, son of Archelaus, and Grandson of Agesilaus.
Pharis, Jove's Pisa.] A City and ^ountain, in the Olympic Plains, where
Jupiter had his Temple, which Hercules intending to destroy, was prohibited by
Apollo's Delphian Oracle, in these words, (...), etc. Pisa Patri curae, etc.
here therefore called Jove's Pisa, chiefly in regard of the Olympic Games
there exercised. Which honor was the occasion of its ruin; for contesting with
Elis, about the jurisdiction of celebrating the said Games, the incensed El^ans
wrought at last its destruction; of which, see Pausanias, l. 5. and 6. Strabo (
l. 8.) writes, that some made a doubt, whether there ever were such a City as
Pisa, but allowed of the Fountain of that name, which, in his time, he says,
was called Bisa.
Jove's Pisa, Elis.] A City in the Region so called, not far from Olympia,
which, though Seneca here makes to be coaeval with the time of the Trojan War,
yet Strabo ( lib. 8.) affirms the contrary, and says, it was not built in
Homer's days, but long after, that is after the time of the Persian War. He
asserts likewise, that all those Places in Peloponnesus, which Homer mentions,
were not Cities, but Regions inhabited by several small Pagi, or Boroughs, out
of which the Cities, bearing the names of the several Regions, were afterward
collected, (...), etc. And after this manner (says he) the Inhabitants of the
several Pagi, or Boroughs, in the Region of Elis congregated themselves into
one City, of the same name.
Elis see,
Adorned with wreaths of Victory.] That is, the Crowns gained by the Victors,
in the Olympian Games there celebrated. These Crowns were of Olive-branches,
yet not of every kind of Olive Tree, but of that only, which was called (...),
i. e. Oleaster, or the wild Olive. In process of time, they came to be of Gold;
of which see particularly P^scalius, De Coronis, l. 6. c. 18. 19. and 20. to
spare the mentioning of ancient Authors, which Tiraquel (in Alex. ab Alex. l.
5. c. 8.) will point out to the more inquisitive Reader. And here Seneca again
seems to speak proleptically, and by way of anticipation. For Strabo. (lib. 8.)
affirms, that these Games were not in use in the time of the Trojan War, nor
this manner of crowning the Victors then practiced, and that Homer makes no
mention of them; those by him mentioned being only Funeral Games, or such like
solemn Exercises.
Adorned with Wreaths of Victory?
Let any Winds our Canvas fill,
And bear us to what Lands they will,
So we poor Wretches Sparta.] The principal City of Laco^ia, called likewise
Lacedaemon, the birthplace of Helena, at this day called Mysithr^, whose
modern condition see described by Monsieur de Guille^iere, in his Lacedaemone
Ancienne et Nouvelle.
Sparta miss,
That bred the Bane of Troy and Greece;
So we at least from Argos.] There are three Cities of this name. The first,
Argos Peloponnesiacum, the chief City of Argia, at this day called Argo; the
second Argos Amphilochium, in Epirus, at this day Anfilocha; the third, Argos
Pelasgicum, at this day vulgarly called Armiro. The first is that which is hear
meant. Se Ortelius in Thesaur. Geograph. and Ferrar.
Argos run,
So we the proud Mycenae] A City of Argia, so called, from Mycenus, the Son of
Sparto, or Mycene, the Daughter of Inachus, as some will, or from (...), the
Pommel of Perseus Sword-hilt falling o^f there; or from (...), signifying
likewise a Mushrome, which Perseus pulling up, there gushed out a spring of
water, with which he quenched his thirst. Upon which accident he there built
the City, and called it Mycene, as Pausanias writes; or from (...), because Io,
when turned into a Cow (as Stephanus De Urbi^us) there first Lowed; the
birthplace of Agamemnon; at this day called Agios A^rianos, according to
Sophianus; by Niger, Charia; by Theve^, Grebigni, as Ortelius testifies.
Mycenae shun.
So we in Neritos.] An Island not far from Ithaca and Zant, of which Virgil,
Aeneid 3. makes mention in these Verses: -- Medio apparet ^uctu nemorosa
Zacynthos,
Dulichiumque Sameque and Neritos ardua saxis.
There was a Mountain of the same name, in Ithaca, of both which Strabo speaks,
lib. 10. citing the Authority of Homer.
Neritos never plant,
Shorter and narrower the Zant.] An Island in the Ionian Sea, lying against the
Western coast of Peloponnesus, near the entrance of the Sinus Corinthiacus,
anciently called Zacynthus, from Zacynthus, the Son of Dardanus (according to
Stephaus). Pliny likewise affirming, that it was before that called Hyrie. Its
length (according to Baudrand, in Ferrar.) is reckoned 25. Miles, its breadth
20. its circumference, 60.
Zant.
So we never reach the treacherous Bay,
And Shoals of Rocky Ithaca.] It is noted, (says Gryphiander, de Insulis) that
the Poets, when they speak of small and stony Islands, call them Rocks, Sive
quia scopulis suis munita, sive quia rem extem^ant, and contemptius de ed
loq^ntur: So Virgil. ^n. l. 3. Effugimus Ithaca scopulos, Lacrtia regna.
Cicero, de Orator. 1. speaks very undervaluingly of the City so called, when he
describes it to be in asperrimis scopulis, ceu nidulum, affixam. This Island is
in circuit about 25 Miles, inhabited only by Exiles and Pirates; now vulgarly
called Val de Compare. Yet Sponius, in his Voyages into the Levant, says it is
called Iatacho, and distant about six or seven Miles from Dulichium, or T^iaki,
as the Modern Greeks now call it.
Rocky Ithaca.
Who Hecuba can tell thy Fate?] Hyginus, de Fabulis, c. 111. writes, that
Hecuba, in her passage by Sea, through impatience of her grief, threw her self
overboard into the Hellespo^t, and was transformed into a Bitch: The Fable
arising from the acerbity and rage of her sorrow, which caused her to curse and
revile all she met with, especially of the Greeks. To which Plautus, ( in
Me^oechmo) alludes, Act, 5. Sc. 1. Hecuba (quod iu nunc facis)
Omnia mala ingerebat, quem quem aspexerat,
Itaque adeo jure caepta appellari est Canis.
being stoned to death by the Thracians in Cherronesus, and a Tomb erected for
her in the place, bearing the Title of (...), or the Bitches Monument, which
Pliny places in front obliqu^ Mastusiae. (a Promontory of the Thracian
Cherronesus, over against Sygaeum.) Strabo, between the City Dardanus, and
Aby^s, over against the Mouth of the River, Rhodius, in the same Cherronesus:
Solinus, upon the Promontory of the Asi^n Syg^um; but falsely, as is observed
by his learned Exercitator^ Salmasius. Cedrenus (in Histor. Compend.) reports,
that she was stoned to death on Shipboard, by Ulysses and his Companions, and
thrown into the Sea, near the Promontory Maronea, which srom that accident they
called Cynossema. Suidas (in voce (...)) writes* that Ulysses, coming to the
Cape Maronea, and being prohibited by the Inhabitants from taking such
necessaries as he wanted, landed his Men, and encountering with them, worsted
them, where Hecuba, exercising her bitter and invective Language, was stoned to
death by the Soldiers, who there buried her, calling the Place, The Bitc^es
Monument. Ovid. Metam. lib. 14. tells us yet the story otherwise, which there
see. Julius Pollux. ( lib. 5. c. 5.) conceives this (...) to be rather the
Monument of some famous Dog: of which he gives several instances, as of
Atalanta's and Xanthippus their Dogs, in Calydon and Salcmine; and Garg^ius,
Geryon's Dog, in Spain, who had their Monuments so called. Which conjecture
seems not to displease the incomparable Observator upon Mela, p. 129.
Who Hecuba can tell thy Fate?
(Of Queens the most unfortunate!)
What servile Hardships shall thou try?
Where, or in whose Dominions dye?

ACT IV.
SCENE. I.
HELENA, ANDROMACHE, HECUBA, POLYXENA.
Helena. Where ever Hymen is unfortunate,
On whom sighs, mourning, blood, and slaughter wait,
There Helen's a fit Helen's a fit Auspex.] The Ancients in contracting, or
solemnizing Marriages, were directed therein by the flight of Birds, or Augury:
And the person that performed the Augurating Office was called Auspex. The
Romans were very observant hereof for a long time; and though at length, they
left off the custom of Augury, yet they still retained the Office of Auspices.
Of which thus Cicero, De Divinat. l. 1. Nihil fere quondam majoris rei, nisi
auspicato, ne privatim quidem, gerebatur; Quod and nune Nuptiarum Auspices
declarant, qui re omissa, nomen tamen tenent. Wherefore Helena is here not
unaptly introduced to be Auspex, at the unfortunate and tragical Marriage of
Polyxena: She being by Lycophron (Advers 512. compared to the Fowl called Crex,
-- toro pessima semper Avis (to use the Words of Propertius) which we in
English call a Da^er-Hen, being a Waterfowl, held to be most unluckily ominous
in Augury, especially as to Nuptials: Upon which, see his Commentator Tzetzes,
Cauerus, Me^rsius, and Dousa in Propert. l. 4. Eleg. 5.
Auspex, forced t'extend
The Woes of ruined Troy beyond their End.
False News of Pyrrhus Nuptials I must bear,
Gems, and Greek Habits for his Bride to wear.
Whilst (circumvented by my treacherous Wile)
I Paris Sister of her Life beguile;
And beguiled be she. "'It Is a Courtesy
"Unprepossess'd with fear of Death, to dye:
Why doubt'st Thou to perform thy task? "On thos^
"The Guilt of enforced Crimes lies, who impose.
Thou Female Glory of the to Polyxena.
Dardan Race!
Heaven now begins to show a friendlier Face
To the Afflicted; does a Mate provide,
Such as not Priam could in all Troy's Pride.
For thee to lawful Hymen's sacred Rites,
The Chief of the Pelasgian Name, invites,
Who rules wide Thessaly: Thee Tethys and Thetis.] Tethys and Thetis were two
distinct Poetical Deities, Tethys being reputed the Daughter of Coelus and
Tellus, and Wife of Neptune, or Oceanus, by whom she had Doris; Doris by Nereus
had Thetis, who by Peleus had Achilles. So that Thetis was Grandchild to
Tethys; as is manifest by this of Catullus; speaking of ^eleus (in Epithalam.)
Tene Thetis tenuit Pulcherima Neptunine!
Tene suam Tethys concessit ducere Neptem?
See, in further Confirmation of this, Apollodorus. I. 1. c. 2.
Tethys, all
The Watery Powr's, thee, hers will Thetis call,
The Seas mild Empress! Pyrrhus marry thee,
Thou Niece to Peleus shall, and Nereus be.
Put off these sad, and Festive Habits take,
Unlearn (...) Captive art, and Captive make.
Thy Her frightfully staring, recommand
To order, by some curious Dressers Hand.
This chance may raise thee to a better State;
"Captivity has made some Fortunate.

Andromache. Was this then only wanting to our Woes?
This? To rejoice, when Troy in Ashes glows?
O time for Nuptials fit! but who denies,
Or doubts to Wed, when Helen.] (...) may not perhaps be altogether impertinent
in this place to say something of the Name of Helen, which seems to be derived
from the Accident of her Birth, her Mother being delivered of her (...), in
Palude, as Ptolemaus Hephestion, l. 4. Nov. Histor. reports; her proper Name
being Echo, which she gained from her notable cunning, in counterseiting the
Voices of others. Of which Homer, as cited by the said Ptolemaus Hephestion
says: (...). Agrivu^m ux^res imitata est vocibus omnes. She was likewise, as
the same Hephestion writes, called L^onta.
Helen does advise?
Helen the Bane, the Ruin, and the Pest
Of either Nation; See these Graves! where rest
Their valiant Chiefs! These Fields! 'bout which are spread
The bared Bones, sad Relics of their Dead.
These, these, thy Marriage scattered, with a flood
Of Europe's best, and Asia's bravest blood:
Whilst thou at ease saw both thy Husbands sight,
Careless on which the Victory should light.
Go then, and for these Wedding Joys prepare!
For Nuptial Lights and Torches never care;
Troy's Flames will those supply. Now Troades
The Marriage Rites of Pyrrhus solemnize
As they deserve; that is, with tears and cries.

Helen. Though mighty Grief no curb, no reason knows,
But often hates those are sharers in its Woes;
Yet before a Partial Judge can I defend
My Cause; who suffer more than you pretend.
Andromache for Hector, Hecuba
For Priam, freely mourns; I closely pay
My concealed Sighs for Paris. It Is severe,
Hateful and sad, a servile Yoke to bear.
Yet that have I endured, these ten years past.
Your Household Gods are sacked; Ilium laid wast.
To lose ones native Land, is a sad curse;
To fear, like me, without Relief, yet worse.
A fellow-sufferance does your Woes assuage.
Against me, the Victors both, and vanquished rage.
Whom you must serve, Chance yet has scarce designed,
I Am sure, without a Lot, a Lord to find.
You Will say I was to Troy the cause of War,
And her sad Ruin. Take what you infer,
To be a Truth; if you can prove that e're
A Spartan Ship me to your Coasts did bear.
But if by Phrygians I a Prize was made,
And to her Judge a Gift by Venus paid,
Excuse then Paris. For our Cause, 'twill come
Before a rough Judge; it waits Atrides Doom.
But now, Andromache, thy Plaints laid by
A while, to bow this resolute Virgin try.
I scarce can hold from Tears. --

Andromache. The thing is sad
That Helen weeps for; it must needs be bad.
But wherefore weeps she? say! what new Deceit?
What mischief plots Ulysses, that grand Cheat?
Must from Idaean Rocks the Maid be cast?
Or from this Tower, or yond' Clifts, into vast
Seas hurld? where with his crook'd and ragged side
Lofty Sygaeum does imbay the Tide?
Speak! What beneath thy looks sly vail is laid?
No Ill, but's less, than Pyrrhus to be made
To Priam Son in Law, and Hecuba.
What Pains, what Torments, must we suffer? say!
For this from our Woes sum may well be spared;
To be deceived. To dye, we are All prepared.

Helen. Would Heaven, the Gods Interpreter had doomed
Me to have died; and at Achilles Tomb
By Pyrrhus furious Hand to have fallen! that I
With thy sad Fate, Polyxena! might vye,
Whom Thetis Son, (to his Grave first victim made)
Demands for Spouse in the Elysian shade.

Andromache. See how great joy does her high soul express
At her declared death! Royal Robes and Dress
Now she assumes, now yields t'adorn her head;
To dye she Marriage thinks, but Death to Wed.
Her aged Mother yet at the Report,
Is Thunder struck; nor more can Grief support,
With this surcharge oppressed. -- Courage! recall
Your Life and Spirits, Madam? -- On how small
A Thread hers hang! -- how little will suffice
T'ease Hecuba of all her Miseries!
She breaths, and comes t'her self again: -- I find
Death to the Miserable is unkind.

Hecuba. Yet lives Achilles to the Phrygians Woe?
Yet does he plague us? Is he still our Foe?
O Paris feeble Hand! his very Grave
And Ashes thirst our wretched Blood to have.
Once me a happy Troop of Children round
On every side enclosed; enough I found
T'impart to all my Kisses; nor could tell
Among such a fair and numerous Issue, well
How to divide a Mother. Now, there is none
Left me but this, my sole Companion,
My Joy and Comfort in Affliction
This, this poor Girl; The last Remain of all
Hecuba's Race! she only lives to call
Me Mother. -- Leave hard-temper'd Soul my Breast!
And this one Funeral after all the rest
Remit at length to me. to Polyxena.
She changes hue,
A shower of Tears does her pale Cheeks bedew.
Rejoice dear Child! gladly Andromache,
Gladly Cassandra thus espoused would be.

Andromache. We, We poor Wretches, Hecuba, are most
To be deplored; who must on Seas be tossed,
Now here, now there, and God knows whither hurried!
She Is happyy, etc.] The Author seems to have taken this from Virgil (as he
from Euripides in Troad.) where (l. 3. Aeneid.) Andromache thus speaks: O
foelix una ante alias Priamoeia Virgo!
Hostilem ad Tumulum ^rojaesub m^ibus altis
Iussa mori; qu^ sortitus non pertulit ullos,
Nec victoris He^i ^etigit Captiva Cubile.
Nos Patria incensa, diversa per Aequora vectoe, etc.
O thou of Priams Daughters the most blessed!
Who under Troy's high Walls felt Deaths Arrest
At thy Foes Tomb! not drawn by Lot, or led
Captive, to touch a Conquering Masters Bed.
We, our Town burnt, through diverse Seas are born, etc.

She Is Polyxena.
happy; by Fates destined to be buried
In her own native Land.

Helen. You Would grieve yet more
Did you but know what Lot's for you in store.

Andromache. Is of my Woes yet any Part unknown?


Helen. The Captives Dooms th'impartial Urn has shown.


Andromache. Whose Slave am I? Whom must I Master call?


Helen. Unto the Scyrian Youth, by Lot you fall.


Andromache. Happy Cassandra! whom Prophetic Rage
And Phoebus from the Lot does disengage.

Helen. She Is Agamemnon's Prize.


Hecuba. Is Hecuba
By any sought for?

Helen. You a short-lived Prey
Are to Ulysses, against his will, become.

Hecuba. O who could be Dispenser of a Doom
So cruel and tyrannical! that brings
Queens to be Slaves to those that are not Kings?
What God does so unluckily dispose
Poor Captives? What stem Judge, unto our Woes
Weight adding, does so little understand
To choose us Lords? and with a rigorous Hand
Deals such cross Fates to Wretches? What dire Lot
TO Achilles Arms does Hector's Mother put?
Given to Ulysses! -- Now indeed distressed
I seem; with all Calamities oppressed.
I shame at such a Lord, not Servitude.
Must he then who Achilles Spoils indu'd,
Have Hector's too? And must the barren, small,
And Sea-girt Ithaca give me Funeral?
Lead, Lead, Ulysses, when you please; no stay
I Will make, but follow thee, my Lord. And may
My own Fates follow me. No calms assuage
The angry Seas, let them with Tempests rage.
May Wars, Fire, mine, and Priam's Miseries
Pursue you; and 'till those Plagues come, suffice
It, this is sure: You have your Lot; I yet
Have robbed you of all hoped for Benefit.
But see with a precipitated Pace
Where Pyrrhus comes? with fury in his Face.
Pyrrhus, Why stopp'st thou in thy Bloody Race?
Sheath in this Breast thy Sword: Let Death in fine
Achilles Father in Law and Mother join.
Go on thou Murderer of the Aged! On!
This Blood fits thee: To Execution
Drag hence a Captive Wretch: And by so vile
Abhorred a Slaughter, Gods above defile,
And Ghosts below. -- What, shall I pray for you?
Seas to such dismal Sacrifices due.
On your whole Fleet, your thousand Ships, like curse
Fall, I wish that shall carry me, or Worse.

CHORUS. TO those that Mourn, it is sweet Relief,
When Nations Sorrows echo to their Grief.
Less felt is that Afflictions Sore
Which numerous Sharer's mutually deplore.
Sorrow is like Infection; loves t'obtrude
It's-self upon a Multitude.
And counts it some content,
Not singly to Lament.
There Is none denies to bear that Fate
All suffer under: in a common Woe
None thinks himself unfortunate,
Though he be so.
Take hence the Happy, lay the Rich aside,
Whose Gold, and Fertile Acres is their Pride,
The Poor will raise their drooping Heads. There Is none
Miserable, but by Comparison.
To those by great Calamities o'retook,
It Is sweet to see none wear a cheerful look.
Sadly that Man his Fate bewails,
In a Private Vessel.] In this manner, Titus first, afterward Trajan punished
the false Informers and Calumniators of their Times, by putting them into an
empty Vessel alone, without any help or Companion, and so exposing them to Sea;
Of which Pliny in Panegyr. ad Trajanum. Vide etiam Casaubon. in Sueton. p. 36.
Who in a Private Vessel Sails;
And naked, helpless, and forlorn,
Sinks in the Port to which his Course was born.
Storms and his Fate, he bears with evener Mind,
Woe sees a thousand Ships before him drowned,
And all the Shore scattered with Wrecks does find,
Whilst Waves by Corus dashed against Rocks resound.
Phryxus for Helen's single loss complained,
When The Gold-fleec'd Leader of the Flock, etc.] Seneca doubtless respected
this Place of Manilius, l. 4. speaking of the Celestial Ram. Adserit in vires
Pontum, quem vicerat ipse
Virgin delapsa, cum sratrem adlittora vexit,
Et rainui deflevit onus, dorsumque levari.
What Manilius applied to the Ram, Seneca more suitably transfers to Phryxus.
by the Gold-fleec'd Leader of the Flock
They both were took
(Brother and Sister) on his Back.
And she in mid-Seas fell a help-less Wrack.
Deucalion yet and Pyrrha, both refrained
From Tears, when they the swelling Sea beheld,
And nothing but the Sea that sweld:
Of Lost Mankind, all that remained.
But these sad meetings, these our mutual Tears
Spent to deplore our miserable State,
The Fleet, which ready now to sail appears,
Will strait dissolve and dissipate.
Soon as the Trumpets hasty sound shall call
The Mariners aboard, and all
With favoring Gales and Oars for Sea shall stand,
When from our sight shall fly our dear-lov'd Land:
What Fears will then our wretched Thoughts surprise,
To see the Land to sink, and the Sea rise?
When Ida's towering hight
Shall vanish from our sight;
The Child shall then unto its Mother say,
The Mother to her Child, pointing that way
Which tends unto the Phrygian Coast;
Lo! yonder is Ilium where you spy
Those Clouds of Smoke to scale the Sky.
By this sad sign, when all marks else are lost,
Trojans their Country shall descry.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
NUNCIUS, ANDROMACHE, HECUBA.
Nuncius. O Horrid, cruel, cursed Fates! What Crime
Has bloody Mars yet seen in Ten Years Time
Like sad or barbarous! where shall I begin?
With your Woes, Madam? Or yours, Aged Queen?

Hecuba. Whose Woes soever you tell, they are mine; each Breast
Bears its own Griefs, but mine is with all oppressed,
The universal sorrow: None can say
He Is wretched, but he is such to Hecuba.

Nuncius. The Virgin's sacrificed; and the Youth cast
From the Towers height: Both brave yet at the last.

Andromache. Relate the Series of their Deaths: declare
This double Tragedy: I long to hear
The sum of all my Griefs. Speak then, and show
The entire complement of all my Woe.

Nuncius A Tower yet stands; A Tower yet stands, etc.] This was Part of the
Scaean Gate, famous in the Trojan Story above the other five (for Troy had six
Gates) viz. the Antenorian, the Dardaui^n, the Ilian, the C^tumbrian, the
Trojan; and the Scaean, which last, some will have so called quia in laeva
urbis Part sita. Some from the fatality of the Place, or sinistrous
Consultations there had by the Trojans. Strab^, l. 13. conceivs it to be a
Thracian Name, as Sc^us Amnis, etc. others conceive it so called, from its
Builder: Serviu^ in 3. Aeneid. derives the Name (...) i. e. Tentorio aut
Tabernaculo: because the Sepulchral Monument of Laomedon was placed over it,
which Etymology of Servius, though approved of by la Cerda, is yet by the
learned Monsieur Bacheit, in his excellent (and not vulgarly known)
Commentaries upon Ovids Epi^iles, censured for a very extravagant one.
All now that is left of Troy,
Whence, bearing in his Arms his Ages Joy,
His little Grandson; Priam used to view
His Troops, and order what those Troops should do.
Thence, (when brave Hector in that glorious Fight
What time the routed Greeks he chased in flight
With Sword and Fire) to young Astyanax
The old King showed his Fathers valiant Acts.
This noted Tower, once our Walls chiefest Grace,
(Now a cursed Rock, and a detested Place)
Huge crowds of Soldiers with their Troops surround.
A Seaman scarce to guard their Fleet is found,
All thither flock: To some a Hill does lend
From far an open Prospect, some ascend
The Rocky Clifts, and there, eager to see,
On Tiptoes stand. Some climb this neighboring Tree,
Some that: Th'adjoyning Woods tremble to bear
The numerous Spectators. Some there are
Climb up steep Precipices, some bestride
Ridges of half burnt Houses, others ride
On pieces of the Broken Wall; and some,
To see his Son's Death, get on Hector's Tomb.
Ulysses proudly stalks through all the throng,
As Way was made; leading in's Hand along
The Princely Youth; who makes no sluggish stop
In this sad March; but gaining the Tower's top,
Thence, here and there, with an undaunted Gest,
Casts round his angry Eyes: Of foam fierce Beast,
As a young tender Cub, not able yet
To tyrannize with murdering Fangs, does threat
And vainly snarls, and snaps, and swells with rage;
The Princely Captive on this lofty Stage
Like courage shows; and from all hearts does force
Compassion; even Ulysses feels remorse.
He weeps not yet for whom all else shed tears.
Now whilst Ulysses (as by Calchas.
enjoined) prepares
His solemn Speech; and with set Prayers invites
The cruel Gods to those more cruel Rites,
He nimbly of his own accord, leaps down
Amid'st the Ruin's of his State and Town.

Andromache. What Colchian, or what wandering Scythian,
Or Hyrcan, bordering on the Caspian Main,
That knows no Law, would such an Act have dared?
Cruel Busyris butchering Altars, spared
Yet Childrens Blood; nor ever Diomed
His Horses with the flesh of Infants fed.
Who Will take thy Limbs, and give them Funeral?

Nuncius. What Limbs could there be left by such a Fall?
His Bones were crushed to pieces; Nor one Grace,
Or mark was left in Body or in Face
Resembling his Illustrious Father: All
Were utterly defaced by the sad Fall.
His Neck was broken. His Head against a Rock
Encountering, dashed his Brains out with the knock.
Naught but a shapeless Trunk he lay.

Andromache. Even so
Too like his Father.

Nuncius. From this Scene of Woe
The Greeks next, (weeping yet for what they would done)
To act another Crime as barbarous, run
In have to Achilles Tomb; whose farther side
Rhetaean, etc.] Pliny, Solinus, and Seneca place Achilles his Monument on the
Rhetaean Promontory; But against the Authority of Strabo, and Poetical Story;
by whom, (as by Lucian in Charonte,) it is seated on the Sigaean Promontory.
See Salmasius in Solinum. p. 869. and Dr. Vossius in Melam. p. 98.
Rhetaean Waves beat with a Gentle Tide.
The Extremes to that opposed, a Champaign Ground
Invests; in the midst of which a Vale is found,
From whose low Edge a hilly Ridge ascends,
And 'bout it like a Theater extends.
The Shore is covered with the numerous Press.
Some think this done in order to release
Their Navies stop; some look on the Design
As meant t'extirpate all Troy's Hostile Line.
Most of the giddy Vulgar seem to hate
The Act, they come to see and perpetrate.
Trojans attend too; and with fearful Eyes
Expect the last of all Troy's Tragedies.
When strait, as at our solemn Marriage Rites,
In head of all, are born the Nuptial Lights:
Next Helen, as the Brides sad Pronuba
Comes with dejected mien; whilst Phrygians pray,
So may Hermione wed; and so may she
Returned with shame to her first Husband be.
Trojans and Greeks are both with Horror struck,
When forth the Princess comes; with submiss Look,
But Cheeks that died in modest Blushes shine,
More Beautiful in this her sad Decline.
As Phoebus seems to cast a sweeter Light
Now near his Set, when the approaching Night
Invades the confines of the doubtful Day.
The vulgar Minds are lost in strange Dismay;
Who (as their Custom is) always commend
Those who are going to their fatal End.
Her Beauty some, others her Youth as much.
Some the sense does of her changed fortune touch.
All her high Spirit praise; that Death dares meet.
Fearless, she outsteps Pyrrhus; whilst to see it,
Some quake, some pity, some admire. Now come
To the Lands Point, Pyrrhus his Fathers Tomb
Ascends; nor does the stout Virago shrink
Or draw one Foot yet back, though at Deaths brink,
But with a stern look, Pyrrhus to provoke,
Turns to receive the Sacrificing Stroke.
Pity at once, and wonder all minds fill,
Seeing her so brave, and Pyrrhus slow to kill.
Soon as his Hand into her tender Breast
Had forced the murdering Steel, a full stream pressed
Of bubling Gore through the large wound: nor died
Her Courage yet: she fell as though she tried
T'oppress Achilles in his Grave, and force
The Earth to lie yet heavier on his Corse.
Both sides, the Phrygians, and the Greeks lament:
These timerously, their Sighs those louder vent.
This was the Order of the Sacrifice.
Nor on the Grounds hard Surface stagnant lies,
Or floats in streams the sacrificed Blood;
The thirsty Grave soon drunk up all the Flood.

Hecuba. Go, go ye Greeks! now seek your Homes again,
With your winged Fleet securely plough the Main,
The Royal Virgin, and the Youth are slain.
The War's now ended. -- Would my life were so.
Where shall I bear this Burden of my Woe?
How quit my Deaths vivacious Remora?
For whom shall I my Tears sad Tribute pay?
For my Girl? Grandson? Husband? Country lost?
Or for all these at once? or my self most?
Whose only wish is Death. Cruel! thou hy'st
To murder Infants; to young Virgins fly'st:
Each where make have to kill: But me alone
Thou fear; and shun'st, though all night called upon
'Mid'st Fire and Sword: -- Nor Rage of hostile Powers,
Nor Flames, nor Ruins of Troy's falling Towers,
One poor old Woman could dispatch. How nigh
To thee, yet ( Priam!) when thou fell'st, stood I?

Nuncius. Away to Sea, ye Captives! now unmor'd
The Greek Fleet hoises Sail: Have, have aboard.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS IN THE ANNOTATIONS.
A.
ABraham's Intention in offering up of Isaac mis-interpreted by the He^ens, and
erroniously made the occasional Introduction of Humane Sacrifices. Page 37
Achilles at his first Arrival at Troy, kills Cycnus. 21 Slain by Paris. 23
Honored after Death with divine Rites. 43 Concealed in Scyros among King
Lycomedes his Daughters, in the Habit of a Virgin, and called Pyrrha. 24 Takes
Lesbos. Kills Trambelus. Lays Siege to Methymne, and causes Pisidice, who had
betrayed the Town to him, to be stoned to death. 24 Discovered in his disguise
by the Stratagem of Ulysses. 25 Wounds Telephus, and cures him. Page 26 Takes
Thebes, Lyrnessus. Chryse. Tenedos, Cille in his March to Troy. Kills Memnon,
Hector, and Penthefil^, p. 28, 29, 30, 31. His Character. 32 His Lute. 39 His
Tomb not on the Rhet^an, but Sigaean Promontory, 113
Act, a Promontory and City of Magnesia, 90 Agamemnon and Menelaus, supposed
Sons of Plisthenes, and not of Atreus. 43 A^ax Oileus, ravishes Cassandra in
the Temple of Minerva. 6 Amyclae, a City of Lacon^a, at this day called
Vo^donia, or Vordona. 10 Another in Italy, destroyed through the silence of its
Inhabitants. ibid.
Antenor's Wife. 9 Argos, three Cities in Greece of that name. 94 Ashes, strown
upon the Heads of those that mourned for the Dead. 12 Asia Minor, or Anatolia,
its several Parts or Provinces. 2 Under the Dominion of Priam. ibid.
Assaracus, not the Son, but Brother to Ilus 4 His Genealogy, according to
Apollodorus and Conon. ibid.
Atreus and Thyestes, the Crimes of their Families. 42 Their Descent and
Gen^alogy. 43

B
BEssa, a Town of the Locrians. 92 Reason of its Denomination. ibid.
Brea^s beaten, a usual Expression of Funeral Sorrow. 13
C
CA^vdnae, an Island in the Agean Sea. 88 Called likewise Calymna. ibid. Famous
for Excellent Honey. ibid.
Calydon, a City of Aetolia, where Diana was worshipped by the Name of Laphria.
91 Calydonian Boar, his Tusks transported by Augustus C^sar to Rome. ibid.
Extant in the time of Pausanias; one of them half an Ell in length. ibid.
Captives, how ordered in the Triumphal Processions of the Ancients. 16
Car^stus, a Maritime City of Eubaea, famous for rich Marble Quarries. 87
Cassandra, her Prophecies, forbidden by Apollo to be believed. 5 The reason
thereof.
Caycus, a River of Mysia, its several ancient Names, its modern. Page 29
Cephalenia, an Island under the Dominion of Ulysses. 60 Called anciently Same,
Samos, and Taphos. ibid.
Chalcis, the Chief City of Eub^a, upon the Euripus. 87 Whence so called. ibid.
Called at present Negropont. ibid. The Original of that Name. ibid.
Chiron, his Cell. 86 Difference between Antrum, Caverna, and Spelunca. ibid.
Which of these was Chiron's Cell. ibid.
Chryse, a Town of Phrygia Minor, where Chryses the Priest of Apollo, and
Father of Astynome, or Chrysis lived. 27 Cause of Difference between Agamemnon
and Achilles. ibid.
Cybele, so called from the Mountain of that Name. ^0 Cycnus, the Son of
Neptune, Slain by Achilles. Five of that Name famous in the Poetic Stories. 21
D
DAncing a part of the Religious Worship of the ancient Ethnicks. 79 Saltatio
(...) in Honor of Apollo described. ibid. Saltatio Coryb^tia in Honor of
Cybele the Phrygian Goddes^ ibid.
E.
EArthquake called (...) scu Mugiens. 20 The cause thereof. ibid.
Eleusis, a Maritime City of Attica, famous for the Temple of Ceres, and the
Eleusinian Mysteries. 90 Elysian Fields, where seated. 18 Whence so called.
ibid.
E^ispae, a City of Arcadi^, or Phocis. 89 Euripus, a Narrow strait between
Boeotia and Euboea. 88 Famous for its wonderful Tides, which see described.
ibid.
Eyes of the dying closed by those of their nearest Relations. 47
F.
FUneral Pile, the Custom or Ceremony of setting Fire to it. Page 49 Funeral
Torches, how made. ibid. Funeral, whence denominated. ibid.

G.
GIrton, a City of Macedonia, called at this day Tacc^i volicati. 83 Gods, why
called Easy. 1 (...), a City of Perhibea, or Promontory of Pellene. 89 By
Pausanias called Donussa. ibid. Gr^ian Fleet, in the Expedition against Troy,
of what Number of Ships. 34 Computation of the Army transported in the said
Ships. ibid. and page 35

H.
HAir, torn by those that mourned for the Dead. 12 Hector Exemplary for his
Piety as well as Valor. 18 For which designed after death for the Islands of
the Blessed. ibid. His fashion or manner of wearing his Hair peculiar. 56
Imitated and affected by Caligula, Nero, and others of the Claudian Family.
ibid.
Hecuba, her Dream of being delivered of a Firebrand, when with Child with
Paris. 5 Her Death. 96 Where buried. ibid. Her Monument called (...). ibid. The
Reason thereof. ibid.
Helena Auspex at the Tragical Marriage of Polyxena. 98 Compared to the Fowl
called Crex, or the Daker Hen, ominous in Augury, especially as to Nuptials.
ibid. Derivation of the Name Helena. 100 Her proper Name Echo. ibid. Called
likewise Leon^a. ibid. Helenus his Wife. 9

I.
INformers and Calumniators, how punished by Titus and Trajan the Roman
Emperors. Page 108 Iolcos, a City of Thessaly, at this day called Iacco. 85
Said (but erroneously) to have been the place whence Jason and the Argonauts
set Sail. ibid. Not a Port Town, but seated 30 Stadia within the Land. ibid.
The Port belonging to it being Pagasae, the place where Argo was built. ibid.
Ithaca, called a Rock, by way of Diminution. 96 Its modern Name Iatacho. ibid.
Distant 6 or 7 Miles from Dulichium, which the modern Greeks now call Thiaki.
ibid.
Jupiter Hercaus his Temple, the Sacrarium of Troy. 6 The place where the
Trojan Kings were inaugurated. ibid. At whose Altar Priam is said to have been
slain. ibid.

K.
KNees, embraced by Suppliants. 72 Reason of that Custom among the Ancients.
ibid.
L.
LYrnessus, a City of Troas, the Birthplace of Hippodamia, or Briseis,
Daughter of Briseus. 27
M.
MElibaea, a City, ennobled by the Birth of Philoctetes, to who^ Hercules
bequeathed his fatal Shafts that were to be employ'^ against Troy. 8^ M^mnon,
Son of Tithon, ( Priam's Brother) and Aurora, or of Titho^ and Cissia. 3^
Brought 10000 Aethiopians, and 10000 Susians, to the Relief (...) Troy. ibid
Slain by Achilles. Page 30 Two of the same Name mentioned by Philostratus, the
one an Ethiopian Prince, the other a Trojan. ibid.
M^don, a City of Peloponnesus, on the Borders of Messenia. 83 By the Turks at
this day called Moytune; being a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Patras.
84
Mycenae, a City of Argis, the Birth place of Agamemnon. 95 Whence so called.
ibid. Its modern Names. ibid.

N.
NEritos, an Island not far from Ithaca and Zant. 95 A Mountain of the same
Name likewise in Ithaca. ibid.
O.
OLenos, a City of Achaia, thin Peopled; in Strabo's time totally deserted. 84
Olympian Games. The Victors therein crowned with Wild Olive. 94 In aftertimes
with Crowns of Gold. ibid. Not known in Homer's time. ibid.
Orestes, Son of Agamemnon, formerly called Achaeus. 163 Born on the Feast Day
of Ceres, surnamed Erinnys. ibid. Implying thereby that he should be vexed by
Furies. ibid.

P.
PAtroclus, slain in Achilles his Armor, by Euphorbus and H^or, not without
the assistance of Apollo. 55 Pelion, the highest Mountain of Thessaly. 86 Its
Perpendicular height, according to the measure of Dicaearchus Siculus. ibid.
^silea, Queen of the Amazons, ^lain by Achilles. 31 Who seeing her dead Beauty
became passionately in Love with her. ibid.
Pepare^us, an Island in the Aege^ Sea, one of the Cyclades. Its modern Names.
89 Pergamus, the Citadel of Troy. That Part which was more especially said to
have been immured by the Gods. 4 Phthia, a City and Region of Thessaly. Page 82
Two Cities of that Name, one in Thessaly, the other in ^chaia Phth^otide. ibid.
One the Birthplace and Principality of Achilles; the other under the Dominion
of Protesilaus. ibid.
Pisa, celebrated for the Temple of Jupiter, and the Olympic Games. 93
Destroyed by the Elaean's its Neighbors. ibid.
Pleuron, a City of Aetolia. There were two of the same Name, the Old and the
New. 85 At this day called Bozichistran. ibid.
Praefica, (...), Chief of the Women Mourners, and Directress of the
Lamentations made at the Funerals of the Dead. 11 Priam his Sons and Daughters.
7 Twice captived. 14 Where and how slain. 15 Called by Tiberius and Nero, The
happiest of Men, for that he saw his Country and Kingdom destroyed with
himself. 17 His first Name Podarces. Whence called Priamus. ibid.
Prothous, Commander of the Magnetians in the Trojan Wars. 86 Pylos. Three
Cities of that Name, each claiming to be the Country of Nestor. 93 Pyrrhus,
introduced by Seneca to personate Nero. 32
R.
RHet^an Promontory 115
S.
SAlamis, or Salamine, an Island near the Athenian Coast. 91 The Birthplace of
Ajax. ibid. Called therefore Ajax his true Salamine, to distinguish it from the
Cyprian Salamine, built by his Brother Teucer, which was called Ambiguous.
ibid. Called at this day Coluri. ibid.
Scaean Gate, why so called. 113 Scarphe, a City of the Locrians. By Causabon
conceived to be trulier called Tarphe. 92 The reason of its Name. ibid.
Scyros, an Island in the Aegean Sea, where Achisles was concealed by his
Mother. Page 41 A Stony Island, whence the Name seems to be derived. ibid.
Scyrius Principatus meant of a mean and low Principality. ibid.
Souls, by some of the Stoics supposed Mortal with the Body. 47 By others of
them believed to endure till the World's General Conflagration. ibid. The Life
after separation from the Body miserable and painful. 48
Sparta, or Laced^mon, at this day called Mysithra. 94
T.
TAnais, mistaken by Seneca for Danubius. 3 A common Error among the Romans.
ibid. Reputed by some to have seven Mouths or Outlets, by some five, by others
only two. ibid.
Telemac^us Son of Ulysses and Penelope. 66 Signification of his Name. ibid.
Te^pe, its Description. Original of its Name. 82 Thebes. Nine Cities of the
same Name reckoned up by Stephanus de Urb. 27 The Cilician Thebes the Country
of Ection, Father of Andromache destroyed by Achilles. ibid.
Thessaly, its Description, ancient and modern Names. 81 Not known by that Name
in the time of the Trojan Wars. ibid.
Tigris erroneously said by Seneca to fall into the Erythraan or the Red Sea. 3
Falls into the Persian Gulf. ibid.
Tit^ressus, a River of Thessaly, that swims upon the River Peneus, without
mingling his Waters. 92 Trachyn, or Trachys, a City of Phocis according to
Strabo, according to Stephanus of Thessaly; so called from the Asperity of its
Situation. 82 Tricca, a City of Thessaly. 83 The Bishopric of Heliodorus,
Author of the fair Ethiopian. ibid.
Triones, Seven Stars in the Constellation of the Northern Bear. 54 Why so
called. ibid. Trio. A Surname to the Lucretian Family. ibid.
Triton, half Man, half Dolphin. The Prime Marine Trumpeter, indu'd with Humane
voice. 22 Tras^n, a City in Peloponnesus, seated 15 Stadia from the Sea. 85 Its
Original. Famous for a fair Port under its Command called Portus Sarokicus and
Pogonus. ibid. Its modern Names. ibid.
Troy, why said to be built by Apollo and Neptune. Page 2 What part of it more
especially immured by the said Gods. 4 The Number and Names of its Gates. 113
The Game or Exercise called Troja. 78 Different from the Pyrrhick Exercise or
Measure. ibid. The Exercise of Torneaments, supposed by some to be thence
derived. ibid.

V.
UR^e. The Lots of Slaves and condemned Persons drawn out of an Urne. 8 Called
Hydria, Situla, and Sitella. ibid. Sortition by Lotts drawn out of Urnes
threefold; Divisoria, Consultoria, Divinatoria. ibid. Urne of Destiny. ibid.
Urns for conserving the Bones and Ashes of the Dead. 49 Distinguished into
Ossuaria, and Cineraria. ibid.

Z.
ZAnt, an Island in the Ionian Sea, lying against the Western Coast of
Peloponnesus. 95
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 21. Line 5. read to. p. 27. l. 2. both fell. p. 43. l. 24. By that* p.
49. l. 3. S^l ri^g. I^. l. 4. Or setting. p. 59. l. ult. Let us. p. 78. l. 26.
W^lfgangus. p. 82. l. 11. religi^. p. 87. l. 1. (...) p. 88. l. 27. A^. p. 92.
l. 21. and. p. 109. l. 7. Hel^'s.


