(...)
Licensed R. L^estrang



Atlas Minimus or A Book of GEOGRAPHY Showing all the Empires, Monarchies
Kingdoms, Regions Dominions Principalities and Countries, in the whole World
By John Seller Hydrographr to the King

HONI SOIT (...) MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

And are sold at his House at the Hermitage in Wapping. and in Pope's head.
Alley in Cornhill (...).

Clark ^^ulp.


A Geographical Description OF THE WORLD.
The World (by which according to the more common acceptance of the Word, in
this place we mean only the Globe of the Earth and Sea^ is divided into four
parts, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America: Of each of which severally, and the
respective Countries therein, we shall here give you a brief Description. And
first,
Of EUROPE.
EVrope, (so called from Europa, Daughter of Agenor, King of the Phenecians,
brought hither (as the Poets feign) by Jup^ter in the shape of a Bull; but as
Historians Record, by a Cretan Captain, named Taurus, (which gave occasion to
that Fable.) Though it be the least of the four grand Divisions of the Earth,
is yet of most Renown. 1. For the Temperature of the Air. 2. Fertility of the
Soil. 3. The Flourishing of Arts and Sciences. And lastly, For the Purity and
Sincerity of the Christian Faith.

Its Kingdoms and principal Regions, are as follow.

1. GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND.
We rank these in the first place, not only in regard they owe Obedience to the
Scepter of our Gracious Sovereign; but also for that, either Salubrity of Air,
plenty of all things necessary to humane Life, or other Advantages, they need
not give place to any Contry in the Universe.

Great Britain, contains England, Scotland, and Wales, making the most famous
Island in the whole World. It was anciently called Albion, ab Albis Rupibus,
from the white Rocks appearing on the South Coast toward France, from whence
it was first discovered. Afterward Britain, some say from Brutus of the Trojan
Race, who first settled a Government here; or, as others will have it, from the
Greek Word Prutania, signifying Metals, because of the great quantity of Brass,
Tinn, Lead, Iron, etc. that is found here. The whole length from the
Strathy-Head in Scotland, to the Lizard-Point in Cornwa^ is counted 624 Mi^es;
and the breadth from the Lands-end in Cornwall to the Isle of Tenet in East
Kent, 340.

England (a Name taken from the Angli, a People that came in with the Saxons,
and not changed by the Danish or N^rman Conquerors) is the chief part of the
Island, being divided into 39 Counties, and 22 Bishoprics, is accounted in
length 386 Miles, in breadth 279, and the Circumference 1532. The Soil is very
fertile and plentiful, and several of its chief Commodities and Excellencies
are expressed in this Verse.

Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Femina, Lana. England is stored with
Bridges, Hills, and Wool, With Churches, Wells, and Women beautiful.
Its first known Inhabitants were the Britains, who being conquered by the
Romans, and afterward overrun by the S^xons, were forced to retire into that
Corner of the Kingdom called Wales, where their Posterity to this day inhabit;
being a Province, divided into 13 Counties, and 4 Bishoprics: The eldest Son
of our English Kings being always entitled Prince of Wales. The before
mentioned Saxons, divided the whole Realm into 7 Kingdoms, and were much
oppressed for a long time by the Danes, but at last being uni^ed under one
King, were subdued by the Normans under William the Conqueror, whose Successors
continue to this Day.

Scotland, is the Northern part of Britain, longer than England, but not so
broad, much colder, and less fruitful. The whole containing 25 Shires, is
divided into the Low-Lands, which speak a kind of barbarous English, and the
High Lands, whose Language is very near the same with Irish. This Realm upon
s^ccession of King James to the English Crown, became united to that Scepter,
and are jointly styled Great Britain. Its chief Commoditi^s are course Clothe^,
Freezes, Fish, Hides, Lead Ore. etc. Here are four Universities: Edinburg,
Glasco, St. Andrews, and Aberdeen. Two Arch-B^^hops, and eleven Bishops.

Ireland, Is the biggest Island in Europe after Britain, the West of which lies
toward Spain, containing in length above 300 miles, and in breadth about 150
miles. It neither breeds, nor will harbor any Venomous Creature. The Soil is
very good, and by the late Industry of the Inhabitants (now the greatest part
English) the whole Country begins to grow Rich and Flourishing; as the populous
and fair New Buildings at Dublin, and other places demonstrate.

2. Of IT ALY.
Italy, The most famous Region of Europe, very much resembles in shape the Leg
of a Man; a most pleasant and goodly Country, commodious for Trassique, and
very fertile. It Is bounded on the East with the Adriatic Sea, South and West
with the Tyrrhene Sea, and North with the Alts, being in length about 1020
mile^, but in breadth not above 410 at the broadest.

It abounds with Corn, Wine, and Oil; yields plenty of Almonds, Pomegranates,
etc. The whole Country seeming but as an entire Garden. The People were
anciently famous for their Valor and Prudence, and are still Honorable,
Courteous, Grave; and very obliging to Strangers, yet much inclined to
Jealousi^, Wantonness, and sharp Revenge; sparing in Diet, but Neat; their
greatest Expenses are about their Gardens. Here, about 1600 years ago the Latin
Tongue flourish^d, being vulgarly spoken, but afterward by the Invasions of
the Goths, Vandals, and other barbarous Nations, the common Speech became mixed
and degenerated which at this day we call the Italian, and yet is still a most
delicate Noble and Courtly Language.

The Capital City is Rome, once Mistress of the World in Temporals, and still
protending to be so in Spirituals; In compass about 11 miles, but full of
Gardens and waste Grounds, so that it is supposed not to contain above 200000
Souls, two parts in three of whom are Clergymen, and Curresans. But in the
flourishing of the R^ma^ Empir^, i^ contained 50 miles in compass, and not
fewer than three or four Millions of People, if we cre^it Lipsius.

After the Emperors removed their Sent to Constant ^^tle, the Bishop of Rome
taking advantage of their Absence, be pretended donation from Constantine, made
himself absolute Prince of a great part of Italy, called St. Peter's Patrimony,
and the L^nds of the Church, and the rest in time became a ^onized into feveral
petty Principalities, and States.

In the bottom of the Adriatic, now called the Gulf of Venice, stands the
famous City, and Virgin Commonwealth of Venice, situate on many Islands, and
the Water running through every S^^ee., being in compass 8 miles, containing 70
Parishes, many excellent Palaces, and curious Buildings.

3. Of TVRKY in EVROPE.
The Turk having now a great part of Europe under his Dominion, we thought fit
to represent those several Regions together. As

1. Thrace, now called Romania; In which stands Constantinople, the Seat of the
Ottoman Empire, by them alled Stambolda, and ofttimes the Port, from the
largeness and convenience of the Haven; This City is situate as if designed for
Empire, overlooking Europe and Asia, and commanding the Euxine Sea, Propentis
and Heliespont, being in compass about 18 miles, and supposed to contain 700000
living Souls; First taken from the Christians by Mahomet the Great, in the year
1452.

2. Greece, The Ancient Mother of Philosophy and Learning, but now reduced by
Turkish Slavery, to Barbarism and Ignorance; yet they still profess
Christianity, and disown the Supremacy of the Pope of Rome, being govern^d by
four Patriarks, viz. 1. Of Alexandria, who presideth over Egypt and Arabia (for
the Communion of the Greek Church extends through many Regions.) 2. Jerusalem.
3. Antioch. 4. Constantinople; but still all pay a Tribute about 5 s. sterling
an Head, per Annum to the Grand Seignior for liberty to exercise their
Religion; As likewise do those Protestants which dwell within his Dominions in
Hungary, and thereby live much more happily than their Brethren who are under
the Emperor, so far does Popish Cruelty exceed Turkish.

3. Moldavia, and Walachia, Two Provinces situate on the River Danubius, and
between Transylvania and the Euxine, or Black Sea, the Inhabitants speak a kind
of barbarous Latin, but so corrupted that it is scarce to be understood.

4. A great part of Hungary (the rest appertaining to the German Empire.) The
People thereof are Valiant, but rude of Behavior, they use the Scythian
Language, but most of them also speak Latin, and for the greater part are of
the Reformed Religion.

5. Candie, Of old called Crete, an Island in the Aegean Sea, being 650 miles
in compass, whence formerly came all our Muscadel Wines: but it being taken
some Years since from the Venetians by the Turks, who are prehibited Wine by
their Alchoran, the Vines are destroyed or neglected, so that there is now none
of that Wine brought over.

4. Of the EMPIRE of GERMANY.
Germany, is divided into the Higher and ^ower, which latter is called Belgium,
or the Netherlands.

Belgium, or the Netherlands, is bounded on the East with the River Ems, and
part of High Germany; on the West with the German Sea; on the North with
East-Friesland, and on the South with the Some, Champaigne, and Lorrain.
Containing in all 17 Provinces: but we shall only speak here of the seven
United Provinces, or Dutch Commonwealth. The Names of which are, Holland,
Zealand, Vtrecht, Over-issel, Zatphen, Groningen, and Gelderland which Union
was first made in the Year 1581, on their revolt from their Ancient Sovereign
the King of Spain, against whom by the great Assistance of the English and
Princes of Orange, they waged War many Years so successfully, that he was at
last forced to treat with them as a free State. These Countries are exceeding
populous, and have attempted to grasp the Trade of this part of the World into
their Hands, being a People very Industrious, Crafty, etc.

High-Germany, is bounded on the West with France, and Belgium, on the North
with Denmark and its Seas; on the East with Prussia, Poland, and Hungary and on
the South with the Alps, and Italy. It abounds with most things necessary for
^ife. In particular, Its Commodities are Mines of Silver, and other Inferior
Metals, Wines, and fresh Fish, Quicksilver, Allom, etc. The People are Honest,
Laborious and Sincere, stout Drinkers, and good Soldiers. The Women of
indifferent Complexion, but somewhat Corpulent. As for their Diet, there is
this Proverb, -- The Germans have much Meat, but fluttishly dressed: The French
little, but neatly cook't: The Spaniard, neither one nor the other. The Title
of the Father here, descends to all the Children; every Son of a Duke is a
Duke, every Daughter a Duchess. Whence comes that Italian Joque, -- The Dukes
and Earls of Germany; The Dons of Spain; The Mounsiers of France; The Bishops
of Italy; The Nobility of Hungary; The Lairds of Scotland The Knights of
Naples; and the younger Brethren of England, all make but a poor Company. For
Religion some are Papists, others Protestants; which latter are again divided
into L^therans and Calvinists.

This Country is almost square, each side being in length about 650 miles, and
has one Governor General, called the Emperor, a Title derived from the Ancient
Roman Emperors, but retains very little of that Power; For most of the under
Princes are absolute in their respective Dominions, whence this mighty Body by
reason of various Interests and Differences, becomes nothing so formidable as
it would be, if firmly united under one Sovereign Monarch.

5. Of FRANCE.
The Kingdom of France is for one entire thing, one of the most rich and
absolute Monarchies of the World, being in Figure almost a Square, each side
containing about 600 miles; it is bounded on the North with the Lower Germany,
on the North-west washed with the British Ocean, on the West with the Aquitain
Sea, on the South, the Pyrenean Mountains fence it from Spain; toward the
East, it extends to the Mediterranean, and full East the Alps divide it from
Italy.

It abounds with all manner of good Frui^s, besides great store of Fish and
Fowl. B^t its chiefest Commodities are four, viz. Wine, Salt, Linen Cloth, and
Corn; the less material are VVoad for dying, Paper, Nuts, Almonds, ^aces to the
new Modes, etc.

The People are generally Complemental, Inconstant, and rash. Both their
Gentlemen and Citizens, live more sparingly than the English: They feed most on
boild or liquid Meats, and are very curious in Sauces.

In matters of War there is an old Comparison, that resembles the French to a
Flea, quickly skipping into a Country, and as soon leaping out of it; of which
late Transactions afford several Instances. Their Language is Amorous, and they
leave out many Consonants in Pronunciation, occasioning this Proverb, A
Frenchman Writes not as he Pronounces, Sings not as he Pricks, nor Speaks as
he Thinks. The National Religion is Popery, yet there be many of the Reformed
amongst them, whom they call Hugonots; though of late much suppressed and
debarred of their ancient Privileges.

The Air in the Northern part of France, is purer than that of England, and
being not so much covered with Clouds drawn out of the Sea, becomes more cold
in Winter, and more hot in Summer, and less annoyed with Mists and Rain.

6. Of several Countries bordering on FRANCE.
These are,

1. The Catholic Provinces, or Spanish Netherlands, commonly called Flanders;
though that be but one of the ten Provinces; the Names of the other nine are,
Limburg, Luxenburg, Brabant, the Marquisate of the Empire, ^rtois, Hainault,
Namurs, West-Freisland, and Mech^^n. The Soil is very fruitful, and mightily
peopled, but exceedingly wasted and impoverished by the late Wa^s between the
French King, and the Dutch and Spaniards.

2. La Franche Conte, or the free County, called also the County of Burgundy,
is environed with Champaign, Lorrain, Bressy, and the Duchy of Burgundy being
in length 90 miles, and in breadth 60. one of the most fertile Provinces in the
World. The chief City is Besanson: the next Dole, famous for the College of
Jesuits there; It was under the Spanish Crown, but a few years ago suddenly
surprised by the French.

3. Lorrain, A Principality adjoining to that last mentioned, about four days
Journey in length, and three in breadth. It abounds with Corn and Wine, good
Horses, plenty of Mines, and store of Salt and Fish. The Dukes Revenue was
formerly computed at 700000 Crowns per Annum; and they were wont to give for
their Devise, an Armed Arm coming as it were from Heaven, and grasping a naked
Sword, to show that they were absolute Princes, holding their Estate by no
other Tenure, than from God and the Sword. But the French have likewise not
long since violently overrun this Country, and the present Duke Commands the
Emperors Forces, having married the Queen Dowager of Poland.

Savoy, A Dukedom compassed with Dauphine, Switzerland and Piedmont, which
latter is for the most part under its Government, lying on the Italian side of
the Alps, and being exceeding pleasant and fruitful. The rest of Savoy is
mountainous and barren. Adjoining hereunto on the Lake Lemane, stands the City
of Geneva, a Commonwealth not extending eight Leagues in Circuit, but of
indifferent good Trade, and well Fortified.

Switzerland, Is likewise a Republic, consisting of 13 Shires or Cantons, of
which five are all Papists, six all Protestants, and two mixed; It Is thought to
be the highest Country in Europe, and sends forth four of the greatest Rivers,
viz. the Danubius, through Germany and Turkey East, the Rhine through Germany
North, The Rhosne through France West, and Po, through Italy South. The Soil is
but mean, being so Hilly; but the Men great Warriors, and famous for their
Mercinary Valor.

7. Of SPAIN and PORTVGAL.
The most Western Country of Europe on the main Continent is Spain, separated
from France on the North-East by the Pyrenean Mountains, and on the West
joining to Portugal, on all other parts washed by the Sea; its whole Circuit
being about 1900 English miles.

They are a mixed People, descended from Goths, Saracens, and Jews. From the
Jews they inherit Superstition, from the Sarac^ns Melancholl, from the Goths
desire of Liberty. They are much given to Women, Vainglorious, and Stately;
very grave in their Carriage, zealous Adherers to the Church of Rome, Obedient
to their Prince, true to their words, and of wonderful Patience in enduring
Adversity. Their Women sober, loving ^o their Husbands, or Gallants, wonderful
Delicate, curious in Painting and Perfuming, but by Custom forbidden to drink
any Wine, at least till they are Married.

This Country yields Sacks, Sugars, Oil, Metals, Liquorice, Rice, Silk, Wool,
Cork, Rosin, Steel, Oranges, Lemons, Raisins, etc. But is defective in Corn,
and glad to be supplied therewith from Italy, France, or Sicily. Nor are their
Cattle large, or many, their Fare being most upon Sallets and Fruits; every
Gentleman limited what Flesh he shall buy for himself and Family. Their
Language is so near the Latin, that themselves call it Romance. They have 15
Universities (such as they are). Their Court is kept at Madrid.

Portugal, Is now a distinct Kingdom by it self, though anciently but a
Province of Spain, its chief City is Lisbon.

8. Of the ISLANDS in the MEDITERRANEAN.
Sicily, Is a large Island, in Compass 700 miles, not above a mile and an half
in one part from Italy, to which anciently, as is supposed, it was joined. The
Soil is incredibly Fruitful in Wine, Oil, Honey, Corn, etc. And is reckoned to
contain of Inhabitants, near a Million and an half.

Sardinia, In length 180, in breadth 90 miles, yields great store of Cattle,
and abounds with Corn, It has 3 Archbishops, and 15 Bishops.

Corsica, is but 7 miles distant from Sardinia, just over against Genoa, in
length 120 miles, in breadth 70. It produces Oil, Figgs, Raisins, and excellent
Wine.

Ma^orca and Minorca, two Isles about 60 miles from Spain, the first 300, the
second a 150 miles in Circuit; and both indifferent fruitful.

Corfu, Cephalenia, and Zant, are three Grecian Islands. The first is 54 miles
in length, in breadth 24. The second is in Compass 60 miles; and the third of
the same bigness. They have great plenty of Currants and Oil, and enough Wine,
and are under the Venetians. Of Candie we spoke before.

9. Of SWEDEN.
Sweden has on the East Muscovy, on the West the Dofrine Hills; on the North
the Frozen Seas; and on the South the Baltic. This Country is little less than
Italy and France, put together. The People are good VVarriors, and live hardly,
the Air is sharp, but so salubrious, that it is ordinary for Men to live above
100 Years. It abounds with Lead, Iron, Copper, Tar, Furs, etc. Containing
these Provinces 1. Lapland, famous for Witches, the People being generally
gross Idolaters. 2. Finland. 3. Gothland. And 4. That which is properly called
Sweden. The chief City is Stockholm, situate in the Sea like Venice. Their
Religion Lutheranism.

10. Of DENMARK.
Denmark is bounded on the East with the Baltic Sea, on the West with the
German Ocean; on the North it has Sweden, and Germany on the South. The Air is
very cold, but misty, which somewhat mitigates it. The Soil very good for
Pasturage, so that they have great store of Cattle: But their chief Commodities
are Fir, Pitch, Tar, and other Furniture for Shipping, Hides, Tallow, etc. The
People are good Soldiers, Thrifty, great Drinkers, feeding hardly on dried
Fish, Bacon, and Salt-meats. In Religion Lutherans.

Norway is under the King of Denmark, a place very barren; so that instead of
Bread, the People eat dried Fish, which we call Stock Fish. They Export Furs,
Train-Oyl, Clap-Bords, etc.

11. Of POLAND.
Poland is parted from Muscovy on the East with the River Neiper, or
Boristhenes, on the West from Germany with the Vistula, on the North it has
the Baltic; on the South Hungary. It Is in compass 2600 miles; very fruitful
for Barley, and Cattle. The Inhabitants excellent Soldiers, but their King
being Elective, they are always so pestered with Factions that they can attempt
no great matter, only to defend themselves against the Turks. They are much
addicted to the Latin Tongue, and have of all Religions amongst them, though
the present King seem most to favor Popery. Their Merchandises are Amber,
Barley, Wax, Honey, Pitch, Tar, etc.

12. Of MVSCOVY.
Muscovy is a vast Country, 3300 miles long, and 3000 broad, part of it only
lying in Europe, the rest in Asia. It Is bounded on the East with Tartaria, on
the West with Livonia, Lituania, and part of Sweden; on the North with the
Frozen Ocean, and on the South with the Caspian Sea, the Turks, and the Lake
called Maeotis. The People are short and thick, broad Bearded, miserable Slaves
to their great Duke, and very Ignorant. The Women love not their Husbands
unless they beat them. A great part of the Country is very Fruitful, abundance
of Honey in every Wood, vast Trees, Black Foxes, famous for their Skins, plenty
of Rosin, Flax, etc. As to Religion they follow the Greek Church.

Of ASIA.
ASia is a very considerable part of the World, in regard 1. Because man was
therein created. 2ly. Here our Blessed Savior was born, wrought his Miracles,
and suffered. 3ly. Here were transacted the most memorable occurrences
mentioned in the old and new Testament. It Is accounted in length 5200, and in
Breadth 4560 miles: the principal Regions therein follow.

1. TVRKEY in ASIA.
The Turk by his puissance having overrun a great share of two of the most
considerable parts of the world, possesses in Asia, these Countries, viz.

1. Anatolia, vulgarly Natolia, and anciently Asia the Less; a Country once of
great fertility, but now waste and almost desolate: here were the seven
Churches to whom John the Divine directs his Book of Revelations, Ephesus,
Smirna, etc.

2. Syria and Phoenicia, two adjoining Provinces, wherein is the Mount Libanus,
famous is Scripture for goodly Cedars: the Cities Damascus, Antioch, Tire and
Sidon; and those now more renowned for commerce, Aleppo and Scanderoon. The
Country abounds with Wheat, Oil, Balm, etc.

3. Palestine, Canaan, in length but 200 miles, and in breadth not above 50;
yet so fruitful, that we read in Holy Writ, it once sustained thirteen hundred
thousand fighting men (besides the Tribes of Levi and Benjamin, but now it is
nothing so plentiful, verifying that Divine saying, The Lord makes a fruitful
Land barren for the Iniquities of those that dwell therein. It Is now under the
Turk, inhabited by mixed people pretending to Christianity, and showing diverse
of the places mentioned in Scripture to Strangers for Money.

4. Caldaea in which stood Babylon, now called Bagdet, where happened the
Confusion of Languages after the Flood.

5. Mesopotamia, lying between the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates, the Soil
exceeding fertile, so that by some it is thought to have been the place where
stood the Garden of Eden.

6. Turcomania, heretofore called Armenia the greater, but now takes name from
the Turks, who being a people of Scythia, and too populous to get sufficient
food in so barren a Country, broke through the Caspian Straight, and seated
themselves here in the year 844.

Lastly, Georgia, not so called from St. George, whom yet here they greatly
reverence; but from the Georgi who long ago inhabited the adjacent Countries.
The people now though Tributaries to the Turk, profess Christianity, and agree
in most points with the Greek Church.

2. Of PERSIA.
Persia is bounded on the East with the River Indus, West with Tigris and the
Persian Gulf, North with the Caspian Sea, and South with the main Ocean. The
People are of a proper stature, an Olive-colour, their Garments Calicue; in
Religion Mahumetans, but enemies to the Turks, as being of different sects and
judgments in expounding the Alchoran, whence bloody wars are often between them.
Their Emperor is called the Sophy of Persia, who rules very tyrannically, and
has many Provinces and petty Kings that are his Tributaries.

This is that Country so renowned of old for its riches and power, for
trampling on the Assyrian Monarchy; they set up here the second great Empire,
which at last was destroyed by Alexander the Great. Here reigned those mighty
Princes Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius, the great Xerxes, Artaxerxes and others famous
both in the sacred Scriptures and profane Histories.

From hence are brought several sorts of Silk; the chief Port where we have
trade with them was Ormus, in the Gulf of Persia; and since Gombroon about nine
miles distant from thence. The greatest Cities in the whole Empire are Spahawn
supposed to contain 300000 souls; Sushan where Ahasuerus made his Feast,
mentioned 1. Esther; Caramania, famous for Cloth of Gold, and the best
Scimitars in the world; with several others.

3. The great TARTARY.
Part of this Country extends to Europe, but the main lies in Asia, reaching
from East to West 5400 miles, and from North to South 3600, being called of old
Scythia, and bounded on the East with the Eastern Ocean, on the West with
Muscovia and Moldavia, on the North with the frozen Ocean, on the South with
the Caspian Sea, Persia, and the Wall of China.

The people are of a swarthy Complexion, deformed and barbarous in behavior;
and as for their Religion, most of them Pagans, the rest Mahumetans: many of
them dwell in Tents, which as pasture grows scarce for their Cattle, do remove
to new Quarters. They sow little Corn, for Horseflesh is their chief food; yet
they have some great Cities, as Astracan, Casan, Cambalu, and Samarchand, that
gave both a Cradle and a Grave to mighty Tamberlain. The Governor of this vast
country is called the great Cham, who rules by an absolute arbitrary power,
being styled by his people, The shadow of Spirits, and Son of the immortal Gods.

4. The Empire of the Great Mogul.
This mighty Empire lies in India, partly within and partly without the River
Ganges, so called as being descended from the Mogul-Tartars; and indeed within
these 100 years last past, this Monarch taking the advantage of his Neighbors
Dissentions, has forced several flourishing Kingdoms to become Tributaries to
his Scepter: in his Territories stands Surat, to which our East India Fleet
frequently traffiques. Here is likewise the populous Kingdom of Cambaia
containing as is thought no less than sixty thousand Villages, besides the
Metropolitan City, stocked with eight hundred thousand souls. As also the
Kingdom of Bengala famous for Rhinocerots, and Stuffs, much in use for morning
Gowns; this Emperor says Boterus, is able to bring into the Field at once three
hundred thousand Horse, and so reverenced by his Subjects, that they strew the
ways he is to pass with richest perfumes; and whenever he cuts his Hair or
shaves his Beard, keep that day as a Festival.

5. Of the PENINSULA, or Tract of Land running out into the Sea without the
GANGES, and all the other parts of INDIA.
Ganges is one of the most famous Rivers in the world, which divides India
commonly called the East Indies into two parts, of which one is said to be
within, the other without the Ganges; but we here for greater plainness divide
the whole into three parts. 1. The Neck of Land toward the Sea without Ganges.
2ly, The main Land within Ganges, and another Tract of Land within Ganges
likewise, but stretching out into the Sea.

These three parts are inhabited by five several sorts of people in general,
viz. 1. Indians or Natives which are in part Gentiles, in part Christians; the
second sort are Mahumetans, Persians and Tartars; the third Jews; the fourth
Arabians or Moors, and the fifth Portuguez.

In the Neck of Land toward the Sea without Ganges, is the Kingdom of
Narsinga, where the people use to burn the Living Wife with the Dead Husband,
because of the trick they had got to poison their Husbands before this Law.
Here is likewise the City Calecute very large, but not walled nor fair built:
the City of St. Thomas or Malleaper, where they say St Thomas was Martyred, to
whose Sepulcher the Christian Indians come in Pilgrimage. The Soil in these
parts is exceeding fruitful, yielding Corn, Spices, Coco's, Jacero's, store of
Elephants, Silk, Cotton and such like: in some places of this Country in
Cambaia, the People take a great pride to color their Teeth black, as well
they say because that is most beautiful, as also because they may differ from
Dogs, whose teeth are white.

In the Kingdom of Brama is the Royal City of Pegu, distant twenty five miles
from the Sea; the King lives in great Riches and Magnificence, and always
keeps four Elephants, three Milk White and one Black; all which he divinely
worships.

Cauchin is situate between the River Cantan and the Kingdom of Siam; it
abounds with Gold, Silver, Aloes, and especially Porcelane, where our
China-Dishes are made.

To several parts of this India our English Company which thence takes their
name, does yearly traffic, and make good returns.

Of ARABIA.
Arabia is threefold. 1. The Desert, called so from the barrenness of the
Soil; 2, The Stony, and 3, The Happy: the last being the most pleasant Country
in Asia, abounding with Gold, Pearl, Balsamum, Myrrh, Frankincense, and all
kind of Spices, wherein the wondrous Phaexix is supposed to build her Nest. The
People are swift of foot, and for the most part live in Tents; the whole is
4000 miles in compass.

Of CHINA.
China has on the East, Mare del zur, on the North, a wall of 1000 miles long
to keep them from the Tartars, which yet proved too weak a Fense, for in the
fatal year 1648, they were overrun by that barbarous Nation.

These Chinoes are ingenious and excellent at Handicrafts, they pretend to Guns
and Printing long before us and use to boast that themselves have two eyes, the
Europeans one, and all the rest of the world none. The Country is of wonderful
bigness, almost as large as all Europe, the Air temperate, the Soil pleasant
and abounding with Barley, Rice, Wool, Cotton, Olives, Wines, Flax, Silk,
Metals, etc. and the Land so plain, that it is said, they drive their Coaches
and Carts commonly with Sails. It Is divided into fifteen Provinces; the whole
Region contains it is said 70 Millions of People, the probability of which, see
justified in Heylin's Cosmography.

Of the Islands of ASIA, which are
1. Japan in length 600 miles, much of the nature of China, but the people more
superstitious, and in opposition to the Chinoes put off their Shoes in
saluting, because the others pull off their Hats.

2. The Moluceo's five in number whence come most of our Cloves.

3. Java in compass 3000 miles, for its fruitfulness abounds with Spices, here
is Bantam a Port much frequented by the English.

4 Sumatra the greatest of the Eastern Iflands, almost 700 miles long and 200
broad; their Riches consists in Pepper, Benzoin, Cassia, Silk, etc.

5. The Phillippine Islands many in number, now in possession of the Spaniard.

Of AFRICA.
AFrica is a Peninsula almost circled in round with the Red Sea, on the East,
the Atlantic Ocean, on the West, the Southern Ocean toward the South, and the
Mediterranean on the North; only there is a small Isthmus (or neck of Land) not
above 60 miles over, that joins it to Asia: the breadth near 2000, the length
above 4000 miles. It Is not very fruitful nor populous except in Monsters and
Wild Beasts, whereof there it too great plenty, as Lions, Leopards, Crocodiles,
etc.

It Is divided into several Regions as follow.

Of BARBARY.
Barbary has on the West the Atlantic Ocean, and on the North the
Mediterranean, containing the Kingdoms of Tunis, Algiers, Fez and Morocco;
their fruits are Figs, Olives, etc. and excellent Horses: the men are of a
duskish color, well proportioned, stately in their gate, Laborious, but
treacherous, the Women sumptuous in Jewels, and even beautiful in blackness, by
reason of the delicate softness of their skins. In Tunis is the City Hippo of
which St. Augustine was Bishop; as also Tripoly, so called, as having three
Cities under its jurisdiction.

Tunis is a great City, containing 10000 Families. Algier is subject to the
Turk in some respect, and yet is a kind of Republique of it self, living wholly
by Piracy; it is very nobly built, and contains about 4000 Households.

Fez extends from Azamor to Tangier now in possession of the English, and by
the help of the Mole, which at vast charge has there been made, it may in time
become an excellent harbor for shipping.

The City Fez is great and incomparably situated, the Buildings stately to
admiration, their Roofs adorned with Gold, etc. and has above 700 Mosches or
Temples.

Of NUMIDIA and LYBIA.
To go into Numidia, we must pass over Mount Atlas, an Hill so high that its
top cannot be seen; whence the Fable, that Atlas sustained the Heavens on his
shoulders. The people have no settled place of dwelling, only stay so long as
Grass will serve for their Camels, and then remove to a new place.

Lybia joins to Numidia, and is so much a Desert, that a man may travel eight
days without finding water, so that Travelers must carry it with them or
perish.

Of the Land of NEGRO 's.
This is called so from the River Niger, or rather from the black color of the
Inhabitants; it has on the East the upper Ethiopia, on the West, the Atlantic
Ocean. The people are stupidly Ignorant, and gross Idolaters, yet have store of
Gold and Silver very fine and pure.

Of the Upper ETHIOPIA, or the Kingdom of PRESTER JOHN.
The upper Ethiopia is governed by a mighty Prince commonly called Presther (or
more properly Presbyter) John, it begins at the entrance into the Red Sea, and
contains in compass above 4000 miles they have plenty of Rise, Barley, Pease
and Beans, Salt is their most current money. Their woods are full of Basil and
other odoriserous Plants, they pretend to Christianity, to which they say they
were converted by the Queen Candaces Eunuch, mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles to be baptized by Philip, and that the Queen of Sheba that went to
hear the wisdom of Solomon was of their Country, and that she had a Son by him
who stole away the Ark of the Covenant, which they have yet to show, etc. The
Person of this Emperor is very much honored by the vulgar, to whom he shows
himself but thrice a year, viz. at Christmas, Easter and Holy-rood.

Of EGYPT.
This Kingdom reaches Eastward to the Arabian Deserts, and North to the
Egyptian Sea, being part of the Mediterranean; it is in length about 560 miles,
in breadth not above 140, and has no convenient Haven but that of Alexandria.

This was anciently the Granary of the world, and still yields plenty of Sugar,
Flax, Rice, all sorts of Grain, Fine Linen, Salt, Cassia, etc. This wondrous
fertility proceeds from the famous River Nilus, which from the 15th of June,
overflows all the Country for the space of forty days, and then drains up its
Waters again: during which Inundation, they secure their Cattle on Hills and
Villages, which are all built on the highest ground, and in the mean time Boats
supply the places of Horses and Camels for commerce.

The chief City is Alexandria, a free Port, heretofore much more eminent for
Trade than now.

There is likewise Grand Cairo, a City of a mavelous strength, eight miles in
compass, and very populous; it is the greatest Market for Sattins, Damasks and
Taffeta's in the world, but the main Commodities, as precious Stones, Spices,
Indian Stuffs, Gums, Perfumes, Amber, etc. are brought hither overland by
Caravans. Four miles from hence are the ruins of those Pyramids which Antiquity
celebrated as one of the worlds wonders.

The Red Sea washing this Country on the East, is so called from the color of
its Sand, and is in length 1600 miles. The old Cities Thebes and Memphis are
now known only in their ruins: the Turks are Lords here, and the People
generally Slaves and treacherous.

To this Country the world owes a great part of mysterious Learning, or rather
is bound to blame them for spoiling natural Philosophy with a mixture of
ridiculous Magic and superstitious vanities; whence our Vagabond
Fortune Tellers to this day take upon themselves the Title of Egyptians or
Gypsies. Their Priests of old were wont to express their meaning in
Hieroglyphics or odd Pictures. The People received the Gospel from St. Mark,
which they generally retained till the coming in of the Saracens, and then
embraced Mahumatism, which yet continues; only those that still remain
Christians, supposed to be no less than 50000, are called Cophti, because they
use Circumcision. They observe not the Lords day, nor any other Festival, but
only in the Cities: they embrace and read in their Liturgies a Gospel written
(as they say) by Nicodemus.

The AFRICAN ISLES,
Are either in the Ethiopick or Atlantic Sea, in the first is, Madagascar
otherwise called the Land of St. Laurence, abounding with all manner of Fruits
and Beasts Wild or Tame. It Is in length 1200 miles, situate under the Southern
Tropic. The People are rude, savage and treacherous; their Commodities are
Cloves, Ginger and Silver.

Zocotara, is an Isle lying just at the mouth of the Red Sea, 60 miles in
length, and 24 in breadth, rich in Aloes, Gums and Spices.

In the Atlantic are St. Thomas, an Island 180 miles about, lying directly
under the Equinoctial, very plentiful for Sugar.

Princes Island is situate between the Equator and the Tropic of Capricorn;
it is called so, because when the Portugals first conquered it, the revenues
were allotted to the Portugal Prince.

The Gorgades are nine Islands situate nigh Cape viride, in the Land of
Negro's, abounding in Goats, and now usually called the Islands of Cape Verde.

The Canary-Isles are in number seven, anciently for their fertility called the
Fortunate Islands; hence come our Canary Wines, as also the little rare singing
Birds called by that name. The Grand Canary excells the rest in greatness and
excellency, for thither all the others repair for justice. But Teneriffe
exceeds in situation and same, as being supposed to be the highest Land in the
world, the Mountain being fifteen miles high; from whence in all Maps and
Charts that I have published to the world, I have placed the first Meridian,
and from thence Eastward do reckon the Longitude.

The Azores are in number nine, of which Tercera being the greatest, does now
give name to all the rest; it is but eighteen miles in compass and abounds in
Oad. The second Isle of note, is St. Michael.

Of the 4th part of the world called AMERICA.
AMerica, first found out by Christopher Columbus a Genoese about the year
1486. But takes its name from one Americus Vesputius, who some time afterward
made a further and more full discovery thereof.

This large Region is very plentiful in Fruits and sundry Creatures that the
other parts of the world never knew; as also in Mines but especially Silver, of
which the Spaniards at their first coming thither, found incredible quantities,
and still supply Europe with that every year with their Plate Fleet. The
Inhabitants are of a complexion swarthy. These People are supposed to be the
progeny of the Tartars, with whose gross manners and ignorance they nearly
agree, as also in complexion; or else of the ten Tribes carried away by
Salmanaser.

America is divided by a certain Isthmus or narrow Neck of Land at Darien into
two parts, the one Northern called Mexicana, the other Southern or Peruana.

Of the English Empire in AMERICA.
Of that part of America called Mexicana, the greatest, or at least the best
part pays obedience to the English Scepter. As

1. New England, a very populous and thriving Colony. This Plantation was first
settled in the year 1623, the people are famous for the strictness of their
discipline and living, eminent Merchants, and of great commerce in many parts
of the world. They coin money of their own, and keep Printing Presses at
Boston, which is the chief Town of the Country, which is on the main land; the
furthest part of the Plantations, being bounded with vast Woods, so that the
utmost extent of the whole is not certainly known.

Virginia, so called in honor to Queen Elizabeth our matchless Virgin Queen in
whose days it was discovered, is situate on the same Continent, but more
Southerly; its Western Limits are unknown, but on the North it has Maryland,
and upon the South Carolina. It Is very populous, and almost incredible to think
what vast quantities of Tobacco is yearly brought from these Colonies to
England, to the happy livelihood of many thousand Families that deal in it.

Newfound-land, noted for the plenty of Fish we have from thence, lying on the
South of Davis's Streights.

Maryland, New York, and New Jersey, are new Plantations lying between
New England and Virginia. And there is lately added another Plantation called
Pensilvania granted by Patent from his Majesty to William Pen, Son to Sir
William Pen one of our Late Admirals at Sea, to him and his Heirs for ever.
Whose situation is at the head of the Bay of Chesopeack, from 40 to 43 degrees
of Latitude, and five degrees of Longitude to the West.

Of MEXICO or NEW-SPAIN.
Mexico, otherwise called New-Spain, whence his Catholic Majesty intitles
himself Hispaniarum Rex. Is bounded on the East without Calfornia, on the South
Peruana, but its Northern limits are unknown; so that we cannot certainly say,
whether this America be a Continent or an Island distinguished by Sea from Asia.
Here are abundance of Golden-sanded Rivers, store of Mines, Mulberry-trees,
Silk, Honey, Black Amber, etc. It was exceeding populous before the arrival of
the Spaniards, who in seventeen years, as Historians tell us, slew six millions
of them, rendering the name of Christianity which they pretended to teach them,
odious to these poor Heathen by their cruelties.

The City Mexico is the feat of an Archbishop and the Spanish Viceroy, it is in
compass six miles, and contains 600 Houses of Spaniards, and as many of
Indians: there is an University, a Printing House and Mint; the People are
witty and industrious, good handy-crafts-men, and Rich Merchants.

Jucutan is 900 miles in circuit, being a Peninsula situate over against the
Isle Cuba; the chief City is Guatimala, over against which lies the Island of
Sancta Cruze.

Of PERUANA.
Peruana, the other or Southern part of America, contains Castella Aurea,
Guiana, Pera, Brasile and Chile, it is in compass 17000 miles, and consequently
bigger than the other which is computed but 13000. It contains several
Provinces, as

1. Castella Aurea, so called from its abundance of Gold, is admirably stored
with Mines, Spices, Pearls and Medicinal Herbs.

2. Castella deloro, in which is Nombre de dios and Panama, two Towns through
which passes all the Traffic between Spain and Peru, for whatever comes from
Peru, is unladen at Panama, carried by Land to Nombre dedios, and there shipped
for Spain, and so on the contrary for what is to go to Peru.

3. New Granada, situate on the South side, a Country very strong by its
natural Fortifications of vast stony Rocks, yet it has many delicate Valleys
which yield much Fruit, and some Mines of Gold and Silver, but not in any great
quantity.

Cartagena, has a fruitful Soil and great Riches, the Metropolis hereof Sir
Francis Drake surprised in the year 1585; and besides inestimable Sums of
Money and Plate, took away with him from thence 240 pieces of Ordnance.

Guiana has on the East and South the vast River of Amazons, and on the North
the great River Orenoque, navigable with Ships of Burden 1000 miles together,
and with Boats and small Pinaces almost 2000. Yet that of the Amazons is
greater still, being navigable 6000 miles, and toward the Sea is said to be
200 miles broad; this Country is situate under the Equinox, and the People in
the winter dwell in Trees, for fear of being drowned in the usual excessive
Floods occasioned by the frequent Rains.

Peru has on the East, the Mountains, on the West Del Zur, or the Pacifique
Sea, so called because it has no Flux or Reflux; the Soil is luxuriant in all
manner of Grain, Fortunate in the civility of its Inhabitants, frequency of
Cities and salubrity of Air; abundant in Gold and Silver above any other in
America. The chief Cities are Saint Michaels, and Arequipa, situate on the
River of Plate, which is 200 miles long and 150 miles broad at the Mouth; the
King of this Country named Atabalipa, being overcome by the Spaniards, gave
them for his ransom an House piled up full on all sides with refined Gold and
Silver, being in estimation above ten Millions; which when they had received,
they most perfidiously slew him.

And here I would mind the Reader, and for the honor of our English Nation,
that several of our Nation has past and repast the Straights of Magelan into
the South Sea, or Mare Pacificum. 1. Sir Francis Drake, and in the year 1669,
Sir John Narborough went thither with two Ships, the one called the
Sweepstakes, and the other the Bachelour. Captain, Humphrey Flemming; both
which Ships proceeded till they came near the Straights of Magelan, not far
from Rio St. Julian (which was the appointed place of meeting) near which
place, they lost one another; whereupon the latter returned home, and the other
proceeded on her Voyage in the South Sea as far as Baldivia, and from thence
returned safe to England, in the year 1681. Some of our English men under the
command of our Captain Sharp and Captain Ringroso, after great exploits against
the Spaniards by Land, entered the South Sea, and took some of their ships; and
in one of them returned home with considerable riches, and came about Terra del
fueogo, and went so far Southerly, as far as sixty degrees South Latitude and
so came to England.

A MAPP OF ALL THE WORLD By John Seller Hydrographer to the King.
map of the World

EUROPE Lat N. 72. As it is now Divided Contines these Enquires Kingdoms and
Estates
On the West England Scotland Ireland France Spain Portugal
On the North The Empire of Russia Sweden Denmark
In the Middle Italy Germany XVII Provinces
On the East Poland Lythvania Turkey in Europe Petite Tartary

Lat. N. 35.

EUROPE
Europe is bounded on ye north with ye North-Sea, on the East with Asia, on the
West with the Atlantic Ocean, and on ye South with ye Mediterranean Sea, in
length 2800. and in breadth 1200 miles The Air tempe rate the Soil fertile
Mighty in Trade abounding in Richea excellent in all Arts and Sciences the
People of white skins generally professing ye Chrystian faith inhabited by the
lureage of Laphet the 3 Principal languages Latin Tutomck and Sclavoruan.

map of Europe

Great BRITAIN and IRELAND
Cities Rivers ENGLAND London Westminster -- Thames York -- Bristoll --
Alexander Chester -- Gloucester -- Humber Canterbury Lincoln -- Tyne Winchester
Exeter -- Sererne Worcester -- Norwich -- Bath and Wells -- SCOTLAND Edinburgh
-- Tweed St Andrews -- Tay St Iohnston -- Frith Dundee Glascow -- Don Aberdeen
-- Dee IRELAND Dublin -- Shanon Waterford -- Share Galoway -- Blackwatter
Limerick -- Barrow

Great BRITAIN and IRELAND.
map of Great Britain and Ireland

ITALIA
ITALY has these States
The Principality of Piedment -- City Tur^^ The Principality of Massa -- City
Ma^^. The Marquisat of (...) -- City (...) The Dukedom of Turcany -- City
Fleren^^ The Dutchies of Milan -- City (...) Parma -- City Par^^ Modena --
City Modena Mantua -- City Mantua
The Republiques of Venice -- City Venice Genoa -- City Genoa Luca -- City
Latea
The Bishopric of Trent -- City Lient St Peter's Patrimony Rome The Estates of
the Church The Bolognese Bologana The Ferran^^^ Ferrara Romagua Ravenna Urbino
Urbino Marca Ancona Sorcu^
The Kingdom of Naples
ITALIA
map of Italy

Turkey in EUROPE
Contains
Romania or Conthin^inople Thrace -- Adrinople Tartary the lesser -- Crim
Moldavia. -- Soczawa Walachia. -- Tmyorista Transilvaina. -- Alba Tulia or
W^senberg Hungaria. -- Buda Greece. -- Salonica S^^avonia. -- Ser^ia Bulaaria
Bosn^^. -- Taisa or Taiza ^^lands. in the -- Aegean Lo^ian Ad^^arique Sea^,
Turkey in EUROPE
map of European Turkey

The Empire of GERMANY is Divided into X Circles The Kingdom of Bohemia not
included
The Circle of
Franconia Francfort Noremberg
Bavaria Munichen Austria Vienna Suabia Ausburgh Ulme
The Higher Rhine or Alsatia Strasburgh Cassel
The Lower or Electoral Rhine Heidelbergh Mayence Treves Cologne
Westphalia Munster The Higher Saxony Dresden Berlin Sterin
The Lower Saxony Brunswick Hamburgh Lubeck
Burgundy Containing the 10 Catholic and 7 United Provinces
GERMANY
map of Germany

THE IX CHIEF ISLANDES in the MEDITERRANEAN
Counted in Europe -- are Cities.
Sicily -- Palermo. -- Messina. --
Sardinia. -- Callari. -- Corsica. -- Bastia. -- Majorca. -- Majorca. --
Minorca. -- Port Mahon. -- Corfu. -- Corfu. -- Cephalenia. -- Cephalenia. --
Zante. -- Zante. -- Crete or Candia. Candia. -- Canea. --

The IX Chief Islands in ye Mediterranean Counted in Europe
1 Sicily 2 Sardinia 3 Corsica 4 Majorca 5 Minorca 6 Corfu 7 Cephalonia 8 Zante
9 Candia


map of Mediterranean islands

There are in FRANCE
VIII. Ancient Soverain Courts of Justice or Parliaments.
Cities In The Isle of France The Parliament of Paris Normandy Rouan Britanny
Renes Guiene Bourdeaux Languedoc Toulouse Provence Aix Dauphine Grenoble
Burgundy Dijon To which have been added -- In Lorrain The Parliament of Mers
Bearn Pau

FRANCE
map of France

The Kingdom of SWEDEN
Has these VIII Considerable Parts
Countries Cities East Gotland -- Colmar West Gotland -- Gotenburgh Sweden --
Stockholm Upsal Lapland -- Finland -- Abo Ingria -- Noteburh Lifeland -- Riga

The Kingdom of SWEADEN.
map of Sweden

These VI Countries are Subject to the Crown of POLAND
The Kingdom of Poland divided into ye Higher and Lower Polonia Cities
Warsow Crakow
The great Dukedom of Lithuania Vilna Grodno
The Ukrain or Country of the Cosaques K^ow Bialacerke
The Duchy of Prussia Dantzik Koningsberg Pilaw Memel
The Duchy of Courland Mataw Samogitia Roziem
POLAND
map of Poland

These V Countries border on FRANCE
The Spanish Neatherlds or the Catholic Provmces Antwerp Brussels
Lorrain -- N^^y Alet^ Toul Verdun
The Franche Com^e or the County of Burgundy Dele Besanson
Swisserland -- Zurich Bearn Basel
Savoy -- Chamberry
The's Countries Border on FRANCE.
map of countries bordering on France

SPAIN was formerly divided into IV Kingdoms
Castile at present Divided into the Old and New Cities Madrid Tolede Burgos
Leon Bilbo Oriedo St Jacques in Gallicra Seril Grenada Murcia
Aragon Saragosa Barcelona ^alentia
Navar Panquelene Portugal Lisbon Porto Br^^anca Connbra Erora Fare

SPAIN and PORTUGAL.
map of Spain and Portugal

MOSCOVY or The Great and White Russia is Triply Divided into
Kingdoms
Casan Casan Astracan Astracan Bulgaria Bulgar
Duchies
Moscoria Moscow Woldemire Woledounre Duina Archangel Pleskow Pleske Smolenske
Smolenske
Hoords Comonalties of Tartars Pega Horda etc.

MOSCOVIA
map of Moscovia

DENMARK Has II Kingdoms
Denmark Cities.
Copenhagen Elsenor Odensee Sleswick Glukstad
Norway. Cities.
Bergen Dronthem Christiana
DENMARK
map of Denmark

ASIA A
Asia is bounded on the West with Europe, on the North with the (...)
Scythick-Ocean, on the East with the supposed Straits of (...), on the South
with part of the Mediterranean. The coasts of India Persia and Arabia: It is in
length 5200, and in breadth 4560 (...), It has ever been renouned for the
Creation of Man. and He noured for the birth of our Savior. In it was the
Garden of Eden, it has swayed the Scepters of the Monarchys of the Assyrian
Babylonians Medes and Persians. The people are generally of a Swarthy
complexion and either Pagans or Mahometans, the greatest monarchs of this part
are on the North ye (...), on the S and W the Turks and on the E the Chinenses
and Iaponenses.

map of Asia

ASIA Lat. N. 72. A

Has On ye. Main Land Turkey in ^sia Georgia. Arabia. Persia. Tartary. China.
In ye East Indies The Empire of the Mogol The Peninsula of India without the
Ganges The Peninsula of India within the Ganges
Islands In the Ocean In the Mediterranean



The Kingdom of CHINA Has toward the South X Provinces Besides VI toward the
North
Provinces Cities Nanquin -- Nanquin Chequian -- Han^cen Fuchien -- Fuchen
Canton -- Quangcen Quansi -- Quansi Yunnan -- Yunnan Quichen -- Quicheo Chiamsi
-- Nanc^un Suchuem -- Suchuem Huquam -- Ambian The North Provinces are
Provinces Cities Lealoton -- Lealeten Pequin -- Pequin Scianton -- Xanton
Sciansi -- Sciansi Sciensi -- Sigansu Honan -- Honan

The Kingdom of CHINA
map of China

PERSIA Has these Provinces
Provinces Cities Servan -- Tauris On ye Caspian Sea. Gilan -- Rast On ye
Caspian Sea. Tabarestan -- Asterabad On ye Caspian Sea. Rhoemus -- Thous On ye
Caspian Sea. Bestan On ye Caspian Sea. Gorgian -- Gorgian Hyrack Agemi --
Casbin Hispahan Chorasan -- Ka^em Herat Chusistan -- Souster Ardgan Fars --
Astachar Shiras Kherman -- Cherman Ornms Gombrone

PERSIA
map of Persia

Turkey in ASIA
Has these large Provinces
Provinces Cities Anatolia or Asia ^^lesse Bursia Su^yrua Trebyond Souria or
Syria -- Alexandrette Aleppo Antiochia Phoenicia -- Damascus Tire Sydon
Palestin or (...)-Land -- Terusalem Nazareth Bethelem Yerac or Chaldea --
Bagded Balsera Arzerum or Assyria -- N^^ire ^osul Diarbeek or ^esopotamia --
Carennt Haran Turcomania or the Greater Armenma -- Erzerum Cras or Chissery
Georgia -- Terlis Con^^^^a or Circassia -- Z^^gis

Turkey in ASIA
map of Asian Turkey

The Empire of the GREAT MOGVL
Has on the Main Land and -- in India without the Ganges -- These X Chief
Provinces
Cabul -- Cabul Candahar -- Candahar Ab^^^^t
Guzurat -- Surat (...)
Bengala -- Gour^ Bengala
Agra -- Agra Delli -- Delli Pengab -- Pengah or Lahor
Caslin^eer -- S^^mak^^ Siba -- Ho^^^r^ Iamba -- Iamba
The Empire of the Great MOGUL.
map of the Mogul Empire

The Peninsula of INDIA without the GANGES
Has these IX Great Realms or Estates
The Kingdm. of Decan -- Chaul The Kingdm. of Cucan -- Goa The Kingdm. of
Bisnagar or Narsinga -- Narsinga The Kingdm. and Coast of Malabar -- Calecut
Cochim
The Coast of the Piscary or Pearl fishing -- Tutucont The Naiques or Here --
ditary Lords -- Gingi Tanjaor Madure
The Coast of Cormanded St Thomas Mehapor
The Kingdm. of Coleonda Musuhapatan The Kingdm. of Orixa -- Orixa
The Peninsula of INDIA without ye GANGES
map of India

The Main Land of INDIA within the GANGES
Has these VIII Provinces
Provinces Cities Gortan. Gor. Pitan. Pitan. Kanduana. Karakatanka Patna.
Patna. Jesual. Rasapore. Mevit. Narral Udessa. ^ehana^. Patan. Gouro.

The Main Land of INDIA Within the GANGES.
map of India

The PENINSULA of INDIA within ye GANGES
Contains these VII large Kingdoms
The Kingdom of Aracan -- Aracan Pegu -- Pegn Siam -- Odia Malacca -- Malacca
Tunquim -- Kecio Cochinchina -- Facfo Camboia -- Camboia


The Pemnsula of INDIA within ye GANGES
map of India

The Asiatick Islands in the Oriental Ocean
are Reckoned under these VI Heads
The Maldivies -- Male The Isles of Ceylon Candea The Isle of Sumatra -- Achem
Borneo -- Borneo Iava -- Bantam Batavia

The Isles of the Moluccos -- Ternate Tider Celebes Gilole Amb^ina
The Philippine Isles Luson Manille Mindanoa Mindanoa
The Islands of Iapon Iapon -- Meaca Ximo -- Nangazacln Xioco -- Tonso

The ASTATICK ISLANDS
map of the Asiatic Islands

The Asiatique or GREAT TARTARY
Has these V Principal Parts
Tartaria the Desert The Sameids The Nagaian Tartars Cumbalich Justina
Usbeck or Zagathay Samarchand Bechara
Turchestian Chialis Chiartiam Thibet The Lake of Kithay
Cathay Cambalu the Residence of the Great Cham Teudue Tanifu
Tartary ye true The River Tartar, with a City so called The Hoord of Bargn
Nayman


Great TARTARIA
map of Tartary

GEORGIA Reckoned in the Asiatique Turkey is Subdivided into these IV Countries
Avogasia -- Sta Sophia Mingrelia -- Savatopoh Fazza
Gurgistan -- Bassachine Derbent
Zuiria -- Stranis or Albaida Zitrach Chipicha

GEORGIA
map of Georgia

ARABIA Is Divided into III Parts
Arabia the Stony. -- Herat formerly Petra Meab Esion Geber Sur
Arabia the Desert. -- Anna Sukana Mexat Ali Sumscabat or Sabat
Arabia the Happy. -- Medina or Medina Alnabi^^e ye City of the Prophet being
ye place of Mahomets birth Mecca the place of His Burial Zibit Aden Mascate

ARABIA.
map of Arabia

The II CONSIDERABLE ISLANDS in the MEDITERRANEAN
Reckond -- in Asia are
Cities Rhodes -- Rhodes Cyprus -- Nicosia Cyprus -- Famagousta

The two Chief -- Islands in ye Mediterranean Reckond in Asia.
map of Mediterranean islands

AFRICA Lat. (...) 35.
Is Divided into Africa or Libia The Mother or Ext^^^^ Africa Barbary
Biledulgerid or the country of Dates Egypt

The Lev^r or Intertor Africa Za^^ or the Desert. The Country of ye Negros.
Guin^^

Ethiopia The Hesher Ethiopia or Under Egypt Nubia Aballines Zanguebar
The Lower or Interier Ethiopia -- Congo The Coast of Cafres Mono motapa

Islands in the Mediterranean Western Ocean Eastern Ocean



AFRICA
Africa is bounded on the East by the Rod Sea or the Gulf of Arabia on the
West with the Atlantic Ocean on the N^vith ye Mediterraneau sea, and on ye S.
with ye Aethi opick Ocean. Situate most under the Torrid Zone. and is the
greatest Peninsula in the world being about 2000 leagues at breadth East and
West. and 1800 leagues in length North and South Here is professed Mahometisme
Paga^sme Christianity and ^^daisme. This parts is touched with ye Royal
Scepter of England in the strong hold of Langier.

map of Africa

The Higher and Lower ETHIOPIA
Contains these Chief Kingdoms
Kingdoms Cities Barnagasso -- Barya The Island of Gueguer -- Anciently ^eroe
Tigres -- Caxume Amara -- Amara Bagamedri -- Ambadara Dann^te -- Damut Dambea
-- Dambea Cafares -- Cafates Narea -- Narea Goyame -- Goyame

The Higher and Lower ETHIOPIA
map of Ethiopia

NUBIA
Math these Kingdoms.
Kingdoms Cities Gorham -- Gorham Cusa -- Cusa Nibia -- Nulna Dancala --
Dancala Lalac -- Jalac Bugilia -- Bugtha Caufila -- Cansila Danfila -- Dasila
These Chief Cities -- Gualna Darga

NUBIA
map of Nubia

The Country of the NEGRO'S and BLACKS
Has
On this Side of the River Niger the Kingdoms of Gualata -- Gnalata Genehoa --
Genehea Tombur -- Tombut Agades -- Agades Canum -- Cano Cassena -- Cassena
Gangara -- Gangara
On the other Side of the River Niger the Kingdoms of Melli -- Melli Gago --
Gago Zanfara -- Zanfara

The Country of the NEGRO'S or BLACKS
map of Africa

These ISLANDS Belong to Africa
(...) The Acores or Western Islands -- Pice Tercera Gra^^sa
N 32 The Madera Islands Madera Port Sands
N 28 The Canary Islands N 2^ Palma (...) (...)
N ^9 Cape de Verd Islands St^ (...) St (...) St (...)
N 13. St Thomas Island under the Equator Paresan S. 16. The Island of St
Helena -- S. ^ The I of Madagascar or St Laurence -- Fort Louis S. 25. N 13.
The I of Zoeotora or Adoes N 12 The I of Bebemandel at ^ month of ^ Red^^^ N.
34. Malta in ye Mediterrancan La Valette
These Islands Belong to AFRICA
map of Africa

The Coast of the Higher Ethiopia
Divided into the Coasts of Abex Ayan and Zanguebar Has these IX States
The Cities of Suaquem -- Arquice --
In Abex Adel -- Adel -- In Ayan Adea -- Adea -- In Ayan Magadoxa -- Magadoxo
-- In Ayan Brava -- Brara -- In Ayan Melinda -- Melinda -- In Zan guebar
Mombaza -- Mombaza -- In Zan guebar Quiloa -- Quiloa -- In Zan guebar The Isle
and City of Hozambique In Zan guebar
The Higher ETHIOPIA.
map of Ethiopia

BILEDULGERID
The Country of Dates Has these VIII Parts.
Suz. -- Taradande Dara. -- Dara Segelmesse. -- Segelmesse. Tegorarin. --
Tegorarin. Zeb. -- Zeb. Beledulgerid the Proper. -- Biledulgerid Fezzen --
Fezzen The Desert of Barca -- Ammon.
BILEDULGERID.
map of Biledulgerid

BARBARY Has these VII Kingdoms.
Morocco -- Morocco Fez -- Fez Tangier under the King of England
Trennsin -- Telensin Oran
Algier -- Algier Bugia Constantina
Tunis -- Tunis Biserta Goletta Cape Bonne
Tripoly -- Elliamma Tripoly ye Old and New
Barca -- Bennichum ant^ently Beremce Barca Coiroan antly Cyrene

BARBARIA.
map of Barbary

CONGO Has these VI Parts
Biafra -- Biafra The Anzicains Loanga -- Banza Leange Congo Divided into its
Provinces -- Sunda Song Pango Bata Bamba Pemba
Cacongo -- Zaire Angola -- Dongo
CONGO.
map of Congo

ZAARA or the Desert is Divided into these V. Deserts
Zanhaga -- Zanhaga Zuenziga -- Zuenziga Targa -- Torga Lempta -- Lempta Berdoa
-- Berdoa
On the S^and S.E. of these are the Deserts of
Gaoga -- Gaoga Borno -- Borno
ZAARA
map of Zaara

EGYPT is now Divided into these IV Parts
Cities The Higher Egypt anciently Thebais at present Said. Said Girgio The
Middle Egypt antly Heptanamos at present Bechria or Demesor. Memphis or Grand
Cairo The Lower Egypt antly the Delta at present Errif. Alexandria Rosetta
Damiata The Coast on the Red Sea. Sues The Coast on the Red Sea. Cossir

AEGYPTUS.
map of Egypt

GUINY
Is Divided into These III Principal Parts
Meleg^rette Cachien or Serra-Liona Guiny -- On ye Coast of ^vory
Assim Tabo
On the Gold Coast
St George de la Mina Fort Nassaw
The Kingdm of Benin Benin
GUINEA.
map of Guinea

The most Southern Parts of the LOWER ETHIOPIA are divided into II great
Countries
The Empire of the Monomotapa which contains The Galls The Monoemugt Butua
Monemotapa
The Cafreria or Land of Cafres which Has Malemba Benguela Mataman The Cafres
The Cape of Good Hope Safala

The Lower ETHIOPIA
map of Ethiopia

AMERICA. Lat. N. 80.
Is Divided into Septentrionahs or ye Northern America The Artick Lands Canada
or Now France Virginia and the English Plantations Florida New Mexico Mexion or
New Spain The Isles Antilles Lucayes Caribes or Canibal

(...) or ye Southern America -- Terra firma or the Main Land Guiana Brasil
Perit The Paraguay or Rio de la Plata Chili (...) or ye Southern America -- The
Magellanique Lands



Lat. S. 54.

AMERICA
America is divided into two great Prmins^la's, the Northermost (...) Mexicana
and the Southermost Peruana The first is divid^^ into several Provinces the
principal of which does Homage to Great Britains Mon^^ch. this Part was to the
Monour of our Nation first discovered by Madoc son to Owen Guined and afterward
by Sebastin Cabot at the charge of King Menry the 7th The second Peninsula
contains several Provinces belonging to the Crown of Spain and Portugal.
The whole Continent abounds with all things necessary for ye use of mon no^
only for food as fish flesh and fruits b^^ also for great q^^ntitys of Silver
that are found in ye bowels thereof

map of America

MEXICO or new SPAIN
The Kingdom of MEXICO New called NEW SPAIN Is thus Divided
Countries Towns New Gralicia -- Compostella Guadalaira -- Guadalira New Biscay
-- End Mexico -- Mexico Mechoacan -- Valadolid Panuco -- St Steren Iucatan --
Merida Guat^^ala -- St Jago Honduras -- Camayagua Nicaregua -- Leou Costa rica
-- Cartage Veragua -- Conception

MEXICO or NEW SPAIN.
map of Mexico

THE English Empire in AMERICA
Countries Towns Hudsons bay -- New found land -- St John's New England --
Boston Plymouth New England -- London Cambridge New York -- New York New Jarsey
-- New Castle Mary land -- St Maryes Virginia -- James's Town Carolina --
Charles Town

The ENGLISH Empire in AMERICA
map of America

BRAZIL
Is by the Portugals divided into these Capitanties
The Capitanie of Paraiba -- Paraiba The Capitanie of Tamaraca -- Tamaraca The
Capitanie of Pernambuco -- Chuda The Capitanie of Pernambuco -- Reely The
Capitanie of Seregi^pe -- Seregi^pe del Rey The Capitanie of Balna de Tados los
Sanctos St Sab^ader The Capitanie de Los Istcos -- Las (...) The Capitanie de
Porto Seguro -- Porto^ Segure The Capitanie de Spiritu Sancto -- Spiritu
Sauches The Capitanie de R^^o Janeiro -- St Sebestian The Capitanie de San
Vin^ente -- Les Sanctos
To which have been added N. W of the former
The Capit^^ Para -- Para The Capit^^ Maranham -- Maranham The Capit^^ Ciara --
Cia^a The Capit^^ Rio Grande -- Poteng^
BRAZIL
map of Brazil

TERRA FIRMA. is Divided into N. Great Governments
The Government of Terra firma -- Panama Nombro de Dios
The Government of Cartagena -- Cartagena The Government of Sancta Martha --
Sancta Martha The Government of Rio de la Hacha Nra Signra de los Remedios The
Government of Vene zuela or Little Venice -- Coro The Government of Paria or
New -- Comana or New Cordova The Government of The New Kingdm. of Granada
Sancta Fe de Bogota The Government of The Lake of -- Parima The Government of
Guiana -- Manoa or El Doroda The Government of Caribiana -- Fort St Louis
TERRA FIRMA.
map of Terra Firma

NEW MEXICO
Has these IX Prorinces
The Province of Anian. -- On ye Strait of Aman The Province of Quivira. -- The
Province of New Albion. -- The Province of Conibas. -- The Province of Cibola.
-- Granada. The Province of The Apaches. -- The Province of New Mexico. Sta.
Fe. The Province of New Granada. -- The Province of The Island of California.
--
NEW MEXICO
map of New Mexico

PARAGUAY or Rio de la Plata
Has these VIII Sarge Countries
Cities Paraguay. -- Guaybiane. Chaco. -- St. Jago del Estero Rio de la Plata.
-- Assumption. Tucuman. -- Corduba. Trapalanda. -- St. Louys. Parana. --
Incarnation. Guayra. -- Guayra. Urvaig. -- Visitation.

PARAGUA.
map of Paraguay

The Chief Islands of the Antilles and Lucayes are VII
The Antilles Cuba St Jago ^avana or St Chrystophers
Iamaica Port Royal Port Maria Oris^m
Hispaniola St Domingo Port de la Plata
Porto Rico St Iuan
The Lucayes Lucayon Bahama which gives the Name to the Channel between these
Islands and Florida Guanahani the first land discovered by Columbus near
America (...) by him called St Salvador

The Chief Islands of ye ANTILLES and LUCAYES
map of the Antilles and Lucayes

CANADA or NEW FRANCE
Has these VI Countries
Estoriland or Terra de Labrador alias New Bretany -- Breast New France --
Quebec Tadousac The 3 Rivers
Saguenay -- Acadie -- Port Royal La Herue New Swedland -- Christina The People
of -- Hurons Algouquins Iroquois


Canada or NEW FRANCE.
map of Canada

FLORIDA is Divided into these V Parts.
The Peninsula Cabo de Florida The Spanish Florida -- St. Matthew St. Augustino
Quilata
The French Florida -- Charles Fort Carolina
The Kingdom of Apalacites -- Melilot The Isles of Bermudes lying opposite to
the Eastern Sh^ar
FLORIDA.
map of Florida

MEXICO or New Spain is Comprised under these IV Audiences or Soverain Courts
of Justice
St. Domingo Has under it The Islands in ye. Gulf of Mexico Florida Rio de la
Hacha Venezuela in ye New Audalusia
Mexico Has Panuco St. Estevan del Pnerto Mechoacan Mechoacan Thascala Los
Angelos Guaxaca Antequera etc.
Ouadalajara or New Gallicia has Cinaloa St. Jeban New Biscany Ends Los
Zacatecas Zacatecas Chametlan St. Sebastian etc.
Ouatimala has Soconusco Guavetlan Chiapa Ciudad Real Vera pax Vera pax
Honduras Valladolid etc.

MEXICO or new SPAIN
map of Mexico

The Western Coast of the Southern America Contains these III large Countries
Peru. Popayan -- Popayan Cah Quito -- Quito Los Quixos -- Bacca Pacomoros --
St. ^ean de los Saliuas Peru Lima or de los Reyes Los Charcas Cusce Los Charcas
Pot^ssi Los Charcas La Plata La Siera -- Sta. Crux de la Siera
Chili. Chili -- St. Jago de Chili La ^mperiale Los Arauques
The Magellanique Lands The Magellanique Lands -- Ciudad del Roy ^lippe The
Patagona The Magellanique Islands or Terra del Fugo

The West Coast of SOUTH AMERICA.
map of South America

The Artick Or POLAR LAND
Has these II Parts
Groenland -- Alwigford Skegford Barford.
Isleland Halar Episcop. Reynebroers. Mid Astadt. Modruneller. Mumhapnera.
Naki. Mokrus^ld. Gre^nastri. Skalholt Episcop. Piknek^p. Ha^er. Staph^lt.
^eplawick. Melastader. S^l^oge. Bign^^^r. Oddo. Ikrid^ cloyt. ^ltaga -- Hilbi
-- Poma -- Gunpur -- Heirskeid. Bride Kurbar. Hop Reybru. Stadur Natz. Gliss
Kolbe^stad. --

the Artick POLE
map of the Arctic region (north pole)


