IMPRIMATUR.

Z. Isham R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris,
April 6. 1686.
REMARKS UPON THE REFLECTIONS Of the Author of Popery Misrepresented, etc. ON
HIS ANSWERER; Particularly as to the Deposing Doctrine. In a Letter to the
AUTHOR of the Reflections. Together with some few Animadversions on the same
Author's Vindication of his Reflections.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1686.

SIR,
IT is not any distrust of the Abilities of your former Adversary (which have
sufficiently made him known) nor an overweening Opinion of my own undertaking,
that has engaged me in this Controversy, but a design to serve the Interests
of Truth, and to assure you, that you have not yet convinced the World, that
your Character of your Religion, as you represent it, is so just, and exact, or
your Reasonings so cogent, but there is something [perhaps material, and of
weight] to be objected to both; and I shall follow the Method, that Refl. p. 1.
you profess to like, to reason as closely, as I can, with all moderation, and
calmness, without making any Reflections, but such as cannot be avoided, when I
treat of some Subjects, among which, I dare undertake, none shall personally
concern you; tho you will allow me to tell you, you have not so carefully
followed your own praescriptions, when you impeach our Refl. p. 2.
Church in general, reckoning her Books of Homilies among those Books, that
have misrepresented Popery; and in particular charge your learned, and modest
Adversary with the P. 3, 4, 18.
same crime, and too liberally bestow your Characters on him, charging him
Refl. p. 6.
with wronging you, and imposing upon his Reader, with P. 16, 17, 18.
Sophistry, with understanding neither Law, nor Logic, and with being
insincere, and using tricks, but probably the Answer has made you angry, and
men in a passion cannot forbear hard Language.

I do acknowledge, that it is severe dealing to pick up all the extravagant
passages in private Authors, and to father them on the whole Church (no Church,
of whatever denomination, being without both evil men as to their Morals, and
opinionative men as to their Tenets) but withal I must say, that it is one
thing to cite Quotations from all sorts of Authors, and another thing to cite
Men of Eminence, and Authority in your Church, (and such, whose Station,
Learning, and Repute, were as great, as ever the Bishop of Condom's, or
Monsieur Veron's, whom yet you rely upon, as you also sometimes quote other men
of your Communion to confirm your Opinions) whose Books also have come into the
World with License, and Privilege, and Commendations of the Authors, and whose
Assertions have never been condemned, after they have been published, (and some
of them probably Members of that very Trent-Councel, which you stick to for the
Articles of your Faith) and in matters of fact, which cannot be foreign to the
Controversies between your Church, and ours, there is a necessity of having
recourse to such Writers, as I shall be often forced to do in these Remarks.

And that I may consider every thing methodically, that belongs to this Topic,
I cannot but observe your Refl. p. 13, 14.
Reflections on the Opinions of some Eminent men in our Communion, which, say
you, we are unwilling to have charged upon our Church. For the first, which you
charge on your Antagonist, That, good works of justified persons are not free,
I must say, that either I misunderstand your Adversary, or you do misrepresent
him; for when Chapter 6. p. 43. Ed. 3.
he says, That, what we pretend to merit by, must be our own free act; (for
these are his words, and not as you quote them) citing for it the Authority of
the Jesuit Coster's Enchiridion, and adds, That therefore the works of
justified persons cannot be said to be their own free acts, because the power
of doing them depends upon Divine assistance; and being done by the power of
God's grace, which could never have been done without it, cannot be (for that
reason) truly meritorious, he is so far from giving an account of the Doctrine
of our Church, that he proves from the principles of your own, that, if good
works be done only by the Grace of God, and made acceptable only through the
merits of Christ, they cannot be truly said to be meritorious, because not the
free acts of them, that do them.

When Mr. Thorndyke allows of prayers for the Dead (though you quote no Book of
his for that Assertion) he does no more, than in some sense our Church allows,
when it prays for a joyful Resurrection in her Office at Funerals; and whatever
the good man might add else of his own, was but his private Opinion (as is also
his notion, that the Eucharistical Sacrifice is truly the Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross propitiatory, and impetratory, as well as the other, which I
take upon your credit, not having the Book by me, out of which you cite the
Opinion) however we assert, that Mr. Thornayke never owned Prayers for the
Dead, as you do (but in the sense of some of the Ancients) for he denied
Purgatory, upon which you ground your Prayers for the Dead, and that our
Blessed Savior is really present in the Sacrament, is the Doctrine and Belief
of the Church of England, and did not you limit that Real Presence to
Transubstantiation, there would be no difference between you, and us in that
point.

I cannot but observe your disingenuous manner of treating the Author of
Jovian, in charging him with a disloyal principle, who has given as many
Instances of his Loyalty, in the most difficult times, as any man of his
station; and were there no other, the writing of that excellent Treatise, in
that critical juncture, is an undeniable evidence of it, when by defending the
Succession, and the Doctrine of Non-resistance, he acquired the ill will, and
displeasure of all the disloyal Party. Why did not you, nor any other of the
English Roman Catholics, write then in the defense of those Doctrines, against
the disloyal and rebellious Doctrines of Julian?

The Press was open for you, and perhaps there was reason for your not
answering of them, Praefat. Billarm. ante tractat. de potestate summi Pont.
adversus G. Barclay.
because the generality of the Writers of your Church agree with that Author in
his principles of disloyalty. Well, but you have found out one disloyal
principle in Jovian, but are you sure of it? It is not your saying, It is a
disloyal principle, that makes it to be so, and therefore I must desire you,
and those that perhaps are misled by you, to read the Book from p. 139. to p.
152. out of which you have cited the passage, and then you will find it to be
such a disloyal principle, Theod. on Romans 13.1.
as will not allow any Christian subject [(...)] to pray for the death of a
Nero, Dioclesian, (though he set up Inscriptions, ob deletum nomen
Christianum,) Constantius, or Valens, but only for a Julian, whose Apostasy
and Wickedness is fingular in Ecclesiastical History, and the like of whom in
all probability can never be expected again.

Nay Sir, this disloyal principle will not let Christian snbjects pray, for the
death of a Julian, though he tyranizes never so much over their bodies, goods
and liberties, if he do not blaspheme Christ, and persecute the Church of God,
with a diabolical spite, against the evidence of Divine Miracles. It leaves the
Christian subjects of all Tyrants, but such as are Julians indeed, under the
obligation of praying for them, according to the Apostle's direction, and the
practice of the Primitive Christians, which the Author of Jovian has so much
insisted upon, and commended; and his Prince must be a Julian indeed, a Julian
in all circumstances, before he can be so much as tempted to pray against him;
for he does not say, that he would pray, but that he should be tempted to pray
for the destruction of a Julian indeed. And it had been happy for the Christian
world, if the chief Pastors, and Bishops, and Councils, and Doctors, and
Casuists, of that which you call the Catholic Church, had never taught any
principle more disloyal than this. Now Sir, I beseech you, to tell me, how much
disloyalty there is in this principle, which secures all Infidel, Heretical,
and Apostate Princes against the Prayers of their Christian subjects, unless
they be in all degrees as bad as Julian, and secures even Julians themselves
against all resistance? and how much disloyalty there is in a man, who by his
principles will pray for all Tyrants, but such an one as Julian was, according
to the Author of Jovian? Sir I would to God you, and your Doctors would declare
as much Loyalty as this; and I desire you to tell me, that suppose a Roman
Catholic Prince should become a Julian indeed, and take up the methods of that
Apostate, whether you think his Roman Catholic Subjects would be tempted to
pray for his destruction? and if they should do so and no more, do you think
they would transgress any rule of Christian Loyalty? Answer me these two
questions sincerely and possitively; and if your answer to the last, be
affirmative, give your arguments for your Opinion, and I dare engage, the
Author of Jovian shall submit to your reasons, or answer them.

For I am confident he has no fondness for his Opinion, to which it is evident
he was led, by his great Charity for the Bishop, and Church of Nazianzum. And
though in apologizing for them, he has asserted, that he should be tempted to
pray for the destruction of a Julian indeed, yet he is so Loyal a Person, that
I believe he would overcome the temptation, and only forbear praying for him,
as having sinned the sin unto death.

After which Apology you will suffer me to tell you, that your Reflections will
hardly be called an answer to the Doctrines, and Practices of the Church of
Rome, because in them you have not said a word to some material points of
Controversy between you, and us, stated in that Book out of the Trent-Council
and Catechism, as if either the right were on your Adversaries side [which, I
suppose, you will be loath to acknowledge] or his reasonings were unworthy your
second thoughts [which, I suppose, you will not own, and if you do, few wise
men will acquiesce in your Sentiments] for you wholly praetermit reflecting
upon the Chapters of the Eucharist, of Indulgences, of satisfaction ex
condigno, of keeping the Scriptures, and Prayers in an unknown Tongue, of
communion in one kind, and of adding the Apocrypha, and traditions to the holy
writ, with some others; which, being some of the most material points in
difference between your Church, and ours, will either deserve some new
thoughts, or you will allow us to say, that that book cannot be thought an
answer, which in silence passes by, or leaps over so many weighty things, that
make up so much of the Controversy.

You assure us, Refl. p. 5.
that the Council of Trent is received here, and all the Catholic World over
as to its definitions of Faith, though it be not wholly received in some places
as to its other decrees, which relate only to discipline. Where I shall not
ask, what you mean by the Catholic World, for I am well assured that you mean
all Christians of the Roman persuasion, which is a very narrow notion of the
Catholic World, excluding all other Christians from being Members of the
Catholic Church, but those of your own Opinion; so that neither the Greek
Church, nor the rest of the Eastern Christians are in your sense any more
Catholics, than the Church of England, and the rest of the Protestants (though
anciently any man, or Church of men, were called Catholic, because they agreed
with the whole Catholic Church in Faith; but now the holy Catholic Church of
Christ must lose its name, if it agree not with the particular Church of Rome)
but I would willingly know of you, whence any particular Church has that
power, that it may receive a general Council (as you call that of Trent) in
some things, and not in others? I thought, that the highest authority of the
Church on Earth had been a general Council, and if so, why its definitions in
matters of discipline should not be received and observed by all particular
Churches, is to me a great question; for I cannot but see, that one of these
two things must follow from your Opinion, either that Councils and Popes are
fallible (for if they are deceived in one Opinion, such as that of the power of
the Church to depose Princes, why may they not be deceived in another, such as
Transubstantiation, or Purgatory?) or else, that they are infallible in greater
matters only, and then to me it is a great wonder, that they should err in
things of less moment; and I never yet understood, but that if general Councils
could decide matters of Doctrine, but that they had also as great a power in
matters of discipline (for if it be a lawful preface to the decrees of all
Councils, as your men say, Visum est spiritui sancto, and nobis, then the holy
spirit is doubtless their guide in matters of discipline, as well as in matters
of Doctrine.) I am sure, that the Ancient Councils took upon them to decide
both by their authority, and all Christians thought themselves obliged to
follow their dictates; so the first general Council of the Apostles bound up
all Christians from eating things strangled, and Blood; so the Council of Nice
determined the precise day, when Easter should be celebrated, as well as the
Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father; and so also the second general
Council made Constantinople a Patriarchate as well as Rome; to go no further.
And I find no persons disputed those constitutions (though only in matters of
Discipline, and Government) till the Popes began to assert their Authority in
opposition to general Councils.

And whereas Refl. p. 6.
you say, that your Adversary wrongs you, and imposes upon his Reader, by
saying, that you give your private sense, and Opinion only of the Articles of
your Religion contrary to the Bull of Pius 4. pleading in your own behalf, that
you expound the Canons of the Trent- Council according to the Catechism set
forth by the order of the Council, and the Pope, as if both of them allowed of
it; I must say, that this cannot be, for the Council never saw the Catechism,
and consequently could never approve, that they never saw, unless they also
were bound to exercise an implicit Faith; for though they ordered a Sess, 18.
and Sess. 25.
Catechism to be published (having observed, how much the Protestants prevailed
against their Church by their constant Catechizing) they left it wholly to the
Pope to see it done, and to give it authority; and this the Author of the
Prolegomena to the Paris Edition of that Catechism, An. 1671. fairly
acknowledges Proleg. 2. and 3.
, affirming, that after the dissolution of the Council, An. 1563. several
Fathers were summoned to Rome to make this Catechism, among whom the principal
man was S. Barromee (as you call him) Archbishop of Millan; we are also told,
that Cardinal Seripandus made the explanation of that Article (one holy
Catholic Church) Michael Medina of another, etc. and that after it was
finished, it was An. 1566. offered to Pope Pius 5. for his approbation, who
committed the examination of it to Cardinal Sirlet, who taking to himself the
assistance of other learned men, examined both the matter, and language of it,
after which the Pope gave his approbation, and ordered it to be printed by
Paulus Manutius, confirming it by his Bulls. And Possevine tells us, that
Gregory the 13. made this Catechism the rule, by which he reformed the Canon
Law; so that if Refl. p. 6.
you interpret the Canons of the Council by the Catechism, then the Canons
depend upon the Catechism for their meaning, and the sense of the Catechism
upon the Pope, who gave it suthority, by which deduction it appears, that your
Rengion is still built not on the Council, but on the Pope; and perhaps it was
for this reason, that the Italian Bishops in their Synods (as do the Synods of
Roven, and Aix in France) call it not the Trent, but the Roman Catechism, for
in truth so it is. Against all which I know only this to be objected, that the
same men, that made the Canons, made the Catechism (which is hardly true, as to
every particular person) but to that I answer, that I believe, you will not
averr; that the same men have the same assistances in a Council, and out of it;
so that were the assertion true, yet the one being done in Council, had the
assistance of the Blessed Spirit (as you hold) to assist the Compilers; which,
I presume, you will not say, that the same men had, when out of the Council.

And if this be so, then does not this make the Pope judge of Controversies of
Faith? For, say you, the Church must interpret Scripture, and interpret
Articles of Faith declared in Councils, which Church must either be the Church
Representative, or the Pope; now to hope for a general Council upon every
emergent dispute in matters of Faith, is a vain exspectation, and if so, you
will do well to show us any other judge in such cases, but the Pope; unless
every particular Church must judge for it self, or every private person be his
own director, and then, where is the interpretation of the Church Catholic?

Now if the Pope be the Judge, how know we, but the next Pope may require the
belief of the Deposing Doctrine, and expound the passages of former Councils
that look that way, as Articles of Faith? what would you do in that case,
especially if the generality of the Ecclesiastics should side with him [as
they did in the case of the Emperor Henry 4. and of our King John] and in
their Synods declare for the Ecclesiastical Monarchy? -- and upon this
supposition, how know we, but that, although the present Pope has confirmed
the Bishop of Condom's Book, another Pope may condemn his mincing the Articles
of Faith? for we do not want Instances of Popes, who have rescinded, not only
one another Acts, and Ordinations, but one another Decrees, even in what they
have called matters of Faith; although I must confess, what is very observable,
that though very many Popes have asserted the Ecclesiastical Power over
Princes, and their Right of Deposing them, we never read of one of them, that
condemned the Doctrine.

You further say, Refl. p. 7.
that though the Trent Council mention the Aid, and Assistance of the Saints,
and Angels over and above their Prayers, yet it means no other Aid, but that of
their Prayers, which seem to me not so agreeable to the words of the Council
Sess. 25.
, which are, That it is good, and useful ad sanctorum orationes, opem,
auxiliumque confugere, to fly to their Prayers, Aid, and Assistance. Now I
cannot believe, that the Fathers of that Council would have explained a
particular act by two more general words, nor when they had mentioned in
particular, Prayers, would they, I believe, have afterward inserted in general
their Aid, and Assistances, unless the Aid, and Assistances were distinct from
their Intercession; and this is agreeable to your allowed Prayers in your
Missal, where you beg God, Dec. 6. in fest. S. Nicol.
ut ejus meritis, and precibus, etc. that by the merits, and prayers of St.
Nicolas, you may be delivered from the flames of Hell. And again, Jul. 6.
Octav. SS. Petri, and Pauli.
That by the merits of St. Peter, and St. Paul, you may attain the glories of
Eternity, where the Merits, and Intercessions of the Saints are manifestly
distinguished, as they are also in the Trent-Catechism, Part. 3. praecept. 1. n.
24.
where in the Margin there is this Note, The Saints help us with their Merits;
and in the body of the Catechism these; They always pray for the happiness of
men, and God confers many benefits upon us, eorum merito, and gratia, for their
merits, and sake; and truly, were we assured that the Guardian Angels could
hear us, I see no reason why we should scruple any more to pray them to protect
us against the Devil, and all other Enemies that may hurt us, than to beg them
to intercede for us to God; and this also is agreeable to the Catechism Vbi
supr. n. 18.
.

Your next Reflection p. 8.
is about the merit of good works, and your self, and adversary are agreed,
that Can. 32. Sess. 6. of the Council of Trent there is no mention of the
qualification of Merit with respect to dependence on God's grace, goodness, and
promises; but both in that Canon, and Can. 26. the words are plain, quae ab eo
per Dei gratiam (misericordiam) and Jesu Christi meritum, etc. And if so, the
Controversy seems to me easily decided; for if it be of grace, how is it then
of works? where is the merit?

Your Answer to the Goliath Argument of your Adversary, as you are pleased to
call it, I remit to be considered toward the end of these Remarks, because it
ought to be spoken to more largely, and by it self, and proceed to take notice,
that Refl. p. 11.
you blame your Adversary for taking the sense of your Church from some
expressions in your old Missals, and Rituals, [tho I am apt to think, that the
Church of England will be contented to be judged by her Liturgy, and Rituals in
the like case] but perhaps you are not disgusted at the use of your Missals,
but at the use of old Missals; and I am persuaded, that you have reason so to
be, because the subtilty of the modern Church has made it self appear in your
present Missals, and Breviaries, as well as in your Edition of the Vulgar
Translation of the Bible, and in other Treatises. For instance, in the old
Roman Breviary printed at Venice An. 1482. and at Paris An. 1543. Jun. 28.
lect. 2. noct. 2. S. Leonis, the words run thus, In eo Concilio damnati sunt
Cyrus, and Sergius, Honorius, Pyrrhus, Paulus, etc. in that Synod Cyrus, and
Sergius, Honorius, etc, were condemned; but in the new Breviary the name of
Honorius is left out, which, had it been left there, would have reflected too
much on the Papal Infallibility, and informed the World, that even Popes
themselves have fallen into Heresy; while in the same Office they take care to
keep up the memory, that that Pope Leo 2. fregit superbiam Ravennatum, brought
the Archbishop of Ravenna to acknowledge the Roman Supremacy, which before that
time that See did not.

A second Instance may be this: In all the ancient Missals in Cathedra, S.
Petri Antioch, Feb. 22. (as also in the old Diumale printed at Antwerp 1553.)
the Prayer is read in these words, Deus qui B. Petro Apostolo collatis clavibus
regni coelestis animas ligandi, atque solvendi pontificium dedisti, i. e. O
God, who having given thy blessed Apostle St. Peter the Keys of thy heavenly
Kingdom, gave him Episcopal power of binding, and loosing Souls; but they
have now left out the word Animas, i. e. Souls; for with that limitation the
Pope's power was only Priestly to use the Keys in binding, and loosing men's
Souls, but without that limitation every man is at liberty to believe that St.
Peter's Keys may be employed in temporal affairs also, in binding Kings, and
setting up a Pontifical Monarchy, to which I shall add one Instance more; that
whereas in the Sacramentarium of St. Gregory the Prayer for St. Leo runs thus,
Annue nobis, Domine, etc. Grant, O Lord, that this Oblation may be advantageous
to the Soul of thy Servant Leo; now the words are altered into, Annue, etc.
Grant, Lord, that by the intercession of thy Servant Leo, this Oblation may be
profitable to us; the first being an Instance of the Ancients Prayers for the
Dead, for Saints, as well as others; the latter an endeavor to countenance
Prayers to Saints by asserting their intercession.

And whereas to requite us for quoting your Missals Ibid.
, you object to us all the expressions of Prayer, Preaching, and Devotion in
our Church, the parallel does not hold, unless you mean our authorized Liturgy,
in whose collects we are ready to vindicate, whatever is asserted. Nor is it
fair to say, that an Atheist may make himself sport with Scripture, if he may
be allowed to separate an infinite number of expressions there, i. e. as I
understand you, to make use of broken sentences (for if an Atheist uses
Scripture in the sense, to which the coherence leads him, he can never make
Christianity ridiculous, much less as ridiculous as Turcism) and for the
passages quoted out of your Missals, they are quoted in the sense, in which
they are meant, and if you deny this, you may right your self by showing the
contrary.

Nor do you do well with the Church of England to say, Refl. p. 11.
she allows the Psalms in Meeter. I dare be confident to averr, that the
Singing Psalms (as they are usally called) were never commanded by our Church
to be used, and are no part of our service, as our Rubric's will inform you,
where there is not the lest mention of them; though we acknowledge, the custom
was brought in through the connivance of our Governors, who at that time were
intent upon matters of greater moment; nor do we say, that the sense of the
Church will help out the nonsense, or ill expressions of any of those Rhymes
(which is a subtle insinuation) but withal we say, that since custom has
brought in the use, no Priest of our Communion, that I know of, is so weak (I
am sure, no one ought to be so) but he knows how to choose out of that great
number some few Psalms, that are pertinently enough translated, and incentive
of Devotion, by singing of which neither God is dishonored, nor the
Congregation engaged to any thing, that is either evil, or ridiculous; which
Apology cannot be made for any of your Missals, which your Priests were obliged
to use without any power left them to choose what Collects, or Antiphona's,
etc. they pleased.

And now you will allow me to smile, when Refl. p. 12.
you say, that if we conclude a Papist guilty of Idolatry, because he bows
down, kneels, etc. to an Image, we may as well say, that Abigail was guilty of
constructive Idolatry, when she fell on her face before David, and so are
Subjects, when they kneel to their Prince, and the Lincolns-Inn-Field Beggars,
when they kneel for an Alms to those, who pass by. For these instances do not
reach the case, that we are talking of; for if Abigail should have kneeled
before the Picture of David, or a Subject before the Picture of his Prince, or
a Beggar before a Gentleman's Picture, and begged with earnestness, and seeming
devotion any blessing, there is no sober man, but would believe, that they were
either very mad, or very foolish; but if they thought them sober, and in their
right sense, (as we do believe your people at Church to be) they cannot be
acquitted of Idolatry, if so be the honor be Religious (as you acknowledge,
your veneration of Images is more than civil honor) so that by these instances
you seem to run into the error of those Alens. Aq. Bonav. etc. apud Bellar.
to. 2. lib. 2. c 20. 2. Opinio.
Schoolmen, that the same honor (let it be Latria, hyperdulia, or dulia) is
due to the Image, that is, due to the person represented; and if any Law be to
be judged of by the common practice (as the Maxim faith, Lex currit cum praxi)
this is very plain from the usages of the generality of people in your Church.
And I am sure, (to confirm this your way of arguing) that I have somewhere read
(though I cannot now readily light on the place) that Scribanius affirms, that
Adoration of Saints, and Images is very lawful, because Abraham bowed down to
the Children of Heth, Genesis 23.7. Surrexit Abraham, and adoravit populum terrae,
filios, viz. Heth. As it is in the Vulgar Latin. And if I must not judge of
any man's Idolatry by his outward actions (which is your exception) then I can
never know any man to be an Idolater; for a Heathen may fall down before one of
his Idols, and call upon it for help, and yet say, that his intention is just,
and that he only meant thereby to worship the True God, which is the excuse
made by the men of your Church.

After this, Refl. p. 16.
you compare the Power of the Pope to that of Civil Powers, as to the Obedience
due to them from their Subjects; but, pray deal heartily, Do you believe the
Pope to have no more Authority in commanding Obedience, than Civil Powers have?
Doubtless you do believe him to have more Authority, or else, why do so many of
your Church refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance, which yet you Cath. princ.
sect. 2. 4. p. 3.
allow to be a lawful Oath? for you say, they refuse it, not for any
unlawfulness in the Oath, but because the Doctrine of Deposing Princes is
therein called Heretical, which they cannot allow of, as the word is understood
in a Catholic sense (where you will allow me to observe, that for the true
notion of Heresy, you depend on the Pope's Breve, and so allow the Pope to be
a Judge in matters of Faith; for Heresy is contrary to the Faith, and
consequently the Deposing Power, which the Pope has determined, is a matter of
Faith) and why do they follow the Papal Dictates in those things, wherein by
the Laws of God, and Nations they are bound to submit to their Superiors?

Here also I observe, that when Popery misrepresented, p. 46.
you Treat of the Pope's Power, you give your self a great latitude, when you
say, That you never scruple to receive his Decrees, and Definitions, such as
are issued forth by his Authority, with all their due Circumstances, and
according to Law; but never tell us, what those Circumstances are (as your
Adversary well remarks) which puts me in mind of somewhat, which your Tanner
disp. 1. de fid. q. 4. dub. 6. n. 263. Compton. in 22. dis. 22. 5.
Authors say concerning the Bull of Sixtus 5. prefixed to his Edition of the
Vulgar Translation, which was afterward recalled by Clement 8. That it was true
the Bull was printed with the Bible, but that it was not affixt to the Gates of
St. Peter 's Church, and in the Campo fiore so long, as it ought to have been
according to the Laws of the Romish Chancery, as if such little things as those
made Ecclesiastical Decrees more, or less valid.

And now to show you, that your Answerer did not show his Learnlng in
discovering, that the Popes have dispenc't only with positive Institutions, but
not with the Moral Law, with Lying, and Forswearing, (as if he sought a knot in
a Bull-rush, and took Sanctuary in a Mystery, as you term it, by talking only
in general terms) what think you of the many Dispensations, that have been
given by former Popes to the Subjects of this, and other Kingdoms, to break
their Oaths of Allegiance, and Duty to their Sovereigns? (the relation between
Princes, and their Subjects, being not grounded on their being Christians, but
on the Obligation of Civil Society, so that a dispensing with the Oath of
Allegiance, is a dispensing with a Duty of Natural Religion, which binds
Subjects to obey their Superiors.) For either Subjection to Princes is a Duty
of the Fifth Commandment, (as we reckon them) Honor thy Father, and Mother,
etc. or it is not; if it be not, you will do well to assert it, and we shall
take care to prove it to be a Duty of that Commandment, not only from the
Authority of the Ancients, and from Reason, but from the Authority of your own
Catechism, which Part. 3. praec. 4. 3. and 11.2. 17, 18.
says, That all persons, who are possessors of power, or dignity, are included
under the term Parents, which is afterward explained by those, who have Empire,
Magistracy, or power committed to them, who govern the Commonwealth. But if to
obey Princes be a duty of that Commandment, then to dispense with that duty, is
to dispense with a Moral Law, and to dispense with Oaths, that bind to that
duty, is to give men a dispensation to be perjured, and to forswear themselves.
And because you tell us Pap. repraesent. p. 47, 48.
, That the Papist is taught in all Books, that to Lie is a sin, and to call God
to witness to an untruth, is damnable, and that the practices of your Church
are according to those praescriptions, and that neither the Sacrament, nor an
Oath of Secrecy can excuse any man from perjury; nor did you ever hear of any
such thing from any Priests in Sermons, or Confessions, never read of them in
your Books, or Catechisms, nor saw the practice of any of them in any of your
Communion;) in which words there is some Art used; for, do you believe, that
any Priest of your Communion may reveal what he hears in confession against the
Laws of your Church, which bind him to Secrecy sub sigillo? and when you tell
us, You never read of any such thing either in Books, or Catechisms, you mean,
I suppose, Books of Devotion; for in other Books, you may undoubtedly read such
Doctrines, or else why should the Pope condemn them? And when you say, You
never saw any such thing, I hope you mean, it never fell within the reach of
your particular observation; but if you read the account of Mr. Garnet, and his
accomplices, you will find, that they took the Sacrament as an Oath of Secrecy,
to carry on that Hellish design.) And withal subjoyn, Ib. p. 66.
That the present Pope has condemned all Equivocations, and Mental
Reservations under the penalty of Excommunication latae sententiae by his
Decree March 2. 1679. We do still averr, that your Church has given
dispensations for Lying, and Forswearing, and we know not, but it may be done
for the future. For, not to instance in the Jesuit Moralists Filiut. to. 2.
tr. 25. n. 325. Sanches oper. moral. l. 3. c. 10. n. 7. and 8.
, Filiutius, Sanches, etc. their averring, That if a man promises any thing,
and swears to it, yet if he do not intend it, he may without sin break that
promise, and that Oath; so that the intention of the Swearer among these
Casuists, makes the Oath valid, as the intention of the Priest makes the
Sacrament. Some other of the same Order, have given dispensations for the
breach of the Moral Law Theol. mor. to. 1. l. 7 c. 20. n. 281, etc.
; Escobar says positively, virtute bullae potest votum non peccandi mutari, i.
e. that a man may break his Vow of not sinning by virtue of a Bull, and he
instances in the committing of Fornication; he Tr. 7. ex. 4. n. 118.
also says, That a man may Lie even to his Confessor, that a man may promise a
general Confession, and yet not confess all his mortal sins, quia quamvis
mentiatur, id tamen parum refert ad Confessarii judicium, i. e. for tho he Lie,
yet that has little or no relation to the Judgment of his Confessor.

Now to these proofs probably you will object, that this is not the Opinion of
the Church, but of private men; to which I answer, that had it not been the
Opinion of your Church, when those Books were written, such men would never
have been allowed to be Confessors (which no man can be unless by the allowance
of the Pope, the Bishop of the Diocese, etc.) though it is well known, that the
Jesuits then were, and still are as Eminent for being Confessors, as any other
Order in your Communion, and perhaps more, and this notwithstanding their
owning these damnable Doctrines, as both you, and I agree to call them. Nor is
it enough to say, that the Book of Escobar, after having been 39 times printed
for an excellent Book (which is an argument, it was much bought, and much
valued) was the 40th time printed only to be censured, and condemned by the
French Bishops (which the poor Jansenists looked upon to have been a
condemnation both of the Author, and his Opinions, whereas they found at last
to their cost, that themselves were censured at Rome, as the criminals) nor
that the present Pope (being more wise, and moderate than some of his
Predecessors) has condemnd those Doctrines (which vindicates us, that we have
not unjustly charged the men of your Church with such Doctrines) among which
propositions if you consult the 26 and 27, it is asserted, That a man may
either, being asked, or of his own accord say, and swear, that he did not do a
thing, which he really did, and yet by virtue of a secret meaning, be neither a
liar, nor perjured. And that this he may do, as often as it is necessary, or
profitable to save his Body, Honor, or Estate, or for any other good end. For
this is to acknowledge, that your Church for a long time heretofore connived
at, or allowed of the breach of plain moral commandments, since the man in
authority, that does not prohibit the sin, that he may hinder, seems to enjoin
it. I also observe, 1. That according to your Opinion, whatever the Pope, and
Cardinals, or other Bishops do either allow, or condemn, is not binding as to
the Faith, since the infallibility is lodged no where, but in a general
Council. 2. If we look into the Censure, there is nothing relating to the
breach of Oaths given to Princes, which is the highest trust in temporal
matters, and withal, that the propositions are not condemned as contrary to the
Laws of God, and Nature, as assertions, that promote impiety, and injustice;
but ut minimum tanquam scandalosas, and praxi perniciosas, [which is the manner
of expression that Alexander 7. makes use of in his censure, An. 1665.] as at
least scandalous, and pernicious to practice, and therefore to be condemned,
which whether this does not look like a trick, and juggle (because you have
encouraged me to use the word) you your self shall be the judge; for
notwithstanding this censure, whenever the scandal ceases (which no one knows,
how soon that may be) and they are judged no longer pernicious, the
propositions may be again owned, and maintained. 3. It is moreover observable,
that whereas former Popes have allowed these Tenants, and Practices without
condemning them, who knows, but the Successors of the present Pope may, when
they please, license anew the propositions, which are now condemned? 4. That
some such thing has been formerly done, your Chapter 26. m. p. 90.
Adversary has given you an instance, which you did not think fit to meddle
with, nor to reflect upon, out of Archbishop Abbot's P. 11.
Preface to his six Lectures, where you will find, that Pius 5. the same Pope,
who authorized the Trent-Catechism, gave his resolution to some of the English
Missionaries, that whenever any of them were called before a judge in England,
he might either refuse the Oath, or Swear, and answer sophistically; potest
Catholicus tractus coram haereticis vel recusare juramentum (quod est
prudentius) vel sophistice jurare, and sophistice respondere suis
interrogationibus. And if you look into the Book called Foxes, and Firebrands,
you will see there, that Heath the Jesuit had a Bull with him dated An. 1. of
the same Pius 5. allowing him to preach what Doctrine the Society of the
Jesuits should order him for the dividing of the Protestants, and not to
instance in the dispensation given by Eugenius 4. and his Legate Card. Julian
to Ladislaus King of Hungary to break his League with the Grand Signior, for
which he was so severely punished in the unfortunate Battle of Varna, and some
other such examples, the Examination of Mr. Garnet is a very plain proof of
this our assertion; for though some men call these little arts equivocation,
and mental reservation, as if they were small, or no sins, yet you fairly, and
honestly condemn both alike, and I know few wise, and good men, but look upon
both as alike sinful, and perhaps the equivocation the more so, because the
design is more cunningly laid to deceive.

And now I am talking of the Jesuits, I think fit to mind you, that whereas you
seem to say, Pap. misrepre. p. 69, 70.
that it is a scandal upon your Church to affirm, that it is more lawful to be
drunk on a Fasting day, than to eat flesh, I have met with a Casuist Escobar.
tr. 1. ex. 13. n. 74, 75.
of your commumunion, who will not allow a man to eat Flesh on a Fasting day,
but as to drink gives great indulgence, when he says, that a man may drink Wine
even in great quantity, and if he happen to be drunk, immoderatio potest
temperantiam violare, sed non jejun ium He may transgress the Laws of
Temperance, but he does not transgress the Laws of Fasting.

After this I will not decide the controversy between your Adversary, and your
self, whether the story of S. Perpetua's Vision be seriously related, or
droll'd on (who pay a great veneration to all Ancient writings, and can hardly
think, that a Martyr in view of an Eternal Crown of happiness would indulge to
any thing, that is light, or deserves to be exposed) but I have some things to
say relating to that Vision. As, 1. That it is very probably believed by most
learned men, that SS. Perpetua, and Faelicitas were Montanists, among whom
there were many visions, which the rest of the World gave no credit to; but
this I shall not dispute. But, 2. I averr, that it is very disputable both from
the vision it self, and from the quotations in St. Austin, whether Dinocrates
were baptized, or no. I know, your Chap. 23. p. 84.
Adversary says, he was baptized, and St. Austin would fain have it so, but
there is no convincing proof, that he was so; and the silence of the Writer of
that Passion seems to imply, that he was not so. Now then I urge you with this
Dilemma, either Dinocrates was baptized, or not; if he were not baptized, (as
it is very probable, because his Father was a very violent Heathen, and so in
all likelihood would not suffer his Son, being so young, to be baptized) then
you have nothing to do with him in Purgatory; for, tho you have allotted an
appartment there for the unbaptiz'd Children of Christian Parents, yet you
allow no place there to the unbaptiz'd Children of Heathen Parents, who with
their Pagan Progenitors are condemned to Hell; unless we must reckon this story
with those other of St. Thecla's bringing the Soul of Falconilla out of Hell,
or St. Gregory's praying thence the Emperor Trajan, which later story the
(...) Munster. praef. ad Evang. S. Matthew. Heb. p. 103/4
Jews, who themselves allow of a sort of Purgatory, make sport of; but if he he
were baptized, (as I profess, I cannot believe, tho St. Austin says so) then it
seems very hard, that a Child of seven years old, (when few Children are
capable of understanding enough to choose to be wicked) should be sent to
Purgatory for sins, which he knew not of; for if that be true, which St. Austin
says, that his Father probably carried him to the Heathen Temples, as we will
suppose it to be, this was the Father's sin, and not the Child's, and so I
cannot see, why Dinocrates should be punished.

And to confirm my conjecture, that he was not baptized, I am apt to think,
that in the Vision the Water, Pass. s. Perp p. 15. Ed. Oxon.
which Perpetua saw her Brother endeavoring to drink of, but could not come
at, was an Emblem of the Waters of Baptism, which he seemed to endeavor after,
and at last Perpetua her self says Io. p. 5.
, that she her self was a Catechumen, when she was apprehended, and that at
that time she had two Brethren both Catechumens; now if we reckon Dinocrates
for one of those two Brethren of hers, or allow him to be dead some time
before, (as I rather conjecture) I am strongly inclined to believe, that while
the Father was an obstinate Pagan, the Sister, and the other Brothers only
Catechumens, that this younger Son, who was but seven years old when he died,
was not baptized, before he went out of the World; now if he were not baptized,
the Fathers tell you, there was no hopes of Salvation for him; for to omit St.
Austin, and the African Fathers, I will only instance in two remarkable
passages, the one for the Western Church out of De Dog. Eccl. c. 74.
Gennadius, Nullum Catechumenum, etc. That no Catechumen, tho he die in a state
of good works (which is more than St. Austin says of Dinocrates, for he accuses
him of Idolatry) can attain to Eternal life, unless he be a Martyr. And for the
Eastern Church out of St. Chrysostom To. 4. (...) in Ep. ad Phi. p. 20.
, (...). Mourn over those, who leave the world without Baptism; they deserve
your sighs, and lamentations; they are out of the Kingdom of God among the
unrighteous, and the condemned.

And now if all your former Arguments will not make us Converts, you tell us,
Refl. p. ult.
that if a man assent to these Articles, as you have stated them, he shall have
admittance into your Church, and probably so, for we know, you deal very gently
with your new Converts, till you have secured them; but who knows how much
further he must go, when he is under new Oaths of Obedience to that Church, who
makes her unwritten Traditions (which no man knows, till she reveals them) to
be as much the Rule of Faith and Manners, as the Holy Scriptures, and
consequently binds all her followers to an Implicit Faith to believe, whatever
she shall reveal? And I remember, that Mr. Cambden Annal. an. 1560.
records a report, that once there were more easy terms of Reconciliation
proposed by the Pope's Nuncio, viz. the allowance of the Sacrament in both
kinds, and the confirmation of the English Lyturgy, and probably many other
things, so the Papal Supremacy were acknowledged; but we are very well
satisfied, that St. Peter had no more Authority, than the rest of the Apostles,
and that every Bishop by Divine Right, is a Successor of the Apostles, and
consequently has equal power in the Church of Christ; that the making more
Sacraments, than we are sure Christ instituted, is an encroachment upon his
Right, (and that the establishment of your five additional Sacraments, is such
an encroachment) that the Jewish Canon of the Old Testament (the Jews, till our
blessed Savior's time, being the only True Church of God) with the
uncontroverted Books of the New, are the only divinely inspired Oracles, and a
sufficient Rule of Faith, and Manners, without the help of the Apocrypha, or of
unwritten Traditions: that General Councils are not infallible, much less the
Pope, either singly, or with the College of Cardinals; that giving the
Communion in one kind, is robbing the people of what our Savior gave them a
right to; and that Prayers in an unknown Tongue are a contradiction to St.
Paul; with many other such points, which it is now needless to mention, for
which reason the Members of the Church of England think fit to continue, where
they are, where they enjoy all the forementioned blessings, with many others,
which must necessarily be forfeited, when they embrace the Romish Communion.

Thus have I curforily taken notice of your Reflections in whatever material
points, you have thought fit to speak to, except that very weighty, and most
material point of the power of Deposing Princes, the through consideration of
which, was the first cause of my present undertaking. Now you encounter your
Adversaries Golath-Argument (as you seen in scorn to call it, as Card.
Bellarmine in the Praeface to his Answer to Barclay says, that writing in
defense of Princes, Barclay came out like Goliath, to defy all the Armies of
Israel) with this distinction Refl. p. 9.
, that in all Councils there are some Articles of Faith, which all Catholics
receive, and some Constitutions, and Decrees relating to Discipline, and
Government, which are not absolutely obligatory, (so that I perceive, that in
some sort, and upon some considerations, those other Constitutions, and Decrees
relating to Discipline, and Government, are obligatory, i. e. upon condition,
tho not absolutely) and withal, you tell us as freely, that if the Deposing
Doctrine had been as evidently declared in former Councils, as ever Purgatory,
or Transubstantiation were in that of Trent, yet with you it should be no
Article of Faith. Which way of arguing (tho it be very generous) seems to me to
destroy your distinction of matters of Faith, and matters of Discipline; for if
the Lateran Council had defined the Deposing Doctrine as a matter of Faith, and
required the belief of it under the penalty of an Anathema, as the
Trent-Council did Purgatory, and Transubstantiation, then either you must have
believed, as the Council required, or else in matters of Faith defined by a
general Council a man may think himself not bound to believe them; and if so, I
see no other reason, why any other man may not as well refuse to believe
Purgatory, and Transubstantiation upon your own principles. But if we allow of
your distinction in your own sense, I suppose, you will hardly allow another
man to make the like deductions, and think himself at Liberty to follow his own
dictates; for, if so, then the half communion, Priests Marriages, Prayers in
Latin, the Popes Supremacy, and many other such points being matters of
Discipline, every man by parity of reason may give himself a dispensation to
believe contrary to the definitions of Councils, if you allow your self a
liberty to believe the Princes cannot be deposed, though it were defined as
matter of Faith in a general Council. And it is remarkable, that for the better
understanding of this distinction you recommend Refl. p. 10.
Card. Bellarmine to us, who, I am sure, makes the Popes personal
infallibility, his superiority to a general Council, and his power of deposing
Princes matters of Faith,

But to allow of your distinction between matters of Doctrine, and matters of
Discipline, and that in matters of Faith from the definitions of a general
Council, no man ought to vary, but in matters of Discipline, though defined by
the same Cooncil, a man is left at liberty; pray, tell me seriously, is every
man left at liberty, or some men only? If every man, then the assertors of the
Deposing Doctrine have as much right on their side, as you have, (for the
private spirit is not to be your guide in your Church any more, than in ours,
and the assertors of that deposing power have Councils on their side, and
Popes, and many private Doctors) and if you tell me, that you are not to follow
your own prudence, but the Doctors of the Church, where you live, in what a
general Council has not decided as matters of Faith, then you must change
Opinions with the climate, you live in (as Pere Cotton said of himself, that in
France he believed a general Council to be above the Pope, but in Italy, that
the Pope was above a general Council) for if you inquire in France, whence, I
suppose, you have your principles, as well as your arguments, they will tell
you now, that the Pope has no superiority over Kings, and that they have
condemned Sanctarellus his book, and burnt Mariana's; but if you inquire in the
Neighboring Countries, they will tell you the contrary; it is well known, what
the belief of Italy is in this point; and for Spain, the Inquisition at Toledo,
Jan 10. 1683. condemned the late censure of the Sorbon; and in the
Low Countries D'Enghien a Professor of Louvaine has written in defense of the
Popes power over Princes against Natalis Alexander, and positively averrs, that
the French Opinion is either Heresy, or next to Heresy, and that more Authors
in your Church assert, than deny the Deposing Doctrine (the present Pope urging
that, and several other Universities to censure the Decrees of the French
Assembly, V. d'Engbien. p. 549. etc. and Jucieu. Calvinisme, and Papisme mis en
parallel. to. 2. part. 3. chapter 3.
An. 1682. Among whom it is observable, that the University of Doway prayed the
King of France, their new Master, to whom they were lately made Subjects) that
he would not force them to change their Doctrine, lest they should be accused
of taking up a new Theology with a new Sovereign) and if you go into Hungary,
the Clergy there also condemned the Doctrine of the French Bishops as
erroneous, and schismatical Oct. 24. 1682. and when the Archbishop of Gran,
the Primate of lower Hungary wrote against the Propositions of the said French
Assembly, an order was given to the Sorbon to censure the Archbishop's Book,
which they refused to do, but upon this condition, that they might be allowed
to condemn the propositions, as if extracted out of some other Author, which
looks like a fine fetch of Sophistry. And now, Pap. misrep. p. 50.
Where is three times the number, who disown this Doctrine of deposing to them,
that own it, as you say? Whereas, besides what has been above mentioned, the
Author of the first Treatise against the Oath of Allegiance, p. 13. says, that
the Deposing Doctrine has been the common received Doctrine of all
School-divines, Casuists, and Canonists, from first to last (before Calvin's
time) in the several Nations of Christendom, yea even in France it self, and
even there of those French Divines, that were most eager for their Temporal
Princes against the Pope, as Occam, Almain, Joh. Parisiensis, Gerson, etc.

And is it not an argument of the great care, which your Church has taken of
the Persons and Interests of Princes (which are sacred) that every Writer of
your Church, whether Priest, or Layman, shall have liberty freely to publish
his thoughts about the rights of Sovereigns, and whether their Subjects, or the
Pope may depose them? As if the Doctrine of Obedience to Superiors were such a
slight indifferent thing, that a man may with safety to his Religion, and
Conscience believe, either that the Pope may, or may not absolve Subjects from
their Obedience. A wise man would think, that there were a greater necessity to
define such a point (upon which the safety of Kings, and their Kingdoms
depends) than to define the precise manner of our blessed Savior's presence in
the Sacrament, which had it never been defined (while all Christians
acknowledge him to be there) might have been the occasion of much peace and
happiness to Chistendom. And if you plead, that some men among us have asserted
the Deposing Doctrine, to this your Chapter 20. p. 75.
Adversary has given you a full answer. For until you can show, that our
Archbishops, Bishops, and inferior Clergy in Convocation have owned any such
Doctrine, or countenanc't such men in asserting it, you say nothing to the
purpose; for we damn the Doctrine, by whomsoever vented, and our superiors are
ready to censure the assertors of it, if they durst appear openly. Nor is it
enough to say, that this has been done by the French Clergy, which is
equivalent to an act of our Convocation; for the agreement will not hold,
because the dispute is not between the English, and the French Church, but
between the Church of England, and the Roman Catholic Church in this point;
now we averr, that the whole Church of England damns, and disowns the Doctrine
of Deposing; but you tell us, that only a part of your Catholic Church does so
too, whereas a far greater part own, and defend it; we assert, that it is
Heresy to own the Doctrine, but you dare not give it that name, lest you
offend his Holiness.

Nay, it is plain from experience, that so far are the Pope, and the great men
of your Church from condemning the Deposing Doctrine, that those few men among
you, that have been so just, and stout, as to assert the rights of Princes,
have fallen under the Church Censures, of which I need quote no more instances,
than Widdrington of old, and F. Barnes (if he be yet alive) and F. Welsh at
this present Excommunicate for affirming it to be the Duty of Subjects to Swear
Allegiance to their Prince, and to defend him even against the Pope himself,
and all his Censures; whereas we daily see the assertors of the Deposing
Doctrine not only live, and dye in your Communion without Censure, but to be
the most thriving men, and the soonest preferred to dignities. So very true is
that saying of Ostens. err. Suares. c. 3. n. 1. p. 918. ad cali. to. 2. de rep.
Eccl.
Marcus Aut. de Dominis Archbishop of Spalato, that the Pope, and his followers
are not pleased with any thing so much, as with the rendering the power of
Kings, vile, weak, and contemptible, to which I will add, and the exposing all,
who defend it.

And to convince you, that you your self have not that venerable Opinion of the
Majesty of Princes, and the Duty, which their Subjects owe them, as you ought,
I cannot but observe, that you not only tell us, Pap. repres. p. 50.
that it is a disputed point among your Doctors (as if it were one of those
School-points, which you mention p. 72. which may be maintained this way, or
that way, without any breach of Faith, or injury to Religion) but withal, that
whereas upon every other head of Doctrine, or Discipline, that you represent,
you are frequent in quotations out of holy Scripture to prove your assertions
(how pertinently applied, your Adversary has considered) upon this head of the
deposing power (as also when you treat of it more largely than of any other
thing in your Sect. 2. 4. p. 3.
Roman Catholic principles, if that Book be yours) you quote not one text
against Rebellion, you confess, that Rebellion against a Prince is contrary to
the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, injurious to Sovereign power, destructive
to peace, and Government, and by consequence in his Majesty's Subjects impious,
and damnable (where I shall not take notice of your limitation of the
proposition to his Majesty's Subjects, which has no relation at all to the
question, whether the Subjects of an Heretical Prince, as you account him, may
not take up Arms against him) but why do not you speak out, and say it is
directly impious and damnable? (if you will not say, it is Heretical) being
against an express Law of God, that binds you to obey (even a Nero, or a
Dioclesian) Romans 13.5.
not only for wrath, but for conscience sake; that tells you, that 1 Samuel 26.9.
no man (upon any pretense whatsoever) can lift up his hand against the Lords
anointed, and be guiltless. For by your way of arguing, if the Fundamental Laws
of a Nation may be secured by such a Rebellion (and you know, the pretense of
all Rebels is Liberty, and Property) and the Government duly settled, peace
promoted, and the Sovereign power, i. e. the Monarchy not injured, though a
particular Monarch may be (and yet your Deposing Divines say, that it is no
injury to an Heretical Prince to depose him, but a just Execution of the Laws)
then a Rebellion may be lawful. But upon the principles of the Church of
England, if all these things could be secured, yet no man can be a Rebel, but
he must be damned, because the Laws of God forbid Rebellion, taking up Arms
against a Prince, or endeavoring to depose him; for as long as the word of God
stands firm, and the above cited texts, with many others, are not blotted out
of our Bibles, we think it directly damnable (and not only by consequence, as
you do) to take Arms against our Sovereign, let his Religion be what it will.

So that, upon the whole, I cannot but ask you, while you have endeavored to
prove Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, etc. from both Scripture, and Fathers,
how happens it, that in the defense of the Rights of Princes, you quote
neither? especially, when you cannot but remember, that the Assertors of the
Pope's Temporal Monarchy, and his power over Princes, are frequent in their
doughty arguments from holy Scripture, such as, God made two great Lights;
behold, here, are two Swords; Feed my sheep; rise, Peter, kill, and eat, etc.
and is there no place to be found in all the sacred Oracles, that forbids
Rebellion, and requires Obedience? does not that inspired Book enjoin all
Christians Mat. 22.21.
, to render to Caesar the things, that are Caesar 's, and 1 Pet. 2.13.
to submit to every ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake; and if you are a
Priest, are you not required to teach others so to do Titus 3.1.
? to put them in mind to be subject to principalities, and powers, to obey
Magistrates, and to be ready to every good work? Is there also nothing in the
Fathers, that looks this way? does not Tertullian say, that a Prince is
inferior only to God? does not Irenaeus aver, that by the same power that men
are made, are Princes constituted? Does not Origin tell Celsus, that among the
Christians he should not find any act of sedition, or tumult, (notwithstanding
all their pressures, and persecutions) and does not St. Ambrose say to the
Emperor, we entreat thee, O Prince, we do not fight? not to multiply quotations.

And, before I leave this head, I cannot but remark, that whereas the Part. 3.
praecep. 4. 11.
Trent Catechism allows, that Emperors, and Magistrates are called Fathers, and
so are included in the Commandment, ( Honor thy Father, etc.) which is more,
than you acknowledge; yet they quote no place of Scripture to make this good,
but the History of Naaman, (sic Naaman a famulis pater vocabatur) where his
Servants call him Father, which does not look like fair dealing, for the
Example does not reach the Doctrine, unless the Fathers of that Council
praevaricate, Naaman being a Subject to the King of Syria, whereas they might
have found without much seeking, that 1 Samuel 24.11.
David calls Saul, my Father, who was his King; and in truth, the title was so
proper to Princes, that the Kings of the Philistim were always called
Abimelech, i.e. my Father the King by a general name, whatever their proper
name was. Now I am loath to judge, that those Fathers made use of an instance of
a Subject called Father by his Servants, that the Example might limit the
Doctrine to subjection to inferior Magistrates, when, had they inserted the
Example of David, it would plainly have proved the Obedience of Subjects to
Sovereign Princes.

And whereas the Fathers of the same Council, who were concerned in the
Catechism, use to quote such places of the Ancients, as they thought pertinent
to the Subject treated of, they having Ibid. 17.
quoted Romans 13.1. to prove that men ought to be obedient to the Higher Powers,
confirm the Doctrine only by the testimony of Tertullian, (who it is true,
speaks plain, and to the purpose) omitting St. Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, and others on the place, who have told the World, that by every
Soul, in St. Paul, are meant Priests, and Bishops, as well as Laymen, nay the
Pope himself, as says St. Bernard; but this probably would have unriddled the
Mystery, and exposed a Doctrine, which they were not willing to disown; the
Catechism, like the Canons, leaving every man, in many such things, a great
latitude; so that in short, I desire you to answer this Question; Either
Rebellion is against a Moral Law, or not; if it be, then the Pope cannot
dispense with it, and then, how happens it, that so many things of lesser
moment were decided in the Trent Council, while this was forgotten, or past by?
If it be not against a Moral Law, then by your own principles, the Pope may
dispense with it, and what then becomes of all Obedience, when another Gregory
7. or Sixtus 5. shall fill the Chair? And tho the Council would not condemn the
Deposing Doctrine, yet why had not the Authors of the Index Expurgatorius
censured such dangerous Books? for if we may judge of the sense of the Trent
Council by its Catechism, (tho made after the Council broke up) why may we not
judge of its sense by the Index, which was ordered to be made at the same time,
etc. by the same men, who composed the Catechism? In which Index more than a
few passages are expunged, that interfere with the Papal Grandeur, but not one
poor sentence condemned, that is destructive to the Rights of Princes.

Here also, pray, suffer me to mind you of a bold assertion of a private man,
as you are, and which, I am sure, as things are now, you cannot accomplish
Introd. p. 11.
, for you undertake, that all Roman Catholic Nations in the World shall
subscribe to the condemnation of all such principles, and practices ( i. e. in
your own words, of such principles as destroy the peace of Nations with Fires,
and Massacres, and rob Sovereigns of their Crowns, and Subjects of their
Liberties) for I am sure, there was a time, when all Roman Catholics were not
of that mind, when the League was rampant against Henry 3. and 4. of France, in
which one of them actually fell, and by the principles of which the other also
was murdered; (not to mention, what the Emperors Henry 4. and 5. and our King
John suffered) and when the Parisian, and Irish Massacres were sufficient
proofs to the contrary. Nor is it possible, even now, to make good your
promise, since I have told you already, what the belief of the Spanish,
Netherland, and Hungarian Churches are in this point, besides what the Italians
hold.

Now against all this Doctrine you have nothing to object, but that this
Doctrine has been condemned Pap. misrepr. p. 51.
in France by the Ecclesiastics there, and by the Universities of Caen,
Rhemes, Poictiers, etc. all which Universities are within the one Kingdom of
France, so that (tho there be no need of considering the Argument, because it
is only the sentiment of one National Church against the rest of what you call
Catholic Christendom) if I make it appear, that the French Church has not
always been of this belief, and perhaps is not so now, then all, that you say
upon that Topic, will be far from proving your assertion; while withal I
profess, that if what I am about to say does not reach so far as a conviction,
and be only a well-meant Essay, yet the cause, which I maintain ought not to be
prejudiced by it, because the main position about the rights of Princes has
been already proved by other arguments, and authorities. And to evince this, I
shall pursue the method which the famous Calvinisme, and Papisme mis en
parallele, part. 3. chapter 3.
Monsieur Jurieu has laid down, adding here, and there my own observations.

If therefore this be, and always has been the Doctrine of the Gallican
Church, then you have stated your argument aright, but if it has not been
always their belief, then the present Gallican Church may be as well mistaken,
as the former, and if so, where is its authority? besides, if the French Church
do condemn the Deposing Doctrine, and all the rest of the Catholic World do
assert it, then the Tradition is not on the side of the French Church, though
never defined as a matter of Faith by a general Council. Now to prove, that the
Deposing Doctrine has been the Opinion of the Gallican Church, I shall produce
one remarkable instance, and that is, the deposition of Childerick, and the
introducing of Pepin (the first King of the second race) into his Throne, and I
shall briefly tell the story out of the French Historian, Girard. du Haillan de
l'Estate, etc. l. 1. m.p. 66, etc.
that I have now by me, who relates, that Pepin after his Conquest of the
Sarazins did so honor, and reverence the Clergy, and repaired so many of their
Temples, that had been ruined, that the most holy men of that time thought him
a Saint, whereupon aiming at the Crown, and finding nothing stick in his way,
but the Oath, which the French had given to their King, he sent to the Pope
(whom he had before obliged) for his dispensation ( Pepin having already gained
the greatest part of the Nobility, Ecclesiastick's, and Commons to his party)
the Pope readily granted a dispensation, the Clergy, as well as the Nobility,
and Commons acquiesc't in what was done, acknowledging Pepin for their rightful
King, and thrusting Childerick into a Monastery; and so do Paulus Aemilius, and
others also relate the story, and among them Cardinal Perron, and Chapter
Childeric. 3. An. 751.
Monsieur Mezeray says, that this was very likely done in that general Assembly
held in March, An. 751. The Bishops being there in great numbers, and Boniface
Archbishop of Mentz in the head of them, who declared to the rest of the
Assembly the validity of the Pope's answer; and he intimates the reason, why
they complied so readily with Pepin, because he gave them a great share in the
Government.

It is true, what our King Declaratio pro jureregio. p. 19.
James observes, that the elder Historians, Ado Viennensis, etc. say, that the
States had dethroned Childerick, and only got the Popes consent to it, and
confirmation of it, and so does Vbi supr.
Mezeray, and Monsieur Prerogat. of the Church of Rome, and her Bishops. chapter 29.
Maimburge, who is zealous in the case against the Papal power of deposing; but
which way soever Childerick were deposed, his deposition is a confirmation of
what I undertake to prove; for if the Pope did it, and the French Clergy
consented, or the three Estates in France did it (of which the Clergy are the
first) and the Pope consented, it is all one, the matter of Fact being plain,
that they both thought it lawful to depose their Prince (for a less crime than
Heresy) because he was dull, and unfit for Government. And we also know, that
when the Line of Pepin was laid aside, and Hugh Capet ( the first King of the
third Race) came to the Crown, there was a right Heir of the Carolovinian, or
second Race of Kings alive, viz. Charles Duke of Austratia, or Lorrain, who was
also laid aside by the consent of the States, of which the Clergy were the
chiefest; it being Vb. supr. an. 752.
Monsieur Mezeray's observations, that Charles of Lorrain, the last Male of the
Line of Pepin, was deprived of the Crown, as Childerick had been; and the same
Id. an. 987.
judicious Historian elsewhere gives an account, how it was done, that Charles
being a Vassal to another King, and a stranger to his own Country, Hugh Capet
being very powerful, and esteemed, was Proclaimed King at Noyon in an Assembly
of the Lords, and in a little while after Anointed, and Crowned by the
Archbishop of Rheims, not one of those, who were present at either Solemnity,
claiming for Charles, but all giving their Oaths as well in writing, as by word
of mouth to his Enemy; and when Archbishop Arnold, Brother to Charles was taken
with him, the Bishops of France Assembled in Council at Rheims, degraded him of
his Prelature for breaking his Oath to King Hugh, whereas all his crime was the
assisting Charles of Lorrain, who was his lawful Prince.

But to come nearer home. In the time of the League it is very plain, that the
Ecclesiastics generally declared for the Leaguers, and allowed of the
deposition of the two Kings, Henry 3. and 4. And whereas you may object, that
some Popish Bishops, and many of the Popish Nobility continued with Henry 3. to
his death, and after that execrable parricide, with his Successor Henry 4. yet
D'Avila, An. 1589.
the Bishop of An. 1589.
Rhodez, and An. 1589.
Mezeray, to name no other Historians, say, that after that barbarous
assassinate, the Catholics, who were the greater part of the Army, met, and,
though some few were for adhering to the King without any conditions, yet the
greatest part thought themselves bound to observe Divine, before humane Laws,
(as they phras'd it) and at last both parties united in one upon these terms,
that they would declare the King of Navarre King of France upon condition, that
he would change his Religion, since it would be strange to their consciences,
and to the whole Christian World, that one should be established King of France,
who was no Catholic; whereupon (many Prelates in the Camp declining even this
moderate course) the agreement was made by a writing mutually signed, wherein
the King swears, and promises upon the word of a King, to cause himself to be
instructed in the Catholic Religion within six Months etc. and to maintain the
Catholic Religion, etc. and yet at last this did not please all, but many went
over to the Leaguers. Now here you see all the Bishops of France (for they were
all either of the party of the League, and it is not doubted, what their
Opinion was, or of the Court party,) were of Opinion, that the King of France
should not be acknowledged, their rightful Sovereign, unless he declared for
the Roman Catholic Religion, nor would his own party admit him, till he had so
promised, and sworn, as the Leaguers would not admit him, when he had so done;
and this is worth the remembering, that his own party, thinking he would dally
with them, set him a certain number of days, wherein to give them his
resolution; and in all their conferences with the Leaguers, the Popish Lords,
who were Friends to Henry 4 made this their Apology. And upon these terms, says
D'Avila, the Duke of Mayenne himself promised by Villeroy his Agent to
acknowledge him the King of France, though at the same time the Pope's Legate,
and the Sorbon had made a Decree, that no agreement should be made with the
Heretics, and particularly with Henry of Bourbon by which passage you may see,
what was the Opinion of the Society of the Sorbon at that juncture, as by what
else was done you may know the Opinion of the Prelates.

And further the Bishop of Rhodez confesses, That if the Duke of Mayenne the
head of the Leaguers had upon the importunity of the Pope, etc. declared
another King of France, upon that nomination there was much appearance, and
likelihood, that all the Catholic Potentates of Christendom would have
acknowledged that King, whom the States should have Elected, that the Clergy
would have done the like, and the Nobility, and People, who followed not Henry
4. But because he had the Title of King, and would have made no conscience to
have quitted him for another, to whom the States had granted it. And at last he
subjoins, That it was high time for Hemry 4. to enter into the bosom of the
Church, or to resolve on a War, of which possibly he might never see the end.

These things succeeded the death of Henry 3. But there were many remarkable
accidents, that preceded it, which give you an account of the Opinion of the
French Church of that Age. We know, the Sorbon is, and has always been
accounted the defender of the Gallican Liberties, and yet in the V. D'Avil etc.
time of the League the whole College (except Johannes Faber the Dean, and two
Senior Doctors) unanimously determined, that Henry 3. by reason of the Murder
of the Duke, and Cardinal of Guise had forfeited his right to the Crown, and
that his Subjects were free from their Oath of Allegiance; nor were Faber, and
the other two Dissenters (says Jurieu) dissatisfied as to the point of Law. i.
e. Whether the King were deposable, or not, but as to the matter of fact,
whether the crimes charged on him were true, or not, or if true, whether they
deserved so heavy a censure; and when the Ambassador of the King of France
urged the Pope, Sixtus 5. to condemn the determination of the Sorbon with this
argument, that such a business did belong to Christ's Vicar, and not to a
petulant College consisting of a few passionate corrupted persons; yet the
Pope liked the censure too well to condemn it. Besides, two or three dissenters
in so great a body, signify nothing; for, had it been in an Assembly of the
Clergy, or in a General Council, the majority would easily have outweighed so
small a number of contrary Votes; (and if the Syndick Faber's asserting the
Right of Princes, makes this no Decree of the Sorbon, then the Syndick Richer's
assertion, An. 1611. in his Book de Ecclesiastica, and politica potestate is
enough to prove, that the Sorbon does not acknowledge the Government of the
Church to be Monarchical) nor were the Sorbonists wanting to countenance this
their assertion, ordering Boucher, and others to preach up the Authority of the
Pope in such cases, and the Justice of the King's Deposition; and there was a
Book written in defense of the Censure (the Author of it believed to be our
learned Stapleton, by others more likely, to to be the above named Boucher) de
justa abdicatione Henrici 3. and to make it appear, that the Assistants of the
League looked on it as a quarrel on the behalf of Religion; it is remarkable,
that the Duke of Parma left his own, and the public concerns in Flanders in a
very ill posture; only that he might re-enforce the League, and relieve Paris,
which was likely to have fallen into the hands of Henry 4. who besieged it.

And now we are come to the Times, that succeeded the Parricide of Henry the
Great, (who, tho never so heartily reconciled to the Church of Rome, was never
forgiven the sin of his first Apostasy, as they called it, till his death) in
the minority of whose Son Lewis 13. When the third Estate would have past a
Law, that the King was deposable for no cause whatever, the Clergy violently
opposed it, and ordered the Cardinal de Perron to make a Speech against it,
which after they had examined, and approved of in the Chamber Ecclesiastic,
they attended him to the convention of the three Estates, where he pronounced
it An. 1615. (which Speech our King James learnedly answered in his declaratio
pro jure regio, where you may see it proved, that the Cardinal took upon him to
assert, that the Pope or the Church had power to depose Princes, and that it
was universally owned in France ever since their Schools had been opened; and
the event made it appear, what the design of the Speech was, after which the
third Estate saw it impossible to go on with their design successfully, and so
declined it) and whatever F. Vb. supr. c. ult.
Maimburge says to the contrary, yet his own argument confirms what I assert,
That when this difference happened between the Clergy, and the third Estate
(the two Chambers, as he calls them) the Clergy informed Pope Paul the 5. in
their answer to his Breve of Jan. 31. 1615. Angebamur non mediocriter, etc.
That they were troubled above measure to see Catholics transported with an
undiscreet Zeal meddle with matters of Faith (where you may observe that the
deposing power is acknowledged by them to be a matter of Faith, earum rerum,
quae ad fidem pertinent, though you deny it to be so) which did not belong to
the third Estate, who were Laymen, and Lawyers, but withal, they confess, that
the determination of this point did belong to the Church, i. e. to themselves,
and the Pope, omnem hanc authoritatem penes Ecclesiam, eosque solos esse, quos
illa fidelium gregi praeesse voluerit. By which it is plain, that that Speech
was not one Doctors Opinion only, as Monsieur Maimbourge affirms, but the
Opinion of the whole Chamber Ecclesiastic, or their whole Clergy. And, that
the French Church afterward owned the Opinion of that Speech, seems plain,
because the general Assembly of the Clergy An. 1665. gave the Abbot Gentil
6000. Livres to collect the Memoirs of the Gallican Church, which were
afterward solemnly reviewed by several Bishops, and Abbots, and then published,
among which this Speech of Cardinal de Perron is printed, and approved, the
whole scope of which, Maimbourge himself confesses, is inconsistent with the
independent right of Princes, and their exemption from any deposing power.

It is true, this Speech, that so few years since, was Printed among the
Memoirs with so much applause, and approbation, is now ordered to be left out
of them; which is so far from being an argument to incline any man to acquiesce
in the judgment of such a Church, that it may justly affright him from
confiding in such volatile changeable men, who in such weighty matters vary
their Opinions so often from one extreme to another. And the reason is plain,
the French Bishops following the dictates of that Court; so that since the
quarrel about the Regale, they have sought to stoop the Pope, and probably to
make his Election depend on the present French King, as it did anciently on
Charles the Great. And of this I could give some likely proofs, but that the
digression would be too long.

But against all this it is objected, That under the present King Lewis 14. the
Sorbon, An. 1663. condemned even the indirect Power of the Pope over Princes,
and asserted, that the King of France has no other Superior but God; to which
we answer, that the same College did in the days of the League maintain the
contrary, as I have formerly proved; and at last the Sorbon is not the
Representative of the French Church; nor can it be imagined, says the Chapter 5. p.
14.
Author of the second Treatise against the Oath of Allegiance, That those men,
who took upon them to vary from the Censures, Decrees, or Definitions of Rome,
would ever go about to set up an independent, or infallible Chair in the
Sorbon, and deliver their Opinion either as an Article of Faith in it self, or
as a Rule of Faith to others. But the Objection is strengthened, That the
Archbishops, and Bishops assembled at Paris, An. 1682. as Representatives of
the French Church, did decree the same; to which we V. Jurieu ubi supr.
answer, that the Declaration was made but by thirty or forty Prelates within
the verge of the Court, whereas in a free National Council the contrary might
have been determined. But put the case that this had been decreed in a full,
and free National Synod, yet neither could this have established an indefeasible
right; for I remember, that in the Convocation under Henry 8. the King's
Supremacy was decreed and established by our Bishops (even by Gardener, Bonner,
etc. who in all other things were zealous Catholics) and yet I suppose you
will be loath to grant, that for that reason the King had a just Right to that
Supremacy. And this also serves to answer your Objection from the
Determinations of the French Universities against the Deposing Doctrine,
because not only the greatest part of the Universities of Christendom did
allow of Henry the Eighth's Divorce from his first Wife, which the Pope, and
perhaps you, would not allow to be lawful; but withal, the two most famous
Universities of England, (which to us are equivalent to all those in France)
and the most famous Monasteries of the Kingdom, when this Question was proposed
to them, An aliquid Autoritatis in hoc regno Angliae Pont. Romano de jure
competat, plusquam alii cuicunque Episcopo extero? Whether the Pope had any
lawful power in this Kingdom, more than any other foreign Prelate? The Answer
was generally returned in the Negative.

Besides, who knows not, that the generality of men speak as their hopes of
Preferment lead them? and that there was a great truth in that Observation of
Aeneas Sylvius, That many men wrote in vindication of the Pope's Authority, and
few for the Authority of a Council, because a Council gave no Dignities nor
Benefices; but the Pope did. And I should be glad to see the present French
Clergy deal with the present Pope (when he meddles out of his Sphere with the
Crowns of Princes) as their Predecessors did with Gregory the Fourth, who under
the pretext of being a Mediator between the Emperor Lewis the Debonaire, and
his Sons, promoted the Rebellion, and was suspected to come with a design to
excommunicate the Emperor and his Bishops; for they protested, Ant. Anon. vit.
Ludovici Pii.
Si excommunicaturus ad veniret, excommunicatus abiret: i. e. That if the Pope
came to excommunicate them, they would excommunicate him for acting contrary to
the Authority of the ancient Canons.

And at last we have Advice given us, Nouvel. de la rep. de Lettres, An. 1685.
p. 716, etc.
That June 26. An. 1683. at Clermont in Auvergne, the Jesuits publicly
maintained four Theses, in opposition to the decision of the French Clergy, An.
1682. 1. That although they call their Theses Explanations of the Doctrine of
the Gallican Church, the first Article of the Decree did not diminish the
special Authority of the Church over Kings and Princes Christian. 2. That the
second Article was not intended to weaken the Monarchick Primacy of the Pope
over the Church. 3. That by the third Article, they intended not to take from
the Pope the Sovereign Power of dispensing with Canons, etc. 4. That by the
fourth Article, they intended not to deprive the Pope of all Infallibility in
matters of Faith. Which Theses, as far as I know, yet pass uncensured. And the
Jansenist, who goes under the name of Rene Clerc Tonsure a l'Archevesque de
Paris, in his System of the Theology of the Gallican Church extracted from
their Memoires, proves, that the French Bishops are not such Friends to Crowned
heads, as they would appear to be; and that they take the Power from the Pope
only to place it in themselves: affirming, That the French King cannot be
judged by a Council except the French Bishops be there, (implying, that then he
may be judged) as if the last resort were to them; and that the Declarations of
the Pope against their King, ought not to be obeyed, till the Kingdom consent
thereunto; so that if the Kingdom consent, the Deposition is lawful: with other
such Positions. And the same Author affirms, That whereas some English
Gentlemen, December. 1. An. 1679. addressing themselves to some Doctors of the
Sorbon, had inclined them to decide for the lawfulness of our Oath of
Allegiance, the Archbishop of Paris sent to them, that it was the King's
pleasure they should not decide it: which makes it plain, that the Allegiance
of the French Church is founded on the Catholic Religion, and that an
Heretical Prince has not the same Right with the most Christian.

And though since that time V. Cause. Valesian. append. 6.
the Sorbon, An. 1686. has given its approbation of the Oath of Allegiance
with the word Heretical in it, yet this is only an honest acknowledgement of
the Rights of Princes, by one College of learned men; while in the same year
the Jesuits at Gaunt, in their Provincial Congregation, expressly condemned the
taking of the said Oath. And who knows, but the Sorbonists of the next Age may
do as their Predecessors of the last did in the time of the League, contradict
all that has lately been asserted. Nor does the Condemnation signify any
thing in your sense, since even a General Council cannot define any thing to be
heretical, unless it be de fide, and the belief required under the penalty of
an Anathema: and when all this is done, if the matter be of Discipline or
Government you profess, you may safely refuse to obey the Council.

To which Observation I will add one Remark more: That though Monsieur
Apology pour la Clergy.
Arnald has written in vindication of the French Church, that they never owned
the Deposing Doctrine, yet if he be the Author of the Jesuits Morals, (for
though Monsieur Paschal his Nephew have the honor of the Book, yet all men be
lieve that Arnald had a great hand in the contriving it) he has not dealt so
ingenuously in this case, as he might: for when he quotes so many Passages out
of the Moralists of the Society, what liberty they give to violate Sacraments
or Oaths, to Lie and Equivocate, and to break all Trusts, Vows, and Promises,
he never so much as touches on the many palpable Propositions in their Books,
which encourage and allow of the breach of Allegiance to Princes.

I have little more to subjoyn, but this: That whereas you appeal to the
Council of Trent for the Faith of your Church, I have observed in that Council
some things (how cunningly soever the Decrees were contrived, and how warily
soever they were penned) which seem not to accord so well with your Catholic
Principles. For instance: 1. Sess. 22. de Sacrif. miss. can. 6.
The Council says, Si quis dixerit, etc. If any man shall say, that the Canon
of the Mass contains any Errors in it, let him be Anathema. And in another
place cap. 4.
the Mass is said to be free from all Error. Now if it be so, I suppose some
of your Doctrines must fall to the ground, being confuted by your Mass. As, 1.
The Doctrine of Transubstantiation: for after the Consecration, the Priest
calls the Sacrament Bread and Wine; Offerimus panem sanctem vitae aeternae, and
calicem salutis perpetuae: And afterward desires God to look down upon it, as
he did on the Sacrifices of Abel, Abraham, and Melchizedeck: And prays, That
those things might be carried by the hands of the holy Angels of God into
Heaven. For how are these Expressions suited to Christ's Corporeal Presence? 2.
All the Prayers of the Mass relate to a Communion, and so are a consutation of
private Mass; and yet the Priest in a private Mass, when no one but himself
receives, says, Vt quotquot ex hac altaris, etc. That as many of us as have
received the most holy Body of thy Son, etc. 3. To instance in no more, the
Prayer for the Dead in this Canon does not relate to Purgatory: for the Priest
says, Memento, Domini, etc. Remember, O Lord, thy Servants, and thy Handmaids
(and then names the Persons whom he is to pray for) who have gone before us
with the mark of Faith, and sleep in the sleep of Peace. Which are plain
demonstrations, that those Prayers were made before those new Doctrines and
Practices were the Belief and Customs of your Church, or else there are Errors
in the Mass, which the Council under an Anathema forbids any man to affirm.

2. The Council declares, Sess. 23. cap 4.
Episcopos in Apostolorum locum successisse; That Bishops are the Successors of
the Apostles: and if so, then there being an equality among the Apostles, so
there is also among Bishops; and where then is the Pope's Supereminent Power as
Successor to St. Peter? and how is he above his fellow-Bishops, if they all
succeed the Apostles, to use St. Cyprian's Phrase, Pari consordio and
potestatis, and honoris; In an equal right to power and honor?

3. The Council Sess. 4.
commands the interpretation of Scripture according to the unanimous consent of
the Fathers: and if so, we are well assured, that the Controversies between us
will be easily decided on the side of the Church of England, for to the Fathers
we are ready to appeal.

And now after all this, suffer me to assure you, that though I love your
generous dealing in the affixing your Anathema's at the end of your Popery
Mis-repres. p. 117, 118.
Book, (wherein you deal much more heartily than many of your Brethren) yet I
cannot but mind you, that you have left your self and others, by reason of the
generality of your Expressions, liberty to explain your meaning; and therefore
I have added some Anathema's agreeable to your own notions of things, (if I
understand you aright) to which I should be glad to find that you sincerely say
Amen: and it is as lawful for me, who am but a private person in the English
Church, as it is for you to do so in the name of the Church of Rome. And
withal, I do engage to make good, that all these Opinions which I propose to be
condemned, are maintained by some Writers of the Church of Rome.

1. He who pays true and proper Religious Worship to Images, let him be
Anathema. Amen. 2. Whosoever confides in the Intercession of Saints and Angels,
as much as in that of Jesus Christ, for Salvation, let him be Anathema. Amen.
3. Whosoever believes the blessed Virgin to have as much power in Heaven as her
Son, and prays to her to command him, and begs from her, pardon of Sins, and
the assurance of Salvation, let him be Anathema. Amen. 4. He who does not
believe that the Merits of Jesus Christ are the only meritorious cause of our
Salvation, let him be Anathema. Amen. 5. He who believes that a Papal
Indulgence does remit Sins, or deliver from eternal Death, let him be Anathema.
Amen. 6. He who believes that the performance of Ecclesiastical Penances makes
satisfaction for eternal Punishment due to his Sins, let him be Anathema. Amen.
7. He who speaks irreverently of Holy Scripture, and calls it Aesop 's Fables,
a Nose of Wax, and unsens'd Characters, etc. let him be Anathema. Amen. 8. He
who believes that the Church has power (in a General Council, or otherwise) to
make additions to the Christian Faith, let him be Anathema. Amen. 9. He who
believes the Pope to have any personal Infallibility, either e Cathedra, or in
Conclave, let him be Anathema. Amen. 10. He who asserts, that the Pope, or any
other, has any power to depose Princes, to dispense with their Subjects
Allegiance, and to authorize them to take up Arms against them, either upon the
account of Heresy, or for any other cause, let him be Anathema. Amen. 11. He
who asserts, that the Pope, or any other, has any power to dispense with any
Moral Law of God, and to give men a License to Murder, Forswear, Lie, or
Equivocate, let him be Anathema. Amen. 12. He who believes any thing contrary
to the Word of God, to Reason, and Antiquity, let him be Anathema. Amen. 13. He
who says, that men are not bound to the obligation of the Ten Commandments,
(and among them, of what we call the Second, you a part of the First) under
pain of eternal Damnation, let him be Anathema. Amen. 14. He who thinks that
Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, and that Mental Reservation may be used
with men of another Persuasion, let him be Anathema. Amen. 15. He who thinks
that Attrition is enough to fit a man for Absolution, let him be Anathema.
Amen. 16. He who thinks that any thing besides a sincere and true Repentance,
can bring a man to Heaven, let him be Anathema. Amen. 17. He who believes that
the modern Miracles of the Blessed Virgin, etc. are to be credited, as he
credits the Miracles of our Blessed Savior and his Apostles recorded in
Scripture, let him be Anathema. Amen. 18. He who thinks Ignorance to be the
Mother of Devotion, and wilfully hides the Holy Scriptures from the sight and
knowledge of the People, let him be Anathema. Amen. 19. He who says a man ought
to obey his Superiors (whether Civil or Ecclesiastical) in things that are
sinful, let him be Anathema. Amen. 20. He who maintains any other Doctrines,
than what were established by Christ and his Apostles, and believed in the
Primitive Church, let him be Anathema. Amen.
These I give you as a Specimen; and when these are condemned, I shall think my
self much more inclinable to be reconciled, than now I am.

And because you are a private Person, and whatever you say, is but one
Doctor's Opinion; and because your Writers differ where your Infallibility is
fixed, whether in a General Council, or the Pope, and if in the Pope, whether in
his fingle Person, or in Conclave; you will oblige the World, if you use your
interest to get these Doctrines Condemned by the Pope, ex Cathedra, (and so you
will bind the Jesuits and others, who believe the Personal Infallibility) and
by the Conclave of Cardinals, (for this will bind others of your Communion) and
by a Council of all the Prelates of your Church, (and this will bind you, the
French Church, and all others that call themselves Roman Catholics:) for
unless this be done, we are still where we were. And I shall tell you, that the
regaining so considerable a part of the Protestants, as the Church of England
is, out of a state of Schism and Heresy, (as you are pleased in your great
Charity to call it) is a Reason weighty enough to summon such a Council, and to
do what is required toward an Accommodation: and till this is done, all that
you say else, is but the sprinkling of a little Holy Water, and gratis dictum.
And this I write to you, because you appear the Advocate of your Party, while I
acknowledge that I make these Proposals only as a private Person; though I
doubt not, but all the Prelates of the Church of England would rejoice to see
so much done toward the healing of the Breaches of Christendom. Amen.

And here I thought to have put a period to this Essay, had not your
Vindication of your Reflections come to my hands; upon which I cannot but
bestow a few Remarks, while your learned Adversary will take care of a more
full Reply. In which, among other things, you undertake to Protest, Popery,
etc. p. 16.
prove, by several instances, That our Church is guilty of mis-representing
yours, because it impeaches the Papists of Idolatry in the worshipping of
Images: and we acknowledge that she does so impeach you; but withal we affirm,
that there is a great difference between what is spoken by any man, or any
Society of men, in a Homily or Sermon, and what is thetically laid down as an
Article, or maintained in disputation, (you your selves, as well as we, being
often forced to make use of this distinction to salve many Sayings of the
Fathers, that they were spoken not Dogmatically, but Rhetorically;) but we need
not depend on this Answer, for our Homily does not speak of the Canons of your
Councils, but of the received Opinions and Practices of your Church. Now that
it is a current Opinion among many of your Schoolmen, That the Image ought to
have the same Worship with the Prototype, I have already proved, out of
Cardinal Bellarmine; and that the Practice of the Common People in this case,
was very disallowable, and much like the Idolatry of the Heathen, as I
understand the Trent-Council, is the Complaint in Sess. 25. de Imag.
general of those Fathers, and of some other of your Writers in particular: so
that herein the Homily speaks but the sense of your own Authors, and with
Justice, censures the Usages of the People of your Communion. And if what your
Ibid.
Council says, be true, That the Idolatry of the Heathens did consist in their
putting their trust in their Idols, he who considers how much more Worship
there is paid to the same Images of the Blessed Virgin, (at Loretto, Monferrat,
etc.) than to other her Images elsewhere, (which can as well put the People in
mind of the Mother of God, as those famous Shrines) will be persuaded, that the
generality of your Communion put their trust also in the Image, as did the
Heathens in their Idols.

Now, to vindicate your Church from Idolatry in this case, though you Protest.
Pop. p. 33.
acknowledge, That you do give Religious Honor to Images, yet you say, That
that Honor cannot be called Idolatry, unless it makes a God of that to which
it is paid. But does not the Second Commandment (as we reckon them) forbid the
worshipping of the true God by an Image? And do not the worst of Idolaters say,
That they do not worship the Image, but the God, who is represented by it? Does
not Celsus say so much on the behalf of the Gentile Idolaters to Origin Lib. 7.
p. 373. Orig. contr. Cells.
(...), etc. Who, but a perfect Fool, thinks an Image made of Stone or Timber,
of Brass or Gold, to be a God? etc. And for the Jews, when they fell into
Idolatry in the Wilderness, by worshipping the Golden Calf, they only worshipped
it as a representation of the true God: for the Feast that was set apart for
it, is called Exodus 32.5.
a Feast held to Jehovah, which is the incommunicable Name of the only true
God. (And the like might be said of the Calves in Dan and Bethel.) But perhaps
you are of the opinion of some men of Eminence in your own Communion, (and
whose Books have never been, that I know of, condemned) who think that the
Worship of the Golden Calf was not Idolatry: for so Moncoeus in his Aaron
Purgatus exprefly affirms, as c. 7. p. 49.
Greg. de Valentia in his Apologetic for Idolatry, (a bold Title for a Book
written by a Christian Priest!) argues from 1 Pet. 4.3. that because the
Apostle does forbid unlawful Idolatries, ( abominable Idolatries, as our
Translation renders it) that therefore there is some Idolatry that is lawful,
which is that of the Worship of Images.

But you object, Protest. Pop. p. 34.
that we our selves are by this Argument guilty of Idolatry, by bowing to the
Altar, and to the Name of Jesus, and by kneeling at the Sacrament, Whereas, I
must tell you, that we bow not to the Altar, but toward it, toward the East,
where the Christian Altar always used to stand, (and toward which part of
Heaven the Primitive Christians used to direct even their private Devotions;)
nor do we bow to the Name, but at the Recital of the Name of our blessed
Savior: so that we pay no Religious Worship to the Altar, or to the Syllables
of that Venerable Name, (as you confess you do to Images) and when we kneel, we
profess we do not worship the Sacramental Elements, nor the Body and Blood of
Christ hid under the Accidents of Bread and Wine; but we kneel, because then we
pray, and we worship God, to whom we direct our Prayers: so that these actions
are not external acts of Adoration to any thing that is seen, or heard, but
only to God. But by this way of arguing. I perceive, the Cause wants
assistance, when you borrow Arguments from our Dissenters to assault our Church
with: for these are their little Objections that have been so often hist off
the Stage.

You further tell us, That it is the intention of the Person who pays the
Worship, that makes the Worship either idolatrous or lawful. And if so, pray
tell me, if a Christian in the East Indies should go into a Pagod, and bow down
before one of their Images, and pay it in all respects the same outward
Adoration that its most bigoted Votaries offer it, and at the same time intend
his Worship toward the blessed Trinity; does this man, by virtue of his
intention, escape the guilt of Idolatry? And I put you this Question the more
willingly, because some of your Jesuits have determined it in the affirmitive,
and acquit the votary of Idolatry, and I would willingly know your Opinion: for
if you consult the Let. 5. p. 61. Edit. Lat. Colon. An. 1658.
Provincial Letters, the Author of them will tell you, that the Jesuits in
China, and other places of the Indies, taught the People that they might
publicly worship the Idols of the Country, Cacin choan, and Keumfucum, so they
directed this Adoration of theirs intentionally to the Image of our blessed
Savior hid under their Clothes; and that this is no Calumny, the same Author
says P. 62.
, That the Practice was complained of, and censured at Rome, July 9. An. 1646.
But notwithstanding that Censure, if your way of arguing be good, the Practice
is still lawful.

Now to evade your Adversaries Argument, That intention cannot alter the nature
of actions, which are determined by either Divine or Humane Law; you shift the
force of the reasoning, by making a Plea from the same Principle for the
Quakers, (and probably it is well done of you, to turn Advocate for a Sect
which owes its Original to the Jesuits, and other Emissaries of your own
Church) because, if intention cannot alter the nature of actions determined by
Law, no Oaths can be lawful, nor the payment of civil Honor allowed of,
because the Scripture says, Swear not at all, and let your communication be
yea, yea, nay, nay, and you shall not be called Master, etc. And the Answer
would signify something, if you could show us any place of Scripture where
such Worship has been paid to Images, notwithstanding the divine determination
to the contrary, as we can show you for the allowance of those things which you
object: for we there read, that notwithstanding the prohibition, the Apostles
did allow of the Title Lord, or Sir, or Master; for St. Philip expressed no
dislike, when Johan. 12.21.
the Greeks gave him that appellation; nor St. Paul and Silas, Acts 16.30.
when the Jailer at Philippi treated them with the same Language. And by Swear
not at all, etc. the Holy Writ only forbids vain and rash Swearing, and
Perjury, and double Dealing, etc. for it in other places tolerates and requires
Oaths, which, says the Apostle, are the end of all strife. After which, you
will do well to show any place of Holy Scripture, that countenances the Worship
of Images, and we shall willingly acknowledge the parity of Reason: for it is
not the intention of the Person commanded, but of the Lawgiver, that makes an
action lawful: for did a man's own intention legitimate his actions that are
otherwise forbidden by any Law divine or humane, then a man may do evil, that
good may come there of, expressly against St. Paul; a man may commit Murder,
Sacrilege, and every other gross sin, as some men have done, and plead for
himself, that he intended nothing but Reformation, and the advancement of
Religion; as the men in our Savior's time persecuted the Apostles to death,
with an intention to do God service: but the intention of the Lawgiver, when
made known, is that which legitimates the actions of the subject either in
matters purely civil, or in matters of Religion, of which latter sort is the
Worship of Images; which I shall acknowledge to be lawful, when you shall have
shown that it is agreeable to the intention of our supreme Lawgiver.

But the further management of this Argument, I leave to your other Antagonist,
while I observe, that Protest. Pop. p. 25.
you shift him off with no other Answer, but this: That a Question or two is
(in his opinion) a confutaof the Reflecter, because you are asked, Whether all
your Representations are conformable to the sense of the Trent- Council and
Catechism? which I have already proved they are not, particularly in the
Doctrine of the assistance of Angels and Saints. which you say, consists only
in their Prayers, while the Council and Catechism, besides their Intercession,
mention their Merits and Aid. And whereas, when he objects against the Pope's
licensing the Bishop of Condom 's Book, that Canus with judgment avers, That
whatever the Pope determines privately, maliciously, and inconsiderately, is
not to be accounted the judgment of the Apostolic See; you rejoyn, that the
Pope's private determination of any Opinion, does not hinder it from being the
judgment of the Apostolic See, unless it be also determined maliciously and
inconsiderately; I cannot understand Canus in that sense, but that, whatever is
determined either privately, or maliciously, or inconsiderately, is not the
judgment of the Apostolic See: for if this be not so, then a private
determination, how malicious soever it can be, so it be upon due consideration,
may be the judgment of the Apostolic See. And who knows, but the present
Pope's allowance of the Bishop of Condom's Book, may be the product of malice,
of his spleen against the French Heretics, as he calls them, for whose
Extirpation he has so solemnly by his Letters thanked the French King? And if
Malice may invalidate the Papal Judgment, why may not Favor, Affection, or
Fear, when they interpose in such Determinations, render them equally invalid?
And if so, why may not the reason of the present Pope's not censuring the
French Clergy in the matters relating to the Papal Power over Princes, be his
fear, lest that Victorious Prince should either set up a Patriarch of his own
in France, or by an Army establish his Right in Italy, and make the Pope depend
on him for his Election.

But to confirm the Authority of the Bishop of Condom's Book, you say, That it
was printed at Rome, translated into diverse Languages, and attested by the Pope
and diverse Cardinals, etc. Will you allow of all that has been published for
Catholic Doctrine at Rome, with the same or the like approbation? Were not
Cardinal Baronius's Annals (to instance only in one Book) printed at Rome in
the Press belonging to the Vatican-Palace? Did not Pope Sixtus V. prefix a very
large Epistle in commendation of the Author, and the Work? Was it not magnified
by the Roman Cardinals? Was it not translated into Italian, German, Polish, and
other Languages, and the two first Tomes of it into Arabic? Now if such a
Recommendation be sufficient to make known the Sentiments of your Church, then
how comes it to pass, that those Ecclesiastical Annals are not received in
France in those things relating to Regal Power, nor in Spain in what relates to
the Right to the Kingdom of Sicily? And if you do allow of the Annals, you must
not only interfere with the forenamed Churches of your Communion, but you
must also acknowledge, what you will be loath to own, that the Pope has a
right to dispose of his Majesty's Kingdoms, as in truth that Cardinal has
entitled him to almost all the other Kingdoms of the World by name.

It is also observable, that the Bishop of P. 50. Edit. Noviss.
Condom, when he speaks of the Pope, mentions the Primacy; but for the Deposing
Doctrine, he says, It is not necessary to speak of it: adding in general, That
all Catholics acknowledge a Head established by God to conduct his whole Flock
in his paths, which those who love Concord among Brethren, and Ecclesiastical
Unanimity, will most willingly acknowledge. By which expression every man is
left to his own Sentiments in that point; and it is no wonder, that the Pope
(though he does believe his own Power of Deposing Princes) does approve of this
Book, for the Phrase of conducting the whole Flock of Christ, is as easily to
be construed, as pasce oves meas, to signify the Deposing of Princes whenever
the Pope pleases. So that we see, that even this seeming Enemy of the Deposing
Doctrine, dares not openly condemn it, but leaves it as a probable Opinion, and
what it is not necessary to speak of; so that every Pope has still his liberty
to declare any Prince a Heretic, and then to proceed to Excommunicate, and to
Depose him; after which, a Clement, a Ravilliac, or any other Assasine, may
proceed to murder him, because he himself also is left at liberty to believe
that the Pope is in the right, when he has deposed a Prince, and that he
ought, as much as lies in him, to obey him in bringing such Criminals to
condign punishment.

At last Protest. Pop. p. 29.
you tell us, That a man may be admitted into your Church, notwithstanding his
refusal to admit the Deposing Doctrine, and the Pope's Infallibility, but as
they are stated by the Representer, i. e. not as Articles of Faith. But this
seems to imply, that no man of your Communion shall dare to condemn the
Doctrines, which must still be looked on as probable and disputable; so that
the safety of Princes and Kingdoms, and the guidance of the Church in matters
of Faith (which depend on the plain stating of the Pope's Power and
Infallibility) must still be left at the mercy of opinionative men, who may
take liberty to dispute and write about these great and weighty points pro and
con, as themselves think fit.

And whereas your Adversary quotes Bellarmine, and Canus, That General Councils
cannot err even in Decrees of Discipline and Government (decrera morum) when
they relate to things necessary to Salvation, and concern the whole Church, you
Protest. Pop. p. 32.
deny, that the Deposing Doctrine is of that nature. But are not the plain
Offices of Morality necessary to Salvation, as well as Articles of Faith? If
not, then nothing but Infidelity damns a man; and if a man's Faith be Orthodox,
it is no matter for his Conversation: If they are necessary, is not Obedience
to Princes one of the moral Commands of God? And if so, is not the practice of
that Obedience necessary to Salvation? and is not Disobedience (which
necessarily follows the Deposing Doctrine) a great sin? And if so, destructive
of the hopes of Salvation. And that it concerns the whole Church, is easily
proved, because Princes are its Nursing-Fathers.; and what Evils have fallen
upon your own Church by such rash Attempts, some of your own Authors will tell
you, is plain from the instance of Henry VIII. Besides, the whole Christian
Church and its Welfare, is concerned in the Doctrine: for though all the
Princes of Christendom have never been deposed at once, yet what is done in one
Country, may be done throughout all Christendom, and so the whole Church
actually concerned in the sad effects of the Doctrine: And had the Empire been
as entire under Henry IV, as it was under the elder Emperors, his Deposition
had actually concerned the whole Church.

And because you call that assertion, that the Pope has not condemned the
no-deposing Power, because he wants power so to do, an Oracle, and say, you
look for an Argument to prove it. It is plain from History, that those Popes
who have been rich, and stout, and powerful, have adventured on the practice of
Deposing (while others of lower Spirits, less Wealth and Haughtiness, have been
afraid of the Attempt) we are not ignorant what the Dictates of Pope Gregory
VII. are, and how busy he was, being backed by the Countess Maud, who
supported him with her interest; nor what Innocent III, Sixtus V, and some
others have done in imitation of him. Nor is it unknown to the World, what Pope
Paul V. thundered against the Republic of Venice, What Pius V. did here in
England, and Innocent X. in Ireland during the Rebellion there: for what was it
that encouraged those hot Popes to go so far, but that they thought their
interest, at least in the Churchmen, so great, that the Countries would
immediately have shaken off their Sovereigns? And what is it that causes the
present Pope to spare the French King about the Regale, but that he is afraid
of him, and knows he wants power to compel him? Nor need the Argument seem so
ridiculous to you, since Cardinal Bellarmine (a man from whom most of your
Writers borrow all their Materials) does not only affirm, that the Primitive
Christians under the Heathen Emperors, did not take up Arms against them,
because they wanted power, but avers against Barclay Tom. 3. Oper. c. 6, 7, 8.
p. 874, etc.
, that the ancient Popes did not exert their Authority against the Emperors
Constantius and Valens, etc. not because they had no right, sed quod Reges,
etc. but because without great damage the Church could not compel them; but
that the Popes did exert their Authority against Leo Isauricus, Henry IV. and
Childeric because they were able to compel them. That Jusian was very powerful,
and attended with many armed Legions, against which an unarmed Multitude
signified nothing; that it was a falsehood that all his Army were Christians,
and that St. Gregory affirms, that the Church made use of no other Remedy but
her Tears, quia decrant vires, because she wanted strength to resist the
Tyranny. So that, pray answer your own Cardinal, or else acknowledge, that your
Adversary speaks such Oracles as may be confirmed from some other Topic,
besides the authority of the Assertor.

And now I shall put a period to these Remarks, when I have minded you of two
things which are your own Concessions.

1. That Protest. Pop p. 6, 7, 17, 18.
upon the confideration of what is here charged, the salvation of every Roman
Catholick's Soul depends, that their Eternity is at stake; and that if Popery
be guilty of what your Answerer says it is, it cannot enter into your thoughts,
that there is any room for it (or its Followers) in Heaven: That all our
Martyrs died for a good Cause, and are doubtless in Heaven: That such Tenants
bid open defiance to true Honesty and Christianity, strike at the World's
Redeemer, and are impossible to be entertained by any, who is one degree above
a Beast. These are the Conclusions I acknowledge, of a wise, a modest, and a
good man; but then it behooves you seriously to consider whether this Charge be
not true, and whether your Adversary be not to be acquitted of wronging your
Church, (of which the impartial Reader will be the most competent Judge) and
withal to think, whether those Schoolmen, and other Writers of your Communion,
that do own all the Doctrines charged upon you, be not by your own Verdict, Men
of no Honesty, no Religion, and but one degree above Beasts: For by this
Concession every unbyast person is able to satisfy himself which is the true
Religion, that which allows its Followers to assert the Doctrine of Deposing
Princes, to pay Religious Worship to Images, to expect more than intercession
from Saints, Angels, etc. or that which is directed by the Revelations made in
Holy Scriptures, and by the unanimous Interpretations made of those Scriptures
by the ancient Fathers, as the Church of England expressly does.

2. That you follow the methods of the French Church [which is so far from
being the Catholic Church, even in your sense of the word, that it is but a
small part of it] from them you take your Principles, from the Bishop of
Condom, and Monsieur Veron; and after their Example, you make your complaints
of being misrepresented: for so the Gallican Bishops did in their late general
Assemblies, held July 11. An. 1685. complain of being misrepresented, and of
the Calumnies, Injuries, and Falsities, which the Reformed Churches lay to
their charge; desiring that King, in their Petition prefixed to the Acts of that
Assembly, to revoke all the Edicts made in behalf of the Hugonots, because
permitted only in times of disturbance, and for reasons which no longer
subsist: which though they afterward modifie and limit only to the passing an
Edict to forbid the calumniating their Religion, yet every considering man sees
what they aim at. And upon this Address the King past an Edict, Aug. 23.
forbidding all the Reformed to preach or write any thing against the Catholic
Religion, either directly or indirectly, and to allow them the liberty of the
Press only for printing the Confession of their Faith, their Prayers, and the
Rules of their Discipline, but no other Books written by the Reformed Divines
of that Kingdom; and what the effects of that and other Edicts have been, every
wise Observer has seen.

May our blessed and holy Savior, the true and undoubted Head of the Catholic
Church, heal all the Breaches thereof, convert all Heretics to the knowledge
of the Truth; shame, and bring back all Schismatics into the Unity of his
Mystical Body, that we may be one Sheepfold under one Shepherd, the Bishop of
our Souls. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement of BOOKS Printed for Samuel Smith at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
THE Vanity of all Pretenses for Tolleration, wherein the Late Pleas for
Tolleration are fully answered; and the Popular Arguments drawn from the
Practice of the United Netherlands are stated at large, and shown to be weak,
fallacious, and insufficient. Quarto.

The Book of Bertram or Ratramnus, Priest and Monk of Corbey, concerning the
Body and Blood of the Lord, in Latin: With a New English Translation more
exact than the former. Also an Historical Dissertation concerning the Author
and this Work, wherein both are vindicated from the Exceptions of the Writers
of the Church of Rome.

Protestancy proved Safer than Popery, by a late Convert to the Church of
England.

Miscellanea in quibus Continentur praemonitio ad Lectorem de infantum
Communione apud Graecos. Defensio Libri de Graecae Eccles. statu contra Object.
Authoris Hist Criticae, super fide and Ritibus orientalium. Brevis and
succincta Narratio de Vita, studiis, Gestis, and Martyrio D. Cyrilli Lucarii,
Patriarchae Constantinopolitani.

Commentatio de Hymnis matutino and Vespertino Graecorum. Exercitatio
Theologica de Causis remediisque dissidiorum quae orbem Christianum hodie
affligunt. Authore Thoma Smith, Becles. Augl. Presbyt. 1686. Octavo.

History of the Original and Progress of Ecclesiastical Revenues. By the
Learned P. Simon. Octavo.

Enquiry after Happiness, by the Author of Practical Christianity. Octavo.

The Duty of Servants: containing, 1. How Parents ought to breed up their
Children, that they may be fit to be employed and trusted. 2. How Servants may
wisely choose a Service. 3. How they are to behave themselves in it, in
discharging their Duty toward God, their Master, and themselves, with Prayers
suited to each Duty. To which is added a Discourse of the Sacrament, intended
chiefly for Servants. By the Author of Practical Christianity. Octavo.

Miracles, Works above and contrary to Nature: or, an Answer to a late
Translation out of Spinosa's Tractatus Theolog. Politicus, Mr. Hobbs's
Leviathan, etc. Quarto.

A Sermon about Frequent Communion. By Dr. Tho. Smith. Quarto.


