I know thou wilt ask 'why I no Front do wear
To take the distant eye? Not I, I swear.
To give an invitation, and no meat,
Would not be thought a courtesy, but cheat.
Besides, (if mine own fears aright divine)
Thou Wilt find but too much Front in every line.
HIPPOLITUS Translated out of SENECA.

By EDMUND PRESTWICH.

Together with diverse other Poems of the same Authors.

Verum pone moras, and studiam lucri, Nigrorumque memor, dum licet ignium,
Misce stultitiam conciliis brevem.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for George Boddington, at the Sign of the Crown in
Chancerylane near the Rolls. 1651.

TO THE NOBLE and MOST VIRTUOUS LADY, Mrs. ANNE LEEDES.
Madam,
HEre you see, what diligence I have used to involve my self into a Lab'rinth,
out of which, my judgment is not clew sufficient to conduct me. I blush when I
remember, how I have betrayed mine own weakness to the public view; and like
Caecrops Daughter, tempted my MINERVA to mine own ruin, for daring to
discover an Infant with such deformed feet. I have reason to fear, 'that those
knowing spirits, the right heirs to all those sacred fountains within the
Diocese of the Myter'd Hill; those professed Champions of Poesy, who are so
jealous of the Muses Honor, will be strict in their examinations, severe in
their censures, and where they find an intruder, whose follies are stripped thus
naked as are mine, liberally use that lash which was justly put into their
hands. But when they shall know, I am not so wedded to self-love, but that (were
I permitted to cast my bean into the Urne) I should be as ready to condemn my
self, as expect my sentence from another; Perhaps, so ingenious a confession
might in noble minds quite pluck out the sting of Anger, and make their
reprehensions rather arise from pity, or a Fatherly affection, then Revenge:
but then I tremble to think how I stand engaged amongst all that ignorant and
censorious Rabble, who because Nature (foreseeing how lavish they would be of
that little which they had) durst not trust them with any considerable stock of
wit, believe they are priviledg'd to cry it down in others; Men, that,
conscious of their own baseness, obstinately arm against truth and
knowledge, and by custom of Malice are grown so barbarous, as they will
vindicate a Prostitute, or set a spurious birth upon the highest point of
Honor; but endeavor to stab their forked tongues into the bosom of the most
chaste and noble Virgin; my meaning is, that they will cherish common and
shallow fancies; Births so infamous, that they can only speak their Parents
shame, when a Legitime Poem often falls a sacrifice to the many-headed and no
brained Multitude. From the rage of these, I fly ^o you for Protection, as
confident (how desperately soever otherwise bent,) they dare not violate so
holy a Sanctuary. Nor do I doubt, but you will guard me from so treacherous
and unjust an Enemy, as pretends to reprove my Faults; but indeed acts his own
Malice, and would have persecuted me worse, had this been better. Neither am I
so impudent, as to desire you should, against the equity of your own
Conscience, defend a trifle, and approve to others what you your self mislike:
No (Madame) I request you to be my Judge as well as Patron; as well to punish
where you find me faulty, as to protect me Innocent; and if after due
examination had, my whole Book shall appear guilty of cheating my Readers out
of so much time for nothing, sentence it to the fire; and believe me, I would
not bewail mine own sufferings, if condemned by so Legal a Process. But if
you shall be pleased to receive it into any degree of Favor, I shall be
secure, that it is not altogether to be despised, and in that confidence, dare,
both vindicate my self unto the world, and make my own revenge of such as
shall provoke me. Your wisdom, Justice, and singular affection to the MUSES,
(to wrong whom, I believe you esteem, as well as I, a sin next Sacrilege)
may sufficiently warrant all men, that your Judgment will be unbias'd.
Therefore as that shall determine of me, I will either quietly submit my self
to all censures, or rise up in defense of my Innocence. In the mean time, I
will not speak one word in mine own behalf; only if this shall fail your
expectation, and prove unworthy this Honor it is advanced to; I beseech you
exercise both your Justice and Mercy, burn it, but forgive him, who will ever
esteem it his greatest happiness to be reckn'd amongst the number of

Your Servants, EDMUND PRESTWICH.

TO THE JUDICIOUS READER.
Judicious Reader,
AS I must confess, nothing could please me more, than to know that my
endeavors had pleased thee; so I must tell thee, nothing can trouble me less
than the knowledge that they have not; choose how thy judgment be stated, I am
resolved to make my benesit of it; for if thy applause shall crown these first
Essaies of my Youth, the highest soaring ambition could not have expected a
more grateful success, than that, which (besides an ample recompense for what
I have already done) brings along with it sufficient matter of encouragement
for the future, and (as it were) kindly constrains me to continue the pursuit
of a study, which mine own Inclinaaion has but too violently begun, making
that appear the child of gratitude which is now perhaps by some accounted
folly. Nor do I doubt, but the* affectionate Zeal of a thankful soul,
together with a generous scorn to belly a judgment so advantageous to my
self, will prompt my Genius to higher and braver things for thy pleasure, then
ever yet I could attain to for mine own; but if with what I seek to obtain thy
favor, I shall only purchase a meritorious anger, thou may condemn these
trifles, ad ficum and piperem, or if thou will (as unserviceable even there) to
more base and servile offices; and believe me, I can forgo (without the least
act of repentance) so fruitless a study, as yields me neither fame nor profit;
nor shall I esteem it a small piece of friendship to stop my wild carreere, my
foot being upon so dangerous a Praecipice. Thus far to thee, whose censure is
grounded upon the sure foundation of an uncorrupted reason. Now thou, who
make a Lottery of thy mouth, and shuffling thy words together, fetchest thy
dislike or approbation from the mere virtue of chance, may be pleased to
consider, that I shall not easily be afraid of noise, that am so confident
against the most imminent dangers, therefore if thy sick palate cannot relish
such cates as I have set before thee; if thou look upon my lines with such a
kind of an odium, as petulant Curres do upon Forrainers, bark till thy spleen
burst, thou hurtst not me; but if the toy take thee to give me a wretched
commendation, I shall but give thee cold thanks, with a non minimum est quod
stultis placui. Thus you may both see that I (being above either hope or fear)
crave not any thing at your hands, only one small request I have, and that
little relating to my self; namely, that since some Friends have been pleased to
usher my dark f^et into the World, that you would not by my weakness measure
their discretion, but affection: grant this, and however you censure me, I
shall continue

Your Friend, EDMUND PRESTWICH.

To my Noble Friend Mr Edmund Prestwich,upon his Elegant POEMS.
SIR, You have gently cured my fears, and I
Congratulate Emergent Poesy,
And you her Tutelar Angel, who have made
Her live, and by your wit secured her shade
By you, (his better Seneca) revived
Hippolitus is now grown longer lived;
And Seneca himself that could not dye,
Has gained another Immortality
Yet here, you but translated; when you choose
An amarous Tract, and speak your own free Muse
My admiration over-reads my Eye,
And I am last in the full Harmony.
JA: SHIRLEY.

To my Worthy Friend Mr Edmund Prestwich,on his Translation of Hippolitus.
HArd is thy Fate (great wit) thus to advance
Thy Poem in this age of Ignorance,
To send it forth in such a time as this,
Where none must judge but such as judge amiss;
Course fordid censurers, that think their eyes
Abused if sixth, on ought but Mercuries,
When honest judgments will not doubt to swear
Thy work deserves an Amphitheatre.
Nor is this piece such as of late has been
The tedious stuff^ of Poetasters seen,
Wit to a nobler height, does thine intend;
No common labor to no common end:
For by thy Version we are taught anew,
T'interpret what we vainly thought we knew
But still mistook; so that in this we find
Thou can do Mira^les, and cure the blind.
The Orac'lous mist from Seneca is fled,
Which with fresh Laurel, crowns his verdant head,
And the black curtain of his clowded sense,
Is drawn by thy exact Intelligence.
Hippolitus that erst was set upon
By all, mangled by mis-construction
Dis-membred by mis-prison, now by thee
And thy ingenious Chirurgerie;
Is reunited to his limbs, and grown
Stronger as thine, then when great Theseus son.
Go on then wits example, and revive,
What none but such as thee, can keep alive;
Slack not the work for want of Industry
For not a line, of those thou writ'st can die.
Char: Cotton.

To his most Honored and most Ingenious Friend, Mr. Edmund Prestwich, upon his
happy Translation of Seneca, his Tragedy of Hippolitus.
WRetched Translators! they who only know
How like the Moon reflections faint to show
To those benighted Ignorants that dare
Not look upon the Sun in his own Sphere;
That their Translations are the Authors Hell
Where nothing but their ghastly shaddows dwell.
Thine's a Parhelion in height and glory
Yet not prodigious nor transitory.
By this thy Version Seneca does get*
A better Genius fresher bays has met.
What can I say, but thou translat'st him even,
As God would man from Paradise to Heaven;
But sin those coppies blur'd so that but one
True Manuscript could find Translation.
Hippolitus has such a handsome Mine
Dressed by thee; thy Muse, worse than the Attick queen
Will I Am afraid in this transplanted Grove
Inc^stuously her own Issue Love.
He Is truly Virbius, for thou have done
More for him now, then erst did Phoebus son;
When his torn limbs lay like a shattered lute
He them patched up, with new breath did recruit.
In Miracles yet him thou do out-doe
Giv'st other life and that Immortal too.
Jove's Vengeance damp't his art, that durst control
The Laws of Fate, bring home a once fled soul.
Thine to does thee to Heavens envy raise,
But thou art secure from thunder by thy bays
But why translate, gild, hatch, why not appear
Thy solid self, sad Ingot, neat, not tear,
As when men court the Maidenhead of light,
Desire to see the first, first rayie flight
Of Phoebus shafts, they face about toth' West
There see some cliffe kissed by the new-come Guest;
So in the ponent of things past must we
Look for thy daybreak, and lo there we see
Thy dawning wit, with early glory play
On this Iberian Mount of Corduba.
And I Am content, 'cause my weak eyes are able
To see thy Sun thus in the water dabble;
But risen to his Zenith, Oh, who can
Stare at thy Halos, when Meridian?
Cromwell Stanhop.

To his much Loved Friend Mr Edmund Prestwich on his Translation of Hippolitus.
Dearest,
MIstrust not; thy Hippolitus,
Will relish much, with God with Us,
And I Am ascertained that this Nation,
Likes nothing like to a Translation.
RIC. ROGERS.

To his Honored and Ingenious Friend Mr. Edmund Prestwich on his Translation
of Hippolitus.
TO say that now the Pedant understands
Words, which no comment opened to his hands
Or sense, his brains less able to obey,
Than patience, or the forgotten quarter-day, head.
Were praises of a pestilence more dead
Than thunder, to blast thy Laurel 'bout thy
To bring thee commendations from their schools
Were to translate the wisemen into fools
As if we added unto Books more state
By Imprimaturs fetched from Billinsgate.
No, to praise thee's to show this age of ours
How far thy Fancy, outwings Cesars powers,
He, who joynd seas, and piniond Neptuns arms
Aff^ighted Nature with the wild alarms
Of his Triumphant madness might transfer
His hand oreth' life of that Philosopher,
Thy Poets Ancestor, which to restore
Must make even vanquished Nero cry no more
Here all my powers make Alt; but thou have made
Thy Poet a new body to his Shade;
Not the long sleep of fifteen hundred years,
Nor the confusion of inrich't Sepulchers,
Where Is better part lay gnawn on by those moths
Of happy Spirits, ignorance and goths;
Affright thy daring Genius thou do state
The laws of Nature, and decrees of Fate
Bidst massy Marble, her entombed up give:
Command'st even dust, re-animate and live:
Make this Tragedian, by new life be known
Less signal in all Tragedies than's own.
He lives in greater beauty than when the throng
Of ravished Romans fed their ears with his song.
Thus Poets, (if their happy thought can clime
But to as high an excellence as thine)
Like the last Angel in the dissolvent skies,
Bid but the dead awake, and they arise.
Edward Williams.

To his Honored and Ingenious Friend Mr. Edmund Prestwich, upon his Poems, and
Translation of Hippolitus.
MOst men will sure mistake when they behold
My rustic Muse, thus confidently bold
Entruding in your Front; till they shall know
Her humbler pride, concealed her far more low
Until surprised, commanded, and confined,
Unto this height, by your Magnetic mind
Which you so richly have Imbodyed here
Though in another mould; you can appear
(I do believe in full as various shapes
As Jupiter ere did to act your rapes
Upon our Muses, since your curious art
Has wrought a miracle of this desert
Which (like a Verger) I would stand and tell
Did not its Character too much excel
My crepid fancy, whilst by your Translation
As by a Magically replantation
From the vitriall form, old Seneca y've raised
In as full verdancy, as his most praised,
And vigorous youth, h've rendered him before
Both Symetry, and Features, and what is more
Given life by Tragedy; Founding your Art
In true Pilosophy, which you impart
In lively Helycon to the torrid wits
Of our poor panting times, where naught befits
The raging humor, but what is worthless born
Mean as the age; beneath a Poets scorn.
Though some there are, whose true born Eagle eyes,
Will rightly scan it, and return the prize
Of full grown Laurel, to the full blown Muse
Of your yet springing brow; none will refuse
To add a branch unto that wreath; whilst I
Thus like a shade contentedly stand by.
A Sable Foil dropped on the beauteous Front
And yet not cast the least of Luster on it
Your Humble devoted MAT. CART^R.

HIPPOLITUS ENGLISHED.
The Actors Names:
Hippolitus. Phaedra. Nuncius. Chorus. Theseus. Nutrix.
ACTUS Primi.
SCENA Prima.
Enter Hippolitus, and diverse servants, as to Hunting. Hip. GO, and surround
the shady woods, and those
High cliffs, which do impale the mountains brows
Disperse, and with your quickest speed descry
Those ragged quarries under Parnes tie
View the Thriasian vales, and banks which are
Worn by the force of rapid torrents, there
Clime up these hills, which with obdured snow
Are ever crowned. Some of you this way go
Where the high aldars into arbours tie
The woods, where those embroidered fields do lie
Which 2 Zephyr, quickening with his dewie breath
Decks with those flowers he called from beneath
Where smooth 3 Ilissus runs flanked on both sides
With Isicles, where slow 4 Meander glides
Ore the equal fields, and frets the sterile shore
Run with unprofitable waters ore.
Take you the left path, whence the woods descried
To 5 Marathon, where beasts, accompanied
With flocks of yonglings, do their stomachs right
Grown bold by the protection of the night.
Go you more Southerly, and take the way
Leads to frost-thawing 6 Acarnania.
The rock of sweet 7 Hymetus you: the small
8 Aphidnae you must visit; this Part shall
Yet rest, where the embowed Ocean does
On 9 Suniori beat it self into a froth.
Whoever has a soul with Glory fired
Him 10 Philalis does call, Lo here retired
Lies the sierce Boar, the laboring Husbands fear
But too well known, now by those wounds they wear
Slip you the silent dogs, and you restrain
The impatient courage of the Molossian:
And let the struggling Cretensian Bitch
With her bald neck the stubborn Collar stretch.
But have a care that straighter couples hold
The fiery Spartane, for the dog is bold
And eager after game, the time draws nigh
The caves shall Echo back, the deep mouthed cry
Now may they, while the dawning lasts, while yet
The dew retains the figure of their feet,
The air examine with a curious guest,
And on the nose run to the holds 'oth' beast;
While he, bowing beneath the burden, bears
The more unused, lay you the lesser snares.
The painted counterfeit, from thence will speed
The frighted Beasts, into our toils indeed
Do you a light and missile javelin shake,
But you in either hand a Boar-spear take
And so employ your might, in ambush laid
Drive you the game, by your loud cries dismayed
Headlong into our nets; and as for you
Embowell what we happen to subdue!
Assist sacred 11 Virago, for thou art
Sole Queen of the worlds solitary part:
Thy never-erring shafts the Beasts do slay
That drinks the 12 cold Araxes, or does play
In frozen Ister: Cretan Hearts by thee
And Lybian Lions persecuted be*
Now lightly woundest thou the flying Buck
To thee, the spotted Tigre to be struck
Proffers his breast; Thou for thy ease may take
The Buffs broad horns, or the Bulls humbled back
Whatever feed in deserts, whether they
Be known to the rich-grov'd Arabia,
Or needy Garamas, let their abodes,
Be in Pyrenean Cliffs, or Hircan woods,
They and the vagabonding Scythians bear
To thy Artillery an awful fear.
Whose Piety has thee's Associate made,
Broke by no feet, his nets have fettered
The captived Beasts; the Cart has seemd to groan,
Under the weight of the brave prey thereon.
Then the Dogs Snouts in blood are died, then come
The glorying Huntsmen, as in Triumph home.
Hearken, my Dogs do spend, and the hot cry
Assures me I have pleased her Deity.
I Am summoned to the woods, this way I Will take
Whereby I may the shorter journey make.

Exit. Actus Primi. Scena Secunda.
Phaedra. Nurse.
Ph. O 1 Crete, great Sovereign of the Seas that be
Replete with ships, on each side coasting thee,
All such as plough the Deep, and cut their way
Through these Floods, open to Assyria;
2 Why am I hostage, where I hate? or why,
Given in Marriage to my Enemy,
To be drawn out in misery and tears,
Have thou condemnd the remnant of my years?
My wandering Husband absent Theseus has*
Not in his Marriage, lost his wonted faith.
Champion to an 4 audacious Sultor now
The Hero stalketh in the dark below;
Plucked from the throne of the infernal King
These madmen Proserpine again will bring.
Nor fear, nor sense of shame restrain him: Thus
The glorious Father of Hippolitus.
In Hell it self endeavors to meet
With lowless pleasures and forbidden sheets.
But (ah) I am with greater weights oppressed
Not from my cares by Night or sleep releast:
The Ill is nourished, which too fast does grow
And burns within; so vapors straightened flow
From the womb of 5 Aetna idle stands
The loom, the shittle falls from my hands.
Now in their Temples do I take no care
To bribe the Gods with vows to hear my prayer
Nor 'twixt the Altars, joined with Attick Dames,
Shake in those silent Duties conscious flames.
Nor 6 with chaste Prayers, and pious rites draw near
The Goddess, that Praesides by 7 conquest here.
I rather would pursue the roused beast
My soft hand with a rugged javelin pressed.
O! whither will my vexed soul? Alas,
Why Frantic, do I thus affect the chase?
8 My mothers crime was fatal now I prove
And in the Woods have placed my sinful Love.
Mother, I do repent thee now. Thou took
A Bull, wild, and impatient of the yoke.
Distempered with thy ill, thy lust preferred
The Fierce Conductor of the Salvage herd*
Yet did he something love: What God can ease*
What Dedalus can quench such flames as these
Should he return, whose powerful Art did build
The Labyrinth my Brothers Monster held
He could not help, my case admits of none
Venus offended with the tell-tale Sun,
9 On us his off spring does revenge the Gyves
She, and her Mars sustained, who ere derives
Her self from Sol, Venus depraves her mind
None dead with Love, but Love and impious joined.

Nu. Thou wife of Theseus, and the 10 child of Jove
From thy chaste breast drive this unseemly Love:
Quench me these Flames, nor yield to such a hope
As may affright thee. He who gives a stop
And a Repulse to Love at first, has bin
Victor, and Safe: who cherishes the Sin,
Too late denies to undergo the yoke
Himself put on: Neither am I mistook
In Princely tumors, how the stubborn mind
Scorns truth, and will not be to right inclind,
The Fates decrees are welcome, who are old
To see their end approaching grew more bold.
First wilt to oppose, nor faulter in that will,
It Is next to modesty to know in ill
A measure. Wretch! what will thou do? Ah, why
Do thou increase thy houses infamy,
And overact thy Mother? this exceeds
Her sin, and more than monstrous be thy deeds.
For to compulsive Fate we attribute
Monsters, but sins to manners we impute
Think thou thy crime more safe and void of fear
'Cause 11 Theseus sees not what is acted here?
Thou art mistaken, for suppose he dwell
For ever there, doomed to a perpetual Hell.
What will thy 12 Father do* thy Father aws
The Sea, and gives a hundred Cities Laws:
And Parents are quick-sighted; What will he
Wink at so horrid an Impiety?
But grant our craft, or circumspection might
Conceal it from him. What will that great Light
Of all things, Father to thy Mother do?
What the Gods fruitful Seminator, who
As he his Thunder brandishes, does shake
The trembling world? are these like to mistake
Can thou yet hope unseen, to keep thy crime
From these All-seeing Grandfathers of thine*
But say the favoring Deities should hide
The fact, and (as it does great sins betide)
None credited thy incest: yet thou wilt find
A present pain, a self accusing mind,
With horror big, and of is self afraid,
Some unreavel'd, none sin unpunished.
Bridle thy impious love, a crime which yet
No barbarous Nation ever did commit:
To Goths, and Scythians, and those who on
Inhospitable Taurus dwell unknown.
From thy chaste breast expel these strange desires,
Thy Mother warnes thee from such uncouth sires:
Shall Son, and Father have one common bed,
Thy impious womb filled with a mixed seed?
13 Well, do; with thy illicite flames make war
Against Nature, and impose new Laws on her.
We are at want of Monsters, and of late
Thy Brothers Court (alas) is desolate!
Shall unaccustomed births the world appall
And Nature be as often unnatural
As a Cretense shall love?

Ph. I know dear Nurse,
Your counsel's good, but I must follow worse;
Fury compels: Wittingly I stray,
Striving in vain my judgment to obey*
So when an over-burdened ship receives
The unwelcome Buffets of encountering waves,
Vain is the Seamans toil, in spite of them
The Vessel goes with the prevailing stream.
Love reason vanquishes, and countermands
Nor will admit a Rival where he reigns,
His Kingdom is the World, he has great Jove
Scorched with the unruly flames of Love.
Fired the breast of the stern God of war.
And the dread-thunder-forging Mulciber;
He, who in Aetna, does for ever turn,
The glowing Embers with a spark does burn
Phoebus himself who aims his shafts so true,
By the more skillful Boy is wounded too.
Gri^vous his power in Heaven, in Earth the same.

Nu. Lust favoring Vice did first this Godhead frame
And that it might the greater freedom have
The name of Deity to fury gave.
Condemned (forsooth) by Venus for to live
Thoroug^ the World a restless fugitive
He, as he through the yielding air does fly,
Fashions his troublesome Artillery;
And now this Little one so great is grown
The Gods submit to his dominion.
These Vanities were feignd: Some guilty mind
To her a Godhead, him a bow assigned.
Swelled with prosperity who flows in Vice
Not daining to admit one pleasure twice;
Lust the companion of great Fortunes waits
On him: he is not pleased with wonted cates
Firm-builded houses, nor your grosser meat.
Why does this Pallace-haunting plague retreat
From humble roofs? a pious Love dwells there:
The Vulgar have affections void of fear.
Princes, and rich men will have more than right
When meaner men can cu^b their appetite.
Who but too much can do, yet would that he
Could more. Consider thou thy quality
And thy returning Husbands Scepter fear

Ph. Alas Love swayes his powerful Scepter here
And I fear no returns, none gone from hence
To the dark house of death find passage thence.

Nu. Be not too credulous, say the gates of Hell
Were shut, and Cerberus the Centinell:
Theseus has forced the way has bin forbid.

Ph. Yet he perhaps would pardon, if did.


Nu. Why He was cruel to a wife was chaste
14 Antiope can testify his have.
But grant we might appeal thy angry Spouse,
Yet who can move the stern Hippolitus?
He does abhor the very name of wife,
And obstinately vows a single life.
Marriage he shuns, an Amazon thou knows.

Ph. Stay, he in mountains crowned with frequent snows,
Or fly he over the sharp rocks; I will
Follow him through the woods, and ore the hills.

Nu. Will he be tempted who resists Love?
Will he chaste pleasures for unchaste remove?
Be kind to thee, for whom (perhaps) alone
He hates the sex?

Ph. With prayers he may be won.


Nu. He Is cruel.


Ph. Love tameth the cruel too.


Nu. He Will fly.


Ph. Fly he by Sea, I will pursue.


Nu. Remember thou thy Father.


Ph. We do call
Our 15 Mother too, to memory withal.

Nu. All womankind he hates.


Ph. I am the more
Secure, of being rivaled with a whore.

Nu. Theseus will come.


Ph. And 16 Pyrithous together.


Nu. Thy Father'l come.


Ph. What 17 Ariadnes Father.


Nu. By these dear breasts, by these time-dyed hairs,
And by this bosom over-worn with cares,
I pray thee have compassion on thy self.
For to desire it is a piece of health,

Ph. I have not lost all shame: Nurse I obey.
The Love I cannot rule I conquer may.
Thou shall not suffer in thy Fame; this is
The only reason bridles my amiss.
18 My Husband will I follow, and prevent
My sin by death.

Nu. Dear Madam, some restraint,
Give to these passions* I the more esteem
Your life, because you do your self condemn.

Ph. Yes, dye I will: but whether halter, knife,
Or leap from Pallas tower conclude my life
I know not yet. Oh that my chastity
Can only guarded by selfe-ruine be.

Nu. What think thou me? so impotent my age
To suffer this? yet moderate thy rage.

Ph. To such as merit, and resolve to dye
Reason in vain does urge the contrary.

Nu. Thou only comfort of my aged years,
Since so perverse, a fate thy will ore bears,
Contemn thy fame. Fame speaks not as it should
Good to the bad, and bad unto the good.
Let us aslay him, and this Nature prove,
So froward, so intractable to Love.
This labor shall be mine; I Will undertake
The Stubborn youth, and exorable make.

Exeunt. CHORUS. 1 GOddess, the offspring of the troubled flood,
And Mother to as troublesome a God,
2 The twined Cupid; with what a certain aim,
Alike immod'rate in his flames and them,
The boy his shafts does level! the disease
Creeps through the marrow and impoverishes
With an insinuating fire the veins.
The Wound appears not in scars, but pains
Within, ransacks the very bones; this boy
To peace is a professed enemy.
Through the world, his shafts are nimbly thrown,
Those Coasts that first salute the rising Sun,
Or ^id him last good night: those that do sweat
Under the torrid Crabs consuming heat,
And those which do beneath the cold Bear freeze,
Peopled but with uncertain Colonies
Have felt these flames; in youth he blows the fire,
Reviveth age-extinguished desire
In crazed limbs, and the cold Virgins snow
Melts with a warmth her bosom does not know.
At his command the Gods forsake the skies,
And borrowed shapes obscure their Deities.
Phoebus his harp lays by; unequal reeds
3 Gather the herd he in Thessalia feeds.
4 How often has the cloud-dispelling Jove
Bin clothed in the meanest shapes for love?
Now like a Swan he claps his silver wings,
And sweeter than the dying true one sings.
Now like a wanton Steer in play does take
The Royal Virgin on his humbled back,
With his oare-imitating feet he ply^s
His 5 brothers waves, and unknown Realms descries;
He breaks the Sea with his opposed breast,
Of his fair Rape, feared to be disposest.
The clear-fac'd Goddess of the night has burned,
And over her forsaken Ch^riot turned
To her unskilful Brother; now the Sun
Does learn to drive two horses, and does run,
A shorter course; day rises slowly, and night,
Keeps no proportion with the wronged light
Retarded by the unaccustomed weight*
7 Alcides has his quiver laid aside,
And the N^maean Lions dreadful hide;
Now he the Emra^ld to his finger fits
And his neglected hair in order fits.
With gold-embroidered buskins he does bind
His legs, his feet, in yellow socks contained,
And with that hand in which the club was born
He twists the thread, and does the spindle turn.
Persia, and fruitful Lydia saw the skin
Of the fierce beast lie by rejected then;
And those huge shoulders, which did once support
And serve for pilla^s to the heavenly Court,
Clad in a Pall with Tyrian purple died,
The fire is sacred, (credit those have tried)
And but too potent; for as far as land
By the salt Ocean is invirond, and
The scattered Stars illuminate the Sky,
Reaches the Kingdom of this peevish boy.
Though guarded by the interposed seas,
His darts have wounded 8 the Nereides;
Nor could the Ocean quench the kindled flame,
The feathered Nation too has felt the same,
By lust provoked; how the fierce Bull has warred
To be the sole Commander of the Herd!
The timorous Heart his rival once in sight,
Fearles, himself addresses to the fight;
And testifies his fury with his voice.
Then the black Indies tremble at the noise,
Of spotted Tigres: Then, all white his mouth.
With rage engendered foam, the wild Boar does
His deadly tushes whet: The Lion when
He feels this sting of Love, his horrid mane
Tosses on high, the very forest faints
Then with the noise of her inhabitants.
The Monsters of the deep this power have proved,
Both they, and the Lucanian Ox have loved.
Nature does claim a privilege in all,
Her yoke is universal, hate does fall
At the command of Love, that ancient fire
Extinguished by the new one of desire,
Why should I more rehearse? it is enough
We see a Step-dames bosom not of proof
Against the Strok of Love. What news bringst thou?
Speak Nurse, and s^y, where thou halt left her now.

Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundi.
Scena Prima.
Nurse.
Nu. NO hope can salve this sore, nor will that fire
Be ever quenched which fr^nzy raizes higher
Although no crackling flame, although conceald
In her close br^st, it is by her face revealed;
Her ^es do sparkle, and her sh^unke checks fly
The light. Best pleased with variety
Is her divided soul; her body feels
The motion of her troubled sprite and reels.
Now her faint limbs a dying measure tread,
And scarce her weary neck sustains her head;
Now would she resta while, but straight forbears
Forgotten sleep, and spends the night in tears:
She rises, and again is laid: She looses
Her scattered (...), and again composes;
She varies habit, wea^y of her self,
And grows regardles both of food and health;
S^ languishingly goes, her strength decayed
And from her checks the withered roses fade.
Care does dissolve her joints: a trembling pace
She holds, not near so comely as she was.
And those same eyes, that testified her line
From Phoebus, nothing like her Grandsire shine.
Still are her cheeks with tears bedewed: so
A warm shower melts the dilated snow
Upon the cliffs of Taurus; but behold
The Court is open, where on a couch of gold
Leanes the inclined Lover, and her brain
Distemperd, does her own attire disdain.

Ph. Good maids these gold and purple garments bear
From hence, what should the Tyrian dye do here?
Or wool, which the trees mollified rind
Yields to the Sexes? a short Zone shall bind
My loins, for expedition girt; no load
Of pearl, on us by Indian Seas bestowd,
Shall lengthen out my cares, nor will I deck
With any Carkanet my widdowed neck.
No perfume my disheveled hair does need,
Careless upon my neck and shoulders spread,
And by the wind displayed, my left shall bear
A quiver, and my right hand shake a spear.
1 Such was Hippolita, and as she guides
From frozen Tanais, and Maeotis sides
Her troops to Attick coasts, her hair collected
Into a knot, and then again rejected;
A Crescent shield gaurding her side, even so
Accoutred I, into the woods will go.

Nu. Comp^in no more, gri^f does not ease (great Queen)
The wrete^ed. Will the fire observe a mean?
Invoke the Virgin Goddess of the wood.
H^il sacred Queen of forests, whose abode
Alone is on the hills; alone who art
There worshipped, these dire portents avert.
Thou, the woods awful Deity: the bright
Planet of Heaven, the ornament of night,
One of the worlds alternate lamps, the trine
Aspected Hecate favor our design.
Tame this hard-hearted youth, that he may learn
To love, and with a mutual ardour burn;
Incline his cares, his breast unarme, his mind
Ingraft in hers, though froward, harsh, unkind;
Let him pay Venus homage, thus thy might
Employ. So still unshaded be thy light.
Through the dispersed clouds making thy way
With thy resplendent horns: so from thy sway
2 May no Thessalian Witches thee constrain,
3 Nor thou thy honor forf^it to a Swain.
Goddess invoked, thou'st heard my prayer, lo now
I see him paying of his yearly vow.
Alone he is, wherefore are these delays?
Art must be used. Fortune gives time and place.
What tremble I? it is hard for to obey
A Crime, but he that fears a prince must lay
Conscience aside, and modesty expel,
The bashful never served a Monarch well.

Actus Secundi. Scena Secunda.
Hippolitus. Nurse.
Hip. THy weary steps why hither bendest thou
With such a clouded face, and troubled brow,
Good Nurse? I hope my Father is not dead,
Nor Phaedra, nor the pledges of their bed.

Nu. Fear not, obsequious Fortune, on thy house,
Still waits, and still the land is prosperous.
But thou, mild as thy houses fate, to me,
Give e^r, who 'm so sollicitous for thee;
Because thou thus affl^ctst thy self, whom fate
Makes wr^tched, we may well comiserate*;
But who court danger, and themselves abuse
With needless tortures, they deserve to loose
Those blessings which they knew not how to use.
Rather in pity of thy years, thy mind
Release, and in a festive measure joined,
Advance thy torch; in wine thy sorrows drown
Enjoy thy youth, which will be gone too soon.
Now apt for all Impressions is thy breast,
Venus to young men, is a welcome guest.
Now glad thy soul: Why should thou lie alone?
Solace thy youth, but too unpleasant grown:
Sl^cken the reins, wholly to riot bent.
Nor let thy better days be thus misspent.
The Gods draw out our lives by their degrees
All (...) them p^culiar properties.
Cheerful when young, in age reserved. Why does
A hard restraint thus kill thy toward youth?
A large increase shall crown the husbands toil,
Whose seed is tightly fitted to his soil:
And all the trees are overgrown by those
Which still uncropt preserve their maiden boughs.
Good dispositions greatest praise do merit
When natural freedom guides a nobl^ spirit.
Salvage, and ignorant, thou to a wife
Preferr'st a melancholy single life.
Do thou think to^l a privilege? to ride
The fiery cour^er till he lose his pride,
Or try the bloody issue of a field?
When the eternal providence beheld
So many enemies to life he made
Fresh offsprings to replenish the decayed.
Go too. Let Venus of humane affairs
Dispose, who our diminished stock repairs;
Should but our youth be barren all thou sees,
After an ages standing vanishes.
Coverd' with rubbish, the uncultur'd land
Would lie, the sea unnavigated stand,
The empty forest; beasts, air, birds would want,
The wind being the sole inhabitant.
How many casual deaths on mankind wait,
Extinguished by the sea, the sword, dece^t!
But say that these were wanting: yet to all
For to pursue their end is natural.
Nature the guide of life, obeyed, frequent
The City then, and public meetings haunt.

Hip. There is no life more free, void of offense*
Or nearer to the pristine Innocence,
Than what is to the woods confind, who lives
With a clear Conscience on the mountains cliffs
Is not enslam'd with avarice, nor draws
The air of seldom merited applause.
Is not with envy swelled, nor kindness blown,
Nor favorite, nor vassal to a crown.
He covets not vain honors, nor the uncertain tide
Of wealth, not hope and fear do him divide
Him scarce the poisonous tooth of malice wounds
Nor does he know the usual crimes of towns,
And great concourses, fears not every noise
Like guilty persons, nor inventeth lies;
A thousand Columes don't his roof uphold,
Nor are his rafters fastened with gold.
His Altars do not flow with streams of blood,
Nor, with the sacred 1 meal, their foreheads strewn,
A Hecatombe of white oxen expects
The stroke of death, and bow their hundred necks.
But he the country does enjoy, endu'd
With a most sweet and pleasing solitude*
Harmless he wanders through the open air,
Nor can he any thing but beasts ensnare.
And, when with labor faint, his weary limbs
Refreshes with Ilissos Crystal streams.
Now he on banks of swift Alpheus lies,
Now thickest coverts of the wood descries,
(Where cool Lerna through her transparent spring
Shows her clear bottom,) ever wandering.
Here birds complain, there the ancient Beech receive
Some gentle wind, and shakes her tremblng leaves
Strech^d on a winding shore he loves to take
A nap, and the bare turse his bed does make;
Whither a fountain falls in scattered showers,
Or flying streams salute the newborn flowers
With murmuring courtship: Wildings are his food,
And strawb'ries gathered from the underwood.
Meats quickly cooked, he delights to fly
Far from the Courts excessive luxury,
Let the ambitious drink in golden cups.
With what a gust he the pure fountain sups
From his convexed palm; and sleep more sound
Securely laid on the obdurate ground.
He lewdly seeks not a retired bed,
Nor in close corners hides his fearful head:
But he does the fresh air, and light enjoy,
And that he lives, Heaven can testify.
I verily believe those Heroes did
Live thus whom after ages Deifi'd.
They had no thirst of gold, no sacred stones
Did limit their unknown possessions.
Bold* ships plough'd not the deep, to foreign shores;
But kept to their own seas, no lofty towers
And ample bulwarks did the city fence,
In arms an universal ignorance.
No engines forced the gates, no oxen plough'd
The earth; she wore no badge of servitude,
Flelds fruitful of themselves sufficed to seed
A sparing people that did little need.
Woods native riches, and some shadie cave
To them unartificiall lodgings gave.
First headstrong wrath, a furious love of gain,
And lust, which in enflamed minds does reign,
Broke this integrity, then did there come
A bloody thirst of Empire in the room.
Great men did prey upon the less, and might
Was chosen arbitrator unto right.
Then with bare hands they fought: untrimed boughs
And stones were the first weapons they did use.
The cornell was not shod with ir'n, nor tied
The soldier a long sword unto his side,
Nor horses manes crested their helmes; but vexed
With smart they took the weapons that were next.
Dire Mars invented warlike stratagems,
And thousand forms of death, hence purple streams
Defiled each land: blood died the blushing mane
Then endless crimes in every horse did reign:
No sin but grew a President; the child,
His Father, Brothers have their Brothers kill*d,
Women their Husbands, wicked Mothers slew
Their infant births. What then did Step-dames do
Nothing indeed's more mild than beasts, but this
Woman, sins ringleader and Artifice
Besets our souls, how many Cities are
Fired by her Incests, lands engaged in war,
And peoples by the ruined weight oppressed
Of their own Countries? not to name the rest:
3 Medea speaks the sex cruel.

Nu. Why.
Condemn'st thou all for ones Impiety.

Hip. I sly, abhor, curse all. Whether it from
Reason, or nature, or mere frenzy come:
I love to hate them: Water shall abide
Sooner with fire: V^ssels securely ride
In the devouring 4 Syrtes; the bright day
Sooner shall rise from the Hesperian Sea,
And wolves be mild to kids, than this my mind
Admit a courteous thought of womankind.

Nu. Love, the perverse often tameth, and removes
All hatred 5 this thy Mother Country proves.
Even that fierce Nation did obey the will
Of Love, or thou had been ungotten still.

Hip. In this respect I Am glad my Mothers dead,
Because my hate is now unlimited.
As a fixed rock on every side, in vain
Assailed by waves, does beat them back again;
So he despises what I say: but see
Where the impatient lover comes (ah me)
What Fate attends her? whither falls she?
Upon the earth her body breathless lies,
And death-like paleness does benight her eyes*
Madam look up, unloose your tongue, behold,
Hippolitusses arms do you enfold.

Scena Tertia.
Phaedra. Hippolitus. Nurse.
Who calls me back to grief; my bosom fired
A new? how sweetly had I here expired?
But why refuse I life? courage my mind,
Try, execute what thou thy self enjoined.
Speak boldly, she, who fearfully does crave,
Begs a denial; my worst crime I have
Acted long since. Shame comes now too late,
I Have loved a sin, if in it fortunate,
A Husbands name may palliate the deed*
Those sins are often thought honest, which succeed*
Go too, begin my soul. Sir, I a while desire
Your privacy: let all the rest retire.
Hip. See here is none to interrupt us; speak.


Ph. But m^ sealed lips cannot the silence break.
Both urged to speech, and forced to be still.
I call you Gods to witness that my will.

Hip. Can you not speak your mind.


Nu. Great griefs are best
By silence, little ones by words expressed.

Hip. Mother give me the burden of your cares.


Ph. The name of Mother to much distance bears.
An Humbler name becomes our Love. Call us
Thy sister, or thy maid, Hippolitus.
But rather maid. I the most slavish yoke
Will wear. Command it shall be undertook.
I Will clime the frozen Pindus through deep snows
Run through the fire, and armed t^oops; expose
My naked breast to naked swords, receive
1 This Scepter then, and let me be thy slave.
To rule becomes thee, me to obey.
It ill becomes a woman's arm to sway
So great a Nation, thou who 'rt in the pride
Of blooming youth, thy Fathers people guide.
Protect thy suppliant in thy bosom hid.
Take pity on a widow.

Hip. Heaven forbid:
Madam my Father will come safely back:

Ph. from Styx, and those insatiate realms no track
Does lead to the forsaken light, shall he
2 Who came a ravisher, dismissed be?
'Lesse Plut'ol sit down a tame Cuckold too.

Hip. Heavens far more equal power this will do.
But while it yet rests in suspense, I Will please
My Brethren with all fitting offices
Protect Thee, that thou seem not widdowed: I
The absence of my Father, will supply.

Ph. O credulous Lovers! O deceitful Love!
Has he not said enough? now prayers shall move.
O pity; hear even my silence woo.
I would, yet would not speak.

Hip. What ailest thou?


Ph. That which thou little thinks a step-dame should


Hip. Speak plainly and thy doubtful words unfold.


Ph. Why Love within my raging bosom fumes,
And with a cruel fire my reins consumes.
The flame which in my bowels hid remains
Thence shoots up and down my melting veins,
As agile fire over dry timber spread.

Hip. What with chaste love of Theseus thou art mad?


Ph. Thou art in the right: I love that ancient face
Which Theseus had when he a stripling was;
When first the down budding upon his chin
He saw the house the 3 Minotaur was in,
And crooked mazes the long thread up wound.
How glorious then? his hair with sillets bound,
A dainty blush over his cheek was spread,
And his soft arms were the securest bed.
Like thy Diana, or my Phoebus then;
Or rather thee: thus, thus he looked, when
He pleased his foe; thus loftily did bear
His head, but thou art something hansomer;
Thou'st all thy fathers parts; and yet against
Reason some of thy Mothers too retain'st,
A S^ythian rigor in a Grecian face;
Had thou come with thy Father in those days,
Then Ariadnes clew had sure been thine,
Thou, thou my Sister, wherefoere thou shine
In spangled ^kies, a cause so like thine own
Assist; one family has both undone,
The Father thee, and me the Son, thou sees
A suppliant Princes fallen on her knees;
Free from aspersions, innocently good;
Changed but to thee; I Am sure none else have wooed
This day to gri^f, or life an end shall bring,
Pity a Lover.

Hip. Thou Almighty King
Of Gods can thou so mildly see, so mildly hear
Her wickedness? if now the Heavens be clear,
When will thou thunder? let the troubled air
Now run on heaps, and day a Vizard wear.
May the reversed Stars now backwards ^un.
And what do thou, thou the irradi^te Sun
Behold thy Grand^ilds lusts? for shame lay by
Thy beams, and into utter darkness fly.
And why art thou idle Spectator turned
Great Jove, the world not yet with lightning burned,
Thunder at me; let thy quick flame consume
Me, I am wicked, and deserve the doom.
I Have pl^as'd my Step-dame, merit I to be
Inc^ous thought? for this Impiety.
Seemed I most fit? deserves my strictness this?
O Women excellent in wickedness!
O thou in thy unbounded lusts more wild
Than was thy Mother! Sh^e only defiled
Her self, yet was the wicked the^t betrayed
By the Prodigious issue which she had;
The doubtful birth witnessed his Mothers shame
With his fierce look, from the same womb thou came
Thrice happy are they in their prosp'^ous fate
Who are by fraud consumed, destroid by hate;
Father I envy thee: this sin, this sin,
Is greater then Medeas could have been.

Ph. I know our houses Fate* I crave, I know
What is forbid, but cannot h^lp it tho,
Thee thorough flames, over rocks; the foaming deep,
And heady torrents comp^ny I Will keep.
Where ere thou goes, there frantic I will be,
Behold coy youth, again I kneel to thee.

Hi. Keep of, and touch not my chaste lims, what now
Immodest wretch, will thou embrace me too?
Then shall my sword du^ vengeance take; my hand
Wreathed in her hair, her shameless neck does bend.
Bow-bearing Goddess, never blood with more
Justice was on thy Altars spilt before.

Ph. Why now Hippolitus, I have my wish:
Thou cursed my frenzy; 'bove my hope was this,
To perish by thy hand, and chaste.

Hip. Avaunt,
And live; least any thing to thee I grant,
Nor shall this steel, by thee polluted, ere
Defile my chaster side by hanging there.
What Tanais, what Maeotis, which does pay
His waters tribute to the Pontick sea
Can wash me clean? not all great Neptunes floods
Can expiate this crime. O Beasts! O Woods!

Nu. Why so dull sulled? now the crime is known
Let us plead force and uncompelled own
The impious act. Sin is best hid by sin,
Who fear to be accused, should begin.
Whether the lewd attempt were ours or his,
Since secret, who shall be his witnesses?
Help, help, Athenians servants; the obscene
Hippolitus is ravishing the Queen;
Her with his naked sword he threatens,
And awes her chastity with fear of death.
See now he flies, and by his fearful speed
Has left his sword, a witness of the deed.
First cheer the Queen, but let her hair still be
Thus torn, and thus disordered as you see.
These pregnant testimonies of an act
So vile, bear to the City; recollect
Your senses; Madam, Why, alas, do you,
Afflict your self, and sly the public view?
No Woman ever was from the event
Esteemed immodest, but from the assent.

Exeunt. CHORUS. SWift as a tempest does he fly so fast
Cloud-gathering* Chorus does not make such have
A shooting Meteor does more slowly stream,
When rapid winds fan the extended flame.
Now may admiring Fame conferr on thee
The honor due to all antiquity:
For so thy beauty does all others pass,
As Phoebe seems fairer then she was,
When at the full she does her fire combine
With meeting horns, and all the night does shine
Blushing she rises. and the lesser stars
Do lose themselves in that great light of hers.
The evening star appears not more bright
When first he ushers in the sable night,
Now 2 Hesperus when rising from the main,
But in the morning Lucifer again.
Nor thou 3 Bacchus for ever young, thy hair
Unshorn, and vines wreathed about thy spear,
With which thou do thy sluggish Tigres wound,
Thy horned temples with a Mitre bound,
Do his untrimmed locks excel; nor set
Thy beauty ( Theseus) on too high a rate,
Because the rumor generally goes,
That Phaedra's 4 sister thee before Bacchus chose.
Beauty thou most uncertain good, the gay
And fading treasure of a short-lived day
With winged feet how do thou post away!
The scorching heat of summer has not killed
So soon, the verdant glory of the field;
In The middle of the Solstice, when the night
Contracts her self, and makes more room for light:
As these fair colors that adorn the face
Are in a moment gone; no day does pass
But may the ruins of some beauty boast,
Form is a fading thing. O! who would trust
So frail a good? use it while thou have power,
For time does steal away, and every hour,
Is worse than that which went before,
Why love thou deserts? beauty is I Am sure
In those untrodden paths, as unsecure
If hid from middayes h^at in woods thou be
Loose rings of 5 Naiades will compass thee,
Who choicest youths imprison in their streams:
And wanton 6 Silvans shall ensnare thy dreams.
Or if the 7 Moon thought younger than the old
Arcadians from her Starry Orb behold
That she with wonder will be six^d th^re.
Of late she blushed, nor any clouds appear
To v^il her naked Luster, but we grown
Sollicitous for the color she was on*
8 Our kettles beat against Thessalian sp^lls
When besides th^e, she had no (...) else;
Thou were her only cause of stay, and she
Bu^ stopped her ch^riot while she looked on thee.
Let fewer frosts but ^ip thee, and the rays
Of Phoebus seldomer salute thy face,
It will excel the Parian Marble, how
That pleasing frown becomes thy manly brow!
How grave a Majesty is seated there!
Although thy neck might with the Suns compare
His flowing tresses on his shoulders spread
With which he is both adorned and covered:
That rugged front, becoming thee, and those
Short curles, which only Nature does compose
Though the most warlike Gods thou might desie
And from the combat bear the Victory:
Though now, while yet a youth thou equallest,
Al^ides brawnie arms, or Mars his chest.
If when thou ridest, Castor never rein'd
His Cyllarus with such an even hand.
If when thy finger to the loop made fast,
With all thy force thou do thy javelin cast;
The Creta^s cannot shoot so far, who be
Esteemed Masters in Artillery,
Or Parthian like, direct thy shafts on high
And no^e return unblouded from the sky;
But in her bowels sixth, do make the bird
Thy prey which in the middle region for'd.
Yet (search all ages records for their fate)
The fair have s^ldome proved fortunate.
Some milder God prot^ct thee, and may thou
Live till thou be deformed, so aged too.
What dare not vexed women do? what snares
She to entrap the guiltless youth prepares,
Her cheeks she does be^ew; her head undresses,
And seeks belief, in her disordered tresses.
All guil is com'd by woman, but who is he,
That in his face such marks of Majesty
Does bear; his head erected with that state?
How like Hippolitus he is! but that
His cheeks do such a ghastly paleness wear,
And such a filth does clothis flagging hair.
See Theseus self returned to Earth is there.

Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus T^rtii.
Scena Prima.
Theseus. To him Nurse.
Th. AT length returned from nights gloomy coasts
And th Pole which shaddows the imprisond ghosts
How light offends mine eyes; now is the corn
1 Triptolemusses gift, the fourth time shorn;
Four Aequinoctials now has 2 Libra seen;
While I uncertain of my Fate have been,
Betwixt the Ills of life and death divided. I
Retained this part of life, when I did lie
Buri^d my sense remaind. Great Hercules
Dragging the 3 dog from hell did finish these
M^series, and brought me thence, but now it wants
The prop of strength, my tired courage faints.
And my legs tremble; what ado had I
To come within the prospect of the sky,
From Phlegethons Abyss! the toil did seem
Alike to sly from death, and follow him
But stay, what sudden outcries pierce mine ears?
Speak some one: In my gates, complaints, and tears,
And sorrow in variety expressed?
Indeed fit welcomes for a hellish guest.

Nu. Phaedra resolves to dye; she does despise,
Our bootless tears, and even now she dies.

Th. What cause of death? why die? now I am come?


Nu. Even that does hasten her untimely doom.


Th. Thy doubtful speech some great thing does presage
Speak plainly, whence proceeds so wild a rage?

Nu. In her own bosom she concealeth that,
To dye determin*d, none must know for what;
Forward, good Sir, forward, the business might
Crave your best speed.

Th. Open the door there straight.


Actus Tertii. Scena Secunda.
Theseus. Phaedra. Nurse. Servants.
O Partner of my bed, do thou receive
Me thus? This all the welcome I must have;
Lay by this sword; restore my troubled sense,
And say, what fury does persuade thee hence.
Ph. Alas great Theseus, by thy Scepter, by
The toward hopes of thy Posterity,
By thy return, and me now do permit
Me here to die.

The. What cause requires it?


Ph. The benefit were lost the cause once known.


The. Why none shall hear it but my self alone.
Do thou mistrust thy Husband? never fear
My breast will prove a faithful Treasurer.

Ph. Conceal thou first, what thou would have concealed


The. Yet shall all means of dying be withheld
From thee.

Ph. The willing cannot want means.


The. Relate,
What crime thou with thy death would expiate.

Ph. Why that I live.


The. Cannot my tears prevail?


Ph. That death is welcomest which friends bewail.


The. Well she is obstinate; but I will force
What she conceals with torments from the Nurse.
Load her with ir'ns, stripes shall make her betray
What ere she knows.

Ph. Now I will tell you, stay.


The. Why do thou turn away thy face, and seek
To hide the tears, which trickle down thy cheek?

Ph. Thee, thee, Father of gods, and thee from whom
Our hou^es first Original did come,
Days brightest Lamp, I call to witness how
I neither to his prayers, nor threats did bow,
And yet my body did his force sustain,
But with my blood, I Will wash it clean again.

The. Say who has been the ruin of our fame?


Ph. One whom then little thinks.


The. Tell me his name,


Ph. This sword will tell you, which he left, afeard
To be attached by the alarmed guard,

The. Oh me! what crimes, what monstrous crimes do I
Behold? rough with the little Imagerie,
The Ivory hilt with those Illustrious 1 signs,
Which glorify the Actean Nation shines,
But how escaped he?

Ph. Why these can say,
With what a fearful speed he fled away.

Actus Tertii. Scena Tertia.
Theseus.
The. OH sacred Piety! O King of Gods,
And thou who rul'st the 1 second Lot, the floods
What rage possessed this impious brat? did Greece,
Taurus or Colchian 2 Phasis teach him this?
His deeds declare his line, and he has showed
Whence he first sprung by his degenerate bload.
Those mad Viragos marriage do despise,
And weary of their long kept Chastities
Turn Prostitutes at last. O cursed root,
Which when transplanted bears no better fruit!
Yet even they fly Incest; an innate
Shame does keep Natures laws unviolate.
Now where is his feigned austerity, desire
To imitate the ancients rude attire,
Strictness of manners, gravitie of look?
O juggling life, how art thou still mistook?
The foulest ^oul wears the serenest face.
The Impudent does blush, Strife seems at Peace,
Sin wears the robes of Piety, Deceit
Applaudeth truth, and the effeminate
A rigid abstinence do counterfeit.
Thou the fierce Virgin Sylvan were thou then
Reserved for this? must thy sins write thee man?
And in thy Fathers bed? now on my knees
I humbly thank the careful D^ities
That I did kill Antiope: least thou
Had in my absence forced thy Mother too.
Fly vagabond to unknown Realms, although
Thou to the worlds remotest countries go,
Severed from Earth by interposing seas;
Or should thou dwell in the Antipodes,
Or hide thy self in the obscurest hole,
Beyond the Kingdoms of the Northern Pole;
The seat of snow and winter left behind,
And the cold blasts of that loud-threatning wind;
Yet, yet the sword of vengeance should thee find.
I will pursue thee every where, search places
Remote, Landlock'd, abstuce, confounding mazes,
And ways inexplicable; and where force
Cannot arrive, I Will reach thee with a curse.
Do thou know whence I came? great 3 Neptune gave
Me Power three times to ask what I would have,
And sealed his promise by the Stygian s^oud,
Behold how sorrowful a boon I would.
No more let him behold the light, but go
From his wronged Father to the Ghosts below.
To me thy Son a hated pity show*
This 4 last gift never had bin asked, if I
Were not oppressed by such an injury.
When in the womb of Hell, where D is did roar,
And threatening Pluto stormed, I forbore.
Make good thy promise now, why do thou stay?
Why have thou still so undisturbed a Sea?
With wind-contracted clouds, put out the light
Of Stars, obscure the Heavens, and masque the night;
Pour out thy Seas, drive all thy Monsters hither,
Call from the Deep the waves retired thither.

Exit. CHORUS. O Nature Mother to the Gods and Jove
Who sway'st the bright Olympus, who do move
The Stars scatterd in their swift O^ be, and force
Even those wand'rers to observe a course,
And on their hinges turnst the 1 Pol^s; Why art
Thou always busied in the heavenly part?
Still ord'ring those Celestial Forms? why do
Thou take such care that now the winters frost
Sold strip the woods, and then agai^t* adorn,
Them with fresh shades; that now the parched corn
The rage of the hot 2 Lion should endure,
Which the more temperate Autumn does mature?
But why have thou, who these do regulate,
And mov'st the Spears poys'd with their proper weight
So little care of man: nor do provide
That good the good, and ill the ill betide.
Mortals do follow the blind guide of chance
Whose hood winkt bounty does the worst advance.
The holy perish in the crafty toils
Of lust: The Court is governed by wiles.
The people love to give the wicked power,
And as soon hate whom they do now adore.
Dejected virtue reapeth but a small
Reward for doing well; the chaste do fall
Under the curse of want: while potent vice
Is crowned for his famed Adulte^ies.
Vain Modesty: and empty Fame! -- but stay,
What does the breathless Nuncius have to say,
And sadly stopping, what sinister Chance
Figures he in his woeful Countenance?

Finis Actus Tertii.
Actus Quarti.
Scena Prima.
Nuncius. Theseus.
Nun. O The sad Fate of Servants! Why am I
The messenger of our calamity.

Th. Speak thy news boldly; custom thou shall find
For all afflictions has prepared my mind.

Nun. My tongue refuses the sad office.


The. Say, What fresh
Misfortunes our declining house oppress?

Nun. Ah me, your Son is dead.


The. I wept, my Son
Long since: now but a ravsher is gone.
But speak the manner.

Nun. Why as he forsook
The City, painting hatred in his look,
Away he flies with redoubled speed,
And quickly harnesses his lofty Steeds,
Their mettal'd heat, he with the curb allayes,
And diverse things un^o himself he says;
Curses your throne, often on your name does call
And fiercely shakes his slackned reins withal;
When suddenly the Sea did roar and swell
Up to the Stars; not any breathing gale
Did crispe the floods; no thunder tore the air,
The Sea it self raised a tempest there.
Sicilian Seas are with the South Wind less
Disturbed, nor half that fury do express
When 1 Chorus rains, stones tumbling up and down
And with white spume does high 2 Leucates crown.
A hill of waves big with a Monster fled
Unto the shore to be delivered.
Nor is this tempest for the ships prepared
But for the land, the Sea rolls thitherward
With a main speed; nor can we guess what she
Should labor with; what uncouth Prodigy
Earth would show Heaven, a new 3 Cyclas did
(...) 4 E^culapius Temple now was hid,
And the famd rocks of Scyron, and with these
The land, straightned betwixt two neigh'bring Seas.
While these amazed we seek, behold the Main
Does roar, and all the rocks resound again;
Whose tops are sprinkled with the waves, which he
Sucks in, and spouteth forth Vicissively.
So through the Ocean as the whirlpool roams
A globe of water from his nostrils comes.
Anon this mountain bursts, and to the shore
Brings something worse, than was our fear before,
The Sea does follow where the Monster lead,
And overwhelms the land, we shook with dread.

The. What was the shape of this prodigious beast?


Nun. He like a Bull erects his seagreen crest,
And virid front: tosses his mane, his ears
Pricks up, and party colored horns he bears:
Such as might both the conduct of the herd
Become, and the Seas Issues he appeared:
His e^es do sparkle, and he vomits flame:
His neck curled like the Ocean whence he came,
His open nostrils snort aloud: his chest
And deawlap in tenacious Moss are dressed:
His ample sides with red are spotted, then
Ends in a Monster; his huge slimie train
Dragged after him, in far^hest Seas those Whales
Have such which swallow up the obvious sails.
Earth trembles with the load: astonished fly
The scattered cattle, nor are followed by
The affrighted Pastor, beasts the forest clear;
And all the Huntsmen are half dead with fear.
Only Hippolitus unmoved remains,
And his amaze^ St^eds with straighter reins*
Encouraged by his wel-known voice retai^s.
Toward Argos lies a steep and craggy way,
Which all the neighboring Ocean does survey:
Here this vast bulk does whet himself, and act
In jest first, what he does intend in fact.
But when he felt his rage increase, and had
Now long enough with his own fury played;
Away he flies, scarce any print remains,
And just before the trembling chariot stands.
Your Son nere changes color, but does rise
With angry looks, and thus aloud he cries;
I shall not easily be afraid of this;
To conquer Bulls 5 hereditary is.
But straight his disobedient Steeds, their load
Did carry thence, and having mist the road
They followed as their fury lead, and ore
Uueven rocks the jolting Chariot bore.
He, as a skillful Pilot takes care
In a rough Sea to keep his Vessel fair,
And with his art beguiles the waves; does guide
His horses, now he draws their mouths aside
With the strained bit, and now the scourge he uses;
Nor all the way his foul companion loses:
Now side by side, he keeps an equal pace:
Now right before; and terror brings each ways.
But here the flight does end; just in the way
Stands the horned Monster of the Sea.
The Affrighted Steeds then lost all rule, and strove
To run down headlong from the rocks above;
Rising before they cast your Son, who, as
He fell, within the reins entangled was,
Which wound about his body, and the more
He struggled held him faster then before.
They with the empty Chariot run, this known
As their fear guides; commanded now by none
So feeling a strange weight, and scorning that
Day was committed to a counterfeit,
Hurried through the air, the Chariot of the Sun
Shook from his seat the unskilful 6 Phaeton
His blood besmears the fields: his head the rocks
Does beat, and Brambles tear away his locks;
Sharp stones dis-figure his fair face, and by
Whole troops of wounds, his hapless form destroy.
The swift wheels drag, his dying limbs at last
His corpse on an erected stake is fast.
Struck through the middle of his groin, a while
He staid his chariot fixed on a pile;
His steeds made a short halt, but quickly they
At once both broke their Master, and delay.
Then briers and thorns his half-dead body tear,
And evr'y bush, a piece of him does wear.
His woeful servants are disper'st to find,
Where his blood marks the way, he thus dis-joynd
Hippolitus; the howling Beagles go
In gu^st of their dissever'd Master too.
Nor all their diligence as yet compleats,
The Corpse, is this the honor beauty gets?
Who now, Partner, and heir unto a Crown,
As bright as any Constellation shone;
Is gathered to his Urn in pieces now
O Nature, but too prevalent art thou.
What ties of blood do thou on Parents lay,
Which we, even against our wills, obey!
Whom dead I wished, now dead I weep for,

Nun. None.
Enough can weep, for what themselves have do^e.

The. Mortals abide no greater curse, than when
Constrained to wish what they unwish age^.

Nun. Why do you weep, if you retain your hate?


The. Not that he is dead, but that I caused his fate.


Exeunt. CHORUS. HOw fickle is the state of man! the poor
Do not the fiercest storms of chance endure;
She strikes them with her lightest strokes, they be
Crowned with content though in obscurity;
A homely cottage does the eyelids close
With a secure and undisturbed repose.
Those lofty towers near neighbors to the sky
Receive the East and South-winds battery;
The rage of the tempestuous Boreas, and
The showr-accommpanied Chorus stand.
The humble valley is but rarely struck
With thunder, when great 1 Caucasus has shook
And 2 Ida trembled. 3 Jove himself afraid
Of the sealed heavens, has earth his refuge made.
Plain homely roofs, and vulgar habitations
Have no extraordinary alterations,
When Kingdoms totter, on their crazed foundations
Fortune does fly with an uncertain wing,
And none can boast he has her in a string.
He who redeemed from eternal night
Again enjoyes the comfort of the light,
Now weepeth his return from Hell, and here
Meets a greater cause of grief than there.
Pallas, whom we to reverence are bound
That Theseus freed from the Stygian sound
Again reveiws the Heavens; (...) Virgin thou
Art not beholding 4 to thy U^cle now:
The greedy Tyrant has his number still.
What voice of weepings this? what bloody Scene
With a drawn sword prepares the frantic Queen.

Finis Actus Quinti.
Actus Quintus.
Theseus, Phaedra, Chorus, Servants.
Th. WHat fury does possess thee? why this sword
Wherefore about a body so abhorred
Are these complaints and tears?

Ph. On me, on me
Pour forth thy wrath hard hearted Deity;
On me let loose thy Monsters, whatsoere
Tethys does in her hidden bosom bear:
Whatever do in farthest Seas remain
Embraced by the unstable Ocean.
Oh Theseus ever fatal to thine own!
Now thy return thy Father, and thy 1 Son,
Have purchased with their lives; still thou thy house
Destroy'st with Love or hatred of thy 2 Spouse;
Oh my Hippolitus, and do I view
Thee thus? and must I be the Author too?
What 3 Scinis, what 4 Procrustes, what new kind
O^ 5 double-visag'd Cretan bulls, confined
(...) 6 Daedalian Labyrinths, scattered
T^y li^bs? Oh! whither is thy beauty fled?
(...) those eyes my stars! what, dead? Oh stay,
A while, and hear me what I have to say.
My language shall be chaste; this sword shall thee
Into my bosom stabbed, revenge of me,
And death shall make me be Phaedra no more,
As my impiety did once before;
Then will I follow thee through all the streams
Of Hell, through Styx, and channels filled with flams,
Let me appease thy Ghost, here 7 take this hair,
Which thus from the disordered sleece I tear.
Though in our wills unequal, we may try
An equal fate; if chaste, to Theseus dye:
If not, unto thy love; what shall I climb
My Husbands bed defiled by such a crime?
Or was this sin undone, only that I,
The abused Vindicator should enjoy
Of an unviolated Chastity?
O Death, the only cure of Love, who best
A broken Modesty recementest
To thee I fly: open thy quiet breast.
Athenians hear, and thou a Father worse
Than I a Stepdame, what I did rehearse
Was false and wicked; forged in my distracted
Bosom: thou'st punished; a sin unacted.
By my incestuous guilt, guiltless and chaste
He fell, now thy deserved praise thou have.
This sword shall pierce my impious breast, and bring
My blood to thy wronged Ghost an offering.
What thou should do now thou have lost thy son,
Learn of a Step-dame: Fly to 8 Acheron.

The. You dark jaws of 9 Avernus, and you caves
Of 10 Tenarus* with you forgetful waves
Of 11 Lethe, grateful to the wretched, you
(...) lakes assist to o^erwhelm me too;
Load me with everlasting plagues, come now
You monsters of the deep; whatever thou,
12 Proteus have hidden in the utmost womb
Of the Ocean, and even that ^cean come,
And me glorying in such a crime convey
To the dark bo^ome of the profound sea.
And thou too prone a Father to my wrath,
Now I deserve to dye, by a strange death;
I have dispersed my Son, and while afraid
To leave a false offense unpunished,
Acted a true; what fourth lot can I try?
13 Heaven, Hell, the sea by my Impiety
Are filled, already in each portion known
Am I: Was my return for this alone?
The way to light unstopt to show me these
Sad and ingeminated obsequies?
Widdow'd and childles I that might at once
Kindle two fun'rall piles, my wives and sons?
O thou to whom this dismal light I ow,
Return me back unto those shades below.
But, Impious, I do now in vain prefer
Forsaken death; cruel Artificer,
Who find out new ways of blood, and death,
Now find a curse thy sin which equalleth.
Pines humbled to the earth by force, at their
Release, my body shall in pieces tear,
Or I will jump from Scyrons rocks. I Have seen
Worse judgments, what their sufferings have been
Girt with a mote of fire. I know what pains,
And future mansion for my self remains.
Make room you sinful Ghosts; thy endless toil
Upon these shoulders lay, and rest the while
Faint 14 Sicyphus: let that false river slip,
When almost caught from this deluded lip.
Let 15 Tityus vulture leave him, and for food
Prey on my Liver still, to pain renewed.
Rest my Pirithons Father, while I, bound
Unto thy Wheel, keep the perpetual round.
Gape Earth, receive me Hell, receive me: this
A juster voyage for me thither is;
My Son I follow: fear not thou, who sway'st
That Ghostly Empire; my intent is chaste.
In thy Aeternall house receive me then,
Now never to escape from thence again*
The Gods are not so much as moved with prayer;
But when I ask a crime, how quick they are!

Cho. Now pay the rites of fun'rall, and mourn,
These limbs you see so misrably torn;
You will have time enough to weep.

The. O bear
Hither those relics I esteem so dear.
Give me that burden, and those limbs, but too
Irreverently gathered by you.
Art thou Hippolitus? thou art, the deed
I do confess, and I thy Parricide,
Least I should sin but once, and that alone,
Did call m^ Father when I slew my Son.
See his Paternall Legacy. O rage
Which thus unp^oppest my declining age!
Let me embrace these limbs, and what is yet
Remaining in my bosom cherish it;
Join these dissected members and digest
Those parts in order which be thus displaced,
Here put his right hand, here his left, once skilled
In moderating of those reins it held.
This mark in his left-side, I know how great
A part have I to weep unfound as yet.
Hold out my trembling hands, and you restrain
My thirsty cheeks your ample showrs of rain,
While to my Son I count his limbs, and mold
His body new. This piece no shape does hold
At all, with wounds so mangled it is unknown
What part it is, but sure I am it is one.
Here in this void, although not proper place
It shall be laid: Is this that Heavenly face
Humbled a Stepdames p^ide? that Beauty come
To this? O Gods how cruel is your doom!
Oh bloody fury! to thy Father thus
Come thou, and by my wish Hippolitus?
Here take my Sires last gift that I should bear
Thee often; mean while we will burn these members here
Open the morning Court, and with loud cries
Let all the Town the fun'rall solemnize.
Look you to th'Royall Pile; search you about
The Fields to find what yet is wanting out,
Give her the burial of a ditch, where laid,
May earth lie 17 heavy on her Impious head.

Exeunt. FINIS.
Comments upon the First Scene: Act the First.
IF this Translation were only to fall into the hands of learned Readers,
Comments were extremely unnecessary, but since we know not how the capacities
of all are pallated, the Reader will be pleased to look upon these
Illustrations as Torches, which if they knew the way, are useless, if not may
light their understanding.

1. Parnes is a Mountain in Attica the dominion of Athens.

2 Zephyr is the West-wind ennobled with sundry Epithites, and particularly in
its derivative of (...), as causing Germination and pulbulation, he is called
Decoy, because of the gentle showers he ushers.

3. Illissus is a River in Attica, which in its seasons (as all the rest is to
be understood) is subject to congelations, so much the more observable, because
Greece is less obnoxious to those inclemencies of cold then these Regions.

4. We should hardly avoid an Indecorum, if we did not reconcile the author in
this Meander, which though it be an Asiatick River, yet credulous antiquity
supposed, that after it had mingled with the Sea became emergent again in
Pel^ponesus.

5. Marathan is a city in Attica, which owes the glory of its memory to a
memorable defeat given to the Persian by the A^henian.

6. Acarnania is the Southern part of Attica, which by the benefit of its
situation, is more warm then the other par^s o^f that Dominion.

7. Hymettus is a place there of great reputation for ^ees.

8. A Village there adjacent.

9. Sunion is a Promontory, where the Sea being neet limitation, beats with
extraordinary violence.

10. The Latin Copies read it Philips, mistaken for Phibalis a place in
Attica, here supposed to be the lodge of a Bore; designd for Hippolitus his
hunting.

11. Diana not unsitly termed Queen of the worlds solitary part, whether as
presiding over the woods, or governing the night according to those Verses,

Terret Lustrat agit Pros^rpina Luna Diana
Ima suprema feras sceptro fulgore sagitta.
12. Araxes is an Armenian River arising from the same mountain which gives
source to Euphrates. To which the Author adds, Ister subject to Glaciation a
River in Germany, that by their remotion, the universalitie of Dianas power may
be more conspicuous, which is his design in the following Verses.

Upon the Second Seen.
CRete, aptly invocated by Phaed^a as being her country, may justly be term^d
Sovereign of those Seas, being seated in the middle thereof, being washed with
the Aegean on the North, the Afric^ (...) ^bian on the South, 279. miles in
length, and 50. in breadth, havin^ (...) ancient greatness a hundred Cities,
nor is it an (...) Epithete in the Greeks to call it (...).

To understand this (...) ascend to the History of Theseus, Minos, and P^aedra,
^or the death of his Son Androgeus, made an eager war upon the Atbenians, who
being compelled to submission, were tied to this Article of sending seven
yong-men every year to Cr^te to be given to the Minotaur, (a Monster begotten
by a Bull upon Pasiphae;) the Story is too obscene for publication) Theseus
decision of fortune had in the third year selected Theseus for this sacrifice,
who by the assistance of Ariadne daughter to Minos killed this monster, and
evaded the Labyrinth. Ariadne and her Sister (our) Phaedra were both taken by
him, where after having ingratefully deserted Ariadne; this Phaedra the
remaining sister was brought to Athens, a country, Enemy to Minos, and married
to him

3. This is by an Ironie, noting Theseus as signal for Inconstancy, Helene,
Hippolita, Melibae, Ariadne, all beloved by him, and forsaken after or
destroyed.

4. By this audacious Champion is intended Pirotheus who after the death of his
Wife Hippodame had with Theseus made a Vow never to marry any, but a Daughter
of Jupiter; None of those Daughters being to be found above; he, a true
^udacious Champion, descends to Hell, associated with Theseus, designing a Rape
upon Proserpine, at the first assault Cerberus killed him, and Theseus
endeavoring to afford him assistance, or revenge, was taken alive, there kept
in chains by Pluto, and after rescued by Hercules. Others are of opinion that
the descent into Hell, was rather to restore Proscrpine to her afflicted Mother.

5. Aetna a Mountain vomiting flames in S^icily.

6. A solemn form of adoration to wave their Torches at Sacrisices, or other
addresses, to their pretended Divinity.

7. In the building of Athens, antiquity was credulous to believe of a
contention between Neptune and Minerva, concerning the Protection and
Nomination of this new City, which was to be determined to be dedicated to
that God who should produce, the most profitable benefit to mankind; Neptune
produced a Horse, because of his use in laboring of the ground and portage,
but Minerva concluding peace and plenty to be the most commodious, caused the
Olive to spring up, with giving her the victory, she named the city (after her
own name of (...),) Athens.

8 Pasiphae, the Mother to Phaedra, wife to Mino^, whom they report to be
enamored of a Bull, and by Dedalus his Art including her in a wooden Cow fed
those wild flames with actual enjoyment of her Beastly woer, from this
unnatural mixture, proceeded the Minotaur.

9. The Sun by discovery, of the embraces betwixt Mars and Venus, to Vulcan her
husband, contracted the hare of this Goddess toward his issue, and Pasiphae
being his daughter is believed to be struck with th^se unwarrantable flames by
her revengefull design and appointment.

10. Daughter to (...) the son of ^upiter.

11. Theseus at that time was inchaind by Pluto.

12. Minos who by opportunity of the ^cituation of his Kingdom, and benefit of
a Navi^, ruled all those ^cas. In this she repeats all the anc^stors of
P^aedra, as the Sun her grandfather by the Mother, Jupiter by (...), at once
presenting her with the fear of Revenge by ampliation of their Power.

13. These Verses are Ironick as upbraiding Phaedra with that Monstrous love of
her Mother, and the monster her Brother the Minotaur;

14. Antiope and Hippolita though different names are to be understood one
Person, the Mother of Hippolitus a brave Amazon Princess, who in a com^a: with
Theseus submitted to his more vigorous valor and was married to him, but after
in some amatorie Expostulations taxing her Husband, he in his passion killed her.

15. Phaedra palliates her impious crimes with the repetition of her Mothers
lust, as if irresistibly derived to her from Pasiphae.

16. Both Theseus and Pyryt^on, being both adulterers, may more excellently
give Indulgence to that crime in which they are equally guilty.

17. The sense is, Will Minos, who not so much as followed to revenge the
Impiety and treason of Ariadve then running away with Theseus, be more severe
in a Remoter cause?

18. Theseus then supposed dead.

19. Pallas Tower the Citadel of Athens, which was divided into the three
Parts, the Aeropolis or Cittadell, the City, and the Pyraeum.

Upon the Chorus of the first Act.
1 VEnerem ex spuma maris and Caeli t^sticulis a Saturno excisis natam
fabulantur. This Goddess said to be born of the flood, either because of the
Fluctuations and Perturbations which follow those Passions, attending the sight
of Beauty, or because moisture gives all things radication so from propagation
(the act which this Gods presides over) the species of things receive their
rise and continuation.

2. This not to be understood of Eros and Anteros, but of a legitime and
warrantable affection, and prohibited for impious desire, the warrantable
Cupid, Cicero in his De natura deorum, will have to be the son of Venus and
Jupiter, the Impious of night, and Er^bus, something against the sense of the
Poet, who would have them both born of Venus.

3. Apollo for the murder of Cyclops, being by Jupiter divested of divinity,
submitted himself to be Admetus (then King of Thessaly) his Shepherd; but our
Poet sems to have it be, only in design to enjoy that Kings Daughter.

4. Jupiter in several shapes accomplished his lusts, to possess himself of
Leda, he became a Swan; to enjoy Europa, a Bull.

5. In the division of dominions betwixt the three Brothers, Heaven and Earth
fell to Jupiters assignation, the Sea to Neptune and Hell to Pluto.

6. Endymion for his exact Observation of the renovations and decrescencies of
the Moon was reputed by the fabulous and easy, faith'd antiquity to have bin
admitted to her embraces, and by her hid amongst the Latmian rocks in Caria,
that she might undiscovered enjoy him; in the mean while her Brother, the Sun;
at her Instance took the government of the night upon him: that Moony chariot
being fained to have been driven with two Steeds, because of the less rapid
motion of her course; compared to her Brother, to whom therefore they ascribed
four.

7. Hercules is reported out of complacency to Omphale the Lydian Princess of
whom he was passionately enamoured to have laid aside his club, and the hide of
the Nemaean Lion, and cloth himself in female habit, and forgetting the memory
of all his former generous undertaking, to apply himself to the Distasse, and
other womanly exercises.

8. The Nereides are supposed the daughters of Nereus and Doris, being all
Sea-nymphs, and called by the Names of Nesea Cymothoe, and others, the names
are at large in Hesiods Theogenia.

Act the second,
Scene the first.
1. HIppolita from Scythia the seat of the Amazons invaded Attica, with her
Viragoes, where being overcome in arms by Theseus, she captived her conqueror
by her beauty.

2. It was an opinion of the Ancients, that the Moon were obnoxious to the
Charms of Witches, amongst none was more infamously famous then those of
Thessaly.

3. This Verse has a new reflection of the Moons descending to Endymion a
Carian Shepherd, and by the deprecation of such another descent, the Poet
insinuates a diminution of her reputation by it.

Scene the second.
1. The Custom of the Ancients in their sacrifices, was to crumble upon the
sacrifice Altar and knives, a cake of barley and salt, which being called in
Latin Mola gave rise to the word Immolare.

2. The stones which bounded possessions were called sacred, either because it
was amongst the Ancients esteemed sacrilegious to remove them, or because that
upon them yearly, the Lords of those bounded possessions, used to sacrifice
upon those stones to Jupiter Terminalis, or the God Terminus.

3. Medea is an apt example to obtrude an infamy upon her sex, for she betrayed
her father Aeta, tore in pecc^s her brother Absyrtus, juggled the daughters of
Pelias into Parricide upon their own parent, destroyed Crcon and his daughter
Creusa, by caustic poisons, to testify her revenging hatred (...) husband
Jason, killed her two sons Mormorus before the eyes of the deprecating father:
And lastly, which Hippoli^us seem^ to (...) upon, being married to Aegeus (the
graddfa^r to this young man, to prefer her own son) laid plots for the (...)
o^ Theseus.

4. The Syrtes are two dangerous Bays in the Lybian Seas, full of flats;
sholes, and quick sands.

5. Meaning the Amazons who by expulsion of their Husbands testify their hate
to Males, yet could this Love which s^ee* persuades him to submit unto,
prevail upon his Mother notwithstanding the disadvantages of being an Amazon
and a Scythian.

Scene the third.
1. Theseus had committed the Regency of Attica to her during his absence.

2. This speech of Phaedras appears dronick, from the improbability that Pluto
should dismiss One, who had a design of rape upon his wife, and might, if
returned, disclose those not to be made public secrets of his dark Province;
yet reflecting upon the power of Love, she concludes, that that may bow even
Pluto himself into Compassion.

3. Of the Minotaure already we have spoken.

4. Ariadne ingratefully deserted by Theseus, was after entertained by Bacchus;
who in consideration of her Love to him, translated her into a Constellation,
whom Phaedra invokes from the similitude of their affections, she having doted
on the father Theseus, as Phaedra on the son Hippolitus.

5. Diana which Hippolitus ado^'d, or Phoebus Grandfather to Phaedra.

Chorus of the second Act.
1. Chorus.

2. Hesperus ascending the Brow of Atlas, that from that height he might more
conspicuously contemplate the course of the Stars, by some accident, of either
of chance, or malice, did there concealedly depart this life, which gave
occasion to conjecture, that he was translated into that illustrious Star,
which in the Evening we call Hesperus, in the Morn Lucifer, or Phosphorus.

3. Of Bacchus, his triumph over India, his attributes of everyoung naked,
crowned with Ivy Horns, unshorn, and the rest; see Natalis Comes Mytholog. lib.
5. cap. 13.

4. Ariaduc was at first enjoyed by Theseus, afterward by Barchus, which the
Poet is pleased to ascribe Bacchenalion, as finding a greater, and more
attracting excellency in Hippolitus father, then Liber Pater.

5. The Naides, so called, (...), were Nimphs which the Ancients ascribed to
Fountains, their imprisoning of beauteous young men in their streams, is taken
from the Disstaters of drowned Hylas and Narcissus.

6. The Arcadians, being Greclans of a more untracted antiquity then the rest,
boasted their beginnings to be before the Sun and Moon.

7. How the Driades, or Sylvan Nymphs may be joined with Pan, as being
solacious, I know not; since Plutarch relates, that Drias, the daughter of
Faunus, had such a particular abhorrence at the sight of men, that to avoid it,
she declined all society, and at her Sacrifices, Males were prohibited to
appear, unless this is spoken generally, and that story received as a
particular exception.

8. The Ancients imagining the Moon subject to Incantations, used by beating of
brass Basins, sounding of Trumpets, and all other clamorous means, to assist
and recover, (as they thought) the Moon, laboring under an Eclipse.

9. Paros is an Island amongst the Cyclades, ennobled for her excellent Marble.

Act the third.
Scene the first.
1. TRiptolemus was an Attick Prince, who (preinstructed by Ceres) taught the
Athenians Agriculture.

2. The Sun entering into the Aequinoctiall sign of Lihra, makes a just
aequality betwixt the day and night.

3. Cerberus is understood to be this Dog, a deformed Monster with three heads,
and supposed by the Ancients, to be the Porter of Hell. Which Hercules in
pursuance of Euristheus, his commands, brought away from Hell bound; at the
same time he ^eemed this our Theseus.

Scene the second.
1. Grecce being subject to Piracies and Invasions, in its more fertile part,
the Territory of Athens being unfruitful, was not so obnoxious to displanters;
hence the Athenians boasted themselves to be aboriginall to that Country, and
wore as an Emblem of it, golden Grasshoppers upon their Bromes.

Scene the third.
1. See the Chorus of the first Act, number 5.

2. Phasis the greatest River of the Colchi, so much the more subject to an
Epithete of Barbarism, because it washeh the Country whence Medea had
original.

3. Aegeus the father of Theseus, had commanded him, if he returned successful
from the Minotaure, that the black sails of the returning Ship should be
removed and white advanced. This Theseus forgetting; the mistaking father
judging the event, suitable to the color, precipitated himself from a Rock
into the Sea, called from him Aegean. The Athenians, out of Gratitude to the
father, and flattery to the son, reputed him translated into the God of the Sea.

4. Theseus had already enjoyed the benefit of two desires (the option of three
being granted to him) the first was to be victorious over some barbarous
Thieves then troubling Attica, the second, to evade the Labyrinth, and this
third, that some Monster might destroy Hippolitus.

5. Stix an Arcadian River of a venomously cold quality, was by the Ancients
supposed for a River in Hell, ofsuch a hor^id reverence with the Gods, that
whoever assumed the name of that to assure a vow, durst not infringe it. He who
violated the sanctity of this Oath, was to be divested of all divinity, and
deprived of Nectar for one hundred years.

Chorus of the third Act.
1. For notwithstanding the opinion of Mathematicians, the Poles do move with
the universe.

2. The Sun in Leo causes more then usual colors.

Act the fourth.
Scene the first.
1. COrus is a Wind usual to the Sicilian Seas, which drives the Waves upon
the Italian coasts.

2. Leucate is a Promontory in Acarnania.

3. The Ciclades are Islands in the Aegenian Sea.

4. This prodigious flood arising, interposed betwixt us and the sight of
Aesculapius his Temple, and those memorable Rocks called Sciro^ian, from Sciron
an infamous Robber, who there died, there by the hand of Theseus.

5. In allusion to Theseus, who destroyed the Minotaure of a mixed shape, half
man, and the rest like a Bull.

6. The history of Phaeton is common. Phaeton, that the Sun would by some act
of indulgence, own him to be his issue, begs of Phoebus the guiding of his
Chariot for one day, which being granted, he by his ignorance put all things in
such a fear of conflagration, that Jupiter to ebriate the disorder, struck him
out of the Chariot with a Thunderbolt.

Chorus of the fourth Act.
1. Caucasus is a ledge of extreme high Mountains in Asia dividing Scithia from
India.

2. Ida is a Mountain of Phrigia.

3. At the invasion of the Giants.

4. Pluto was Uncle to Pallas, as brother to her father Jupiter, (...) if he
lost an inhabitant of Theseus, recovered another by Hippolitus.

Act the fifth.
Scene the first.
1. SEe the third Scene, Act the third, numb. 3.

2. By his indiscrete credulity in believing Phaedra and his ra^h passion, in
killing Antrope.

3. Scini^ was an infamous thief, which tied passengers to trees forcibly
bended together, which afterward permitted to return to their natural course,
tare in Pieces all such as were held to them.

4. Procrustes of the same condition with ^cinis, only varying something in
cruelty; passengers, under color of entertainment, were brought to a bed,
which if they were too long, for by amputation of the extending part, they were
equal, if too short, they with racks were stretched out even with it.

5. The Minotaure of Crete, formerly spoken of.

6. Dedalus made that Labyrinth.

7. It was a custom amongst the Ancients, at the interment of their friends,
by way of testification of their sorrow, and in honor of the deceased to cover
their faces, and cut off their hair, as if they took no delight in any ornament
of Nature after the decease of those persons, in whom they placed their supreme
contentment.

8. Acheron (in English joyless) is a River imagined to receive, first the
souls of the deceased, because at the Moment of death, a certain fatal sadness
seiseth so on the Spirits, that an easy divination may be made of death
approaching, for then the memory and conscience of past actions (the River
which we must first pass over) puts our immortal part into an apprehension of
sinking under the burden.

9. Averna is a Lake in Campania, near the Bajae, which because of the
male-odoration of the air antiquity, supposed to be the first descent into Hell.

10. It seems those superstious ages ascribed several descents into Hell, for
Tonarus is here taken for it, at the straits whereof, Hercules descended
thither, from whence he redeemed Theseus, and captivated Cerberus.

11. Leth^ is another of those fabulously designed Rivers of which, whatever
ghost tasted, an immediate forgetfuluess of all things past was its attendant;
though in truth, Lethe is a River about the utmost extent of the Sirtes, which
submerged and latent, for some miles breaks out again near the City Berenice,
from hence the wide-throated faith of the Ancient swallowd an opinion that it
had his emergency from Hell.

12. Proteus a Sea God the son of Oceanus and Tethis, is said to feed Neptunes
Sea Monsters, to be extreme skillful in divinations, and to transform himself
into any shape.

13. Theseus imagining all places here, accuses himself that in all places are
full testiment of his guilt, in the shie Ariadnes constellation, witnesses his
ingratitude in her treacherous desertion; Hell endures his accompanying
Pyritheus thither, to assist his adultery upon Proserpine. The Sea accuses him
by his careless obedience to have sent his father precipitated thither.

14. Sisiphus for his numerous depredations upon Attica, was kill^d by Theseus.
The Punishment aflicted upon him in Hell is supposed to be an injuctive task
to roll a great stone up to the top of a high Mountain, to which, when a^ved,
by its relaxency to the bottom, it makes his labor still beginning, but never
accomplished.

15. Titius endeavoring to ravish Latona, Apollos mother, was by Jupiter
struck dead with Thunder, others say, killed by Apollo, his sufferings are said
to be by a Vultur gnawing perpetually on his Liver, which undiminishably
continues.

16. Ixion the father of Pyritheus taken up by Jupiter into Heaven entertained
lustful thoughts toward Juno, of which Jupiter informed, framed a Cloud in
the effigies of Juno, upon which the deceived adulterer begot the Centaure,
being returned to earth, he vaingloriously boasted of his embraces with the
Queen of heaven* Jupiter to punish his violence, sunk him into h^l with a
Thunderbolt, where he is tied to a wheel and tormented with perpetual
circumrotation.

17. Those dead, of whom the Ancients had any cause to detest the memory, were
usually followed with an imprecation that the earth might lie heavy on them,
out of a strange conceit that the soul (which they believed to be inhumed with
the body) could slowly, if at all, remove to the seat of the happy, by reason
of (...) depressure with such a weight.

DIVERSE SELECT POEMS.
By the same Author.
On an old ill-favored Woman, become a young Lover.
LOve me! Heaven bless me. Had thou told me all
The common miseries, which can befall
A man, to make him wretched; I had met
Them, and embraced them with a youthful heat,
Rather then heard thee talk of Love; this news
Is worse then all the plagues the Gods can us,
To punish black offenders with; to thee
Want and continual sickesse, blessings be.
Sure thou do now like beggars, who to crave
Take a delight, though they may nothing have:
For I can nere believe, thou can acquaint
Thy hopes, with expectation of a grant.
Be thine own Judge, or call thy partial glass
To witness; can thou find in all that Mass
Of monstrous ugliness, one piece that can
Render thee fit for the most sinful man,
If all the rest were answerable? no,
Thou may securely boast that none can show
So full a harmony, no part of thine
Can at his fellows richer form repine,
Nor can they for Supremacy contest,
When every part is worst, and none is best.
Some, when Pandora's box was opened doubt,
That thou were all those plagus which thronged out.
And most agree, as every generous God
A several ornament on her bestowed,
The sportive Deities have given to thee
Each a particular deformity;
Jove gave thee an imperious mind; his Queen
Made thee a scold, and gave thee tongue and spleen:
Sol tan'd thy skin. Iris did paint thy face:
Hermes taught theft: Saturn gave length of days,
God Momus gave thee a repining soul:
Phoebe to keep thee chaste, has made thee foul;
Yet (it seems) Venus whom thou do adore,
Enraged at that has made thy will a whore;
And Mulciber, who would not be behind
His courteous wife, gave thee a halting mind.
But by what chance into the world thou fell
None can conceive under a miracle.
Thy Mother (had thou had one) at thy birth
Had frantic run as soon as brought thee forth:
The trembling Mid wife from her shaking hands
Had let thee fall, killd in thy swathing bands.
The timely zeal else of the standers by
Had rid the world of such a Prodigy;
Or had thou, by their fear from present death
A while preserved, drawn a contemned breath,
None would have fatherd thee, nor had thou bin
Esteemed the lawless progeny of sin,
And of the people. Spurnd from each ones blood
Thou so had perished for want of food.
But you are no humane seed, thy shapelesse age
Allows thee not of mortal Parentage.
Yet 'twould almost persuade me to believe
That (if thou be a woman) thou art Eve:
Only I think man might have stood till now,
If Eve had been no hansomer than thou;
For it is not time or age could change thee thus;
Thou were by Nature made so leperous.
I rather think Jove did himself transform
To woe the Earth, and got thee in a storm;
Or else some grave* fruitful with dead men's bones,
Has teemed the offspring of her Skeletons.
Thou art of such a dirty mol'd; a thing,
Already so like earth, the grave can bring,
No change to thy complexion. I dare swear,
The Worms would scorn to touch thee were thou there.
You Are a mere Chaos, which I am content
To grant that nature for a Woman meant;
But either she forgot, or else her store
Enriching other Beauties, made thee poor,
And of necessity she left thee thus;
Some parts defective, some superfluous,
And others so misplaced, Poets would swear,
Jove got thee on Calisto when a Bear;
And that the suddenness of her translation,
Gave her no time to lick thee into fashion;
And I am half persuaded, thou dodst hope,
Some wealthy dowry from the skies should drop:
For if thou will be married, thou have need,
To have a heavenly Marriage-good indeed;
No temp'rall blessings ever were of force,
To countervaile so horrible a curse.
What madman do thou think would give consent
To cast himself away for thy content.
Why this is worse. So would one death suffice;
Thus, never dead, continually he dy^s.
For when thou opes thy sore, and do relate,
Like a cursed shrew the rigor of thy fate,
Telling what slames are in thy bosom bred,
A Fever entertaines him in his bed:
If thy wan looks for pity seem to call,
Into a deep consumption he does fall;
And when thy laboring eyes bring forth a flood
Of gore, for tears, he gets the flixe of blood:
When thy rude cough does shake each aged limb,
An Ague, or the Palsy shakes him.
Then if from thy pale Lips he drink a kiss,
Without an Antidote he poisoned is;
But if he do the Act, he does mistrust,
He Is damb'd for dealing with a Succubus;
Besides it is odds that he the ^ -- does get,
Although thou have them not with mere conceit;
And for the Plague, there is none will doubt, but he
In a full measure has it, who has thee.
Now if thou know any man, who pleases
To marry such a portion of diseases,
Take him, for I Will be sworn, if e're I do it
The certainty of Heaven must woe me to it.
What should I do with thee; unless that I
Durst show thee somewhere to get money by?
And then I do believe, thy tongue might come
To save me the expenses of a drum;
But when they had so foul a Monster viewed,
Who must appease the frighted multitude?
What must I do, when every Clown shall swear,
I rai^e the Div'l, and am a Conjurer?
When by my sufferings cheated, I shall need
Persuade my self, that it is so indeed:
Confess the accusation true, and tell
The Judge, thou art not only the Devilish, but Hell
Durst they look on, in truth 'twere pretty sport
To see thy cheeks enameled with dirt,
And yellow, when thy hollow eyes in red.
And white, are gorgeously apparelled;
Never Envy Tysiphone; thy hair
May with the Gorgons snaggy locks compare,
And can (for ought I know) change men to ston^*
I never durst look what color it was on:
Thy long and beaked nose, offended with
The neighborhood of such a tainted ^reath,
Does drop into thy mouth; belike a Rhewme
So salt might season it, though not perfume:
Thy teeth (too weak a guard) for to oppose
The constant motion of thy tongue (God knows)
All in griefs Liv'ry black, as if they mournd
For their departed Fellows, are adorned.
Then thy hulch back, splay foot, and beetle brows
I pass, almost afraid to think of those;
Nor dare I speak thy name, no more than once
The Jews durst do their Tetragrammatons.
All generally is naught, for though there be
Some few things, which are simply good in thee;
Yet those blind Pearls, those bloud-shot rubies in
Thine eyes, that golden Ore upon thy skin;
Thy sable teeth made of unpolished jet,
Are all like jewels in a Dunghill set:
And I to pity thee shall be inclind,
Give me these gems, the dunghill left behind.
An Ale-match.
NOw are they set; by this time is the round
Begun, and their ambitious cups are crowned;
The health is named the Kings, for the like good
Subjects thought that would breed the purest blood:
'Twas a shrewd argument they should be maimed,
When the first blow thus at the head was aimed.
Nothing too much for's Majesty they thought;
Nor could their loves be limm'd in a small draught,
They were resolved to burn the stream of Fate,
And with whole pots, cement his broken state.
A deluge the old sinful world did cleanse,
And they (by like) tried that authentic means.
But with a different success, for then
The offended Gods destroyed both beasts and men.
When this prepostrous flood of theirs oppressed
Only the man, and multiplied the beast.
Thus having reared the Standard of the King
They shortly after fell to mustering.
And first unto this desperate service press*
Like careful Soldiers, their own Mistresses.
I do believe they had a plot, to prove
Whether worse drunkards made Bacchus or Love.
But now they found, consulting on the case,
Women were nothing if without their glass.
So is their copy changed, and they took
A harder volume, but a lesser book.
I know not what temptation might be i'nt,
But sure they spoild their eyes with the small print.
Often they read it, nor a time could find
To leave, till seeing double made them blind
'Twas wonderful to see the Virgins Mothers:
Their pregnant healths delivered of others.
Fruition's the first born, they cannot escape
But their unbridled fancies act a rape.
Sure they were bashful, or the Ladies coy,
That only in their drink they could enjoy.
Now their conceits are swelled, and they will give
No credit unto Poets, but believe
Jove courted the Acrysian maid of old,
In showrs of Nectar, rather then of Gold.
They Are bold to think Daphne had never shrunk
The Lovesick God had he bin half so drunk
With any generous liquor, as with pride,
He was before, or Love when her he spide.
Had lacked a tree till now; the Virgin had
The guerdion not of wit, but drink bin made.
The next is to love me, but in that case,
Who could, beyond my understanding was
Nor was I much inquisitive, I know
What they did drink, no matter then to who.
Besides, 'twas plain, who could affect such strange
Creatures as they, were then must needs love change
Well they go round in riddles, every pot
Was woven now into a Gordian knot,
Which they like the great Conqueror divide,
And never look how they should be untide.
Nor can they think but he was sharpened well,
When this prompt sword fulfilled the Oracle,
And so, after his Asian conquests, showed
In being drunk a piece of gratitude.
By this time the aspiring juice does fume
Into their brains, and they condemn the room,
With those internal vapors almost choked
They ask the reason why the chamber smok'd.
The helpless windows, and the door in vain
By turns are shut, and opened again.
The remedy was nearer, had each one
Closed but his mouth a while it had been gone.
But they would lose no time, and now you would think
Their flaming eyes had sucked those seas of drink;
For big with light, they seemed so many Suns
Their faint light dimn'd with exhalations.
Now are they scattered, every one now chooses
Another station which he straight refuses,
And so the third; their restless bodies walking,
Like the Egyptians in the darkness stalking.
Yet as a Lover from his Mistress forced
(By order of the dance a while divorced)
Moves slowly, and his speaking eye forbears
To guide his feet, and kindly follows hers;
But then again with winged speed does take
That hand he was constrained to forsake.
So they divided by the envious fume,
Do sadly wander up and down the room
But summoned by some friendly name, fly hither
And jointly celebrate the health together;
At last these grosser vapors are dispersed
And quit those parts they troubled at the first;
Yet the more subile spirits still remain
Working insensibly upon the brain.
Encouraged thus they reinforce the fight,
And the room cleared, they clear the table straight;
And for the suddainer dispatch, they by
A quaint device, increase the company;
Three multiply to six, while every one
Is by two adversaries set upon:
Now this, and now the other they assault
Like skillfull Beagles, never at a fault;
But still who ends does again begin,
Their cups dancing a perfect Mattachin.
They bar all tedious Lectures; it is decreed
That there they only fluent styles should read,
And without pausing if a piece of cake
Did not by chance a breathing Comma make,
While 'twas a chewing; for Tobacco is
No point of drink, but a Parenthesis.
But now at length they to a full one come,
Each man resolving on a voyage home.
They pay their reckoning, yet it seems they staid
(As by the sequel proved) till they were paid.
Still there remained for every man a pot,
Which they like Foulers ram down after th'shot.
Now these mingled with half a pint of sack
A pretty piece of Conjuration make;
It Is all divided into three times three,
And each glass laden with a family,
Which having swallowed once, you might have seen 'um
Quite altered; their homes were now within 'um
They talk no more of parting now, but call
For a fresh bale of pots, and roundly fall
To their old game, I think 'twas In and In
For they could find no passage out again.
The room was now a Conjurers Circle, and
The pots and Pipes for Mystic figures stand;
To one another they Magicians were,
And their discourses charms to keep them there.
Marry their Host must be the Devil, for he
Was truly glad of their Impitie,
And most officious in his malice lends 'em
A boy-like Mephostophiles to attend 'em
Whom they keep in perpetual motion, still
Emploid either to empty, or to fill.
For now they would brought their bodies to that pass
That they like Mountebanks with every glass
Run themselves through: they looked like unbreech'd guns
A scowring, whence the tainted water runs
In the same quantity, and does not wast
A jot, tho changed in color, and in taste;
Cut into humane figures, I have seen
Some waterworks have very like them been:
So were the Belials tubs, nor they in Hell
Ere met with vessels more insatiable;
And sure the Poets meant that they were tied
To give a drunkard drink, till he denied.
I could not choose but smile at the old Fable
How Her^ules did cleanse Augeas Stable;
Me thought with that, and them, as the case stood
There was a kind of a similitude.
You Have have heard of the famed river that pursues
With eager streams the flying Arethuse,
And grown impatient of the sad divorce
Does under Earth and Seas a passage force
Till she at length is caught, and the fight done,
Their frindly waters in one channel run;
Take any two of them, and the whole chase
Most excellencly represented was.
Of Xerxes Army, Histories relate
How they drank up whole Rivers at a bait,
An easy matter for all them to do;
But who by drinking ere created new?
Had but the fire in Tower-street happened there,
And they bin peece-meal blown into the air,
They had gone nigh to quench it; for an hour
At least, their drink would have maintained a show^*
Mine Host hearing them call for it so fast
Came up in a great fear himself at last,
And seeing all was well, again retired;
For he believed the chamber had been fired.
By this time they had made more Ale away
Than would have served Faustus to's load of hay:
'Twould have struck all the gifted Brethren dumb
And taught the Bishops how to silence 'um.
Yet still their feav'rish appetites increase
The more they drink, they are satisfied the less.
I'^e undertake, had but the Fens been such,
They would have drained them better than the Dutch.
Ten more of their own humor, and in one
Half year the Navy would be useless grown;
The King (God bless him) could no shipping lack,
The narrow Seas they fordable would make;
And think it nothing too. They three had Seas
Within them, far more dangerous than these:
So rough, the Pilot, Reason could nor steer,
But he himself did suffer shipwreck there:
They Would made a perfect Microcosme of man;
Their bladders were the Midland Ocean;
Their bellies the Aegaean Sea, the whiles
Their floting entrails seem the thick-set Isles:
Their troubled breasts the Adriatic, and
Their mote hearts like Sea-girt Venice stand.
Or if you will ascend more high, their brain
Swims like the frozen Sea dissol'd again:
And their benighted understandings look
Like Green Land men by winter overtook.
Yet some who saw them thus diguised, say,
They were all a mere Terr' incognita;
Nor without cause; well might they be unknown
To them, who to themselves were strangers grown.
Had they been cat^chized then it is thought
That the first question would have put them out;
For any thing they of their own Names knew
The Minister might have baptized them new.
They talked like men asleep, of this and that,
And whilst a speaking often, forgot of what:
The rest bound up in frost you would have thought,
And the next thaw come to have heard it out.
It would have run a good Gramarian mad,
To tell how many parts of speech they had,
The Noise at Babel was each whit as good,
And I believe, far better understood.
For they had a confusion too, and worse
Than that of tongues, of the Intellective Powers.
In language they were English all, but than
In understandings all Ebrician.
What is it a clock? says one, another cries,
You're in the right; with all my heart replies
The third; all answ'ring so far from the matter
That mortar brought instead of brick was batter.
Yet all this while, they drink, and sometimes take,
A whole pot merely, for variety sake.
A whole pot merely for vari'ty sake.
The Boy calls up his Master, and he swears
That they are Papists all, and now at prayers;
He thinks their great and lesser Cups are strung
In order, 'stead of Beads, upon their tongue:
He fancies an Ave Mary in each glass,
And every pot a Pat^r Noster was.
But now both pots and glasses they forbore,
Their treacherous heads (alas) would bear no more,
But droop like Tulips overcharged with wet,
The sleepy Poppy, or the Violet;
Yet so much sense even now in them remains,
They break the Weapons that had cracked their brains.
Now they sit still, and not a word does pass,
Like the Disciples of Pythagoras.
To do their Mother Tongue a piece of right
Their tongues that clipped it now were silent quite.
Mine Host aware of this dumb show does bring
Up in an Antimasque the reckoning,
In which I do believe (were the truth known)
He often saw double and told two for one;
But when he drew it, he did much mislike
The fallacy of that Arithmetique.
Well, they discharge him, or to say more true
He first discharged himself, and then them too;
For all this while they sat like stocks; the Room,
It self a quicker motion did assume:
For that ran like the Heavens Circular,
And them we might to the fixed Stars compare
When they sat still, or reeling too and fro
Their doubtful legs like the Errata go;
And stand for Hieroglyphics of the Sunn's
Strange course, that goes so many ways at once.
But now I at a ne plus ultra am,
Nor know I how they to their lodgings came;
For when they thought of going, then their feet,
To speak the truth, had clean forgotten it.
On a Talkative, and Stammering Fellow.
THou thine own Pillory, who for thy ears
Do crop thy tongue, and talk in Characters;
Who words epitomizest, and can tell
How to divide a Monosyllable;
Thou that do quavers speak, and such as are
But evil Language, and worse Music far,
So that thy pleasant Auditors often make
Wagers, thou learned of an Owl to speak,
Or else that Nature when thou were but young;
Tied a perpetual Ague to thy tongue.
How Mountain like thou labour'st to give birth
Either to Nonsense, or bring nothing forth?
In troth I can but pity thee that do
Endure such throws for thy tongues female lust;
And wish thy mouth had been so Cannon bored,
Thou should not need a Midwife for each word
Rather than undergo the grievous pains
That wait on such a costive utterance,
I would advise thee purge, and aptly vent
It backwarks, Excrement with Excrement;
Or with thy Pincers pluck thy teeth that do
So ravenously bite thy words in two.
I Would scorn to eat a Morsel with those base
Grinders that hindered me from saying Grace;
Would give a general defy to meat,
Ere mine own words so like a Coward eat.
Thou chew'st them so, they stick forth' most part twixt
Thy teeth, and we must stay till them thou pick'st.
When thorough that blind maze of signs and sound,
Which so do the intelligence confound,
They should conduct us to thy meaning, thou
In th'middle of the lab'rinth breakst the Clew.
As it is, thy tongue is fit for nothing else
But to pronounce the Devil's Oracles,
And 'twould for that be excellent, all the skill
Being to leave the meaning doubtful still,
For which thy canting speech is made so fit,
'Twould pose the Devil himself t'interpret it.
It sounds like the tongues Chaos, that same rude
Matter that did all Languages include
Ere words received form, when there was neither
French, Dutch or English, but all heaped together.
Nature in thee did overact her part,
And so struck dumb her Adversary Art.
Let others boast their Mother Tongue, but she
Has given the Mother of all tongues to thee.
Thy speech is much like Bullion that is made fit
For any stamp, but has received none yet:
Though It may to each particular relate,
It Is when thou speak it neither this nor that;
But being coined by thy hearers ears,
To every Country man his own appears,
As if (not to do the Holy Ghost that wrong)
He with the cloven foot had cleft thy tongue.
It Is heathen language, neither circumcised
After the old Law, nor after the new baptized;
Has neither mark whereby it may be known,
Nor so much as denomination.
It Is thought thy Ancestors did fetch their rise
From th'time that words were into Colonies
Divided, and did band themselves together
In several tongues as birds do of a feather;
When men by their example did disperse
Plantations thorough the whole Universe,
Then thy Forefathers did directly fall
Under no one, but bordered upon all,
Hence it is that one did thy discourse extol,
And styled it, the Universal soul
Of Language, as being mingled with that art
'Twas All in All, and All in every part.
Hence it is thou talk such Linsey-Woolsy, and
Do in one word make rodes into each Land,
While every syllable in the utt'rance fights
For thus invading one another Rights,
And Nature to preserve the public quiet,
Them with the Stocks does punish for their riot.
Thy tongue (and not unwittily perhaps)
One likened to the Almesbasket filld with scraps,
It feeds our ears with mixed and broken words,
Just like the poor with bits from several boards.
Swi^ter than thought it runs through each Clime,
Visits all Nations in a point of time,
And whence the greater miracle does rise
Although so great a trav'ler never lies.
But since men's ears are not so given to roame,
'Twere better that thy tongue too stayed at home:
For as the palate cannot distinguish 'twixt
The several tastes of liquours that are mixed;
No more our ears while thou retain'st a spice
Of every tongue can know thy various voice.
A suite made up of patterns were both fit
To emblemise thy speech, and cloth thy wit;
It Is like an over busy servant* who
With too much have his errand does outgoe;
Bells jangled without order, or a Clock
That strikes at random might be thought to mock
Thee; methinks every word thou do pronounce
Sounds as sev'n Dev'ls spoke in thee at once.
Had Noah's Ark upon some Rock been split,
When all the Living were embarked in it,
Those many strange, and disagreeing cries,
Could not have made a more confused noise.
I often have walked the Exchange, and must confess
The Buzz of all that concourse was both less,
And less perplexed, better than thee I could
What every man said there have understood.
What a learned Di'logue would betwixt you pass
Had thou like Bala'm but a speaking Ass?
Thou have so rugged and so wild a phrase
It Is like a Book stuffed witb Et caeteras,
Which the Press up in cunning knots does tie,
And yet dissolved just nothing signify.
Were thou but musically given, by thee
How rarely Barnaby would chanted be,
When as the Drunkard might take all along,
His reeling measures from thy stagg'ring tongue?
I wonder thou will give a beast the head
So much, and know it such a stumbling jade.
Alas consider that men use to stay
And rest awhile, who travail a rough way.
For mine own part, I Am willing to apply
My self to the study of Cheirology,
And talk with thee by signs, so thou wilt command
Thy tongue give place to the Rhet'rick of thy hand;
But you are (I doubt) too greedily inclined
To quit so many trades 't express thy mind;
Besides it is natural to thy disease,
Neither to let men speak nor hold their peace.
And (a plague take thee) speech he little needs,
Who is so plainly spoken by his deeds.
Upon Lucretia*
NOw the chaste Matron being left alone,
Had leisure to consider what was done;
And though the sinful act committed were
Against her will, she could not choose but fear
The uncertain voice of Fame, which does but prize
Suspected virtue as apparent vice.
Then melting into tears, O Gods! says she,
Is this the best reward for Chastity?
Or do you hate that virtue, that we must
Be forced when we will not yield, to Lust?
What balm, what comfort have you to assuage
My furious forrow? miserable age!
When most do willingly this sin commit;
And such as would cannot live free from it.
Then did she wring her hands, and tear her hair,
Sighing her body almost into air;
So true a grief had been enough to make
Her innocent, although she did partake
Of Tarquin's guilt. But now at length she dries
Those wealthy pearls from her o'rcharged eyes,
And with a calmer look, these tears, says she,
Are booteless; Childish sorrow cannot free
Me from men's censures: Something must be done
To expiate his crime, lest thought mine own.
There did she stay awhile, and with her eyes
Cast down, as studying on her enterprise,
By chance she did the Tyrants Poniard find,
Which he at his departure le^t behind.
She took it up, and a sad smile did show
Her joy for her approaching overthrow.
Yet will I triumph over shame, and by
My death (quoth she) confirm my Chastity;
And thou polluted steel, which once did ^orce
Me to the breach of wedlock, shall divorce
Me now for ever; then she said no more,
But acting what she had resolved before,
Drove the continued wound unto her heart,
The noble Spirit hastened to depart;
Perhaps it was afraid it might defile
It self by staying with that Flesh awhile.
The Power of Love*
POets made the a God, and Love, if thou
Be Deify'd, make me a Poet now;
Then will I sing thy praises, and rehearse
Thy feared name th'rough the wide Universe;
Some faithful grove, where no close spy discovers
The strict embraces of enjoying Lovers,
Shall be thy Temple, hallowed by my prayers.
The cheerful Birds shall be the Choristers,
A Poet shall be Priest, and I will bring
My wounded heart to be the offering;
My body shall be the Altar, and mine eyes
Shall feed the slame that burns the Sacrifice.
Then in thy powerful name I will all jars
Compose, and once more free the Earth from wars.
Beasts hunting after prey shall then grow tame,
Arrested by the accents of thy name;
The Lion then shall kiss the Lamb, and keep
Him harmless, while the Wolf defends the sheep;
The Bear and Dog be friends; the Crocadile
Shall weep no more when as he would beguile;
The Si^ens tempting voice shall then have power
Only to calm the waves, not to devour,
And ravished with the tune the rising Seas
Shall dance for joy, not gape for carcasses.
The Turtles shall leave off their courtship, and
As listening to the music silent stand,
But at the close of every melting strain,
Approving what they hear, shall Bill again.
The Virgin Phoenix shall believe a Mate
A fitter means than death to propagate;
The Nightingale shall change her note, and mourn
No longer for her Rape, but for her scorn;
The Loving Pelican shall spend her blood
More freely to preserve her Mate than Brood;
The Salamander feel a hotter fire:
The Gennet shall not have the Wind his fire.
Rivers to kiss th'embracing banks shall stay,
Till forced by the upper streams away,
And then with a sad murmr forward creep
As loath to intermingle with the deep.
All Trees shall grow like Palms, by two and two,
And fade at once as they together grew;
None shall be barren, all (thus matched) shall bear
Some grateful issue to the kindly year.
Still with fresh Verdure shall the Earth be clad,
And yield increase for what she never had,
Scorning by her spruce Lover to be found
At any time with withered Chaplets crowned.
Children, whose tender age as yet affords
Them but the Liberty of half-clip'd words,
Shall learn the Dialect of Love, and break
Their minds by acting what they cannot speak;
While forty Echoes (who have only tongue
For that,) shall bear the burden of my song,
And taking it from one another bear
Thy praises thorough either Hemisphaere,
Till the whole Earth with joinct consent approve
All things are subject to the power of Love.
The new Niobe.
MErcy great Love, and hence I Will swear
My self a vassal to thy Shrine,
And even when the art raging here
My verse shall speak that rage divine,
Though my insufferable smart
Persuades me thou a Fury art,
So thou wilt but cast one other dart.
Why should she still unmoved stand,
And set at naught thy power and thee,
Defying thy dead-doing hand;
Her language than her soul more free?
While thou her prophanations hears,
And, as if thou had ^ost thy ears
As well as eyes, to strike forbeares?
What was my over-active crime?
What Blasphemies have I ere spoke,
Which could to Heaven so nimbly clime,
And your quick Fury thence provoke?
Perhaps I called thee boy, and blind;
Scorned Love, does not she bear that mind?
Why then in punishment not joined?
Are Women privileged alone
Securely to do ill? or can
One trespass be less monstrous grown
In Woman than it is in Man?
No, no, I see that thou have sworn
We both shall pay the price of scorn
With different passions overborn.
Yet am I used no worse by thee
Than the great ruler of the day;
I Love a Stone, and he a Tree;
She by her prayers became a Bay,
And mine like Niobe is grown
By often weeping to a Ston,
But changed by my tears not her own.
Love, thou art just, and it is but fit
She should into a Statue Freeze,
Who in her self the hopes of it
Destroys, as well as she ^at sees
Her offspring, which she glories in
Slain by her pride; but for that sin
A Mother too she might have been.
Gain in Loss
AWay, fond Boy away,
What tempts thee for to stay
Hovering about my breast?
Thou can not hope to sway
Whereas disdaines possessed
With such an interest.
And Honour'l not allow
That thou should lower bow,
When daily Conquests post
Afresh to Crown thy Brow,
And every shaft almost
A heart or two can boast.
Yet if thou entr'st here,
By thine own power I swear,
All glory thou must quit;
No Bow nor Quiver bear,
But unto Scorn submit
Thy self an Anchorite.
Thus spoke Almanna, and Cupid smiled
To think how much she was beguiled,
Then shot, but spite of all his art
His blow the little Archer spoiled:
Out flew the Golden-headed dart,
But could not pierce her armed heart.
Almanna laughed, and the God cried
With fear of whipping terrfii'd,
And grieved for his broken Bow;
No hope of comfort he espied,
So that his tears, which seemed to flow,
If not then blind had made him so.
Another such he would have bought,
But there was none, and if without
He went, or this should broken bring
Venus would know, that very thought
Fresh floods from the poor boy did wring
Lest she should whip him with the string.
But th'Virgin not of Marble made
All means to comfort him assayed,
And often his blubbered cheeks did dry.
At last, with pity overswai'd,
She promised him that he should lie
Among'st the Babyes of her eye.
There he the beams of those bright Twins,
With which all hearts, all eyes he wins,
Has both for Bow and Arrows found,
And nothing now to think begins,
Since his own shafts did once rebound,
But self-love can Almanna wound.
The perfect Love.
Why should I hold my peace and silent be
when my life lies on the discovery?
Besides I know, infallibly I know
That thus a worser fate attends on me
Than beasts, for I unto the Altar go
And fall a sacrifice none knows to who.
All other things with time and age receive
That full perfection Nature could not give
Them at the first, when only wretched I
Am the sole prodigy, and downward thrive,
Do grow into my grave, and (tongue-ti'd) die
A very'r child than in mine infancy.
Before I could have spoken sure I could
Have made a shrewd shift to be understood,
When now I stand like one with lightning struck,
And almost starved cannot make signs for food,
Only my wants are writ in a sad look,
Which for the rich is but too hard a book.
At first I could have prattl'd, and have sed
What ever my affection dictated;
Talked a far off of love, and Hymen, praised
The Marriage, and condemned the single Bed:
Extolled that Beauty she her self debased,
And sworn the new-made Heavens not fairer faced.
How often I then have took, and gently strained
A fragrant balm out of her melting hand,
And cherished it in that strict fellowship
With mine, her envious Glove could not withstand,
But my expiring Soul hung on my lip
Would that rich Nectar up in kisses sip!
How have I then feasted my greedy eyes
With the survey of that brave AEdifice;
Examined the dimensions of my heart
To know if it were able to comprise
What I beheld; admired the state, and art,
And lost my self with wonder in each part
Then with a blush, or sigh I could have shown
How much I wished the fabric were mine own;
And she no question understood me too.
But now what a strange Lover am I grown,
Who cannot so much as wish ('it is strange, but true)
Her tied to one so'unworthy of her view?
O Miracle of Love! or let me be
A lover of my self as well as she,
Or let this bright and immateriall fire
Consume this dross, which thus depresses me,
And so render me worthy my desire;
Or let me quickly in the flame expire.
To a Lady working a Bed with Crewell
The Murder.
MAdam, why should you thus mispend an honre?
Leave this uncharitable work,
Under the shadow of each new-made flower
There will a speckled Serpent lurk,
Which (though they hurt not you) will us devour,
Alas how many too adventurous hearts
Will perish by their hidden stings?
One touch, one look, is worse than forty darts,
And far more speedy ruin brings:
A curse on them taught Beauty such black Arts.
What may we think your serious exercise,
If murder be your recreation?
Sure on the universe you then devise
To bring a total desolation,
And fire the World with your consuming eyes.
I say you might more noble pastimes find
For to beguile the lazy time;
You answer* Thrift on this had set your mind,
Judging such sports indeed a crime;
But sure such thrift's to narrow'r Souls confined.
Ah! cruel Wanton! now your craft I spy,
Your riddle now is understood,
That you are covetous I Will not deny,
But it is covetous of Blood,
And you are saving that you may destroy.
Now when this guilty piece shall reared be,
The Trophey of your Martyred Slaves,
It shall be styled by all that do it see,
Since fruitful with so many graves,
Not Crewell Bed, but bed of Cruelty.
The Revenge.
THen let soft slumbers o'r your eyelids creep,
When your disquiet fancy spies
Men shipwrack'd in those Seas they Bleed, and Weep;
Hears lulabyes composed of cries,
And horror rocks your quaking limbs asleep.
And sure as death If I be one that fall,
(As much I doubt my froward Stars)
Let the slain Lovers make me General
I Will find a means to heal their scarres,
And you at last shall bear the smart of all.
First such as of your sparkling eyes complain,
Under their clouds of flesh I Will place
To steal those beams wherewith themselves were slain
And armed with those glorious rays,
In the next fight they shall kill you again.
Then those were hanged in your jacynth hair
Shall rob you of a lock or two,
Which, heing twisted with a Lovers tear,
Shall make a chain to fetter you,
Or string the Bow the God of Love does bear.
Next such as perished by a frown shall come
Armed with the hand of time, with which
I Will make them plough such furrows in the room
May envy to your anger teach;
And all your Beauty'st find a grave at home.
He that drinks poison in a kiss, and dies,
I Will knead with your most Virgin breath,
Till he to such a noble structure rise
(Shake at the curse I now bequeath)
Wonder shall close your lips, till death your eyes.
And since I am assured that no part
Of yours will be assoil'd of Blood,
Thawed by a scalding sigh I will convert
Your frost and snow into a flood,
And drown your Beauty with what guards your heart.
Then as th'asswaging waters left behind
The Earth with slime and rubbish clad,
And the surviving Couple did it find
But by themselves inhabited,
Till pregnant stones renewed lost mankind.
So you this inundation overpast,
Shall in no part appear the same,
But all this world of Beauty be laid wast
Till pitying Love renew the frame,
And you your stony heart behind you cast.
But these are weak revenges, fit for those
Who could not stand a single charm;
Those feeble spirits beaten without blows,
And half-consum'd ere I was warm,
Yet never looked beyond your lip or nose.
Then what shall I who have surveyed you round?
Read over all this Book of Love;
Yet still remained unconquered, till I found
How every line a chain did prove,
And every point thereof had made a wound?
Why first I Will kiss you till my wounds be well,
And, made of your inverted name,
Bind to your bosom such a powerful spell
As while I kiss shall you inflame,
Till your unslak'd desire burn hot as Hell.
Nor shall your torments vanish when awake,
Like to a fearful dream of fire;
No (if I dye) a brave revenge I Will take,
And (it I must in flames expire)
Will you a terrible example make.
Glad Love shall clap his little wings* for joy,
Fanning therewith the kindled pile,
And, that your self may help for to destroy
Your self, convert your tears to Oil,
And so raise the aspiring flame more high.
Then your sick eyes shall languish after all,
And at each varied object take
New fuel, till what now we suns do call,
Turn into blazing Stars, or make
Torches for your own Beauties Funeral.
Then your proud heart shall (into tinder burned)
Take fire with every falling sparck,
While your fair outside Ethiopian turned
By your own heat, shall in the dark
Be even by Whore-masters and Drunkards scorned.
Thus these gay testimonies of your Art,
Which now so great a triumph have
O'r those produced by nature, shall convert
Their Geniall bed into your grave,
And living death, for their dead life impart.
Then leave this work of ruin, and employ
The hours you dedicate thereto,
In saving whom you have condemned to dye;
To save, more Honor were for you
Than to create; much more than to destroy.
To a Lady refusing to unvaile.
Why not unvail? by Heaven you are
Almost as scrupulous as fair,
I Will tell you Madam by your leave
These niceties do you but deceive,
And while from us you would conceal
Your Graces, from your self you steal.
It is ridiculous to say
That pnblication takes away
From Beauty, that is a Species must
To others for a Genus trust.
For know it is general consent
That makes you Women excellent;
Nor is it in yours, but in our eyes
Your principal perfection lies;
And though you bear such monstrous rates,
From us you had your estimates.
While prostrat at your feet we lie,
Our humbled necks mount you so high;
Our breath does lift you up, though grown
Out of our reach, to pluck you down.
It is Opinion that must tell
Nature if she've done ill or well.
If Man did never Court her Face
Woman would never Court her Glass;
It Is we that make you wise or fair,
Or good, or whatsoere you are,
And when you give your selves to Man
It Is but his gift given back again.
I Will swear but now I looked on you
As I would up to Heaven do,
And valew'd you at such a rate
That all Mankind's to poor to pay't,
When had you still been clouded thus
I should have thought you Leporous.
Whoever will a face extol
None ever saw, for Beautyfull,
With as much reason might commend
The Child unborn for his brave end.
But for the eye no Beauty were,
No more than Music but for the ear.
Your gaudy vessels but for man
Had empty and unregarded lain,
Rotted upon the Dock where they
Were built, and never seen the sea;
Or Launched forth been made a sport
For every wind, and known no Port:
Or, being driven to one by chance,
(Cheated by your own ignorance,)
Where now you richly fraughted come,
Returned laden with ballast home.
Let nature rigge you up with all
The trim and state a Prodigal
And skillful builder can invent
Either for Use or Ornament;
Double and treble Deck you; arm
You with the power of your own charms;
Hatch you with Beauty, and endow
You with that worth may Anchor you;
Streamer you with your own bright hayr,
That Crown of Comets which you wear,
Which like a Glory aptly place
Themselves in curls about your face;
Of those most lovely eyes of yours
Let her create two Cynosures;
And more to dazzle our weak sense
Gild you with beams are shot from thence;
With Honor ballast you, and give
You that so large prerogative
Of a great fortune, yet you stand
Windbound, unladen, and unmanned.
Our praises are the only gales
That have the power to swell your sails:
We are your Merchants, and you are
From us to have your bill of fare;
We are your Pilots, who should sit
At th'Helm, though by you thrust from it;
We (Madam) are your Judges too,
(Though too often sentenced by you)
And gen'rally believe that she,
(Choose how Miraculous it be)
That any ways declines so just
A trial, does her self mistrust.
Then draw this Cypress cloud which does
Thus both to Beauty wrong, and truth;
And since there is no cause for this,
Let not the world believe there is.
On a lame and scolding Negro,
HOld me the light a little, what is this,
Which both the substance and the shadow is?
What work of darkness is it that talks thus loud,
Like Thunder, speaking from behind a cloud?
Whose face looks like Nights mantle, and the Sun
Withdraws himself, if by her looked upon?
Now I conjure thee by Beelzebub tell
Me what thou art, be thou a Fiend of Hell,
Or else some Christian soul, which, thus with smoke
And fire all black'd, has Purgatory broke;
Or be thou indeed Mortal, flesh and blood
Like us, felt, (heard I Am sure) and understood.
If so, why do thou wear this veyl? from whence
Proceeds in Creatures such a difference?
Sure Nature, grieved for some great loss, to show
Her sorrow, clothed thee in a mourning hue,
And made thee lame, that it might not lie hid
How little care she took of what she did:
Or else in thee she bountifully showed
Where she her richest treasures had bestowed;
Thy body all compact of golden Ore
Taught us where thou were found to look for more;
And by that means thou were at once a Scorn
To us, and Traitor to thy Country born.
An EPITHALAMIVM
Invocation of Hymen,
COme Hymen, come, it is thou alone
Can satisfy this longing payr;
It Is thou must justify them one,
As they in heart already are.
Come then and join their willing hands,
That as their souls long since did kiss,
Their bodies may no longer stand
Exempted from so great a bliss.
Fly, fly, thou snail-pac'd God to Church,
And hasten the solemnities:
Never trifle time to light thy torch,
But rather do it at her eyes.
Thou would not use this needless stay,
Were thou but warmed with half their fire;
Then how should Mortals brook delay
When they be winged with desire?
Come Hymen, come, thou art too slow;
The impatient Groom is in a rage,
He tells the Moments as they go,
And thinks each minute is an Age.
The bashful Bride hangs down her head,
And silently she curses thee.
Her Cheeks are double-dy'd in red,
With Anger and with Modesty.
The Turtles on the Altars mourn
To see their deaths deferred so long,
And Cupid in a rage has sworn
Thou dearly shall repent the wrong.
Venus knits her offended brow,
And with her angry Son accords
No Rites hereafter to allow,
But taking one another words.
Thus, thus will thy cold Altars fall,
Thus will thy Temples be defaced,
And thou abandoned of all
Wilt be Vndeify'd at last.
Then, while some reverence thy name,
While thou art yet esteemed divine,
Throw not the remnant of thy Fame
Away, but these two Lovers join.
To a Gentlewoman that sued to her Servant, whom she had formerly forsaken.
THou may as well leave off; thy tears, or smiles,
I count no better than a Crocadiles,
And all thy protestations are but wiles.
Thou may as easily out-noise the Wind,
Deaf the rude Sea, make Love no longer blind,
As change the tenor of a settled mind.
I Would Loved too long should I not know at last
How quickly all thy vows were overpast,
And thy old servant by a new displaced.
And should I know all this, and not take heed,
'Twere pity then but I afresh should bleed,
And you might beg me for a fool indeed.
False Woman no, thy unsuspected fall
Has quenched those flames, and left, of that great All,
Naught but the ashes of Loves funeral.
And can thou hope to kindle a new fire
Where there be left no sparks of old desire,
And a Love-broken heart is made entire?
Why then I Will yield; but, since I cannot be
Thy Love, such Miracles shall make of thee
A God, and I Will adore thy deity.
But thou art far from that, as Heavens from cares,
So far thou can not hope for it in thy Prayr's,
Nor purchase with thy penitential tears.
For my young hate of thee is so improved,
As I to hate my self am almost moved
When I but think that I a woman loved.
Yet I Will not say all Women are untrue,
Nor but the bad may mend, but never you,
However I will never believe you do.
But if, as thou have prodigally swore,
Thou love me better now than ever before:
Show it me then and trouble me no more.
How to choose a MISTRES*
FIrst I would have a face exactly fair:
Not long, nor yet precisely circular.
A smooth high brow, where neither Age, nor yet
A froward peevishness has wrinckles set,
And under that a pair of clear black eyes
To be the windows of the Aedifice;
Not sunck into her head, nor starting out;
Not fixed, nor rolling wantonly about;
But gently moving, as to whet the sight
By some fresh object, not the appetite:
Their Orbs both equal, and divided by
A wel-proportion'd noses Ivory.
The nostrils open, fit to try what air
Would best preserve the Mansion, what impair.
The color in her cheek so mixed, the eye
Cannot distinguish where the red does lie,
Or white; but every part thereof, as loath
To yield in either, equally has both:
The mouth but little, whence proceeds a breath,
Which might revive one in the gates of death,
And envy strike in the Panchayan groves,
When their spic'd tops a gentle East Wind moves.
The lips ruddy, as blushing to be known
Kissing each other, by the Lookers on;
And these not to perpetual talk disposed,
Nor always in a lumpish silence closed;
But e'vry word her innocence brings forth
Sweetened by a discreet and harmles mirth.
The teeth even, and white; a dimpled chin;
And al these clothed with the purest skin.
Then, as good painters ever use to place
The darker shadow to the fairer face,
A sad brown hair, whose amorous curles may tie
The Prisoners fast, taken captive by her eye.
Thus would I have her face; and for her mind
I Would have it clothed in Virtue, not behind
The other's Beauty, for a house thus dressed
Should be provided of a noble guest.
Then would I have a body so refined,
Fit to support this face, enclose this mind.
When all these Graces I in one do prove,
Then may Death blind me if I do not love.
Yet there is one thing more must needs concur;
She must love me as well as I love her.
Love without Hope.
HOpeless (ah me) I love, nor can I tell
Whether my Love, or my Despair,
Deserve to be esteemed the greater Hell,
For both alike do breed my care;
Despaires cold ^rost cools not hot desire,
Nor yet is warmed at the Neighboring fire
The faculties of my distempered mind^,
Another servants are become,
And my corrupted reason has resigned
To his old enemy his room;
There the Usurper now the tyrant plays.
Ill must that kingdom thrive where Faction sways.
Toogreedily I gazed, and through mine eyes
My heart did fly unto her breast.
She, with her own contented, straight denies
To entertain so poor a guest.
With tears it begged, that since it had bestowed
It self on her, it might not lie abroad.
But, she by this confirmed in her scorn,
No tears, no prayers were prevalent;
Coldly she did advise it to return,
And, proud she would counsel it, it went.
But (ah) in vain; struck blind with too much light,
The way was stopped th'rough (...) it took its flight.
Naked and wounded it lay helpless there,
Till, I who once had owned it,
Was for the Run'way a Petitioner,
I only begged she would permit
The wretch a habitation there to have,
Though used in the Nature of a slave.
Indeed I hoped better, for could I
Imagine she would ever br^nd
Her name with breach of Hospitality,
Whose credit did so candid stand,
As all that knew her thought they might deter
Vice from their Childten, if named after her?
But what is more free than gift? this empty seat
Does feel the absent Captives pain,
And now too late I do her heart entreat
Far Hostage, or mine own again.
Thus by my folly am I overthrown;
Constrained to beg for what was once mine own.
My heart a Slave; Reason of rule bereft;
My Will, and Understanding wait
On hers, and unto me is only left
The sad Memory of a better State.
What can I hope for then, who am so poor?
Besides my sorrows I can give no more.
The dumb LOVER,
FAir (...), cruel Maid,
Many Shepherds had enflamed,
Whose complaints her sport she made,
Frowning still when Love was named,
Yet those frowns did Love persuade.
Among the rest (ah hapless Youth)
Ann^phil did wish to have her,
Though scant of wealth, yet in sooth
Passing all that sought her favor,
For his passing, passing truth.
This poor Wretch sought to suppress
With his tears the rising fire,
But those tears proved witnesses
To the World of his desire,
And his pains were never the less.
Speak he durst not, for he feared
No death worse than a denial;
Yet in his eyes, still betear'd,
A too miserable trial
Of what Love can do, appeared.
Arms across, unsteady pace,
Eyes cast down as in subjection,
Broken words, and changed face,
A most desperate affection
In the woeful youth betrays.
Coward Love, often would he say,
Who thy shafts on slaves bestowest;
Wounding such as do obey,
But with Rebels meeting, throwest
Down thine arms, and runn'st away:
Was it not enough that I
Willingly thy yoke took on me?
But I must that service buy,
Which (I fear) has quite undon me
With fresh cares, fresh misery?
Was it not enough that thou
With thy proper force refused
To succor me, but that now
My tongue (th'rough thee speech-disused)
Cannot mine own thoughts avow?
Art thou a God, who I see
Thus thy humblest Vassals wrongest?
No, thy weaker Deity
Either yields unto her strongest,
Or thy sting is lost in me.
Then his hearty sighs would show
What his tongue had left unspoken,
And he beat his breast to know
If his heart, already broken,
Now were quite consumed or no.
And, as if those windy sighs,
Had in him a tempest raised,
Floods would seem to drown his eyes,
Because they too much had gazed
For unsafe discoveries.
Once he in this woeful Plight
Had his lovely Saint espied;
But at that unlooked for sight
The storm was laid, the floods dried,
And his eyes beheld the light.
How he then amazed stood!
With what more than glutton-greediness
He devoured that precious food!
Health could not diswade his neediness
From what his sense found so good.
His eyes left Physicians rules;
Measure in such feasts observed
Is a lesson fit for fools:
They from such nice precepts swerved
Traind in Love and Beautyes Schools.
Yet his tongue would fain have gat
So much leisure from their wonder,
As might serve for to relate
What a burden he lay under;
But to speak it knew not what.
And when he her heart to bow
Had framed a speech full of passions,
Mingling many a faithful vow
With more humble supplications,
Then (alas) it knew not how.
Yet his other parts did prove
Friends to its determination;
All his gestures spoke of Love,
All did seem to beg compassion;
Even his silent lips did move.
And in words, which never are
Heard but by the understanding,
Whispered forth, O heav^enly ^aire,
O Godess all, al commanding,
Deign to hear a Caitiff's prayer.
Long have I loved, loved well,
Faithful Love not hate deserves.
What salvage mind is so fell,
As his loving flock he sterveth,
If not saved by Miracle?
Long have I served, service true
Requires wages for paines-taking;
And, though stipends were not due,
What Miser's so given to raking
As he would no favor show?
Long have I in fetters lay'n;
Misery compassion breeds;
And, though Pity quite were slain,
The bloody'st mind never feeds
On such as count death a gain.
See but how the Sun displayes
His beams on the meanest Creatures;
And will you withdraw your* rays
From one who admires your features,
And knows no light but your face?
See our fruitful Mother earth,
How she in her Womb does cherish
The Seed, till a happy birth
Makes the Lab'rors fields to flourish;
And will you bring forth a dearth?
Mark how every grateful tree
Yields the Swain a yearly blessing,
And will you undressed be
Ere you will either pay for dressing,
Or accept the Courtesy?
When a fruitful shower of rain
From a melting cloud distilleth,
The earth drinks it up again,
And it the earths wrinckles fills;
Shall my tears then fall in vain?
Breath you forth a fervent Prayer,
Heaven therewith is straight acquainted,
And you hope will ease your care;
Should not then my suit be granted,
Since you so like to Heaven are?
Love the neighboring Elm and Vine
In such strict embraces tyeth:
Love does make the Turtle pine
When his loving marrow dies;
And have you no sense of mine?
Love his power does each where prove,
Every thing has Love about it,
Trees, Beasts, Birds, and Gods above,
And are you alone without it?
The most lovely void of Love?
Change, O change this hum'rous mind;
Never by a name be fooled,
Greater glory will you find,
Be by Flesh and Blood but ruled,
If you leave a Babe behind.
Were you now laid in your grave,
And this beauteous outside rotten,
No monuments your fame could save,
Virtue quickly is forgotten,
If the world no Pictures have.
Then, if Marriage be the best,
The best Lover should be chosen.
Will you warm a Niggards breast,
Whose desire with care is frozen,
And his Mistress in his chest?
Or shall any sensual slave
Glory in so rich a Treasure;
One who covets but to have
You to satisfy his pleasure,
Which his lust, not Love does crave?
Rather take a man would dye,
One who goods and life despises,
Might he pleasure you thereby;
(This from perfect Love arises)
Such an one (though poor) am I.
Thus within himself he prayed,
But received small satisfaction,
For she heard not what be said,
And she would not read his action.
So the Wretch is quite dismayed.
A Remedy against LOVE.
IF thou like her slowing tresses,
Which the unshorn ^haebus stain,
Think what grief thy heart oppresses,
And how every curls a chain
Only made to keep thee fast,
Till thy sentence be o'rpast.
If you are wounded by her eyes
Where thou think Cupids lie,
Think thy self the Sacrifice,
Those the Priests that make thee die:
If her forehead beauteous show,
Think her forehead Cupid's bow.
If the Roses thou have seen
In her cheek still flourishing
Argue that there dwells within
A calm, and perpetual Spring,
Though she never used deceit,
Believe all is counterfeit.
If her tempting voice have power
To amaze and ravish thee,
Sirens sung but to devour,
Yet they sung as well as she.
O beware those poisoned tongues
That carry death in their songs.
If the best perfumes seem vile
To her odorif'rous breath,
And the Phoenix fun'rall pile
When she propagates in death,
Then remem^er how that she
Lives by that does poison thee.
If her comely hody has
Fairest in thine eye appeared,
Think how that a Trophey was
Only for thy ruin reared.
Women often their beauties praise
On their Lovers ruins raise.
And if she have every part
May a Woman perfect make,
And, without the help of Art,
Firmest resolutions shake,
Know Pandora had so too,
Who was made but to undo.
But if virtue please thee most,
And thou like her Beauteous mind,
Then I give thee o'r for lost;
There no remedy I find;
Yet if she be virtuous then
Sure she will not murder men.
Answer to the former.
OH Vain lip-wisdom, that do make me school
Another in those things I cannot learn
My self! only this difference I discern
To be 'twixt thee and a professed fool;
He wears his cognizance, but thou have hit
Asse-like upon the Lion skin of Wit.
Fool that I was! what if those curles be chains,
What if her eyes do murder my content,
What if her brow be to my ruin bent;
Are fear of death, hate of a prisoners pains,
Of power to set the wretched captive free,
And not (rather) augment his misery?
How id'ly have I talked! if I could rack
My faith till I believed she did paint,
Would not the wrong don such a faultless Saint
Be a fresh torment to my soul, and make
Me hate my self who did so basely err,
Rather than have a misconceit of her?
Sure too much wit has made me mad. I said
The Sirens only sung to work our harm;
But who at any time avoids the charm?
Ulysses did. Ulysses was afraid
And* since he escaped) may thank his timely fears
That taught him (e're he heard them) t'stop his ears.
But here is a potent argument indeed,
There is (forsooth) such an antipathy
Betwixt us two, her breath does poison me!
I would I might upon such poison seed;
But were it so; have I nor ^inely brought
An Antidote when it has already wrought?
Here comes more stuff of the stamp; that brave
Storehouse of Noble* worth, Virtues best seat,
Where first (like Sisters) she and Beauty met,
Made but a Trophey for a Conquered slave.
And what inferrs all this, ^ut that I am
Hers (by the Rule of War) who overcame?
Into what errors do poor Lovers slip!
But now, I did affirm Pandora made
So fair, that man might better be betrayed.
Were the Gods cheated in their workmanship?
But that they knew Man's frailty had they sent
Her, thus adorned, for a punishment?
Here have I mixed truths with falsehoods; right
Indeed it is that in a virtuous Love
The Soul is fixed, and finds no remove;
But 'twere as base and false for to endite
A virtuous Woman for destroy'ng Mankind,
As the Sun when the rash gazer is Struck blind.
I Love (alas) I Love, nor all the skill
Of my subjected reason can resist
His power who Tyrannises as he list;
Acknowledging no Law besides his will:
And I by striving do but make my sore
Fester, my bondage harder than before.
To Almanna, Why She should Marry Me.
HOw comes this sudden change, my Dear?
I will be sworn, not full two days ago
Thou were most excellently fair,
But now, I grieve to say it, you are nothing so.
No sickness could disfigure you,
Nor sorrow plough such wrinckles in your face,
Your happy bosom never knew
That saw^y thought, which durst disturb your peace.
But yet if grief or sickness should
Have the good Fortune to approach so nigh,
Sickness it sel^ recover would,
And sorrow be converted into joy.
Nor can I yet believe you owe
Ought unto Art for the last face you wore,
A Borrowed Beauty you I know
Despise, and would have none at all before.
Choose how it be, methinks that face
Appears to me now no such Miracle;
Yet still it is the same it was,
Only it does not please me half so well.
Then you will say it is evident
The change is in my judgment and not you:
It is so, but then you must grant
It Is, 'c^use I know more now than then I knew.
Sweet! I will tell thee; heretofore
I never pierced further than thy Skin;
Reading thy body o'r and o'r;
Without examining what was within.
And then indeed I did esteem
Thy matchless Beauty at so high a rate,
That ev'r^ object else did ^eem
A mere deformity compared to that.
But now this happy day, I have
Discovered a new and richer mine,
I all my admiration gave
To that most admirable soul of thine,
Which so dims all exterior form
That now thy Body worthless did appear,
And sure had fallen beneath my scorn,
But that I see thy soul is lodged there.
Now, if thy Body in revenge
Shall yield it self to base desires, thou wilt see
Another, but a far worse change;
Thy Body fair, thy Soul deformed will be.
But if thou will give me a right
To call them both mine own, thou so shall make
Them both seem precious in thy sight,
Yet neither from the others luster take.
For while my soul is thus alone
The Judge both of thy soul and body made,
It partially inclines to one
And no regard is to the other had.
But if my body once were joined
In the Commission with it, then would thine
A far more equal sentence find
Being supported by the Love of mine.
Like is best judge of like we say,
And sure in shape I wondrous like thee am,
Since thus by the whole world we may
So easily be taken for the same:
Then plight me but thy troth, and thou,
Both in thy Mortal, and Immortal part,
Shall seem more fair than thou seem now;
Nay, were it possible, more fair than the art.
Then I all day will gaze on thee,
And feast at night on what I then did view,
And thou (my Dear) shall so both be
My study and my recreation too.
Nor shall thou yet, though made one flesh
With me, lose any thing at all thereby;
But grow to more by being less,
And even by contraction multiply.
Our very souls shall twine and be
So close in mutual embraces knit,
They shall grow Parents too, and we
New virtues will as well as Children get.
Stilled th'rough the alimbeck of desire
Our bodies by degrees shall melt away,
And purged by a still equal fire
From all their dross, grow souls as well as they.
But if thou trust to others eyes,
And shall reject so generous a flame,
Believe it others shall thee prize,
Not as the wonder of thy sex but shame.
The brighter that the Angels were
Before they from their first Creation fell,
Each one did afterward appear
By so much the more dark, and terrible.
And if thou look but back thou wilt find
Pride, and Rebellion c^uses of their fall;
Sins, to which Murder will be joined
In thee, and make thee the great'st Devilish of all.
For know this heart of mine was given
Long since up to the power of Love; but he
God-like, did still keep state in Heaven,
And only ruled there by Deputy.
And since he had the faith suspected
Or skill, of any one particular,
He unadvisedly erected
An Aristocracy of every fair.
But thence such evils did ensue,
And my poor heart was so in pieces rent,
That he at length did fix on you,
And made it a Monarchick Government.
Then now thou'st All that All they had,
Should thou turn Tyrant, and with fire and sword
Thine own Dominions invade,
Would thou not be by the whole world abhorred?
The Angels thinking to de pose
The Deity, were into Devils turned:
And fear not thou the fate of those,
(Whose sin thou imitat'st,) if I be scorned?
For though thou covet not the Throne,
Yet thou dethronest Loves great Deity;
And though thou make them not thine own,
The Subject kill'st, and kingdom do destroy.
The Meteor.
DId you behold that glorious Star, (my Dear)
(Which shined but now, me thought, as bright
As any other child of light,
And seemed to have as good an interest there)
How suddenly it fell, our Eyes
Pursuing it through all the spacious Skies,
Through which the now extended Flame
Had chalked the way to Earth from whence it came?
And were you not with wonder struck to see
Those Forms, which the Creation had
At first in number perfect made,
Thus sometimes more, and sometimes less to be?
Or rather in this second Birth,
To see Heaven copied out so near by Earth,
As were it not for their own fall,
We should not know which were the Original?
Fair one, these different Lights do represent
Such as pretend unto the Love
Of you, of^ which some Meteors pr^ve,
Some Stars; some high fixed in Loves Firmament,
And some (that seem as bright and fair)
More basely humble hover in the Air
Of words, and with fine dextrous art,
Do act a Passion never touched their heart,
Yet these false Glowworm fires a while do shine
Equal to the most Heaven-born flame,
And so well counterfeit the same,
That they, though almost beastly, seem divine;
But should some blind unlucky chance
Deform you any ways, or make your wants
Vie Greatness with your Beauty, then,
They drop to their own Element again.
That Witch self-love is the sole Guide to these,
And sets such Charms upon their Blood,
That it is with it or Ebb or Flood,
According to their own Conveniences;
And now those seem thus clear and high,
They also mount and shine, but by and by
Not able to maintain that height,
Fall over-charg'd with their own sordid weight.
That seeming Star which shot but now was made
Of Vapors by the Sun exhaled,
When our Meridian he scaled,
And still ^ad stayed there, had he still stayed;
But now its proper Center is
Thus interposed betwixt him and this,
In that forced height it will remain
No longer, but inclines to Earth again.
So while your Beauty its bright Rays projects
Upon these groveling sons of Earth,
It gives new affections Birth,
And to a nobler height their ^ouls erects;
So winging their newborn desire,
Their towering thoughts dare at your self aspire,
And gotten the half way, do there
Hover a while 'twixt yours and their own Sphere.
But when the night of Absence does divide
You from their view, and their first base
Desires possess the middle space,
And court them back again, their thoughts abide
No longer in suspense, nor stay
So much as the decision of the Day,
But ere that can, with you, return,
They all unite themselves to the firstborn.
Now such as love like me are truly Stars,
And even then do shine most bright
When most you do absent your light:
Let Chance, let Nature place the strongest bars
Of wealthy Earth 'twixt you and me,
Or masque you with a Cloud of Leprosy,
Yet still my Love should be the same,
And at some part of your great soul still light its flame.
An EPITHALAMIVM
Upon T. P. and M. H.
INsulting Night proud in her lengthned sway.
Hail glorious Maid, whose brighter beams display,
And with fresh luster wing the tardy Day.
Phoebus, who worn with Age, now bedridden lies,
Looks out to see what God his room supplies,
And takes new vigor from your sparkling eyes.
Some, who your morning Blushes saw, did swear
The Sun looked red, and a foul day was near;
But all the shower will be a maiden tear.
Fair Virgin blush not, (though a Bride) to none
Are you beholding for the Light which shone;
Guided unto the Temple by your own.
No intermedling God can claim a share
In this Conjunction; you your selves did pair;
They not Assistants but Spectators were.
Cupid his Quiver emptied had in vain;
Your Husband did retort his shafts again;
But with one glance shot from your eye was slain.
The pitying Epidaurian straight was moved,
But all his Balsams ineffectual proved:
It Is known he dies you wound, if not beloved.
Glad Love with his recovered shafts persuades
Himself he easily can conquer Maids*
And with his dull Artillery you invades:
But his ill-headed Darts did all rebound;
Only soft pity there an entrance found:
So Buff daunts Swords, which a weak straw will wound.
The blow was double, you your self did groan,
When you beheld what you your self had done,
And surely loved his wound because your own.
Hymen the Priest of Heaven then left the Skies
To wait on you in these Solemnities,
But had his Torch extinguished by your eyes.
The busy God, that he might something do
Studied a Benediction then; but you
Proved both the Blessing and the Donor too.
Jove's Herald, warned by the Trump of Fame,
His Hat and Feet new-winged hither came,
To bless you in his absent Fathers name.
Who would have come himself, but that afraid
The Giants of this Age should Heaven invade,
Were they not by his awful Thunder staid.
Thus should the God have spoke; but he does stand
With wonder dumb, and from his trembling hand,
The Charmer charmed, lets fall his snaky wand*
Bac^hus beheld, who all amazed cried,
Had Semel' had these Rays she had not died;
But Jove himself (though armed with lightning)
Straight he his wine press leaves, and brings down fried.
For you his Ariadnes starry Crown;
But finds you wear a richer of your own.
The God of War does from the Battle ^lie;
Hangs up his useless Sword and lays by
All other tokens of Hostility.
His crimsoned hand from blood; his brow from sweat,
And dust now cleans'd, he humbly does entreat
He may on you to Concor^'s Temple wait.
But while he covets peace, the God does wage
A War within himself, whose potent rage
Does in the Conflict all his Powers engage.
The twice repulsed ^ (...), who his sight
For this days triumph begd, does curse the light;
Before but hood-winckt; now he is blinded quite.
Vulcan his Forge in Sicily neglects,
And hither his lame steps in haste directs,
Heavens peril, nor Jove's anger he respects.
A thousand Hammers in his brain do beat,
And all his study is how he may get
You ^etter'd in his Artificial Net.
But the deceived God while that he placed
And in conceit already you embraced,
Was by a look of yours himself chained fast.
His Wife at once blushed, wept, and sighed, and frowned,
And cried, Now is my Pap^os unrenown'd,
And all her Glory in this Mue^t-lake drowned.
My Mars has left me, would she would allow
Me but my long despised Husband now;
But he is Prisoner too, I know not how.
This said, she yokes her Doves, resolved to see
If by her Beauty she again might free
Whom yours had brought into Captivity.
Vain was her Enterprise, she soon confessed,
The Magic of her Face could not contest
With yours, and so stood gazing with the rest.
The warlike Pallas knits her martial brows,
And as she shakes her trembling spear, she vows
Revenge, then her unveiled Gorgo^ shows:
But strait she found her Error, You alone
Did more than she determined to have done,
Medusa's Head and She both turned to stone.
The bashful Ph^ebe with a down-cast look
To beg your kind Reflection hither took
A journey, and her dark'ned Orb forsook:
But ready now to utter her Desire,
The light was such she durst approach no nigher,
Nor yet in that amazement could retire.
Great Juno backs a Cloud, and as she sails
Through the Air, her blushing Face she vails
(Now vanquished twice) with her stripped Peacocks
Her Argos hundred Eyes she hates, and pined tails*
With Envy wishes that she had been blind
Her self, when first she did your Beauty find.
The Goddess stoops to Earth, and thinks to shroud
You from Jove's view in a condensed Cloud;
But you dispersed it, and more glorious showed.
Thus all the Gods this morning suffered shame
By you alone, and stood as in a Dream*
Till you once joined, unto themselves they came.
And now Bacchus and Ceres strive who best
Shall please your company; for you they gh^st
Would most on one another Faces feast.
The others (daring not appear) have sent,
By me their Proxy this short complement,
Which once delivered away they went.
BRight Virgin, though your blooming youth abound
With all those Virtues which the Earth adorn;
Though every part be with that Beauty crowned,
May make it noon ere it be fully morn.
Though bounteous Heaven no blessings has in store
Which you deserve not richly to enjoy;
Whatever Phoebus does behold, and more,
Even to twist the thread of Destiny.
Though you deserve the Seas discovered womb
Should unto you her hidden Treasures give,
Which when you die should serve to build your Tomb;
But all the Gods attend you whilst you live.
Though we confess all this to be your due,
Yet do not boast that it is yours alone;
Your Husband meriteth both this, and you;
What then deserve you now conjoined in one?
May you live long and happy, all your days
Crowned with a lasting plenty and content;
May no disturbance ever cloud the Face;
But what one does, let be by either meant.
A fruitful, and a toward Lineage bless
Your youth; the subject to support your age;
And when Death summons you, in happiness
May they succeed as well as Heritage.
And (if more may be said) may you two have
Blessings above your hopes, above your wishes;
And when age fits your bodies for the Grave,
May then your spirits meet breathed out in Kisses.
Thus the uncaptiv'd Gods do jointly pray,
Yet Juno vows a chaste revenge withal,
Swearing (fair Bride) that you a while shall stay,
Before you do upon Lucina call.
On a Necklace of small Pomander, given him by a Lady.
ANd art thou mine at length? come thou to deck
My worthless Wrist thus persum'd by her neck?
Can thou so freely to my use dispense
That precious Odor thou receivedst thence?
Could thou (alas) such real joys sorsake
For this sad cause to justify thy black?
Me thought thou were, while thou did that invest,
The cinders of the Phoenix spiced Nest,
Out of whch rose her admirable Face,
As the sole sp^cies of that Virgin Race.
There had thou grown immortal; while worn there
No day but added to thy Life a Year:
But now thou do with me in Exile live,
Each day does take, what there each day did give.
Alas poor Fool! Man might have taught thee this,
Death waits on those are banished Paradize.
Could thou have still continued there, thou would bin
Long-lived as he, had he not found out sin.
No Fate had cut thy thread, nor chance unstrung
Thy Beads, till the Worlds Passing Bell had
Pearls had looked pale with Envy, Diamonds mourned,
And sparkling forth their prouder anger burned,
While every grain of thee had grown a Gem
Of greater price than the whole Race of them.
The wary Prophets mercenary Wife,
Who for a Bracelet sold her Husband's life,
And thought her Crime excused, the flame-fac'd stones
Being such prevalent Temptations,
All her so dear-bought Jewels would have thrown
Down at her feet for the exchange of one
Thou Would grown a Rosary for Angels there,
Thy glorious Beads dropped in eternal Prayer.
Offered in smoke thou might have bought the Gods
Out of their Heaven to have changed Abodes
With thee; we should have seen the deathlesse Train
About her neck linked in an endless Chain:
The emulous Powers contending who should rest
On the Swan-downy Pillows of her breast,
Where by a more especial favor thrown,
They had that Heaven preferred to their own.
And can thou quit so coveted a place
To feel such a sick Pulses frantic pace?
To circle this poor arm which still must mourn
Because it must not be where thou were worn?
Indeed it is true my small Physician, she
Taught thee thy skill, but it is best showed on me.
Thanks charitable Friend. For this will I
Study a reward great as thy courtesy.
No Relic shall be kept more safe, nor be
In greater Adoration had than thee:
Each morning will I with a trembling kiss
Offer my burning Lips in Sacrifice:
All day look on thee with that greedy view,
As if I meant to string mine Eyes there too:
At night my never slumbring thoughts shall keep
The Watch, while thou do in my bosom sleep;
And lest my panting Heart alarm thee there,
I Will turn it out for to be lodged elsewhere:
I would not with a minutes absence buy
The World, though Heaven were the Security.
I Will tell thy numerous seeds, and know the same
Not only by their number, but by name;
Then set a higher price on every Bead,
Than I would rans^m upon a Monarchs head;
No wealth should fetch thee from me, unless she
Would be the price her self, who owned thee.
When scorched by some proud Beauty, I for shade
Will fly to the small knots of thy dark brade:
And when I Am ready with despair to freez,
I will inflame my self by kissing these;
Driven to Extremity I scarce would stoop
To take the Chemists greatest secret up;
For with a touch of thee my fancy would
Be sure to turn all Metalls into Gold.
Thou art my All on Earth, and he that robs
Me but of one of these thy little Globes,
I in Heavens juster Chancery will lay
To's charge the stealing the whole World away;
But which (when Fate protract) thy time is come,
(Hastened with grief to be so long from home)
Thou shall from me again to her depart;
For on the slaming Altar of my Heart
I Will all the filth thou here contracted'st take
Away, and so in Incense pay thee back.
Thus I Will requite thy kindness; but be sure,
Thou do not wound, where thou pretend'st to cure;
'Twould be a treacherous and unworthy Art,
Thus tied about mine arm, to give my Heart.
On Himself being Lame.
I Prithee tell not me of Pox or Gout;
It is my Fancie's fallen into my Foot.
I know her haughty stomach did disdain
To lie a soaking in a small-Beer brain;
This Salamander does in flames still dwell,
And in a cooling Iulip finds a Hell.
Give her a Bowl of Spanish, which might breath
A Fever into the cold Limbs of Death;
Might make the Brethrens Marble rise, and dance,
Till it had waked the drowsy Puritans,
And raised their new-molded dust to sing
Zealous Encomiums of the Cath'lique King:
Then she will knock at Heaven: this Tavern fly,
When thoroughly drenched in Sack does soar most high,
And (like the South-winde) from her dropping wings,
Shakes the bright shower, which up in numbers springs;
Numbers might pose Arithmetic, and teach
Dull man what feet will up to Heaven reach;
Numbers, which without sweating are distilled,
And writ when you would believe the Inck was spilled,
And that in so harmonious a strain
You Would find a Music in the precious rain.
Then might you see her Wine-wet cheeks outshine
The Muses washing in their Hippocrene:
She were a Wife for Bacchus then but that
He must not marry what himself begat.
Then she would out-noise Jove's thunder, that which rent
The Womb of Semele for the Firmament:
Swear that with Genial Nectar he was warmed,
When Is fertile brain brought forth Minerva armed,
And tell me if I Would heat it well with Wine
His should not be more pregnant than should mine;
She would be my Minerva, nor afraid
To challenge at both Weapons the great Maid;
And she would still have swagger'd there no doubt,
If I would still have turned my Reason out;
But when she found her self was over-awed
By that, the ranting Girl her self out-lawed;
Then to spite me, she sick (forsooth) does grow,
And only because I would not be so:
Drooping she down into my Anckle fell
Angry that I at Night should stan^ so well,
And as she sunk she whispered in mine Ear,
'Twas Justice to lame me who lamed her.
Since thou (says she) wilt needs grow wise, and staid,
I Will stay thee within doors till thou grow mad;
When business shall invite thee forth, or Friends,
Thou shall not stir, not though thy Mistress sends.
Keep thy head sober, and mark if thou don't,
Ere I have done, wish thou could go upon it;
There let thy precious Reason rule, while I,
To spite her, raise thy humble foot as high.
There I, like Bacchus in Iov^'s Calf, will keep
Such Revels, as shall rob thine Eyes of sleep;
Run raging up and down* as if I were
Turned Froe, and kept his frantic Orgies there;
There will I quaff cold humors stead of Sack,
And dance on the Ropes till thy tough Sinews crack.
Then shall thou call for Wine, fill, fill again,
And not for pleasure drink, but even for pain,
Till thou have been at a more vast expense
To drive, than might before have kept me thence.
Yet I Will not cripple thee of both, still use
One Leg, and stand on it like a studying Goose;
Make lamentable Verses, tuned with Oh,
And comma'd with Alas, which could they go
But smoothly on a Ballad-singers tongue,
Unto Holla my Fancy, might be sung:
But whatsoere thou henceforth writest shall
Serve for waste Paper to the Hospital;
Nor shall thou there find any parcel man
So lame, as he thy halting Rithmes can skan.
This is the truth, then never wonder why
A harsh low Fancy writes nor smooth, nor high.
What do her Numbers then in print, you will say?
Why, Faith, if they be good, I hope they may;
If not, she is a Witch, and you will confess,
The Law condemns Witches to the Press.
The broken Heart.
GOd does require a broken Heart; it is true;
But he would have it whole, and broken too:
Broken when it on it is own sins reflects;
Entire when Him it is Object it respects.
Woman will have the same; her Lover's Soul
Must also both divided be and whole;
Whole in regard none else does in it share,
But yet divided betwixt Hope and Fear.
Heaven and Imperious Woman both lay claim
Unto my Heart, and both will have the same
Vnrivall'd, yet the easi'r to decide
The business I presumed to divide
Betwixt them what they sought, and so being loath
To displease either, have displeased them both.
What should I do? I knew I should preser
My God, and therefore could not give it her:
And when I would have given him all his due,
Me thought in her I saw a Deity too.
O Fool * thousands may claim thy Heart, but none
Can have a Right unto his Claim but One.
And can's^ thou not distinguish Titles? He
Does Mercy exercise; she Tyranny.
A Love-bred Confidence is the best sign
Of a just Monarchy; a Right Divine.
And Cruelty grounded upon distrust
Is full as sure a note of an unjust.
Give God thy broken heart, he whole will make it;
Give Woman thy whole heart, and she will break it.
To PHOEBVS, Seeing a Lady before Sunrise.
PHoebus lie still, and take thy rest
Securely on thy I ethy's breast;
Thou need'st not rise to guild the East:
For she is up whose wakings may
Give birth and measure to the day,
Although thou hide thy self away.
Phoebus lie still, and keep the side
Warm of thy chaste and watery Bride,
Thy useless Glory laid aside:
For she is up whose beautie's might
Can change even Darkness into Light,
When thou can but succeed the Night.
Phoebus lie still, and shroud thy head
Within the covert of thy Bed,
Or counterfeit that thou art dead:
For she is up, and I do find
Gazing on thee does only blind
The outward eyes, but her the Mind.
Yet Phoebus rise, and take thy Chair
Once more, shaking dull vapors from thy hair*
But wink, and look not on my fair:
For if thou once her Beauty view,
Ere night thou will thy self undo,
Nor have a home to go unto.
And were thy Chariot empty, she
But too unfit a guide would be,
Having already scorched me:
For I Am afraid lest with desire
She once more set the World on fire,
Making all others Ae^hiops by her.
FINIS.

