APOKOLOKYNTOSIS. OR A MOCKERY UPON The DEATH and DEIFICATION OF Claudius
Caesar.

Written in Latin by LUCIUS ANNAEUS SENECA the Philosopher.

Imprimatur, Iunij 17. 1664.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid. 1664.

To the READER.
THis Book is Entitled APOKOLOKYNTOSIS, wherein Seneca exceedingly derides the
pretended Deification of Claudius Caesar, and, by the way, scoffs at the whole
Apotheofis of the Romans and Graecians, upon occasion of that of Claudius, who
fell into a lingering Consumption by eating Mushroms, his usual dish, poisoned
with Coloquintida, by the instigation of his Wife Agrippina, but by the
subtlety of a Noble woman, Mistress of that Art. Claudius Son of Drusus
Germanicus, succeeding Caius in the Empire of Rome, is recorded to have been a
Prince no less Cruel than Foolish; insomuch that his Mother Antonia was wont
to call him a Monster of Men, whom Nature had begun^ not perfected: and when
she taxed any man of much foolishness, would say, He was more sottish than her
Son Claudius. His Grandmother Augusta always thought him most despicable,
would never admonish him but by messages, or by short and sharp Letters. His
Sister Livilla, when she heard he was to be Emperor, would openly lament the
deplorable condition of the People of Rome. This man Lucius Annaeus Seneca has
here painted forth in his proper colors; and perhaps was the more bitter, in
revenge of the banishment he sustained under him: though afterward Agrippina,
being then marri^^ ^o Claudius, that she might not be famous only for wick^d
acts, interceded for Seneca, and obtained not only ^is release, but his
preferment to the Praetorship; con^eiving it would be no less grateful to the
Public, in ^egard of his fame for Learning, then advantageous to ^er,
intending to use his help in the Education of her Son Domitian, and his advice
in advancing him to the Empire; for she believed (as Tacitus says) he would be
a friend to her in respect of that benefit, and an ene^y to Claudius in regard
of that injury. This may serve ^o declare the Author's scope in writing this
facetious Tract; which is so opposite to the usual gravity of Se^eca, that it
has been doubted by some to be his: but ^he unquestionable assertions of so
many ancient testimo^ies must needs remove that scruple. And because the Book
has never yet worn an English Livery, but has ^een totally omitted by the
Translator of the rest of his Works, as a Tract more busy and difficult,
interwoven ^ith various and acute verses, it was the rather under^aken for
satisfaction of some private Friends, without ^hought of troubling the World
with it. The Copies which are transmitted to us do without all doubt so differ
from the Original, that they will scarce admit of sense ^n many places; and
they who attempt the reconciliati^n do but quarrel among themselves: yet in the
most dif^^cult passages the present Translator makes use of some ^f their
Castigations, not with much approbation, but for ^ant of better, being
unwilling to be too laborious in ^^ifles.

APOKOLOKYNTOSIS. OR A Mockery upon the Death and Deification of CLAUDIUS
CAESAR, etc.
WHat passed in Heaven before the third day of the Ides of October, Asinius
Marcellus and Acilius Aviola being Consuls, in that New year which gave
beginning to a most happy Age, I will now declare: nor shall any thing proceed
either from Injury or Favor. But if I be asked, how I know it to be true:
First, unless I please, I will not answer. Who shall constrain me? I know I
recovered my liberty when he died, who verified the Proverb, He must be born a
Tyrant or a Fool. If I list to answer, I Will speak what comes in my head: Who
ever required an Oath of an Historian? But if I must needs produce my Author,
ask him who saw Drusilla ascend to Heaven: the same saw Claudius take his
journey thither, though not with equal pace. Whether he will or not, he must
see what is done in Heaven. He is the Supervisor of the Appian way, which thou
know Augustus and Tiberius took when they went to the Gods. If thou
inquire of him, he will whisper to thee alone, but if others be present, will
not speak a word; for since he swore in the Senate he saw Drusilla ascend to
Heaven, and no man gave any credit to so good news, he affirmed in plain terms,
that if he saw a man killed in the very Marketplace, he for his part would not
tell it. What I heard from this man, I relate for truth, so happy and sincere
do I esteem him.

Now Phoebus had abridg'd his rising light,
And the time sooner did to sleep invite.
And now prevailing Cynthia her reign
Improved, and fruitful Autumn did complain
Of Winter's sad approach, which so bereft
The Vines, few Grapes the Vintager found left.
I think it would be better understood, if I said the Month of October, or the
third day of the Ides thereof. I cannot tell justly the hour; Philosophers
agree more easily then Clocks: but it was between Six and Seven. Poets are too
tedious in their descriptions; they cannot be content to describe the rising
and setting of the Sun, but they will also disturb Midday. Will thou also thus
pass over so good an hour?

Sol now had passed the middle part of Heaven,
And to his bending Steeds the reins had given,
And toward Night his flaming Chariot driven.
The Soul of Claudius began to forsake his Body, but could not find the way
out: when Mercury, who ever delighted in his Wit, calling forth one of the
Three Fatal Sisters, said, Why, cruel Woman, do thou suffer this wretched
man to be so tormented, who, alas, never deserved it? It is now the sixty and
fourth year since he struggled with his Soul. Why does thy envy deny him
death? Permit Astrologers to tell at last the truth, who from the time he was
made Prince, every year, every month, have been carrying him to his grave. And
it is no wonder they erred; no man knew the hour of his Nativity: For, indeed,
no man ever thought him born. Do what ought to be done.

Give him to Death, and in a better sort
To reign permit him in an empty Court.
But Clotho replied, I was willing, I confess, to respite his death, till he
had made those few that remain, Citizens of Rome: For he resolved to see all
the Graecians, French, Spaniards, and Britans, become Cown-men. But since thou
art pleased that some strangers be left to propagate their race, and that thou
so command^st, it shall be done. Then opened she a Box, and took out three
Spindles; the first belonged to Augurinus, the second to Baba, the third to
Claudius. These three (said she) in one year, and in a little distance of time,
I will command to die: For I will not send him away unaccompany'd. It is not
fit that he who lately saw so many thousand people before, behind and round
about him, should be suddenly left alone. In the mean time he must be content
with the society of these.

This said, she from her Spindle pulled a Thread,
Which showed the foolish King would soon be dead.
But Lachesis with hair entwined round,
And with a fresh Pierian Laurel crowned,
Took up a handful of pure Wool, and wrought
With such a happy hand, that it was brought
To turn from common wool to burnisht Gold.
The change her Sisters wondered to behold.
Nor could they stay, to work they all agreed,
And found the Golden Age did thence proceed.
The task was easy, with small labor done:
For presently such happy Yarn was spun,
The Woof whereof they truly might presage
Would outlive Tithon's, or old Nestor's age:
Phoebus assisted with his songs, and joy'd
At future good; his hands were often employed,
Sometime to help them work, and other while
With his sweet Harp their labor to beguile.
And while they heard him sweetly sing and play,
They found their Work went easilier away:
Taking such pleasure in his Music then,
That it surpassed the Destinies of Men.
Phoebus then said, O Sisters, let my prayer
Move you to take this Prince into your care,
And beyond mortal age his days to advance,
For he resembles me in Countenance,
And feature too; nor does he come behind
For Voice, and Instruments of any kind.
He happy times for wretched men shall cause, Here Seneca was but an ill Augur.

And shall break off the silence of the Laws.
As Lucifer, when Stars from sight refrain,
Or Hesperus, when Stars return again;
Or as the Morning when Day first appears,
And Sol with graceful looks the sad Earth chears:
So Caesar comes, and so shall Rome behold
Her Nero with a Face of Heavenly mold,
And with bright Hair that does his Neck infold.
Thus far Apollo. But Lachesis, who of her self favored this gallant person,
was so bountiful to Nero, as to add to his, many of her own years. In the mean
time they all bid Claudius adieu, and wishing him good luck, prayed him to
hasten out of his Palace. So he stirted out his Soul in a fit of Wind, and
seemed to live no longer. He died whilst he was hearing Comoedians, that thou
may know I have some reason to fear them. The last words he was heard to
utter, when he sent out a great sound from that part where he could more
readily speak, were, Out alas! I think I have bewrayed my self. I know not what
he then did; but I am sure he bewrayed all things else. What was afterward done
upon Earth is needless to declare, you know it sufficiently; public joy has
deeply imprinted it in our memories: no man can forget his own felicity. Hear
now what was done in Heaven: Let the Author's credit gain belief. It was told
Jupiter, that a certain person was come, of a good stature, somewhat gray, and
threatened I know not what, for he continually shook his head, and drew his
right leg after him: and being asked of what Nation he was, answered in such a
confused tone, and with so disturbed a voice, his language could not be
understood; and that he was neither Grecian nor Roman, nor of any known
Country. Jupiter commanded Hercules (who had travailed all the World over, and
seemed to know all Nations) to go and inquire what kind of man he was. Hercules
went; and indeed was somewhat troubled at first sight of him, though he feared
no Monster; beholding an unusual countenance, and a gate seldom seen, and
hearing a voice not like any earthly creature, but like some Sea Monster,
hoarse and inward, he looked for a Thirteenth Labor to be imposed upon him:
but eying more strictly, he seemed to be as it were a man. He therefore
accosted him, and, what was easy to one that understood a little Greek, said,
What art thou? whence come'st thou? what is thy name? When Claudius heard this,
he rejoiced to find there men that loved Learning, and began to hope the
Histories he writ would be in some esteem: and intimating himself to be Caesar,
uttered this Verse of Homer, Into Ciconia by a furious blast
I driven was, when I from Troy had past.
But what follows is as much Homer, and is more true; Where I the City and the
State
Did both together ruinate.
And indeed he had put Hercules to his nonplus, being a person little skilful
in retorts, had not Febris been there, who leaving her Temple came alone with
him: all the rest of the Gods and Goddesses he left at Rome. This man, said
she, tells meet Fables. I who lived with him many years assure you he was born
at Lions, and owes his privilege to Munatius. What I tell ye is true, he was
born at Lions, fifteen miles from Vienna: He is a right Frenchman, and
therefore as became a Frenchman he took Rome. I present him for the same born
at Lions where Licinius ruled long. And thou Hercules, who have trod over more
Countries then an ordinary Mule, must needs know men of Lions, and that Xanthus
and Rhodanus are many miles distant. Claudius here grew angry, and with as much
murmuring as he could make began to chafe. What he said no man understood; but
he commanded F^bris to be carried away, and with his hands opened, being strong
enough to do what was usual with him when he caused men's heads to be struck
off, he commanded them to cut off her head. Thou would have thought them all
his enfranchised creatures, so little did they regard what he said. Then
Hercules, Hear me, said he, thou Fellow; leave playing the fool: thou come'st
hither where Mice eat iron. Tell me the truth quickly, or I Will dash out thy
shallow brains. And that he might seem more terrible, he became a Tragoedian,
and said, What place, speak quickly, gave thee birth?
This club shall pound thee else to earth,
Which many a cruel King has slain.
Look that thy Answers now be plain:
And let me know what clime has bred,
What land produced that shaking head.
When I went far the Realms to view
Of that three-body'd King I slew,
And brought from Spain with great renown
The noble herd to Argos Town,
I saw a Mountain which the Sun
From East beholds, from whose foot run
Two rivers, Rhone so famed for force,
And Soane uncertain of the course
It is to take; whose slower pace
Does moisten, not the banks deface.
Say then, Is that thy native place?


This he uttered stoutly and boldly enough, but had some doubt he might be
flapt by a fool. But Claudius, when he saw this courageous man, left trifling,
for he knew well there was never his like in Rome; and also found that he
himself had not such power and favor there: A Cock may do much upon his own
dunghill. Therefore, as far as he could be understood, he seemed to say thus, I
did hope (O Hercules, who art the most valiant God) to have had thy assistance:
And if I were put to find Surety of the knowledge of me, I did expect thy
Testimony, who know me very well: for thou may remember, I was he who in
thy honor did daily administer Justice before thy Temple in the Months of July
and October: and thou know how much misery I endured, in sitting to hear the
Lawyers plead night and day; into whose hands had thou fallen, though thou
be very stout, thou would rather have cleans'd again the Augean Stables,
so much more dung did I rake up. Well, said Hercules, I am content to be thy
Patron, because I will: and then brake into the Assembly of Demigods who were
consulting about Claudius: who murmuring at it, said, It is no wonder thou
rushest into the Court, no place is shut from thee. But tell us now what God
thou would have him. An Epicurean he cannot be, for he has no employment
himself, nor gives any to others. A Stoic God? how can he be, as Varro says,
round and perfect, having neither head nor prepuce? It Is true, he has
something of a Stoic, for we see he has neither brains nor head: yet he might
justly have desired this favor of Saturn, whose feast he celebrated all the
year long. But Caius Caesar would never endure it, in regard he sought what he
could to kill Lucius Syllanus his Son in Law, whom he condemned of Incest. And
why, I pray? Because he desired that his Sister (being one of the
sprightfull'st women in the City, and was therefore called Venus) should be
styled Juno. He would not seem to tolerate Incest at Rome, though it were
permitted in the half degree at Athens, and in the whole at Alexandria;
because, as he said, at Rome Mice lick Mil-stones. This man would teach us to
make crooked things straight. What he does in his Chamber we know not; but he
searches all the corners of heaven, and would be made a God: He thinks it a
small matter to have a Temple in Britain, where the Barbarians give him Divine
honor, erecting, as it were, an Altar to his eternal Dominion. At length
Jupiter finding the matter agitated with confused interlocutions among
inferior Gods, advised them to dispute no longer, and wished every one that
had interest in that Assembly to declare his opinion. I, Fathers Conscript,
says he, have permitted you to deliver your judgments in this sublime Court,
which you have made no better then a Thatched house. I will have the ancient
discipline observed. This man, whatsoever he is, what will he think of us?
Claudius being withdrawn, first Father Ianus was asked his opinion; who being
very subtle, was made Afternoon-Consul in the Calends of July, and always
looks both before and behind at once. He having been conversant in Courts of
Justice, was very Eloquent, and spoke so much that the Scribe of the Court
could not set down all, and therefore I do not repeat it, lest I should put
what he said into other words. He spoke much of the Greatness of the Gods, and
that so high honor ought not to be given promiscuously. It was wont to be
counted a great matter to be made a God; you have lessened the reputation of
it. And therefore, said he, that I may not in my sentence look so much upon the
person as the matter, I advise that none henceforth be made a God that eats the
fruits of the earth, or whom the fertile earth in any sort nourishes.
Whosoever, contrary to this Act, shall be made, feigned, or be painted a God,
let him be thrown to Hobgoblins, and at the next Prize to be played by the new
Fencers, let him be soundly whipped. The next that delivered his judgment was
the Son of Vica Pota, who was also designed a small Bankier Consul; formerly he
subsisted by Traffic, and in petty Cities sold Jars of Oil. Hercules stepped
handsomely to him, and rounded him in the ear. He then said, Since divine
Claudius was near in blood to divine Augustus, who no less then he did solicit
the Deification of his Grandmother Augustae and did indeed far excel all mortal
men in wisdom; and that it is expedient for the common good, to have one who
can with Romulus devour boiling turnips; My judgment is, that Claudius be made
a God in as ample manner and with as good right as others were made before him;
and that this miracle be added to the Metamorphoses of Ovid. The opinions were
various, and Claudius seemed to have most votes. For Hercules, who saw his own
iron in the fire, ran up and down from one to another, saying, Envy not me the
honor of this work; I am concerned in it: when you have occasion I shall
requite the courtesy: one hand washes another. Then stood up sacred Augustus
to deliver his opinion; which he did with very much Eloquence. Fathers
Conscript, said he, I call you to witness that since I was made a God, I have
not spoken a word here: I always mind my own business. But I can no longer
dissemble nor contain my sorrow which my modesty makes greater. For this cause
I made peace at Land and Sea, furnished the City with Laws, and adorned it with
stately Buildings. What to say, grave Fathers, I cannot tell: no words are
sufficient to d^clare my indignation. I must make use of the expression of
Messala Corvinus an eloquent man: He has cut in sunder the Majesty and
Jurisdiction of the Empire. This man, Fathers Conscript, that seems to us
scarce able to fright away a fly, has chopped off men's heads with as much
facility as a dog eats tripes. But how can I relate his many cruelties? I have
not leisure to lament public calamities when I look upon my own domestic
miseries. Those therefore I will omit, and these rehearse. Though Phormea
understands little Greek, yet I do, and remember the Proverb, Indignation
hardly grows old. He whom you see lurking so many years under my name, in
requital has killed two Julia's my Nephew's Daughters, the one with the sword,
the other with famine: and also my Nephew's Nephew Lucius Syllanus. Consider,
Jupiter, the cause being so wicked, and which concerns you near, whether this
man shall remain with us. Tell me, divine Claudius, why thou did condemn any
of these of either sex without hearing, or taking cognizance of the cause. Has
this been usually done in heaven? Certainly it was never done. We know that
Jupiter, who has reigned here so many years, only broke the thigh of one
Vulcan, and taking him by the foot threw him out of heaven, and being angry
with his Wife, hung her between heaven and earth to punish her. But did he kill
her? Thou slew'st Messalina, to whom I was great Uncle as well as to thee. Thou will say thou After he had put her to death, he sent for her to Supper,
know not. The curse of the Gods light on thee: so much more shameful it is
that thou know not then that thou did it. This man ceased not to prosecute
Caius Caesar after his death: he slew his Father in law, this his Son in law.
Caius Caesar would not permit the Son of Crassus to be styled the Great: This
man restored his name and took off his head. He slew in one house Crassus the
Great, Scribonia, Tristonia, and Assario, all Nobles: But Crassus such a fool,
as he might have reigned as well as he. Consider, Fathers Conscript, what a
Monster sues to be made a God: will you now make him? Behold his body formed to
despite the Gods. In brief, let him pronounce but three words together, in any
reasonable sort, and I will be content to become his slave. Who will adore this
God? who will believe him to be so? In conclusion, while you make such Gods,
you your selves are not thought to be Gods. The sum of all is, grave Fathers,
if I have behaved my self honestly among you, if I have not been uncivil to
any, revenge my wrongs; I for my part pronounce this as my opinion, [and then
read out of a Table-book] Since divine Claudius has slain Appius Syllanus his
Father in law, his two Nephews, Pompey the Great, and Lucius Syllanus, Crassus
Father in law to his Daughter, an honest man, and as like him as one egg is to
another, Scribonia Mother in law to his Daughter, and Messalina his Wife, and
so many beside that it is endless to recount them; he ought to be severely
punished, and to be allowed no appeal, but to be carried hence, and within
thirty days to leave Heaven, and within three Olympus. All the Gods rose to
confirm this judgment: and without expecting further order, Cyllenius took him
by the wry neck, and dragged him toward Hell, From whence they do maintain
None can return again.


While they descended by the broad way, Mercury asked what that concourse of
people meant, whether it were Claudius his Funeral. And truly it was as
glorious a show as could be seen, set out with so much pomp, that it appeared
the Funeral of a God: Such variety there was of Trumpets, Cornets, and Hoeboys.
Claudius heard the noise: All men rejoiced and were merry, the People of Rome
found they were at liberty. Agatha and a few Petty-foggers heartily lamented;
the Lawyers came out of their holes, pale and meager, scarce able to breath,
like men newly recovered from a trance. One of the company seeing the Lawyers
lay their heads together bewailing their fortune, drew near and said, I told
you Saturn 's Feast would not always last. Claudius when he saw his Funeral
perceived himself to be dead; for they chanted with a loud voice this Funeral
Elegy.

Let your sighs and tears abound,
Let cries fly the Palace round,
At least feign a mournful sound;
Since so brave a man, whose head
Was with wisdom fraught, is dead,
The Earth none like him eve^ bred.
In swift Races he excelled,
His light dart the Persians quelled,
And the Parthians who rebelled.
He his foes did overthrow,
Taught the Medes his strength to know,
And their Painted backs to show.
Britans and the Irish, plae'd
Beyond known Seas, he soon chased:
They to bear his yoke made have.
The Ocean, which no bounds saw,
To Obedience he, did draw,
And to yield to Roman Law.
Plenteous tears for him provide,
Who, though hearing but one side,
Sometimes neither, Causes tried.
What Judge will there now be found
That will sit the whole year round,
And give Sentence without ground?
Minos Judge of Souls below,
TO whom a hundred Cities owe
Homage, will his Seat forgo.
But, O you of Venal race,
Lawyers, now in this sad case,
Beat your breasts and weep apace.
Poets too, who ^aeke great pains,
Though, alas, with little gains,
Vent your Sorrows in fresh strains.
You, 'bove all, grown rich by Play,
Shaking th'elbow night and day,
Never put your grief away.
Claudius was much delighted with his praise, and would fain have heard more:
But Talthybius, Messenger of the Gods, laid hands on him, and covering his head
that he might not be known, led him by Campus Martius, and between Tiber and
the close way descended toward Hell. Narcissus, his enfranchised Servant, went
before the direct way to entertain his Patron; and when he came near, he ran to
him all neat and trim as out of a Bath, and said, What? do Gods mix with Men?
Hasten (said Mercury) and give advertisement of our coming. Narcissus would
have complemented longer with his Lord, but Mercury admonished him with his
Rod, and again bid him make have. No sooner had he spoken, but Narcissus
hastened as if he ha^ flown. The passage is steep and easy of descent, and
therefore though he were gouty, he came in a moment to the Gates of Plut^^;
where lay (as Horace says) that hundred-headed Beast, which presently rose and
shook his bristled crest. Narcissus, who used to play with a little white
Beagle, was in a kind of fear when he saw a Dog so black and shaggy, that one
would be loath to meet him in the dark, and cried, Claudius Caesar is come. And
behold, a multitude came singing with acclamations, We have him, let us
rejoice. In this Company were C. Silius, designed Consul, Iunius Praetorius,
Sextus Trullus, Marcus Helvius, Trogus, Cotta, Teclus, Valens Tabius, whom
Narcissus had caused to be Executed. In the midst of this troop of Singers was
Maestor the Pantomime, whom Claudius for comeliness sake had made leaner. The
news was presently carried to Messalina, that Claudius was arrived. First of
all came flocking his freed-men, Polybius, Miron, Harpocras, Ampheus, and
Pheronactes, whom he had sent before, that he might not want Servants in any
place. After them came two Praefects, Iustus Catonius, and Ruffus, Pompey's
Son. Then came his friends, Saturnius Luscius, Pedo Pompeius, Lupus, and Celer
Asinius, who had been Consuls. And last of all, his Brother's Daughter, his
Sister's Daughter, his Father in law, his Mother (...) law; all his near allies
came to meet him: whom when Claudius saw, he cried out, Behold, all places are
full of my friends. How came you hither? Pedo Pompeius reply^d, What say
thou, bloody man? do thou ask how? who but thy self has sent us hither,
thou murderer of all thy friends? Come let us go, I Will show thee the
Iudgement-Seat: and then brought him to the Tribunal of Aeacus. He it was who,
by virtue of the Cornelian Law enacted against murderers, informed against
them, and made their process; and now desired to have his name Registered as
the accuser of Claudius; that he had murdered thirty Senators, three hundred
and fifteen Roman Knights, and of other People, The number infinite, like Sand
or Dust.


Claudius being much dismayed, cast his eyes about to find an Advocate to speak
for him, but found at present none. At length Publius Petronius, who was wont
to eat at his Table, a man well versed in the Claudian language, appeared, and
desired to be admitted his defender, but was refused. Pedo Pompeius accused him
with great vehemence; Petronius seemed willing to answer for him. Aeacus, a
most just man, having heard but one side, condemned him, and said, If he suffer
what he has done to others, the judgment is just. A great silence was made.
All were astonished and wondered at the newness of the thing, saying, the like
was never done. Claudius thought it more just then new. It was long debated
what kind of Punishment should be inflicted. Some moved, that if the Gods would
be pleased to release the punishment of one, either Tantalus might be freed of
his Thirst, whereof he would else die, or Sisyphus of the burden of his Stone,
or Ixion have his Wheel stopped. But it was resolved that none of the Condemned
persons should be discharged, lest Claudius himself might afterward expect
like favor. They agreed that a new punishment should be devised, That some
fruitless labor should be imposed upon him, and a kind of Desire, without End
or Effect. Then Aeacus pronounced that he should play at Dice with a
bottomless Box: And now he began to cast Dice to no purpose, for they still
dropped out at the wrong end.

As often as he prepared was to cast,
Shaking the Box, the Dice fell out as fast.
And putting them into the Box again,
Like one that played, he found he played in vain:
For still the Dice slipped thorough and were gone.
So Sisyphus with many a heavy groan
To the Hill-top bears his returning Stone.
Caius Caesar now appeared, and claimed him in ^ight of Bondage, producing
witnesses who saw him box'd and beaten with Rods and Cudgels by him. He was
adjudg'd to Caius Caesar, to whom Aeacus gave him: He gave him to Menander his
manumitted Servant, to help him to frame Indictments.

FINIS.

